It is said that the lords usurped the right of judgment; nothing is less accurate: to restore a neglected power and to exercise it is not to usurp it. Moreover, on this point as on all others, feudalism did but modify and generalize that which it found already established. Certain proprietors enjoyed, within the Roman Empire, the right to administer justice to the inhabitants of their domains, and they preserved this right under the first dynasty of the Frankish kings [the Merovingians]. Though Charlemagne strove to make imperial justice prevail over private jurisdictions (*justices particulières*), he did not, at the very least, contest the legitimacy of the latter. 

It is therefore true that feudalism, when it conferred upon the lords the right to dispense justice to their vassals and their serfs, did not introduce a new principle of government into society. In the Middle Ages, the common interests of individuals were few, and the action of public authority consisted of military command and the administration of justice; from the moment these two powers were attributed to the lords, the legal and regular reign of the aristocracy began. The lord and the vassal were not united to one another merely by a few limited and strictly defined duties; they were bound in all the acts of their private and public lives. 

The word *faith* [fealty] was created to designate the principle of all feudal obligations, and that maxim was proclaimed which we shall so often hear repeated in Syria: “Between lord and man, there is naught but faith.” This change in the nature and form of the principal governments of Europe did not occur without a stubborn resistance on the part of the royalty. All the genius of Charlemagne was employed to avert this destruction of central authority; but what could his profound insights, his wise laws, and his brilliant victories avail against the prevailing customs of his age? There remained but a single institution which still reminded the provinces of the existence of a...