...amidst an indigenous population composed of Syrians, Greeks, Jews, Turks, and Arabs. The Syrians, who by their numbers greatly outweighed the other elements of this mixed population, were also distinguished by their corruption, their cowardice, and by a hatred toward the Europeans, the effects of which were often fatal to the Christian colonies. The Crusaders might therefore have—without fear of being accused of injustice—protected themselves by severe laws against the ill-will of the Syrian population and granted them no political rights; yet they did not do so. They believed, on the contrary, that prudence imposed upon them the duty to neglect nothing to rally to their cause a nation which, devoted to commerce, industry, and agriculture, held the resources of the country in its hands, and from whom it was vital to withdraw any secret support for the former masters of Syria. The subsequent course of events proved that the Crusaders had pushed their generosity too far.

Godfrey of Bouillon therefore permitted the Syrians to live according to their own laws and to have their own particular tribunals, composed of the leading men of their nation and presided over by a *reis* [a local headman or magistrate], who held in these courts the office that the Viscount held in the Courts of the Burgesses (*Cours de Bourgeoisie*). In places where there was no *reis*, the local bailiff (*bailli*) fulfilled these functions. The jurisdiction of these Syrian courts extended neither to cases of high justice [matters involving capital punishment or high treason] nor to cases involving the burgesses. The judicial institutions of the great fiefs resembled, in all points, those which existed in the heart of the kingdom. The Prince of Antioch had, like the King of Jerusalem, his High Court (*Haute Cour*) and his Court of the Burgesses. We shall examine elsewhere whether the same laws were in force in the principality and in the great fiefs of the kingdom.

Such is the system of institutions that was applied by the Crusaders to the lands they had just conquered. It is not necessary to take into account the era...