...[This] venerable tribunal in the 11th century—that is to say, at an epoch when the ideas of municipal confederation had not yet spread through Europe—raises several interesting questions which are set forth and resolved in the Introduction to our second volume.

The High Court (*Haute Cour*) and the Court of Burgesses (*Cour des Bourgeois*) sat in Jerusalem; it remains now to be told how justice was administered in the provinces. Godfrey of Bouillon, in enfeoffing the various parts of the Principality of Jerusalem, granted—not to all his vassals, but to certain among them—the right to dispense justice, or, as it was said in the East, "court, coin, and justice" (*cour, coins et justice* [the right to hold court and exercise jurisdictional authority]). These justiciars administered justice to their vassals in accordance with the laws and customs followed in the High Court; but as they judged by virtue of a royal concession, and since in Syria justice was in no way inherent to the fief, the King could, when it suited him, come to preside over their courts and bring with him a greater or lesser number of his liege men (*liges*).

There existed, therefore, in all fiefs held from the Principality of Jerusalem, seignurial courts which one must consider as branches of the High Court, but which possessed no political power. It was no less necessary to multiply the bourgeois jurisdictions. Godfrey established, in all the cities or other populated places, Viscounts and Courts of Burgesses (*cours de bourgeoisie*). 

But the nobles and the Christian burgesses did not alone constitute the entire population of the kingdom; indeed, they formed but the smallest part of it. There existed, outside of the Crusaders, an indigenous population composed of Syrians, Greeks, Jews, Turks, and Arabs. The Syrians, who by their numbers greatly outweighed the other elements of this mixed population, were also distinguished by their corruption, by their cowardice, and by a hatred against the Europeans...