TITLE: Godeffroy of Boloyne: or, The siege and conqueste of Jerusalems,
IDENTIFIER: 39020004691971-godeffroyofbolo
URL: https://archive.org/download/39020004691971-godeffroyofbolo/HighRes_39020004691971_djvu.txt







dadjflfrag of 

6arlg ttgIts^ ®nt JJomfg. 

(Sftra Suits. § 0 . LXIV. 

1893 (reprinted 1926.) 



(lodefnjtr ttf §0lnpc, 

OR 

®he and Oionqueste of Jjwusatym, 


BY 

WILLIAM, ARCHBISHOP OP TYRE. 


TRANSLATED FROM THE FRENCH BY 

Wiliam Caston, 

AND PRINTED BY HIM IN 1481. 


EDITED FROM THE COPY IN THE BRITISH MUSEUM, WITH INTRODUCTION, 
NOTES, VOCABULARY, AND INDEXES, 

BY 

MARY NOYES COLVIN, Ph.D. 


■-^p^ \ If . fz 5~ V\o. (p lA 

LONDON 

PUBLISHED FOR THE EARLY ENGLISH TEXT SOCIETY 

BY HUMPHREY MILFORD, OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS 

AMEN HOUSE, WARWICK SQUARE, E.C. 4. 

1893 


[Reprinted 1926] 



112838 


€dra Strits, txiv. 

printed in Great Britain by Richard Clay & Sons, limited, 
BUNGAY, SUFFOLK. 




CONTENTS. 

PAGB 

INTRODUCTION ... ... ... ... ... ... vii 

TEXT ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... I 

NOTES ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 313 

VOCABULARY ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 317 


INDEX OP NAMES ... ... ... ... ... ... 331 


INDEX OF PLACES 


343 




INTRODUCTION 


I. Caxton’s text, and his original, William of Tyre, a.d. 1163—1183, p. vii, 

II. Editions, Manuscripts, and Translations of William of Tyre, p. xi. 

III. William of Tyre, p. xx. 

IV. IVilliam of Tyre’s literary works, p. xxv. 

V. Godfrey of Bouillon, p. xxix. 

I. 

Godeffroy of Boloyne, or the Siege and Conqueste of Jerusalem, 
was printed by William Caxton, as he himself informs us, in the 
Abbey of Westminster, the work being finished on the 20th of 
November, 1481. 

There are ten copies still extant of this edition: British Museum 
(1), Cambridge (2), Imperial Library, Vienna (1), Hunterian College, 
Glasgow (1), Baptist College, Bristol (1), and (4) in private libraries. 
The present edition was printed from the copy in the British Museum, 
which is described by Blades ( Biography and Typography of Wm. 
Caxton, London, 1879), as follows : 

“ The book is a small in-folio, containing 144 leaves, of which two 
are blank. Excepting the first two gatherings, the signatures are 
entirely in Arabic numerals. 

“ Collation;—A is A 3" with A 1 blank, b a 2" b 1 being blank; 
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, and 16 are all 4“ 8 , 
17 is a 3”. 

“ Typographic peculiarities;—There is no title page. A full page 
has forty lines, which are of even length, and measure 4f inches 
without folios or catchwords. Space is left at the commencement of 
chapters for the insertion of three to seven-line initials.—The volume 
commences with a blank leaf, after which follows the prologue or 
preface, the text beginning on A 2 , with a space for a four-line initial, 
thus, ‘ The hye, courageous faytes and valyaunt actes of noble, illus¬ 
trious, and vertuous personnes, etc.’, and ending halfway down the 
recto of the 6th folio, of sig. 17., the verso being blank.” 



viii Introduction. I. Caxton’s Tecct and its Original. 


Mr. Blades also states that the book is translated from the 
French, adding, “ the author of the book appears to be unknown.” 
Happily, this last conjecture of Mr. Blades is a mistake, as the author 
of our text, far from being unknown, is no less a personage than 
William, Archbishop of Tyre from 1175 to 1184, and Caxton’s 
Godeffcsye of Boloyne is a translation of the first hundred pages or so 
of a History of the First Crusade, and the French establishments in 
the Holy Land, written by William, in the second half of the 12th 
century. 

It is a book which not only was a standard authority through all 
the Middle Ages, but one which even up to the present time is 
regarded as reliable in most particulars, and forms the base of all 
modern histories of this period. The book was written first in 
Latin, but was soon put into French, from which Caxton translated 
it into English. His translation is almost a literal one. He turns 
many of his French constructions into English, without any attempt 
at Anglicizing them, even transferring a French word bodily when he 
does not readily find its English equivalent. On the whole, he 
understands his French, although there are incorrect renderings here 
and there, owing more to hasty reading, it seems, than to actual 
ignorance. 

The editor of this text, in preparing it for publication, read the 
English first with a French Manuscript of the 15th century edition, 
from which without doubt it was translated. Curiously enough, 
MS. 68 of the Biblioth&que Rationale, Paris, with which it was col¬ 
lated, belonged originally to Louis de Bruges, Seigneur de la Gruy- 
thuyse. Blades says of him : 

“ Among the nobles at the court of Phillip the Good (Duke of 
Burgundy, in 1419), many emulated the literary taste of their sove¬ 
reign, but none showed greater judgment and liberality in the 
formation of his library than Louis de Bruges. 

“ This nobleman, who had risen by his talents to the highest 
position, received at his chateau of Oost-camp, near Bruges, in 1470, 
Edward IV. of England, when he sought refuge from the Lancas¬ 
trians, in Flanders, and was afterwards rewarded by the King with 
the title of Earl of Winchester. His library was scarcely inferior to 
that of his sovereign, and nearly the whole of its manuscripts were 
the production of Flemish artists, at Bruges or Ghent. The large 
size of the volumes, the beauty of the vellum, the elegance of the 
writing, the artistic merit of the illuminations and ornaments, and 
the luxury displayed in the bindings are evidences of the interest 



Introduction. I. Gaxton’s Text and its Original. ix 

taken by the Seigneur de la Gruythuyse in the formation of his 
library. 

“ At his death it passed to his son Jean, and was soon after added 
to the collection, already existing, at the chateau of Blois, belonging 
to the kings of France. Great pains were taken to obliterate the 
armorial bearings, devices, and monograms which showed the former 
owner of the manuscripts; but these attempts were only partly suc¬ 
cessful, as about one hundred volumes, now among the most precious 
treasures of the Bibliotheque Nationale of Paris, still attest that they 
once belonged to this celebrated collection.” 

As Caxton lived for many years in Bruges, as the representative 
of the English nation, and was on friendly terms with many of the 
Flemish nobility, there is little doubt that he was well acquainted 
with the library of Louis de Bruges, and probably had himself spent 
many an hour over this very volume, which is a magnificent specimen 
of Flemish handicraft—a large in-folio, with writing like copper¬ 
plate, and adorned with many beautful artistically-executed minia¬ 
tures in grisaille. But, although as far as execution and binding are 
concerned, a book worthy of our highest praise, the text itself, which, 
as may be seen by the headings of the different chapters, is the same 
as the copy from which Caxton translated, is a very poor one, and 
the result is that many of Caxton’s sentences are faulty, obscure, or 
thoroughly unintelligible, owing to the faultiness and obscurity of 
his original. In many cases, the editor of the present text, in order 
to get at the original meaning, has been obliged to have recourse to 
vol. ii. of the Recueil des Croisades, published by the Academy of 
Inscriptions and Belles Lettres, in Paris, which contains not only the 
corrected French text of William’s history, but also the Latin original, 
to which an appeal has been made in doubtful cases. 

Some obscurities still remaining have been cleared up by Paulin 
Paris’s recent edition of William of Tyre. 

For aid in this preface, and in the Index of Places and Names, 
at the close of the book, the editor is also much indebted to the 
following authorities: 

H. Prdtz : Studien fiber Wilhelm von Tyrus, irn Neu-Archiv 
Deutscher Geschichte, Bd. viii. 

Pauun Paris : La Chanson d’Antioche. 

Paulin Paris : Guillaume de Tyr. et Ses Continuateurs. 

Roericht : Zur Geschichte der Ersten Kreuz-Zfige. 

H. von Sybel : Geschichte des Ersten Kreuz-Zuges. 

Dansey : The English Crusaders. 



X 


Introduction. I. Authorities consulted. 


Von Hasselt : Les Croises Beiges. 

Von Reiffenberg, in vols. iv. and v. of Les Chroniques Beiges: 
Le Chevalier au Cygne and Godefroid de Bouillon. 

Baron db Hodt : Description des Tombeaux de Godefroid de 
Bouillon. Bruxelles, 1855. 

Pigeonneau : Le Cycle de la Croisade et de la Famille de 
Bouillon. 

Hist. Litt. de da France, vol. xiv., article by Pastouret on 
William of Tyre. 

Brdnet : Manual du Libraire. 

D. Mart^ne et D. Durand : Amplissima Collectio. Paris, 
1724-33. 

Muratori : Rerum Italicarum Scriptores, vol. vii. 

Guizot : Collection des Memoires sur L’Histoire du France, vols. 
xvi.—xviiL 

Deschamps : Dictionnaire de Geographic Ancienne et Moderne. 
Paris, 1870. 

La Gran Conquista de Ultra-Mar. Madrid, 1858. 
Spruner-Menke : Hand-Atlas des Mittel-Alters. 

Migne : Patrologi® Latin® : Tomus 20 / 

„ ,, Graec* ,, 86. 

„ Dictionnaire de Geographic Sacr^e et Ecciesiastique, 
vols. 28—30 of the Cyclop4die Theologique. 

Freeman : The Historical Geography of Europe. 

Froebese : Gottfried von Bouillon. Wissenschaftliche Vortrage, 
14th Series. Berlin, 1879. 

Tasso : Jerusalem Delivered. 

Collin de Planot : Godefroid de Bouillon. Paris, 1842. 
Ault-Dumesnil : Dictionnaire des Croisades in vol. xviii. of 
Migne’s Nouvelle Encyclopedic Th4ologique. 

Pere Maimbourg : Hist, des Croisades. Paris, 1686. 
McClintoch and Strong : Cyclopedia of Biblical Theology and 
Ecclesiastical Literature. 

Gaston Paris, on La Gran Conquista, Romania, No. 68, Oct. 
1888 and Oct. 1890. 

Ticknor: History of Spanish Literature. 

Palgrave : History of Normandy and England. 

Rogier : La Noblesse Franfaise aux Croisades. 

Recueil des Croisades. Tomes i. and ii., published by the 
Academy of Inscriptions and Belles Lettres. Paris, 1844. 



II. Editions, MSS., and Translations of Wm. of Tyre, xi 

Mas-Latrie : Chronique d’Ernoul et de Bernard le Tresorier. 
Collection de la Soci4t4 de L’Histoire de France, vol. iii. 

Biant : Catalogue des Manuscrits de L’Eracles. Archives de 
L’Orient Latin, vol. i. Paris, 1881. 

Chevallier : Eepertoire des Sources historiques du Moyen-Age. 
Paris, 1877-1886. 

T. Fuller : History of the Holy War, ed. 1840. 

Mrs. W. Busk: Mediaeval Popes, Emperors and Kings. 4 vols., 
1854-6. 

II. DIFFERENT EDITIONS, MANUSCRIPTS, AND TRANSLATIONS 
OF WILLIAM OF TYRE. 

The original history was written, as has been already mentioned, 
in Latin. It was composed in Palestine, between the years 1163 and 
1183, and consisted of twenty-two completed books, divided into 
chapters, and of one chapter of a twenty-third book. The work was 
evidently either left unfinished, or mutilated after William’s death, as 
he tells us expressly in his preface that he has divided his work into 
twenty-three books, each of which is in turn divided into chapters. 
“ Distinximus autem volumem universam in libros xxiii, eorumque 
singulos certis designavimus capitulis, quo lectori facilius quicquid de 
articulis histories sibi viderit necessarium occurrat.” The theory that 
portions of the history were destroyed after William’s death, is a very 
plausible one, when we reflect that these closing chapters, if closing 
chapters there were, must have contained the record of events which 
did not present his political opponents in a very favourable light, so 
that they would have had every reason for suppressing them. 

The book commences with a brief general account of the situation 
of affairs before and at the time of the first crusade. Then follows a 
detailed account of that great movement, particular stress being laid 
on the part taken therein by the French and Flemish chivalry, and 
especially by Godfrey of Bouillon. The ninth book treats of the 
taking of Jerusalem by the Crusaders, and of the choice of Godfrey as 
king, closing with his sudden and unfortunate death. The other 
thirteen books contain the history of Palestine under French rule, 
down to the time of William’s own death, which is supposed to have 
taken place in 1184. 

His preface, written after he had nearly completed his work, tells 
us of its aim and scope :— 



xii II. Ernoul and Bernard continue William of Tyre. 

“ Narrationis seriem ordinavimus exordium, sumentes ab exitu 
virorum fortium, et Deo amabilem principum qui, a regnis occidenta- 
libus, vocante Domino egressi, terram promissiouis et pene universam 
Syriane in manu forti sibi vendicaverunt, et inde usque ad regnum 
domini Balduini quarti, qui in ordine regum computato domino duce 
Godefrido qui primus regnum obtinuit, locum habuit septimum, per 
annos LXXXIV, cum multa diligentia protraximus historiam.” 

This history had, in the course of time, several different continu- 
ators. The first of these was one Ernoul, member of a noble family 
of Giblet, a town of Palestine, on the coast north of Beirut. Ernoul, 
who must have been a well-grown youth at the time of William’s 
death, served as a young squire under Balian d’Ybelin, who had been 
made Lord Lieutenant of the kingdom of Jerusalem, after the capture 
of king Guy of Lusignan in 1187. Young Ernoul followed his master 
through all the vicissitudes of this critical period, and assisted in the 
defence of Jerusalem when besieged by Saladin, a few months later. 
Years after,—after he had become one of the most able and learned 
jurists in the High Court of Cyprus,—Ernoul of Giblet wrote, in the 
French language, an account of the events in which he had taken 
part, his intention being to give the world a truthful narration of 
the conquest of Jerusalem, and of the irreparable loss of the Holy 
Cross. 

Eruoul’s story stops with the year 1228. Here, however, an 
unknown pen takes it up, and, after some condensation of the pre¬ 
vious matter, brings it down to about 1231. This last writer narrates 
especially the events of the Crusade of Frederic II. of Germany, 
ending with the capture of St. Jean d’Acre. 

At about this same time, in France, one Bernard, called the 
treasurer, Bemardus Thesaurius, supposed to have belonged to the 
monastery of St. Pierre in Corbie, wrote a history of affairs in the 
East, ending also with the year 1231. Corbie is a little town in 
France, east of Amiens. Here existed formerly a magnificent abbey 
of Benedictines of great wealth and antiquity, said to have been 
founded by Queen Bathilde in 662. The history of this abbey has 
been written by a Benedictine of Picardy, but nothing has been 
learnt of Bernard, except the fact that the office of treasurer has 
existed there since the 13th century. 

Already, before the continuation of the unknown author was 
finished, or Bernard’s account was written, the Latin original of 
William of Tyre was known in France, where it received, without a 
doubt, the title with which it has come down to us, viz., Historia 



ll. Bernard’s Continuation of William of Tyre. xiii 

Rerum in Partibus Transmarinis Gestarum ; and certainly by 1225, 
if not before, it was translated into French. 

Now we have, as we 6ee, three or four different historians, all 
handling the same subject, but at different epochs. What more na¬ 
tural than that they should be arranged chronologically; and by the 
omission of prefaces, and by judicious condensation, be made into one 
compact whole. This is exactly what was done by some one, per¬ 
haps by Bernard himself, who, after he had written his account of 
affairs in the Orient, as an independent composition, may have con¬ 
ceived the idea of combining it with William’s and Emoul’s histories. 
Be this as it may, the compilation closes with Bernard’s work, which 
ends thus : Explicit liber ; ceste eonte de la terre d£ Outremer , fist faire 
li tresoriers Bernars de St. Pieire de Corbie en la carnation. Mello 
C.C. XXXII. 

Naturally, for centuries, and even down to the modern critical 
examination of the book, Bernard was regarded as the real author of 
the whole work. His compilation was the history, par-excellence, of 
the Crusades and the Holy Land through all the Middle Ages. 
Strangely enough, although the compiler left Bernard’s name at the 
close of the book, he forgot to give it any title at the beginning; 
and as a result of this forgetfulness, each editor, or even copyist, felt 
himself privileged to bestow upon the book what seemed to him a 
suitable appellation, so no one text probably in the whole history of 
literature has had so many different names. The most common and 
curious of all them is that of the Roman d’Eracles, a title given by 
some rubricator, because the first line begins, “ Les anciennes ystoires 
dient que Eracles en fut moult bon Chrestien, et gouvemeur de Vempire 
de Romme," William having introduced his history by recalling the 
fact of the conquest of Jerusalem by the Persians, and their deliver¬ 
ance by the Emperor Heraclius, in 629. Other more appropriate 
titles are : Le Lime des Passages d’ Outre Mer / Le Livre de l'Acqui¬ 
sition et de la Perte de la Terre Sainte ; Les Chroniques d'Outre Mer; 
Limes des Voyages a la Terre Sainte; Histoires du Passage de Gode- 
froy de Bouillon, or simply, Le Livre du ConquUe. 

Ernoul and Bernard form what M. Mas-Latrie,—who first 
disentangled the intricate relations of the different editions of 
William of Tyre to each other,—calls the “ first epoch ” of his 
continuators. 

A few years later than Bernard, in 1248, St. Louis of France 
“put on the cross,” and departed for the Holy Land; the attention 



xiv II. Four Groups of Continuers of William of Tyre. 

of the Christian world was again drawn towards the East, and new 
deeds of valour called for a new chronicler. Another continuation 
was composed in the French language, taking the narrative up where 
Bernard left it, and bringing it down to the year 1261. This con¬ 
tinuation has been published in the French Academy edition of the 
continuators of William of Tyre, under the title, Continuation d’apres 
le Manuscrit de Rothdin. 

Soon after this appeared what may be called the third series of con¬ 
tinuators. This third series is not a direct continuation of the second 
series. It does not take up the narrative where that left it, in 1261, 
but attaches itself to Emoul and Bernard, that is, to the first class of 
continuators, and closes with the year 1275. This third continuation, 
according to the best judges, is the work of two hands, and was 
written entirely in the East. The first half is supposed to have been 
the composition of a knight of Cyprus or Syria, and contains the 
history of the kingdoms of Cyprus and Jerusalem, united during the 
minority of King Henry III. of Lusignanj the latter half, which 
narrates the events transpiring between 1248 and 1275, seems to 
have been.written by a monk, as it is more scholarly in style and 
character. 

The fourth and last group of continuators are only copies of the 
second series (that closing in 1261), to which has been added an 
account of the taking of St. Jean d’Acre, and of events subsequent to 
1288, so that, in this edition, there is a gap in the history, from 1261 
to 1288. 

Most of these different series exist only in manuscript, there 
being several copies of each known. M. Riant, in Les Archives de 
VOrient Latin, gives the following summary of the manuscripts of 
William of Tyre and his continuators, suppressing very justly M. 
Mas-Latrie’s last class, which (as he observes) differs from the others 
only by the addition-of matter that is really foreign to the rest of the 
work. 

I. Class. Translation of William of Tyre; eleven MSS., two of 
which are now lost. 

II. Class. In three subdivisions, and containing thirteen MSS.: 
a. Ernoul to 1228, five MSS.; b. Estoires d’Oultre Mer, et de 
la Naissance Saladin, three MSS.; G. Bernard le Tresorier to 
1231, five MSS. 

III. Class. William of Tyre translated, and continued down to 
1231, twenty-two MSS. 



XV 


II: Spanish Translation of William of Tyre. 

IV. ' Class (liothelin). William of Tyre translated and con¬ 
tinued down to 1261. (This is the Academy edition.) Sixteen 
MSS. 

V. Class. William of Tyre translated and continued down to 
1275. This has been published by the Academy, and by Dom 
MartfenS and Guizot, eleven MSS. 

An excellent description of many of these manuscripts is given in 
vol. ii. of the Recueil des Croisades, published by the French 
Academy of Inscriptions and Belles L,ettres. 

Taking into consideration the extreme popularity of William of 
Tyre’s history in France, as attested by the large number of manu¬ 
scripts still existing, it is strange that more translations into other 
languages have not been found. Of those known, but one seems to 
have been in any sense a popular book, namely, that into Spanish, 
which is known under the title of La Gran Conquista de Ultra 
Mar. This is a vast compilation, of which M. Gaston Paris has 
commenced to give us the first satisfactory analysis in the Romania, 
No. 68, Oct. 1888. La Gran Conquista takes as its basis the 
history of William of Tyre, inserting at appropriate intervals other 
French compositions treating of the Crusades or of Godfrey of 
Bouillon, such as La Chanson d’Antioch, La Chanson de Jerusalem, 
Le Chevallier au Cygne, the poem of Les Chetifs, also the romans of 
Berthe, of Mainet, of Flore and Blanchfleur. It is an immense work, 
filling a volume of 659 pages of two columns each, of a quarto 
edition. The date of this compilation is uncertain. The prologue of 
the first printed edition, that of 1503, states that it was made at the 
suggestion and under the auspices of Alphonso X. of Castile, who 
reigned from 1252 to 1284. The epilogue of a manuscript of the 
15th century attributes it to Alphonso XI., who died in 1350, 
while the epilogue of the oldest manuscript known, that of the 14th 
century, gives the merit of the undertaking to the son of Alphonso X., 
Sancho IV., who died in 1295. M. Paris remarks that this latter 
date is probably the correct one,—the first being too remote, and the 
second too recent, to be accepted. Both of the epilogues mentioned 
state that the kings of whom they speak caused the book to be 
translated from the French into Castillian. 

There is no doubt that the Spanish translator possessed a copy of 
William of Tyre with the third series of continuators, namely, that 
bringing it down to 1275, as La Gran Conquista follows that edition 
closely, with additions (according to M. Paris) from a source Still 
00DFHEY. b 



xvi II. English, Translations of William of Tyre. 

unknown. M. Paris also conjectures that the French MS. at the 
disposal of the arranger of the book may have been a defective one, 
as the translation breaks off abruptly in the middle of a sentence, 
leaving the narration at the beginning of the year 1271. TicKnor, in 
a note on La Gran Conquista, in his History of Spanish Lite¬ 
rature, says that its closing chapters (those giving an account of 
Conrad of Hohenstaufen, and the assassination of Henry, grand¬ 
son of Henry III. of England, at Viterbo) were added by the 
Spanish arranger; but a comparison with the original shows that 
these details were all literally and exactly translated from the 
French. 

Of La Gran Conquista three manuscripts are known : two in the 
National Library at Madrid, and one in the Royal Library. The 
first printed edition was that of Hans Giessen, Salamanca 1503, in 
folio. A later edition is that of Madrid 1858, in 8vo. 

We have one English translation, that made by William Caxton, 
printed for the first time in 1481, and reprinted in the present 
volume. 

Caxton made his translation from the same edition as La Gran 
Conquista, viz. that ending with the year 1275. 

Riant in his enumeration of the versions of Eracles, mentions a 
second English translation contained in manuscript, Reg. 18. B. 26, 
of the British Museum, and entitled The History of the Holy Ware. 
This manuscript is a paper one, in folio, containing 256 leaves, and 
written about the middle of the 16th century, apparently late in the 
reign of Henry VIII., instead of in the 15th century, as Riant gives 
it, on the authority of the old Royal Catalogue, by Casley, which is 
wrong. 

This History of the Holy Ware is a compilation containing: 
I. An account of Robert, Duke of Normandy, of his visit to the 
Holy Land, and of his son William, afterwards the Conqueror of 
England. II. A narration of the events of the First Crusade, taken, 
according to the author, from the book of the Conquest of Jerusalem, 
and from the book of the Nine Worthies in French. III. An 
account of the adventures of Richard, Coeur de Lion, in the Third 
Crusade. IV. A narration of the prowesses of Prince Edward, son 
of Henry III., and of the events of the Ninth Crusade. V. A 
“ Treatie ’’ translated from the French of a certain Frfere Hay ton, 
treating of the different countries of the East, and of their great 
rulers and heroes. The book ends with directions for making the 



II. English and German Translations of Wm. of Tyre, xvii 

journey to the Holy Land, and rules for the behaviour of pilgrims 
en route. 

Part II. of this compilation is supposed by Biant to be a direct 
translation of the compiler from one of the numerous French editions 
of William of Tyre. On investigation, however, it proves to be only 
a condensation of Caxton’s translation. 

The first chapters consist of a genealogy and biography of Godfrey 
of Bouillon, taken without doubt, as its author says, from the “ IX 
boke of the IX worthies in french.” After this introduction, the 
history of the First Crusade is taken up, at the departure of Gautier 
Sans Avoir for the Holy Land, and continued down to the death of 
Godfrey. The close of this book, at the same point where Caxton 
ends his translation, together with the fact that all of Caxton’s mis¬ 
takes in translation and in proper names are found in it, is pretty 
conclusive proof that our unknown arranger did not trouble himself 
to go back to the French for his materials, but availed himself of 
Caxton’s translation. The matter is very materially abridged, the 
condensations being made with great ability and discretion by omit¬ 
ting the long rhetorical speeches, and giving their substance in brief. 
Many minor and unimportant details are also judiciously omitted; 
the wording is in general exactly that of Caxton. 

The fifth part of this compilation, that translated from Fr&re 
Haiton, was published in 1526 by Pynson, but the first, third, and 
fourth seem never to have been printed. 

As to the translations into German, it is not easy to decide from 
the brief descriptions given, whether those mentioned by biblio¬ 
graphers are really translations of William of Tyre, or of the poems 
of Godfrey of Bouillon, and the Chevalier an Cygne, which were 
extremely popular in the 13th and 14th centuries, and were rendered 
into a prose form, which caused them to resemble not a little the 
genuine history, and to be often confounded with it. 

Brunet, in his Manuel du Libraire, under the heading “ Godefroy 
de Bouillon,” and M. Beilfeuberg (Int. to Le Chevalier au Cygne) 
mention several German and Flemish translations of the romance of 
Godefroid de Bouillon. The oldest of these Brunet describes as 
follows: 

“It was printed at Augsburg in 1482, with this title ‘ Hienach 
folgt. ein warhaft und bewerte historie wie die turche un andre 
geschlecht der ungleubigen die cristeltichen Kirche,’ etc.; on the back 
of the last leaf is printed ‘Dise warhafftige history hat gedrucht 

b 2 



xviii 11. German and Italian Translations of Wm. of Tyre. 

hanns Bamler zu Augsperg, und volendet au Mantag vor Jeorg. 
Anno Te JM Lxxxij jare ze’ (1482).” 

The book is a Gothic in-folio. It contains 47 half-page wood- 
cuts. This book is mentioned by Zapf, History of Printing in 
Augsburg, L, p. 65, No. 21, under the title of Historic von der 
Kreuz Fahrt. It was reprinted at Augsburg in 1502 by Lucas 
Zeizsenmeier under the following title: Herzog Godfried wie er wider 
die Turgen und hayden gestritten. 

No reliable analysis of the contents of these books seems ever to 
have been made; but the Biblioth&que Nationals of Paris, according 
to M. Brunet, possesses a Flemish translation of this same work 
printed at Harlem in 1486, and reprinted in Antwerp in 1510 and 
1511. This Flemish copy, however, on the authority of M. Pigeon- 
neau (£e Cycle de la Croisade et de la Famille de Bouillon), who 
has examined it, is not at all a copy, of either the poem of Le 
Chevalier au Cygne or of Godefroid de Bouillon, or of both combined, 
but is a translation of William of Tyre; so the conclusion is that 
the Augsburg German editions must also be translations of William’s 
history. Pigeonneau gives the following description of the Flemish 
book : “ It is a small in-quarto, without title, date and name of editor, 
printed in Gothic characters and ornamented (like the Augsburg 
edition of 1482) with 47 wood cuts. It commences with these 
words, 1 Hier beghient prologhe van der Scoene historien Hertoghe 
Godewort van Boloen.’ ” 

In Italy the first translation into the popular language that I 
have been able to find, with the limited means of research at my dis¬ 
posal, is that by Lorenza di Firenze, which bears the date of 1347, 
and the following title, “ II Libro del Passagio di Terra Sancta, et e 
traslato di francescho in fiorentino, per Lorenzo di Firenze cittadino.” 
This manuscript is to be found in the Laurentian Library in Florence, 
is written on vellum, is in folio, and is translated from the second 
class of William of Tyre’s editions. Its designation is Phet. XXI, 
No. 44. In 1562, at Venice, an Italian translation was printed by 
Guiseppe Horologgi, entitled, “ Historia della guerra sacra de Gerusa- 
lemme della terra promissione, et de tutti la Soria ricuperata da 
christiani da Guglielmo arcevesco di Tiro, tradotta da Guiseppe 
Horologgi, Venetia 1562.” Guizot in La Collection des Memoires 
sur VHistoire de France, vol. xvi, p. 14, mentions a third Italian 
translation made by one Thomas Baglioni, in 1610, and also published 
in Venice. 



XIX 


II. Latin Re-translations of William of Tyre. 

The most curious thing about the history of our hook is its 
re-translation into Latin, at an early date, showing that the French 
translation must have been considered the original composition, and 
that the Latin original was comparatively unknown. In 1725, 
Muratori published a collection of Italian historians, entitled Rerum 
Italicarum Seriptores. Among these historians he included Fran¬ 
cisco Pipino, a monk of Bologna, who lived in the first half of the 
14th century, and wrote in Latin a history of the First Crusade and 
the events which transpired in the Holy Land between the years 
1095 and 1230. His book is introduced by the following statement: 
“Here commences the history of the Conquest of the Holy Land, 
which the author has translated from French into Latin.” He closes 
thus : “ All these things, about the life and deeds of King John, arif 
taken from the history of Bernard the Treasurer.” Pipino trans¬ 
lated, as can easily be seen, from a manuscript of the third class, 
that containing the continuation of Emoul and Bernard, which he, 
like everybody else, regarded as the work of Bernard alone. 

Riant, in his list of the versions of Eracles, also cites two other 
Latin re-translations, both-anonymous: one in the University Library 
at Leyden (Voss 110). This is a paper folio of the 16th century, 
and is supposed to be a copy of an old MS. written in Italy. The 
second is at Utrecht, No. 285 of the City Library, a manuscript of 
the 15th century, although this latter piece of information seems to 
be regarded as doubtful by M. Riant. 

We have also very good evidence that a Latin re-translation was 
made in England as early as the first half of the 13th century. 
Ralph, prior at this time of the monastery of Coggeshall in Essex, 
wrote a history of the Holy Land, which he calls Ghronieon Terrce 
Sanetce, describing especially the siege of Jerusalem by Saladin, at 
which he himself had been present. In order to excuse the lack of 
details in regard to many previous events in the history of the 
European establishments in Palestine, Ralph refers his readers to a 
Latin history treating of these events, and lately translated from the 
French by the prior of the Holy Trinity in London, a book which 
could hardly fail to be one of the earlier editions of William of 
Tyre. 

Since the invention of printing, there have been many excellent 
editions of William of Tyre, both in Latin and French. It was 
published for the first time in Latin in 1549, in Bale, in folio, by 
Phillibert Poyssenot of D61e. Henri Panteleon issued a new edition 



XX 


II. French Editions. III. William, of Tyre. 

in the same city in 1564, adding a continuation, also in Latin, 
written by one John Herold, a learned German of the 16th century, 
and a native of Hochstadt, in Suabia. Herold narrates the history 
of the Holy Land from 1185, bringing it down as late as the year 
1527. The earliest French edition printed was that published in 
Paris in 1575, in folio, under the title “Histoire de la guerre Sainte 
Dite proprement La Franciade orientale, faite latine par Guillaume 
archevesque de Tyr, et traduit en Fra^ais par Gabr. du Pr4au.” 
In 1611 Bongars published a collection of Latin writers on the 
Crusades, under the title Gesta Dei per Francos, 2 vol. in folio, in 
which he included William of Tyre. Between 1724 and 1733, Dom 
Martfene and Dom Durand, benedictines of St. Maur, men of great 
learning and research, published a second collection of Latin authors 
on the Crusades, entitled Amplissima Golleetio, in 9 vols., folio. The 
fifth volume of this collection contains the Latin version of William 
of Tyre. 

Other more modem editions of importance are those of Migne, 
Patrologice Latince Cursus, vol. 201, and Guizot, vols. 16—18 of the 
Collection des Memoires mr VHistoire de France, Paris 1823—25. 
The Academie des Inscriptions et Belles Lettres commenced in the 
first half of this century a collection of texts relating to the Crusades, 
entitled Recueil des Croisades: vols. I and II, which appeared in 
1844, contain not only the Latin, but the corresponding French text 
of William of Tyre. The latest edition in the French language, and 
without a doubt the most accurate and scholarly that has yet 
appeared, is that of Paulin Paris, Paris 1879, which contains, how¬ 
ever, simply the history as written by William, without any of the 
various continuations. 

III. WILLIAM OF TYRE. 

Of William of Tyre, second archbishop of the name, but little is 
known, except what can be gathered from his own writings. He 
was born about 1130, without a doubt in Palestine, which, in the 
prologue to his history, he calls his beloved birth-place, Natalis soli 
magis tracti dulcedine. He was probably of French descent, as 
shown by his familiarity with French ways and customs, people and 
events, although Paulin Paris hazards the supposition that he was an 
Italian, as he speaks of being called to Borne on one occasion, not 
only by public business, but also by private affairs. 



III. William of Tyre. His Birth and Bank. xxi 

As to his rank, authorities differ; Prutz (Neues Archiv der 
Qeschichtc, etc., vol. viii. p. 93), stating that he was from a middle- 
class family. Prutz bases his conclusion on a Cartulary of the 
Church of the Holy Sepulchre, of the year 1175, in which the name 
of a certain Radolphus, brother of the archbishop, William of Tyre, 
occurs, as belonging to a family not of noble rank. On the other 
hand, Pastouret (Hist. Litt. de la France, vol. xiv., p. 588) affirms, 
on the authority of one Etienne of Lusignan, author of a history of 
Cyprus, that William of Tyre was related to some of the leading 
nobles of the kingdom of Jerusalem. However this may be, it is 
certain that he was brought up in or near Jerusalem, with which he 
was thoroughly acquainted. Every part of the city is known to him 
intimately, not only as it was in his day, but as it had been in the 
past. In mentioning Jerusalem, he always calls it “ regio nostra,” 
and when speaking of anything in connection with that city or its 
inhabitants, he says “we,” “ours,” to distinguish it from the Princi¬ 
pality of Antioch or the Counties of Tripolis and Edessa. On this 
subject we have also the authority of the unknown continuator of 
William, who tells us (Book XXIII., chap. 10): “The archbishop 
of Tyre was called William, and was born in Jerusalem.” 

As to the exact date of his birth it is difficult to decide, although 
both French and German savants have spent much time in investigat¬ 
ing this point. We can only judge approximately by incidental 
remarks that William makes about fresh events in his life. He cer¬ 
tainly studied, as a young man, for a time at least, in Europe. He 
says of himself that he was studying “ trans mare ” at the time of the 
divorce of Amalric, king of Jerusalem, from Agnes of Courtenay, 
daughter of Joscelin II., Count of Edessa in 1162 (Book XIX., 
chap. 4): 

“Quaesivimus sane nos postea diligentur, tamquam circa talia 
curiosi quoto consanguinitas gradu se contingent, qui non de scholis 
redieramus, sed trans mare, circa liberalium artium adhuc detine- 
bantur studia, quando Hierosolymis haec facta sunt.” 

Just where he was studying is only to be conjectured. Pastouret 
imagines in Paris, while other authorities remark that he seems very 
well acquainted with Rome; and the supposition has even been 
advanced that his studies may have been prosecuted at Constanti¬ 
nople, which theory would account for his thorough knowledge of 
the Greek language, and also for his acquaintance with Byzantine 
politics and dignitaries. Wherever he received his education, it was 



xxii III. William of Tyre. Archdeacon in 1167. 

most certainly unusually thorough anil extensive, embracing a range 
of studies which only a man brought into constant contact with both 
the Occidental and Oriental civilization and literature would pursue 
at this epoch. 

That he was an excellent Latinist is shown, not only by his fine 
style, which compares favourably with any other composition that the 
Middle Ages produced, but by his extended acquaintance with 
classical Latin literature, citations and references being found in his 
history from nearly all the best-known Latin authors, such as Ovid, 
Virgil, Horace, Lucan, Juvenal, Statius, Terence, Cicero, Livy, and 
Sallust. Of his proficiency in the Greek language there is no doubt. 
He says himself that he spoke it (Book XIII., chaps. 1 and 2), and 
the fact that he was sent on more than one diplomatic mission to 
Constantinople confirms his own statement. He also spoke and read 
Arabic with ease. In speaking of his History of the Arab Princes, 
he tells us that lie followed mainly Arabian authorities. His explan¬ 
ation of Arabic terms also shows his familiarity with the language. 

A young priest of his learning and abilities did not have to wait 
' long for preferment, and in 1163, which must have been immediately 
after his return from his Western studies, we find him figuring as a 
Canon of the church in Tyre. Although not living in Jerusalem, 
William evidently soon became a special favourite with the king, 
Amalric I., at whose request he was made an archdeacon on the 1st 
of September, 1167. The little kingdom of Jerusalem was at this 
time agitated by the plan that Amalric had conceived of subjugating 
Egypt. For many years a civil war had been waged in that country 
headed by two rival viziers. As each party was threatened with 
defeat, it had applied in turn to the Turks or to the Latins for aid, 
so that Amalric had had an excellent opportunity for obtaining a 
thorough knowledge both of the wealth and of the weakness of his 
neighbours. Induced partly by cupidity, and partly by fear of 
the Turks,—who under the brave Noureddin were becoming more 
powerful every day,—Amalric decided that the time had come for a 
serious invasion of Egypt, and, to this end, he sent an embassy to 
Constantinople to ask for assistance from the Emperor Manuel, whose 
niece he had lately married. William, the newly-made archdeacon, 
accompanied this embassy, which was composed of Greeks and 
Latins. He remained in Constantinople, presumably on business for 
the king, until October 1168, when he returned to Tyre and to his 
church duties. His relations to his archbishop seem, however, not 



III. William of Tyre in Jerusalem. xxiii 

to have been very agreeable, and in a few months, early in 1169, we 
find him starting for Rome, partly, as he expressly states, on private 
business, and partly to get out of the way of his unfriendly superior. 
Towards the close of this same year he returned to Palestine, but not 
to Tyre, as Amalric offered him the tutorship of his nine-year-old 
son, afterwards known as Baldwin IY. or Baldwin the Leper. From 
this time on, William lived in Jerusalem, and seems to have grown 
daily in favour with the king, already well-disposed towards him. 

That William was a kind and able instructor is not to be doubted 
by any one who reads the accounts that he gives of his royal charge. 
The most interesting is that of Book XXI., chap. 1 :— 

“The child made great progress in his studies, and more and 
more gave, us reason to centre our hopes upon him. He had a fine 
figure, and was more skilful in riding and controlling a horse than 
any of his ancestors had been. He had a good memory, and was 
fond of conversing. He was economical, and remembered a kind¬ 
ness done to him as well as an injury. He resembled his father, not 
only in face but in form, and in his walk, and the sound of his 
voice. His mind was quick, but his tongue was slow. Like his 
father, also, he was fond of hearing interesting stories told, and was 
always ready to follow good advice.” 

The boy seems in return to have conceived a deep attachment for 
the wise and learned prelate. 

In 1173 Amalric died, and Baldwin succeeded to the throne, at 
the age of 13. The future did not promise tranquillity or happiness 
to the young king, who was even then afflicted with an incurable 
and loathsome malady. The political situation of Jerusalem, always 
one of danger, was at this time more precarious than ever. Weakened 
by the fruitless attempts of Amalric to conquer Egypt, it wa3 now 
torn by internal dissensions, as the more powerful barons contended 
among themselves for the supremacy, foreseeing the speedy death of 
the sick boy. Amidst this confusion the fortunes of William throve 
steadily. He was immediately appointed Chancellor of the Kingdom, 
as he tells us, Book XXI., chap. 5, “ ut esset qui regiarum episto- 
larum curam habent.” Very soon after, in 1174, Bishop Radulphus 
of Bethlehem died, and William was installed in the vacant bishopric. 
At about the same time he must have been made archdeacon of the 
church in Nazareth, as the records show him in possession of thi3 
dignity in December 1174. The very next year, his old enemy, Frederic 
Archbishop of Tyre, died, and William was named as his successor. 
For the next three years we find William occupied with his double 



xxiv III. William of Tyre. His Death* 

duties as Chancellor and as Archbishop, keeping an attentive eye on 
the political condition of his land,—which we know from his own 
words was a constant and ever-increasing source of anxiety to him,— 
and at the same time defending firmly the rights of his pupil against 
all encroachments. In September 1178 he went with the dignitaries 
of the Holy Land to Home, to the third Council held in St. John 
Lateran. There he was deputed to draw up a report of the Council, 
of the number of persons present, of its proceedings, and its decisions. 
He remained in Rome until September 1179, when he started for home, 
stopping on the way several months at the court of Manuel, Emperor 
of Constantinople, on political business, and arriving in Tyre the 6th 
of July, 1180. On his return, William found his native land in 
greater need than ever of wise counsels and energetic action, and 
from this time on he occupied himself much more with statesmanship 
than with ecclesiastical matters. The rapidly increasing power of 
Saladin was a source of the greatest apprehension to the feeble little 
Latin kingdom, and none saw more clearly than William, the dangers 
that threatened them, or strove more untiringly to prepare for the 
struggle which was inevitably to come. Although his home was 
ostensibly in Tyre, he spent all of his time in Jerusalem with the 
young king. 

Late in the year 1182 came the news of Saladin’s approach at the 
head of a powerful army. After‘ravaging Galilee, Saladin commenced 
the siege of Beirut. Baldwin, accompanied by William, hastened to 
Tyre, where a fleet was fitted out to be sent to the rescue of the 
threatened city. The two, pupil and master, celebrated Christmas at 
Tyre, and then returned in January 1183 to Jerusalem. 

This is the last positive record by himself that we have of 
William of Tyre. The last chapter of his history mentions the inci¬ 
dents of the spring and summer of this year, without any specific 
information as to his own movements. Of the date of his death, 
nothing certain is known. Ernoul, in his continuation, gives the 
following account of it.—In 1180, Amalric, patriarch of Jerusalem, 
died. The question of his successor was one of great importance, as 
the position of spiritual director of the Holy City, and that of 
guardian of the Holy Sepulchre, was regarded by the whole Christian 
world as one of the most honourable that the Church had in its gift. 
Sybilla, mother of the infant Baldwin V., favoured Heraelius of 
Caesarea, a man of fine personal appearance : “ Beau clerc <5tait," says 
Ernoul, “ et pour sa beauts l’ama la mfere le roi,” His habits, however, 



IV. William of Tyre’s Literary Works. xxv 

were dissolute, and William opposed him energetically, not only on 
the ground of his personal unfitness for this lofty position, but also 
because of a prophecy that the Holy Cross which had been brought 
back to Jerusalem under a Heraclius, should be taken away again 
under a Heraclius. 

Heraclius, notwithstanding, received the patriarchate. William, 
convinced of the evils that would result from this unworthy choice 
at such a critical time, decided to appeal to Rome, and hastened 
hither to prevent if possible its confirmation. Here he died sud¬ 
denly, killed, it was supposed, by poison administered by a phy¬ 
sician sent after him for that purpose by Heraclius. As the quaint 
old French of the 13th century has it, “Quand Eracle sut qu’il ala k 
Rome, dist a un sien fisicien qu’il alast apiAs, et quil l’empoissonast; 
et cil si fist; si fu mort.” 

IV. WILLIAM OF TYRE’S LITERARY WORKS. 

The literary productions of William of Tyre, of which we have 
to-day any knowledge, are three in number. 

I. The already mentioned Report of the Third Lateran Council, 
held in Rome in 1179. In his 21st Book, chap. 26, William refers 
to this Report thus: “ If any one would like to know the statutes 
of this Council, the names, the number, and the titles of the bishops 
who were present, let him read the account that we wrote of it, at 
the request of the holy fathers who were there present, which we 
have caused to be deposited in the archives of the holy church at 
Tyre, among other books that we have placed there.” 

II. A History of the Arabian Princes, from the time of Mahomet 
up to the year 1184. This book which was entitled De Gestis 
Orientalium Principum, or De Orientalibus Principibus et eorum 
Actibus, is now unfortunately lost, but in the prologue to his History 
of the First Crusade, William speaks of having written it, and says 
that he was urged to undertake it by King Amalric, who procured 
for him the Arabian books that he used as authorities, especially the 
history of Seitli, patriarch of Alexandria, which he followed mainly. 

“ Cujus etiam rogatu ipso Arabics exempleria menestrante alium 
historiam, a tempore seductoris Mahumeth usque in hunc annum, 
qui est nobis ad incarnatione Domini M.C.L.XXXIV, per Annos 
quingentos septuaginta decurrentem conseripsimus, auctorem maxime 
secuti virum venerabilem Seith, filium Patrici, Alexandrinum patri- 
archum.” 



xxvi IV. William of Tyre’s Litfrary Works. 

He also mentions this same work in several other places, namely, 
Book L chap. 3, Book XIX. chapters 15 and 21. 

This “venerabilem Seith ” is, according to the best authorities, 
Said Ibn Batrik, born in Egypt in 879. He was a celebrated phy¬ 
sician, and was for many years Patriarch of Alexandria. His book 
was written in Arabic, 4 Uid contained a history of the world, from 
the time of Adam up to the year 326 of the Hegira, that is, up to 
937 a.d. The Arabic word Said or Seith, meaning “ the fortunate 
one,” was transformed into Eutychius, in Greek; and the same 
history was published in a Latin and Arabic edition, at Oxford, 
in the 17th century, by one Pococke, under the title S. Eutychii 
Patriarchi Alexandrini Annales Lai. et Arab., ed. Pococke, Oxon. 
1658. 

III. William’s third work was his History of the First Crusade 
and of the Establishments founded in the East by the Crusaders, or, 
as the title runs —Historia rerum in partibus transmarinis Oestarum. 
This is really the great work of his life, and the work on which his 
literary fame rests. Soon after his return from his Eastern studies, 
in 1163, he conceived the plan of writing a truthful and unbiassed 
history of Latin affairs in the East. King Amalric encouraged him 
also in this literary undertaking, and volunteered to assist him in 
every way possible. The first eleven books were finished, the internal 
evidence shows us, before the summer of 1173 : book fourteen, after 
William was made Archbishop; and the first chapter of the unfinished 
twenty-third book must have been written in the last year of his 
life. According to these data, the book occupied him for twenty 
years. 

When we consider William of Tyre’s merits as a historian critic¬ 
ally, and compare him with other writers of the same period, it is 
not difficult to see that he far surpasses them all, and that his work 
is, in fact, the first history, in the modern sense of the word, and the 
best, that the Middle Ages have to show us. The list of authors 
who have treated of the same subject is a long one, but none are at 
all worthy to be compared with William, either in learning, ability, 
style, or arrangement of materials. We have, first, the narratives of 
those men who were themselves eye-witnesses of the events they 
record—diffuse, ill-arranged chronicles, generally written from a par¬ 
tisan standpoint, to celebrate the prowess and doughty deeds either 
of one great noble or hero, or of one nation or section of a nation. 
Under this head may be ranked Raymond of Agiles, who accompanied 



IV. William of Tyre's lAterary Works. xxvii 

the Count of Toulouse on the First Crusade. Naturally, his liege 
lord and the hot-headed superstitious Provencals have the leading 
places in his account of things. Then comes an anonymous writer, 
attached probably to Bohemond, Prince of Tarentum, whose adven¬ 
tures and prowesses he narrates at length. Foucher of Chartres is 
the next in order, with his chronicle, which he calls Gesta Peregrin- 
cintium Francorum. Foucher started for the Holy Land in the suite 
of Robert of Normandy and Steven of Blois, but soon left them for 
Baldwin, the brother of Godfrey of Boulogne, whom he followed to 
Edessa, so that his narrative recounts the deeds and conquests of the 
North Frenchmen and Flemish. 

In many instances these accounts disagree totally, and the aim of 
their authors seems to be, not so much to give a fair, dispassionate, 
accurate statement of what happened, as to make everything as mar¬ 
vellous and wonderful as possible. As to the historians who were 
not eye-witnesses—of whom Albert of Aix (Albertus Aquensis) is a 
fair sample—they seem to have copied all the others, without even 
noticing the incongruities in the narrations that they were com¬ 
bining, or without having the least idea of regarding their sources 
with any critical attention. 

William’s idea of the manner in which a history should be writ¬ 
ten was very different from this. In the first place, the scope of his 
work was much greater, including not only an account of the First 
Crusade, but of almost a century of French rule in the Orient. 
Instead of plunging in mediae res, he went systematically to work, 
and gave, in the first place, a clear, well-arranged description of the 
state of things in the East, previous to the First Crusade, with a 
logical analysis of the causes leading up to that great movement. 
As to his sources, William states in his Preface, that Books I. to XV. 
are based on oral communications of old people, on letters and other re¬ 
liable documents. He also states further, that he has used no previous 
authorities: “ In hoc vero nuliarn aut Grsecam, aut Arabicam habentes 
prseducem scripturam, solis traditionibus instructi, exceptis paucis 
quie ipsi oculata fide conspeximus narrationis seriem ordinavimus.” 

Notwithstanding this elaborate disclaimer, it is certain that 
William was acquainted with all previous histories of the Crusades. 
Von Sybel, the learned German historian of the First Crusade, has 
amused himself by comparing William’s history with those of Albert 
of Aix, Foucher of Chartres, Raymond of Agiles, and Tudebodus, 
and has clearly demonstrated that William followed sometimes one, 



xxviii IV. William of Tyres Literary Works. 

sometimes another of these authorities for the first half, at least, of 
his work. But this much must be said for him, that he followed 
with discrimination, always selecting the author who, in his judg¬ 
ment, would be most likely to have gotten the correct account of an 
event, and always suppressing whatever, to his mind, savoured of 
exaggeration, or appealed too strongly to the credulity or superstition 
of his time—in a word, he weighed carefully his authorities, and 
strove to be painstaking, critical, and impartial. 

When it came to the later period of his history-—to that of his 
own time—he was equally exacting in respect of the testimony of 
eye-witnesses, always, if possible, getting more than one account of 
an event or a transaction. His historical and geographical data are 
especially accurate and good. He also seems to have some idea of 
the philosophy of history, and tries to bring out clearly the relations 
of cause and effect in his narration of events. His style is excellent. 
Although using the Latin of the Middle Ages, it was founded on the 
best Latin models, with which, as we have already seen, he was 
thoroughly familiar. His matter is well arranged, and his sentences 
clear. His great fault is a certain striving after rhetorical effect. 
He is fond of stately, well-sounding sentences, and fine phrases, which 
he employs with effect in his descriptions of battles and sieges. The 
merits of a style of this kind are seen but dimly through the medium 
of 15th-century English, especially when we consider, that, often 
owing to mistranslation, or to paleographic errors, the long sentences 
which were so sonorous in Latin, have suffered a reductio ad ab- 
surdum, and have lost not only their pristine literary grace, but 
even their original meanings. Still, notwithstanding these draw¬ 
backs, no one can read Caxton’s Godeffroye of Boloyne, translation of 
a translation as it is, without feeling the vigour, sincerity, and culture 
of its far-away author, whose character the learned Thomas Fuller 
long ago so admirably summed up, in the Preface to his Holy War : 

“ He was a pious man, and an excellent scholar, skilled in all the 
learned Oriental tongues, besides the Dutch and French, his native 
tongue—a moderate and faithful writer: treasurer he was of all the 
money contributed to the Holy War, chancellor of his kingdom, 
employed in several embassies in the West; present at the Lateran 
Council, the acts whereof he did record; cardinal he might have been, 
but he refused it; in a word, unhappy only that he lived in that age, 
though that age was happy that he lived in it.” 



V. The Life of Godfrey of Bouillon. 


xxix 


V. GODFREY OF BOUILLON. 

• 

Godfrey of Bouillon is to us of the 19th century a very shadowy 
personage, known chiefly as one of the leading characters in Tasso’s 
Jerusalem Delivered, and it would certainly not occur to us, were we 
called upon to name the world’s greatest heroes, to place him high 
up in the list. 

As the dispassionate modem judge reads the histories of the 
First Crusade, it seems to him that there are half a dozen other 
princes at least who deserve as much consideration and admiration 
as Godfrey : the clever scheming Bohemond, the chivalrous Tancred, 
the impetuous Count of Toulouse, and even Godfrey’s own brother, 
the sensible and energetic Baldwin, all, according to the records, seem 
to have done as good service; all seem to have played as important 
a part, and to have distinguished themselves as much as Godfrey of 
Bouillon. But it is very evident that William of Tyre does not 
think so, nor does Caxton, nor any of the preceding or subsequent 
historians of the Crusades. 

Young, chivalrous, and sincerely religious, Godfrey of Bouillon 
seems from the very beginning of the First Crusade to have aroused 
the popular admiration, and to have been singled out from among his 
peers to become the subject of tradition, legend and poetry. In fact, 
by common consent he was regarded as the central figure of the 
Crusades; and there is no doubt that Caxton only voices the general 
opinion of his time when he “stalls” him in “thyrde stalle of the 
moost worthy of Cristen men," and ranks him as the world’s greatest 
hero since Arthur and Charlemagne. Of course, as is the case with 
all great men who live in an uneducated and uncivilized age, a series 
of traditions and legends soon grew up around his name. Even less 
than a hundred years after his death, at the time that William of 
Tyre wrote his history, these traditions and legends were widely 
spread. Over some of them the discriminating William shakes his 
head, in particular, wisely refusing to credit the story of the swan, 
which strangely enough, after having been brought from the East by 
Oriental story-tellers, had attached itself to the family of Bouillon. 
Of this very legend, William says, “ Praeterinus denique studiose 
licet id verum fuisse plurimorum, astruat narratio cygni fabulam, 
unde vulgo dicitur, sementivam eis fuisse originem, eo quod a vero 
videatur deficere talis assertio.” 



XXX 


V. The Life of Godfrey of Bouillon, ffis Birth. 

Other traditions, equally false but more probable and natural, he 
accepts, and bravely incorporates in the interesting little sketch which 
he gives us of the life of Godfrey, in the ninth book of bis history, 
when narrating the circumstances of the choice of the first king of 
Jerusalem. Indeed, late investigations have shown that much of 
the biography of Godfrey of Bouillon which has been regarded as 
authentic, is either without any foundation in fact, or has been 
obtained from unreliable sources. In the few pages following, I give 
a brief account of what is really known of the life of Godfrey of 
Bouillon. This account, although containing information regarding 
our hero’s early life—from outside sources—yet on the whole follows 
William of Tyre, and fulfils the double purpose of giving a brief 
biography of Godfrey of Bouillon, and, at the same time, a short 
resume of Caxton’s book, from the point where Godfrey puts on the 
cross, to start for the Holy Land. 

Godfrey of Bouillon—or “ Boloyne,” as Caxton incorrectly calls 
him—was the second son of Eustache, count of Boulogne-sur-Mer, 
and Ida, sister of the hump-backed Godfrey, duke of Lower Lorraine. 
William, following the authority of William of Malmesbury, makes 
Godfrey the eldest son of his parents, but Ordericus Vitalis and 
other contemporary historians state that he was the second son. In 
the life of his mother Ida ( Acta Sanctorum, ad XIII April, p. 141), 
we find also that Godfrey is given as her second son. He was of 
most distinguished birth and lineage, as both his father and his 
mother traced their descent back to Charlemagne. Eustache and 
Ida had two other sons; one older, named after his father, Eustache, 
succeeded to the estates and title of Count of Boulogne; another, 
younger, named Baldwin, became king of Jerusalem after Godfrey’s 
death. William of Tyre assigns to Ida a fourth son, named William, 
who remains at home with his mother, while his three brothers are 
fighting in the Holy Land, but no reliable authority for the truth of 
this statement has ever been found. Ida had no daughter, although 
tradition designates a sister of Godfrey of Bouillon as the unfortunate 
and ill-used wife of Henry IV. of Germany. 

The year of Godfrey’s birth is not positively known, but its most 
probable date is 1060. His birth-place is equally uncertain, some 
authorities stating that he was bom in Baisy, Brabant, thus making 
him a German subject both by birth and adoption. Most of the 
later historians and biographers have, however, decided in favour of 
Boulogne-sur-Mer, in France, his father’s ancestral home. Here the 



V. The Life of Godfrey of Botoillon. His Cha/racter. xxxi 

three boys were very carefully reared by their pious and intelligent 
mother, whose teachings seem to have had a life-long influence over 
them all. 

Godfrey, who at an early age was adopted by his childless uncle 
Godfrey, duke of Lower Lorraine, spent much of his childhood in 
Brabant, and at the age of seventeen succeeded to the March of 
Antwerp and all his uncle’s allodial possessions. Among these was 
the family castle of Bouillon, from which he took his title, which 
curiously enough Caxfcon has altered into “ Boloyne,” confounding it 
evidently with that of his father and brother in France. The early 
manhood of Godfrey, up to the call for the First Crusade, as narrated 
by enthusiastic biographers, and repeated to a certain extent by 
William of Tyre, represents him already as a brilliant, irresistible 
hero. According to these traditions, Godfrey appears at the court of 
the Emperor of Germany, surrounded by glittering retainers. Henry, 
impressed by the stately manner and beautiful person of the youthful 
hero, inquires “ Who is this noble-looking knight ? ” and kisses him 
when he leams his name, twice on the chin and cheek. Then 
follows a series of knightly deeds. Godfrey succours the poor 
orphan, protects the friendless, and fights a duel for part of his 
heritage unjustly claimed by a relative. He is chosen from all the 
German nobles to carry the banner of his emperor against Rudolph 
of Suabia, and kills this same Rudolph on the field of battle. Then 
comes the famous journey to Rome, where Henry besieges the Pope, 
and Godfrey, after wonderful deeds of valour, is the first to enter the 
city. Here, tradition says, heated by battle, he drank too freely of 
wine, and was in consequence seized with a fever, which lasted until 
he put on the cross for the First Crusade, when he immediately 
became well. William of Malmesbury, who relates the story, states 
that Godfrey had no return of his malady during all the exposures 
of the First Crusade, until Jerusalem was taken, and a Christian 
government thoroughly established; then, his mission on earth being 
fulfilled, God permitted his fever to seize him again so violently, that 
in a few days he died of it. All of these stories oxcept the last are 
plausible, and probable enough, but we do not find authorities to 
confirm them. Godfrey’s life up to the time of the First Crusade— 
as nearly as can be gathered from documents and authentic records— 
was that of an ordinary young knight of good family. He was 
courageous and upright, and occupied himself chiefly in protecting 
his possessions from powerful and greedy neighbours, and in attend- 

GODFREY. e 



xxxii V. The Life of Godfrey of Bouillon. First Crusade. 

ing to his own affairs. His chief care seems to have been to advance 
to the best of his ability his own worldly interests; and there seems 
to have been very little manifestation of religious enthusiasm, or 
indeed of those heroic qualities which were soon to develop him into 
a world-renowned hero, and obtain for him honours which the world 
esteemed as among the greatest that could be conferred upon mortal 
man. This mucli is really known of him. He had a quarrel with 
Count Theodore of Flammes, whom he took prisoner, and kept in 
durance vile for the rest of his life. When only seventeen, he was 
besieged in the Castle of Bouillon, just after his uncle’s death, by 
Albert count of Namur, and by the Bishop of Verdun. Against 
this combined attack Godfrey defended his fortress with skill and 
energy. The lords of Bouillon up to 1076 were also counts of 
Verdun, but after this time, Bishop Theoderic wished to have the 
title and the property bestowed upon Albert of Namur. Godfrey 
naturally opposed this intention, and not only protected himself and 
thwarted their purpose, but laid waste the diocese of the Bishop, and 
harassed him afid his ally in every possible way. That Godfrey did 
go to Rome, to aid the Emperor against the Pope, seems definitely 
established, and as a reward for his services, in 1089, Henry 
bestowed upon him the duchy of Lower Lorraine, which had been 
refused him after the death of his uncle. 

When the call for the First Crusade came in 1095, from Urban 
II, at the council of Clermont, Godfrey decided at once to go, and 
set about his preparations with such energy that he was the first of 
the great princes ready to start, although his retinue was one of the 
largest, for under his standard were ranged 10,000 horsemen and 
80,000 infantry. At this time, it is certain that he had no idea of 
devoting his life to the conquest of Jerusalem, and no intention of 
expatriating himself for ever. He sold his castles of Stenay and 
Monzon to the Bishop of Verdun, with whom he seems to have been 
on good terms again; he also mortgaged the Seignory of Bouillon to 
tho Bishop of Liege, but on the express condition that he himself, or 
three of his nearest heirs especially named, might buy the property 
back within fourteen years. The price fixed was 1300 silver marks, 
and three gold marks. This price is given by Gilles d’Arval. 
Ordericus Vitalis says that he received 7000 marks of silver for 
them, while Albert d’Aix makes it only 1500. The bishop had a 
great deal of difficulty in raising this large sum of money, and even 
went so far as to despoil the shrine of St Lambert, the altar, the 



V. The Life of G. of Bouillon. Start for the Holy Land, xxxiii 

pulpit, and the sacerdotal vestments, of their gold and precious 
stones, besides taking everything valuable that he could lay his 
hands on in the convents and monasteries of his diocese. 

The fact that Godfrey made a series of unusually rich donations 
to different ehurches and religious houses between the years 1090 
and 1096 is well authenticated. In 1090 the records show that he 
restored to the Abbey of Gorze, in the diocese of Metz, the church of 
St. Dagobert at Stenay. In 1096 he gave many large gifts to this 
same church in concert with his brother Baldwin. In 1094, in 
concert with his mother and brothers, he presented the church of 
Baisy to the monastery of St. Pierre at Bouillon. He also founded 
at Antwerp the chapter of St. Michel, transferred later to the church 
of Notre Dame. In 1096 he assigned five manors to the monastery 
of Afflighem, situated near Genappe; and the same year the family, 
as a whole, gave the church of Genappe, with all its revenues, to the 
same monastery. Godfrey also gave the castle of Falkenstein to the 
church of Notre Dame at Verdun, and presented the chapter of St. 
Jervais, at Maestricht, with an estate that he possessed on the 
Meuse. 

Godfrey’s worldly and religious affairs thus being all put in 
order, as we see, he finished his preparations and started for the 
Holy Land in August 1096, with his brothers Eustache and Bald¬ 
win. As for the oft-repeated statement that Godfrey was the officially 
appointed leader of the First Crusade, there is no truth in it. The 
Papal Legate, Bishop Adhemar of Puy, was the only person to whom 
any authority had in any sense been officially delegated; but there 
was no one particular leader of this great movement in the strict 
sense of the word; each great prince prepared his own outfit, and 
gathered his army, and set out, when and how it best pleased him. 
If Godfrey has always been considered the central figure of the First 
Crusade, it is owing not to his political position, but to his moral 
influence and personal character, probably because it was instinctively 
felt that he, more than any other of the great princes, was in sym 
pathy with the tendencies and motives that called it into being. 

Godfrey’s journey to Constantinople, which city Adhemar had 
chosen as the rendezvous of all the princes, was not an easy one. He 
found all the countries through which he had to pass excited and 
unfriendly, owing to the outrages which had been perpetrated upon 
their inhabitants by the undisciplined bands of common people that 
had preceded him. Following the Danube, he arrived peacefully 



xxxiv V. The Life of Godfrey of Bouillon. At Constantinople. 

enough at the boundaries of Hungary. Here however he encoun¬ 
tered great difficulties, so that it took him the whole month of 
September to traverse that country. The first part of November he 
crossed Bulgaria, and finally reached Nissa, where he received friendly 
messages from the Greek emperor Alexis, which he accepted in good 
faith. When he came to Phillipopolis, however, he learned that 
Hugh of Vermandois, brother of the king of France, who had pre¬ 
ceded him to Constantinople by another route, instead of being 
treated by the Greeks with the consideration due to his lofty rank, 
was held a prisoner by the Emperor. Indignant at this treatment, 
Godfrey—who had scrupulously refrained from molesting the inhabit¬ 
ants of the countries through which he passed—immediately gave 
his men licence to pillage the land. This summary proceeding soon 
brought the Emperor to his senses, and he begged Hugh’s pardon for 
his imprisonment, and agreed to set him free as soon as the French 
army should arrive in front of Constantinople. Not being able to 
obtain his ends by force, the crafty Alexis then changed his tactics, 
and by flattery and gifts soon persuaded Hugh, who was a vain 
young prince, to take the oath of allegiance to him—hoping to induce 
all the other barons and princes to follow this example. Godfrey 
was the next to arrive; but on being summoned to swear fealty and 
obedience to the Emperor, he utterly refused to do so, exclaiming 
reproachfully to Hugh, who came to him a second time to persuade 
him to take this step, “ What! you, a king's son, have become 
a slave also!” But as the winter wore on, and Alexis showed him¬ 
self so unfriendly, Godfrey began to fear that, unless this concession 
were made, they might be long delayed in their undertaking, or 
indeed be hindered altogether from going on to Jerusalem. Albert 
of Aix, who gives a fuller report of these negotiations than William 
of Tyre, states that finally Godfrey consented to become Alexis’ liege 
man, rather than bring about an open rupture with him, saying that 
he had not left home to overturn Christian kingdoms, but to get the 
Emperor’s help in carrying Christian weapons against Jerusalem. 
This matter being settled the barons and princes decided to leave 
Constantinople, and to continue on their holy journey. The first 
city of importance beyond Constantinople on Mussulman territory 
was Nicaea, the capital of Bithynia, then under the rule of Solyman's 
son David, surnamed Kilidge-Arslan, or the Sword of the Spirit. 
This town, although strongly fortified, the Crusaders resolved to 
besiege. Godfrey fought valiantly, and performed wonderful deeds 



V. The Life of Godfrey of Bouillon. Conquers Saracens, xxxv 

of valour, but he was not successful as the director of this siege. 
Nothing was really accomplished before Nicaea until Bohemond, 
Prince of Tarentum, arrived. He infused new life and energy into 
everything, and soon forced Kilidge-Arslan to surrender. 

In accordance with the oath that they had sworn at Constanti¬ 
nople, the Crusaders handed the city over to Alexis, on the 27th of 
June, 1097. Having rested themselves thoroughly, they set off again 
for Syria by way of Phrygia, Cilicia, and the passes of the Taurus. 
Very unwisely the army divided, the main body, under Godfrey, 
Raymond of Toulouse, Adhemar, and Hugh of Vermandois, crossing 
the plain of Dorylaeum, while a smaller force, commanded by the 
Duke of Normandy, Bohemond, and Tancred, turned off to the left. 
Kilidge-Arslan, after his flight from Nicaea, nothing daunted by 
his defeat, had collected an army of about 200,000 men, and had 
returned, hoping to retrieve his misfortunes. As soon as he learned 
of the division of the army of his opponents, he determined to 
attack the smaller body. A terrible slaughter ensued. The Sara¬ 
cens were on the point of gaining a complete victory, when the 
main army came up to the rescue, preceded by Godfrey and fifty 
knights, who had been too impatient to wait for their slower-moving 
companions. In a moment the situation was changed. The Saracens 
were thoroughly routed, and fled in every direction, leaving their 
tents and a rich booty to the victors. 

The Crusaders continued their route after their victory, through 
an arid and desolate country, suffering incredible tortures from 
hunger, thirst, and heat; and it was not until they arrived in 
Armenia that relief was obtained. Here Baldwin left the main body 
of the army in order to besiege Edessa, which seemed to him too 
tempting a piece of booty to be left behind, while Godfrey and the 
other princes marched towards Antioch in Syria, which great and 
powerful city they realized must be taken before they could go on to 
Jerusalem. 

Bagi Sijan, a Seljoucide prince, was at this time Emir of Antioch. 
For several years the whole Mahommedan world had been convulsed 
by internal religious dissensions. The two parties, whose heads 
resided respectively in Egypt and Bagdad, were struggling for the 
mastery in Palestine. Bagi Sijan,—or Baghistan, as he is called in 
French and English Chronicles,—who sympathized with the Fati- 
mides or Egyptian faction, was absent from Antioch as the Crusaders 
approached, having gone with the princes of Aleppo and Jerusalem 



xxxvi V. The Life of Godfrey of Bouillon. Siege of Antioch. 

against Emessa, which was occupied by the opposite faction. On 
hearing the news of the Christians' arrival, he speedily returned to 
Antioch, and realizing his danger, sent for aid in all directions, 
including even those foes against whom but the day before he had 
been arrayed in arms. 

The Crusaders, after some debate, decided to attempt the siege of 
Antioch immediately, and took up their position around its walls, 
notwithstanding the fact that they had not enough men to invest 
them entirely. This was a siege in which, strange to say, the 
besiegers suffered infinitely more than the besieged. Antioch was 
well provisioned, while the country round about had been so 
thoroughly pillaged and laid waste, that it was with extreme diffi¬ 
culty that the Christians could obtain the necessities of life. Added 
to this was the discomfort of a rainy season, so long continued that 
their very tents rotted over their heads. As a natural consequence of 
this state of things, a frightful epidemic broke out, which reduced 
their numbers with startling rapidity, and enfeebled and discouraged 
those who were left alive. It was not until spring returned, and 
better weather came, that anything like energy showed itself among 
the besiegers. 

In all this trouble Godfrey bore himself like a Christian hero, 
suffering patiently with the others, and signalizing himself by deeds 
of valour and courage. One of his exhibitions of strength and 
bravery is reported in more than one of the old chronicles. A fleet 
of Genoese and Pisans having anchored in the port of St. Simon, the 
Crusaders, in all haste and joy, sent a body of men to receive the 
provisions and news that they brought, and to escort back to Antioch 
the sailors and carpenters who were to assist them in constructing 
besieging engines. As the little body of men returned, it was attacked 
and routed by a party of Saracens, who were lying in wait for them. 
Godfrey, hearing of the engagement, hastened to the spot with a large 
detachment of men. Bagi Sijan, who was standing on one of the 
towers of Antioch, rejoicing over the defeat of the Christians, seeing 
his own men, in turn, in danger, sent a party out from the town 
to their assistance. The melee became general, and the fighting 
desperate on both sides. The Christian princes smote prodigious 
blows, and performed wonderful deeds of valour. Robert of Nor¬ 
mandy split the head of one of his opponents to the shoulder with 
a single stroke, but Godfrey surpassed even that. A huge Saracen 
engaged with him, and shivered his shield with the first blow. 



V. The Life of Godfrey of Bouillon. Antioch taken, xxxvii 

Godfrey, rising in his stirrups, calmly cut his adversary in two 
across the middle with one stroke, so that the upper half of the 
man fell to• the ground, leaving the lower half still sitting on the 
horse. 

Thus for months the Crusaders invested Antioch, and at the end 
of this time would have been no nearer accomplishing their purpose 
than at the beginning, had not one Emir Feirus, as William of Tyre 
calls him, a renegade Armenian of wealth aud influence in Antioch, 
turned traitor, and delivered the city into their hands, on condition 
that Bohemond of Tarentum should be its prince and ruler. Once 
inside the walls, the Christians, infuriated by the long resistance, 
and exasperated by their own sufferings, slaughtered the greater part 
of the inhabitants, young and old indiscriminately, as many as six 
thousand perishing in a single night. But Godfrey and the other 
princes had but a short time to exult over their success. It will be 
remembered that Bagi-Sijan at the commencement of the siege sent 
to all the great Mahommedan princes for aid. To his appeal they 
did not turn a deaf ear; and only three days after the Christians 
entered Antioch, on the 6th of June, Kerboga, prince of Mosul, 
presented himself before its gates, with an army estimated variously 
at from 300,000 to 600,000 men, and the besiegers became in turn 
the besieged. On the horrors of that siege it is difficult to dwell. 
It is enough to say, that after being shut up three weeks in a city 
stripped of provisions and stores of every kind, the Crusaders, 
rendered desperate by famine and misery, marched out against 
Kerboga and his army—headed by Godfrey and Tancred, and their 
fellow peers—decided to die by the sword rather than by disease 
and hunger. Inspired by their necessities, and uplifted by their 
religious faith, the weak and enfeebled men fought as only desperate 
men can fight, and were rewarded by complete victory. They 
remained masters of the field, while the vast army of Kerboga was 
scattered to the four winds of heaven. This battle was the end of 
any effective opposition to the onward march of the Crusaders; but 
the hardships that they had endured seemed for the time to have 
quenched the ardour of the leaders of the army, for it was not until 
late in the following winter, after the repeated solicitations of the 
common people, that the princes and great barons could be persuaded 
to leave their private expeditions against adjacent cities, and start on 
their way towards Jerusalem. Godfrey, Eustache, and Robert of 
Flanders did not get under way until spring. 



xxxviii V. The Life of Godfrey of Bouillon. Siege of Jerusalem. 

Their route lay along the sea now, through such a beautiful and 
fertile country, that notwithstanding the murmurs of the common 
people, who were impatient to reach their journey’s end, the leaders 
could not resist the temptation to stop and lay siege to some of the 
wealthy towns near by. Godfrey besieged Gibel, while Kaymond of 
Toulouse attacked Archas. In this way some time was consumed, so 
that it was not until the end of May that the forces were all united 
again, this time, however, with a firm determination to let nothing 
hinder them from proceeding directly to Jerusalem. 

Sickness and war had made terrible havoc among their number, 
so that of the hundreds of thousands who had started on this under¬ 
taking, scarce fifty thousand were now left. The excitement was 
tremendous as they approached the Holy City. The last night, 
many of the men, unable to restrain their impatience, marched the 
whole night through, and at daybreak, June 10th, 1099, saw the 
walls and towers of Jerusalem rise up before them. Never before or 
since, in the history of the world, probably, has a scene of such 
intense emotion, on so large a scale, been seen, or have such transports 
of joy and reverence been witnessed. Strong, stalwart men, who 
had endured untold suffering and privations to behold this sight, 
sobbed aloud; some cast themselves upon their knees in prayer; 
others kissed the earth on which they stood, in an ecstasy of 
rejoicing. 

The very next day energetic preparations were made for the 
assault of the city. To each of the princes was assigned a portion of 
the walls, to invest. Godfrey, with his brother Eustache and his 
cousin Baldwin du Bourg, occupied the north-west side, between the 
gate of Damascus and the gate of Jaffa, which included the spot 
most precious to them all, the inclosure of Mount Calvary. The 
Saracens—well provisioned, and thoroughly prepared for a long siege 
—had not only stripped the country around of everything eatable, 
but had filled up all the wells and cisterns for a long distance, so that 
in a few days the besiegers suffered both from hunger and thirst. 
Nothing daunted, they continued their siege with all the fire of 
religious enthusiasts; and recognizing the fact that their unaided 
strength could not accomplish their purpose, they set themselves 
systematically and patiently about building the necessary engines for 
making a decisive attack. For weeks they laboured untiringly, until 
at length everything that the military science of the time could 
devise, with the limited means and material at their disposal, was 



V. The Life of Godfrey of Bouillon. King of Jerusalem, xxxix 

ready. On Thursday, July the 14th, the assault was commenced. 
For two days the conflict was terrible; both sides fought with the 
energy of desperation, until late on Friday afternoon, when the two 
brothers Lethold and Engelbert of Tournai, followed by Godfrey of 
Bouillon, set foot upon the walls of Jerusalem. In an incredibly 
short space of time Godfrey and his men were down in the city, and 
the gates were thrown open. The Crusaders massacred their enemies 
without mercy, and blood ran in torrents to their knees in the 
street. 

But Godfrey, with his deep religious sentiment, felt that prayer 
rather than bloodshed befitted their first hours in Jerusalem, and set 
the example to the others by withdrawing from the carnage, and 
going barefooted, clad simply in a clean linen garment, to the 
sepulchre of our Lord, to return thanks that He had thus allowed 
them to accomplish their pilgrimage and fulfil their vows. Godfrey 
was followed by all; weapons and bloody garments were laid aside, 
and barefooted, with heads reverently uncovered, all marched to the 
Church of the Resurrection, weeping tears of joy, praying and singing 
songs of penitence and rejoicing. 

The victory now obtained was complete, but there was no time 
to sit idly, or even to rest after their long labours. The city was 
cleared of its dead ; and after that, the first care of the Crusaders was 
to organize a Christian government, and above all to choose a fitting 
ruler, a man capable of leading them in war, and of controlling and 
guiding them in peace. After due deliberation and careful inquiry 
into the character and ability of each of the great barons, on July 
23rd they elected Godfrey of Bouillon king of Jerusalem, and would 
have proceeded immediately to crown him, had not that pious and 
reverential prince unconditionally refused the honour. Their leader 
and duke he was willing to be, “ but God forbid,” said he, “ that I 
should be crowned with a crown of gold, where my Saviour bore a 
crown of thorns.” At least, this is the report of the deliberations 
and their result, as given by William of Tyre, who followed Albert 
of Aix. According to Eaymond of Agiles, the crown was first offered 
to Eaymond of Toulouse, who refused it in the words here attributed 
to Godfrey. Other authorities state that the crown was also offered 
to Robert of Normandy, who in turn refused it, and that then the 
choice fell upon Godfrey of Bouillon. Whether this be true or not, 
it is certain that the choice once made, all were unanimously pleased 
and contented with it; the common people, especially, regarded it as 



xl V. The Life of Godfrey of Bouillon. Death, July 18, 1100. 

the result of an inspiration from heaven. Little opportunity was 
offered for festivities in honour of the new king, as an Egyptian 
army, 300,000 strong, under the Emir Afdal, was advancing against 
them. So confident of victory were the Moslems, that they were 
even bringing with them, it was reported, ropes or chains with 
which to bind their prisoners. At the moment that Godfrey took 
command of the little army of the Crusaders, the enemy were already 
traversing Gaza, the ancient land of the Philistines. He sent im¬ 
mediately for Tancred and Eustache, who were away in Naplouse, 
and prepared to go out against the foe, as he saw that to allow them¬ 
selves to be besieged in Jerusalem would only repeat the horrors of 
Antioch. At first, Robert of Normandy and Raymond of Toulouse 
refused to join the outgoing troops, but soon, seeing the imminent 
danger that threatened them, yielded, and united with the others. 
The two armies met near Askalon, Godfrey at the head of scarce 
20,000 men. But such was their enthusiasm and bravery that 
nothing could withstand them, and the vast army of Afdal was 
gloriously routed. This battle firmly established the Latins in 
Palestine; and the great princes, feeling that they had fulfilled their 
vows, started one after another for home, leaving Godfrey with a few 
thousand men to solve the difficult problem of governing, protecting, 
und increasing his newly-founded domain. 

Of the events of Godfrey’s reign there is but little to say. He 
ruled wisely, strengthening himself in every possible way, and 
making good laws both for the governing and the governed. He 
died after one short year of kingship on July 18, 1100, and was 
buried on Mount Calvary, near the Saviour whom, in life, he had 
striven with reverence and single-heartedness to serve. Tradition 
gives us more than one version of the cause of his death. One 
authority tells us that he died from eating some poisoned fruit, 
presented by the neighbouring Emir of Csesarea; another states that 
he was poisoned by Dagobert, the new bishop of Jerusalem; but 
neither of these two stories seems to be any more reliable than the 
quartan-fever legend already mentioned. 

Thus perished, in the flower of his age, the man who above all 
others was the leading figure in the great religious movements of the 
11th and 12th centuries. 

Caxton’s reasons for presenting the English-speaking and reading 
world with a translation of William of Tyre’s history, he gives us 
in his simple preface. He wishes to arouse his countrymen to a 



V. The Life of Godfrey of Bouillon. Caxton. xli 

renewed interest in the Holy Land, and above all to make them 
familiar with the noble deeds and “hye courageous faytes” of 
Godfrey of Bouillon. As Godfrey disappears from the pages of 
William’s history at this point, so Caxton abruptly ends his transla¬ 
tion, without other comment than the date when the work was 
finished. It may be wondered that Caxton makes no mention of 
William of Tyre, either in his preface, or at the close of the book; 
but there is no reason to believe that he, any more than the other 
editors and translators, knew who the real author of the work was, 
the identity of these editions and translations with the Latin text of 
William of Tyre, being a discovery which it was reserved for modern 
scholars to make. 




1 


GODFKEY OF BULLOGNE, 

OR 

THE SIEGE AND CONQUESTE OF JHERUSALEM. 

CAXTON, 1481. THE PROLOGUE. 

He hye couragyous faytes / And! valyaunt actes of noble, Illus- Noble deeds 
t trous and vertuous personnes, ben diene to be recounted / put held in 

• memory, 

in memorye / and wreton, to thende that ther may be gyuen to influence 
4 to them name Inmortal, by souerayn laude and preysyng, “ v 0 ° r ^ 8 eviI 
And also for to moeue and tenflawme the hertes of the Redars 
amt hierers, for teschewe and! flee werkes vycious, dishonnest and 
vytuperable / And for tempryse and accomplysshe enterpryses 
8 hounestes, and werkes of gloryous meryte, to lyue in remembraunce 
perpetuel / ffor as it is so, that thystoryagraphes haue wreton many 
a noble hystorye, “as wel in metre as in prose, By whiche thactes 
& noble fayttes of thauncyent conquerours ben had in remem- 
12 braunce, and remayne in grete, large / and aourned volumes / and 
so shal abyde in perpetuel memorye, to thentente that gloryous 
Prynces and hye men of noble and vertuouse courage, shold take Princes and 
ensample tempryse werkys leeful and honneste / Fyrst, for goddes simuid^pat- 
] 6 quarell / in mayntenyng oure 1 fayth and the libertees of holy chirche, them. 

For the recuperacion of the holy land, whiche our blessyd lord to recover u>« 
Ihesu Criste hath halowed by his blessyd presence humayno / and 
by shedyng therin for oure redempcion his precious blood ; ffor the 
20 releef of sucho cristcn men as there dwelle in grete myserye and 

thraldomm, And also for the defence of theyr Royammes, Londes, to defend 
Enlierytages / and subgettes. An(t for thyse causes tendeuoyre doms*"'* 
theym in theyr noble persones / with alle theyr puyssaurjces and 
24 power, tadresse and remyse theym in theyr auncyent Fraunchyses 

and lyberte / Acordyng 1 to that we fynde wreton in holy scripture Many noble 
of many noble historyes, which were here ouer long to reherce. written in 
But in especial of thre noble and mooste worthy of alle other, that tnrea. Scnp 
28 is to wytte, fyrst of duo Iosue, that noble prynce / whiche ladde and of Joshua, 

1 Orig. onre. 


GODFREY. 


B 



2 


of David the 
King, 


of the noble 
Judas Mac¬ 
cabeus. 


In profane 
history is 
found re¬ 
corded the 
prowess of 
Hector of 
Troy, 


of Alexander, 


of Julius Cte- 
sar. Emperor 
of Rome. 


Of Christian 
heroes, 
the first and 
best is 

Arthur, King 
of the Britons. 


He is stalled 
in the first 
place. 

Charle¬ 
magne, the 


Of three men of prowess in olden time. [Prol. 

conduyted the Childeren of Israhel, the chosen people of God!, oute 
of deserte in to the londe of promyssyon,the Londe flowynge Mylke 
tod hony. Socondly, of Dauyd! the Kynge and holy Prophete / 
Whorne God! chaas after his herte, And! achyeuyd! many grete 4 
Bataylles, gouernyng the sayd! chosen people of God! by the space of 
fourty yeris / And! the thyrde of the Noble Iudas Machabeus; how 
he delfended* the sayd! people in fj’ghtyng 1 many and! merueyllous 
bataylles, for veray zeele and! loue of his lawe, and'mayntenyng of 8 
the same vnto the deth, tfor which causes a-forsayd, the names of 
thyes thre abyde perpetuel, for thre of the moste beste and! Nobleste 
of the Iewys / And! in the nombre of 1 the moost digne and moost 
worthy / 12 

a Nd by cause valyaunce and prowesse is remembryd emong the 
gentyles & payn[e]mes, as emong thebrewes, I fynde wreton of 
the incredible, cheualrous prowesse of the noble and valyaunt Hector 
of troye, whos excellent actes wryten / Ouyde, Homer, Virgyle, 16 
Dares, Dyctes and other dyuerse, and eche better than other, re- 
herchyng his noble vertUes / strengthe and humanyte / Secondly, of 
Alysaundre the grete kynge of Macedone, which domyned and had 
to hym obeyssaunt the vnyuersal world ; And the thyrde, the noble 2(1 
Julyus Cezar, Emperour of Rome, whos noble actes ben wreton by 
poetes, as lucan / stace and other / And 1 dayly remembryd! as newe 
and ffresshe as he yet lyuyd 1 / whiche thre ben sette as for the moost 
worthy emong the gentyles and paynems. 2! 

n Ow lete vs thenne remembre what hystoryes ben wreton of 
Cristen men, of whom ther be many wreton. But in especial, 
as for the best and worth yest, I fynde fyrst the gloryous / most 
excellent in his tyme / and fyrst founder of the round! table / Kyng 28 
Arthur, kyng of the brytons, that tyme regnyng in this Royamme / 
of whos retenue were many noble Kynges, Prynees / lordes and 
knyghtes, of which the noblest were knygbtes of the round tabic, 
of whos actes and! historyes there be large volumes, and! bookes grete 31 
plente and many / 0 blessyd lord, whan I remembre the grete and 
many volumes of seynt graal / ghaleliot, & launcelotte de lake / 
Gawayn, perceual / Lyonel / and tristram, am? many other, of whom 
were ouer longe to reherce / and also to me vnknowen! But 3 
thystorye of the sayd Arthur is so gloryous and shynyng, that he is 
stalled in the fyrst place of the mooste noble / beste and worthyest 
of the cristen men. Secondly, of Charlemayn, the grete Emperour 3 
3 leaf 1, back. " Orig. Epenarour. 



T’rol ] Charlemagne and Godfrey of Bologne. 

of Allemayne, and kyng of ffraunce / whos noble actes and con- 
questes ben wreton in large volumes with the noble faytes and actes 
of his douje pieros, that is to saye, liowlond and olyuer / with the 
4 other / whos name and renommee abydeth also perpetuel, and is 
stalled in the second place emonge the most worthy of Cristen men. 
Of alle thyse historyes afor reherced, the bookes and volumes ben 
had in latyn, ffrenssh and! Englysslie, and other langage. 

8 t Henne as for the thyrd of the Cristen prynees, taken, reputed 
and renommed for to be egal emong thyse worthy & best that 
euer %vere, I mene the noble Godefroy of Boloyne / whiehe 1 now 
but late, not yet four C. yere syth he flowred, and was stalled in 
12 the thyrde stalle of the moost worthy of Cristen men, whos hystorye 
is made and wreton in Latyn and firensslie in large and grete 
volumes / And as not knowen emonge vs here / whiehe ben adiacent 
and neyghbours to the place of his natyuyte / whos noble hystorye I 
16 late fonde in a booke of ffrenssh, al alonge of his noble actes, 
valyaunees, prowesses / and accomplysshement of his hye empryses / 
In whiehe I fynde very causes, as me semeth, moche semblable and! 
lylce vnto suche as we liaue nowe dayly tofore vs, By the mes- 
20 creauntes and! turkes emprysed / ayenst Cristendom. And! yet 
mocho more nowe than were in his dayes / ffor in his dayes the 
turkes had conquerd vpon Cristendom but vnto the braas of seynt 
George by Constantynople, And had no foote on this syde the sayd 
24 Braas. But at this daye it is so that they haue comen ouer and 
goten that Imperial Cyte, Constantynople aforsayd / and many 
Boyamme and countre / to the grete dommage and hurte of alle 
Cristendom; To the resistence of whom, as yet, fewe Cristen prynees 
28 haue put theym in deuoyr. Thenne I retorne agayn vnto the 
conqueste at suche tyrne as they were coine to the sayd Braas, that 
by the dylygent solicitude of a pour heremyte / the sayd GodefFroy 
of Boloyne, and other dyuerse prynees / lordes and comyn peple, 
32 auowed the croysyng and empryse to warre agayn the mescreauntes, 
And to recouere the holy Cyte of Iherusalem; whiehe afterward 
they achyeuyd, and conquerd fro the sayd braas vnto the holy lande, 
and recouerd the holy cyte of Iherusalem / as in this sayd book, 2 al 
36 alonge and playnly slial appere. In whiehe cyte the sayd Godeffroy 
was elect and chosen for his vertue / prowesse / and blessyd 
disposicion, to be kyng of the sayd Iherusalem, and the londe 
therabout. 


great Em¬ 
peror of Alle¬ 
mayne and 
King of 
France, is 
second. 


All these his¬ 
tories are to 
be had in 
Latin, 

French, and 
other lan¬ 
guages. 

The third is 
Godfrey of 
Bologne, 

His history is 
in Latin and 
French, but 
notyet known 
in English. 


The Tuiks 
to-duy have 
made greater 
encroach¬ 
ments upon 
Christendom 
than in tlie 
time of 
Godfrey. 


The First 
Crusade un¬ 
dertaken at 
the solicita¬ 
tion of a poor 
hermit. 


1 leaf 2. 


8 Orig. boook. 


B 2 



4 Caxton wishes to incite Christians to reconquer Jerusalem. [Prol. 

Tbu history t Henne I, thus vysytyng* this noble hystorye / whiche is no 
fable ne fayned thynge, But alle that is therin trewe / Con- 
lonaiiiering siderynge also the grete puyssaunce of the Turke, grete enemye of 
croacbmeiits oure Cristen fayth, destroyar of Cristen blood!, and vsurpar of 4 
certayn Empyres, and many Cristen Royammes and countrees, And! 
now late this sayd yere hath assaylled the Cyte and castel in the 
Isle of rhodes, where valyantly he hath be resisted; but yet not 
withstondyng he hath approchod more ner, & hath taken the Cyte 8 
of Ydronte in puylle, By whiche he hath goten an entre to entre 
in to the Royamme of Naples; And fro thens, withoute he be re¬ 
sisted, vnto Rome & ytalye / to whos resistence 1 beseche 1 almyghty 
God to pronyde, yf it be his wylle : Thenwe mo semeth it necessary 12 
au Christians and expedyent for alle cristen prynces to make peas / amyte and 
ugahietTi'em, allyaunce eclie with other, and prouyde by theyr wysedommes the 
resistence agayn hym for the defense of our fayth and moder / holy 
chirch / & also for the recuperacion of the holy londe & holy Cyte 16 
of Iherusalem / In whiche our blessyd sauyour, Ihesu Crist, redemed 
and follow vs with his precious blood, And to doo as this noble pry nee 
ofGodrreyor Godeffroy of boloynedyde, with other noble and hye prynces in his 
Bologna. companye. Thenne for thexhortacion 2 of alle Cristen prynces / 20 
Lordes / Barons / Knyghtes / Gentilmen / Marchanntes / and all the 
i translate comyn peple of this noble Royamme, walys & yrlond, I haue 
fromThe emprysed to translate this book of the conquest of Iherusalem out 
TOura^e men of ffrenssh in to our maternal tongue, to thentente tencourage them 24 
the^recovery by the redyng and heeryng of the merueyllous historyes herin 
' comprysed, and of the holy myracles shewyd that euery man in 
his partyc endeuoyre theym vnto the resistence afore sayd, And 
recuperacion of the sayd holy londe. & for as inoclie as I knowe 28 
no Cristen kynge better prouyd in Armes, and for whom god hath 
shewed more grace / And in alle his empryses gloryous, vayu- 
quysshour, happy and eurous / than is our naturel / lawful / and 
souerayn lord and moost cristen kynge / (1) Edward, by the grace of 31 
god, kynge of englond and of ffraunce, and lord of Yrlond / vnder 
the shadowe of whos noble protection /1 haue achyeued this symple 
i hope espe- translacion / that he of his moost noble grace wold adresse, styre, or 
|uce y ion^' commauude somme noble Capytayn, of his subgettes to empryse this 36 
interest him- warre -agayn the sayd turke & hethen peple, to whiche I can 
matter. thynke that euery-man wyll put hand to in theyr propre persones / 

1 leaf 2, back. 2 Orig. thexortaciou. 

(1) The Clarendon figures in brackets refer to the Notes at the end of the text 



5 


Pro].] Admirers of brave deeds are exhorted to read this book. 

and in theyr meuable goodes / Thenne to hym, my inoost drad i address tuu 
naturel andfsouerayn lord, I adresse this symple and? rude booke, rude book to 

my sovereign 

besechyng his moost bounteuous and haboundaunt grace to receyue lord . 

4 it of me, his indigne and humble subgette, William Caxton, And 
to pardonne me so presumynge; besechyng almyghty god that this beuccMnp 
sayd book may encourage, moeue, and ennamme the hertes of may influence 
somrae noble men, that by the same the mescreauntes maye be‘«adit. 

8 resisted? and? putte to rebuke, Cristen fayth encreaced? and? enhaunced, 
and the holy lande, with the blessyd cyte of Iherusalem, recouerd?, 
and? may come agayn in to cristen mens hondes. Thenne I exhorte i exhort uii 

J ° ; m men to read 

alle noble men of hye courage to see this booke, and here it redde: tins book, 

J ° 3 in order to 

12 by which ye shal see what wayes were taken, what noble prowesses learn the 
and valyaunces were acliyeuyd by the noble compahiyes, & especial 
by the said noble prynce godeffroy of boloyne, due of Loreyne / by "“Ijjj,* 00 " 1 ' 
whiche he deseruyd the name of one of the moost worthy that euer 
1G were, and! ys stalled in the thyrd! stalleof the Cristen conquerours J 
And! in the nynthe of the mooste worthy / where his name and 
renomme shal remayne and abyde perpetuel / And for to deserne 
the tentlie place, I beseche almyghty God! to graunte and ottroye to 
20 our sayd souerayn lord, or to one of his noble progenye /1 meane my i beseech my 
lord Prvnce / and my lord Rvchard, due 3 of yorlce and norfolke,(2) nnd my lord 

, J _ , ' , , , , , ’ , , , V ' Riobonl, the 

to whom I humbly beseche / at theyr leyzer and playsyr, to see & nuke ^of 
here redde this symple book, by which they may be encoraged to ^ n ^ k [ h)J 
24 deserue lawde and honour, and that their name and renomme may slm P |e ll00k - 
encreace and remayne perpetuel / And after this lyf short and tran- 
sytorye / All we may atteyne to come to the euerlastyng lyf in 
heuen, where is ioye and reste withoute ende. Amen. 

28 t Henne for to knowe the content of this book, ye shal playnly see by 
the table folowynge / wherof euery chapytre 3 treateth al alonge. 

The fyrst chapytre treateth how Eracles conquerd Perse, And slewe Cosdroe] 
and brought in to Iherusalem the veray Crosse / Capitulo primo. [p. 18, 
(S2 How the puyssaunt Cosdroe wasted thempyre of rome,-for tauenge the deth of 
themperour Mauryce, fader to his wyf / ca°. ij. [p. 20] 

How this puyssaunt kyng entred in to Iherusalem / and demaunded dyly- 
gently of the temple / and reedefyed it, and assigned grete reuenues to 
6 entretiene it / capitulo iij°. [p. 21] 

How Charlemayne by his lyberalyte gate, for the prouffyt of cristen peple in 
hethenesse, thamyte of hethen prynces. capitulo iiij. [p. 22] 

1 leaf 3. 2 Orig. dnc. 3 Orig. ohapytpe. 



G 


Table of Contents, Chapters 5—21. 

Of the noyse that sourded eraonge the hethen peple discordynge in theyr 
lawe / And how they of egypte yssued! oute of theyr londe,' and of the 
euylles and harmes that they dyde. capitulo v. [p. 23] 

How tliafflyction / Iniuryes, and tormentes of cristen men, grewe in the 4 
tyme of Calyphe hetham. capitulo yi. [p. 24] 

How at the requeste of themperour of constantynople the cristen men 
ohteyned licence to bylde agayn the chirche of the holy sepulcre. 

Capitulo vij. [p. 26] 8 

Of the turkes, ,fro wliens they cam, And! how they grewe in to 1 grete 
puyssauwce, & dyde chose theym a kyng for to mayntene their warrys. 

Capitulo viij. [p. 28] 

Of thorryhle synnes regnyng thewne in Cristiente / as wel in thyse partyes as 12 
in tho partyes / capitulo ix. [p. 31] 

Of a bataylle that themperour Ho may n of Constantynople had ayenst a 
prynce of t.horyent named belphot / capitulo x. [p. 32] 

Of many manor tormentes / that the Cristen peple suffred for their synnes in 16 
that tyme. capitulo xi. [p. 35] 

How after they had bon .iiij C / lxxxx yere in the seruage of the hethen 
men, our lord pourueyed remedye for his cristen peple. ca. xii. [p. 36] 
How Peter theremyte enterprysed the more hardly his viage, by the reue- 20 
lacion or vysyon that he sawe in his sleep / ca°. xiij 0 . [p. 39] 

Of the persecucions of the chirche in that tyme / And how the pope Vrban 
was put out of the see of Rome by the Bysshop of Rauenne. 

Capitulo xiiij. [p. 40] 24 

Of a general counseyl that the pope Vrban ordeyned 1 , for the reformacion of 
holy chirche and thamendement of the people. ca / xv. [p. 42] 

How many noble and hye men / and other moyen peple of the royamme of 
ffraunce crossyd theym for to goo ouer see / ca". xvj. [p. 43] 26 

The names of noble men that enterprysed this pylgremage / as wel on this 
syde the see as beyonde the montaynes / 2 ca°. xvij. [p. 45] 

Of thauentures that a Rowte of Cristen men in this vyage, of whom one 
gaultier without knowleche was capitayn / ca°. xviij. [p. 47] 32 

How Peter theremyte was chyef and Capitayn of a grete hooste, in this vyage 
toward the holy londe. capitulo xix. [p. 49] 

How somme of tlioost of Peter theremyte vnwytyng hym / sette fyre in the 
subarbys of Nyz at theyr departyng / capitulo xx. [p. 50] 36 

How Peter theremyte was aduertysed of al this, and of the harme that 
ensiewed / Capitulo xxi. [p. 51] 


1 leaf 3, back. 


2 Orig. montaxnes. 



7 


Table of Contents. Chapters 22 —37. 

How themperour of constantynople, beyng 1 aduertysed of thies oultrages, sente 
his messagers to Peter theremyte / capitulo xxij. [p. 54] 

Of the mayntenyng of thoost of Peter theremyte, And how thre M / duehe- 
4 men toke a castel by assault / and slewe alle theym that were therin 
with the swerd. capitulo xxiij 0 . [p. 55] 

How Solyman, lord of that countre, reprised and toke agayn the castel, and 
slewe alle the duche men that were therin / ca°. xxiiij. [p. 56] 

8 How our men armed theym for tauenge the duche men, And! of a recountre 
that they had agaynst Solyman. ca°. xxv. [p. 57] 

How Peter theremyte, beyng in Constantynople, was aduertysed of this dis- 
confyture / And saued thre thousand cristen men beyng Mn grete daunger. 
12 capitulo xxvj. [p. 58] 

How a preest named Godechan made liymself Capytayn of / xv thousand 
duche men in this vyage, And 1 of theyr oultrayes. 

Capitulo xxvij. [p. 59] 

16 How two C thousand Cristen men afoote, & thre thousand on horsbak, 
withoute Capitayn, assembled! in this pylgremage, And of theyr 
mayntene / capitulo xxviij. [p. 61] 

How this peple began to destroye the londe of the kyng of hongrye by 
20 cause he wold not graunte them leue to passe / capitulo xxix. [p. 63] 
How the due godeffroy of Boloyne beyng with a grete hoost cam vnto 
hongrye, and sente his messagers to the kyng to demande passage. 

capitulo xxx. [p. 64] 

24 How the messagers of due godeffroy declared theyr message vnto the kynge 
of hongrye / and therupon his answere. ca°. xxxj. [p. 65] 

How the sayd kynge sente for to fetche the due Godeffroye, And how he 
wente, & of the deuyses that they had to gydre / ca“. xxxij. [p. 68] 
28 How the due Godefroy sente his messagers to themperour of constanty¬ 
nople, 2 to thende that he shold delyuer to hym huon le mayne and other 
that he helde in pryson. capitulo xxxiij. [p. 69] 

How due Godeffroy constrayned themperour by force to rendre & delyuer 
32 his prysoners. capitulo xxxiiij. [p. 71] 

The grete despyte that themperour toke that due godeffroy refused to goo 
in to Constantynople vnto hym / capitulo xxxv. [p. 72] 

Of the descripcion of the Cyte of Constantynople, And of many conntrees 
36 and londes therabout. capitulo xxxvi. [p. 73] 

How our peple brente theyr lodgys, and toke theyr harnoys / and of an 
assault that the grekes made on them. capitulo xxxvij. fp. 74] 


1 leaf 4. 


2 Orig. constantyuople. 



8 


Table of Contents. Chapters 38—53. 

How after our peple began to destroye the contre / And of a message fro 
Buymont vnto duo godeffroy. And the answere of the due vpon the 
same agayn. capitulo xxxviij. [p. 76] 

How themperouc appeased the due Godeffroy / and sente for hym / and of 4 
thonour that he dyde to hym / capitulo xxxix. [p. 77] 

Of the yeftes that themperour made to due Godeffroye, to the barons, and to 
the gentilmen of his hooste. capitulo xl. [p. 78] 

How buymont was made Capitayn of a greet hooste, And the names of 8 
many nobles of thooste, & of theyr maytene. ca°. xlj. [p. 79] 

Messagers and lettres fro themperour to buymont, And the contenue of the 
same, as foloweth / capitulo xlij. [p. 81] 

How Buymont approched constantynople, and was sente for to come to the 12 
emperour, And how by the prayer of due Godeffroye 1 he wente toward 
hym / capitulo xliij. [p. 82] 

How therle Robert of fflaundres with his hoost approchyd Constantinople, 
And how themperour sente for hym / And of theyr deuyses to gydre. 16 

capitulo xliiij. [p. 83] 

Of the mayntyene of thoost whiche therle of tholouse and the bisshop of 
Puy brought ouer see. capitulo xlv. [p. 84] 

Ambassadours of themperour to the sayd erle and Bysshop, and of the 20 
contenue of his lettres / and of the daunger wherin the sayd bisshop 
was. ca°. xlvj. [p. 86] 

How therle of tholouse, beyng with themperour, wold not doo hommage 
to hym, And of the despyte that themperour dyde / 24 

ca°. / xlvij. [p. 87] 

How themperour, for tauenge hym and therle, made his conestables tenbusshe 
them, and assaylle thoost of therle. capitulo xlviij. [p. 88] 

How at thynstaunte prayer of the barons of thooste, therle made homage to 28 
themperour, which thenne gaf grete yeftes to hym and his / 

capitulo xlix. [p. 90] 

How due Robert of Normandye / and other here named, approuched Con¬ 
stantynople, and made hommage to themperour / ca°. L. [p. 91] 32 

How themperour sente, for to destroye our cristen men, one his seruaunt, 
faynyng to be a trewe eonduytour and guyde. ca°. Lj. [p. 92] 

Of the situacion of Nyeene / And how our peple approuched thert'o, merueyl- 
lyng of the place, and of the strengthe / capitulo / Lij. [p. 93] 36 

How the puyssaunt turke Solyman with a grete hooste aduysed tyme and 
houre to assaylle and smyte on our peple, for to reyse the siege / 

capitulo Liij. [p. 94] 


1 leaf 4, back. 



9 


Table of Contents. Chapters 54—68. 

How Solyinan, beyng 1 in the montaynes, 1 sente his messagers to them of 
the toun, 2 A mV of the comforte that he gaf to theym. 

Capitulo Liiij. [p. 95] 

4 How the messagers of Solyman were taken by our men / And by them was 
kuowen the eouyne of the sayd Solyman. ca°. Lv. [p. 96] 

How a grete batayll of Solyman cam ancV smote on our peple / And of thende 
of the sckarmuche / capitulo Lvj. [p. 97] 

8 How our barons were lodged in the sayd siege / of their mayntene, & how 
euery day they enforced them thassaylle the toun / ca°. Lvij. [p. 98] 
How our barons made castellys of tree and approuched the toun, And how 
they within brake one of theym / and slewe them that were therin / 

12 capitulo Lviij. [p. 99] 

Of the counseyl that our men toke for tassiege the toun by water, for to con- 
strayne them not for to entre ne yssue / capitulo Lix. [p. 100] 

How, after the cyte was assieged by water and by londe, our men 3 assaylle 
16 it; And of a shotte that due godeffroy dyde shote. ca°. Lx. [p. 101] 
How, after many assaultes, oure men beyng in counseyl / A lombard cam to 
them / whiche offred to make an engyne that shold destroye the toun / 

capitulo Lxi. [p. 103] 

20 How after / that this engyne was so wel wrought, the wyf of Solyman, with 
tweyne of her childeren, wente out of the toun, & were taken by our 
men. capitulo Lxij. [p. 104] 

How themperour 4 sente grete barons for to receyue the toun / after that our 
24 peple had acerteyned hym that they wold yelde it / 

Capitulo Lxiij. [p. 106] 

How our hoost 5 departed on theyr ioumeye. And how somme departed fro 
theyr felawship / And how solyman determyned tassaille them / 

28 capitulo Lxiiij. [p. 107] 

Of the bataylle that Solyman had! ayenst somme of oure peple that were 
departed fro theyr felawship folyly / capitulo Lxv. [p. 108] 

Of the dylygence that due godeffroy made whan he was aduertysed herof / 
32 and how Solyman was disconfyted, and! his lygnage taken. 

capitulo Lxvj. [p. 109] 

How the fourth day after this vyctorye, our peple went forth on theyr waye, 
And! of the grete mesease of the hooste the same daye. 

36 Capitulo Lxvij. [p. Ill] 

How somme of the grete barons of thoste / after to haue approuched Anthyoche 
the lasse / departed! for to goo vytaylle them / Capitulo Lxviij. [p. 112] 

1 Orig. montayuea. 2 Orig. tonn. 3 leaf 5. 

4 Orig. themperonr. 5 Orig. hooost. 



10 


Table of Contents. Chapters 69—85. 

Here recounted thystorye of somme aduentures / that thenne fylle in thoost 
of Cristen men / capitulo Lxix. [p. 114] 

How Taucre, that was departed fro thoost / assieged Tarse / and toke it by 
certayn couenaunt. ca°. Lxx. [p. 115] 4 

How hawdwyn, hroder 1 of Godeffroy, sechyng his aduentures, sawe Tancre 
and his peple tofore Tarse, and adressyd hym to theym. 

Capitulo Lxxj. [p. 116] 

Of thenuye that Bawdwyn and his peple had!, to see the baner of Tancre on 8 
the walle of the toun. And! how Tancre departed. 

Capitulo Lxxij. [p. 116] 
How a lytil after, Tancre cam to the Cyte of anamystre / whiche the turkes 
helde, and toke it by assault. capitulo Lxxiij. [p. 118] 12 

How Bawdwyn entred! in to Tharse / And how thre bonder# pylgi’yms were 
slayn of the turkes afore the same toun / Capitulo Lxxiiij. [p. 118] 
How the peple of bawdwyn knewe the departyng of the turkes, 2 And of 
the slaughter of the cristen men. capitulo Lxxv. [p. 120] 16 

How the sayd Bawdwyn retorned to the grete boost / An# how Tancre 
mayntene# hym moche wel in conqueryng* countrees. 

Capitulo Lxxvj. [p. 122] 

How bawdwyn conquer# a grete contre vpon the turkes, by the counseyl of a 20 
knyght Ermyne, named Pancrace / ca°. Lxxvij. [p. 123] 

How they of Rages sente their messagers to bawdwyn, prayeng hym that he 
wold come to theym. capitulo Lxxviij. [p. 124] 

How this due that was at Rages varye# for to holde this / that he had 24 
promysed to bawdwyn / capitulo Lxxix. [p. 126] 

How bawdwyn wente tassaylle famosette, a Cyte nygh to rages. 

Capitulo Lxxx, [p. 127] 

How they of the toun of rages slewe theyr due, And chaas bawdwyn for to 28 
be theyr lord. capitulo lxxxj. [p. 128] 

How bawdwyn wente an# assieged the toun of Sororge, nygh to Rages, and 
toke it / and of his ordenaunces. capitulo lxxxij. [p. 129] 

How the grete hoost cam to fore Marese, and how the turkes that were within 32 
fledde / And how our peple payned them to conquere countrees / 

capitulo lxxxiij. [p. 130] 
How it was commaunded vnto alle the barons to come to thoost, for to goo 
vnto Anthyoche, And of somme recountrees that they had in the waye / 36 

capitulo Lxxxiiij. [p. 132] 
How Anthyoche by sucession of tyme / had dyuerse names. And of the 
noblesse of auncyente. capitulo Lxxxv. [p. 134] 

1 Orig. kroder. * leaf 5, back. 



11 


Table of Contents. Chapters 86—104. 

Of the situacion of Anthyoche. Lxxxvj. [p. 135] 

Who was thenne lord of anthyoche / and! by what maner he was comen vnto 
this seygnorye. capitulo Lxxxvij. [p. 136] 

4 lliiterse oppiynons of our men tofore they had assieged anthyoche. And 
how they acorded alle for tassiege it. capitulo Lxxxviij. [p. 137] 
How, after the situacion of the toun, echc of the hye barons of thoost were 
lodged at the sayd siege / capitulo Lxxxix. [p. 139] 

8 How our peple assembled in counseyl for to fynde the moyen for to sende for 
vytaylle, and! of a brydge that they made. ca°. Lxxxx. [p. 140] 

How our peple stopped a yate without forth / And! of a castel of tree that 
they made. capitulo Lxxxxj. [p. 141] 

12 How oure peple were in grete meschyef, for as moche as they of the toun 
yssued / & entred in & out with grete rowtes. 1 ca°. Lxxxxij. [p. 142] 
Of the famyne and! mortalyte of thost, after that they had 1 be at the sa 3 r d 
siege the space of two monethis / capitulo Lxxxxiij. [p. 144] 

16 How our peple ovdeyned grete Rowtes for to goo for vytalle, 2 & to reteyne the 
peple whiche fledde for hongre. capitulo lxxxxiiij. [p. 145] 

How buymont and therle of fflauwdres mayntened theym, beyng in fourage 
of theyr recountrees / and of the gayn that they made. 

20 capitulo Lxxxxv. [p. 146] 

How a grete Rowte of Cristen men were in this tyme slayn by the turkes 
bytwene® Fynemyo and terme / capitulo Lxxxxvj. [p. 147] 

How the vntrewe greke latyus departed fraudelously fro thoost, And other 
24 moo by the onsample of hym / capitulo Lxxxxvij. [p. 148] 

How the prelates of thoost cou;*seylled to doo penaunce for tappese god, & of 
thordenauwces that were made teschewe synne. 4 Lxxxxviij. [p. 149] 
How buymont fonde a subtil remedye, for to dolyuer and purge thoost of 
28 tespyes of the turkes / capitulo Lxxxxix. [p. 150] 

How the Calyphe of Egypte sente his messagers with grete yeftes vnto our 
hoost. capitulo C. [p. 152] 

How Ancean, lord of Anthyoche / and! the barons, sente vnto the turkes theyr 
32 neyghhours for to demaunde socours. ca° Cj. [p. 153] 

How oure peple knewe the couyne of the turkes. Of thembusshe that they 
made, & of theyr vyctorye & gayn that they had / ca°. Cij. [p. 154] 
How the turkes of Anthyoche sprang out, and assaylled the lodgyses of our 
36 peple / capitulo Ciij. [p. 155] 

Of a castel that oure men made / Of somme pylgryms that arryued atte porte / 
And how they were disconfyted! by a busshement of turkis. 

capitulo Ciiij. [p. 156] 

1 Orig. rowtes. 2 leaf 6. 3 Orig. bytweue. 4 Orig. syuue. 



12 


Table of Contents. Chapters 105—122. 

Of a bataylle where our men auenged them of the turkes / And of a stroke 
that due godeffroy gaf in this bataylle. ca°. Cv. [p. 159] 

How the cristen men thanked' our lord of this vyetorye, And made a castel in 
their mahommerve / where they fouude grete gayne. 4 

Capitulo Cvj. [p. 162] 

Of a fortresse that Tancre made ouer the ryuer, And how he deffended it 
valyauntly. capitulo Cvij. [p. 163] 

How thenne the turlces of the toun 1 began to haue mesoase and 1 sorowe, and 8 
our peple ease. capitulo Cviij. [p. 165] 

How therle estieuen of chartrys and of bloys fledde fro thooste shamefully. 

capitulo Cix. [p. 166] 

How a Cristen man, Emyrferyus, whiche was in Anthyoche, acqueynted hym 12 
with buymont. capitulo Cx. [p. 167] 

Of som deuises that the said emirferius sent to buymont,® <fe hi what maner 
he acorded to delyuer hym the toun / capitulo Cxj. [p. 169] 

How buymont discouerid this thyng to due godeffroy, to huon le mayne, to 16 
the due of normandye, & to therle of flaundres. ca°. Cxij. [p. 170] 

3 Of the grete socours that the soudan 4 of Perse had sente to them of An¬ 
thyoche, And! corbagat assieged Rages / capitulo Cxiij. [p. 171] 

How oure men aduertysed? of the grete hooste of corbagat, sente sowme of 20 
theyr knyghtes for to esteme them. And what they reported of that 
they had seen. capitulo Cxiiij. [p. 172] 

Of the counseyl that oure peple toke for to ordeyne theyr nedes, whan they 
sawe the comyng of this right grete boost. cap®. Cxv. [p. 173] 24 

How after that buymont had declared his fayt to alle thoost / they acorded 
that the toun shold be his, sauf therle of tholouse / ca°. Cxvj. [p. 174] 
How they of Anthyoche had fere of treson, And how they assembled in coun- 
seil, & of that which emirferins deposed therat. ca°. Cxvij. [p. 176] 28 
Of the meschyef that the turkes made euery day to the cristen men that were 
in Anthyoche enhabytyng with them / ca". Cxviij. [p. 177] 

Of the dylygence that buymont® made in this werke. And emyrferius slewe 
his broder, & delyuerd the toun to the cristen men. ca°. Cxix. [p. 179] 32 
Of the mayntene of the cristen men in this pryse, And of thaffraye of the 
turkes of the toun. capitulo Cxx. [p. 181] 

How Ancean, lord of Anthyoche, fledde by a posterne oute of the toun / and 
he was recounted and put to deth. capitulo Cxxj. [p. 183] 36 

How, after that our men had? made grete slaughter of theyr enemyes, our men 
helde counseyl for to take the dongeon / thenne beyng seased of the 
turkes - capitulo Cxxij. [p. 184] 

1 Orig. tonn. 2 Orig. bnymont. 3 leaf 6, back. 4 Orig. soudaner. « Orig. buyxnout. 



13 


Table of Contents. Chapters 123—140. 

How, wbyles that thoost gartiysshyd the toun, Somme of thoost corbagat cam 
rennyng to fore it. capitulo Cxxiij. [p. 185] 

How, the thyrd day after the getynge and! pryse of Anthyoche, corbagat with 
4 his hoost arryued to fore it. oapitulo Cxxiiij. [p. 186] 

How after that / the due was within the barres of the toun / many of his 
men slayn, the turkes entred in to the toun. ca°. Cxxv. [p. 188] 

How oure eristen men, that a lytil tofore had! assieged! the toun / were now 
8 assieged in the same. capitulo Cxxvj. [p. 189] 

How corbagat dyde do assaylle a fortresse which therle of fflaurtdres kepte 
without the gate, & of that ensiewed!. capitulo Cxxvij. [p. 191] 

Of the grete f'amyne and mesease that our men suffred in the cyte of Anthy- 
12 oche, beyng assieged on alle sydes by the said corbagat. 

capitulo Cxxviij. [p. 192] 
How the turkes, felyng that oure men were in suche meschyef of liongre, 
enforced them for tassaylle the cyte / capitulo Cxxix. [p. 193] 

16 How corbagat sente his men of armes, for to slee the maronners that were at 
the parte ; wherof our men had a grete losse. capitulo Cxxx. [p. 194] 
How guyllem de grateuylle and his felaws fugytyfs cam in to 1 Allexandryee 
the lasse. Capitulo Cxxxj. [p. 195] 

20 How therle of chartres / discouraged themperour of constantynople, that he 
shold not goo & socoure our peple in anthioche. ca°. Cxxxij. [p. 196] 
How, by the wamynges of the sayd Erie / themperour, whiche wold haue goon 
& socoured our men, retorned shortly. ca°. Cxxxiij. [p. 198] 

24 How our peple in Anthyoche, beyng aduertysed herof, were alle discouraged / 
And Corbagat enhaunced in pryde. ca°. Cxxxiiij. [p. 199] 

How the spere was founden that Ihesus was preehyd 2 on the crosse with / & 
of the comfort that our pilgrims toke therby. ca°. Cxxxv. [p. 200] 
28 How peter thoremyte was sent by our men vnto Corbagat, the wordes that he 
sayde / and answere of the sayd corbagat. ca°. Cxxxvj. [p. 202] 

How the sayd Peter retorned in to the toun / and wold openly haue 3 sayd 
his message / and of the subtyl counseyl of the due / whiche wold not 
32 suffre it / capitulo Cxxxvij. [p. 204] 

How tofore, er our men departed, they made redy theyr bataylles right wel in 
poynt / And of the nombre of them / ca°. Cxxxviij. [p. 205] 

How Corbagat was aduertysed of thyssuyng of our peple / and sente archers 
36 for to deffende the brydge / And how they were disconfyted / 

capitulo Cxxxix, [p. 207] 
How oure men reioysed them of a dewe descendyng 1 fro heuen / & of 
theyr mayntene in approuchyng the turkes / capitulo Cxi. fp. 208] 
1 leaf 7. 3 sic : = pricked. 3 Orig. hane. 



14 


Table of Contents. Chapters 141—157. 

How Corbagat ordeyned his bataylles / and how the two hoostes marched to 
gydre in bataylle. capitulo Cxlj. [p. 209] 

Of the fleyng of corbagat, and 1 of somme turkes gadred to gydre and agayn 
discomfyted by our men / capitulo Cxlij. [p. 211] 4 

How our peple retorned fro the chaas / and wente to the pyllage. And of 
the grete rychesses that they fonde / capitulo Cxliij. [p. 213] 

Of the fayr ordenaunces that oure people made in the ehirclies of anthyoche / 

& in other townes by / after this victorye / ca°. Cxliiij. [p. 215] 8 

How our peple sente ambassadours to themperour of Constantinople, for to 
somone hym for to come socoure them as he had promised / 

capitulo Cxlv. [p. 216] 

How the pylgryms of thoost desired to goo vnto Iherusalem, for teschewe the 12 
mortalyte and taeomplysshe theyr vowe / ca°. Cxlvj. [p. 218] 

The dylygence that due Godeffroye made for to socoure a turke, to whom he 
had promised to helpe hym. And how he reysed the siege, beyng tofore 
his castel. capitulo Cxlvij. [p. 219] 16 

Of somme pylgryms goyng fro Anthyoche toward the due godeffroye, that 
were distressyd 1 by the turkes / And rescAwed by the due / 

Capitulo Cxlviij. [p. 220] 

2 How the due alway enforced hym to augmente cristiente, and of somme 20 
fortresses by hym beten and destroyed. ca°. Cxlix. [p. 221] 

How the knyghtes of Rages wold haue bytrayed Bawdwyn theyr lord, And 
how he was therof aduertysed / ca°. CL. [p. 222] 

How therle bawdwyn was in daunger of deth, by the treson of a turk named 24 
balac. ca°. CLj.. [p. 223] 

How therle of tholouse 3 toke the eyte of albane / and therin constituted a 
bisshop / ca°. CLij. [p. 225] 

How oure peple retorned in to Anthyoche / and toke counseyl for to goo to 26 
Iherusalem / and of this that foloweth. ca°. CLiij. [p. 226] 

How the due godefl'roy wold goo to Rages to vysyte his brother, er he began 
his way to Iherusalem, And of somme of his aduen[tu]res. 

.capitulo CLiiij. [p. 228] 32 

How, after the cyte of albane 4 was conquerd, a grete debate aroos bytwene 
therle of tholouse and buymont / ca°. CLv. [p. 228] 

How, at the request of the comyn peple, therle of tholouse ordeyned day for 
to conduyte them. Ca°. CLvj. [p. 230] 36 

How therle of tholouse auengyd hym of somme turkes Robbours which 
robbed his hoost. Capitulo CLvij. [p. 231] 

2 leaf 7, back. 3 Orig. thohouse. 

4 Orig. albare. 


1 Orig. aud. 



15 


Table of Contents. Chapters 158—174. 

How therle of tholouse approchyd! with his hoost vnto Archys / And of the 
situation of the same. Ca°. CLviij. [p. 233] 

Of a toun named tortuose, whiche Ravmont toke with a Eowte of pylgryms / 
4 And of the departyng of the other Barons. Capitulo CLix. [p. 234] 
How the due assieged Gibelet / and of a traysou by whiche he left his siege. 

Capitulo CLx. [p. 235] 

How thoost murmured of the spere founden in Anthyoche, And of the grete 
8 myracle that happed* in the presence of alle thooste. 

Capitulo CLxj. [p. 237] 

Of thambassade of Egypte eomen with oure men in to thooste of pylgryms / 
and of the reuerence that was don to them. ca”. CLxij. [p. 239] 

12 Of an embassade fro themperour of cowstawtynople comen to our pylgryms, & 
of thanswer to the sayd Ambassiate / capitulo CLxiij. [p. 240] 

How the comyn peple complayneil them of this, that they wente not hastely 
to Iherusalem / capitulo CLxiiij. [p. 242] 

16 Of the grete dylygence that our men made for tapproehe to Iherusalem, And 
of thalyannces of somme Turkes made vnto them. 

^ Capitulo CLxv. [p. 243] 

How the Cristen men of Bethlehem receyued 1 moclie wel Tancre & his rowte / 
20 & sotte his 1 baner in the chirche of our lady / ca Clxvj. [p. 245] 

2 Of thardaunt desire that the peple had to see Iherusalem, and how thoost 
approched, and was lodged by ordenaunce. capitulo Clxvij. [p. 246] 
Of the situacion of Iherusalem, and! of the descripcion, anil! also of many other 
24 cytees, townes, and countrees theraboute. Capitulo / CLxviij. [p. 248] 
How Iherusalem hath had! many names, after dyuerse lordes therin regnyng / 
And! yet of the situacion wel at longe / Capitulo CLxix. [p. 250] 
Here thystorye deuyseth of many merueyllous edefyees conteyned in the same 
28 cyte of Iherusalem / & who made them. capitulo / Clxx. [p. 251] 
How the turkes of Iherusalem, whan they knewe the comyng of oure hooste, 
stopped! the pyttes and! fontaynes of the toun / 

Capitulo CLxxj. [p. 253] 

32 Of the nombre of them of thoost / of them of Iherusalem, and how our men 
lodged them in the siege to fore Iherusalem. capitulo CLxxij. [p. 254] 
How our men began tassaylle Iherusalem, And! of the grete dyligertce that 
they dyde to make engyns for to take it / ca° / CLxxiij. [p. 256] 
36 How our peple were in grete meschyef atte sayd siege / And how the turkes 
deserted them / by cause they myght yssue and! entre in and out of the 
toun. capitulo CLxxiiij. [p. 257] 

1 Orig. hit. - leaf 6 . 



16 Table of Contents. Chapters 175—189. 

How the turkes enforced! them to make merueyllous engyns ayenst oures, and 
of the meschyef don to the cristen men dwellyng in the toun. 

eapitulo CLxxv. [p. 258] 

In this tyme arryued 1 a ship of genewys atte ports of halappe, And how 4 
theyr messagers cam in to thoost, and 1 of theyr request / 

Capitulo CLxxvj. [p. 259] 
How alle the pylgryms, euerich after his estate / payned them to make 
thengyns for thassault. capitulo CLxxvij. [p. 261] 8 

Of the fayr processions that oure pylgryms made / to thende that god shold 
gyue to theym vyctorye / And how they pardonned eche other theyr 
male talentes and euyll wylles / capitulo / CLxxviij. [p. 262] 

How oure men sodenly transported! in the nyght theyr engyns vnto that 12 
other parte of the toun for tassaylle on that syde. 

Capitulo CLxxix. [p. 263] 
How, the daye folowyng, oure peple made a merueyllous assault, & how the 
turkes defended them subtylly & wel. capitulo CLxxx. [p. 265] 16 

The nyght departed the sayd assault, our peple withdrewe them / And how 
they watched! theyr engynes / and! the turkes the toun / 

Capitulo Clxxxj. [p. 266] 

How oure peple retorned! agayn on the morn to thassault 2 / And! 3 of the 20 
sorceryes that they wold haue charmed one of our engyns. 

capitulo CLxxxij. [p. 267] 

Of the dispar of our peple at the sayd assault, And how they were recom¬ 
forted by a knyght vnknowen 4 and euydent myracles. 24, 

capitulo CLxxxiij. [p. 268] 
How therle of tholouse assaylled vygorously toward! the south, And! of 
thardaunt desire that eche man had! to doo wel / 

capitulo CLxxxiiij. [p. 270] 28 

Of the pryse and! takyng of Iherusalem / and how due godeffroy entred fyrst 
on the walles / and who folowed. capitulo CLxxxv. [p. 271] 

Of the mayntenyng of our peple entred in to the toun toward the northeest, 
and therle of tholouse, herof al ignoraunt, assaylled alwey. 32 

capitulo CLxxxvi. [p. 272] 
How xM turkes were slayn in the temple, and of the grete tresour that 
Tancre fonde in the temple / capitulo CLxxxvij. [p. 274] 

Of the ordenauwes that the cristen men made tofore they vnarmed! them 36 
after that the toun was taken. capitulo CLxxxviij. [p. 275] 

How the cristen men, that had charged theyr message for theyr delyueraunce 
to peter theremyte, knewe hym. ca°. CLxxxix. [p. 277] 

1 Orig. arryned. 2 thassanlt. 3 leaf 8, back. * Orig. vuknowen. 



Table of Contents. Chapters 190 — 206 . 17 

How they clensyd the touu of the dede bodyes. Of many other ordenaunces / 
And* how the dongeon was yolden to therle of tholouse. 

capitulo CLxxxx. [p. 278] 
4 How the hye barons of thoost assembled for to chose a kynge of Iherusalem, 
And thoppynyon of the clergye vpon the same. 

Capitulo CLxxxxj. [p. 279] 
How the due godeffroy was chosen kynge of Iherusalem, And! how he was 
8 presented to our lord in his chirche of the holy sepulcre / 

capitulo CLxxxxij. [p. 281] 
How due godeffroy after his election requyred therle of tholouse that he shold 
delyuer to hym the tour dauyd. ca°. CLxxxxiij. [p. 282] 

12 Of a patriarke electe and chosen in Iherusalem. And how there was founden 
a part of the veray crosse. capitulo CLxxxxiiij. [p. 283] 

How due godeffroy payned hym to amende the Royamme: of his good con- 
dicions and statutes. capitulo CLxxxxv. [p. 284] 

16 Of the sayeng of the countesse of boloyne, moder of the sayd due, that she 
sayd of her iij oldest sones was verefyed / ca°. CLxxxxvj. [p. 286] 
Of the wagyng of a bataylle which was bytwene due godefroy and an hye 
baron of almayne / capitulo C : Lxxxxvij. [p. 287] 

20 Of a fayr fayte of armes, which that the due 1 dide in a bataill that themperour 
of Almayne had ayexst them of saxone. ca°. Clxxxxviij. 5 [p. 288] 
3 How the valyaunt due godeffroy augmented! holy chirche / and! he wold 
neuer here crowne / capitulo CLxxxxix. [p. 290] 

24 How the turkes of Arabe ant? of Egypte made their sommance for to come in 
to Sury tassaylle our cristen men. capitulo CC. [p. 291] 

How the crysten men, whan they knewe thyse tydynges, cryed! to god for 
mercy & for to haue vyctorye. capitulo CCj. [p. 293] 

28 How oure men assembled 1 and! ordeyned! theyr bataylles for to fyghte ayenst 
the turkes. And how the turkes were disconfyted*. 

capitulo CCij. [p. 294] 

How somme of oure barons wohle retorne home / after that they had don 
32 theyr pylgremage / capitulo CCiij. [p. 296] 

How buymont and bawdwyu acerteyned of the conquest of Iherusalem wold 
accomplysshe theyr pylgremage / ca°. CCiiij. [p. 298] 

How our cristen men chosen a very patriark in Iherusalem / And! assigned! to 
36 hym rentes / capitulo CCv. [p. 300] 

How by thatysement of somme men a grete debate sourded bytwene the due 
& tho patriark of Iherusalem. ca°. CCvj. [p. 301] 

1 Orig. dnc. - Orly, clxxxxvij, 3 leaf 9. 

GODFREY. O 



18 


Of the Roman Emperor Eracles. !• 

Here recounteth thistorye, how the fourth part of Iherusalem cam vnto the 
patriarke of the same / capitulo CCvij. [p. 302] 

Of the same mater. . ca °- CCviij. [p. 304] 

How due godeffroy, for taugmente cristiente assyege<i one of the tounes of the 4 
turkes / capitulo GCix. [p. 305] 

How the turkes brought presentes to the due Godeffroye at the sayd siege / 
and of theyr deuyses to gydre / capitulo CCx. [p. 307] 

How buymont was taken in goyng to meletene, whiclie cyte the lord of the 8 
toun woldf haue yolden to hym. capitulo CCxj. [p. 308] 

How the due godeffroy assembled his peple and! entred in to Arabye. And 
of the gayn that he made of two grete strokes, that he smote on two 
camellis, And of his deth. capitulo CCxij. [p. 309] 12 

Here endeth the table of the content an# chapytres nombre# of this 
present book, entitled the siege an# conqueste of Iherusalem by cristen men. 


> leaf 10. 
Beginning 
of the book 
Eracles, 
also called 
Godfrey of 
Bologne, 
treating of 
the conauest 
of the Holy 
Land 

by Godfrey of 
Bologne. 


Eracles was 
Emperor of 
Rome. 


Maboinmed- 
anism was 
widely spread 
in liis time. 


'Here begynneth the bolce Intitule# Eracles / and also Godefrey 
of Boloyne / the whiche speketh of the Conquest of the holy londe 16 
of Iherusalem / conteynyng diuerse warres and noble faytes of 
Armes made in the same Royamme / and in the contrees adiacent, 
And also many meruayllous werkes happe# and fallen, as wel on 
this syde / as in tho partyes this tyme duryng 1 / And how the 20 
valyant due Godefrey of Boloyne conquer# with swerd the sayd 
Boyamme / And was kynge there / 

The ffirst chapitre treatetk how Eracles conquerd 
Perse and slewe Cosdroe / and brought in to 24 
Iherusalem the very crosse / capitulo primo / 
He Auncyent hystoryes saye that Eracles was a goo# crysten 
man, and gouernour of thempyre of Rome / But in his tyme 
Macliomet had ben, whiche was messager of the deuil, An# 28 
t made the peple to vnderstonde / that he was a prophete sente 
from our lorde / In the tyme of Eracles was the fals lawe of 
maehomet soweii and sprad abrode in many partyes of thoryent / 
and namely in Arabye / in so moche 2 that the prynces of the 32 
londes yet wold not gyue faith to his secto that he prechid and 
taught, whiche is cursed and euyl / but lie constrayned them by 
force and by swerd tp, & alle their subgets to obeye to his com- 
mandemens, and to byleue in his lawe 2 / Whan Eracles had 36 

2 — 2 Caxton seems to have misunderstood his French here entirely. It 
was the princes themselves who “ constrayned their subjets by force and by 



19 


Ch. I.] Of the Roman Emperor Eracles. 


conquerd Perse, and slayn eosdroe, which was a puissaunt kynge, he 
brought agayn to Iherusalem the very Crosse (3) / whiche they had 
ladde in to perse / And abode and dwellyd in the londe of Surrye / 
4 And dide do ordeyne and chose a patriarke, a moche wise man 
named Modeste / By whos counseil he dyde do make agayn the 
chirche 8 / and habylled the holy places / and clensedf them that 
the tyraunt Cosdroe(4) of Perse had smeton doun and destroyed, 
8 Eracles sette grete entente & made grete costes for to repay re them / 
And whiles he entended ther aboute / liomar, the sone of captap, 
whiche was a prynce of Arabe, the thirde after machomet / cam in 
to this contree named palestyne, with so grete nombre of peple that 
12 alle the londe was eouerd with them / and had thenne taken by 
force a moche stronge Cyte of that londe named! Iadre / fErom thens 
he drewe hym toward! damaske / and! assieged! 1 the cyte, and by 
strengths toke hyt / ffor he had so grete a nombre of peple that 
16 nothyng myght resiste hym / themperour heracles, which yet 
dwellyd in a parte of this londe named Cylyce, herde tydynges of 
this peple / And sente good espyes & trewe, in whiche he trusted!, 
for to see and serche their couine / 2 ffor he desyred! moche to hane 
20 a doo with tbise peple on the felde, and fyghte and chase them out 
of the londes and cytees 2 whiche obeyed to Cristente & to thempyre 
of Rome. But whan his messagers cam, he had by them knowleche 
certaynly that he had not peple ynowhe to fyhte ay east them / ffor 
24 they were so fyers & so orguyllotis of the grete nombre of peple 
that they had / that they thought / nothyng myght resiste them / 


Eracles 
conquered 
Cosaroe, king 
of Persia, 
and brought 
the true cross 
back to 
Jerusalem. 


Hoinar, sou 
of Captap. 
prince of 
Arabia, 
invades 
Palestine. 


Eracles sends 
his spies to 
ascertain the 
character of 

the invaders. 


And ther vpon heracles had deliberacion, and counseilled with his Bracie. it- 
peple / that it shold be lest dishonour to departe and retorne in to 
28 his contre / than suffre his peple to be destroyed, & myght not 
amende it / Thus thenne, he departed out of Surye, by cause the s r rta - 
kynge of Arabe & his peple were of so grete power & so proude / as 
they that fonde alle the contre habandonned 3 to them / ffor in a 
32 short tyme they had conquered alle the contre of Surye vnto The Arabs 

0 •' 1 conquer all 

Egypte / One thyng 1 that was to fore happenned m this contree, Syria. 


swerd to obey.” Fr. que li princes des ter res ne se tenoient mie a ce que 
Vcn enscignast et amonestast d entire celle male aventure, encois contreig- 
noient par force et par espee touz leur songiez a obeir an commandemant 
Mahomet , viz. as the princes of the land were not satisfied with teaching and 
admonishing, etc. 1 leaf 10, back. 

2 *“ 2 Caxton has translated very freely Fr. (Jar il desirois moult a sgavoir 
8 } il peust cele gent attend re an champ ou ruser eux et chacier des terres et 
des citiis. 8 Orig. habandonwned. 



20 


They did 
this the more 
easily, be¬ 
cause of the 
damage done 
previously by 
Cosdroe. 


Maurice was 
an Emperor 
of Rome, 


who gave 
his daughter 
Mane in 
marriage to 
Cosdroe, king 
of Persia. 


When Mau¬ 
rice was slain 
by Foca, 

Cosdroe was 
very angry 
with the 
Romans. 


To avenge 
his wife's 
father he 
wasted and 
destroyed 
Syria, which 
was a Roman 
province. 


How Cosdroe wasted the Roman Empire. [Ch. II. 

whiche heelp moche them of Arabe tencrece their power, ffor 
cosdroe the puissannt kynge of perse, of whom I haue spoken to 
fore / had ben with grete puissaunce in Surye / and had destroyed 
the Cytoes and castels / brent townes & cliirches, and slayn greto 4 
partye of the peple / and the remeunnt had! brought in to Captyuyte / 
And toke the cyte of Iherusalem with force, and! slews within the 
tounn xxxvj. M. men / And bare away with hym the veray crosse 
that our lord Ihesu Cryste suffred deth on for vs, And ladde with 8 
hym the patriarkc of Iherusalem named (5)Acliaiye , 1 and brought 
hym with hym with the other Caytyfs / 

Here reeounteth thistorye how that the puissaunt 
kynge Cosdroe wastyd the Empyre of Rome, for 12 
tauenge the deth of themperour Maurice / fader 
of his wyf / capitulo ij° 

Ow I shal telle yow why he had so doon / lyke as I sayde / 
n he was a ryght myghty kynge / now had ther be an emperour 16 
at Koine, named! Mauryce, whiche as we fynde was moche 
acqueynted with seint gregorie, And was his gossib, ffor 2 the sayd! 
seynt Gregorye had cristenyd! to hym a daughter named! Marie / 
This Maurice gaf her in Maryage to this Cosdroe / And ther by was 20 
a grete frenship bytwene them / & grete alyaunee bytwene them of 
perse and the Komayns as longe as themperour lyued / in suche 
wise / that for the loue of his wyf & the Komayns, whiche were 
Cristen / This Emperour made Cosdroe to be baptised. But after 24 
it befylle that foca slewe in treson this Emperour Maurice / And 
was Emperour in his place, and was called ffoca cezar / whan 
cosdroe herd herof he had merveyllous grete sorow, grete desdayne/ 
grete orguyel, & grete hate ayenst the peple of the Komayns, by 28 
cause that he whiche had! slayn theyr lorde vntrewly / and was yet 
blody of the blood! of the emperour, they had! chosen to he their 
lord, and had gyuen to hym thempire / ffor this cause he entended! 
to his power to hurte and destroye al thempire of Kome / And for 32 
this cause, for tauenge the deth of the fader of his wyf / whiche 
ofte enticed hym therto / he entred in to the londe of Surye, whiche 
thenne was subget to thempyre of Kome, and wasted & destroyed 
it / lyke as I haue said to fore / and voyded almost alle the peple 36 
that was therin / ffor whiche cause This kynge homar aforsaid, & 

1 Lat. Zauliar'uu. 2 leaf 11. 



21 


Ch. III.] How Cosdroe rebuilt the Temple of Jerusalem. 

his peple of Arabe, that fonde this londe so voyde, myght the better Homar found 
doo theyr wylles with alle / deserted and 

J J destroyed. 

How this puissaunt kynge entred in to Iherusalem / 

4 and dematmded dylygently of the Temple, and 
reedyfied it, and assigned grete reuenues therto 
for tentretene 1 it. capitulo iij° 

Han they cam in the holy cyte of Iherusalem, they fonde it 
8 w destroyed and! deserte / sauf a fewe cristen men whiche dwellyd 
there, and were suffred that they shold lyue as Cristen men, and 
make agayn their chirehes, and that they shold haue a patriarke. 

In the while that this myghty prynce duellid in Iherusalem, he 
12 began tenquyre moche ententifly 2 of the peple of the tourni, & Homar in- 
pryncipally of the patriarke whiche was named Sophonye / & had SI" ’temple' ' 
ben chosen after modeste, whiche was deed, of whom I haue spoken 
to fore, In what place the temple of our lord had 3 be whan Titus 
16 the prynce deffeted and destroyed al the cyte / he shewid to hym 
the very certayn place, & the fondamentes, & a parte of the 
muraylles whiche were thenwe yet apperyng / he made anon to be 
sought & to be brouht to hym, without longe taryeng, grete nombre 
20 of masons & of carpenters / & dide do be sette stones of marble & He assembled 
of other manere, & alle tlivnges necessarve therto he dide do and caused it 

,, ’ tu be rebuilt. 

assemble as moche as shold nede / And deuised the maner and 
ordynance of the mesure 4 / and of the dyspences for to make the 
24 temple / And, as he was a noble prynce of hye affaire & noble / he 
brought anon to ende this that he had emprised, in suche wise that 
the temple was reedefyed in suche forme and estate as it yet 
apeereth / this saide prynce hym self assygned grete rentes & He assigned 

revenues to 

28 reuenues ffor euer more, for to sustene and repayre alle that shold susiain it for 

ever. 

be nedeful to thedyfices and other necessites of the temple / and for 
the seruyng 1 of the lyght / day and nyght, by the liandes of them 
that he commysed to kepe the temple / Ther is in the same temple, 

‘ 32 within and without, 5 letters of golde 5 in the langage of Arabe, 

1 Fr. entretenir, i. e. support. 2 Orig. eutentifly. 3 leaf II, back. 

4 Fr. mt rrain, building material, not measure. 

6—6 The French has lettres faites d’or musique, i. e. letters made of gold 
mosaic-work. Caxton probably misunderstood the word musique, and simply 
left it out. The Latin gives, Exstant porro in eodem templi aedificio intvs 
et extra ex opere mvsaico Arabic? idiomatis litterarum vetvstissima monv- 
menta quae illius temporis esse erednntvr. 



22 Of Charlemagne and Prince Aaron. [Ch. IV. 

whiche deuyse as we suppose / who was he that reedefyed the 
temple / and what tyme / And how moche it costeto rebylde it / 

How Charleraayne by bis lyberalite gate for the 
prouffyt of cristen peple in hethenes / tharaytye 4 
of hethen prynces / capitulo iiij. 

jempaiem Hus it happed! that this holy cyte of Iherusalem, for the 

the power of t svnnes of the peple, was in seruage and *in daunger* of hethen 

heathen J x , , . . , 0 

nations four peple longe tyme / That is to wete ccccxxxmj yere con- o 

hundred and 1 * ° 17 . i x 

thirty-four tynuelly / but not allway in one manere / Iney were one tyme 
better, & another tyme werse / lyke as the lordes chaunged, whiche 
were of dyuerse maners & condicions / but neuertheles thise peple 
were alway in subiection / It happed! that one grete lorde of this 12 
saide lawe had 113 'ghe in his seignorye alle the londe of thoryent, 

The l'rinfc sanf only ynde / This prynee 2 was named Aaron,(6) & his surname 
ruledbi the ressit / This man was of so grete cortosye / of so grete largesse / of 
nations ex- go live vveonr / and of so grete affaires in alle good! maners, that yet 16 

cept India. J ° ° . 

the paynems speke of hym / lyke as they doo in firaimce of 
This Aaron Chaiiemayn / they were botlie in one tyme, this aaron & this 
same time cliarlemain. 8 And therfore, in their tyme, the cristen peple in 

ns Oh&rlc- 

magne. Iherusalem were in better poynt / than thei had euer he to fore 20 

The Chris- 4 ** • 

tiana^of Jera- vnder ony of the hethen peple / ffor Charlemayn the good Emperour , 4 
well treated ivhiclie so moche ti'auailled and suffryd for our lorde / and so moche 
enhaunced! the fayth of Ihesu Criste, to thende that the Cristiente 
in Surye myght be the better and more debonairly cherysshed and 24 
entreated; Pourchassed so longe that he had! the lone and aequeynt- 
auwce 6 of the said Aaron, by messages that wente and cam / 
Aaron loved Wherof this Aaron had moche grete Ioye / And aboue alle the 
Charlemagne prynces of the world he louid and! honoured themperoiir Charle- 28 
oilier princes, mayne, and the Cristen peple that were vnder hym / And alle the 
holy places that were vnder his power / he wolde that they shold 
be entretiened, mayntened and wel aourned, lyke as Charlemayne 
had desyred and sente to hym worde / Wherof it semed that our 32 
peple beynge there / Were more vnder th'e power of Charlemayne 
than vnder the power of the hethen men / Whan he myght fynde 
He rewarded the messagers of Charlemayn / he charged and 6 laded them alle 
mague^o s with richesses of thoryent / With clothes of sylke, with spyces / 36 

1-1 Fr. en dangier, in the power of. 2 Orig. pryuce. 3 leaf 12. 

4 Orig. Emperonr. 5 Orig. acqueyutaunce. 6 Orig. aud. 



23 


Ch. V.] Of Charlemagne. Of the Eastern Jleathen. 


Ieweles of golde of dyuerse facions / And! with ryche precious 
stones, whiche he sente to his frende Charlemayn / And! largely he 
gaf and! rewarded? the messagers / And! emonge al other thinges, He 
4 sente into ffraunce an Olyphant; This debonayrte pourchased! the 
good! Charlemayn for the Crysten men that were in captiuyte vnder 
the said! Aaron / And in lyke wyse the said Aaron, for the loue 
that he bare to Carlemayn, pourohassed! for other Cristen men that 
8 were in al hethenes vnder dyuerse lordes, as in egypte, And! in 
Aufrique / That is to seye in Alexandrye / And! in Cartage / ffor he 
sente grete yeftes and ! 1 moche good! 2 to sustene the power of Cristen 
men , 2 & sente grete presentes vnto theyr lordes & maistres mys- 
12 creauntes, & amyable letters / In suche wise, that he pourchassed 
their loue and acqueyntaunce / by whiche they conteyned them 
more debonairly vn to cristiens that were in theyr subiection ; thus 
dyde the hye prynce charlemayn vnto the hethen lordes, that were 
16 fer fro hym / ffor it is to be bileuid! / that yf he had ben nyghe to 
them, that he wold haue essayed for to haue delyuerd! in another 
maner the peple of our lord 1 , lyke as he dyde ryght gloriously in 
many places / 

20 3 Of the noyse that sourded emonge the hethen men 
discordyng in theyr lawe / and how they of 
egypte yssued out of theyr londe, and of the 
euyllis that they dyde. eapitulo v° 


He even sent 
an elephant 

5 > France. 

his Aaron 
also procured 
better treat¬ 
ment for the 
Christiana in 
other heathen 
countries. 


If Charle¬ 
magne had 
lived nearer 
these 

heathens he 
would have 
succoured 
the Chris¬ 
tians more 
effectually. 


24 N this season, it happed 1 that a grete debate sourded bytwene oreat «%■- 

• . e T» / 0U8 

l the mescreauntes of Egypte / and? the mescreauntes of Eerse / arose among 

1 ' ' the unbe- 

ffor eueryche partye of this peple wold haue the seignourye uevers, 

vpon the other / The Eote of this grete hate and enuye sourded and 
28 aroos of that whyche discorded / and yet dyseorde of certayn poyntes 
of theyr lawe / in suche wise that they haue dyuerse names / ffor 
they that holde the lawe of perse haue the name in theyr langage 
soun 4 / And they of the lawe of Egypte be named siha. And they 
32 be not so ferre fro the very crysten lawe / as ben the other / It 

happed that they of Egypte yssued out of theyr londe, and conquered so that the 
alle the londes vnto Antyoche / And emonge the other cytees that iMuodouto^ 
were taken / The holy cyte of Iherusalem cam vnder theyr power 

1 Orig. aud. Sllem - 

z—'i Fr. a sovstcnir les povres chrestiens. Caxton has here mistaken 
“poures," poor, for "povoir," power. 3 leaf 12, hack. 

4 Fr. Sonu, Lat. Sunni. 



24 Christs Sepulchre, cast down.. Christians Sufferings. [Ch. V, VI. 

and seignourye / The peple that were there in eaptiuyte 1 were 
resonably wfcl entreated / tyl it happed by tho euffraurace of god 
that his peple shold be chastised / and that was by a desloyal and 
Hecawn, cruel lord and calyphe of Egypte, whiehe was named hecam / lie 4 
Egypt, aur- passed in malyce -and cruelte alle his predecessours in suche wyse 
crueUyaii 2 that the peple of his lawo helde them as wode men of pryde / of 
dSc h e££T rage / and of falsehed 2 / Emonge the other tyrannyes, he commanded 
He cast down to caste doun to the ground the chyrche of the sepulcre of our 8 
of the 1 Holy i or( i e Ihesu Cryste / whiehe had ben 3 made 4 first of Constantyne 
Sepulchre. them p erour | by a noble Patryarke of Iherusalem named Maxyme / 
and after reedefyed by modest that other patriarke / In the tyme of 
heracles, of whom we haue spoken to fore, he sente to them a fals 12 
caliphe, one his bayly, whiehe was lord of Eames, and named 
hyart . 5 (7) This dyde the commandement of his lord 1 , and caste it 
Orestes was doun to grounde / In this tyme was patriarke of this chyrche a 
of e thfs timlch right valyaunt man named Oreste / and was vncle vnto this vntrew 16 
kynge of Egypte, broder of his moder / And' this was the reson why 
he was so cruel ayenste Crystiente / ffor the heethen men sayde that 
he shold neuer be ferine in theyr lawe / by cause he had a erysten 
moder / And for to take away this suspecion he destroyed this 20 
holy chirche of the holy sepulcre / whiehe was the fontayne and 
begynnyng of our very creaunce / 

How thaffliccyon, iniuries and torraentes of erysten. 
men grewe in the tyme of Calyphe hetam. 24 

capitulo vj° 

Ro thenne forthon began thestate of our peple at Iherusalem 
f to be more greuous and more sorowful than it was wonte to 
be / ffor they toke grete displaysir at theyr lierte for the 28 
chirche of the resurrexion of our lorde, whiehe they sawe so 
Heccamim- destroyed emonge them / And on that other syde they were 

pos6(l great 

tributes upon charged ouer sorowfully wyth tributes, taskes and tayllages, ayenst 
Jerusalem the custome and preuyleges graunted to them of hethen prynces / 32 
And also, they were deffended to make ony festes on the dayes of 
They were theyr hye festes / but thenne they were compellyd to trauaylle by 
fc°utays! llCir 1 0ri, J- captinyte. 

2—2 p r q ne i es g ens fig id ioi ig tenoient avssi commc fonend d’orgevil 
et de raige, i. e. even the people of his own religion considered him crazy 
with pride and anger. 3 leaf 13. 

4 Fr. “ ref ait, premier ement? Constantine did not make, but remade 
the church. 6 The ed. of P. Paris, Paris 1879, gives Hiarot. 



25 


Ch. VI.] The Sufferings of the, Christians in Jerusalem. 

force and angre / or they were commanded not to yssue out of 
theyr howses ne dores / but holde them cloos wythin J to thende 
that they shold make no semblaunce of feste wythin them / And* 

4 yet also they myglit not be therin in pees ne assured / but they They could 
caste at them by the wyndows 'grete stones, donge, dyrte, and foul remain m 
ordure / And! yf it happed somtyme a Crysten man to saye a light their homes, 
worde that dyspleased ony of the hethen men / Anon he shold be Henvy 
8 taken like a murderer, and brought to pryson, and shold lose ]™ r ® ll j," flirled 
therfore his fyste or fote / or he was brought to the gybet / And 
alle the good that he had / was brought in to the handes of the 
Calyphe / Somtyme they wold take the chyldren of the crysten 
12 peple / bothe sones and doughtres, in to theyr owne howses / and 

made them mescreauntes ayenst theyr wylle / And somtyme by Their ehii- 
betyiige / and another wyth lyes and flaterye made many yonge forced to ^ 
folke to renye our fayth j And thus they dyde to our 1 peple moehe Christian 
16 shame and grief / But notwythstondyng 1 / good crysten men lefte J i t '. d, d "°p rith ' 
not / but admonested and contorted the peple to suffre al this with ft ood ch,l »- 
2 a good! herte and veri penitence for the faith of Ilxesu Criste, and 
promysed them for thise shames / the Ioye / thonour and the 
20 glorye of heuen, whiche euer shal endure / The good Cristen peple 
spack so to gydre / that they enforced them to holde, And kepe 
their cristen fayth the more surely / By cause they dyde them so 
moche harm And 1 repreef. It sholde be ouer longe a thinge to 
24 recounte to you / Alle the meseases & the myschiefs that the peple 
of our lord endured that tyme. But I shal shew yow one exampel, 
to thende that by the same ye vnderstonde the 3 more of other / 

One of the hethen men, ouermoche malicious and vntrewe, whiche A malicious 
28 hated of ouermoche-cruel hate the cristen men, he aduised and .im-i««i a 

plan to 

thoughts an a day how he myght brynge them to deth. He sawe <ie*froy an 
wel that alle the cyte helde the temple in moche grete honour & ^ s ^ mple 
reuerence, whiche was reedefyed, & the laye peple named it / the gf e " a r t rted 
32 temple dominus / & that they whiche had the charge to kcpe it dide 

al their peyne to kepe it cleen & nette / now ther was a place to ]‘* p 9 n J" da ;' l s < " 
fore the temple, whiche was named thaitre 4 of the temple / Whiche 
they wolde kepe as clene / as cristen men kepe their chirches and 
36 aultres / And this vntreu man, that I haue said yow of to fore, 

1 Oriff. our. 2 leaf 13, back. 3 Pr, “ Plnneurs des autres.” 

4 Fr. aitre, i. e. the Cathedral yard, or the square before the Cathedral. 

The word evidently puzzled Caxton, so that he transferred it bodily, instead 
of trying to find its English equivalent. 



26 


Thifl ma¬ 
licious man 
aforesaid 
placed a dead 
dog in the 
open place 
before the 
temple. 


The heathen 
men all 
declared that 
it had been 
done some 
Christian, 
and clamored 
for their 
death. 


A young man 
devised the 
deliverance 
of the Chris¬ 
tians, by 
taking the 
deed upon 
himself. 


He nad his 
head smitten 
oft. 


The Bead Bog in the Heathen Temple. [Ch. VI, VII. 

Toke by nyght, in auche wise that no man sawe it / a dede hounds 
al roten and stynkyng, and! brought it in to the same aitre to fore 
the temple / On the morn, whan they of the toun 1 earn to the 
temple, they fonde this dogge / Thenne sourded and aroos / a crye / 4 
a noyse, and a clamour so grete thurgh alle the toun / That ther 
was nothings spoken of but of this hounds. They assembled / and 
put out of doubte / that this was not doon ne caste there but by the 
Cristyens / Alle the hethen men Accorded to this poynt that alle 8 
the cristen peple shold be put to deth with the swerd / 2 And there 
were theyr swerdes drawen redy out / And they also that sholde 
smyte of their heedes . 2 Emonge the crysten men was a yonge man 
of a moche grete herte and of grete pyte / And spak to the peple, 12 
and said to them / “{fair lordes, trouthe it is / That I am not 
culpable in this things, ne none of yow, as I byleue certaynly / But 
it shold be ouermoche grete domtnage yf we alle shold deye thus, 
ffor by this shold alle the Cristendomme he quenchid in this londe /16 
Wherfore I haue thought in my self / how I shal delyuer yow alle, 
by thayde of our lord / Two thynges 1 3 desyre of you, for the loue 
of god / That one is that ye praye for my sowle in your orisons / 
That other is that ye deporte 4 and honoure my poure lygnage / ffor 20 
I will take this things on me / and saye that I allone haue doon 
this fayt, whiche they put on vs alle ” / they that doubted the deth 
had grete Ioye whan they herd this / and promysed to hym their 
orisons, and thonoure of his lygnage / In this maner that they of 24 
his lygnage euermore on palmSonday shal here tholyue, whiche 
signyfyeth Ihesu Criste whan he cam in to Iherusalem / Thus this 
man cam to fore the Iustice / And said to them that the other 
Cristen men were nothyng 1 culpable in this fayt / and sayde that he 28 
hym self had doon the dede / whan they herde this / they delyuerd 
alle the other / And he only had his heed smeton of / 

How at the requeste of Themperour of Constanty- 
noble the cristen men obteyned lycenee to bylde 32 
agayn the chirche of the holy sepulcre. 

capitulo .vij° 

1 Orig. tonn. 

2-2 Caxton is so hampered here, by his corrupt French text, that he does 
not make a very intelligible translation. The 'text of A. shows us the sense 
of the passage—“ Et ja estoient pres les espies traites de cel qm levr 
devoient i tom les testes tranchier." 

3 leaf 14. 4 Fr. deportez, protect, take care of 



Ch. VII.] The Christian Embassy to Constantinople. 


27 


s Uche diseases 1 suffred the peple of our lord in this tyme; hut 
Ihesu eryste, that wel can sette remedyes in thinges merueillous 
& out of ordre / recomforte them after, ffor this vntrewe He<*am, 

4 prynce of egipte, hetam, deyde / and his sone, named daher, regned ERjpt’.died. 
after hym / This daher renewed the alyauwces with thempdrour of «>n. reigned 

_ . 0 . r after him. 

constantynoble, ^whiche was a Komayn, and named Eliopolitans 2 / 
he prayde 3 the said daher, whom he moche louyd, 3 that he wold 
8 suffre that the Cristen men myght reedefye the chirclie of the holy 
sepulcre, whiche his fader had do beten doumi / he graunted it for 
the loue of themperour / It was not longe after that this emperour 
deyde / and after hym regned! Constantyn, whiche had to surname 
12 Monomaques / whiche is to saye in grece as a man fyghtyng allone / 

The poure cristen that were in Iherusalem had lycence for to make The ciiri«- 

...... tians had 

agayn their chirches / but they had? not the power, for their permission 
pouerte / And herupon they had a counseyl that they wold sende ^eircimrcb, 
16 to themperour / and! requyre hym for goddes sake that he wold mone J r - 
helpe and! socour of his Almesse, for the reedefyeng of this holy 
werke / Ther was in the tounn of Iherusalem a good 1 man named 
Iohan 4 Cariaintes, bom in Constantynople, & had ben a grete 
20 gentilman of the contre as of his lignage / But yet was he more 
gentil of herte & good maners / This man was comen on pylgremage 
to the holy sepulcre, and had lefte alle the bobauwee and thonour 
of the world / & had taken thabyto of relygion / ffor to folowe our 
24 lord Ihesu Criste in pouerte 5 in the place / where he suffred pouerte 

& messease for vs / This said Iohan was pravd of alle the cristen They eent to 

beg aid of the 

peple there, that he wolde entrepryse this message for to go to Emp«™ of 
themperour, for the loue of god and of them / he dyde it with a 'mpie. 

28 good wylle, and departed, and 6 cam in to Constantynoble, and spak 

to themperour / and dide alle that he was requyred / ffor themperour The Emperor 

_ agreed to 

craunted? that he wolcle make alle the dispenees 7 that shold* be bear aii the 

° 4 expense of 

nedeful to the byldyng of this holy chirche / and wolde reedefye it rebmWmj, 
82 at his owen coste / This Iohan was moche Ioyous Whan he had so 
wel accomplissyd his message / and toke leue of themperour, and 
cam agayn in to Iherusalem / Whan he had said to the peple the 
good tydinges that he brought / they made grete Ioye, And many 

1 Fr. “ mesaises ” should not, in this case, be translated “diseases," but 
calamities, miseries. 

2—2 Caxton has here misunderstood his text. The French has, “qitl 
avoit non: if omain, et estoit nemmi en sour non: Elyopolitanes.'' 

8—3 Fr. celui Daher qni moult Vaimoit. 4 leaf 14, back. 

5 Orig. ponerty. 8 Orig. aud. 1 Orig-. dispeuoes. 



28 The Sepulchre rebuilt. Sorrows of Christians. [Ch. VII, VIII. 

Tiie chria- wepte grete terees for pyte / by cause they thoughte that our lord! 
for joy at wolde not al wav forgete them / whan he had! doo to them suclie 

tins news. J ° • .. T , 

comforte / In this tyme was patriarke in Iherusalem an holy man 
named! nycesores 1 / Themperour held! ryght wel his promesse, ffor 4 
he sente without taryeng grete partyr of his tresour / and! dide do 
make the chyrche of the holy sepulcre moehe hye in thestate and 1 
The eimrch manere that it is yet / And! was ful made the yere of thincarnacion 
pieteThi'the of our lord a M xlviij, And had 1 ben xxxvij yere destroyed. This 8 
ieal ’ was ryght the yere to fore that our peple recouerd! the cyte / Whan 
the Cristen men there had 1 made agayn the chirehe / they were 
The Chris- moche Ioyous, and! were also therin well comforted of all tlieyr 

tians now feel _ . . i - . . 

repaid for all mfeseases and repreues that they sutfred*, wherof they had grete 12 
suffered. plente / not only in Iherusalem / But also in alle the cytecs aboute / 
as in bethleem / And! in the cyte where Amos the prophete was 
born, named Tecua / As ofte as the Caliphe sente in to the lande a 
newe bayly / so ofte were sette on them new tributes & taillages, 16 
whiche they myght not well paye / & yf they payed not, anon they 
menaced them for to caste doun their chirches to the ground, & 
saide they had of their lord commandement so to doo: thus in this 
They had sorow were the cristen peple / one while vnder them of egipte / 20 
ureatiy under another tyme vnder them of Perse / but this was not but yet a 
uunff'nS the begynning to them, as whan they cam vnder the power of the 
2 turques / ffor the turques conquerd the Royame of perse / and also 
of Egypte. Thus the holy cyte fylle in to their demayne / whiche 24 
demened it so cruelly & tormented! it so cruely / that it semed to 
but that wai the peple of our lord that they had be in fraunchise and in grete 
thd?treat t0 reste vnc ^ er them of Egypte and of perse. Thus helde the turkes 
Turks by tlle th em there viij yere / 28 


Of the turkes; fro wens they cam / and how they 
grewe in to grete puisaunce, and dide chese them 
a kynge for to mayntene their warres. 

capitulo viij" 32 

or as moche as we haue spoken of the turkes / & shal ofte 
it seems beat f speke of them in this book / me semeth good that I save to 

to give some ° 

the°Turksf y°w fro whens this peple cam first / & wherby they had so 

grete power / The turke & turkemans cam out of a lynage, Rote, & 36 

1 Fr. Nyeefores, Lat. Nyeephorus. 2 leaf 15. 



29 


Cb. VIII.] Of the Character of the Turks. 
of a contre 1 toward the Eest whiche is in surve, 1 And were a peple They came 

, O , , , J r from the 

moche rude & witliout ordynaunce / ne had no eontreye, ne no * ; n a “' 7er( , 
certayn d welly ng 1 place / But went all aboute fro londe to londe / ™t* a “" d d 
4 & sought pastures for their beestis / ne neuer duellid in castel ne * >eo £’ lc - 
tounre / And whan they wolde ineue from one place to another / 
thenne wente euery lynage by hym self / And they made in euery Every tribe 
kynred or lygnage a prince whiche was tlioyr Iusticer: by thise andchoeeout 
8 prynces, all their mesfeates and trespeaces were redressyd and 
amendid / And they obeyed, and dide that he or they commanded / J u “ u “- 
They caryed with them alle theyr thynges, seruauntes, menages, 
houshold, thier Oxen, kyen, sheep, and other beestis. In this ah their 

\V6flltb ff<19 

12 thynge was alle theyr rychesse / They laboured no londe by eeryng >■> herds, 
ne sowyng / ne they coude neyther bye ne selle / ffor they had no They had no 
moneye; but their beestes, their chese and Mylke, changed thei, for exchanged 
to haue other tliinges that they neded. Whan they had ben in ducts for 
16 one place, and had nede to goo in to another, they sente the wisest needed, 
of their peple vnto the princes of the coiitre / And they made 
couenauntes for them for to dwelle in theyr wodes & pastures for 
the tribute that they shold paye lyke as they shold accorde / Now it 
20 happed that a grete partye of this peple departed fro the other / and a large body 
entred in to the londe of perse / & fonde this londe moche plenty- 
vous of pastures / and! ryght good of suche as they neded / And gaf 
to the kynge the trybute that they were accorded fore / And dwell yd and lived 
24 there I can not telle how longe / This peple began to growe and time, 
multeplye 2 in suche wise that 3 there were of them a memayllous 
grete nombre / in so moche that the kynge, and they of the contre until they 
self began to haue grete -doubte of them and fere / leste they myght that the 

a ereiaits oe* 

28 doo harme by the power that ouermoche grewe and encreced; here gjn w fear 
vpon they had a counseyl emonge them / that they wold dryue and 
chasse them by force out of theyr londe / But after, they chaunged 
theyr counseyl / and semed better / that they shold charge them Heavy^ 

32 with suche tributes that they myght not suffre / And thenne they ‘™ e ^ sed “ po “ 
shold departs 4 by their owne agrement 4 lyke as they were come / 

Thus they dyde / But they suffred longe thise greues / til atte 
laste, whan they myght nomore suffre / thei couftscylled emong 
36 them self that they wold nomore paye to the kynge. whan the 
kynge herde this / he dide do crye thurgh alle his Royamtne / that 

l—i JCj. “ vers bisse quand Ven est en Surie," i. e. north of Syria. 

2 Grig, mnlteplye. 3 leaf 15, back. 

4-4 Fr. 11 par ennui, et de lew gri.” 



30 


Hov) the Turks chose them a King, Selduc. [Ch. VIII, 

At ]«*t they they shold yssue out of it by a certayn day that was named to 
to leave the them / And that they shold passe the flood named cobar, wliiohe 
is vtterist part of the Royatrame of perse on that other syde / And 
As the Turks whan they were departed!, and! on the playn, they sawe them self 4 
Kethereto ouer, & appereeyued that they were so grete plente of peple that no 

firsTreaiiz&t londe myght suffyse 1 them / ne withstonde them yf they helde hem 
ana power, to gydre j ffor to fore, whan they dwellid in perse / they dwellid fer 
a sondre, in suche wise that they knewe not their power / But now 8 
whan they sawe that they were so many, they had meruaillous grete 
desdayne of that they had suffred, and the pryde & grieuousnes of 
one prince. They take counseyl emonge them, and sawe that no 
peple myght resiste them / but myght conquere alle londes ther 12 
aboute / But one tbynge destrobled them / and that was / they 
They decided had no kynge on them / And! thenne they dyde in this manere / 
king toTuie They fonde emonge them an hondred lignages / of whiche euerich 

had his meyne / And euery lignage brought forth an Arowe marked 16 
in suche wise that the Arowe of eche lignage myght be knowen / 
arid whan alle thise Arowes were brought to gydre / They called a 
lytil chylde / and! commanded hym to take vp suche one as he 
wolde / ffor they had acorded emonge them / that of the lignage, 20 
that the Arowe shold be taken vp by the chylde / they shold chese 
them a kynge / The chylde toke vp one of a lignage that after was 
called Selduees / Now they knewe that of this lignage they muste 
chese a kynge / And they toke an hondred of the most prudent & 24 
wise men that they coude fynde in al the lignage / And com¬ 
manded that eche of them shold brynge an arowe / wheron his name 
shold be wreton / And after they called the chylde / and bad hym 
take vp one of the Arowes / And concluded emonge them / that he 28 
shold be kynge / of whom he 2 toke vp the arowe / he toke vp one / 
one seiduc on whiche was wreton Selduc / This Selduc was a moche goodly 
by lot. man / and gretely honoured in his lignage / ho was grete and 

stronge, a good knyght and wel proued / and semed wel to be a 32 
good man and of hye werkes / They chees alle this man for to be 
theyr kynge, as they had promysed / And dyde to hym homage 
and feaulte by oth, and obeyed hym, and honoured hym, lyke as is 
His firet com- don to a new kynge / This kynge, for the first of his commande-36 
was that aii mentis, commanded and made do crye ouer all, on navne of lesvnsr 

should return itii 1 J J ° 

into Persia 0 f theyr lyues, they shold repasse & goo ouer agayn the flood of 

1 The French gives “ touffrir,” endure, which Caxton has evidently mis¬ 
taken for “ svjfire," to suffice. 2 leaf 16. 



31 


Ch. IX.] Of the Condition of Christianity. 

Cobar, and retorne agayn in to perse, ffor they wold no lengre be 
in danger for to seche place and stede where they myght dwelle / 
but wolde that they shold eonquere this londe and other / and to conquer 

, J ^ ' the land. 

4 reteyne them in theyr seignourye / lyke as he saycl 1 and? commanded, 
it was don / ffor the peple conquerd in a short space by force of They con- 
armes, not only the Royame of Perse / but alle Arabe and other only Perma, 

. . ' but Arabia 

contrees of thoryent / and toke them by strengthe, and! reteyned 
8 them vnder theyr power / And thus it happed that this peple that Eaat - 
tofore had be so rude / and lyued so out of rule as becstis / after 
gate in lasse than fourty yere so grete seignouryes, as ye now here / 

And mounted in so grete pryde / that they wolde no more haue the They would 
12 name lyke as the other had! / 1 wherfore they were called! turkes / becailfT 

Turcoman*, 

The other that wold? not leue theyr manor of lyuynge were alleway f 

named, and yet ben, Turquemans / Thise peple, whan they had Tutk - 
conquerd this contre of thoryent / they wold entre in to the 
16 Royamme of Egypte / ffor they were of moche grete puissaunce / 

And! descended! in to Surrye / and conquered the contre / And They da- 

ecended into 

emonge the other cytees, they toke the holy cyte of Iherusalem. An<J Syria, 
auche peple as they fonde there they demened right euyl, and boiyc«yo f 
20 tormentid and greued tliem more than they had ben tofore / lyke 
as I haue sayd to you to fore / 

Of tkorryble synnes regnyng theune in crystiante, as 
wel in thyse partyes / as in tho partyes. 

24 capitulo ix° 

E haue herd how this peple that were crysten were demened, 
y in this contre of thoryent / Now ye may here how the 
crystiente 2 is contened and ruled in other partyes of the 
28 world / knowe ye for certayn, that this tyme were founden but 3 But few 

" ir ^ people in the 

fewe / that had the drede of our lord in theyr herte / Alle right «'°rw at tins 
wysnesse / alle trouthe / alle pyte were faylled / The fayth of LoId°fn their 
Ihesu cryste was 4 as it had be quench id / and of chary te men spack h ' arte - 
32 not / debates / discordes / and warres were nyhe oueral / in suche 

wyse, that it semed / that thende of the world was nyghe / by the Theod or 
signes that our lord sayth in the gospell / ffor pestylences and seemed nigh, 
famynes were grete on therthe / ferdfulnes of heuen, tremblyng of 
36 therthe in many places, and many other thinges there were that 

1 Caxton omits here “ dont ilz vindrent." 

* Fr. se contend'd, i. e. conducted itself. 3 Ochj. but. 4 leaf 16, back. 



32 


The primes 
oppressed 
their own 
subjects. 


and even 
despoiled the 
churches. 


Monks and 
priests were 
maltreated. 


Sin and vice 
flourished 
un rebuked. 


Every one 
seemed to 
exert himself 
to serve the 
devil. 


The sad state of Christendom. No true faith. [Ch. X. 

ought to fere the hertes of men, to drawe them fro euyl / & to 
brynge to them the remembraunce of our lord / But they were as 
deef and blynde of heeryng and of seeyng* / this that was nedeful to 
them for to saue theyr sowles / The prynces and the barons brente 4 
and destroyed! the contrees of theyr neyghbours / yf ony man had 
saued ony thynge in theyr kepyng / theyr owne lordes toke them, 
and put them in prison and in greuous tormentis, for to take fro 
them suche as they had 1 / in suclie wyse that the chyldren of them 8 
that had ben riche men / men myglit see them goo fro dore to 
dore, for to begge and gete theyr brede / and somme deye for 
hungre and mesease / 1 As to the chirches ne Religyouses, they kept 
not theyr priuyleges ne none other fraunchyses / but were taken fro 12 
them alle 1 that mocht be founden, as wel meobles, rentes, and 
other thynges / ye the crosses, chalyces, & the sensours, they toke 
fro the chirches / and molte them for to selle / yf ony fledde to the 
chirche for to warante and saue hym / he was taken & drawen out 16 
vylaynously, as out of a tauerne or an other place / To Monkes and 
clerkes were doon wronges, and all the shames they myght / Ther 
was no iustycc / but on them that trespaced! not ne forfayted 
nothyng / The contrees were ful of theues & of murdriers / In 20 
cytees ne in good townes was noman sure / There regned custom- 
ably dronkenship / lecherye / playeng at dyse & roberyes / ther 
was no mariage kepte / ne lignage / And! also as of euyl lyf were 
the clerkes or werse / as the other / The bysshops ne the other 24 
prelates durst not reprehende ne chastyse none for theyr euyl 
werkes / The Rentes of holy chirche they gaf ne payd none / but s 
solde the benefices / And fynably I saye yow, that alle euyl werkes 
had surpryse<i alle crystiente / in suche wyse, that it seined* that 28 
eueryche dyde payne for to serue the deuyll / 

Of a bataylle that themperour Romayne of Constanty- 
nople had ayenst a puissaunt prynce of thoryent 
named Belphet. ca° x° 32 

o Wr lorde, that by his pyte chastyseth in this woi’ld for to spare 
in that other / and! can Wel bete his children that he louetb, 

1-1 Fr - “ As ye ,ises n ’f 3 religyous ne gardoient nul previlege, ne nul 
franchise einz leur tollient, etc. Caxton seems here to have translated the 
French as (i les) by the English as. It should read—They protected none 
of the privileges or franchises of the church, or of the religious orders but 
took away, etc. 2 Orig. bnt. 



Ch. X.] 


Of the heathen prince Belphet. 


S3 


1 for to sane them, suffrocJ a grete fiawe 2 to come in to the contre, 
for to chastyse the peple / ffor in this tyme, whan tliemperour 
Romayn was lord in constantynoble / yssued out of the partyes of 
4 thoryent a puissant hethen prynce named! Belphet, whiehe brought 
with hym so grete plerete of peple out of perse & surye, that they 
couerd alls the contre / & the multitude was so grete that it myght 
not wel be nombred / they brought with them cartes / Charyottes / 
8 horses, camels / beuffes / kyen / & other smale beestys, so grete 
plente / that vnnethe it myght be byleuyd! / & with this grete 
apparayl / This grete force & strengthe lie brought in to thempire 
of constantinoble / & began to take & waste alle that he fonde / & 
12 where as they fonde fortresses / cytees or castellis, they toke it al 
with assault / ffor nothyng myght resiste them, but that they smote 
alle doun to therthe / alle the peple hool 3 fledde to fore hym / this 
tydynges cam to themperour that this grete lord had supprised & 
16 taken alle his contre / anon without taryeng, he sente alle about in 
thempire, & dyde thenne somone alle his hoost, & assembled as 
moche peple as he coude gete / & as moche good as he myght fine 
for this werke that was so grete / whan his peple were comen, he 
20 yssued! with as many men of armes and of warre as he myght haue / 
& drewe to that parte where this belphet cam / he fonde hym to 
sone, as he that was ferre entred in to the londe / whan they knewe 
that eclie of them was so nygh other / they ordeyned! theyr bataylles 
24 for to fyghte / & assembled so cruelly & of so grete angre / as peple 
that had! eche to other grete hate. The hethen foughte for tenhaunce 
theyr lawe, & for teucrece theyr power / & the cristen men defended 
theyr fayth & the lawe of Ihesu criste, & to saue and! kepe theyr 
28 Hues & franchyses, & theyr wyucs / childoren, & theyr con tree / 
The bataylle was moche grete & cruelle, moche peple slayn, & blode 
shadde here & there. Atte laste the grekes myglit not suffre the 
faytes 4 ne the grete plente of the mesereauns / and fledde as dis- 
32 comfyted so fowlethat none retomed! agayn, but 5 ranne away wifch- 
oute ordenaunce, eueryche where he myght best saue hym; they 
that folowed them 6 dyde alle that they wolde. 6 They slews many, 
& toke grete plente a lyue, And! enxonge alle other, Themperour was 

1 leaf 17. 2 Fr.Jleuu, scourge. 

8 Fr. entierenient, entirely, i. e. to a man. 

4 Fr. fail. Caxton has evidently confounded this word, which means 
burden, weight, force, with fait, feat. 6 Orig. bnt. 

a_8 f> r ii eli faisoit presque leurs volontts,” i. e. had pretty nearly their 
own way with them. 

GODFREY. D 


At tlii® time 
came from 
the East a 
Prince named 
Belphet. 


He began to 
devastate the 
Empire of 
Constant!' 
nople. 


The Emperor 
marched out 
against him. 


The battle 
was fierce, 
and many 
were slain. 
Finally the 
Greeks tied. 


Their Em* 
peror was 
taken 
prisoner. 



u 


Belphet 
treated him 
shamefully. 


After a time 
he set him 
free. 


Belphet con¬ 
quered all 
the land ne 
far as Con¬ 
stantinople, 


including 

Antioch. 


The Turks 

began to 
maltreat the 
Christians. 


Prince Pelphet conquers the Christians. [Ch. X. 

taken hym self / whan tydinges cam in to the contre that the batayl 
was loste, and! theraperour taken / ther was grete sorowe of alle 
tholde men, wyues / & childeren that had not ben there / belphet, 
this prynce of myscreauntes, seeyng* that he had thus playn 4 
victorye of the cristen men, mounted & aroos in to grete pryde / 
ftor he thought wel that he shold fynde no barre that shold lette 
hym to doo his wills in 1 thempyre. whan he was lodged, & his hoost 
aboute hym / he commanded themperour to be brought to fore hym, 8 
which had be taken in the bataylle / & he sette his foote vpon the 
necke of themperour / & this dyde he ofte, & whan he shold! 
mounte vpon horsbak or descends / in shame and despite of the 
fayth of our lord and of the cristen peple. Whan he had thus a 12 
whyle shamed, reuyled, & despyted themperour, He lete hym goo, 

& delyuerd hym & som of his barons / that had be prisoners / & 
whan themperour was come agayn in to constantynoble / 2 the 
barons of the loude reputed! hym as ouermoche dishonoured! / as he 16 
that had shamefully conduyted! the bataille, 2 & toke hym & raced 
out his eyen, & lete hym vse his lif in sorowe & shame. This 
prynce belphet began to take alle the londe, in suche wyse, that in 
a lytil whyle he co/tquerd fro the 3 lystes of surye, vnto the see 20 
called the braas of seynt george / which is wel xxx iourneyes of 
lengths / & x of brede / & in som place xv, & whan he cam to the 
braas / he wold haue passed in to constantinoble / whiche is on 
that other side of that litil see / but he myght not finde shippis 24 
ynowgh / Thus the cristen peple of that londe, for theyr synnes 4 
were vnder this cruell peple / emong the other, the noble and hye 
cyte where saynt peter was, 5 & made fyrst as chyef of cristente / 
that is, antioche, was taken in the ende, and subgette vnto the 28 
turkes / thus had this belphet in his seygnorye & demayne the 
londes named celessurye / the two cilices / painphylee / lyce, 
lycaone / cappadoce, galace / Bethyne, & a parte of the lasse asye / 
alle tliise couwtrees ar moch fertile & ful of peple / this hethen 32 
peple began to bete doun the ehirches & greue the cristen peple, as 

1 leaf 17, back. 

2—2 Cax ton’s translation is here incorrect. “ Les barons de la terre tinrent 
a trop grant deshonneur se celui qui ainsi bonteusement les avoit conduits 
(var. avoit este menez), demoroit plus seur dedans le povoir et la haultesce 
de l’empire.” 3 Fr. Laliche, i. e. the town of Laodicea. 4 Orig. syuues. 

1 It is hard to understand whether Cax ton means here that Saint Peter 
was “ made chyef of Ongtente,” or the city of Antioch. The Latin original 
has—“ Inter quoe noinlie et eximia provinciamm multarum moderatrix et 
princepe civitae principle apoitolorum eedee pr'vma capta est." 



35 


Ch. XI.] Of the Sufferings of the Christians. 

it plesyd them / ffor so grete affraye & drede was in the hertes of 
the cristen peple / that they alle fledde vj iourneyes fro the said 
belphet / this was a thynge that greuyd merueylously the holy cyte Jerusalem 
4 of Iherasalem & the peple of the countre / ffor whyles themperour ““fferedby^ 
of constanty noble was in good pees & in his grete power / many of marten, 
grete socours, grete comfort of ryche yeftes & of large almesses cam 
vnto the peple of surye, and also fro the londe of antioche. But 
8 thenne they had loste alle, & had none hope that euer ony ayde ne 
socours sholdf come to them / wherfor they supposed euer to be in 
seruage & captyuite without ony raunsom. 


12 


Of many maners of tormens that the cristen peple 
suffred for theyr synnes / in that time / 

capitulo xi“ 


The Chris¬ 
tiana Buffered 
all these 
torment* on 
account of 
their eins. 


w Hyles that this tyme was so peryllous for the seygnorye of 

thyse hethen men / cam oftymes in pylgremages the grekes The Greeks 
16 ! and the latyns in to Iherusalem / ffor to prave oure lord! and crye medepii- 
hym mercy / that he wold? not forgete thus his peple. yet many 
cam theder in grete perylle, ffor alle the countrees by whiche they 
sliold passe were ful 2 of theyr enemyes / and ofte they were robbed 
20 and slayn / And whan they myght escape and come to the holy 

cyte / they myght not entre therin. But eche persone muste paye Each pilgrim 

had to pay a 

a besaunt for trybute, wherof happed ofte that they that were beeant to 
despoylled, had not wherof they myght paye this tribute / & Holy city. 
24 myght not entre in to the town / And for this they suffred Colde / 
hungre / and grete mesease / And many deyde. And herof the 
Cristen men of the toun were moche greued / For they susteyned 
them that lyued / And muste burye them that were dede / and 
28 seche such thyng as was nedeful to them self & other / 3 They that 
myght entre in the town were yet more greued 3 / ffor som were 
murdred in the holy places of the cyte secretely / & was doon to The pilgrims 
them moche shame & repreef openly. Ther was fylthe caste in sorts of 
32 their visage / & other spytte in the myddes of theyr visage / & som the heathen, 
men bette them / wherfore the cristen men of the town, that had 
som acqueyntaunces with the hethen men, eonduyted and ladde 
them 4 to theyr pylgremages, for to kepe them to theyr power. 


1 leaf 18. 2 Orig. fnl. 

3-3 Caxton has misunderstood his French, which reads “ Cenlx qui 
povoient entrer dam la ville let grevoient encore plus," that is, gave them 
(the Christians of Jerusalem) even more trouble. 4 i. e. the pilgrima. 

D 3 



36 Indignities suffered by the Christians. Peter the Hermit. [Oh. XII. 

There were in the cyte of them of Malfe, which is a cyte of puy ell, 
which had a chirche in Ihentsalem named 1 saynte marye de la 
There was a latyne,(8) whereby was an hospital of poure peple, where as was a 
them near chappel that was named! saynt Iohan Eleymont / This saynt Iohan 4 
u Latyne. a patriarke of Allexandrye / Thabbot of the chirche of our lady 

had in his cure & in his pourueyauwce this hospital, & pourchassed 
alle that was nedeful for them. There were receyuyd alle the pour 
pylgryms whiche had not wherof to lyue / And this hows was of 8 
moche grete charyte / Thus were the cristen peple in grete disease 1 
in the toun / But there was nothyng that displesyd them, as whan 
they had made theyr deuocions atte holy places in the toun, with 
grete traueylles & grete costes, And whan they were in the seruyse 12 
They were of our lord / the hethen mescreauntes cam in with grete noyse & 
in the holy crye, and satte vpon the aulters / threwe doun the chalyces / brake 
the lampes / &, the tapres / & yet for more to angre the. cristen 
peple / they toke ofte the patriarke, which was thewne, by the 16 
berde, and! by the heer / And! threwe hym doun to the grounds, & 
defowled hym vnder theyr feet, of whiche alle cristente had grete 
The Chris- sorowe & moche pyte / In thyse sorowes and meseases were the 

endured this cristen men in the londe of Surye, as I haue sayd you to fore, 20 

«9o years. CCCC four score & ten yere / and alwey cryed vnto our lord for 

2 mercy with syglies & teeres / & prayde hym deuoutly that he wold 

not alle forgete them / But the good lord, that after the tempeste & 

The Lord at derke weder can wel brynge clerenes and fayr season, behelde this 24 
theirjprayenh peple in pyte / And sente to them comforte and delyuerance of the 
them. tormentes in whiche they had longe ben. 

How aftir they 3 had ben four CCCC lxxxx yere in 
seruage of the hethen peple / our lord pourueyed 28 
remedye for his cristen peple / capitulo xij. 

i Haue wel said to you byfore / that out of many londes cam 
Peter the pilgryms in to Ihentsalem / emong alle other ther was one 

to Jerusalem, which was of the royame of ffraunce, born in the bisshopprych of 32 
Amyens, That is to wete / one named peter, whiche had ben an 
heremyte in a wode / And therfor he was called peter theremyte / 

He was small this was a litil man of body, & as a persone had in despite, & lytil 
h2rt reat ' of P r °y sed by semblaunt / But he was of a merueyllous grete herte / 36 

1 Fr. “ metaiee ," here means discomfort , misery. 2 leaf 18, back. 

3 Orig. the. 



Peter the Hermit. 


37 


Ch. XII.] 

of moche clere engyne / anil good vnderstondyng / and spak right 
wel / whan he cam to the gate of Iherusalem / he payd the trybute 
of a besauwt & entred in to the cyte / and was lodged! in a good 
4 cristen mans hows / This petre 1 alwey enquyred 2 & demauwded He made 
moche of his hoost / of the gouemaunce & estate of the cyte / And inqumea. 
how the cristen men conteyncd them vnder the liethen men / And 
how theyr lord demened & gouerned them / his hoost, whiche had His host told 
8 longe 3 ben in the towne / tolde to hym alle the maner playnly of story of their 

* *- v v sufferings 

the tymes passyd, And how the cristente had 1 be defowled / And 
the holy places dishonoured / whiche was sorouful to here / And he 
hym self, which a good while had be in the toun for to doo his 
12 pylgremage / sawe wel & perceyued a grete partye of the caityfnes / 
in which the cristen men were / he herd saye that the patriarke was 
a good wyse man, deuote & religyows, which was named symeon / (9) 

Peter thought that he wold goo & speke with hym / & demande of Peter took' 
16 hym the estate of the chirches, of the clergye, & of the peple / he the patriarch 
cam to hym, & dyde so as he thought, And asked of hym alle thise should he 
thynges / The patriarke apperceyued wel by his wordes and his 
countinaunce / that he was a man that dredde god / & right wyse 
20 and vnderstondyng / And began to telle to hym by layser / alle the 
meseases of the cristen peple. whan peter herde thise sorowes 
of the mouthe of this good man, whom he byleuyd wel, coude 4 
not absteyne hym fro grete syglies / & wepyng many teeres for 
24 pyte / & ofte demanded of tho patriarke yf ther were ony cowseil & 
remedye for this werke / & the holy & deuote patriarke 5 answerd 
hym: (10) “ we haue made many orysons & prayers vnto oure lord 
god for to receyue vs in to his mercy and grace. But we apperceyue 
28 wel ] that our synnes be not yet purged / ffor we ben cortaynly in 
the culpe and blame, whan oure lord, whiche is so rightwys, 
holdeth vs yet in the payne. But the renomme of the contrees by The chris- 

, , J r J , , , liana of 

yonde the montaynes is moche grete here, that the peple there, and France only 
32 specially of them of ffraunce, ben good cristen peple, and moche '•'em, 
stedfaste in the fayth. And therfor oure lord holdeth them at this 
day in moche grete peas and in hye puissaimce 6 / yf they wold 
praye our lord that he wolde haue pyte on vs / or 7 that they toke 
36 counseyl 7 for to socoure vs / we haue certaynly hope that our lord 

1 After “Peter" Caxton has omitted Com me il estoit saige et engverant, 

“as he was a sensible and inquiring man.” 2 Orig. enqnyred. 

3 Orig. louge, 4 Coude = our, “ he could.” 

4 leaf 19. 6 Orig. puissauce. 

r—r Fr. ou gu'ilzpHnssent eonteil, “or if they would take counsel,” 



38 


for the Greeks 
have not 
power 
enough. 


Peter is of 
the same 
opinion, 


and advises 
him to send 
letters to the 
Pope. 


He offers to 
carry the 
messages 
himself. 


The Patri¬ 
arch accepts 
this offer with 
Joy. 


Peter undertakes the Crusade. [Ch. XII. 

shold helpe vs by them for taccomplysshe oure werke. ffor ye see 
wel that the grekes and themperour of Constantinoble, whiche ben 
our neyghbours and as kynnesmen, maye not helpe ne counseyle vs / 
ffor they them self ben as who sayth destroyed / And haue no 4 
power to defende theyr owne lande ” / Whan peter herd! this / he 
answerd in this maner / “ fayr fader, Hrouthe it is that ye haue 
sayd / ffor of that londe am I. 1 And god be thanked / the fayth of 
oure lord is moche better holden there and lcepte / than it is in ony 8 
other londes that I haue ben in, syth that I departed on my Iourneye 
fro my eontre / 2 And I byleue certaynly that [if they knew] of the 
niesease and seruage in whiche thise hethen mysbyleuyd peple 
holde you Inne, 2 / that, by the playsyre of almyghty god, by theyr 12 
good wylles, they shold fynde coumseyl and ayde in this your grete 
nede & werke / wherfor I counseyl you one thyng, yf it be aggre- 
able to you & seme good / that is, that ye sende your lettres vnto 
oure holy fader the pope, and to the chirche of rome, vnto the 16 
kynges, prynces & barons of the Occident & weste parte / In which 
late them wete playnly 3 how it is with you / & that ye crye to 
them for mercy / that they wolde socoure yon for the loue of god 
& for his fayth in suche maner, that they myght haue honoure in 20 
this world & sauaeion of their soules in that other / & for that ye 
be pour peple / ye haue no nede to make grete dispewcis / yf ye 
thynke I be sufficiaunt for so grete a message / ffor the loue of 
Ihesu Criste & remyssyon of my synnes, 4 I slial entreprise 5 this 24 
vyage, and! offre my self to take so moche traueyl for you / And! I 
promyse truly to you that I shal late them haue knowleche / how it 
is with you / yf god sende me grace to come thydre ” / whan the 
patriarke herd this / he had moche grete ioye / he sente anon for 28 
the moost saddest & wysest men of the eristen peple, & for the 
clerkes & laye men / & sayde & shewde to them the bounte and the 
seruyse that this good man offryd to 6 them / They were right glad / 
And! thanked hym moche / Thenne anon, withoute taryenge / they 32 
made theyr wrytynges and! sealed! them with theyr seales / and 
delyuerd them to peter theremyte / 

1- 1 Fr. vray est, ce que vows avez dit de la terre dont je my, “ that is 
true, what you have said of the land from which I come.” 

2— 2 Caxton’s obscurity is here due to his bad French text, which omits 

one of the important verbs in the sentence. A. gives the correct reading, “ Je 
crois certainement qve s'il savoient la mesaise et li sewage qn que cist 
mescreant voz tiennent ,” etc. 3 Orlg. playuly. 

* Qrig. synues. 5 Qrig. enterprise, 6 leaf 19, buck, 



39 


Ch. XIII.] The Vision of Peter the Hermit. 

How the said peter theremyte entreprised the more 
hardyly his vyage, by thapparic/on or vision 
that he sawe in his sleep / ca xiii° 

4 t Euly our lord god! is swete / pyteous / and mercyful / ffor he 

wylle not suffre to perysshe / ne to he loste / them that haue TheLor^^ 
in hym ferme and stedfast hope / And whan the men lacke helpe / «>«» wijo 
gocf sendeth to them his ayde / And this may clerely be seen in 
8 this werke / for fro whens cometh that this pour man / whiche was 
lytil & despysed persone, wery and brused of so grete Ionmeye and 
waye / that durste enterprise so grete a dede and werke / how 
myght he wene that our lord! wolde accomplysshe so grete a werke 
12 by hym / as for to dylyure his peple fro the myserye and caytyfnes 
that they had ben in, nygh fyue C yere / But this hardynesse cam Peter's 

' courage, ths 

to hym of the grete charyte that he had! in hym / And! the fayth of hi* 
wrought in hym for the loue that he had to his bretheren / In thise 
16 dayes happed a thynge / that moche lyft vp his herte to poursue 
his enterprise / ffor this good man, whan he had taken this message 
and charge therof / he wente moche ofter than he was woonte to 
doo to the holy places in the cyte, and cam on an euentide to the 
20 chirche of the holy sepulchre, and made there his prayers deuoutly, 
with grete plente of teeris / Aftir this he sleepte vpon the pamente, 

& hym semed that our saueour Ihesu Criste cam to fore hym / The Lora 
x and charged hym self to doo this message 1 / And said to hym, J > | ®^ iuB 
24 “ petre, aryse vp hastely / and goo surely thedyr as thou hast charged 
entreprysed / ffor I shal be with the / It is now tyme from hens ^Jjiiywhat 
forth / that my holy Cyte be clensed / and that my peple be [' a e ka J^ under ' 
socoured " / Petre awoke in this poynt, And was fro than forthon 
28 more abandouned vnto the waye, and also sure, as his Iourneye and 
message had be doon / he entermed 2 and appoynted his departyng 
for to doo his erande / And had leue and benediction of the 
patriarke / he descended doun to the see 3 / and! fonde there a shyp 
32 of marchauntes that wolde passe in to puylle / he entred in to the Pete™tarts 
ship / the which had good wynde, & in shorte tyme arryued at bar / immediately. 

1-1 Fr. et Ini enehargoit ee message mesmes. Caxton translates mesmes 
as belonging to lui, instead of to message. It should read, “ and charged 
him with this same message.” Lat. •“ Et eandem injunxisse legationem.” 

2 Caxton’s original gives 11 enterina sen departement pour faire son 
chemim,” i. e. “ prepared to depart on his journey.” Another version gives 
“ atorna son oirre." Caxton read “ enterina ” as enterma, an easy, paleo¬ 
graphic mistake, and then made “ entermed ” of it in English. Lat. “ ad 
redeundum aceinctus.” 3 Orig. see. 



40 Urban curses the Emperor, and, is turned out of Borne. [Ch. XIV. 

peter yssued out, & wente by londe to rome. he fonde in the 
contre the pope vrban / and salewed hym in the name of the 
Heiiotiv«r» 1 Patriarke and of the cristen peple of Surye, and delyuerd to hym 

his letters to * * 

Pop* urban, theyr lettres / & sayde to hym by mouthe, moche trull <fc wysely, 4 
the grete sorowes, the miseryes and vyletees that the cristen stiffred 
thenne in the holy londe / as he that was expert therof / amf coude 
wel saye to hym the trouthe. 


Of the perseeucions of the chirche in that tyme, and 8 
how the pope Urban was putte oute of the see of 
Rome by the bysshop of Rauenne / ca° xiiij. 


Harry, 
Emperor of 
Germany, 
has a quarrel 
with Pope 
Gregory VII. 


The Emperor 
encroaches 
on the pre¬ 
rogatives of 
the Church. 


The Pope 
endeavours to 
settle the 
matter peace¬ 
ably. 


The Emperor 
declares war. 


i N this tyme, Harry themperour of Allemayne, had 1 a grete 
debate ayenst the pope Gregory the seuenth, to fore this 12 
Urban / and the discorde aroos for the rynges and the closes 2 of 
the bisshoppes that were dede in thempy^e / For suehe a customme 
had ronne a grete whyle there, that whan the prelates were deed / 
the rynges and croses of them were brought to themperour / And 16 
he gaf them to his clerkes and his chapylayns, or whom he wolde / 
and sente to the chyrches, and 1 bad them that they shoolde holde 
them for theyr bisshops and archebisshops without other election & 
other proof, by whiche holy chirche was adommaged sore / For he 20 
sente ofte persownes / that were not propice therto / The pope 
gregorie sawe that this customme was ayenst the right and lawe 
wreton, and also ayenst reason / and prayd hym amyably to leue 
this for the loue of god, of holy chirche, and for sauacion of his 24 
sowle / ffor it apperteyned nothyng to hym / Themperour wold not 
leue this for the pope / wherfor the pope cursed hym / herof them¬ 
perour had so grete despite & so grete 3 desdayne / that incontinent 4 
he began to warre ayenst the chyrche of rome / & ayenst the pope 28 
he made to rise an aduersarye / Tharchiebisshop of rauenne, whiche 
was named Gilbert, (11) & was wel lettred & moche riche / This bis- 


shop trusted ouermoche in thayde of themperour / And in the plente 
He deposes of his rychesse / And he cam to rome / and deposed and put out the 32 

Gregory, and ' r 

puts Gilbert p 0 pe of his see by fauour & force / And becam so fel, and of so 

of Ravenna in r r J 1 1 

his place. grete pryde that he had, that he forgate his wytte & reson that he 


ought to haue by his clergye / And sette hym self in the see / And 
made hym to be holden for pope, as he that wel wende to haue ben 36 


1 leaf 20. 

3 Orig. gtete. 


2 Fr. croces, crosier, or bishop’s staff. 

4 Orig. iucouteneat, 



41 


Ch. XIV.] 


Urban is chosen Pope. 


it / I haue said* you to fore, that at that tyme / Cristen peple were 
in gret paryll thurghout alle the world / & that the comandemens 
of the gospel were moche forgoten / and! of holy chyrche / And! men 
4 ranne faste and habouradantly to the werkes of the deuyl & to alle 
synnes / & whan this discorde and! Scysme was so grete / Thenne 
alle trouthe was 1 goon & the fayth of our saueour was lyke as it 
had ben alle perysshed! / The bysshoppes, the abbottes, and the 
8 prouostes 2 were beten & sette in prison / 3 And alle theyr thynges 
were taken awey fro them, namely by them that helde of them- 
perour 4 3 / In this debate was done alle the shames and repreues to 
the pope / Thenne the holy fader sawe that he was not obeyed as 
12 he shold be / and that he was in paryl of his lyf / And ho went in 
to puylle / by the helpe and counseyl of Robert guiehart / wliiehe 
thenne was lord of the contre / This Robert dyde vnto our holy 
fader / and to his peple, as moche of honour, of servyse, ancl bounte 
16 as they wold! take, and! yet more / at laste our 5 holy fader wente 
hym in to salevne / & becam seke, and 0 laye doun & there deyde / 
& was there bnryed / The Cardynals that were there Chose another, 
wliiehe was named! viator 7 / whiche endured but one moneth or 
20 there aboutes : After hym, they choos this vrban that I spack of to 
fore / This vrban sawe that themperour was yet in his malice & his 
angre / & durst not 8 abandone to hym, ne put hym in his power, 8 
but helde hym in the forteresses of some barons, that for goddes 
24 sake reteyned hym in grete doubte / whiles he was in this poynt 9 / 
peter theremyte cam to hym / ancf brought to hym the message fro 
the Crysten men in the holy londe / our holy fader the pope 
knewe moche wel / the bounte / the wytte / and the religion that 
28 was in this peter / And / ansuerd to hym moche swetly, and! sayde 
that he shold goo hastyly speke to the princes and barons of the 
royame of ffrannce of this werke / for yf he myght escape sauely fro 
the handes of themperour, he hym self had Intencion to passe the 
32 montaygnes, and drawe hym toward tho parties for to helpe the 
better to this wherke / yf it were possible / Thenne peter was right 

1 leaf 20, back. 2 Fr. provnires. priests, not provosts. 

3—3 p r “ I'm mcttoicnt autres evesqnes et autres abts en leurs lent no- 
miement a cents qiti se tcnment devcrs I’empereur.” Lat. “ Quicmnque 
impcratori in hac swa perversitate nun erant consentientes." 

4 Orig. themperonr. 6 Ong. om\ 8 Orig. aud. 

l Caxton here follows his French original, which is corrupt. The Latin 
and the better French translations give Vietor. 

8-8 Fr. s’abandonner, a son pooir, “trust himself in his hands.” 

8 Orig. poyut. 


The state of 
Christianity 
at tills time 
very deplor¬ 
able. 


The digni¬ 
taries of the 
Church are 
maltreated 
and insulted. 


The Pope 
flees to 
Robert 
Guiehart for 
protection. 


Here he dies. 

A Pope 
Victor is 

chosen. 

After him 
Urban is 
elected. 


He receives 
Peter favour¬ 
ably, and 
advises him 
to preach the 
Crusade in 
France. 



42 


Peter 

preaches the 
Crusade with 
such power 
that the 
people weep 
tears of pity. 

Like John 

the Baptist 
before Christ, 
so Peter pre¬ 
pares for the 
coming of 
Pope Urban. 


Pope Urban calls a General Council. [Ch. XV. 

glad of this good answers of our holy fader / and! passed! lombardye 
and! the montaygnes, 1 and! cam in to ifrance / And! began diligently 
to gete 2 the barons, like as he was sent expresly to them, and! tolde 
to eehe of them the shames and disconvenyenees 3 that the hethen 4 
peple dyde to the Crysten folke in the holy londe / And the same 
he said to the mene peple / for he assembled them oftymes, and 
tolde to them the sorouful state of the londe & Cyte of \hemsa\era / 
in suche wyse that he made them to wepe many a teere / And at 8 
euery tyme he made some fruyt by his sayeng and exhortyng the 
peple to gyue socours to the holy lande / And like wise, as saynt 
lohaq baptyste preched to fore, to make the way to fore Iheiu 
cryste / so in the same wyse this Peter brought tydynges to fore 12 
the comyng of our holy fader / wherfore he hym self, whan he 4 cam, 
was the better herd and byleuid / and the more dyde in this werke / 


Of a general counseyl that the pope vrban ordeyned 
for the reformacion of holy ehirche & thamende-16 
ment of the peple / cap" xv° 


In 1095, 
Henry 
reigned in 
Germany, 
and Philip in 
France. 


The Pope 

f oes into 
ranee. 


He orders a 
Council at 


Cluny j 


n second 
Council at 
Pay Nostro 
Dame; 


i N the yere of thyncarnacion of our lord M. lxxxxv. regned the 
fourth harry, kynge of almayn and emperour of Rome / the 
xviii yere of his regne / and the xii of his Empire, and In frannee 20 
regned thenne philipe, the sone of harry / Then we sawe our holy 
fader the pope vrban, that the world was moche empeyred and 
tomed to evyl / and helde a counseyl ther vpon of the prelates of 
ytalye at playsance / where he made establysshemens by theyr coun- 24 
seyl, for tamende the maners of the Clergye and of the laye peple / 
After he knewe wel that he was not sure in the power of thera- 
perour, and passed the montaygnes and cam in to the royame of ' 
frannee / he fonde the peple euyl endoctryned and ouermoche en- 28 
clyned to synne // Charite faylled / and warres and discordes were 
emonge the riche men / And thought that it was nede to doo his 
power & myght for tamende Cristiente / he ordeyned a generall 
counseyl of alle the prelates that were bytwene the montaynes 5 and! 32 
the 3ee of Englande / this counseyl was sette fyrst at ®Clony / 
Another tyme at puy nostie 7 dame® / And the thirde tyme at Clere- 

1 Orig. montaygnes. 2 Fr. querir, search out. 

3 Fr. disconrenancet, insults, not discomeni cnees, as Caxton evidently 
read it. 4 leaf 21. 6 Orig. montayues. 

*-* Other editions give Venelai, Lat. et universis transalpinarum par- 
films a pud Vigiliacum. 7 Fr. Pui Nmtre Dame. 



Ch. XV, XVI.] Urban adopts Peter’s Crusade before the Council. 43 


mont, in auuergne / This was in the moneth of Nouembre / There 
were many Archebisshops / bisshops / abbotes / and grete prelates 
and persones of holi ehirehe of thise parties. Ther were by the 
4 general counseyl many commandements 1 gyuen for tamende clerkes 
& layetee 2 / for teshewe synnes / and* recouere good maners / There 
was holy ehirehe al reformer?, of whiche it had* grete nede / 
Emonge alle other, Peter theremyte was there, whiche forgate not 
8 the werke that he was charged! with / but admonested! the prelates 
eche pryuatly by hym self, & prayde the comune peple openly 
moche wel and wysely / Thewne toke our holy fader the wordes, 
and shewed! generally to alle the counseyl / what grete shame it was 
12 to alle the cristen men, of our faith / that was so nyghe destroyed! 
& faylled in the place where it began / and it myght be grete fere 
and drede whan it faylled! at the heed & welle / that the ryvers shold! 
not endure / that were rennyng thurgh the world / And! saide 
16 moche wel, that alle the very Crysten peple shold! take herof grete 
despite of thus desheryted! by their defaulte / and! his contre 
delyuered! to his enemyes / And! promysed! that yf they wolde take 
3 vpon this pylgremage, he wolde chauwge theyr penaunce in to this 
20 werke. And yf they deyde in this waye, confessid and repentaunt, 4 
he wolde hike it on his fayth, that they incontinent shold goo in 
to the Ioye of heuen. On that other syde, as long* as they were in 
the seruyse of our lord!, they were in the warde and kepyng* of holy 
24 ehirehe, bothe they and theyr thynges, in suche wyse, that they that 
dyde to them ony doraage, shold be acursed, & alle this com¬ 
manded he to be kept of alle the prelates that were atte counseyl. 
This doon, he gaf euery man leue, and commanded [that he] shold 
28 preche this pylgremage and pardon. And tolde to them that alle 
men shold trauaylle to gyue and make longe trewes and pees of the 
warres, for taecomplysshe the' better this pylgremage, and to 
performe it. 


a third at 
Cleremont. 


Peter ad¬ 
dresses this 
last Council, 


The Pope 
himself then 
preached 
with great 
vigour, 


promising 
remittance of 
sins to all 
who put on 
the Cross. 


He com¬ 
mands all 
priests and 
prelates to 
preach the 
Crusade. 


32 How many noble and hye men, and other of the 
Royame of fraunse, crossed them for to goo 
ouer eee. ca° xvj° 

o Wr lord gaf his grace vnto our holy fader the pope in vtteryng 
36 of the word of god, which was said in suche wyse, that it was 

* Orig. conmandements. 2 Orig. layefee. 3 leaf 21, back, 

4 Orig , repeutaunt, 



his wife and 
children; 


but by so 
doing he 
saves his 
soul. 


barons of 
France 
undertake 
this work 
vigorously. 


44 The French Folk flock to Peter’s Crusade against the Turk. [Ch. XVI, 

The preach- fyxed and roted in the hertes of them that herde hym, and! not only 
Pope success- of them that were present, but of alls other that it was recorded 
and! told vnto, ffor the bisshops wente in to theyr countrees and 
preched to theyr peple like as it was to them commanded!. 1 How 
it is a difficult be it that it was a strange thyng, 1 and right greuows for a man to leue 
man to leave his contree, his wyf, his childeren / and lygnage, And leue them 
that he loueth by nature. But whan one thynketh what reward 
he shal haue of our lord so to doo, thenne he geteth a feruent loue 
in hym self for the charyte of our lord, and 2 leueth the naturel loue 
of his flessh, for to saue his sowle / and this myght wel be perceyued 
and seen, ffor the peple of the Royame of ffraunce, and! the grete 
barons, and other lasse that were enclyned to synnes and acustomed 
aii the great to doo ylle, as I haue said to fore, aftir they herde this precliyng*, 
entreprysed so vygorously the werke of our lord, and auowed them 
to ward this pylgremage, as ye shal here, ffor it semed that euery 
man ought to entreprise tauenge the wronge and shame that the 
hethen dyde to our lord, and to his peple, in the londe of Iheru- 
salem. Ye shold haue seen the husbonde departe fro his wyf, And 
the faders fro the childeren, and the childeren fro the fadres. And 
Many join to it semed that euery man wolde departe fro that he louyd best in 

save tucii* 

souia. this world, 8 for to Wynne the Ioye of that other / Ther was so grete 
affraye, and so grete a meuyng thurgh alle the londe, that vnneth 
ye shold haue foimde an hows / but that som had enterpiiseil 
this 4 viage / I saye not that alle that wente were wyse and of pure 
entencion toward our lord / ffor som monkes wente out of theyr 
cloystres without leue of theyr abbotes or pryours / and the recluses 
wente out of the places where they had ben closed in / and wente 
Many go for forth with the othor / Som wente forth for loue of theyr frendes, to 

more worldly ' *" 

reasons. here them felawship / Other wente forth for bobaunce, lest they 
shold be reputed for euyl and not good / And som there were that 
wolde withdrawe them for theyr creancers, and haue respite of theyr 
dettes / But how that it was theyr entencions within theyr hertes, 
it semyd good for the grete enterpryse that they shewed outward / 
And it was of grete nede that this pylgremage was chosen at that 
tyme / ffor there were in the world so many synnes that they with- 
drewe the peple / fro our 5 lord / And it was well behoueful that 
god shold sende to them som addressement, 6 by whiche they myght 

1-1 Fr. Bien saves, queforte chose, “Be assured that it is a hard thing,” etc. 

2 Orig. aud. 3 Orig. wrold, 4 leaf 22. 6 Orig. onr. 

3 Fr. adriccment, according to Cotgrave, a directing or setting in the nearest course 


Men need 
this hard 
penance. 



45 


Ch. XVII.] Many distinguished Men undertake the Crusade. 

come to heuen / and! that he gaf them som traueylle, as it were a 
purgatorye to fore theyr deth / At this counseyl auowed presently Among the 
this pylgremage, the good! bisshop of Puy named Aymart / whiche Adi.c-^ 
4 aftirward! was legate in the same hoost / and! conteyned! hym moche 
wysely and truly / Also, the bisshop of Orenge, whiche 1 was an holy orange, 
man and relygyous, auowed there the same viage / And! ynowhe of 
other whiche were not at that counseyl that enterprised the same 
8 vowe / Our holy fader had! commanded / and made the bisshops to 
holde it / that alle they that wolde auowe this pylgremage shold Each cru- 
sette the signe of the crosse on their right sholdre / ffor thonoure of " 8a B 1 s are ® 
hym that bare the torment of the crosse vpon his sholders for to 
12 saue vs / and! taccomplysshe this that oure lord! saytli in the gospell / 

“Who that wil lyue aftir me / renye 2 hym self and take the crosse 
and folowe me ” / wel forsaketh he hym self, that leueth / that the 
flessh loueth / for sauyng of his sowle / whan one of the grete barons 
16 was croysed! so on his Sholdre in a contre, alle the peple of the 
contre that were also crossyd cam to hym, and chees hym for 
theyr captayne, and made to hym feaulte for to haue his ayde 
and warantise in the waye of the sayd pylgremage / 

20 The names of noble men that enterprised this pyl¬ 
gremage, as wel on this side as beyonde the 
montaynes / capitulo xvij 0 

i N the royame of fraujzce and of Allemayne, 3 hughe, the in Frame*, 

Oi O i t* , , the following 

24 yonger brother of the kyng of fraunce 4 3 / Robert, therle of great men aw 
flaundres 6 / Eobert, Due 6 of Normandye, Sone to kynge William Hugh 
of 7 Englond / Stephen, therle of chartres and of bloys, which was j^tSto? 8 ’ 
fader to erle thybauld the olde, whiche lyeth at laigny / Eaymond, 

28 therle of tholouse / and many knyghtes of that londe / The valyant Tou,ouse > 
man Godefroy of buyllon, Due of lorayne, with his two bretheren, Godfrey of 
Bawdwyn and eustace / And one theyr cosyn, Bawdwyn, sone to 
the counts huon de Eetel / Therle garnyer de gres / Bawdwyn, the 
32 erle of henawde / Ysoart, the erle of ye / Kembout, therle of 
Orenge / William, therle of forests / Steuen, therle of Aubmalle / 

Eotrout, the erle of Perche / Hughe, the erle of saynt pol / & many 

1 Orig. whi he. 2 Fr. rente, “ let him deny himself.” 

3—3 Fr. “ Sue le maine, frere an roy France, ” Hugh the great, not 
“ Hugh the younger brother.” Lat. Hugo Magnus. 4 Orig. frauuce. 

* Orig. fiauudres. 6 Orig. Dnc. 7 leaf 22, hack. 



46 The Equipment of Peter the Hermit's Crusaders . [Ch. XVII. 


Wm. of 
Montpelier, 
Girard of 
Roussilon. 


In Italy 

Uohemond, 

Prince of 

Tarentum, 

and hiu 

nephew 

Tattered. 


The barons 
decide not 
to go all 
together. 


Every man 
provides his 
ownnruisaud 
provisions. 


The day of 
departure 
was a sad 
one. 


barons and knyghtes that were not counted 1 / As raoul de baugenel / 
Euerard du puisat / Guy de garlande, which was steward of 
fraunce / Thomas de fferre, Guy de possesse, Giles de chaumouxt / 
Girard cherisy / Rogier de baruyle / Henry dawsique 2 / Centon of 4 
beart / Guillem amanaix, Gaste the bediers, Guillem de niont- 
pellyer / and Gyrard de Roussilon / ye may wel knowe that with 
this peple were eroyssed moche grete plente of knyghtes and other, 
with grete nombre of comune peple / whiche peter theremyte gadred 8 
in the Royamme of frauwee and in thempyre of Allemaygne. And by 
yonde the montayns men eroyssed them also / Buymount the pryuce 
of Tarente, whiche was soon to Robart guyehart, that was Due of 
puylle, and Tancre his neuew, his sustres sone, and many other grete 12 
barons of this londe that were not so renommed ne knowen as thise 
were. There was grete Appareyllemens, and! 3 araye that was made 
for this pylgremage. The grete men had enterprised, that assone as 
the wynter was passed they wold putte them on this pylgremage. 16 
The mene peple, the knyghtes, the barons, and other, aftir they 
were acqueynted that one with that other / sente to eche other 
lettres and messages for taccorde to goo to gydre / and! apoynted! 
the tyme of departyng 1 , and of the waye that they sholde holds / 20 
And whan Marche was come, ye sholde haue seen horses arrayed, 
with sommyers, palfroyes, and stedes / tentes and pauyllons, and 
to make armures. 4 5 ye maye wel knows 6 that there was moche to 
doo of many thynges, 5 ffor the barons were acorded that they shold 24 
not goo alls to gydre, ffor no contre myght suffyse ne fynde that 
which shold be nedeful for them / ffor whiche cause alle the hoostes 
neuyr assembled (as ye shal here) tyl they cam vnto 7 the cyte of 
Nycene. The mene peple charged them self not moche with tentes 28 
ne Armures, ffor they myght not bere it. And therfor euery man 
garnysshid hym aftir that he was, with moneye and goodes, as 
moche as he supposed shold be nedeful for hym. Whan the days 
of departyng 1 8 cam, ther were grete sorowes, grete wepynges, and 32 
grete cryes at departyng 1 of the pylgryms / ffor there were but fe\ye 
howses but of them som wente / And suche howsholders ther 
were / that they wente alle, and caryed theyr wyues, and® bare 
theyr childeren with them / It was a merueyllous thynge to see this 36 

1 Oriy. couuted. 2 Fr. Henry WAsqne. Lat. de Ascha. 3 Oriy, aud, 

4 Fr. “ faire-armeures chargier,” Caxton neglected to translate "chargier." 

6-6 Fr. “ Bien y porez savoir qn’il semhloit commencement de tree grant 
chose" Caxton has certainly translated very freely here. 

6 Oriy. kuowe. 7 Oriy. vuto. 8 leaf 23. » Orig. aud. 



Ch. XVI.II.] The Christian Knight Gaultier, without Knowledge. 47 

meuynges / ffor it had not byfore be acustomed to see suehe 
thynges in fraunce / ne neuer byfore was crosse bom ne taken for 
pylgremage. 

4 Of thauentures that a Rowte of Cristen men had in 
this viage / Of whome one Gaultyer withoute 
knowleehe / was Captayne / capitulo xviij 0 

t He yere of thyncamacion of our lord .M. foure score xvj / The 8th of 
8 the eght daye of Marche cam a gentiiman, a knyght right noble, waiter the 
named Gaultier,(12) without knowleehe 1 to his surname, with into 

’ v ' Germany. 

hym cam a merueyllous 2 grete plente of folke a foot, ffor ther were 
but fewe men a hors bak in this rowte / they passed in allemayne, 

12 and! drewe hem toward! hongrye / The Royamrae of hongrye was Hungary ie 

is i . iii a difficult 

alle enuyronned with grete waters, and large mershes, and depe country to 
lakes, in suche wyse that none myght entre ne yssue but by 
certayne places and strayt entrees that ben as yates of the londe. 

16 In hongerye was thenne a kynge, a moche valyaunt man named! 

Colemant / And was a very good cristen man / He kuewe that 
Gaultier cam by londe with grete peple / and! had 1 therof moche 
grete Ioye / and 1 helde wel with the pylgremage that he had enter- 
20 prised / he reeeyued them debonayrly in his londe, and commanded King Cole- 

. . , , ,, , „ , 1 , i mantreceive# 

thui gh his royanie that they shold haue alle maner vytaylle, good Waiter 
sheep, 3 and alle that they neded! / The pylgryms passed alle hongrye 
in good peas, tyl they cam to the ende, where they founde a water They reached 
24 whiche was named Marce / This was the bounde of hongerye toward of Hungary, 
thoryent. they passed this water in good peas, and entred in to 
hongrye. 1 And withoute knowyng of this Gaulteer, some of his 
peple abode ouer the water / And cam to a castel named Malleuylle, 

28 for to by vitaylles, of the whiche they had nede / The hongres 5 by 
cause 6 that alle the hoost was passed, sauf they which were but a 
fewe, ranne vpon them / And bette them / And dyde to them ouer- a few who 
moche shame. They passed the water, and cam to gaultier / and tacUy^ 
32 shewde to hym playnly how they had ben demened without for- Hungarians. 

1 Some of the French texts give “ Gautier sans Savoir,” which Caxton 
follows; others have the more correct, “ Gautier sans Avoir," i. e. Walter 
the Pennyless. Lat. Galterus cognomento “ Sans Aveir." 

2 Orig. merueyllons. 

3 Fr. a bon marehie, i. e. at low prices; “good, cheap ” seems to have 
been the ordinary translation, see p. 48 ; liht cheap is another form for the 
same expression. See Ancren Jliwle, 1. 398, and Townleg Mysteries, 102. 

1 Bougrye, Bulgaria. 6 Bougres, Bulgarians. 6 Orig. canse. 



48 


t>isasters to the Christians in Bulgaria. 


tCh. XVIlf. 


They com- faytte : They had! raoche grete despite, and moche sorowe herof. 
^v'aiter. And had passed the 1 water agayn, yf they had not so grete peryl 
and so grete distourblyng', And thought they wold goo theyr waye, 
and leue for tauenge this thynge / So long they wente tyl they cam 4 
to belle graue, whiche is the first Cyte of bougrye 2 on this syde. 
Gaultier sente to the due of the town, and requyred hym that lie 
The Duke of wolde late them ther by vytaylles / he wold not suffre ony to be 

Bellegrave *'*'*'' 

win not eeii so id to them. Thoost had grete disease 3 for lak of vytaylle / and 8 
visions. myght not longer kepe them, but that a grete parte of them wente 
a fowragyng for to gete vytaylles for them, and for theyr beestys / 
They founde grete plente of beestes in the contre / whiche they toke 
and brought to theyr lodgynges / whan they of the contre herd this, 12 
a conflict they armed them, and assembled grete peple of the couwtree, and ran 
• vpon them where they droef their proyes, and fought with them / and 
toke the beestes fro them / and many of them they slewe, and hunted 
the other away, the nowtbre wel of Cxi of oure 4 men, shytte them 16 
in a monasterye for to kepe them there sauf / but the boragres cam 
waiter sees there aboute / and sette fyer on the chirche, and brente alle / Gaultier 

that his men ' 

are to blame, sawe that he ledde with hym many folyssh peple, whiche he coude 

not rule ne sette alle in ordenaunce, And withdrewe hym fro them, 20 
and toke them that wold be ruled and obeye hym, and wente in to 
forestes of bougrye, 5 which ben large and long, and began to passe 
He sets out the moost wysely and stylle that he myght / tyl he cam to a cyte 
straTce name d stralyce / and is a contre named danemarche® the moyen / 24 
There fonde lie a good man that was duke of the londe / whan this 
receivcdhere knewe what they were and whyther they wente / he receyued 
’ them moche debonayrly, and made them to haue vytaylles and 
other thynges good cheep. And dyde to them bountes and seruyses 28 
ynowgh for the oultrage that was doon to them at belgraue. And 
dyde redresse and yelde agayne to them as moche as he myght 
and given recouere / and aboue alle this / he delyuerd to them good conduyte 
JoConstanti- and sewr tyl they cam to constantynoble / whan they were come to 32 ( 
constantinoble, themperour sente for gaultier. he cam vnto hym, and 


Here the 

Emperor 

receives 

Walter 

kindly. 


sayde to hym thoccasion of his viage, and that he wolde abyde there, . 
peter theremyte, by the commandemt of whom he had brought 
thyse pylgryms / whan themperour herde this / he receyued hym 36 


1 leaf 23, back. 

2 Lat. “ Bulgarorum et fines alligat ad locum deveniens qui dicatur 

Belgravia.” 3 Fr. souffrete, lack, scarcity. * Orig, onre. 

6 Bougrye, Bulgaria. 

® Fr. Danemarche la Maienne. Lat, Dacia Mediterranea. 



49 


Ch. XIX.] Peter the Hermit starts with his Army. 

f * 

moche wel and swetly / and assigned to hym a fayr place without 
the town / where as he lodged hym with his felawship, and com¬ 
manded that they shold haue vytaylle and alle other necessaryes 
4 good chepe / and ther soiourned they a whyle. 

How Pieter the heremyte was chyef of a grete hoost in 

this'viage toward the holy londe. capitulo xix" c> leaf so 

i t was not longe aftir that peter theremite cam fro his contre / Peter the 
8 with grete plente of peple, vnto the nombre of xl / M / he cam out with 
in to lorayne, and passed francone / bauyere, osterych 2 / and drewe 
hym toward hungrye. Peter sente his messagers to the kyng of 
hongrye, to thende that he myght passe his Royamme, he sente 
12 hym worde that he shold haue good leue yf they wold goo in peas 
without medlynges 3 and oultrages / They answerd that they were 
pylgryms of our lord / and had no talente for to trouble the pees / 

Thus entred they the royamme of hongrye / and passed by the 
16 lande without ony debate, vytaylles and other thynges had they 

ynongli good cheepe / At thende they cam to the castel of whiche I The^ arrive 
spak to fore / named maleuylle: There herd they saye / what was Here they 
doon to them of the retenue of Gaultier, and the grete oultrage doon inju»ticedon« 
20 to them without cause / and sawe yet the armes and despoyllis of men. 
theyr felawes that had be robbed there hange yet on the walles / 

Oure pylgryms that sawe this were alle as they had ben out of 
theyr wytte, and ran to armes / and 4 began euery man to do wel. 4 
24 they toke the toun by force, and smote of the heedes of alle them 
that were within, sauf a fewe which ran in to the water and were 
drowned, ther were founde of them that were deed wel a four M / They un 
and of peters meyne were slayn an C / whan this was don the hoost avenge their 
28 forede there grete plente of vytaylles / and abode wel v dayes in that pilgrim*, 
place / The due of “ Bougrie,” which was named Incita, 6 vnderstode 
how thise pilgryms had venged their felaws ayenst them of male- 
uylle / and doubted for as moche as he had defended the vytaylles to The Duie of 
32 our peple / and that he had slayn many of them. And hym semed greatS oV 
that bellegraue was not strong ynough / therfor he lefte the town / 
and wente in to a strenger castel / Thus alle they of the cyte yssued 
with their, goodes / and drewe them to the depe forestes / Peter 

2 ? orig. ofterych. 3 Fr. Meslees. 

4 4 jy “ s’entre commenc&rent a semondre et a amonester a Hen faire." 

Caxton, misled by the recurrence of the preposition a, skipped a line in his 
translation. 5 Fr. B. Vicetel. A. Vitira. Lat. Nickita. 

GODFREY. E 



50 


Peter s Army arrives at Nyee. [Oh. XIX, XX. 

whyles he laye yet at maleuylle, herd saye that the kyng of 
hongrye had herd of the deth of his peple / wherof he was moche 
angry / and that he somoned and assembled alle his power for 
Peter u in tauenge his men that had be slayn / And doubted herof / And was 4 
the duke, no merueylle / wherfore he made tassemble alle the shippes that 
Hungaiy. myght be founden atte ryue of the see to hym / and made his peple 
to departs moche hastely his cartes and charyottes / and the beestes 
they had merueyllous grete praye, and lad away grete rychesses fro 8 
the castel of maleyulle, that they had there taken whan they were 
[i if. 24, bk.] passed ouer in to bongrye. 1 they cam to fore bellegraue / and fonde 
the cyte alle voyde, ffor they were alle fled / Aftir they wente eght 
grete iourneyes by many grete forestes tyl they cam to fore a cyte 12 
named Nyze / This town fonde they moche stronge, and wel wallyd 
with grete towres and stronge / And within was grete garnyson, 
and the beste men of warre of alle the londe, and grete plente of 
armours aud vytaylle / Peter the heremyte and his hoost fonde a 16 
brygge of stone by whiche they passed a water rennyng 2 nyghe to 
the cyte / they passed the brygge and lodged them bytwene the 
water and the towne, And by cause they had not mete 3 ynough / 
Peter sente his messages vnto the lord of the toun / and prayd hym 20 
fayr for hym and for his peple that were cristen / and pylgryms 
that wente in the seruyse of our lord / that they myght bye 
vytaylles of the toun at resonable prys / Thenrae the lord sende 
worde to peter that he wold not suffre / that they shold entre in to 24 
They have^to the toun / But, and yf he wold gyue hym good ostages / that his 
to keep tiie peple shold doo no harme ne oultrage to the peple and marcheauntes 

pence. 

of the toun that shold come for to selle them vytaylle / he shold 
sende to them ynough at resonable prys. whan Peter and his peple 28 
herd this they were glad ynough. They delyuered good ostages / 
and anon they of the toun cam out with grete plente of vytayl and 
other thynges necessarye in the hoost / 

How some of tlie oost of peter thermyte vn\vetyng32 
hym sette fyre in the subarbes of Nyz at theyr 
departyng / cap” xx° 

m oche was this nyght, the hoost of the pylgryms, refresshyd of 
alle thynges that they had nede / ffor they had ben long fro 36 
ony good toun. And they of the cyte were to them moche debonair 

Fr. viandes, food, victuals. 


They arrive 
at the city of 
Nyze. 


Peter asks 
that provi¬ 
sions be sold 
to them at a 
reasonable 
rate. 


2 Orig. rennyug. 



51 


Ch. XX, XXI.] Of the Behaviour of Peter’s Army. 
and resonable. On the morne they demanded theyr ostages / And in the mom- 

° . ing they go 

they were delyuerd gladly / And forth they wente in peas. But 
now ye shal here how the deuyl doth grete peyne for to empresshe 
4 and lette good werkes / In this companye had ben the euen a fore a 
stryf to one of the marccbauntes of the town / and som of the oost / 
whan the hoost was departed, the duchemen assembled to the except a 
nombre of an hunderd, 1 and for vengeaunce of the stryf / they Dutchmen^ 

8 sawe vij myllenes, whiche stode at brygge nyghe the town / and 2 JS by 
sette them a fyre, and brente them anone / this was not ynough, 
but there was a litil borough without the cyte / and they sette that 
a fyre also, and brende hit to asshes / and syth wente theyr waye 
12 aftir .theyr 3 felawship, whiche knewe nothyng herof / Of this l*w*J 
thynge the lord of the town, whiche had the euen to fore shewde 
to them grete debonayrte was gretely meuyd, for he sawe that they 
rendrid euyl for god / and was half out of his wytte for angre / 

16 4 This felonnye that this fewe dyde was ivyted alle the boost, 4 
whiche was euyl and pyte. he made anon arme alle the town, and 
yssued on horsbak and on fote / hym self cam to fore / and prayde, 
and moche desyred his peple for to venge vpon thyse false rowters, pilgrim*. 

20 and theuys the oultrage that they had don. whan they approched 

the hoost / they fonde fyrst thise 5 thre malefactours whiche had He overtakes 
not yet ouertaken theyr felaws / And ronne on them, and smote of and 
their heedes / it had thenne be ynowgh, but 6 they were not con- their he “ ) *- 
24 tent, 7 but smote in the aftirst parte of thoost whiche doubted He also 
nothyng / they fonde eharyottes / sommyers / males, seruauntes, o1 

wymmen, and 2 children / whiche myght not goo so faste as the piigrime. 
other / They slewe many, and somme they ouerthrewe, and ladde 
28 away the cariage. And thus retorned in to theyr cyte without hurte, 
and alle blody of the bloode of the pylgryms. 

How Peter theremyte was aduertysed of alle this. 

And of the harme that ensiewed. eapitulo xxj° 

32 p Eter was goyng with the grete companye 8 whan a messager Pej*m«^ 
cam to hym rydyng, & told to hym of this aduenture that was tw *- 

1 Orig. huuderd. 2 Orig. aud. 

*- 4 Fr. “ et la felonie que pou dee gent ltd avoient faicte, mist tut a 
tout lost." 

6 Fr. Ttois: these Dutchmen ; Canton probably mistook Tiois for trait, 
aud translated accordingly. 6 Orig. bnt. 7 Orig. coutent. 

8 Fr. companye de Post, with the main body of the army. After “ Pott ” 
is omitted “ qui mot ne Sfavoit de cecy.” 



52 


He sends to 
the Duke for 
an explana¬ 
tion. 


When Peter 
hears the 
reason, lie 
Bees that his 
[« If. 25, bk.] 
own men 
were to 
blame. 


His followers 
will not go 
on without 
revenge. 


They break 
off the nego¬ 
tiations. 


Peter orders Peace to be made. [Ch. XXI. 

fallen in the taylle of thoost. Peter sente anon to them that were 
to fore, that they shold retonme agayn the way that they were 
comyn vnto the cyte of nyz / In this retorne they fonde thynges 
ynowgh that displesyd them, ffor they fonde their felawes byheded, 4 
lyeng by the waye / they had grete sorowe herof / One fonde his 
fader deed / Another his brother or his sone, and another his wyf 
or his donghter / there were many disconuenyentes. 1 Peter, whiche 
had his entencion pure vnto oure 2 lord / entented not, but tappese 8 
the malyee, and leye doun the discords whiche was sourded emong 
the peple / he sente som wyse and prudent men to the lord and to 
the moost hye men of the cyte, for to demaunde by what occasion 
they had don this euil and cruel tees ayenst the peple of our lord / 12 
They answerd that this was by the defaults of the pylgryms / and 
that they had fyrst doon grete oultrage to brenne theyr mylnes and 3 
burghe. whan Peter and the wyse men that were with hym herd 
this / They thought wel that it was no place ne tyme to venge 16 
4 theyr shames, And therfor torned the mater vnto peas and acorde / 
for to recouvre the praye, the prysonners and caryage whiche they 
had ledde away fro thoost / ffor there were of the mene peple 
whiche wold not be ruled, and wold not suffre them of the towne to 20 
haue pees with vs / but wolde auenge 5 by force the oultrage that 
they had doon / Peter felte this thynge, And apperceyued anone 
the euylle that sourded / And sente of the wysest and grettest of 
his companye 6 to make the pees / his peple wold not haue pees. 24 
He made a crye on payne of deth, in his name and the name of the 
barons / that noman be so hardy to broke the pees that was made. 
And this he charged vpon their pylgremages, theyr feaulte, and on 
thobedyence that they had promysed hym / And whan they of the 28 
boost herd this / they 7 remeuyd not / But folyssh peple wente 
forth and made grete noyse, and wold not obeye. The messagers 
that were in the toun for taccorde this that was don, sawe that the 
noyse grewe more and more, and retourned to theyr felawshhip 32 
withoute ony conclusion or doyng that they had enterprised / and 
dyde theyr best to seeee the debate j but 8 they had no power, ffor 
there were moo than a thousend pylgryms, whiche noman myght 

1 Fr. disconvenues. 2 Orig. onre. » Orig. aud. 

6 Orig. aneuge. 6 Orig. compauye. 

7 08x100*8 original is here corrupt. A. gives the correct reading, “ ti ne 
le orwrent pat," they did not believe it, instead of « they remevyd not," 
which is in direct contradiction with the next sentence. 

8 Orig. but 



53 


Ch. XXI.] The Battle near Nyze. 


holde ne reteyne / But that they wold goo armed to the toun. Out 
of the toun yssued as many or moo ayenst them, ther began the 
bataylle and the medle grete and thyk, and began to slee eche other 
4 largely / Peter ne his route meuyd not / but 1 byhelde the bataylle. 
They of the toun that were on the walles and at wyndowes sawe 
that theyr peple had the werse, and apperceyued that the grete 
power of thoost 2 entermeted not of this warre, and 2 thought that 
8 they wold not helpe them / And 3 opened theyr yates and yssued 
oute by grete rowtes alle armed, and smote in the bataylle / And 
founde of our peple aboute a / V / C. vpon the brygge / 4 And 
addressyd to them and slewe them alle, sauf somme that were caste 
12 in the water / And alle were perysshed. whan the grete hoost 
apperceyued theyr peple thus euyl demened, they myglit suffre it 
no longer, but wente to Armes / and smote in to the bataylle / one 


Agre 

takes 


place. 


The pilgrims 
get the worst 
of it. 

Those who 
had only 
looked on 
have to come 


aftir another, lyke as they myght be armed, the peple that had of 

16 bygonne this debate were discomfyted fyrst / And began to flee so 
fast that nothyng myght tarye them j They began to bete them on 
horsbak, that cam for to helpe them / by whicbe the good men were 
discomfyted / And they of the -Cyte that were nygh to theyr 
20 retrayt, began to chase them moche straytly, and to slee them / At 
last, whan oure peple were withdrawen / they retorned 5 * by the 
6 caryage and harnoys / And caryed alle, and ledde it with them, [“leaf 26 ] 
And toke wymmen and childeren that myght not flee, and putte 
24 them in prison. There were wel slayn and lost of the peple of the lOjOoo pin 
hoost / X / M / and the bongres 7 wan alle the harnoys of thoost / slain, and 
There was a cart loste that longed to peter theremyte, alle ful of “ 8 e ' hlldren 
Eychesse, whiche had ben youen to hym in ffraunee for to socoure 8 prisoners. 
28 and sustene the necessytees of the hoost / they that myght escape 
fro this discomfiture, drewe them in to the forestes / and hydde them 
in the depe valeyes in the nyght / And on the morn they began to 
calle eche other / and to whystle, 9 and sowne trumpes and busynes 
32 in the woodes. And thus began to reassemble, and gadred them Those who 
to gydre on a territorie. 10 t° assemble. 


1 Orig. but. 

2-2 Fr. “ ne s'entremetoit de cele guerre." 

3 Orig. Aud. 

4 Fr. “ et s’adrceiirent & eulx." 

6 Orig. retorued. 1 Bougres, Bulgarians. 8 Orig. soconre. 

9 Fr. huchier, to call in a loud voice, not “ to whistle.” 

10 Fr. tertre, a small hill. The word territoire, with which Caxton 

translates tertre, seems to be peculiar to him. 



54 


The Emperor orders Peter to go to Constantinople. [Ch. XXII. 


Altar four 
days 4000 
are collected, 
who continue 
their way. 


They meet 
the measeii- 

S ers of the 
Ireek 

Emperor; 


who inform 
them of the 
evil reports 
that they 
hear of their 
conduct. 


The Emperor 
orders them 
to march 
straight to 
Constantin¬ 
ople. 


[* If. 26, bk.] 

There they 
join Walter 
and his men. 


How Themperour of Constantynoble, beyng aduer- 
tised of thise oultrages, sente his messagers to 
peter theremyte 1 / ca ? xxij 0 

a T the fourth daye were nyghe alle assembled aboute peter, 4 
And they were about a four thousand, they were in moche 
grete meschyef, as they that had lost theyr frendes and theyr peple, 
and almost alle theyr harnoys / not withstondyng 2 they lefte not, 
but wente forth on the waye 2 that they had enterprised, with grete 8 
mesease and payne for lak of vytaylle. And as they were in this 
poynt, They sawe come ayenst them the messagers of themperour of 
constantynoble, 3 whiche spak to peter / And anon he dyde assemble 
the heye men and Capytaynes of the hoost for to here the message 12 
that they brought. And aftir they sayd in this manere / “ ffayr 
syrs, moche euyl tydynges and renomme is comen of you to our 
lord themperour / ffor it is tolde to hym that ye goo by the cou»tree 
of his empyre with force, and robbe the peple of suche as they 16 
haue, breke his townes, and slee his peple / and doo alle the 
oultrages and wronges that ye may / the good chere / bounte, and 
alle the seruyse that is doon to you auaylleth nothyng, ne may 
adoulce ne aswage your hertes / Therfore he commandeth you that 20 
ye abyde in none of his cytees more than thre dayes / But goo 
your waye strayt forth to constantynoble / ffor he hath commanded 
vs to goo with you / and that we do brynge to you on the waye 
vytayll good cheep ynowe.” (13) whan thise good men herd this, 24 
that themperour had don to them this bouwte / they had grete ioye / 
and excused them of thise bataylles and fyghtyng, and shewd 
openly what the bongres had doon withoute theyr offence or culpe 
by force and grete oultrage. 4 The messagers dyrected them on the 28 
way tyl they cam to constantynoble / They fonde there gaultyer 
sans sauoyr / and his peple, that taryed for them / And thewne they 
wente alle to gydre 5 / And lodged them in the place that was 
assygned to them / And there eche tolde to other of theyr mys- 32 
auentures : 6 Themperour sente for peter. And he wente to hym / 

He sawe in the towne many thynges / T palaysses, many rychesses / 


1 Orig. therempte. 

2—2 Fr. mais ne laissierent mie pour ee qnila ne te meiitent en la roye, 
but this did not hinder them from starting on the journey, etc. 

3 Orig. constantyuoble. 6 Orig. ggdre. 

6 Fr. mesaventures, misfortunes. 

2—2 (next p.) Fr. et en ee palais mavntes richeues et maintei merveilles. 



55 


Ch. XXIII.] Peter’s Arrival in Constantinople. 

and marueylles 7 / But he was a man of grete herte and courage, and 
abasshyd of nothyng / Themperour demanded of hym of thestate Tim Emperor 
of his pople, and of other barons of thoccyent / that were thus jn»uons of 
4 meuyd to this pylgremage. Peter answerd hym moche wel of alle 
thynges / And said that they were pour peple, and were come to 
fore / But the prynces and hye men cam aftir with moch grete 
peple / which wold not long tarye / themperour and his barons of 
8 the palays sawe alle that peter was so lytil. And so wel / so wysely / 
so fayr and so wel appoynt of alle thynges, answerd that they 
merueylled ouer 1 moche / and alowed and preysed hym moche. 
Themperour gaf to hym grete yeftes / And receyued hym in his ^ 

12 grace / And syth he lete hym retome to his peple. There rested ^ eter - 8 
the oost of the pylgryms wel at ease and in peas / And a whyle 
aftir shippes were made redy by the commaundement of themperour, 

And they passed the see named the braas of seynt george, And Tim Crusad- 
16 cam in to the lend named bythyne / This is the fyrst partye of eraser st. 
Asye / vpon the see / And they lodged them in a place called 
Cinintot . 2 

Of the mayntenyng of the hoost of peter theremyte / 

20 And how thre thousand duchemen toke a eastel 
by assault / and slewe alle that were therin with 
the swerde / capitulo xxiij“ 

t His was in the marches of theyr enemyes / there was the 
24 hoost about two monethes, And euery day they foiide fresshe They are wen 
vytaylles to selle good cheep, wherof they were wel at ease, 3 so provisions, 
moch that it coude not wel be suffred longe / They began to meue , 3 
and made routes for to goo en fourage in the contrey / Ther wente 
28 wel somtyme .X. M / or more, maulgre the barons, that were 

capytayns in the hoost. Neuerthelesse 4 Peter commanded and Peter forbids 
sente lettres to them, that they shold abyde, and not remeue fro the forge and 
oost / to pylle tyl the grete Prynces were comen. On a daye it 
32 happed that Pieter passed the braas / And cam in to Constanty- 

noble 5 for to speke for vytaylles / that began to wexe dere / 6 The [' leaf 27 ] 
mene peple sawe that Peter was not there, And were the more 
hardy, they assembled, and were of a companye wel eght thousand 

1 Orig. oner. 8 Fr. Oivitot. 

3—3 <1 Tant que li peuple gui a peine pent souffrir grant aise longvement 
se eommenga & es mouvoir ,” etc. 

4 Orig. neuetthelesse, 6 0 >'ig. Coustautyuoble. 



56 Solyman retakes the Castle and beheads the Dutchmen. [Ch. XXIV. 

Notwith- a fote, and thre honderd a horsback. they made theyr bataylles, 
tiiey go on a and wente alle in ordenaunce toward the cyte of nycene, ayenst the 
^dition near wille and deffence of alle the grete men of thoost / whan they earn 
nyghe to this grete cyte, They smote in to the townes about it, and 4 
toke merueyllows many beestes, grete and smale, And brought 
moche grete gayne / And retorned saufly withoute hurte home agayn 
in to the oost with grete ioye and feste. The duchemen, whiche 
hen a peple rude and hardy, sawe'this glorye and this gayne that 8 
they had wonne / and had grete enuye therat / and were meuid 
with couetyse of good, and to haue worship / relyed them to gydre 
alle of that tongue vnto the nombre of thre thousand a foote / and 
wente strayte toward Nycene / There was a / Castel at foote of an 12 
sooo Dutch- hylle, nygh vnto Nycene, at leste Foure myle of. These Duchemen 
castle. 0 e ‘ cam theder and began tassaylle the castel moche strongly / they 
within defended them to theyr power as long as they myght, but it 
auaylled not / ffor the castel was taken by force / And the duchemen 16 
entred therin / And alle them that they fonde within, men, wymmen, 
and chylderen, they slewe without mercy / They fonde ther in 
vytaylle ynowgh, and other thynges / and sawe that the place was 
moche fayr and delectable / and garnysshed it, and sayde that they 20 
wolde it liolde tyl the grete prynces, whome they abode and taryed 
for, were comen / 

How Solyman, lord of that contre, reprysed and toke 
agayn the castel, and slewe alle the duchemen 24 
that where therin. ea° xxiiij" 

s 01yman,(14) whiche was lord of this contre and gouemoure, 1 
had herd longe to fore / that the cristen peple were meuyd of 
the Royamme of ffraunce for to goo in to the londe of surye / And 28 
Solyman pre- that they addressed them for to passe by his londe / Therfore he had 

pares to de- . * , . , , ' 

fend his land, ben in thoryent, iro whens he was come / and had brought grete 
plente of knyghtes and other peple / by whom he entended to kepe 
his londe / And greue his enemyes / that shold passe there by / he 32 
was thenne drawen toward our peple, and with his folkes was in 
, the montaynes and woodes / He herde how thys duchemen had 
his castle. taken his castel and slayn his men / and cam the moost hasty wyse 
lutheDntch- he myghte and assyeged the castel / and toke it without taryeng 2 / 36 
pTr. ! 7 , bit.] and he smote of the 3 heedes of alle them that he fonde / The 
1 Orig. goneruoure. 2 Orig. taryeug. 



57 


Ch. XXV.] Hov) the Dutchmen were avenged. 


tydynge cam in to the hoost that Solyman had slayn alle the 
duchemen and theyr felaws / They had moche sorow / and ther 
arroos a grete cyye and grete wepyng in the lodgys / The peple 
4 afote toke herof grete despite emonge them / And began to speke 
hrewdly / And said that the barons of the oost ought not to suffre 
his. But that they shold renne a horsbak and auenge blood of 
theyr bretheren, 'that so nygh was shed 1 / The grete men of thoost, 
8 that knewe more of warre and of other thynges / than the mene 
peple, wold haue holden them in peas / And sayde this may wel be 
yet amended / And also thenrperour counceylled / And it was 
trouthe / that they shold abyde the comyng of the grete barons, 
12 whiche shold not longe tarye / The peple and the folyssh folke were 
not content with thyse wordes / But they had a Capytayne named 
godefrey bureau, whiche brought them in suche reuerye 2 and 
murmur that they spake largely and rudely ayenst the knyghtes / 
16 And sayde alle elerly that they were vntrewe and euyl, and that 
they lete not to auenge this by wysedom / but for grete cowardyse / 


The pilgrims 
lament their 
lose, and are 
bent on 
revenge. 


The wiser 
ones wish to 
await the 
coming of the 
great barons. 


But the 
'people are 
obstinate. 


How oure men armed them for tauenge the duehe- 
men, and of a recountour that they had ayenst 
20 Solyman / ca° xxv“ 

i T happeth oftvme that the werse counseyl ouercometh the often bad 

r r v counsel pre¬ 

better / And it is no meruaylle, nor there ben more fooles than vans over 

wysemen. Thyse mene peple, and without reson, meuyd them so 

24 moche and cryed that the barons and other men that were with 

hem ran to armes, an horsbak 3 and on foote. There were wel / 

XXV / M. on foote / and / V / C / a horsbak, alle wel arrayed / 25,000 root- 

• • 1 # ' . men and 60 * 

They made theyr batayUes / and went© forth in ordenaunce toward horse^tart 
28 the montaygnes by the woodes strayt toward Nycene / They were 
not departed thre myle whan Solyman, whiche had moche peple 
with hym, apperceyued 4 them : ffor he cam alle couerd and secretely 
in the wode / ffor to make an assaylle / in the oost of the pylgryms / 

32 But whan he herd the noyse and thaffraye in the foreste, he wyst 
wel that thei were the cristen men that cam ayenst hym, and 
suffred them to passe, he hym self with alle his peple drewe hym 
incontinent oute of the wode in to the playn where as they shold 

1—1 Fr. “qui ainsi pres d'eulx estuit espandu ,” viz. “which was thus 
shed so near them." 2 Fr. enrederie, rage, fury, obstinacy. 

8 Orig. borabak. 4 Orig. apperceyued. 



58 


Defeat of the Christians. 3000 saved by Peter. [Ch. XXV 

passe / whan oure peple were yssued, they sewed them sodenly / 
they toke none hede of hym, and anon with their felawship ran 
p leaf as] vpon our men with their speres J and swerdes for tauenge theyr 
bretheren. The hethen men sawe on that other syde that certaynly 4 
a aerce con- they wold fyghte / and that euery man dyd his bests / receyned 
them moch fiersly / the bataylle began moche cruelle / and many 
were dede on bothe sydes: and the bataylle dured longe / But 
solyman had moche more peple on horsbacke, whom the pylgryins 8 
a fote myght not lenger suffre / But began to flee without 
The Turks ordenaunce / and were discomfyted / The turkes folowed them 
oji. aftir, sleeyng alle them that they myght atteyne, tyl they cam to 

theyr lodgyng / There were slayn Gaultier sans sauoyr / Reygnald 12 
de broyes and ffoucher dorleans, whiche were good and valyau»t 
knyghtes / and almost alle were slayn and brought in to prison / 
ffor of / XXV / M men / and fyue honderd men on liorsbak, coude 
not be founden thre to gydre / But that they were taken or slayn / 16 

How peter tkeremyte beyng in constantynoble was 
aduertysed of this disconfyture / and saued thre 
thousand cristen men, beyng in grete daunger. 

capitulo xxvj? 20 

^taok'th * vyctorye brought Solyman in in grete pryde, and in grete 

Christian sewrte he smote in to the lodsis of the Cristen men / where as 

camp. ' 

wer lefts thauncyewt peple, men, wymmen, clerkes, and monkes, 
whom he put alle to deth / he fonde maydens and smale childeren, 24 
whiche he ledde with hym, for to be euer aftir in seruage. On that 
one side of the tentes nyghe vnto the see / was an old fortresse for- 
leten and beten doun, in whiche no man dwelled, nether was fonde 
som of the therin dore ne wyndowe / Theder fledde of the pylgryms aboute a 28 
to an old thre thousand, one aftir another for to kepe theyr lyuess / They 
stopped thentrees the best wyse they myght with grete tymbre and 
trees, and with grete stones / The turkes knewe therof / and cam 
The Turks and began tassaylle it on alle sides moche anguysshously / They 32 
defended them the best wey they myghte, ffor they had grete nede. 
word is sent whyles they were thus assaylled / a messager wente hastely to peter 
Constantin- theremyte, which was in constantynoble, as is said to you to fore, 
reverses. This message said to hym that alle his men were perysshyd / sauf 36 
a lytil remenaunt, whiche were at grete meschief in an old hows 
asyeged, whiche were in moche grete daunger / yf they had not 



59 


Ch. XXVII.] The Emperor rescues Peter's Army. 

hasty soooure. Peter was moche abasshed / And had meruayl- 
lously grete sorowe / Neuerthelesse, anon he ranne to themperonr, 
and fyld doun at his feet, and prayd hym for goddes sake and 1 for p if. 2 s, biro 
4 the sauacion of his sowle, that he wold sende socoure to this poure SjfismJIra’ 
peple that were in so grete peryll / that yf he hasted not / they for help ' 
shold be alle deed / Themperour that moche louyd peter sente anon 
his messagers tbeder / and commaunded the turkes that essaylled The Emperor 
8 them / shold leue thassault / and departs thens / They wente aweye Tarireto^ 
anon whan they had herde the commandement of themperour, But 2 
they ledde with them prisonners ynowe / horses, mules / and other 
beestes / tentes / pauyllons, and gonnes. and wyth alle they 
12 retourned in to nycene / here ye maye here how so moche peple Aiutese ai». 
was loste / by the folye of the moyen peple j whiche wold not gamedJbj tbs 
haue ne endure the gouernaunce of the wyse men aboue them, common 
Here may men wel see that it is grete peryl to trusts to the bataylle 
16 or warre of them / that knowe not of it / 

How a preest named godechan made hym self cap- 
tayn of / xl / M / duehemen in this viage, and 
of theyr oultrages / ca“ xxvij“ 

20 s Yth that Pieter was passed in to bythme as I haue said / it 
was not longe aftir that a priest named Godechan 3 had prechyd 
in duchelonde / lyke as peter theremyte had doon in ffraurace. And Dutchmen,^ 
cam with his peple for to goo in this pylgremage, ffor he had wel Ho| y L,nd - 
24 assembled 4 / xl / M / of duchemen f They entred alle in to the 
londe of hongrye / ffor the kyng had comaunded that they shold be 
receyued debonayrly, by cause it were his neyghbours, and that 5 
they shold vytaylle and other necessytees 6 at prys resonable. 7 They The^remain 
28 that fonde the londe right good began to abyde there alle the »u winter. 
wynter 7 / and for the ease that they had they began to wexe prowd 
In suehe wyse that they toke away the vytaylles and other thynges, They rob and 
and ledde awey the beestes oute of the feeldes / they toke wyues / 

32 bete theyr liusbondes and slews them / and for noman wold they 

2 Orig. Bnt. 3 Lat. Godescalcus. 

4 Fr. et Lat. XV m, instead of XL M. 

6 Caxton has omitted the verb in this clause. Fr. “Ten lew vendoit 
viandes etc. 6 Orig. uecessytus. 

7-7 Caxton here translates s'enyvrer, i. e. to become intoxicated, by 
“to pass the winter," evidently mistaking it for a derivation of yver, 
winter. Fr. “ ceux gue trouvoient la terre moult bonne, so conimencercnt 
i enyrrer," etc. 



80 The King of Hungary sends Messengers to Cfodechan. [Ch. XXYII. 

Hungary of ^ eue ^ se oultrages / The kynge of the londe horde the tydynges of 
JjjjjjMj this peple, and was moche displaysyd, and was moche sory ther- 
fore / And myght not wyth his honour no longer suffre it, lest it 
shold tome to ouermoche hurts of his londe and of his suhgettes. 4 
And dyde do assemble moche peple on horsbak, and on fote for 
and proceeds tauenge on thise duchemen. he began to poursyewe them so ferre, 
Dutchmen, that he fonde them right in the mydle of his royame by a castel 
named bellgraue / the kyng had seen and also herd of thoultrages 8 
that they had doon in his londe whyles he siewed aftir them j The 
duchmen knewe that the kynge cam vpon them and was nyghe. 

C 1 leaf 29 ] band they knewe wel that they had not ben wel gouerned toward 

hym / But had doon many ylle tomes and wronges in his londe, 12 
wherfor they had not deseruyd his grace and his loue ! : Neuirtheles 
Tiiey are de- they ran to armes, and sayde that they wolde defends them fro tlie 
"haunt™' ^ 0n 8 ers / aR d wold neuer deye for nought / but erst wold they selle 
death. theyr lyf moche dere / whan the kyng and the hongers sawe this, 16 
they thought that this peple were moche stronge and 3 hardy / and 
there as alle dispayred / And sawe that he myght not ouercome 
The king has them without grete losse of his peple in that maner / and lefte the 
stratagem, force of bataylle / and toke hym to subtilite and falshed / as peple 20 
that is ful of barate deceyte and trycherye. The kynge and the 
He>«nde hongers 4 sente message to godechan and to the grete men of the 
Sodeehan companye for to deceyue them by fayre wordes of peas / and sayd 

to them in this manere : 24 

“ Ouer grete complaynte and moche fowle renomme is comen to 
the kyng of you, fayr syres / whiche hath sente vs hether / flfor as 
he hath herd saye / ye haue not had to none of youre hoostes no 
fayth ne trouthe, But haue taken fro them that they hadde, and 28 
haue beten And slayn them / ye have taken their doughters and 
wyues, and doo suche oultrages to them as it ought not to be sayd. 
The marcheauntes and other peple that ye fynde by the wayes, be 
not sure, and goo not quyt fro you, but be robbed and pyled / Of 32 
whiche thynges the kyng hath grete clamours aftir him / Neuir- 
who ten him theles the kyng knoweth wel / that ye be not alle in this defaulte. 
does not but ther ben emong you many 5 good men and wyse to whom this 

think them 47 

ail guilty, folye moche displaysyth / And the oultrage of the malefactours 36 
whiche haue so angred the kyng and his peple / Therfor the kyng 
wil not put the defaulte of one partye vpon alle / ne it is not right 

2 Orig. lone. - 3 Orig. aud. 4 Orig. hougers. 

6 Orig, mauy. 



Ch. XXVlI.] (xodechans Men massacred by the ffungarians. 61 

that the trevve pylgryms shold bye 1 the trespas of the bad / and andthstthe 
he doubteth to take vengeance on you alle / wherfore we counseyle nouoenffer 
you that ye appese the kynge in this maner / And we promyse 
4 you in good fayth that ye shal neuer haue damage / Offre, and 
putte 2 your bodyes / your armes, and alle your thynges in his tint they 

( wotiici oeuer 

wylle and in his mercy, without makyng of ony appoyntement throw them- 

B61V68 Oil tllO 

with hym / for yf ye wil not so doo ye see wel, ye haue not the mercy ° f the 
8 puysamice ayenst hym / for ye be in the myddle of his royamme, 

And may not escape hym.” Godechan and the grete men of his irnot. they 
hoost to whom this oultrages moche displesyd. and the folyes of destroyed, 
the mene peple trusted wel in the wordes that they had brought to 
12 them, And had grete hope in the hyenes and mercy of the kyng. 

They called the peple / counseyled 3 and prayde them that they P if. 29. bk.] 
wolde rendre theyr harnoys / and put them in the mercy of the 
kyng / they wold not doo it, and sayde ther shold neuer come good 
16 to them to put them under so vntrew peple. Neuertheles, atte 

laste they dyde by the counseyl and wylle of the wyse men. Theyr The pilgrims 
harnoys, and alle that they liadde they delyuerd atte commando- themteum 
ment of the kynge, whan they supposed thereby to haue goten 
20 theyr lyf / They ran to the deth / 4 ffor the hongers assay lied them 
anon in the mydle of them alle armed / And of this poynt toke 
none hede / they began to slee* and smyte of heedes without de-but the 
mandyng who was good ne who was euyl. They slewe so many 'J 1 a e “fJ^ r un . 
24 that they waded in the blood vnto the half legge / it was sorowe 
and pyte to see theyr bodyes of so fayr peple slayne in the stretes, 
wayes and feeldes / som happed tescape that wente emong the 
other, and retomed in to theyr contre, and tolde this meschyef and 
28 trayson / by whiche they taught alle the pylgryms that they fonde 
that they shold not truste to the peple of hongrye / 

How / C.C / M. cristen men a foote and thre. M. a 
horsbak withoute 5 captayn assembled in this 
32 pylgremage / and of theyr mayntene / 

eapitulo xxviij® 

1 Fr. comparent, pay for, i. e. to be punished for. 2 Orig. pntte. 

»-4 py "guar li Hongre saillirent el milieu de cels gui de ee ne se 
gardoient et lei commencierent a ocir.” Gaston’s translation is very obscure 
here: as can be seen from the French, it was the Crusaders who were off 
their guard. 

6 Orig. vvithonte. 



62 Christian Pilgrims slay Jews, and go to Hungary. [Ch. XXVIII. 

Another i Jf a litil tyme aftir this grete occisyon that I haue said to fore 
P t'arti' n %h assembled moche grete peple a foots without capytayne. Netier- 

out «captain, theles ther were emong them hye men and good knyghtes, But 1 the 
eomune peple obeyed them not / ne byleuyd them of nothynge j 4 
There was emonge them Thomas de fere, elerembault of vendueyl / 
Guillem Carpenter. And the counte herman / These peple that 
were a foote dyde many ylles and oultrages by the ways / And ther 
who stay all arrose einong them a madnesse and a rage of whiehe they coude not 8 
they meet, kepe them fro sleyng of alle the Iewes in alle the wayes and townes 
by whiehe they passed / They slewe merueyllows grete nombre at 
especially in Coleyne, at Magonce / and in other places (15) / In thise partyes as 
Mayence. they wente was an erle, a right noble lord named Emycon / whan 12 
he sawe this peple / he put hym self in theyr companye for to goo 
with them in this pylgremage / he chastysed not ne blamed the 
mysruled peple / but entysed them to doo euyl tomes / They passed 
by francone and by baupere so ferre that they drewe in te hongrye, 16 
and cam in to a toun named meeszebors. wel supposed they to 
haue passed in to hongrye withoute ony gaynsayeng / but whan 
P leaf so] they cam to the brygge / it was deif ended them and 2 closed. There 
not'aiiowed was » fortresse whiehe was closed on that one syde with the ryuer 20 
Hungary, of the dunoe / and on that other syde with the ryuer named lintans / 
defended by The remenauwt was enuyronned with a depe mareys / within the 
fortress* on fortresse was grete plente of peple wel armed, wherfore it was not 

lyght for to passe that toun by force / fEor the kynge of hongrye 24 
had wel vnderstande of the comyng of this people / whiehe were 
Tii ere were withoute faylle wel / CC / M / on fote. And on horsbak were 

800,000 foot- J 1 ' ' 

men and sooo nomoo but thre thousand / And doubted moche that they whan 

horsemen in ° 

tui« com. they were entred in to his londe, wolde auenge thoceision 8 that was 28 
doon by falsehed and trayson vpon the peple of godechan, ffor the 
rumoure and speche was moche yet of that fowle and vylanous 
fayte thurgh out al the londe / They that sawe that they myght not 
They begged passe in to the londe, prayd them of the fortresse that they wold 32 
sen 61 rs to*' su “ re them to ser *de messagers to the kyng of hongrye, for to requyre 
Hnngary.° f ^ ls g race they myght passe in good peas / and they wold lodge 
them ther whylest in tho places that were ful of pastures to fore the 
paas. 


1 Orig. Bnt. 


Fr. decision, slaughter. 



63 


Ch. XXIX.] How the Crusaders passed through Hungary. 

How this peple began to destroye the londe of the 
kyng, by cause he wold not graunte to them leue 
for to passe / ca° xxix° 

4 a Lytil whyle taryed they that wente to the kyng / but retomed 
anon / ffor they myght not spede of such thynges as they 
demanded. The kyng answerd that for yefte ne for prayer shold 
they entre in to his londe / whan they of the oost, grete and smale, 
8 herd this / they were moche angry / ffor they had trauaylled and 
despended moche good to come thedyr / 1 And now they had loost 
their waye 1 / They concluded emong them that they shold brenne 
and destroye the contreye of the kynge / as moche as was on this 
12 syde the mareys / They sette fyer on townes, and toke the men, 
and destroyed alle the contrey whyles they dyde thus / the peple of 
the fortresse cam out, 2 and with other peple of the kynges to the 
nombre of / vii / C / what 3 of knyghtes and other peple wel 
16 armed, and passed by shippis er euer the pilgrims 4 knewe of it ony 
word, and they sette them for to deffende the pylgryms at a paas 
that they shold not entre. whan the pylgryms sawe this / they ran 
vygorously vpon them in suche wyse, that er they myght saue them 
20 self they were slayn alle / sauf a fewe of them that withdxewe them 
in to the mareys / and hydde them in the reed / whan thyse pyl¬ 
gryms thus had the victorye / they mounted in moche grete 
hardynes / and said that by force they Wold 6 take the fortresse of 
24 hongrye / and withoute leue they wold passe thurgh the londe. 
Thenne they began to somonne and recomforte 6 euery man to doo 
wel / 7 They toke poles and made scaffholdes moche grete plente 7 / 
whiche they sette to the walles / And mounted vp couerd with 
28 theyr sheldes and targes, and assaylled it moche hardely many 
pyked with pykoys, and myned the walles with grete force that 
8 thentre semed al redy for to entree, 8 they that were within were 
nyghe deed for despayer, ffor they defended slowly as men affrayed 
32 in their hertes, ffor they supposed anon to be slayn / and sodenly 
cam a fere and a drede vpon the hertes of the pylgryms that wened 


The king 
would not 
allow them to 
pass. 


The Crusad¬ 
ers desolated 
the whole 
country in 
revenge. 


They conquer 
the Hunga- 


[* If. 30, bk.j 


The Crusad¬ 
ers then 
assail the 
fortress, 


but are not 
successful. 


l—i p r m . aeoient leur voge perdu. A good example of Caxton’s literal 
translations, the meaning being, “ now they had had their journey for 
nothing.” 2 Orig. ont. 3 Fr. “ taut chevalier que sergenz." 

4 Orig. pilgrims. 6 Fr. entrerenforter. 

7 — 7 Fr, Pom et esohieles Jirent a moult grant plenti. They made a 
great number of scaffolds and ladders. Lat. pontibns fabricatis. 

8— 8 entre should read entrie and vice versa. 



64 Panic among the French Pilgrims, who are slain. [Ch. XXX. 


The Hunga¬ 
rians are 
much aston¬ 
ished at the 
unexpected 
flight of the 
Crusader*. 


The great 
Bins of the 
Crusaders 
make them 
cowardly. 


They were 
obliged to 
take a round¬ 
about way. 


This was a 
lesson to 
those who 
came after, to 
go more 
peaceably. 


Godfrey of 
Boulogne 
started the 
15th of Au¬ 
gust, 1096. 

[4 leaf 31] 


anon to be slayn / And neuer was knowen wherfore it was, and 
anon fyl donn fro the scaffoldes / and taryed not / but fledde 
sodeynly / and none wyste why they fledde. The hongers whan 
they sawe this / myght wyth grete peyne byleue it, that this was 4 
trouthe / ffor they sawe no rayson why. Neuertlieles, whan they 
apperceyuyd they descended doun / and began to folowe the chaas 
in 1 suche wyse that them next to fore them were almost alle taken 
and slayn. 1 In this auenture was fonden none other reson / sauf 8 
that the peple was so ful of synne / that they had not deseruyd the 
loue of our lord / ne thonoure of the world / And therfor theyre 
synnes 2 acowarded them in suche wyse that they myght not doo ne 
acoomplysshe this grete werke / wliiehe they had nyghe aehyeued. 12 
The erle Emycon cam agayn in to his contre with grete nombre of 
peple disconfyted / The other barons of ffraunce that I fore haue 
named wente in to lombardye, and so in to puylle / There had they 
knowleche that somme of the grete barons were passed in to duras, 16 
and fro thens in to grece / They wente aftir and folowyd (hem. In 
this manere were the peple of ffraunce disperpled and of the con- 
trees ther by / The waye of hongrye was moche more strayte and 
ner yf they myght haue goon it / 3 And had not be destrowbled by 20 
theyr folye 3 / But the other that cam aftir peyned them moche for 
to goo more wysely and more in peas. 

How the due godefroy of boloyne beyng with a grete 
hoost cam vnto hongrye, sente his messagers to 24 
the kyng for to demande passage / 

capitulo xxx° 

c Omen was the moneth of anguste, in the yere of thyncarnacion 
of our lord / M / lxxXxvj / the xv / day of the same moneth, 28 
The valyauwt godefroy of buyllon, due of loraygne, assembled them 
4 that shold be his felawes in this ioumeye / And cam fro his 
contrey with so grete apparayllement as it apperteyned to his 
estate / with hym Bawdwyn his brother / Bawdwyn, the Erie of 32 

1-1 Fr. “ telement que ceux qui ung pou devant eitoient pretque mort 
on prim Occident ore» let autres.” Caxton has not at all understood his 
French here. He seems to have mistaken devant for a preposition, and to 
have translated the rest of the sentence accordingly. 

1 Orig. synues. 

3—3 Fr. “ H ceux qui avant estoient alUt ne Veil stent ti destowbt par 
lew folie,” if those who had gone in advance had not by their folly closed it 



Ch. XXXI.] Godfrey sends. Messengers to the King of Sungary. 65 

henawde / Huge, the Erie of seynt pol / Euerard his sone, which 
was a moche valyaunt 1 yonge man. Garnyer the Erie, sumamed of 
grees / Bernard, the Erie of Toul / Pieter his brother / Bauwdwyn 
4 de hors, cosyn to the due / Henry dasque / godefroy his brother, 

And many other good knyghtes with them / Thise men were so 
good frendes emonge 2 them, and so wyse men, that in no wyse they 
wold departe that one fro that other / they cam alle hool with their They arrived 
8 thynges in to Osteryche the / xx. daye of septembre vnto a town the aoth of 
which is named tayllewborcli, there reraneth a ryuer named lyntans, 
and departed thempyre of allemaygne fro the royamme of hongrye / 
whan they were comen theder, they had herd! by the waye euyl 
12 tydynges of the grete mesauentures, that Godechan and! his peple 
had in hongrye / They assembled! and toke counseyl emonge them / 
how they myght passe this contre in peas / They alle acorded! that They sent 

c * * * messengers 

they shold sende messagers & lettres vnto the kyng of hongrye to the Kiu| 
16 for to demande first / by what reason theyr felaws, the pylgryms 
whiche were theyr bretlieren were thus perysshed! in his power and 
his londe / Aftir this they eneharged the messagers that they shold 
entre with hym in to comwnicacion, 3 that they myght passe his 
20 Royamme seurly and in peas / Anti! that herin they put them in 
deuoyr and payne / ffor this waye was for them moche shorte / and 
more couenable yf they myght haue it / than for to passe by see / 

In this message wente godefroy dasque, brother of henry, by cause Godfrey 
24 he had long to fore ben acqueyntei# with the kynge of hongrye / charge of the 
with hym they sente other wyse men / They wente so 4 fer that 
they fonde the kyng, And salewed hym in the name of hem that The^wduted 
sente them, And delyuerd their lettres of credence / And aftir sayd delivered 
28 to hym thyse wordes. Bag '- 

How the messagers of the due godefroy declared their 
message vnto the kyng of hongrye / And ther 
vpon his answere / ca°. xxxj'.’ 

32 “t He wyse man & noble Godefroy, Due of lorayne, And the 
other prynces that with hym come in pylgremage / haue sente 
vs now vnto you, And by you wolde knowe by what occasion the Thev asked 
other pylgryms, whom they helde for felaws and! bretheren / haue »wir 
36 so cruelly be slayn and smeton in pieces in your power / Wei they pilgrim*. 

1 Orig. valyauut. 2 Orig. emouge. 3 Ot'ig. colcacion. 

4 Orig. to. 

GODFREY. F 



66 


The King replies. 


[Ch. XXXT. 


P lf.SI,ljk.] 
They marvel 
that good 
Christiana 
could so de¬ 
stroy those 
who had left 
their homes 
to enhance 
the faith of 
Christ. 

They wish to 
know if it 
were the fault 
of the pil¬ 
grims. 


The king, 
eurrouuded 
by his barons, 
answers: 

" It pleasetli 
me, Godfrey, 
that thou art 
come, and 1 
am glad to 
hare you hear 
my excuse. 


We received 
Peter and his 
men kindly. 


They repaid 
us with in¬ 
gratitude. 


knowe and sende you 1 worde that they haue ben so slayii, ffor 
2 they haue fonden many of them that ben escaped / Moche they 
meruaylle how ye and your peple, which ben cristen as ye saye / 
haue thus destroyed the good companye, whiche for to enhauitse the 4 
fayth of Ihesu Crist ben departed out of theyr contre / in suche 
wyse that the most mortal enemyee that they haue, had not don 
werse / They desire moche to knowe yf it were by the defaulte of 
the pylgryms; ffor yf ye haue doon it by Iustyce, or in deffendyng 8 
you and? youre londes / or other wyse that they wold enforce and 
take ony thyng 1 away yf it were so / The due and his felaws wold 
take it more lightly / But yf it be doo without their trespaas, or for 
hate that ye had to them / and thus murdred them, they that sente 12 
vs hether, lete you wete by vs that they haue lefte theyr owne 
couretreyes for tauenge the wronges and the oultrages that haue ben 
don to the peple of oure lord / And yf they finde that ye haue so 
doo / they be not in wylle to passe ferther, tyl they haue to theyr 16 
power auenged the deth of the pylgryms of our lord.” And herwith 
godefroy, that acounted to the kyng, made an ende of his wordes. 

The kyng was in his pal^ys, where he had grete plente of 
barons of his Koyamme and of other peple, thenne answerd and 20 
sayde: “ Godefroy, it plesyth me moche that ye be come in to this 
contrey for to speke to me / It is a moche good thyng for me for 
two causes / that one is that ye be of myn acqueyntauwce and my 
frende longe syth / And we shal afferme and renews our loues and 24 
our acqueyntaunces in this youre comyng. That other cause is that 
I knowe you to be a man wyse, resonable, & of good wille / and 
am moche ioyous of this that ye shal here my excusacion / trouthe 
it is that we haue the name of the cristiente / it were & shold be 28 
moche fayr to vs yf we had the werkes / But 3 they that ben passed 
tofore with peter theremyte and with godechan, haue not the 
werkes of pylgryms ne of cristen men / ffor we receyuyd peter 
theremyte & his peple in oure londes and in our 4 townes with 32 
grete debonayrte, And departed with them oure vytaylles: and 
other thynges we gaf to them / But they, lyke as the serpent that 
prycketh or styngeth liym that kepeth hym warme in his bosomme / 
hath guerdonned & rewarded vs for our good dedes / for in 36 
thende of the royamme of hongrye / whan they ought to thanke vs 
and rendre graces to god & to theyr frendes / They toke by force 
one of oure best castellis / And put to deth alle that were therin, 

1 Orig. yon. 8 Orig. Bnt. 


4 


\ onr. 



67 


Ch. XXXI.] The King sends Messengers to Godfrey. 

and caryed the beestys with them / they toke alle the maydens of 
the town lyke rowters & theues. The company of godeehan cam 
after them / they abode not 1 to forfaytte til the ende of our [* leaf 82 ] 

4 Royamme / but assone as they were entred and passed the yates of 
hongrye, they began to make idle thoultrages they myghte / They 
brente the townes, slewe the men / enforced the wymmen / and 
bare away alle thynges / they dyde so moche, that for theyr 
8 trespaces were wel worthy to haue hate 6f god & of the world / 
we that be here in the place & in the dygnyte / by whiche we 
ought to kepe the peple / as long* as it shal please god / and! our 
barons that haue sworn the feaulte of the Royalme, myght not wel 
12 endure 2 thus to destroye our peple and our contrey, but haue put 
to the hand by force in vs defendyng / The thyrde companye cam 
also with folke a foote / we doubted! the noyse and debate in suche The third 
wyse / that we wold not suflire them entre in to our londe ne come would not™ 
16 emonge vs / Our lord, that Ingeth alle the wordes & knoweth alle our land." 
thyng, wote wel that it is thus, and that I haue lyed to you no 
worde. Now we praye you that ye excuse vs oueraal where ye shal 
here speke of it ” / whan he had said this, he sente the messagers 
20 in to theyr Innes / where they had moche grete honour and grete 

feste / The kyng toke counseyl of his barons / and ordeyned his The king «eut 

' return mes- 

owne messagers, whiche lie sente to the due godefroy and 3 to the 
prynces that cam. He had spoken ynowgh to godefroy dasque / frey. 

24 and made hym grete chere / and gaf to hym and his felawshippe 
yeftes / And 1 aftir toke leue of him and 5 retorned al to gydre with 
the messagers / whan they were comen to fore the due godefroy / 
one of them sayd the message in this man ere: “ The kyng of 
28 hongrye saleweth you, my lordes / And sendeth yow worde that he 
knoweth certaynly by renomme that ye be a man of moche hye 
lygnage, puyssauwt 6 of peple, wyse and trewe of herte, prudent and 
valyaunt of body / in suche wyse that your prouesse is born in to 
32 many londes / ffor thyse thynges our lord the kynge, whiche neuer 
sawe yow, preyseth and loueth yow moche in his herte / And hath 
moche grete desire to doo you honoure / These pylgryms that ben begging God- 
with you / And that haue enterprysed so hye a pylgremage he valiant com- 

* * . pauions to 

36 preyseth moche / and desyreth moche to see them, and to worshippe, visit him. 
and to haue theyr acqueyntaunee : ffor he holdeth hym self ewrous 
and gracious that our lord hath sette hym in such a poynt, that he 

3 Orlg. eudure. 8 Orig. aud. 4 Orig. Aud. 6 Orig. and. 

01 Orig. pnyssaunt. 



«8 


He beg6 them 
to come to 
hi# castle of 
Ciperon, 


* If. 32, bk.] 


The duke 
goes with 300 
horsemen to 
visit the king. 


The king ac¬ 
cords them 
safe passage 
through his 
land. 

Hut demands 
Baldwin and 
his wife as 
hostages. 


They arrive 
safely at Mai- 
leville, on the 
Danube. 


Godfrey traverses Hungary peacefully. [Cli. 'XXXII. 

may doo seruyse and bounte to one so valyaunt 1 a man. Therfore 
vnto you, fayr lord, and to the hye men of your companye he 
prayeth, requyreth and! demandeth for a synguler 2 yefte, that it 
wold plese you 3 to come see hym at one his castel named Ciperon / 4 
ffor he desireth moche to speke to you at leyser / and doo that ye 
wille demaurade.” 

4 How the said kynge sente for to fetche the due 
godefroye / And how he wente / and of the 8 
deuyses that they had to gydre / cap” xxxij 

w Han the due and his barons had herd the messager thus speke, 
he drewe them a parte and toke counseyl / They acorded wel 
that the due shold goo. he sente for suche eompanye as he wold 12 
haue / And wente forth with thre honderd horse, withoute moo, on 
his way / hit was not long but he earn to aperon / he passed the 
brygge / and fonde the kynge, whiche made to hym grete ioye and 
moche honour. And long they spak to gydre / And the kynge 16 
excused hym of the deth of the pylgryms / vnto the due / lyke as 
he had doon to the messagers / At thende the kyng cam so to poynt 
that they were appeased goodly / The kyng acorded to hym the 
passage thurgh his royamme / yf he wold sette hym suche hoostages 20 
as he shold chese for to kepe the pees / Alle this was graunted / 
And he demanded in hostage Bawdwyn, brother of the sayd due, 
his wyf and her maygne / they were delyuerd to hym gladly. Thus 
entred they with alle theyr peple in to the lond of hongrye / The 24 
kynge helde to them wel his couenauntes / ffor he dyde doo erye in 
alle the townes as they shold passe / and also thereby that they 
shold selle to them vytaylles good cheep / and 5 that noman shold 
meue to them no debate / The due commanded also and made to be 28 
cryed, that none on payne of his lyf were so hardy to take ony 
thynge fro the lond ne fro no man / ne for to doo no wronge, but 
holde them for felawes and bretheren / Thus it happed that they 
passed alle hongrye without ony maner stryf or noyse. The kynge 32 
rode alwey nyghe to thooste, on the lyfte syde / ledyng* his hostages 
with hym, redy for tappese yf ony noyse arroos / Atte laste they 
cam to malleuylle, wherof ye haue herd to fore, whiche stondeth on 
the ryuer of the dunoe / There they taryed tyl alle the boost were 36 

1 Orig. valyauut 3 Orig. singnler : 'Fr. singnlier don, as a special favor. 

3 Orig. yon. 6 Orig. aud. 



69 


Ch. XXXIII.] They arrive at Nissa. 

passed! by shippes / wherof were but fewe / But to fore he had don 
sette ouer / a thousand men wel armed for to kepe the arryuyng on 
that other syde. whan the hoost of the comyn peple were passed, when the 
4 the kyng cam to the due and to the barons, and brought the *« crossed 
hostages 1 that were delyuerd? to hym 1 / he made to them moche 
ioye and honour at departyng, 2 and! gaf to euerych grete yeftes and 
ryche. Aftir he toke leue, and retomed home ageyn / The due 
8 and the barons passed! ouer with their peple / and cam to belle- 
graue, a cyte of bougrye, of whiche we haue spoken to fore / And 
there they lodged! 3 them / After they passed thurgh the wodes / til P 
they cam to the cyte of nyz, and after to stralyce / 


12 How the due godeffroye sente his messagers to them- 
perour of eonstantinoble, to thende that he shold 
delyuer huon le mayne and other, that he helde 
in prison. cap" xxxiij" 

16 h Ere may be knowen the euyl disposicion and deceyte of the 
grekes / ffor syth themperours latyns faylled in constanty- 
nople / and thempyre cam vnto the grekes / of whom the fyrst was 
nycofores. 4 Anon the barbaryns that were aboute them, the blacz tw ninrr, 
20 and the comans, 6 they of bougrye, 6 whiche ben toward the eest, 6 Bulgarians 
supprised ahd toke thyse londes that were so good, plentyuous / qi«rea» n 
and delytable / And conquerd alle fro the dunoe vnto constant}'- 
nople, And on that other parte vnto the see Adryane / 7 There is [;'™i' e tant1 ' 
24 a cyte in lombardye, nygh to the londe of the marquys, 8 named There i« a 
Adre / & is right a litil cyte / But by cause it is nyghe the see of barrtj"caiiea 
venyse and of Ancone, hath this see the name of the see Adryane From thl , 
in wrytyng. 7 This see goth rigljt nygh constantynoble / vnto a / JiucmukM 
28 xxx / myle. This euyl peple of thempyre of constantynoble had its name ‘ 
wel wonne 9 vpon the grekes / xxx. journeyes of lengths, And x of 

l—x F r . quit lew rendit. Caxtou has here exactly reversed the meaning 
of his French text. 

2 Orig. departyug. 4 Lat. A r !/cephon<s. 

5 These two nations inserted by the French translators. They are not 
in the Latin original. 

8—6 p r ( p,i i enr s on t defers bise, —towards the North ; Lat. septen - 
trionalis. 1 

7—7 This whole sentence is an insertion by a French translator. 

8 Caxton has spoiled the sense by his omission here. The French text 
gives “ pres de la terre le Marquis ff Eest, gui a non Adre,” viz. near the 
land of the Marquis of Site, whioh is called Adre. 9 Orig. wonue. 



70 


The chief 
city of Epirus 
is Duras. 


Ill this land 
we also Arca¬ 
dia, Thessaly, 
and Macedo¬ 
nia. 

The Emperor 
llasilias re¬ 
conquered 
these coun¬ 
tries. 


The duke 
passed 
through 
MoeBia. 


[« If. 83, bk.J 


At Asinople 
they heard 
that the Gre¬ 
cian Emperor 
had impri¬ 
soned Hugh 
the Great. 


They traverse many Countries. [Cli. XXXIII. 

brede / ffor aboue this see that I haue spoken of, is 'a countre 
named Epyre. 1 The ehyef cyte is named duras / of whiche pyrrus 
was somtyme kynge. 2 An other is named Mayene 2 / that is in the 
myddle of the londe 3 / where ben also noble Cytees / Nyz and 4 
stralyce / In this londe was Archade / Thessale / and machedone / 

4 Of thyse thre landes euerych was called Trace 4 / And alle thise 
were conquerd vpon the grekes / But afterward ther was an 
Emperour named Basilie recouerdf thise londes, 5 And brought the 8 
blacz and the boUgres longe afore this tyme / in suche wyse that 
the two danemarches were comen agayn to his power 5 / but yet 
wold not the grekes suffre to repayre agayn the townes / ne labours 
the londes, which shold be right good, to thende that none shold! 12 
enhabyte there, By cause they holde it for a strengthe / And that 
nothyng shold be fonde therin / Also in espyre, whiche extendeth 
fro duras vnto a mount named! bagulars / And endureth foure 
iourneyes : by that passed! the other barons / But the Due and! his 16 
companye passed! by danemarche la Mayen / whiche is named 1 
otherwyse Mese / They cam by a destrayte, whiche is named! the 
Cloystre of seynt Basyle / And! syth they descended! in to a playne / 
Where they fonde grete °plente of vytaylle and! .of pastures / And! 20 
cam vnto Asine pol, whiche is a moche fayr cyte and good / There 
herd! they saye and! trouthe it was / that themperour of constanty- 
noble had! enprisonned huoii le mayne / broder of the kynge of 
ffraunce, and! many other barons that cam with hym; ffor thise 24 
noble men were hasty, and cam by lombardye in to puylle / ffro 
thens they passed! to duras / And soiourned for tabyde the other 
bprons / whiche ought to come in to tho partyes / ne they supposed 
to haue doubted ony thyng in the londe of the grekes, that were 28 
cristen as they were / But the baylly of duras toke alle the moost 

1— 1 Fr. a deux terra, de quoi chascune a non Espire. Lat. neper 
Adriaticum cnim mare erat utraque Epirus, cvjvg altering metropolis eft 
Durachium. 

2— 2 Fr. “ en la terre ou ces petering passoient avoit deux Danemarches. 

L'une avoit non de Ripe (Lat. Dacia Ripensis ) qui cst a senestre fur la 
rive de la Dunoe Vautre est nommi la Maienne.” Caxton has ruined the 
sense here by his omissions. 3 Lat. “ Dacia mediterranean 

4- 4 trois terreg dont chescun avoit non Trace," Caxton’s 

translation again faulty. 

5— 5 A “ il chaca leg Blag et leg Bovgres bien loin si qve les Danemarches 
li remestrent." The text B that Caxton followed gives achata, which is 
evidently a corruption of chaqa, and the brought ” may be a misreading 
for •“ bought.” The Lat gives “ eodem Rulgarorum subjugato populo per 
Basilitm. 



Ch. XXXIV.] The Emperor has imprisoned Hugh the Great. 71 

grete barons, and sente them in yrons to themperour of Constanty- TheUihffof 
noble to doo his wylle with them / he helde them in prison, and »« r ‘hegre»t 
abode the comyng 1 of the other barons / by cause yf they cam with »*£> 

4 grete power he wolde delyuer them for theyr loue / and yf they cam 
not with grete myght he thought not lyghtly to lete them passe, 
whan the due godefroye and the other barons herd tydynges of this 
prisonment / he toke good messagers, and sente them with theyr 
8 lettres to themperour. And they prayde and warned hym that he Godfrey sent 
shold? sende to them without delaye this hye and noble man huon perorand 
le mayne and alle his companye / ffor they helde hym for lordes, 
bretheren and 1 felaws of this pylgremage. And herin he had don men - 
12 more his wylle and his force than right / whan he had reteyned 
one so gentil and hye prynce. 

How the due godefroye constreyned themperour by 
force to rendre and delyuere his prisonners / 

16 capitulo xxxiiij" 

i N this tyme was Emperour a greke, moche fals and ful of Aiexiu» the 
tricherye, and was named alexes, and to his surname Conius / roy™ niae 
he was moche acqueynted and pryue with that other Emperour finery. 

20 Nychofores bothoniat, in suche wyse that he made hym his steward / 

And was the grettest man of the londe sauf themperour. He by 
his malyce purchaced euyl and harme ayenst his lorde, by thassent 
of grete peple that he helde aboute hym, and toke hym and helde 
24 hym in his prison vj yere tofore that our pilgryms cam theder / 

The messagers of the Due and the other barons demanded of this 
Emperoure Huon le Mayne, lyke as they were eommaunded, and 
the other prysonners / in lyke wyse / Themperour answerde shortly He sent word 
28 that he wold not delyuere them / They retourned 2 in to the hoost, that he wool 
and said to them thansuer of themperour. 3 whan the due & the the barons, 
other barons herd this, they were moche wroth, And concluded p lMfS4] 
emong them by theyr counseyl / that they wold playnly make 
32 warre ayenst hym / that dyde so grete oultrage to holde so hye a 
prynce in prison, ne wolde not answere by mesure ne reason / They 
liabandonned to the hooste to take in that contre where they were The auk# was 

- venr &ngry 

in, Alle that they coude fynde, And brente alle the townes / Thus 
36 abode they in thise partyes, and destroyed alle the contre / And 

dyde moche grete dommage and harme : and grete plente of proyes country. 

1 Orig. aud. 2 Orig. retourued. 



72 


The Emperor releases Hugh. [Ch. XXXV 

and other gaynes cam in to the hoost of the barons / Theraperour 
sente vnto the due and vnto the other barons / that they shold doo 
The Empeira-holde theyr peple in pees, And! that he wold! delyuere huon 1 le 2 
toreiease e mayne and the other prisonners. They agreed! and acordid gladly, 4 
Great, and And! cam with alle thevr bataylles renged! and in ordenaunce to fore 

the other , , „ . , . „ , . 

priaonen. constantynoble, as for tassiege the toun. Anon yssuecr oute nuon 

the mayne, doene dancelle 3 / Guyllame charpentier, Clarembault 
de venduel / And entred in to the pauyllon of the Due / And 8 
thanked! hym moche and! alle the other of theyr delyueraunce / 
And! the due and the hooste receyued! them with moche grete ioye / 
ffor they had moche grete angre and grete despite of that was don 
to them. 12 

The grete despyte that themperour toke, that due 
godeffroy reffused to goo in to constawtinoble 4 
vnto hym. cap° xxxv 

w Hyles they spak thus to gydre, cam the messagers fro them-16 
perour to the due, And requyred them in theyr lordes name 
that he wold entre with a fewe of his companye in to the toun / 

The Duke re- And come speke with themperour / The due had counseyl herupon, 
the'Emperor. and answerd 5 / that he wold not yet come in to the toune. whan 20 
themperour herd this, he had therof moche grete despite, And 
income- defended oueral that ther shold nomore vytaylle be sold to them, 
Emperor for- ne none other thynges. The noble men sawe this, and sente out 

bade any one J ° f 

tSauftothe on foura gy n g ouer a ^ e the countrey. And they brought in vytaylle 24 
pilgrims. grete plente, in suche wyse that they had ynowgh, poure and ryche. 
^im*forage Themperour sJwe that this contre sholc^be destroyed / and doubted 
solves. that they wold yet doo werse / therfor he commanded to his 

marcheauntes that they shold goo in to the hooste and selle to them 28 
suche thynge as they neded. The daye of Cristemasse or of the 
Natyuite of oure Lord approehed / Therfore the Due and the 
Barons dyde do crye in the hooste / that no man shold forfaytte ne 
(' if. 34, iik.] trespace in tho foure dayes / The mene whyle cam the 6 messagers 3? 
Mnds E 'rX- lor °f themperour, that spak to the barons moche fayr, that they wold 
totSebX'." passe the brygge and come on the syde of the palays whiche was 

1 Orig, hnon. 2 Orig. te. 

3 Caxton’s French text gives Doene Dancelle, which he follows. This is, 
however, a corruption of Drene de Neele, Lat. Drogo de Neela, 

4 Orig. constatinobie. 6 Orig. auswerd. 



73 


Ch. XXXVI.] A Description of Constantinople. 

named blaquerne, ffor there myght alle the hooste lodge in grete 
howses whiche were nygh the hraas of seynt george. And alle this 
said! they for tricherye and deceyte. Neuertheles 1 our peple byleuyd 
4 them lyghtly / ffor the wynter was moche cold and sharpe of raynes The winter 

. was very cold 

and* snowes, in sucne wyse that the pauylions rotedf, anc£ ne myght andrainj, 
not hold out the water of the rayne / the horses and! poure peple "'»■ 
myght not endure 2 it. herof toke themperour his occasion for to £” t * bUin 
8 sende in to the hoost / and that they shold! passe toward the town : sotheyac- 

' " * ^ cepted the 

and semed that he had grete pyte on them / but his entencion was Emperor', in- 

' vitation and 

alle other wyse / ffor he dyde this to thende that he shold enclose came into the 
them in a place more strayt, that they shold! not renne in to the 
12 contre, And that he myght haue the gretter power to constrayne 
them therin. 

Of the description of constantinoble / And of many 
countrees and londes ther aboute. 

16 capitulo xxx vj° 

f Or to vnderstowde how the barons were enclosed by the des- 
loyaulte of themperour / it is to wete how the cyte of con¬ 
stantinoble stondeth / the see whiche is in venyse cometh nygh How the rity 
20 vnto / xxx myle of constantinoble / ffor thens departeth an arme nopie i* »>tu- 
like a fresshe water, And estendeth it toward 3 the eest, in lengthe / 
ij / C / xxx / myle / it is not lyke 4 euen / ffor in somme place 
it is but a myle broode, And in another it is wel xxx / of brede 
24 or more / after the places that it renneth in. And it renneth The »mi of 

‘ . the sea run- 

bytwene thyse two Auncyent cytees, Sexton and Abydon, of whiche neti^tetween 
that one is in asye / And that other in europe / 5 ffor the arme is Abydo». 
deuyded fro thyse two londes : 5 Constantinoble is in' europe : That it«iao<ii»iii™ 
28 other parte is nycene, whiche is in asye / This braas or arme, thus nopie from 
as it is moost brode toward the see / lyke a roode where the porte 
is / it is sayde that it is mooste paysible / And easyer than the see 
is. nyghe therto stondeth constantinoble, whiche is lyke a tryangle. 

32 The first syde is bytwene the porte and this arme / Ther standeth a 
chirche of seynt george / of whiche that see is named the braas of 

* Oi'ig. Nenertheles. 2 Orig. endnre. 3 Fr. rers midi. 

4 Fr. nnie, “ lyke even ” (in breadth). 

e-6 Caxton has mistranslated this sentence by reading divise as a past 
participle instead of a substantive. Fr. car le bras est devise de ces deux 
terres, viz. for this am (i. e. the Hellespont) is tffe division of these two 
countries. 



74 


The Treachery of the Emperor. [Ch. XXXVII. 

seynt george / And this endurith vnto the new palays of blacqueme, 

The second after tiie porte / That other pan 1 of the walle dureth fro this 
wall extends chirche of seynt george vnto the porte 2 aire / The thyrde pan fro 
George to fhe t'kat vn ^° paktys of Blacquerne / The towne is raoche wel 4 
Golden Gate, closed toward the 3 chainpayne of walles, of dyches, of towres, and 
p leaf 35 ] barbicans / Atte porte descendeth a fressh water rennyng / 
whiche is lytil in the somer / but in wynter it becometli moche 
grete for the rayne / This water hath a brygge, on whiche oure men 8 
passed ouer / 4 whiche is enclosid bytwene the grete see and the 
braas / behynde the yate J where they lodged 4 for tabyde that 
The Emperor comyng of other barons. Themperour 6 sente ofte his messagers to 
the Duke to the due, And sente for hym to come and speke with hym. The 12 

come and Bee 

him. due doubted moche his tricherye, and wold not goo / But to thende 
would not go. that he toke it not for euyl / he sente to hym thre noble men / that 
is to wyte, Conon de montagu / Henry dasque / and bawdwyn 8 de 
bort, and excused hym by them / that the barons that were with 16 
hym wold not counseylle hym to goo and speke with hym tyl that 
the other barons were comen. Themperour was moche / wroth, 
and deffended agayn that no vytaylles sold be shold to the boost, 
so the Empe. And dyde yet werse / ffor he sente on a daye erly in the mornyng* 20 
whoTiew shippes al ful of archers, that cam sodenly by the braas right there 
pilgrims the as ^ uc was / they shotte grete plente of arowes, in suche 

wyse that they slewe moche peple that was goon on 7 the see syde, 
And many they hurted by the dores and wyndowes / 24 

How our peple brente theyr lodgys and toke theyr 
hamoys / And of an assault that the grekes made 
on them / ea° xxxvij 0 

w Han the Due and the other barons herd this / by eomyn coun- 28 
seyl / they sente the brother of the due 8 for to take the brigge / 
to-thende that they of the toun shold not sease ne take it / They 

1 Fr. pan, piece, strip. 

2 Fr. as portes oires, to the golden gates. Lat. usque ad auream portam. 

4—4 The French here misunderstood by Caxton, “ Si gueilz furent enclot 

entre la grant mrr et le bras, selonc le port on ilt estoient logiez, en maisons 
qvi la estoimt /aides.” they (i. e. our men) and not the bridge, were inclosed 
between the sea and the arm. They were not lodged “ behind the gate,” but 
along the harbour. Caxton has mistaken port, harbour, for porte, gate. 

6 Orig. Themperonr, 

6 Fr. Baudouin de Bore, or Borgh, Lat. de Borgo. 

1 Fr. stir mer. 8 Orig. dne. 



75 


Ch. XXXVII."] The Pilgrims bum many Houses. 


toke / v / honderd men 1 what knyghtes as other wel armed, and 
cam fyrst to the brygge and kepte it, and sawe that alle the cyte was 
meued and armed for to come on them. Our men were thenne 
4 adcerteyned that they of the towne were theyr enemyes. And sette 
fyer in the howses 2 were they lodged in, s and in other by whiche 
they doubted and fered wel a / vj / thousand or seuen in suche 
wyse that som of Emperours owne howses were brelite 3 / After they 
8 dyde do sowne theyr tompettes 4 / And wente them alle in orden- 
aunce 5 after the Due toward the brygge. ffor they doubted 6 moche 
that they of the towne wolde come theder for to deffende them the 
paas / but, 7 as I haue sayd, bawdwyn, brother of the due, had thenne 
12 goten it vpon the grekes, whom he had ouerthrowen and chased 
ryght ferre. The hoost and alle the cariage 8 passed ouer / alle in 
to the contrey. And arrested there alle in ordenaunce in a fayr 
playn, moche fyers and courageous, by the chirche of seynt cosme 
16 and daruyan / which now is named the palays of buymont & the 
palays of blacqueme / whan it was come nygli the euentyd there 
were many slayn of them of the town / & of the other, but not so 
many / The grekes myght no lenger sufre, but the pylgryms dis- 
20 comfy ted them & chassed them, sleyng* and hewyng* alle them that 
they myght arreche, in suche wyse that they droof them in to the 
toun by force. Thenne retourned they agayne as they that had 
wonne the felde / And lodged in the playne / The grekes were 
24 moche swollen and angry of that they had lost so many men and 
; had ben so euyl demened. And 9 began to ordeyne thurgh the 
town how they myght yssue oute with moche more affraye and 
stronger than they had. But the nyght cam 10 that destourmed their 
28 counseyl. 10 This was an euident thynge, that themperour had don 
the barons passe the brygge by tricherye and vntrouthe for to haue 
closed them as within barryers. 


The Duke 
sent 500 men 
to seize the 
bridge. 


The pilgripui 
burned many 
of the houses 
in which they 
were lodged. 


P If. 85, bk.j 
The army 
then paseed 
over the 
bridge into 
the country. 


Then they 
discomfited 
and slew 
many of the 
Greeks. 


It was evident 
that the Era- 

[ >eror had be- 
laved very 
treacher¬ 
ously. 


1 Fr. “ Taut chevalier comme autre* 2 Fr. ou , where. 

3 ~ 3 Caxton's obscurity is here owing to a corrupt French text.—The text 
given in the Historians Occidentanx has the correct reading : “ Et es avtres 
delez qui duroient bien milles on sept, si qve aitcnns des mesons i Jirent 
arses, qui estoient Vempereov —i. e. they burned the houses in which they 
were lodged, which occupied six or seven miles of ground; and some which 
belonged to the emperor were burnt also. 

4 Fr. trompettes. 6 Orig. ordenanuce. 

6 Orig. donbted. T Orig. bnt. 9 Orig. Aud. 

10 Fj t “ qui les destourna de ce conseill.” 



76 


The Pilgrims •pillage the Land. [Ch. XXXVIII. 

How after this our 1 peple began to destroye the contre. 
And of a message of buymont vnto due gode- 
froye. And the answer of the due vpon the 
same. capitulo xxxviij" 4 

S sone as thoost apperceyued on the mom the day / it was 
cryed that euery man on payne of deth shold arme hym / on 
w a™ him- horsbak and on fote / The Captayns of som bataylle were ordeyned 
for to lede the peple in fourage. The other sette them in ordyn- 8 
aunce for to kepe their lodgys / ffor wel they apperceyued certaynly 
that themperour ponrehassed for them alle the euyl that he myght, 
Part of them They that wente for vytaylle withdrewe them wel / lx / myle / 
aging,They pylled al aboute them alle the townes that they fonde / And* 12 
“Mother*, brought Corn, Wyn, Beestys, and other Bychesses / Wherof the 
victuals. londe was full that vnnethe myght they conduyte alle / And 1 they 
were oute sex dayes / And! aftir retornned in to the hooste with alle 
this merueillous gayne / whyles as they conteyned! thus, Messagers 16 
Bohemond cam fro Buymont to fore the Due / Ant? salewed! hym in theyr 
gers to God- Lordes name / And! delyuerd to hym lettres whiche saide in this 
manere / He salewed in his lettres the due as he ought to salewe 
p leaf sc] suche a man / Aftir 8 they sayde / “knowe ye, sire, that ye haue to 20 
doo with a moche vntrewe man / whiche alwey sette his herte and 
purpoos to deceyue them that truste in hym / Specially he hateth the 
Latyns to the deth. And doth his power in alle maners, that he 
tobe'on'iiis can *'° ^ 00 eu 3'^ to ourl peple. And yf ye haue not yet apper- 24 
fiw malfceof 1 ce y uec * it / s hal knowe al by tyme as I saye to you / ffor I knowe 
and the 6ks ’ we i the matyce of the grelces / And also the trycherye of them- 
iiie 11 Emperor. P erour / Therfor I pray you / that ye withdraws you fro constan- 

tinoble / And retorn e to ward the playnes of andrenoble or of 28 
sympole / and there ye may wyntre you where as is grete plente of 
offercto"ome alle goodes / And I myself, yf it please god, assone as the sprynge 
ft!ey ald Gort " *ke yere cometh, shal come and 1 hast to meue, And shal assem¬ 
ble with you / And shal helpe you / as my lord and frende, ayenst 32 
the vntrew prynce that entendeth to doo euyll with alle his power 
vnto cristiente” / whan the due had herd thyse lettres, by the counseyl 
of his barons He sente to hym ageyn other lettres that after the 
salewyng spak thus / “ we thanke you gretely, And so doo the other 36 
prynces that ben with vs, of the loue and trouthe that ye haue 


Every man of a 
both foot and 
horse was 
commanded 


1 Orig. onr. 



77 


Ch. XXXIX.] The Emperor honours Godfrey. 

sente vs' / And! knowe ye certaynly that 1 we haue founden on the 
pvynce and! on the peple of grekes / lyke as ye wene wel to knowe 1 / 
we knowe wel that yo saye it of wysedome amt* of trouthe / 2 But 
4 we doubte moehe the armes that we toke in our contrey for to warre t ™ < ’- 
on the hethen men / shold! retorne and conuerte ayenst them that 
here the name of cristiante as we our self doo 2 / we attende and 
desyre rnoeh your comyng / Thenne, yf god will, whan ye shal be 
8 comen we shal doo take you to our counseyl.” 

How themperour appesed the due godefroye and sente 
for hym, and of the honour that he dyde to hym. 

capitulo I xxxix. 

12 t Hemperour was moche anguyssous emong his pryue cou«seyl, The Emperor 
& thought how lie might appese to hym the due & his anxjoue t<^ 
peple by cause he destroyed his contre / of which he herd the nuke and hi* 
clamours right grete and! ofte / And! by cause that he knewe that 
16 the messagers of buymowt were come / and had brought tidynges / 
that he wold hastely come, he sente ageyn his messagers to the 
due ./ & prayd hym that he wold come speke to hym, & yf he 
doubted of ony thyng he wold sende 3 Iohan his sone in hostage in He offers,to^ 
20 to the hoost '/ This message plesyd moche to the barons whan they 
herde it / and they sente conon de montagu- / & bawdwyn de 
borgh for to receyue the hostage / they receyued hym and! 5 delyuenl 6 
to Bawdwyn brother of the Due, 7 whiche abode / for to Beule and* [t if.se,bk.j 
24 gouerne the hoost and* to kepe the hostage / The due and other TheDuksami 
barons wente in to Constantynople to fore themperour which had c«j[^ ^ 
moche desyred them / The grekes made to them grete Ioye mer- ™“ r ‘ he Eln ' 
ueyllously what someuer they tlioughte. 8 Themperour kyssec? them 
28 alle. And! demanded! of euerych his name / for to honoure euerych 
by hym self / as he that wel coude do it. they were wel beholden 
of alle them of the palays / At last themperour 9 satte in his mageste, ti.« Emperor 
and the barons aboute hym, And! sayde to the due thyse wordes / »nd^ 
32 “ we haue herd! saye many tymes in this londe, that thou art of hyghe nuke tims: 

i—i ‘‘-turns avons ja tronvt, et en prince et en peuple, ce que tons 
en soupefonez.” 

8-3 Fr. “ Nous donbtons mout les armes, que nos preismes en nostre pais 
pour guerroier la gent mescreant, torner a ceus qui portent le non de la 
Crestienti, si com nos fesons.” 

8 Orig. seude. * Orig. moutagu. 6 Orig. aud. 

• Orig. delynerd. 8 Orig. thonglite. 9 Orig. themperonr. 



78 


“We know 
that thou art 
a good knight 
and true, 
and we praise 
thee And love 
thee in our 
heart. 


“ We choose 
andavowtliee 
for our son, 
and put our 
Empire into 
thy hand.** 


The Emperor 
then present¬ 
ed the Duke 
and hie com¬ 
panions with 
great gifts. 


But the Duke 
divided all hie 
[« leaf 37] 
gifts with 
those about 
him. 


The Emperor gives great Gifts. [Ch. XL. 

lygnage / and of moche grete power in thy contre, and a good 
kuyght and trewe, in suche wyse that for the fayth of Ihesu criste 
tenhaunce, hast enterprised to warre ayenst the mescreauntes and 
hethen peple / whiche greue the cristen peple merueyllously / fi'or 4 
alle thyse thynges we prayse the and lone in our herte / And wylle 
honoure the with grettest honour that we may doo / fEor thou art 
worthy and dygne / It playseth vs and therto accorden our barons / 
that we cheese the & auowe for our sone / And we put our 8 
Empyre in to thyn hande, that thou kepe it as our sone from henss- 
forth in good estate and in termes of loue” 1 / whan, he had seyde 
this / he dyde hym to be clad with the robe of an Emperour / And 
to sytte by hym / And 2 thenne the barons made to hym right grete 12 
feste & solempnyte aftir the custom of the londe in suche thynges / 
And thus was the pees affermed bytwene the prynces / and also 
bytwene the peple. 

Of the yeftes that themperour 3 made to due godefroye, 16 
to the barons and to the gentilmen of his hoost. 

capitulo xl° 

a None whan this was don / the tresour of themperour was 
opeued & was presented to the due / and to his felawship / 20 
so grete yeftes and so grete" rychesses that it was merueylle to see / 
Ther was grete plente of gold, of syluer, and of precious stones / 
many clothes of sylk ryght ryche: vayssellys of dyuerse facions, 
whiche were merueyllous 4 of facions and of matere / Oure peple 24 
meruellyd moche of this grete rychesse / Thyse yeftes cessed not at 
the fyrst tyme / but fro the daye of the Epyphanye / vnto thas- 
sencion tyde / themperour gaf to the Due euery weke as moche as 
two myghty men myght susteyne / of pierrye / of pens of gold, of 28 
copper, and of tyn he gaf to hym ten muyes, s euery muye is 
four busshellys. 5 But the due departed alle thyse thynges vnto 
knygh = 6 tes and alle ^tboute where he sawe / that it shold he wel 
employed. Whan they had hen with themperour a lytil whyle, 32 
they toke leue & cam agayn in to the hoost / They sente agayn 
Iohan his sone, whom they had holden in hostage moche honour¬ 
ably / Themperour dyde do crye vpon peyne of deth / that noman 

* Fr. “ en enterine amour," in sincere or perfect love. Caxton probably 
read enterine as two words (in, terme), and translated accordingly. 

2 Orig. Aud. 3 Orig. themperour. 4 Orig. merueyllons. 

”~ 6 Inserted by Caxton. 



79 


Ch. XXL] They lodge near Chalcedon. 

shold doo harme to the pylgrytns / but shold! do selle to them alle 
maner wares at prys resonable / The due in lyke wyse dyde doo 
crye, that euery man as dere as he louyd his lyf shold doo no force 
4 ne wrong to them of the contree / Thus forthon lyuyd they in From this 

. . time on, tlie 

moche peas / whan Marche cam the due knewe wel / that the other Greeks and 

........ Crusaders 

barons wold come / and 1 apperceyued? wel that the wille of them-lived in 

peace. 

perour was / that he wold passe with his peple the braas of seynt 
8 george / To the same acorded the barons and the other of the 
hoost / And! saide to themperour that he wold passe ouer / And he 
anon dyde do make redy many shippes & passed wel alle and cam in March, 
in to betlinie, whiche is the fyrst partye of Asye. They lodged crosseYinto^ 
12 them aboute 1 the Cyte of Calcedonie / Of this cyte fynde we 
wryten, that in the tyme of pope lyon and Marcyen themperour 
assambled there one of the iiij grete couwseyllis / where ther were 
.iij.C.xxxvj / prelates for to condempne an heresye, that a Monke 
16 named Entyses(16) had founden. And that helde a patriarke of 
Alysaundre named discretus(17) / but 2 there they were dampned / 

This cyte is so nyghe constantynoble 3 that there is but the braas by- This city is 

. . .. divided from 

twene them bothe. And there was the hoost lodged moche easely / constant- 
20 fl'or who so had to doo in the cyte of Constantynoble he myght *j™"£ e of st. 
passe twyes or thryes in a day / The cause why themperour made 
the due to passe, was for he wold not that / the hoostes of the 
barons that were to come / shold not 4 assemble 5 to gydre so nyghe 
24 hym / And in lyke dyde he to the other barons that cam aftir, ffor 
he neuer wold lodge tweyne to gydre / 

How Buymont was made capitayn of a grete hoost. 

And the names of many nobles of thoost & of 
28 their mayntene. ca° xlj. 

a Ftir this maner contened hym themperour and due godefroy. 

But buymont the sone 6 of Robert guyehart, prynce of Tarente, Bohemond, 
had passed the see adryand / And was come vnto duras / whan alle his rentum, h4 
32 hoost was comen he toke his waye thurgh the desertes of bougrye / Dura^and 
And wente softe and fayr 7 by cause of them that folowed hym. In Bulgaria, 
his rowte were many noble men / of whom w r e 8 shal name to you a [«i«af si.bv, 

1 Orig. aboute. 2 Orig. bnt. 

s Orig. constantyuoble. 4 Tbis “ not" is superfluous. 

6 Orig. assembhe. 6 Orig. 60ue. 7 Orig. an dffayr. 



80 


Many noble 
men accom¬ 
panied him. 


Thev spent 
Christmas in 
the city of 
Castore; but 
could get no 
one to sell 
them pro¬ 
visions. 

They went 
foraging in 
the country, 
and got great 
wealth and 
booty* 


The Emperor 
feared the 
coming of 
Dohemond. 


And sent men 
to follow him, 
and to do him 
damage if 
possible. 


Buymont and his Suite arrive. [Ch. XLI. 

part / that is to wyte / Tancve the sone of graal the. marquys. 1 
Rychard the pryncipat sone of william ffierbracor The Brother of 
Robert guychart / Raymont his brother / Robert the hanse 2 / 
Herman of caryn 3 / Robert of sourdcval / Robert fytz cristen, 4 1 
vnxfrey fytz raoul 5 / Rychard sone of therle Ranyol erle of rousyg- 
nol,® and alle his bretheren. Ogan of ehartes. Aubery of cannac / 
And vmfrey of montygneux / Alle thyse had made buymont their 
capytayn / They cam in to the cite of castore and made there the 8 
feste of cristemasse and helde it moche hyely / But 7 by cause they 
of the contre wold selle to them / nothyng which helde them for 
enemyes / therfor by force they muste sende out on fouragyng and 
brought grete proyes and 1 good! gaynes / of whiche they dyde moche 12 
harme to alle the contrey / Aftir they earn in to the londe of 
pelagoine, whiche is moche good and fertile, and lodged them there / 
Aftir they herd saye that nygh by was a castel right strong, wherin 
alle the popeliquans 8 of the knde were withdrawen for the strenght 16 
of the place / And there were none but suche mysbyleued peple / 
Buymont and his peple armed them and wente tlieder anon 9 / And 
founde there moche grete rychesso in the towne and grete proyes 
whiche they put out a part / And after sette fyer ther in the town / 20 
And alle them that yssued they slewe with the swerde. And the 
remenaunt bothe men and wymmen they brent alle. Themperour 
herd saye- that Buymont cam with grete peple. And doubted 
moche / And had his comyng moche suspecyonous, ffor he had 24 
many debates ayenst hvm and his, of whiche lie had alwey the 
werse. The souldyours of themperour and alle they that enter- 
meted 10 of armes soiourned and wyntred in thyse partyes by whiche 
Bumont passed / Themperour commaunded 11 to his conestables of 28 
alle bis peple, that they shold cooste buymont with as moche people 
as they myghte gete vnto the water named bardare / in suche manere 
that yf they myght greue, ennoye, and doramage in ony paas to 
them, 12 that they shold come on hym strongly. Thus he had 32 


1 There is a discrepancy here in the French texts, some giving “ son of 
Gral,” others “son of William.”—Lat. “ Wilhelmi marehionis Jiliws.” 

2 Fr. Robert de Hanse. 3 Fr. Herman de Carni. 

4 Fr. Robert le fih Ousten. Some versions give “ Turstan." —Lat. Ro¬ 
bertos filing Tristan. 6 Fr. Onfrey le fih Raoul. 6 Fr. Ramol. 

7 Orig. Bnt. 8 Fr. popeliquans, heretics. Lat. heretici. 

8 Orig. auon. 

10 Fr. s'entre mettoient, had to do with. 

11 Orig. commanded?. 

12 Fr. en auctm pas, at any place, or, on any occasion. 



Ch. XLII.J Messengers arid Letters from the Emperor to Buymont. 81 

ordeyned cautelously behynd them, but to fore as he / was moehe in this he 
disloyal and! couuert, and! coude wel make semblaunt of other treacherous, 
thynge than he thoughte, he sente vnto buymont of his grete ^ 

4 men / And by them lettres moche payssyble and of fayr wordes / “JJ 1 ™ e ’" f 
And! of bountes moche debonayr and deceyualle whiche were as 
folowen. 

Messagers and letres fro Themperour to Buymont, 1 
8 and the 2 contenue of the same as foloweth. p learssj 

eapitulo xlij 0 

t He salewyng to fore was moche fayr / And aftir sayde / “ we 
knowe certaynly that thou art an hye prynce & moch noble 
12sone of an noble and valyaunt man / 3 ffor this grete manor we who said, 
prevse the / and haue the in cliierte 3 / And also for thou hast thee, fnd 
enterprised, 4 with so good herte and 1 so good wille in this tyme the ggrtoow 
seruyse of oure lord / And the pylgremage 5 whiche is due vnto alle 
16 them 5 that byleue in Ihesu criste. we haue feme wylle & cer-, 
taynly purpoos to honoure the / And shewe by dede our grace that ourLor “” 
we haue thought / Therfor we praye and requyre the in good “Wepray 

' thee to do no 

favth / that thou commande 6 to thy peple that they doo none damage to 

J ' A our country, 

20 oultrage to oure peple, & haste / the to come to vs all surely, ffor andmretunt 
thou shalt haue ther by honour & prouffyt / Our 7 messagers that J ^'price"" 
come to the shal by our commandement doo thyn hoostc haue 
resonable market of vytaylles and of alle other thynges ” / The seni- 
24 blaunt of thise wordes were fayr / but ther was ther vnder moch 

venym and of felonnye. Buymont, whiche was wyse and knowyng Boi.enumd, 
many thynges, had many tymes preuyd the desloyalte of them- ofte^experi- 
perour / And receyued thyse wordes by semblaurece moche aworth Emperor^ 
28 and in thanke / But he preysed them lytil in his courage. 8 Neuer- did not ’ 
thelesso, he thanketh hym by mouth / and by lettres that he W' words, 
daygned to wryte to hym and sende, considered that he was so suial 
a man ayenst hym & sente hym other curtoys wordes, &c / Thise bua answered 
32 messagiers that were thus comen, conduyted the hoost vnto the ousiy. 
ryuer of bardre / whan the moost partye of the hoost were passed 

1 Orig. Buymont. 

3-8 Fr. Por ce, de grant manure, te prisons, et aeons elder!’ Caxton’s 
French text may have omitted the “ de." 4 Orig. euterprised. 

' 6—e F r _ “ fj,ii e »t la besvigne de tons ceux," which is the duty of all 
these, etc. 8 Orig. commaude. 7 Orig. Onr, 

3 Fr. courage, heart. 

GODFREY. O 



82 


Buymont approaches Constantinople. [Ch. XLIII. 

ouer, & the other ordeyned them for to passe after. The con- 
estables of the soldyours whiche had awayted and folowed them 
The Em- wened to haue founden thevr povnt. And! launced on this partye 
themes they °* “OORt, whiche was not yet passed, and! were many moo of them 4 
Oliver™'" 6 ^ an ot oures / The noyse and! the erye arroos moche grete. Tancre 
Berdan. whiche moche was appert & hardy, had 1 tho passed half the 
The bnve ryuer whiche was grete, but 2 whan he herd this he retomed! agayn 
turned back as hastly as he myght, 3 and discomfyted! / ij. M / of the moost 8 

and put the 

Greekej» noble of them vigorously and putte 4 them to flyght. 3 And! many 
them'° f toke of them a lyue / whom he brought to fore buymont, he 

prisoners, demanded them in the presence of alle / wherfore they had ronne 

so on the hoost of the cristen men / whiche were also cristen and 12 
peple of themperour their lord and frende / They answerd that they 
were seruauntes and soldyours of themperour and muste 5 doo his 
[ 6 if. as, bk.] commandement, fifor by hym they had this don / 6 here by myght 

alle they apperceyue that herde this, that the fayre wordes that 16 
themperour sayde were but deceyuaunce and tricherye / but buy¬ 
mont, whiche was wyse and knewe that he muste 6 passe by them- 
Bohemond pyre, made semblauwt that he apperceyued not, and made good 
bin™ not u> chere to thise men for to couure his courage / And that plesyd not 20 

perceive the ° ' r J 

Emperor’s som of his barons / 

treachery. ’ 

How Buymont approuehed constantinoble, 7 and was 
sente to come to themperour, And how by the 
prayer of due Godefroye he wente toward hym / 24 

capitulo xliij" 

b Uymont and his hoost wente so ferre by the countrees that 
As they they approched Constantynoble. whan themperour knewe that, 

constantf- 4 he sente agayn grete messagers to hym / and prayde hym entierly 28 
Emperor sent that he wold leue, his hoost and come speke with hym with a pryue 
command meyne / Buymont wyst not what to doo, ffor he was in the daunger 
him pri-‘ th hym B0 g re te a man, whom he doubted to angre / And on that 
vateiy. other parte, he knewe his falsenesse and deceyuaunce, And had wel 32 

1 Fr. ja, already. 2 Orig. bnt. 

3—3 This sentence seems to have been entirely misunderstood by Caxton. 

Fr. “ Et deux milles des plus preux retournerent avecques lid ; llz se fra- 
perent en ceulx qui estoient renuz moult vigoureusement, si qne ilz les discon- 
firent tantost , et misrent eu fuite —i. e. two thousand of his own men 
returned with him, and attacked the others and discomfited them, etc. 

4 Orig. pntte. 6 Orig. mnste. r Orig. coustantinoble. 



83 


Ch. XLIV.] Buymont does Homage to the Emperor. 
apperceyued that he louyd hym not / And! therfore, he fered to goo Bohemm.d 

" ' hesitated 

to hym / whyles he was thus entredeux 1 / The Due Godefroye cam about obey- 
to hym the thursdaye afore Esterdaye, ffor themperour had! so moche summons. 

4 prayd! the Due / by cause he doubted that he wold not gladly come 
to hym / that the Due wente to hym for to make hym come to 
themperour / whan the due and Buymont mette / they made moche 
grete Ioye to gydre, and spak to gydre of many thynges. After Godfrey^ 

8 entred the due for to praye hym to come to his fader themperour / pen™«ie 
Buymont was loth tobeye his prayer and requests / But with grete J°H> r e Eln - 
peyne the due vaynquysshyd 2 hym by prayer / And made hym to And snaiiy 
goo. Themperour receyued hym with grete honour and ioye and K im to do so. 
12 kyssyd hym / And aftir spak so moche to hym and to the due, that 
Buymont by the counseyl of the due made to themperour hommage 
with his hondes, and swar to hym feaulte as to his lorde / Thenne Bohmumd 

, swears feally 

shold! ye haue seen come out of the tresour of themperour many to the Em- 
16 grete rychesses, gol# / syluer / vessel / precious stones / and? clothes r ^ iv ^ reat 
of sylk so moche that vnneth myght be preysed / whyles that ^ im - 
Buymont abode in the palays, Tanere his neuew, sone of his suster, 
that was right wyse and of grete herte, retched not for to see Tunmd ^ 

20 Themperour ne to speke to hym / But made alle 3 the hoost to goto the 

.... Emperor, 

passe ouer the braas seynt george ; and to lodge in bethine, nygh to J“* r c £J 8Sed 
calcedoine / where thooste of the other barons 4 had ben a good ciuiwdon. 
whyle / whan themperour knewe that tanere had eschewed hym, [ * leafss,J 
24 he was moche wrath, but he made no semblaunt therof, as he that 
wel coude couure his courage / he made moche grete feste to the 
barons that were with hym, & euery daye he gaf to them grete 
yeftes and newe thynges / Aftir they departed by his leue / And 
28 passed the braas with the other / There soiourned they, & abode Here ^ r l s he 
the comyng of the other barons. There was brought to them grete 
plente of vytaylles / and 5 of other thynges fro the eyte of con- “‘^ 0 ° 1 “ ier 
stantynoble and fro the countree aboute. 

32 How the erle Robert of fflaunclers with his hooste 
approched Constantynoble, And how themperour 
sente for hym / And of their deuyses to gydre / 

cap” xliiij" 

1 A good example of Caxton’s habit of transferring French words and 
expressions bodily into English. 2 Orig. vaynqnysshyd. 

s Fr. “ tout I'ost.” 6 OHg. aud. 



S4 Robert of Flanders does Homage to the Emperor. [Ch. XLV. 

r Obert, the Erie of fflaundres, whiche was comen to fore the 
vynter to bar, a cyte of puylle, where the body of seynt 
Robert of Nicholas lieth, had passed the see, and was descended! at duras / 
wintered «t Ther in a moche fayr place and plentiuous 1 he had wynterd hym / 4 

Duras, and 

hastened to assone as began to wexe fayr tyme, he toke his Iourneye 
otto* pii'- e a ^ er ^ le °^ er / h*sted fast 6 to folowe them / but it happed 

grime. that er he cam to the barons / he receyued! 2 the messagers of them- 

perour that sayd to hym in his name / that he shold! leue his hooste 8 
and come see themperour, and speke with hym wyth a fewe of his 
meyne / he demaunded and knewe wel / how the other barons had 1 
don to fore hym. And therfor he cam in to constantynoble 8 with 
Hewai^ a fewe of his companye. Themperour 4 receyued hyni wyth grete 12 

noph waii Io y e an $ honour / They spak of many thynges to gydre. And! 

by'th.Ern- a ^’ er > tyke as other barons had! don, he dyde hommage, and made 

per°r. oth of feaulte / Themperour gaf to hym grete yeftes / and to alle 

them of his companye, whan he and his peple had abyden and 16 
soioumed there, by the wylle of themperour he made his peple 
He joined passe ouer. And lie hym self wente after vnto the other barons / 

crusader#, whiche with grete Ioye receyued hym, And spak moche to gydre of 

and they theyr auentures of the waye. And ofte they were in counseyl, how 20 

together, they shold doo fro than forthon / they were moche displesyd for 

Hiid were very tv * * 

impatient, taryeng' of the other barons whom they abode / It was not longe 

because the J ° J I O 

rest of the after, but that the messagers of the Erie of Tholouse and of the 
arrived not, lyisaliop of puy were come. And tolde how theyr lordes cam / and 24 
that they were nygh / And shold be liastely in constantynoble. 8 

c*if. as, bk .] 6 Of the mayntiene of the hooste that therle of Tho¬ 
louse and the bisshop of puy brought ouer see. 

cap" x\v°. 28 

The^Eari of ^ t Hyse tweyne noble men departed to gydre out of their 
the Bishop of countrees with grete nombre of peple with them / They were 

Puy were ° 1 r ' J 

bymaoy"' 84 accom P an yed with many valyaunt and puyssaunt men of theyr 
powerful"^ countreyes. Ther was fyrst William, bisshop of Orenge / Kay bout, 32 
“*"• erle of the same cyte / Gaste de bedyers / Giralt de roussylon / 

Guillem de montpeliers / Guillem, erle of forestes / Raymont peles / 
centon de heart / Guillem de Amaneux / And many other barons 

1 Fr. planinrevx, fertile. 2 Orig. receyned. 

* Orig. constautynoble. 4 Orig. Themperonr. 

6 Orig. eoustantyuoble. 



85 


Ch. XLV.] Their Privations in crossing Dalmatia. 

moche worshipful, whiche for the seruyse of oure lord lefte theyr 
countrees, theyr lygnages and alle theyr delytes. They cam alle in They wn red 
to lombardye, and passed by the syde of aquylee. And aftir cam 
4 in to the londe called Ister / ffro thens in to dalmace, whiche is 
a grete contrey bytwene hongrye and the see adryane / Therin be '»»«»• 
fore Archiebisshopps / Iadre / spalete, Antibare, and Kaguse / The 
peple of that contre is cruel and moche acustomed to robbe and to The people of 

1 * this country 

8 slee / There be montaynes, and the londe is ful of depe waters “ nd 
rennyng / And large mareyses in suche wyse that there is but lytil 
londe gaynable 1 / Beestes ther be grete plente in the pastures by 
whiche they lyue / Neuertheles they that dwells nygh the see / ben 
12 of other maner lyuyng of habyte & of langage / ffor they speke 
Kommant / 2 And the other speke not but as they be nourysshid 2 / 

The noble men of whom I spak / camen in to this londe. And The» noble- 

A ' men and their 

had ther many grete trauayllys and diseases for the wynter, which 
16 was ouer cold, And for the contre, whiche was euyl gamysshyd of gjjjjj 
vytaylles / they hadde merueyllous grete suffraunce, ffor alle the land - 
peple of the countree for feer of the pylgryms had lefte cytees, 
castellys, and townes for to flee and hyde them in montaynes. 

20 They had bom theder alle theyr thynges / ffrom thens they pour- 
siewed the pylgryms / And them that were olde / seke and feble, 
and taryed after the hoost, they slewe alle / The erle whiche was 
wyse toke hede of the hoost / The other barons he sente to fore / 

24 he kepte alwey the rier garde with grete nombre of his peple wel 

armed aboute hym / the ayer of the contre was so ful of mystes The »ir mi 
and so thycke / that they byhynde myght vnneth folowe them to andmisttKt 
fore; ffor this londe, as I said to fore, is ful of ryuers and rennyng scarcely tee 
28 waters / of lakes and mareys / that a grete nyle 3 sourdeth euery “J^ey^ 
day / it semed that it shold neuer sesse / On that other syde the 
sclauouns and the dalmaces ‘that knowe the places and the coun- [* leaf to] 
trees made on them many assaultes at certayn paas / and slewe 
32 many of them that were vnarmed. The Erie and the good men of u^SlSui. 
the hoost closed them in, And slewe many of them. And many conunoaiiy. 
moo shold haue slayn / yf the wodes & their retraytes had not 
be so nyghe / Somtyme it happed that therle toke of them a lyue { 

36 And made to smyte of theyr feet and handes / And lefte them lye 

1 Fr. gaingnable», capable of being cultivated. 

2—2 Fr. "les antres ne parlent se Etclaennois , non ,"—the others speak 
nothing but the Sclavic tongue. 

3 Fr. nisle, fog, mist. 



86 The Emperor sends Ambassadors to the Earl of Toulouse. [Ch. XLVI. 

in the waye for to fere 1 with the other that cam after / In this 
After three maner they were thre wekes in that londe in grete paryl / And in 
peril and grete mvsease / After thev cam in to a castel named serdre 2 / there 

discomfort, 3 J / / . _ . _ 

they came to they founde the kyng of sklauonye. The Erie that was wel he- 4 
thttklnfof s P°^ en / s P ft k moche fayr to hym / and gaf to hym largely grete 
Sciavoma. yeftes and Iewellys / ffor he hoped ther by that he wold haue 
holden his peple in peas, And haue don hem had couenable market 
Neither by of vytaylles / But 3 it auaylled not / ffor neuer for prayer, ne for no 8 
Ey'presents seruyse / myght they as wage 4 his courage / ne mollyfye the peple 
moitify tiie of the countre / But they founde them more cruel and! more vyllan- 
country. 0 us than to fore. Thus were they foure wekes after in this sorowe, 

ffor they were fourty dayes in passyng this contre / Aftir cam they 12 
to duras. 

Ambassadours of themperour to the sayd Erie and 
bisshop / And of the contenue of his lettres / And 
of the daunger wherin the said bisshop was 16 
thenne / capitulo xlvj“ 

t Hemperour had in suspection the comyng of therle / by cause 
that he knewe wel that he was a moche wyse man and! of 
grete courage. And wel herd saye that he had with hym grete 20 
The Emperor plente of good men / Therfore he sente to them to duras noble men 
the Eari of of his londe that delyuerd to hym lettres fro themperour, which 

Toulouse and .... . . , 

the Bishop of spak in this maner after the salewyng 1 / “ The good renomme that 

renneth of the thurgh the world 1 , hath made vs to haue eertayn 24 
tydynges / that thou art a man of grete wytte, of grete power, and! 
of grete prouesse / Therfore we moche desyre to see the, and 
honoure as hym that we loue of good herto, and preyse / And we 
praying them praye the moche acertaynly, ami requyre for a grete yefle / that 28 
lanTwuhout thou c ' 00 ^y peple passe our contrees without oultrages ami doyng 1 
doing harm, harme. And haste the to come to vs, alle sure to haue oure grace 
and oure bounte; we haue commanded! that vytaylles and other 
necessytees shal be sold to thy peple at prys resonable ” / whan the 32 
p if. 4 o, bk.] Erie and alle the barons herde thise tydynges by thyse lettres, they 
barons a 'were d vvere 8^“*® 5all( I ioyous / ffor they had! longe suffred! grete diseases / 
Ig-J- They toke theyr waye by forestes and! by rtiontaynes, and! passed 
letters these of Epyre. Aftir they cam in to pelagonne, where they 36 

1 Fr. pour espoenter leg avtres," to frighten the others. 

2 Fr. Scedre. 3 Orig. Bnt. 1 Fr. “ afoucir son coeiir." 



87 


Ch. XLVII.] The Earl of Toulouse will not do Homage. 

fonde moche grete plente of alls goodes / The valyaunt bisshop of 
puy lodged hym on a day fer fro the hoost in a fayr place that he 
founde / and in the nyght the bougres assaylled hym in his lodgys The rnnhop 
4 and toke hym / But by cause he was necessarye to cristiente our by 
lord sauyd hym, that they slewe hym not / ffor one of the barbaryns s» ri "' s - 
demaunded of hym gold / therfore he defended hym fro the other, rescued from 

d&nsor find 

that they slewe hym not / In the mene whyle the noyse was herde hjsjMe’pre- 
8 in the hoost. Thenne they ranne to armes / and syth ran on them / Christianity. 
And reeouured the bisshop with alle his thynges / On the morn 
they toke theyr waye and passed salenyke 1 / And alle macedonie / 

And after grete trauaylles and many ioumeyes they cam to a cyte 
12 named Redost / Thether cam the messagers of themperour agayne / AtRedost, 
And spak to the erle, prayeng 1 hym in theyr lordes name / that he 
wold come to fore his hooste with a fewe of his companye in to ^j, m also 
constantynoble / Messagers ther were also fro the barons that had ^”' n h 8 e er * 
16 passed the braas / And requyred the same by mouthe, And by 

lettres fro theyr lordes. The erle hym self had sente messagers to ^Jperor 1 .' 6 
fore to knowe the beyng 1 of the countre / and of the barons. And 
they were retomed, whiche acorded moche to the same, and eoun- 
20 seylled hym to doo that themperour requyred. 


How the Erie of Tholouse beyng with themperour 
wold not do howtmage to hym, and of the despyte 
that themperour dyde / ca / xlvij® 

24 b Y the prayer of so moche peple therle muste nedes doo soo at 

theyr instaunce / And thus lefte his hooste / And cam in to The Earl 

complied, 

constantinoble with a fewe of his meyne / many messagers encount- «md was «>* 
red hym, whiche alle cam for to fetche hym / whan he cam to fore 
28 themperour he was well receyued with moche grete chere and ioye 
of hym, and 2 alle the barons of the palays. After themperour dj’de 
to be sayd to hym / and requyred hym right swetly / that for to 
haue alwey alyaunce and amytee with hym / And also for the grete 
32 prouffyt that he shold haue therof, he shold make hommage to be would not 
themperour / lyke as alle the other had don / he answerd shortly to thl Em- y 
that he wold none make ne doo to hym. Themperour had grete At thj5 the 
desdayne, and was moche wroth / he sente to fetche the conestables veTywrotul" 5 
36 of his souldyours, and for them that had the charge of his men 3 of P ieaf«: 


1 Orig. saleuyke. 


2 Orig. aud. 



88 The Emperor treats (hem treacherously. [Ch. XLVIII. 

and com- Arnies / And! commaunded them secretely in counseyl, that they 
men t« do^aU shold auyse theyr tyme and! poynt, and smyte in to the hooste of 
theycon |d to xhe Erie / And! doo to them alle the harme they myghte, And slee 
grete plente of them / This dyde Themperour 1 comaunde them 4 
the more surely / by cause that he wyste wel that they that were 
on that othersyde myght not helps them, And! by cause they were 
his 2 men 3 they wold! not sone greue them* / And! had! commaunded! 
that alle the shippes to here ouer vytaylle, sholde come hastely 8 
ageyn in to the Cyte, So that they on that other syde shold not 
come ouer agayn / 4 ffor euer he had! suspection thassemble of oure 
peple 4 / And! therfore he made them to passe ouer eche after other 
The great as they cam / The grete chere that he made to them / And the grete 12 
welcome th»t yeftes that he gaf, cam more by barate and of drede than of loue 
Srmadere or iar § esse / Blit oure peple, and specially the ffrenssmen, myght 
but treachery n ot byl eue that this Ioye that he made to them / ISTe the Eychesse 
t"on d ' cep " that he gaf myght come of ony trayson ne of euyl / They knewe 16 
not by experyenee so moche thenne as they dyde afterward. 


How themperour, for tauenge 5 hym on therle / made 
his Conestables tenbusshe them / and assaylle 
the hoost of therle / ea / xlviij® 20 


He conestables whiche had commandement of Themperour, 1 
The Greeks t spak to gydre to theyr men / And made a busshement nyghe 
ambush, and to the hooste of the Erie of Tholouse / In the nyght, whan 
Eari;» army they had supposed alle well to be assured, themperours peple smote 24 
in emong them, and slewe and wonnded many or they were awaked 


The pilgrims 
put their 
assailers to 
flight, but 
were much 
disheartened 
by the 
treftcherv of 
the Greeks. 


and apperceyued it / But whan the crye arroos / And the noble 
men of thooste apperceyued the trayson, they armed them and 
reteyned theyr peple that began to flee / and after ran vpon them 28 
of themperour, And slewe many / and chassed the remenaunt. On 
the morn they of the hooste began to be moche esmayed of the 
trauaylle that they / had suffred in the nyght / And of the trayson 
of the grekes / and theyr hertes began to 6 cole / and to faylle of 32 
the purpoose of theyr waye and pylgremage. And not only the 


1 Orig. Themperonr. 

2 Fr. ri homes, his liege men, that is, they had sworn fealty to him. 

3—3 Fr. “ne li nviroient mie si legierement," they would not for a light 
thing injure him. 

4 Fr. “ Car tovjours avoit il souspegonnevte Vassembles de nos gens," 

6 Orig. taueuge. 6 Fr. refraidier. 



89 


Ch. XLVIII ] The Emperor tries to appease them. 

smal & comune peple, but many of the grete .& noble men had 
forgoten theyr vowes and theyr honours, and wold haue retorned 
home vnto theyr countrey. But the noble bisshop of Puy / and! Bujujiegood 
4 'the Bisshop 2 of Orenge were emonge them, and! many good!, wyse, [i ir. 41> b k.] 
relygyous men ancf clerkys, that prechyd! to them the wordes of our ^“/ n “" d 6n . 
lord, and recomfortod them moche wel / And shewde them that yf “,““™|* d oon - 
they retoumed, they shold lese thonour of this world / And also of 
8 that other. Thus with grete peyne they reteyned them, whan the 
erle, whiche was in Constantynople, herde of the trayson that was when the 

, . 0 Earl heard 

don to hym in his hoost, he was as a man out of his wytte, & of the 

J 1 -hiii Emperor’s 

anon sente his men to themperour / And* sente hym word that he twaaonhe 
12 had betrayde hym. ffor whyles he reteyned hym and made hym J’™” 1 ' w,tl1 
good chere, he had doo slee his peple by trayson / And sente worde 
herof to the barons that were on that other syde, prayeng them as 
his bretheren that they wold come to hym to auerage it. wel may 
16 ye knowe that yf therle had power sufficient, he wold not haue 
departed tyl he had auengyd hym; And that it shold haue ben 
dere bought / ffor he was a man of grete courage, And forgate not 
lyghtly shame don to hym / Themperour sawe that this thynge was The Emperor 
20 goon ouer ferre, in suche wyse that he repented hym / that he had had gone too 
so commaunded in his angre and hastynes, and hasted hym moche ^ss^Bohe- 
for to sette counseyl in this werke / And sente / for Buymont and 
therle of fflaundres to come and speke with hym / by cause he wold ^^“ t i,e 
24 sende them for to appese therle of Tholouse / They cam, whiche ^, e of To "' 
were moche angry of this that was don / They wente to therle in 
the name of themperour / But they sayd to hym more on theyr 
owne behalue than of tliemperours / They shewde hym wel that it 
28 was not tyme ne place for tauenge his shames that had ben don to 
hym in the seruyse of oure lord, ffor it shold be empesshement 
vnto the grete werke that they had enterprised for to saue theyr 
sowles / And on that other syde, yf they wolde so doo, they had 
32 not the power ne puyssaunce; therfor it were better to hyde their 
thoughtes / than to discouere theyr hertes, to theyr domage and! 
shame / the Erie, thus angry, was no fool / but 3 souffred that his The Eari, 
wytte vaynquysshe his angre / And said that he wold submette to ["°{j 1 | > i j^Jf d 
36 thyse two noble men that spak to hym, and byleue them / They 
cam to themperour priuely, 4 and shewd to hym al the fowle dede 
and werke that was commysed / Themperour vnderstode the grete 
yre that they had in their hertes / & sente for therle to come to 
2 Orig. Bisslop. Orig. bDt. 4 Orig. prinely. 



90 


The Earl of Toulouse does Homage. [Cb. XLIX. 


hym in to his palays / & excused hym to fore alle pryue, & 
apperte, & estrangers, that he had not comanded this fayte to be 
doon / but it displesyd hym moche / And yet he, beyng without 
The Emperor culpe and blame therof, he was redy to restore to the Due alle the 4 
[i leaf is] dammages that 1 were don to his hooste after his power.' Thus 


make good 
the damage 
done by his 
men to the 
Crusuders. 


euery day by day / and more and more myght wel be perceyued the 
grete hate that the grekes had to the latyns, And of the desloyal 
felonnye that themperour had in his herte / ayenst oure peple / but 8 


it must be suffred / fifor it myght not thenne be amended. 


How at thynstaunt prayer of the barons of the 
hooste / The Erie made hommage to themperour / 
whiche gaf grete yeftes to hym and his. 12 

Capitulo xlix? 

a Fter the counseyl of the other barons / the erle was therto 
meuyd / And by the grete prayers of themperour, that he dyde 
hommage to hym, and sware to hym feaulte, lyke as the other had 16 
doon / And the pees was affermed emong them. Themperour gaf 
to them so grete yeftes / that alle they were merueyllously esmayed / 
The other barons, that were come ouer agayn on the hether syde, 
receyued n'ewe yeftes and presentes. After, they passed the braas, 20 
and retoumed in to bethnie. And they prayd moche the erle that 
he shold not longe tarye and abyde there, the Erles hoost cam in 
constant"- to Constantynoble / And he made them passe ouer the braas, & to 
his men en- lodge with the other: he hym self abode in the toun, for certeyn 24 

camped near v 

the others, necessytees 2 * that he had do to doo and! to ordeyne / And! he, as a 
The Eari moche wyseman, prayde and Incited ofte themperour / that he 
to perBnade shold enterpryse the seruyse of our lord, And that he wold be lord 
saifm with™’ an< ^ ca Py* a y n °f all® the hoost / where as were so many noble men / 28 
them. And he had hope that our lord shold sende to hym suche honnour 
that he shold delyuere his peple and londe by hym / 8 wel coude the 
Erie make to hym remonstrance / acordyng to the barons whiche 
had spoken in this mater 8 / Themperour answerd to them alle in 32 
TheEmjeror one maner / that this pylgremage 4 was a moche hye thynge / and 
that lie much that he moche desyred the pardon / And aboue alle other thyng 1 the 

desired to go. J r 1 J D 

2 Orig. uecessytees. 

s —3 Yr. “ Bien sgaroit le conte hti monstrer, selonc ce que leu autre8 
barons Ini avoient monstri qitil jyarlast, et euxmesm.es en avoient partt.” 

4 Orig. pylgrenagr. 


Finally, the 
Earl of Tou¬ 
louse swore 
fealty to the 
Emperor, 
as the other 
great barons 
had done. 


The Earl 

flrrivnl 4i\ 



91 


Oh. L.] They go to Niccea. 

company e of so hye noble men plesyd hym nioche. And about Bat we coun- 
hym and bis empyre he sayd he had moch cruel peple and moch 
vntrew, as the Bougres, the comans, and other that gladly wold! doo "“““fdbi" 1 
4 harme to hym and to his londe, and conquers his Empyre, as nioche ‘ 

as they myght gete / And therfore it were grete parylle for me to 
withdraws fro my Countreye / well and fayre he excused hym 
withoute forth / But that he saytl 1 to oure 1 peple was but trycherye [> ir. 42 , bk.] 
8 and falsehed; ne he had neuer talente to helpe our peple / But 
thought wel in his herte how he myght noye them to his power / 

They that were ouer the braas / The Due Godeffroy / Buymont / 
therle of fflaundres / And the Bisshop of Pny, aduysed and ordeyned 
12 theyr afEayres for them / And sayde they wold drawe them to ward Thegreat^ 
Nycene / ffor to abyde there the other Barons that were comyng 1 on 
the waye / whan they approched a cyte which was named Nyco- Zmtng 
mede / which is the oldest Cyte of the Countre of Bythyne / Be ye ot the othet *- 
16 certayne that Pieter theremyte, with a fewe peple that had abyden onu« way 
there, yssued oute of the poure 2 place / And had ben there for the jeredPeter 
wynter. And cam ayenst thyse Barons, and salewed them. They 
made to them good chere / And demaunded them of theyr waye 
20 and Ioumeyes / They gaf to them 3 gret.e yefets, of whiche they had 

grete nede. 3 Pieter tolde to them theyr grete mesauentures, 4 And who recount* 
sayde that it cam by theyr owne oultrage and folye. Thyse noble tunes, 
men of whome I haue sayd, had peple ynowgh, and cam to Nycene / 

24 And assieged it the XV / day of maye / They lefte places ynough 

for to lodge the other Barons that cam after. The Erie of Tho- mencethe 
louse, whan he had do made suche thynges as hym neded in 
Constantynoble / he toke leue of Themperour / whiche gaf to hym Ma r- 
28 ryche yeftes alle newe / And cam after hastely to the syege of 
Nyeene. 

How due Robert of Normandye, and other here 
named, approched Constantinoble / and made 
32 hommage to themperour. ca“ 1° 

N the whyle that they leyde the syege / Bobert due of Robert, Duke 

§ ii i* of Normandy, 

i normandye, and other noble men with hym; that is to saye, and other 
Steuen therle of Chartres and of bloys / Eustace broder of 

2 (trig, ponve. 

s-3 Caxton has translated here very freely. Fr. “telement quit: eurent 
grandement lews neeessites .” 4 Orig. mesanentures. 



92 


sent mes¬ 
senger * to 
the Emperor. 


They had 
spent the 
winter in 
Apulia, but 
in the spring 
had crossed 
to DuroB, 

[5 leaf 48] 

and after 
long marches 
arrived in 
Constanti¬ 
nople. 


The Emperor 
welcomed 
them, and 
demanded 
the oath of 
fealty, which 
they gave. 


They then 
pursued their 
way to 
Nicsea, 
where they 
were received 
with great 
joy. 


Robert of Normandy arrives. [Ch. LI. 

Due Godeffroye, sente to the Emperour and to other Barons theyr 
messagers / In theyr companye were Steven 1 daubmable, Alayn 
fergaunt / And Conayn, two hye Barons of Brytayne; The erle 
Rotheron of Perse, Rogyer de Bameuylle / Thyse and! other ynowgh 4 
were 2 in the Yere to fore, in thentre of Wynter, comen In 8 to 
Puylle ant? in to Calabre, whiche 4 ben good Countreyes / Whan 
the newe tyme was comen / they assembled theyr peple / And 
ordeyned theyr passage on the see, And cam to duras / And by 8 
cause they had taryed so 6 longe, they hasted them moche, and 
passed Macedomone and the two thaarses, And by grete Ioumeyes 
ant? grete trauaylles cam vnto Constantynople. Themperour sente 
for them to come to hym / They that knewe how the other barons 12 
had don, cam in to his palays to hym / He receyued them with 
moche grete I'oye / Alle his Barons made to them grete 6 feste / He 
spak to eueryche by hym self ryght swetly, 7 and acqueynted 8 with 
hem 7 / After dyde do requyre of them hommage and feaulte. They 10 
dyde as the other had don that were passed to fore / And sayd it 
was no shame to ensiewe thensample of so valyaunt men, ne to doo 
that they had don / They becam his men, and dyde hym hommage, 
anc? swore to hym / Themperoure receyued them in his grace / And 20 
gaf to them so grete yeftes that they were abasshed alle / ffor the 
yeftes were so ryche and so dyuerse / that they neuer to fore had 
seen none such / And after toke theyr leue 9 of Themperour / And 
passed the braas of Seynt George / And cam with grete haste to 24 
Nyceno j where as the hooste of cristiente abode for them. The 
Ioyc was grete whan they were comen, whiche were the laste / They 
lodged them in the places that were kept for them. 

How themperour sente for to destroye oure Cristen 28 
men one his seruaunt, faynyng to be a trewe 
Conduyteur & guyde. ca° lj° 

1 Fr. Etienne d’Aubcmarle. 

2 Caxton has here omitted “ aveeques le contc de Elandres, et avee Ihton 
le Maine'' 

3 Misled by the recurrence of the words “Apulia and Calabria" Caxton 
has here omitted several lines. Fr. “ en Pnille et en Calabre. Mais quand 
les antres passerent jnsques a Duras, ceulx-ci pour la pretie de Viter y 
rassemblerent levrt gens, et se remiserent en Piiille et en Calabre qui tout 
moult bonnes terres.” 4 Orig. whehe. 8 Orig. grede. 

7 "V 7 Fr. "et moult bien les aeointa," and received them kindly. 

8 Orig. acqneynted. 8 Orig. lene. 



93 


Ch. LII.] All assemble before Niecca. 

Atyns 1 was a Greke, and wel aequeynted with themperour, u 

1 the moost fals, vntrewe man that euer was. And so he wel *n<i deceitful 

Greek, 

semed / 2 ffor he had! his nosethrellys remuled! and tourned. 2 
4 This felawe, by the commandemeut of his lorde, wente with oure who, by the 
men / And? sayd? that he wold condayte 3 them, ftor he knewe wel Emperor, 
alle the Contre and the paases' by whiche they woldf passe and goo / ottr m8n - 
But Themperour dyde alle this for euyl / ffor he trusted in the 
8 falsenesse of this fals greek / whiche counseylled them allewey to 
theyr dammage / And was alway as the serpent emonge the elis. 

And themperour had charged hym for to late liyrn wyte euery day 
how the boost behaued them, and of theyr purpose / And therupon 

12 he wold sende to hym his wylle and 4 entente / At this siege oure at thanes* 
peple first assembled to gydre, and the Capyteyns and barons spak theCruMde™ 
of theyr comune 5 werkes and eounseyls / ffor to fore they had ail 

neuer ben to gydre, ne seen eche other / 6 ther was knowen together. 

16 certaynly 7 by nombre and by extymacion to 8 fore Nycene, 6 whan [“it.is,bk.] 
they were alle assembled / sixe ,C / thousand men a fote / And 1 of There were 

- - , „ ' , ' , , , , ' , 600,000 foot- 

knyglites and men of armes on horsbak, an hundred thousand or eoidiera and 
J D 100,000 
moo / They alle had moche grete wylle for to employe them wel in 

20 this wane / And desyretl 1 moche at this fyrst begynnyng 1 of theyr 
warre to enterprise so liyely and doo so wel / that alle other peple 
shold doubte them. 


Of the situacion of Nycene / And how our peple 
24 approched therto / Merueyllyng of the place and 
of the strengthe / cap 0 lij° 

o F the cyte of nycene, knowe ye that it had be vnder tharclie- 
bysshop of nychomede / But themperour constantyn made it to 
28 be taken away fro the power of this archebysshop / and it was a *•«***»• 
place of honour / by cause 9 the fyrst of the iiij grete counseylles 
had be sette there / ffor in the tyme of scynt syluestre the pope 

1 Fr. Latins. Tail. Latinus. 

2-2 Fr. " Car il avoit vnes narines rennilees." Lat. “ nans habeas 
inutilas in signvm mentis perversae." Caxton evidently read remuUes, and 
then not understanding the word, gave it an English termination, and 
transferred it bodily to his translation. 

2 Orig. condnyte. 4 Orig. aud. 6 Orig. comnne. 

8-* One of the important verbs is left out in this sentence. Fr. “ selonc 

ce quit fat eertainement seen par nombre ct par estimacion ilz eurent dcvant 
Xicene," etc., i. e. they had before Nicene. etc. 

2 Orig. certayuly. * Orig. canse. 


j of the four 
• great councils 
had been held 
there. 



94 


Description of Niccea, [Ch. LIII. 


in the time ther was a patriarke of constarctinoble, named alexawdre / & 
peror con- emperour coMstawtin / ther was a mescreauwt named arrius / which 
there^wiwa^ mesprised certeyn poyntes of the fayth / & many men folowed 
Arnue. hym. therfor assembled in the Cyte of Nycene iij. C. xviij. 4 
nesembied*at prelates / Ant} there was disputed! ayenst this popelican. And by 
condemned wytnes of scripture, and by thaecord of holy men that were there, 
hie heresy. Arryus was condempned! and! his mysereaunce / Syth after, in the 
tyme of an another constantyn, Emperour, whiche was sone vnto 8 
ayorne, 1 Assembled! another counseyl 3 in the same place / whiche 
The seventh was the / vij / Thenne was adryan pope of Rome : And Tareste 3 
church was was patriarke of Constantinople, there were dampned som mys- 
here, when byleuyd peple, that said / that alle the ymages that were made in 12 
holy chirche were ayenst the fayth, And they were false cristen 
men and 4 vntrewe that suffred! them. This cyte of Nycene stondeth 
in a playn, but the montaynes ben nyghe / And! it lacked! not moche, 

The country 6 but they be round aboute 5 / The countrey is moche fayr and 16 
fertile *" d plentyuous / “the grete forestes ben by a ryuer nyghe the cyte, 
toward the weste, moche longe and! brode 6 / By that ryuer the 
shyppes brynge vytaylle and other marchandyse in to the cyte; 
whan it is a grete wynde, the grete wawes smyte sore on the’walles. 20 
On that other part of the toun ben grete dyches, brode and depe, 

The walls of And ful of water, of a lake and other ffontaynes. The walles 

the city are 

aiidtBck gh * a ^ 0U ^ e strong©, hye / thy eke / And? fulle of grete Tourettys / 
p leaf 4 fj The Peple within 7 the toun were fiers and hardy, and wel aduysed 24 


and Lite 
people fierce 
and hardy, 
and skilful In 


of armes 8 / And grete plente there were / whan oure men approched 
it, they merueylled moche of the strengthe of the toun. 


arms. 


How the puyssaunt Turke Solyman, with a grete 
hoost, aduysed tyme and houre to assayle and 28 
smyte on our peple, for to reyse the siege / 

Capitulo liij u 

s Olyman, of whome I haue spoken to fore, whiche was a moche 
puyssaunt Turke, had the seygnorye of this cyte / and of alle 32 

1 Fr. Irene. Lat Irenae. 2 Orig. couuseyl. 

3 Fr. Tareses. 4 Orig. aud. 

5- s p r _ “queles ne soient tout entour” but that they surround it entirely. 

6- 6 Fr. “ Les grant forez sont delez; un» lai» est pres de la ciU moult 
lez et moult Ions devers Occident.'' Caxton’s French text gave “river” 
(fleuve), which he has followed, but the Latin and the other French transla¬ 
tions give “ lake” (lais). 8 Fr. “anises d'armes,” skilled in armes. 



95 


Ch. LIV.] Some Details about Solyman. 

the countre aboute. he was moche wyse / hardy and? manly of his Solyman was 
body, ffro the tyme that he herde of the comynge of our peple / and manly, 
he was gamysshed! of his frendes and soldyours for to defends his 
4 cyte and his londe. An vncle of his, named Belphet,(18) moche 
puyssaunt and ryche, had late conquerd alle the londe that is fro 
the braas of seynt george vnto surry / whiehe is / xxx / iourneyes 
longe / In that tyme Romanus diogenes was Emperour, 1 whiehe 2 
8 was to fore alexes / that was deposed / This belphet, soudan of impiiet gave 
perse, had gyuen the gretter parte of the londe to solyman his f* I [J 8 0 [ o tl,eir 
neuew / in suche wyse that he had alle the londe fro the cyte of solyman, 
tarce, that is in Cylyce, vnto the braas of seynt george / Thus this 
12 Solyman 3 had his baylles in the town of Constantinoble, 3 whiehe 
resseyuyd his passages 4 and custommes of the marchans of the 
toune and of other. This solyman was withdrawen to the montaynes 
with as moche peple as he myght haue, ax/ myle fro the boost, 

16 And dyde lye in a wayte and espye how he myght fynde the maner 
to reyse the siege / yf he had mocht / 

How Solyman, beyng in the montaynes, sente his 
messagers to them of the toun, & of the 
20 comfort that he gaf to them. ca" liiij 0 

Wre peple cam to fore the tonn, and withoute acorde and rim cm- 
o without ony ordenauwee began tassaylle, in suclie wyse that vested 

. Nicsea, but 

they within myght not yssue / ne they without entre. But thejuiijMt-,, 
24 the grete lake that toucheed the town destroubled moche, ffor they abietogoami 
myghte, maulgre the Hooste, goo and come by the see as ofte as Lake, 
they wolde / Oure Peple had none shippes, ne myght not deffende 
the lake. Certaynly they had besyeged 1 6 it wel by londe / Solyman, [* if. «t, bv.] 
28 that sawe this cyte thus enuyronned with peple, wherof he was 
wroth & angry / And doubted moche that they of the toun shold 
be abasshed of the grete multitude, ther for he sente two of his solyman sent 
preuy messagers, And commaunded* them in his name that they to the 
32 shold entre in to the toun / And saye thyse wordes, “ I holde you 
so valyaunt men, and of suche prouesse, that I byleue certaynly 

1 Orig. Emperonr. 2 Lat. “ qni ante hune Alexium fnerat tertius." 
s-» Caxton’s corrupt French text does not follow the Latin very closely 
here. The text of the Historiens Occidentals gives a more correct version; 

“ Mn tel maniire nets quil avoit ses baillez, d’avtre part, en la ieue de 
Constantinople,” i. e. he had his bailiffs just in sight of, not within Con¬ 
stantinople. 1 JPr. peages, tolls for passage. 



96 


Solyman’s Messengers are taken Prisoners. [Ch. LV. 

toiling the that ye preyse and sette lytil by this peple, that ben comen fro so 
not to fear fer contreyes, where the sonne goth doun. And they be wery, euyl 

tile Cru- . , , , , , , ' . , 

saders, who ordeyncd and gamysshed, and haue none horses that may endure 
with travel trauayll / we ben fressh, and our horses rested in our contre / 4 

and poorly u • ' 

armed; -wlierof it is no doubte we be better than they an C / tymes. And! 

that ye maye wel knowe, ffor it is not longe syth that we dis- 
confyted in one day moo than /1. M / Therfor conforte you and 
mayntene you as noble men, if or to morn, to fore the houre of none, 8 
and to be ye shal be without 1 faylle delyuerd of them alle / but be ye wel 
would come aduertysed & redy, that whan we smyte in the lioost / ye opene 
tod"hver day youre 2 yates and! yssue vpon them in suche wyse / that ye thenne 

be parteyners of the vyctorye of thonour / & of the proufEyt ” / 12 


How the messagers of Solyman were taken by our 
men, and by them was knowen the couyne of the 
sayd solyman. cap 0 lv° 


t He messagers of Solyman cam upon the lake, And arryued a 16 
lytil ferre fro the toun. And after began tespye and! see how 
our people they myght entre in to the cyte / Oure peple apperceyuect them and! 
niMungen, ran on them, that one of them was slayn atte takynge / That other 
the other took was brought a lyue to fore the barons / they made hym to be 20 
prieoner. drawen and payned to saye the trouthe. he confessyd and sayde 
that Solyman had! sente them in to the cyte 3 ffor to gamysshe them 
& make them redy / ffor theyr lord! on the morn shold come 3 and 
After taring smyte sodanly in the hoost / the barons byleuyd hym wel. And 24 
*reat bar commaunded hym to be kept / And toke couwseyl emong them how 
took counsel, they shold! doo. Therle of Tholouse and 1 the bisshop of puy were 
ma™ 681 S ° ly * no ^ y et come vn ^° the hoost / The barons sente for them hastely 

for this thynge / They cam and! rode alle the nyght, in suche wyse 28 
that they cam in to the hoost to fore the sonne rysyng. The baners 
were displayed!, and! the trompes sowned. Ther was moche peple, 


who arrived ^ vnneth myght they lie lodged in the places that were kept for 
promised, ^ lem / Thenne Solyman at the hour of tierce / lyke as he sayd 1 that 32 

morning. was taken / cam doun fro the montayn in to the playn. Thenne 

[‘leaf *6] our peple that were 4 wel aduertysed armed them. And dyde do 


1 Orig. wtliiout. a Orig. yonre. 

3—3 Fr. “pour ettlx garnlr de ce quo leur seigneur vendroit le lende- 
main," to warn them that their lord would come the next day; garnir 
seems here to be used in its original German sense. 



9 ? 


Oli. LVI.J Solyman attacks the Crusaders. 

sowne the trompettes. Euery man drewe hym in to his bataylle 
as it was ordeyned / ami nioche quyckely 1 were alle sette in 
ordenaunce. 

4 How a grete bataylle of Solyman cam smyte vpon 
our peple, And of thende of the scarmuche. 

capitulo lvi° 

o F the hooste of Solyman departed a bataylle fro the other, 
wherin where 2 ,x.M / men on horsbak / And drewe them 
8 toward the gate right toward the south / Ther was lodged therle 
of tholouse. And this yate was delyuerd hym to kepe / But Soly- 
mau that the day to fore had espyed that waye and had seen no 
man there lodged / And wende that no man had ben there / ffor he 
12 knewe nothynge of the cornynge of therle ne his companye / this 
bataylle smote in emonge the peuple that were comen / They 
receyued them moche fiersly with glayues & swerdes / & sore 
adommaged them / 3 And made them to resorte agayn bakward. 8 
16 Solyman 4 that ensiewed made them to retoume with hym, and 
assembled to the peple of the erle of fflaunders / The due godefroye, 
buymont, and therle of thoulouse, aduysed and sawe that ther were 
so many of the turkes / that the erle of fflaunders myght not suft're 
20 alle. And adressyd theyre bataylle to that parte / And smote in 
emonge them. The medle was moche harde / and aspre 6 / And 
many turkes were slayn / Ther was so moche don and so wel / that 
Guy de gerlande, seneshal of the kynge of ffraunce, 6 Guy du 
24 puysett, Rogier de bameuylle / Thyse bare awey the prys to fore all 
other. But this bataylle endured wel an houre al hoole / In thende 
the turkes myght suffre nomore our peple / But were discomfyted 

1 Orig. qnyckely. 2 Fr. estoient, “ were,” not “ where.” 

3—3 Yr. “ et firent ressortir arriere.” 

4 According to the Latin original Soliman on returning, attacked, not 
the troops of the count of Flanders, but those of the count of Toulouse, and 
the count of Flanders came to his rescue with Godfrey of Boulogne and 
Bohemoud. Caxton’s translation is due to his corrupt French text. Lat. 
“cum ecce Solimannus, cum majoribus subsequens copiis eis, ref unde ns amir 
moi qui jam erawt dissvlvti, secum itervm in nostras redire compulit. At 
vero dux, dominus quoque Boammulns et conies Flandrensis, cum suis expe- 
ditionibus, ad unguem armati, videntes hostium majores advenisse cuneos et 
tarmas densiores, [et] gravi mnltitudine et animosa instantia cometis 
exeroitum supra vires fatigari, irrnunt unanimiter, et hostium se inferunt 
legionibus.” 

6 Fr. aspre, vigorous, sharp. 

8 Lat. Guido de Porsessa. A Buy de Posesse. 

GODF«EY. H 


One of So!y- 
man's batta¬ 
lions attacked 
the Ear! of 
Toulouse. 


Solyman 
driven back, 
returned and 
attacked 
them again. 


Many Turks 
were slain. 


After an 
hour's con¬ 
test they were 
forced to flee. 



98 


The Cru¬ 
saders were 
greatly en¬ 
couraged by 
this victory. 


They sent a 
thousand 
heads of the 
slain to the 
Emperor. 

[»lf.46,bk.l 


The great 
barons take 
counsel how 
to arrange 
the siege of 
Nycsea. 


Thev sent 
timber to 
make ma¬ 
chines. 


The Position of the Parons at the Siege. [Ch. LVll. 

and fledde away moche fowly / Our peple folowed them not ferre, 
ffor the montaynes and the wodes were ouer nere in which they 
fledde / But were of turkes elayn / iiij. thousand, and! som ther were 
a lyue taken / Oure peple had! moche grete ioye of this vyctorye, 4 
and! cam ageyn to theyr siege, and besieged the toun 1 as wel as 
they myghte for to angre and discourage them within the toun, 
whiche awayted after socoure. They made to be caste with engynes 
to them within the toun grete plente of heedes of the turkes that 8 
had ben slayn in the bataylle / The prisonners a lyue and a 
thousand heedes of the turkes they sente to themperour / He coude 
them grete thanke and had therof moche ioye. And sente to them 
agayne newe yeftes of Iewellys, of clothes of sylk and other 12 
thynges right largely / And commaunded to the marchauntes 2 that 
they shold lede vytaylle ynowe vnto the hooste / and other thynges 
necessarye. 

How oure barons were lodged in the sayd siege / of 16 
their mayntene / And how euery daye they en¬ 
forced 8 them tassaylle the toun / Capitulo lviil 

m Oche thought our barons how this cyte myght be assieged on 
alle partyes, ffor other wyse them semed they myght not gete it / 20 
By oomyn counseyl they lodged them alle / They sette ayenst the 
sonne rysyng the due and his two bretheren / Toward byse 4 were 
lodged buymont and 6 tancre and the other barons that were in 
theyr companye / 6 The due 7 of normandye and the erle of filaunders 24 
lodged by them to ward the south / The erle of tholouse,® hue le 
mayne, the bisshop of puy, therle of chartres, and other barons, 
many with alle their peple, were so lodged that alle the cyte was 
enclosed sauf the lake whiche was in the weste / And after sente 28 
they hastely in to the forest. And made to come grete plente of 
tymbre for to make engyns / Alle the carpenters of the hoost 8 and 

1 Orig. tonn. 

3 Fr. “ ilz s’effor cotent, n they exerted themselves. 

4 Fr. “devers Use,” toward the North. Lat. Septentrionalis. 

5 Orig. aud. 

6—6 Caxton has altered the sense here, by wrongly dividing his sentence, 
misled probably by his original, in which it is difficult to decide which is the 
correct division. A. gives the clearer and more correct reading—“ li quens 
de Flandres et li dns de Normandie se logterent liz auz: devers midi fu li 
quens de Toulouse" etc. 7 Orig. dnk. 8 Orig. hooost 



Oh. LVltt.] The Barons make an unsuccessful Assault. 99 

sawyers cam forth / of whom was grete nombre. Iu a lytil whyle 
reysed they engynes and slynges. And! made in therthe wayes and ai>d»iing» 
caues couerd for to fylle the dyehes and to myne the walles, 

4 Ther was grete caste of grete stones at the walles and tourettes / so xheycwt 

00 ‘ great stones 

that in many places the walles were clefte and broken in many 
partes / ffor to doo thyse thynges / they were wel .vii. wekes. Jj} a “*" y 
There were in this whyle many assaultes and fyghtes ofte to fore 
8 the yates / On a day the barons acorded that the toun ahold be 
assaylled; but this assault endamaged lytil the toune ne them Thej^Msauit- 
within. But ther were lost two valyaunt men / that one was but ctona^ed 
named! Bawdwyn handeron, 1 a ryche man and! a good! knyght of 
12 berry / That other was of Jflaunders named Bawdwyn of gauwt, 
noble and! hardy / -Thyse two wente so ferre to fore daye, that 2 the 
one was slayu with a stroke of a stone / 3 And that other with an 
Arowe / Guyllem, Erie of forest / And Galles de lylle, 3 thyse two 
16 were hye noble men / and assaylled moche that day. In this tyme 
deyde of sekenes in the hoost guy de possesse a moche good knyght. 

The hooste were sorouful of the deth of thyse noble men / but The army 
euery man 4 that our lord wold! gwerdone them perpetually in ^irowfuu^ 
20 heuen ffor the good seruyse that they deyde in. They were *»‘h oUwo 
honourably buryed / And after entended vnto theyr werke / 

6 How our barons made theyr eastellys of tree and ap- t* 
prouehed the toun. And how they within the 
24 toun brake one of them and slewe them with 
Inne. Capitulo lviij. 

o N a dav the capytaynes of the hooste were acorded! that the They decided 
eastellys that they had made shold! be drawen forth and aproche *° 

28 the walles / ffor eche of the greet men had commaunded to make 

1 Fr. Baudot 11 Chanderon. Lat. Calderon,. 

2— i Fr. “ ces deux s*estoient moult tiris auant, ce jour, taut qne? etc 
these two had gone so far in advance (of the others) that day, that, etc.— 

Caxton has mistaken “avant” for a preposition governing day, instead of 
an adverb modifying “ tiris.'* 

3- 3 Fr. “ li autres d'une sajete, et remest li assauz , vn autre jour fn 
recommenciez li assauz par avort des barons et fit occis d'une sajete, Guil- 
laums li quens de Fores, et Galles de Lyle. Caxton has ruined the sense 
here, by his “ bourdon.” He has omitted all between the two “ sajetes.” 

* Fr. “ tos avoient ferine esperance que nostre Seigneur, qui sn son 
service les prenoit i leur guerredonnoit moult hautement a tousjours Cax¬ 
ton has omitted, "had a firm hope" just before "that our Lord? 


H 2 



Herman of 
Germany and 
Henri 
D'Asque 
deviafe-a pow¬ 
erful engine. 


100 The Turks destroy the Engines of the Crusaders. [Ch. LlX. 

an engyne liastely in his parte / The erle herman of duchelond 
and* 1 henry dasque, that were good knyghtes and 2 enterprisers, had 
deuysed a thyng of a 3 grete tronke of an oke, and had sette theron / 
xx / knyghtes alle couerd aboue / And vnder they had men ynough 4 
for to myne the walle / They approuehed 1 the castel that it ioyned 
to the walle / The knyghtes aboue began to defifende them, And 
they vnder persed the walle. The turkes within had dressed the 
grettest part of theyr engyns to this castel, and many strokes had 8 
smeton so longe that wyth the strok of a grete stone 4 they brake 
alle and fylle doun to gydre 4 in suche wyse that neuer one 5 escaped 
aboue ne vnder, but alle were deed, There was grete sorowe in the 
hoost / And moche more shold be, ne .had not be the grete com- 12 
forte that they had in our lord / They lefte not herfore, but euery 
man payned hym more and more to greue them with Inne / And 
gaf to them so many assaultes day and nyght / that they lete them 
haue but lytil reste / but one thyng ther was that greued our peple 16 
moche / And that was that ther cam euery day in to the toune 
fresshe vytaylles and newe men / Armours and artyllery by the 
lake / And they coude not defende it, wherof they were moche 
marryd. 20 


The Turks 
broke this 
engine and 
killed all the 
knights 
within. 


Ouv men 
could not 
prevent the 
enemy from 
entering the 
city by the 
lake. 


Of the courcseyl that our men toke for tassiege the 
toun by watre for to constreyne them not for to 
entre ne yssue / cap 0 lix° 

h Erof wold our barons haue counseyl how they myght dis- 24 
trouble this comyng by water / They assembled and acorded 
that they wold sende of theyr knyghtes grete plente, wyse men, 

The baron, and men a fote and take alle the shippes at the see syde that they 
bring ships coude fynde, 6 and sette them vpon charyottes of the hoost and 28 

overland on 

Seiato 1 brynge suche as they myght brynge hoole. And 4 the other they 
this lake. shold parte in two pyeces or three. And also they wold sende to 

themperour and praye hym that he wold delyuer to them shippes / 
They that had charge of this werke cam to the see without taryeng* 32 
and fonde shippes grete plente, suche as they had nede of. And 
pif.w.bk.] by 7 the commauudement of themperour, whiche graimted gladly, 


1 Orig. amd. 2 Fr. “ entrepreneurs," enterprising. 

3 Fr. “ de grot trie de ehene," of large timbers of oak. 

4-4 Fr. “ 11 deffroisa et ch'eut tout ensemble," it broke in pieoes, and fell 
down in a heap. 

6 Or ig. oue. 


a Orig. fyude. 



Ch. LX.] The Barone assault the City again. 


101 


III one night 
they drew 
the Bhips 
seven mi lee 
overland. 

They soon 
launched 
them in the 
lake, 

and 

garnished 
them with 
sailors. 


drewe out of the water ynowgh, Thenne coupled they to gydre 
four 1 cartes or fyue after that the shyppes were, and sette them 
theron by force of peple al hole, and with many men drewe them 
4 forth with cordes and with trayse of the cartes in one nyght / vij, 
longe myle or more / Thise shippes were taken of and launched in 
to the lake moche hastely, ffor many hondes make light werke. 

And the peple wente therto with a good wylle. They had emonge 
8 them many maronners that coude wel shippecrafte / And they were 
sette therin, moche peple offerd them self to entre alle armed / they 
toke as many as neded, and garnysshed wel thyse shippes / Somme 
shippe had in an honderd / and other / 1. or xxx. or xx / after theyr 
12 gretenes / in suche wyse that the waye that they had in the lake, 

Oure men hadde taken from them, whan they of the hooste sawe that 
this waye of the laken was take from them, 2 they had grete Ioye. 

And hoped that the siege shold not endure / The turkes of the 
16 toun whan they apperceuyed that oure men had don so grete a 
werke and so stronge, They fyll in despayre and were abasshed and 
merueylled of the vygour of our peple that had don this in so short 
tyme / And thenne were they enclosed on alle sydes, and had loste 
20 the waye for theyr shippes. 

How after the Cyte was asseyged by water and by 
londe, oure men assaylled it / And of a Shotte 
that Due Godefroye dyde. Capitulo / lx" 

24 w Han the Barons sawe that theyr shippes were in the lake in 

suche wyse that no man myght greue them, Anon they dyde The i,mom 
do erve that alle men shold arme them and come to thassault, And »second 
it was acorded that eche of the barons shold assaylle in that parte 
28 where he~was lodged / they admonested and enforced theyr peple 
to doo wel / Thassault was more 3 / than euer it had be j There 
somme threwe out of thengyns grete nombre of stones / Euery man 
dyde his part: toward the south in the partye that was delyuerd 4 ' 

32 to therle of thoulose / there was an hye toure more grete than ony Thejnhicein 
of the other / by that tour was the palays, In whiche Solymans wyf man's wUa 
was. Therle had sette alle his entent for to breke this tour longe near the nail 
tyme / 6 £for he had doo throwen ther at grete stones 5 / And had 

1 Orig. fonr. 2 i. «. the towns-people. 

3 Fr. greindre , greater. 4 Orig. delynerd. 

5—5 Fr. “ Car il y art/it fait jeter deux grosses pervieres longuement," 



102 


A great Shot made by Godfrey, [Qh. LX. 


The Earl of 
Toulouse at* 
[} leaf 48] 
tacked this 
tower vigor* 
ously. 


The troops 
mined the 
walls, and 
threw such 
large stones 
at it, 

that they 
weakened it. 
Those within 
made a new 
wall of lime 
and stones. 


not broken one stone of the tour / And! by cause he wold 1 not for 
shame so leue it without takyng* of it. And ordeyned gretter 
1 stones alle newe, 2 which began to breke the creuaches of the same 
tour 8 / & with the strokes of the stones moclie powdre cam out 4 
of the clyftes / The peple -of the hoost apperceyued it / And sawe 
that the toure began to falle / they passed! the dyche / and! brought* 
engyns. vnto the walles. Ther began they with grete exploit to 
myne the walle and to perse it, they within caste grete stones upon 8 
the engyns / And! with shotte of handbow’es and! arbalestres they 
hurted 4 many of them that they sawe discouerd / And by cause 
they sawe that the 5 closyng* of the toure began to faylle / they walled 
it within forth with stones and chalk, and made a right stronge 12 
wall good and thycke / 6 Our men that were atte tour 6 had made an 
hole in the walle, that two men myght wel entre attones frely / 

On the walle in the parte where Due Godeffroye assaylled, ther 


a hugs Turk was a turke stronge, grete, & hardy, which dyde grete dommage 16 
msn greatly *° oure men / ^ lu '^ e man y with a strong* bowe turquoys that 
’ he had / And with a lytil of oure langage that he coude / cessed not 
to saye euyl and discourage them that assaylled and called them 
Cowardes. hit happed that due godeffroye saw it / And auysed 20 


hym many tymes and was merueyllously displesyd with hym / 7 And 
thought how he myght chevysshe to be at his ease, 7 he toke in his 
hand a arbaleste good and myghty / and! helde it bent til the turk 
cam agayn and abandouned 8 hym / The due toke his syght and 24 
Duke Godfrey marke and shotte at hym, & smote hym right thurgh the bely, 
bod^Mio that he fyl doun to the ground fro the walle / The crye and the 
hefeii down showtyng* began grete in the hooste and the ioye / The due had 
The Saracens grete honour and many good prayers therfore. the other sarasyns 28 
abashed of that were on that other parte of this deffenee were moche abasshed 

thi« feat. 


Caxton mistakes here : “ perriires ” (machines for casting stones) for 
“pierres” (stones). 

2-2 Caxton’s translation here does not make sense. Fr. “ Le jor ie 
V assault on commenga a veoir ever aces, en celle tour, qni se longnement 
iestoit tenne i. e. they commenced to see the crevices, instead of “ break¬ 
ing’’ them. 

3 Fr. “ menerent un chat” brought a cat, i. e. a covered shed. 

4 Orig. hnrted. 

6 Fr. clostnre, barriere, that which encloses. 

o-e p> r ii nos gens, qni estoit on chat,” our people who were in the shed. 

7-7 Fr. “ se pensa comment il porroit ce venchier,” and devised a plan 
for revenging himself. 

8 “ s’abandomia,” exposed himself, 



103 


CL LXI.] The Turks throw burning Oil on ov/r Men. 

and ferd that they deffended them the more cowardly. The other 
that were in the other partyes of the toun caste fro the tours stones 
vpon oure peple that were atte assault amt hurte many with castyng, 

4 shotyng, and throwyng* vpon oure engyns py tche / Oyle and grece They threw 
alle boyllyng* / Amt threwe also brondes and! other thynges bren- boilinggrea«e 

' upon our 

nyng* moche thycke in suehe wyse, that somme they brente. They men. 
that assaylled on the partye of therle of tholouse at the tour that I 
8 sayd to you to fore, laboured sore for to myne the walle / But one 
thyng destroubled them sore, what someuer they brak on the day / They reborn 
they within made it agayn in the nyght / in such wise that they 
were in wylle to leue it / And wrought more slowly than they day- 
12 dyde byfore, 1 wherfore a moche valyaunt knyght of 2 the hooste of [»if.48,bk.] 
the Normans cam right theder and admonested the assay lies 3 for to 
goo forth, he passed the dyche tofore with his helme laced / the a valiant 
shelde vpon his heed and brake vygorously 4 the walle, where as sailed the 
16 the turkes 6 had made agayn / But ther was none that folowed hym. but none foi- 
And they of the wallys threwe so grete stones on him and so thycke, ana^e was 
that they slewe hym in the presence of the other that were by / 

And after with hookes and crochettes they drewe the bodye vp to 
20 them on the walle / And there disarmed hym, and threwe the 
bodye to our peple. Thenne our men that were there toke the 
body, and buryed it worshipfully / he was moche bewaylled in 
thoost of cristen men, 

24 How after many assaultes, oure men beyng in Coun- 
seyl, A lombard cam to them, whiche offred to 
make an engyne that shold destroye the toun. 

capitulo / lxj“ 

28 t Henne saiwe the Barons that they loste moche peple with 
thassault / And dyde but litil harme with theyr engyns 6 
vnto 7 the toun and theyr enemyes / Assembled for to make coun- 
seyl how they myght doo / There cam a man to them, a lombard, a Lombard 
32 which had seen the grete hurte & losse of our peple / & sayd build «om« 
to the barons that he was a good maister to make engyns, yf he war for ‘ha 
myght haue stuff & maters therto propice & necessary / which 
with goddes helps shold in short tyme ouerthrowe the tour where 
36 to they had don so moehe payne / and wold make large waye for to 

1 Orig. byforee. 3 Fr. assaillevrs. 4 Orig. vygoronsly. 

4 Orig. turkes. 6 Orig. eugyns. 1 Orig. vuto. 



104 


The baron* 
screed to give 
linn material 
and men, 
and to pay 
him well. 


He finished 
lit* engine, 
and fastened 
it to the wall. 


p leaf 49] 


About mid* 
night the 
tower fell. 


Solyman'* 
wife endeav¬ 
ours to escape 
with her two 
sons. 


Our Men destroy the Tower. [Ch. LXII. 

entre in to the toun who so wolde / They that herde hym promysed 
hym that he shold haue alle that shold be nedeful / And yet a 
good reward and ryche for his laboure / This maister toke workmen 
and made them to werke as he commaunded, that in short tyme lie 4 
had made his engyn, whiche was merueillously 1 strong and grete / 
And! ioyned it to the walle alle ful of men of armes & footemea / 
they that were on the walles vpon the tour threwe with grete myght 
grete stones and fyre brennyng* moche thycke / hut thengyne was 8 
so stronge and rude, that the strokes dyde it no harme / ne the fyer 
myght not fastne on it: whan they of the toun apperceyued that 
they coude not noye this engyn, they were sore a ferde, and dis¬ 
couraged merueyllously, 2 and alle in despayre. Our men traueylled 12 
to theyr power to take oute the grete stones atte fote of the walle 
of the toure / And vndersetted it with strong stanehons and grete / 
whan they had so moche myned that them semed that it was 
ynowgh. They 3 toke 4 theyr habyllemens and sette them ferre fro 16 
the walle / and thenne put fyer on alle sydes vnder the toure, & 
wythdrewe them to their habyllemens and to thengynes alle in 
saufte, whiche were a grete way of. 4 About mydnyght the fyre had 
soo brente and wrought that this tour fylle doun to therthe with so 20 
grete a noyse and tempeste that it semed that alle therthe trembled / 
And ther was none, but he had grete liorrour and feer in his herte / 
Oure peple made hastely do sowne the trumpettes, and crye to armes 
for to come dilygently to thassault. 24 

How after that this eugyn had so wel wrought / The 
wyf of solyman, with two of her ehilderen, wente 
out of the toun and were taken by our men / 

cap 0 lxij 0 28 

t He wyf of Solyman, that longe had he in mesease of drede / 
had so grete feere that almost she deyde for drede, and sayd 
she myght no lenger see it ne suffre / and made sodanly make redy 
a vessel, and put it on the lake for tescape by nyght / But oure 32 

1 Orig. merueillously. 2 Orig. merueyllonsly. 

4—4 This passage seems not to have been entirely understood by Caxton. 

Fr. "II mistreat leur atret, boiz et grant merricn, por le mur qui iert fortemerU 
estanqonez, puis bouterent le feu de toutesparz et se trestrent arrUres dedanz Icut 
engine tot sauvement." —Lat. “ El sustentamlis qui mururn casurum sustenta- 
bant igne supposito et mutriendis ignibus apta subjecta materia maehinam reliw 
quunt ad sues cum omni celeritate se conferentes." 



105 


Ch. LX II.] ITiey take Solyman’s Wife and Sons captive. 


peple that were in the shippes for to kepe the water fro theyr 
enemyes cam avenste her, and toke the lady with her two sones They were 

... . J taken prison- 

that she had with her thenne in her companve. They presented ers by the 

. r j j r Crusaders. 

4 them in tlie mornyng to fore the barons. They made them to be 
kept right surely with the other prisoners that they had 1 / The 
Turkes in the toun 1 were thenne in grete mesehief, as wel for 
thentre that was so grete and brode / as for their lady that they 
8 had loste / therme they axed trewes for to speke to the barons to The Turk. 

pair for a 

gyue ouer the toun and them self in to theyr handes. Tacius, the truce, 
greek of whom I haue spoken to fore, whiche was moche double 
and malycious, spak to the noble men that had the gouernaunce of 
12 the toun in counseyl, And shewd to them that thyse pylgryms were 
straungers 2 of ferre eountrees and euyl and cruel men / And shold 
doo to them alle the hanne they myght, And destroye the peple 
and the londe, yf they yelded the cyte to them. But and yf they Tacius the 
16 wold aduowe and take themperour to theyr lord / And yelde them »uades the 

1 ° 1 townspeople 

to hym theyr lyues sauf, and theyr goodes in to his hande, he shold 
kepe them well and saufty 3 / and 1 shold doo to them grete good / ^ l t ° r ;,j" atesd 
ffor he was theyr neyghbour / So moche sayd he and dyde, that Cnisader “- 
20 they of the toun toke theyr counseyl 4 & cam to the barons, and 
sayd to them that they wold put in the handes of themperour theyr 
lyues sauf / theyr bodyes the cyte and theyr godes / This displesyd 
not moche to 5 the barons / ffor theyr entencion was for to passe [ 5 if.«, bk.] 
24 forther / & hoped that themperour wolde departe the gayn / proye 
and goodes of the toun 6 generally in thoost, neuertheles, to fore 
that they wold grauwte them this tbynge / they sayde that they The cm- 
shold delyuer entierly, and doo come in to the hoost alle the '«the »ur- 
28 prisonners of pieter theremyte that were in the castel of counthot 7 / ““gjjwjjaj 
And in lyke wyse alle the other that they had taken in the siege, ^ tlm.?'* 4 
and them to fore that Solyman helde. And this don they acorded 
that they shold yelde them to themperour / Thenne the barons, 


32 prynces and knyehtes, and also the comyn peple sente by one They send 

1 * 0 messengers 

acorde messagers to themperour for to sygnefye hym how they of tojfoe^Em- 
the cyte had yelded them to hym / Therfore they sente to hym / J 1 ”™™ 
that he shold sends of his hye and noble men with grete nombre of 


1 (frig. toun. 2 Orig. stvauugers. 3 Orig. sanfly. 

4 Orig. counseyl. Orig. tonn. 

7 Caxton’s French text gives “ Cunthot.” In the different French MSS. of 
our text, there is a remarkable row of variations for this word. Ocrinchot , 
Syniloth Couthot, and Tmichat. Lat, Civitot, 



106 The Emperor received the surrendered City. [Ch. LXIII. 

peple for to resseyue the toun, And the persones of whom they 
had many / ffor they alle acorde# that the honour shold be his, 
And that the toun shold come in his demayne, And the prisonners at 
his wylle / They that had enterprise# theyr vowe for taccomplysshe, 4 
ha# purpose# for to departe fro this place, and to goo forth vnto 
the lande of surye. 


How themperour sente grete barons for to receyue the 
sayd toun after that our peple had acerteyned 8 
hym that they wolde yelde it / Capitulo / lxiij 


The Emperor 
was greatly 
rejoiced, and 
took posses¬ 
sion of the 
city. 


He sent . 
thanks and 
■pedal gifts 
to each of the 
barons. 


But the com¬ 
mon soldiers 
complained 
bitterly, 


because they 
received none 
of the spoils. 

[3 leaf 50, 

sig. 61J 


g Rete ioye had themperour of thyse tidynges / he tarye# not / 
but sente of his moost priue men, as wel barons as knyghtes, 
with grete quantite of men of armes that resseyued the cyte in his 12 
name / An# garnysshe# it of alle thynge that was nedeful, & 
dyde repayre the walles an# alle that was broken of the torettes. 
Alle that euer they founde in the toun of Armures of Rychesses 
and of vytaylles they seased for themperour / And sente the 16 
prisonners in to Constantinoble / Themperour sente to euerych of 
the barons special lettres, presented to them grete yeftes / And 
thanketh them moche of thonour / that they ha# don to hym / 
An# of this that they so wel kepte theyr promesse / 1 flfor that toun 20 
ha# don grete gryef and anoyaunce 2 to thempyre 1 / The mene peple 
that moch ha# trauaylle# in the siege an# ha# holpen with grete 
courage / compleyne# sore / ffor they ha# hope# that alle the hauoyr 
an# goodes of the toun shol# haue ben departe# emonge them / 24 
But themperours men bare it alle away, An# they that trauaylle# 
for it were not rewardi# / the worde that was moche grete cam 
3 vnto the barons / & they say# that they had grete wronge / ffor 
the couenauntes made bytwene themperour & them were suche 28 
that yf they gate in theyr waye, ony cytees that ha# ben to fore 
themperours, they shold deyluere the cyte & the londe to them¬ 
perour / but the proyes & gayne shol# be departed 4 in thoost. 
Ayenst thyse couenauntes dyde themperour, but it was not tyme 32 
thenne ne place to make argument ne debate ayenst the Grekes, 
therfor the noble men made the comyn peple to tarye, 5 to thende 

— 1 Caxton’s French. MS. is faulty here. A. gives the correct reading:— 

“que grant accroissement avoientja fait a Vempire.’’ 

s Orig. anoyauuoe. 4 Orig. drparted, 

5 Ft- taire, to keep still, not ‘‘to tarye,’’ 



Ch. LXIV.] He restored Solyman’s Wife and Sons, unharmed. 107 

that they shold not enpesshe this pylgremage / thus was suffred 

that the wyf of soliman & his ij sones & grete plewte of prisoners sojjrman’^ ^ 

were ledde in saefte vnto themperour / which made moch grete *»n were 

delivered up 

4 feste to the lady & her childeren, & as longe as they were in the 10 **>• 
toun he helde them moche honorably / after in short tyme he (o 

sente them agayn to solyman, alle quyte delyuerd, without demand- So| s' m “ n - 
yng of ony raunson. this dyde he to thende, to haue the loue and 
8 grace of the turkes / in suche wyse that ther was bytwene them 
a counseyl & acorde to greue our peple / & also for another 
rayson / that is to wete yf they were in such poynt of another eyte 
or place, that the cristiews constreyned so by force, that they shold 
12 not be aferd to yelde them ,frely in the hande of themperour / thus The city oi 
was taken the cyte of nycene, the yere of thyncamacion of our lord, takenm the 
a / M / lxxxxvij, the xx day of the moneth of Iuyn. June, 1097 . 


How our 1 hoost 8 departed on theyr iourney / & how 
som departed fro theyr felawship / and how soly¬ 
man determyned tassayle them / 

Capitulo lxiiij® 


t He hoost of the pylgryms departed by the commaundement of The cru- 
20 the barons, the iij daye to fore thentree of Iuylle, fro the place marched forth 
where they had holden siege / they wente two dayes to gydre moche 
peasybly / & after lodged them by a brygge for the ease of the and encamped 
water / On the mom, after theyr customme atte spryngyng of the 
24 day, they passed the brygge duryng the derknesse of the nyght, If or 

it was not wel day / Or, perauenture , 3 they departed wetyngly the Here tiny 
one fro the other, ffor buymont, the due of normandye / Therle into two 
steuen of chartres / Tancre and 1 therle of seynt pol tomed away on 
28 the lyft syde / And! descended! in to a valeye named! Gurgom / And 
lodged them there aboute none by a ryuer, where as was grete 
plente of water / There rested they al that nyght in peas. But, 
ueuertheles, they made theyr hoost chaimge 4 theyr watche diligently / 

32 alle the other tomed on the right honde alle the day / & went 
thurgh a fayre Countre / & lodged them in fayre grete medowes 
5 vpon the water syde. And that one hoost was fro that other more [s if. 50 , bk.j 
than two myle / Soliman had his herte swollen, and was felly an 
36 angred that he had thus loste his wyf with his children and his 


1 QrU). onr. 


3 Orig. hooost. 3 Orig. peraueuture, 

4 Fr. cxchuuguaitier. 



108 Solyman attacks one Division of the Crusaders. [Ch. LXV. 

soiymanfoi- noble cyte / he commaunded to folowt oure peple on the lyfte 
division to syde / And? dyde grete peyne to see how he myght greue them, he 
might harm had! with hym a moch grete nombre of men of armes on horsbak / 
his espyes were with the pylgryms, whiche toke heede of alle theyr 4 
couyne, they dyde hym to wete that oure hoost was denyded in two 
parties / And that the lasse partye was torned! toward the lyfte side 
ner to hym than that other parte / he was moche glad and! Ioieful 
whan he herde thyse tydynges / he sawe that he was wel in poynt 8 
for to venge hym / And had his men al redy, and! ordeyned his 
ho attacked bataylle to poynt at the day sette / departed for to befyghte oure 

them at day. J r , , , ,, 

break. men, thus as the spryngynge ot the day began to clere / the men 

that made the watche this nyght that were withdrawen a lytil fro 12 
thoost, appereeyued them, and cryed! to Armes, And! blewe homes 
and! trompettes moche affrayedly / the hoost awook sodenly, and 
our men armed them right hastely / And ordeyned theyr bataylles 
They placed as they had deuysed. The wymmen / sekemen and childeren were 16 
and children i e dd! a part besyde a water al ful of reed, by whiche men myght 

in a safe place, , 1 J \ , 

not come to them, to fore were they closed* with cartes and 

sent messages charyottes / wherof they had grete plente. And after sente mes- 

thearmy, sagers vnto the grete hooste, ffrom whiche they were folyly 20 

and prepared ° ° , ,, 

themselves departed for to praye them that they dylygently wolde come 
socoure them, ffor they were in moche grete paryll / whan theyr 
bataylles were thus renged, euen right the first day of Iuyll at the 
soiyman had houre of pryme / be ye certayn that Solyman, with a grete nombre 24 

800,0(10 horse- „ ‘ J ' J „ , / , ’ , 

men, our peo- of men of armes, estemed at two honderd thousand wel armed to 

pie were but 

fewinmim- poynt and horsed, arryued. ther was not one of them, but he was 
mostly on on horsbak. Oure 1 peple were but fewe / And the moost part of 

them on foote / And it was no merueylle though they doubted the 28 
comyng of theyr enemyes. 

Of the bataylle that solyman had ayenst som of our 
peple that were departed fro theyr felawship 
folyly / ea° lxv? 32 

Han the Hooste of the Turkes smote in on our men, the noyse 
w was moche grete of busynes / of trompes / of men, and of 
horses that none myght he herd / and was grete hydour to 
here the fyrst comyng on of the turkes / They shotte so thycke 36 
vpon our peple that there was neuer rayn ne hayl so like, in 80 

1 Orig. onre. 



109 


Cli. LXVI.] They are hard pressed by the Turks. 

moch that ther were many hurte of our peple. whan the first route 
x had made theyr shotte / The second route cam after where moo [ l leaf si. 
Archyers were than to fore / & began shote moche more thycke than 
4 may be recounted 2 / Our knyghtes sawe that they loste theyr horses °"r n ra '|V r 
& them self by the shotte, And smote in to the turkes vygor- JjJJJJjgT 
ously, But the multitude of the turkes were so grete / that our men 
had grete dammage, whiche were but fewe. They that had theyr ou,| r- 
8 sholdes & targes they kept them som what, But they that were 
without armour muste flee / or ellys they had be slayn emong the 
horses. And 1 many were slayn amt hurte / There were slayn of oure 2000 of our 
peple, as wel of footemen as of horsmen, two thousand. Ther was slain. 

12 slayn a moche valyaunt yong man, noble and hardy, whiche had! 
don wel alle that day, Guyllam, sone to the Marquys, Brother of 3 
Tancre / he was smoton with an arowe and deyde in the place / 

And another valyant man in like wise named Robert of Paris. He 
16 deyde by his prowesse / Tancre that was hardy made merueylles of 

Armes / Amt abandouned hym self, as he that sette not by his lyf /■Bohemond 
Buymont sawe hym / & he brake alle the prees / And cam there as cred, who was 
he was / And toke hym by the brydle and brought hym bak / the danger. 

20 turkes sawe oure men moche hurte and trauaylled and toke theyr 
bowes on the lyft Arme, And after ran on them with swerdes and 
maces in suche wyse that they ouerthrewe 4 them and 5 put them a 
bak vnto theyr caryage. There they helde them And hydde them ournien 
24 by the reed, and deffended them vygorously, and sufEred the grete 
plente of turkes discharge vpon them one route after another. 

Of the dilygenee that Due Godeffroy made whan he 
was aduertised herof / And how So]yman was 
28 discomfyt & his bagage taken. Capitulo lxvj 0 

0 Wr barons, godeffroy, the noble due, and the other prynces 
herde thyse tydynges how buymont and his companye were at 
suche meschyef hasted them sore / ther cam to gydre the due 6 and Godfrey and 
32 his ij bretheren, bawdwyn & Eustace, the erle raymont / hue le 
mayne, and many other barons ynowgh. The peple a foote 7 / 

And they that were euyl horsed they lefte for to kepe the lodgys / 
they wente forth / & wel 8 xl / m / alle armed & wel horsed / 

3 Orig. recounted. 3 Orig. of of. 4 Orig. ouerthrewe. 

3 Orig. aud. 3 Orig. dnk. 7 Orig. fooote. 

8 Caxton has omitted “ estoient" here. 



110 


When Bohe- 
mond’s men 
saw assist¬ 
ance arriving 
[*lf.51,bk.J 
they took 
heart and 
fought more 
bravely. 


The Turks 
soon fled dis¬ 
comfited. 


Our men 
found great 
booty in the 
tents of Soly- 
mau. 


The Cru¬ 
saders rested 
themselves 
and their 
horses three 
days. 


Croclfrey comes to the Itescue. [Ch. LXVt. 

'whan they approched the place where the batayll was / & sawe 
them so put a bak / & herde thafraye of trompes & hors / the 
peple of buymont espyed them, ano?t their herte cam agayn 1 / & 
were eratierly refresshyd / & smote in to their enemyes as they 4 
that nothynge doubted 1 / & began to doo well. The 2 good bisshop 
of puy was there, & comforted ofte the barons & the knyghtes 
for tauenge the blood of the cristen men whiche thenemyes of our 
fayth had there shedde. Incontinent the barons that cam smote 8 
in to the turkes so vygorusly 3 that it seined that euerich myght 
abyde the burthon 4 of the batayle. 8 they slewe so many, and! bete 
doun in theyr comynge / that the other durst not abyde, But fledde 
away discomfyted / the nobles folowed them, & chaced them wel 12 
iiij / myle, sleyng al them that they myght atteyne. & they fouwde 
many of our 6 men prisonners that the turkes ledde with them / 
whom they delyuerd. after they wente to the tentes of solyman, and 
there they founde so grete plente of rycliesses / of vytaylles / of 16 
sheep, of horses, & other beestes that it can not be recounted / 
Robes, vayssel, & pauyllons of dyuerse colours & of straunge 
facions in suche wyse that ther was none, but he was ryche. ffor ye 
may well knowe that / ij C.M / men that solyman had / behoued 2(1 
grete plente of lodgys & of other estorementes. 6 our peple cam 
agayn in to oure tentes with grete ioye & honour, ther were lost 
wel in that batayll of our men a foote 7 aboute a .iiij. M.,& of 
horsmen but fewe. Of the turkes were founden dede / iij / M., & 24 
there were of them many grete men / this batayll endured fro the 
hour of pryme vnto nygh none / & ofte our peple had the worse, 
ffor as I haue said, solyman had / ij C / M / men alle on horsbak. 
our peple were but / 1. M / on horsbak whan they were alle 28 
assembled the one with the other / whan our lord had thus gyuen 
this victorye to his peple / they rested them in this fayr place 
where the tentes were / thre / dayes / theyr horses refresshed them 
right wel in this whyle. of the armures & other gayne that they 32 
had conquerd vpon theyr enemyes, they arrayed & apparaylled 
them right wel / that to fore were euyl armed / Moche wel dyde 

1—1 Carton has mistranslated his French. Fr. "quant ilz aprouchierent, d 
les gens de Buymont, qui eatoient si audesaoubz, oyrent lea trompea et Veffroy dea 
chevaux qui venoient, si leur, revint le cuer A Unis." 

3 8 Fr. "qu’il eembloit A ung chascun d’eulx qua I'en s’atendoit d lui de 
toute la besoingne," that it seemed to each one of them that he was expected to 
take the whole burden of the battle on himself. 4 Orig. burthon. 

* Orig. onr. * Fr. ‘ ‘ cetoremente, ” equipments. 7 Orig. foete. 



Ill 


Oh. LXVlI.] The Crusaders continue their journey. 

they in this bataylle, & grete honour had /they and shal euer haue, They w»i 
and in especial they that here be named! / Bawdwyn le borgh / great honour 
thomas 1 de fedre / regnault de beauvays / Gale 2 de chamont / 
gaste de bedyers / & geart 3 de cherysy / therene was ordeyned 
& acorded by the barons & cryed! in thoost / that no man shold 
ryde fro thens forth by hym self without leue of the captayns. 

How the iiij day after this victorye our peple went 
forth on their waye / & of the grete mesease 
of thoost the same day / cap 0 lxvij 0 

a 4 Fter this, whan they had abyden there thre dayes / the fourth Thu fourth 
daye folowyng*, by tymes to fore day, they dyde doo sowne 5 wcto“%iey* 

, went on their 

theyr trompettes, & wente forth on theyr waye / Syth they way. 
passed! 6 bythyne / And entred in to the londe that was named 
piside. They trauaylled so long, that at the laste they fonde a 
contre moche drye & infertile, without waters J The tyme was 
moche hoot and brennyng 1 , as it falleth ofte in Iuyll / They had so 
grete thurst / that they wyst not what to doo. the peple on fote They ■uffered 
specially faylled and faynted, alle for the duste / for the heete / mu™™™* 
and 7 for thurste / ther deyed wel this same day of mysease fyue 1,1 oned »r- 
honderd men & wymmen. And knowe ye certaynly that ther 
happed a merueyllous thynge that day in the hoost, that we fynde 
nowher in none other historye / ffor the wymmen with childe, that 
yet were not come to theyr terme / by thanguyssh of the heete, & 
of the mesease of thurst, that they were delyuerd of theyr childeren 
& childed / & not only the pour wymmen / but the ryche also / 
this was a grete sorow, & pyte to see / The men, that ought to be 
more hard & stronge ayenst trauaylle, wente theyr mouthes open / 

& sought thayer and moysture therof, whiche they myght not 
haue : the heete, and also the swote destroyed them / ye shold haue . 
seen the horses and other beestes, that myght not goo 8 forth, in 
suche wyse that they muste leue them, whiche deyde in the waye / 
houndes for the chace & huntyng / fowles for the flyght, as Homid«,&i- 

v ° * u coil8, anti 

fiawcons / hawkes / & sperhawkes, ye shold haue seen that day hawks died 
abyde & deye. & in lyke wyse the grete stedes & cursours, 

l jy Thomas de Fere.” J Fr. “ Gale de Chauvumt." 

* Fr. " Girart de Oherisi ." 4 Orig. Fter. 5 Orig. sowue. 

7 Orig. aud. 

• Fr. “alter avant," go further. 



112 


They arrive at' Antioche the Less. 


tCh. LXVlll. 


and homes whiche were moost perylloits / becam alle araged and wood for 
ucVof water, thurst 1 / & with grete payne were ledde forth / whan they had 
our Lorn had ben long 1 in this mesease / Our 2 lord beheld them in pyte, & 
P A“ ' made them to adresse in to a valeye, where they fonde 3 a rennyng 4 
to a running water, favr & grete. thewne ranne oure peple to the brynke or 

stream. > J o , . 

ryuage with grete haste, many tlier were that drawk so moch that 
they deyde vpon the place ; fEor som of them that had eschewed 
the deth / fonde it there, by cause they kepte no mesure. & this 8 
fylle vnto knyghtcs & other men, and beestes, whiche 4 dranke as 
moche as they wolde / whan they were escaped* this euyl aduenture, 
they cam in to a londe moch fayr and fertile, ful of woodes, of 


They arrived ryuers, of medowes, and of good* feldes labourable / This was by 12 
the Less, anthyoche the lasse / whiche is the chyef cyte of the londe of 

and quartered " ' . . t _ 

the dxvay pisside ; and there lodged they with theyr hoost. 


How somme of the grete Barons of thoost, after to 
haue approuched Antyoche the Jasse, departed 16 
for to goo vytaylle them. Capitulo lxviij 0 

some went f Ro thens departed / som of the barons of thoost / & helde 

farther on, r 

difficult to Wa8 their waye, by cause it was a greuous thyng* to tynde vytaylles 
[® if. 52 , bk.] 5 to so moche peple to gydre / The fyrst was Bawdwyn, Brother to 20 
visfonsfor so the due; with hym was peter 6 therle of scaruay, Reynart therle of 
Biddwin, toul / Bawdwyn de borgh, & guyllebert de montcler / ther wer 
brother,’fed wel v / C / on horsbak / & ladde with them men a fote largely / 
mid Tailored The second* was tancre / & with hym Rychard* du pryncipat, 24 
another. J^obert danse, 7 & other knyghtes 8 grete nombrc, that they were / 
v C / on horsbak, & had also many men a foote as the other had. 
theyr entencion and* purpose was to ride about the thoost in the 
contre, for to 9 seche somme aduenture and vytaylle; 10 & yf they 28 
had founde ony paryll / grief, pas, or plente of theyr enemyes, 10 that 
they wold* lete thoost haue knowleche therof / they wente strayt 

1 Orig. thni’st. 2 Orig. Onr. 8 Grig, foude. 

4 Fr. “si I’cn les laissoit tant boire comma ih voulurent." 

8 Caxton has here misread his French, which gives “Pierre conte deStarnoy.’ 
This, in turn, is- a corruption for Stadenois, which is the reading of A. Lot. 
comes de Stadenes. • 

7 Fr. “ Robert d!Anse." 8 Orig. kuyghtes. 9 Orig. so. 

lo—io p- r “ Silz eussent trouve aulcun peril de grief pas, ow de plenti de lews 
ennemis,” if they should get into any trouble, either from a dangerous place, 
or on account of the great number of their enemies. 



113 


Ch. LXVIII.] Godfrey is wounded by a Bear. 

theyr waye, & passed by syde ij cytees: tliat one was named 
lychonie, and that other Eraclee. after, they torned on the right 
honde, and passed toward the see side. The due Godeffroy & the 
4 other prynces abode in theyr lodgys, for the plesaunt & delyt- 
able places that they had foimden, by cause they wolde playe & 
refresshe them of the trauaylles & a/moyes that they had sufEred. 
thenne said they that they wold goo hunte in to the forestes, which 
8 were nygh to them on alle sydes, & were ful of wilde beestes / 
On the morn they entred in the woode / eche helde his way at his 
will, the due, as he wente a path thurgh the foreste, lierde a man 
crye / & he drewe thederward / & he sawe a poure man, that 
12 was goo for to fetche wode for to here in to the hoost, fledde, 
strongly cryeng<, to fore a grete bere / The due ran vpon hym, & 
drewe his swerdf for to delyuere the pour man fro the beeste / thenne 
the bere adressyd hym vnto the due, and lefte the pour man, that 
16 fledde fro hym / he hurte the dukes hors so sore, that he caste the 
due to thertlie. The due leep a foote, & drewe oute his swerde. 
the beeste was nothyng aferd! of hym, but made a felonnows crye, 
horryble & hydous, & syth ran vpon the due, & bote hym 
20 right cruelly in the thye. after, he adressyd hym right vp, & 
embraced hym with his potes, or feet to fore, for to haue caste hym 
to grouMde. the due, thus hurt as he was, was yet raoch strong, 
& fyl not to the erth thenne / but caught hym by the skyn about 
24 the necke with his lyfte hande, for to put away his heed from hym ; 
& with that other hand he put his swerd in to his body, thurgh 
bothe the sydes vnto the crosse, and! so slewe hym. After, he 
wente and sette hym doun on therthe right by / ffor he had so moeh 
28 bledde of his wounde that he had in his thye, and was so mer- 
ueyllously sore hurte 1 that he myghte not stonde longe on his feet. 
The poure man, whiche he had delyuerd fro deth, ran hastely in to 
the hoost / and tolde them this tydynge 2 of the 3 due. Alle they 
32 that herde it were so efirayed that they ranne with grete haste 
theder / The barons, and alle the other that myght goo. they 
founde hym lyeng 1 on the ground, pale 4 and discoloured ; and after 
toke hym in a lyttier, and bare hym in to the hoost. But neuer 
36 man was more demened, ne more sorow made, ne 6 noe moo pytyous 
cryes and 1 mentacions thurgh alle the lodgyses, As wel ryche as 
poure / and men as wymmen / Anon were sette alle the maistres 

1 Orig. hnrte. 3 Orig. tydyuge. 4 Fr. "vain," weak, faint. 

5 Orig. nr. 

GODFREY. 1 


The.? pissed 
by the cities 
of Lycaonia 
and Heraclsa. 


Duke God¬ 
frey, while 
hunting, saw 
a man fleeing 
from a great 
bear. 


The Duke 
attacked the 
bear, and 
was severely 
wounded. 


The man 
whom he had 
[* leaf 53, 
sig. 64.] 
rescued ran 
to the camp 
with the 
tidings. 

The barons 
came and 
carried God¬ 
frey home 
in a litter, 
with great 
lamentations. 



114 


Two of the great Baron% are dangerously ill. [Ch. LXIX. 

and cirurgens for to dychte hytn & to hole hym; there were 
many / ffor euerych of the prynces had of them, for to awayte on 
them in the hoost. 

Here recounteth thystorye of somme aduentures that 4 
thenne 1 fylle in the hoost of cristen men / 

cap 0 lxix 0 

At the same i N this sayson, the same tyme, it happed that another valyaunt 
motid of^'ou- man, named Eaymont, Erie of tholouse, laye doun seke of a 8 
very ill. maladye moche greuous and! peryllous / Neuerthelesse, the hooste 
wente forth alwey / Tlierfor he must he caryed forth in a lyttier. 

On a day it happed that he was so deteyned! of his maledye / that 
certeynly they supposed! that he shold! deye / They that kepte hym 12 
made the littier to be sette doun to the grounds, ffor they sawe hym 
so fehle that they thought certaynly that the sowle shold departe. 
The bisshop of Orenge, whiche was a moche holy man and a 
religyous, sayd the coinmendacion for the sowle and the seruyse, as 16 
tuc army of one deyeng, sauf syngyng masse. Alle the hoost was ouermoche 
Krief, for they discomforted / by cause they supposed alle, that anon and sodanly 
thMe’gTra/ to l pse thise two grete men, whiche were of moche grete counseyl 2 
men - and of grete ayde / They made prayers and orysons thurgh alle 20 
rue sick thoost, Where as they songe masses. The ryche and the pour 
gmyeAumj prayde moche humbly, and with good herte, that our lord wold 
•would spare rendre them hool and sauf / for to socoure and counsevle them / as 
pmyere hcir h a( l ne ^ e * The barons departed in charyte largely almesse 24 

vnto the pour peple / so moche dyde they, one and other, that oure 
lord, whiche is ful of pyte, herde them, and gaf helthe to the two 
noble men in short tyme, in suche wyse that they rood al hool, & 
in good poynt with thooste they passed al pissyde. And after 28 
entred in to a lande named lycaone, And cam vnto 3 a Cyte called 
licoine / they founde it alle voyde, and nothyng* therin / they had 
grete meseases of vytaylle, ffor the Turkes, whiche had herde the 
tydynges that oure peple cam / trusted in none of theyr fortresses / 32 
but voyded them, and fledde in to the fore^tes and 4 montaynes / 

[• if. 53, bk.] men, wymmen & childeren, 6 horses, beestes, vytaylle, & alle 
other thyng they caryed with them / They 6 suffred moche disease 

1 Orig. theune. * Orig. couuscyl. * Orig. vuto. 4 Orig. aud. 

6 Fr. “ Car ilz se hasUrent moult de passer cellui pays," they hastened, not 
’'suffered.'' 



115 


Ch. LXX.j Tancred besieges Tarms. 

to passe that contre. They cam in to Eraelee / And after cam in to Ti'e^vent on 
a cytc named Marase / There they lodged! and soiourned! thre dayes / 
Bawdwyn, brother of the Due, that was departed! fro the hoost, lefte Mar * M 
4 his wyf with his two bretheren / She deyde there of sekenesse / Here Bald- 
She was an hye lady of Englond, valyanwfc, 1 wyse, and good* / ©gt***. * aB 
gutier 2 was her name / She was buryed and enteered moche » he dled - 
honorably in the same place / She was moche bewaylled in the 
8 hoost. 

How Tancre, that was departed fro the hoost, as- 
sieged Tarse / And toke it by certeyn couenaunt. 

cap 0 lxx° 

12 t Ancre, whiche was a wyse a man, and of grete courage, rode 

thurgh the londe sekynd! auenture, in suche wyse that he fonde Tancr«j'« 

# party arrived 

in his waye a cyte called Tarse. This londe of Scylyce is a couwtre »t Tamw, 
of thoryent, toward the sonne gooyng doun. In this londe ben 
16 two grete cytees, whiche ben Archebisshoprichs, that one named! 

Tarse, of whiche I said to fore / Therin was born seynt poul s lle . re st - 
thappostle / That other was named anauazie / And eche of thise two l,or "- 
cytees haue other cytees vnder them / Tarse founded one of the 
20 childeren of Noe Ionen, whiche was sone of Iaphet / the sone of 
Noe. Neuerthles,(19) solins sayth that perseus founded it / but it 
maye be wel that one founded it / And that other repayred and 
amended it / Tancre assieged this cyte, and constreyned them Tailored 

DB9I6|^GU it, 

24 within, what by menaces and fayr wordes / that they yelded it to 

hym in a nianere / They sette this banere vpon the hyest toure of ' urrend «r. 
the toun. And he swar and affermed to kepe them from damage 
and hurte ; ne non shold be put out of his hows, ne lese ony thyng 
28 that apperteyned to them vnto the comynge of the grete hoost. 

And thenne shold they yelde the toun vnto the grete prynces of 
thoost without ony debate / Thus was it acorded bytwene hym and 
them of the toun. In this toun were cristen men, hermyns, and twa city 
32 grekes / And in alle the londe about. 3 But the turke helde alle the Greek* 
fortresses that medled with armes / And had the seygnorye vpon ™" t '“^ urkt 
this peple / And wold not suffre them of nothyng 1 , sauf to occupye " f e u5* 1 £ 1 J|£ d ‘ 
and laboure therthe, and for to marchaunte to bye and selle. 

2 Fr. Outuere, Lat. Ouluera. 

* Orig. abont. 


1 Orig. valyaut. 



116 tialdioin arrives at farms. [Ch. LXXl. 

How Bawdwyn, brother of Godeffroy, sechyng 1 his 
auentures, sawe tarccre & his peple to fore tarse, 

& adressed hytn to them / ca° / lxxj 

t« leafs*] 2 b Awdwyn, Brother of the Due, and the peple that he ledde 4 
Baldwin’s with hym, were entred in to a countre moost barayn, where 

many’hard- they suifred grete peyne for vytaylle. After, they cam vpon a 
tain from" m ontayne, where they myght see alle the londe of Scilice / and 
rauidwse h ® y ^e cytees vnto the see. They sawe tarse nygh them, and 3 the 8 
tent!T d ’’ pauyllons, And they supposed that they had be turkes / that had! 

assieged the cyte / They descended! doun for to knowe what peple 
they were / And also for tenquere the beyng* of the countre about / 
They that were with tancre, in thauaunt garde, sawe tbyse men of 12 
Tancrod mis- armes approuche, And! lete theyr lord haue knowleche / Tancre 

took them for , , , , , , , , „ ' 

Turks as they wende certaynly that they had be turkes, that cam for to soccure 

approached, j j j ’ 

them of the toun, and made eche man to arme hym dylygently / 
ana went out and sette them in ordenannee : And after yssued oute ayenst them ,'16 

against them. 3 J j i 

The baners displayed. But whan they approuched that one to the 
They soon other / And knewe eche other by the armes / they opened theyr 
“‘friend” helmes and embraced eche other, and made moche grete ioye, And 

after cam to the cyte. And thenne bawdwyn was by tancre right 20 
wel and honourably lodged, ffor tancre had grete plente of vytaylles, 
of whiche bawdwyn and his peple had grete nede. 

Of thenuye that bawdwyn & his peple had to see 
the baner of tancre vpon the walle of the toun / 24 
& how tancre departed. ca° / lxxij 0 . 

i N the mome whan the sonue was vp, and cleer daye, bawdwyn, 
and they that were with hym, sawe the baner of tancre vpon 
Baldwin and the hyest tour of the toun. And had therof moche grete enuye; 28 

ills men were 

jealous when and began to murmure and speke maliciously of that they had 
uiTu'ie tower' 8 re ^ er power, and moo peple and better, & said that they ought 
to haue the worship of this toun / It is trouthe that vnto this day 
there / bawdwyn and Tancre had ben lyke two bretheren, in moche 32 
pryue acqueyntaunce and trewe loue / But bawdwyn, by enuye of 
his herte and by euyl wordes that som of his men made hym to 
vnderstonde, was thus of this thynge meuyd. Tancre, whiche 
was moche wyse, attemperat and resonable man, vnderstode thise 36 
1 Orig. sechyug. 8 Orig. aud. 



117 


Ch. LXXII.] Tancred departs for Adana. 

wordes, 1 And? dyde moche payne for tapesse hym. And cam in T»ucred tried 
persone to bawdwyn, and shewde hym / how to fore that he was Ballwin? 
comen / ne that noman knewe of his comynge, were thyse couen- 
4 auntes made bytwene hym and them of the toune / And his baner 
sette vpon the toure. • And herin he vnderstode not that he myght 
haue ony shame ne dishonour, Bawdwyn was not 2 content of p if. m, bit.] 
thise wordes, and he founde somme that attysed hym in his folye / 

8 he spak grete wordes, ylle and iniuryouses, to tancre / in suche Baldwin an- 

Bwcrfid him 

wyse / that with lytil more they wolde haue 3 don armed theyr men, insultingly, 
for to haue destroyed eche other, thenne sente bawdwyn for them 
of the toun / And whan they cam, he menaced them strongly, and 
12 saide that they shold thro we doun the baner of Tancre to therthe / anacnm- 
And sette vp his on the tour : 4 And vf they dyde not, they shold citizens to set 
wel knowe that he wold destroye them, and alle that they had the place or 

J J Tancred'a. 

without the toun / and take the toun and caste it to therthe, 

16 maulgre alle that tancre myght doo / They of the cyte sawe that 
tancre myght not waraunte ne deffende them ayenst bawdwyn, 
made with hym suche couenauntes as they had made to fore with 
tancre / And sette his baner where as he commaupded 5 / Tancre 
20 saw the force that was don to hym, and was gretely desplesyd, and 
had grete yre in his herte / But he couerd his thought wysely, And 
wold not suffre the peple, that were comen in this pylgremage for to 
make warre ayenst thenemyes of the fayth of Ihesu Crist, shold 
24 slee eche other for thoccasion of hym. he departed fro this place / Tui««a, to 
ffor he doubted that somme noyse or medle myght sourde herof. met, left 
And cam to a cyto nygn by, named adane / There myght he not Adana, 
entre / ffor a noble man of burgoyn, named gelphes, was parted fro 
28 thoost with a grete route of men of armes as the other dyde, for to 
seke auentures, and he had taken this cyte by force / And had 
caste out the turkes / And helde it entierly. Tancre herde that 
somme of our peple helde it, and sente good messagers to gelphes, 

32 And 0 prayd hym to opene the yates, and suffre his men that they Thelordnf 
myght goo in to the toun for to bye to them suche as they neded / j?^“' r r c ' d “ ive<1 
This Gelphes dyde it debonayrly / And hym self gaf to them jjjjjdj. «<* 
largely for nought / ffor he had founde the toun ful of gold and 
36 syluer, of Robes, of beestes / of whete / of wyne / of oyle / and of nMdcd - 
alle good that a man had nede of / 

1 Orig. wrodes. 3 Orig. hane. 4 Orig. tonr. 

5 Orig. commanuded. 0 Orig. Aud. 



118 


Tailored takes Anamystre by Assault. [Ch. LXXIII. 

How, a lytil after, tancre cam to the cyte of anam¬ 
ystre, whiche the turkes helde it, and toke it by 
assault / cap 0 lxxiij 0 


Tancred took 
leave of his 
host the next 
morning, 
and went on 
to An.i- 
myatra. 


[* leaf 55] 


He took this 
city after a 
three days* 
assault. 


They re¬ 
freshed them¬ 
selves and 
their horses 
here. 


t Ancre on the morn toke leue of his hooste, And! toke his way 4 
with his peple / And* rode so fer that he cam to a Cyte, named 
anamystre 1 / This was one of the beste cytees of that londe / It 
was fayr / and moche delytable. Tancre cam theder, and knewc 
certeynly that the turkes helde it / he assieged it al aboute, And 8 
fro 2 the tyme that he cam he assaylled* the toun. thus he dyde the 
first, the second, and the thirde day / so many assaultes he made to 
them, and hurted them of the toun, 3 that they were strongly greuyd 
and abasshed. they without toke 4 the toun, and entred vndtr the 12 
walles, 4 And* thus was the toun taken by force / And* alle them that 
he fonde therin of hethen peple, he put to deth without mercy. 
The toune was ful of rychesses, and alle maner of vytaylles were 
grete plente. Tancre departed al the gayn and the goodes of the 16 
toun to his men, as he that wel knewe how that he shold doo / and 
to eche man after that he was / in suehe wyse that alle his men 
were ryche. They refresshed* them moche wel, and theyr beestes, 
of the mesease that they had suffred in theyr waye. They soioumed 20 
there a grete whyle with moche grete deduyt. 


How bawdwyn entred in Tarse. And how / iii.C of 
our pylgryms were slayn of the turkes to fore the 
same toun. ca° lxxiiij, 24 

After the f b Audwyn sawe / that Tancre was departed fro Tarse, AncJ* sente 
Tancred, for them of the toun 3 and sayde to them that they shold lete 

manded the them entre in to the toun, fior nym thought 5 shame to lye long 
admit wm t0 an< * a t*yde there ydle without doyng ony thyng, tyl the comynge 28 
into the city. 0 f the grete hoost / They sawe and aduysed wel that they had not 
power ynough to resiste them, and thought yf they lete them not 
entre with theyr agreement / that they wold' entre ayenst theyr 
wylle & without force 6 / thenrae they opened their gates / & wold 32 

1 Fr. Anamistre, Lat. Mamistrane. s Orig. tonn. 

4 — 1 Fr. “prinreni eschieles et entrerent pardesms Its murs." 

6 Orig. thought. 

8 Fr. “ et A force," and by force. Caxton has said here exactly the con¬ 
trary of what he intended, probably. 



119 


Ch. LXXIV.] The Turks flee secretly from Tarsus. 

that bawdwyn shold haue two toures where he shold lodge, & 
other of thoste in the howses in the toun alle peasibly, the turkes 
that had! the seygnorye of the toun helde yet the other towres in 
4 theyr puissaunce / they had in moche grete doubte and suspection 
bawdwyn and his men that were lodged in the toun / And they 
thought that they shold haue no socours / And aboue this they had 
moche grete drede of the grete hoost that shortly shold arryue 
8 there / and sought emonge them the moyens and! maner / How 
they myght yssue oute of the toun, and lede with them theyr 
wynes 1 and! childeren 2 with theyr pryncipal bageus and Iewellys / 

It happed! that this same nyght thre honderd men afote that were 
12 departed! fro Buymont for to folowe tancre arryued! alle to fore this 
Cyte of Tarse, where they thought to fynde hym / whan bawdwyn 
knewe what peple they were / and that they wente in thayde of by 
tancre / he wold not 3 suffre them to entre in to the toun / They 
16 were wery and Hrauaylled and prayd! hym moche swetly, and! cryed! if.66.bk.] 
hym mercy many tymes, that for the loue of god he wold doo so 
moche that they myght this nyght be lodged in the toun / ffor they 
wold no thyng but 6 good, herof the fotemen 6 of this companye 
20 prayd hym in lyke wise / But he wold in nowyse here them / 
Neuertheles by cause they without 7 had mesease / the mene peple 
in the toun aualed doun with cordes, breed ynough, 8 and wyn in 
barellys, and other vytaylles, with whiche they myght wel passe 
24 this nyght / whan our peple were a slepe in the toun, And they 
without began theyr first sleep it happed that the turkes that were 
within the toures / opened the yates of whiche they had the keyes the 

secretely withoute noyse, & ledde out theyr wyues, theyr childeren, ^irfimiiio 
28 & alle their thynges, And all the hethen men of the toun thought »ndprop«w, 
they were not sure with theyr ghestes, and yssued out of alle the 
toun : whan theyr wyues and childeren were withdrawen a lytil fro 
the toun / they wolde leue tokenes eruell and ylle of theyr depart- 
32 yng> / they cam vnto the thre honderd pylgrims that laye withoute 
gate & slepte strongly as they that doubted of nothyng / And 
put them alle to deth and slewe them / yf ony of them escaped he of the warn, 
was happy. 

1 Orig. wynes. 

a Caxton’s French text, which is corrupt, gives: “avec leurs aultres prin¬ 
cipals bages," which he has followed by translating “bageus and jewellery.” 

The Lat. gives il et omni mada mbstardia sua,” which the better French texts 
translate, by '‘Unites leurs choses." 3 Ong. uot. 5 Ong. bnt. 

6 Fr. “desa companye,'’ of hiaown army. 7 Orig. withont. 8 Orig. ynongh. 



120 Baldwin is greatly blamed for his Conduct. [Ch. LXXV. 

How the peple of bawdwyn knewe the departyng of 
the turkes, and of the slaughter of the cristen 
men. cap® lxxv® 

in the mom- o If the morne erly whan oure men awoke in the toun they sawe 4 

ing Baldwin’s J * 

men <Ue- the toures where the turkes hact he lodged open and! the howses 

covered the 0 * 

th^dfaSiui v °y de / They knewe wel that they were fledde. They serched the 
thaulad’ walles and! 1 yates for to enquyre how they were goon, they wente 
taken place. so f erre t,l la t they fonde this grete occision 2 and slaughter at the 8 
gate. Thenne began a sorow and a moche grete crye in the toun, 
Thecommon Alle men put the blame and! culpe on Bawdwyn and! hys knygtes, 
Baldwin* c ^ or they wold auenge the deth of theyr bretheren, whom the 

sarasyns had so shamely and! vylaynously slayn. By cause that the 12 
knyghtes of bawdwyn and also he hym self wold! not suffre them 
to come in to the toun. And! in dede the men of foote sayd this 
was don by grete oultrage & grete falshede. And yf they had 
not lyghtly withdrawen them in to the toures / they had 1 smyten 16 
them alle to deth / The knyghtes helde them alle stylle tyl that 
‘Thekni^iita the footemen were cooled! / and! after sente messagers whiche spak 
•JjJurs to be to them and requyre them to forbore so long / tyl that Bawdwyn 
p leaf 66] 3 had! spoken to them / they were content to here Bawdwyn speke. 20 
couii® miTb" Bawdwyn excused! hym to fore alle / and swar and affermed that 
tn<ao for none other thynge thentre was deffended them, but for that he 
had sworn to them of the toun / that by hym shold none entre tyl 
the grete hooste cam / By thyse wordes and by cause other enter- 24 
meted to make the peas and spoken debonayrly to the mene peple, 
was bawdwyn acorded to the foote men and his knyghtes also. In 
one moming this toun they soioumed and abode a certayn whyle, vntyl a morn- 
SSnenr 1 ' 6 y n S / *h e y sawe ln see n yg“ them- 4 a shippe aboute iij myle fro 28 
them, them / They yssued oute of the toun and! descended to the see / 
they that were in the ship approched to them in suche wyse that 
they spak to gydre / they of the ship sayde that they were cristen 
from men, they demaunded of what contre, and they answerd of fflaun- 32 
Holland, ami dres / of holande / and of ffryselande / And troutli it was they 
had? be escumours 4 of the see and robbers the space of viij yere. 
Now they repented them / And by penaunce cam in pylgremage to 
Iherusalem / they desyred them to come a londe / And they cam 36 

* Orig. aud. s Orig. oceisiou. 

4 Fr. “ une name" a fleet, instead of a single ship. Lat. classis , 

6 Fr, “ esatmeurs," pirates, corsairs. 



Ch. LXXV.] Tancrecl attacks Baldwin. 


121 


and! made to gydre grete ioye / they had a maister ouer them named! 
guynemer. 1 And! was bom of boloyne vpon the see in the londe of 
Erie Eustace, fader of the said due Godeffroy / whan he herde that 
4 Bawdwyn the sone of his lord was there, he lefte his ship, And! said! 
he wold! goo with hym to Iherusalem / he was moche ryche of this 
euyl gayne. And had many men with hym / that he ladde in his 
ship / thenne Bawdwyn lefte / v.C men of armes for to kepe the 
8 toun wel in poynt. And after he toke his waye for to seke somme 
auentures as he dyde to fore / he helde the right way til he cam to 
the eyte of anamyster, whiche tancre had goten by force of armes 
vpon the turkes, as I haue sayd you to fore / Bawdwyn thought 
12 wel that he wold not lete hym entre in to the cyte. And tlierfor 
he lodged hym in the gardyns about / 2 Tanere knewe that bawdwyn 
whiche loued him not 2 was so nygh hym / And he had not for- 
goten the wronge and the oultrage that bawdwyn had don to hym. 
16 Thenne he dyde do arme his men, and sayde that thenne was tyme 
for to venge hym / ffor he was nygh his retrayt, & bawdwyn was 
fer fro his. They sente Archiers to fore in grete nombre for to 
hurte and! slee theyr horses, whiche they had sente in to the 
20 pastures. Tancre had with hym fyue honderd men of armes in 
good poynt and wel horsed. And smote in sodanly in to the 
peple of bawdwyn whiche were not aduysed of them / they slewe 
many and moo they hurted, the men of bawdwyn ran hastely to 
24 s arme them & cam & fought with them that ran by the tenths / 
there began a bataylle bytwene them moche grete and fiers, but it 
endured not longe, ffor tancre had not so grete plente of peple that 
myght endure ayenst the men of bawdwyn, therfor they wold with- 
28 drawe them in to theyr toun / but theyr enemyes enchassed them 
strongly so moche that they muste flee / there was a brygge ouer a 
water bytwene the hooste and the cyte / the peple of tancre entred 
so thyck that many were lost and slayn vpon the brygge and 
32 drowned in the water / whan they were put in to the toune agayn 
they were moche angry in their herte / and wold take more peple 
and retorne agayn; but the nyght cam that destroubled it 4 / In 
this scarniuche was taken Bychard le pryncipat, cosyn germayn of 
36 tancre, and robert danse, both two were noble men, by their coun- 
seyl and a'tysement tancre had ronne vpon Bawdwyn. Of that 

1 Fr. ‘ ‘ gwynemers." 

2 Fr. “ Tancre savoit que Baudoin qu'il n'aimoil mie," 

4 Fr. “ le conseil," i. e. their plan. 


The cap tain's 
name was 
Guy Neiner 
of Cologne. 


Baldwin now 
started out 
in search of 
further ad¬ 
ventures. 


Tancred 
armed him¬ 
self to go 
against Bald¬ 
win to avenge 
the insult of 
Tarsus. 


P If. 56, bk.] 


Baldwin's 
army chased 
Tancred and 
his men back 
into the city. 



122 


Tancred and Baldwin are reconciled. [Ch. LXXVI. 

other syde was taken a moche noble man, named Gylbert de 
Mountcler. they were moche angry on that one syde and! on that 
other for them that they had loste, ffor they doubted! that they had! 
in the ben slayn or drowned! / whan it cam on the morn and! theyr hertes 4 
meeeengers a lvtil aswased / they sente messagers eche to other / And! knewe 

of reooncilia- J ° J ° ' 

«ent between certa y ll ly that thyse men that were taken lyuecf of whom they 
the orrates. dredde that had ben deed, and good men wente bytwene / And 1 
medled for to speke of pees in suche wyse that they cam agayn to 8 
entier concordaunce and! parfyght loue by the grace of the holy 
The two ghoost that adressyd! theyr hertes / They amended! theyr trespass 
ondbecome eche to other / And! kyssed! to gydre as frendes in good! fayth / 

friends. 

How the sayd Bawdwyn retorned to the grete hooste /12 
And how Tancre mayntenyd hym moche wel in 
conqueryng con trees. Capitulo lxxvi 0 

b Awdwyn had! counseyl whan he was come to Maraae, as I 
Baldwin re- have recompted that he shold! goo no feather forth / But 16 
rnainarmy 18 retorned in to thoost of the barons, By cause he herd saye how the 
brother.” due his brother had be hurte peryllously / And wold see and knowe 
of his estate and. how he ferde / theyr counseyl was that tancre shold 
goo forth. Bawdwyn lefte with hym guy neuers(20) / And them 20 
Tnncred end that were in his companye comen fro the shippe / They passed all 
on through sylyce and bete doun alle the forestes 1 of the hethen men that they 
myght fynde. they brente the townes, and slewe theyr enemyes. 

[• leaf 573 And after cam vnto a cyte called Alexandrye the lasse, 2 that they 24 
Alexandria toke by force, and conquerd al the contre about. The hermyns and 
aaeauu.' by turkes that dwellyd in the montaynes of this contre, herde tydynges 
that Tancre and his men were so valyaunt and so myghty that 
uothyng myght holde ayenst them / And sore dredde that lyke as 28 
he conquerd the playne, he wold come vpon them in the mon¬ 
taynes / And destroys the londe entierly and the peple, ffor 
tappease his courage they sente to 3 hym good and certeyn mes¬ 
sagers, whiche brought to hym grete yeftes, as gold / syluer / pre- 32 
cious stones / clothes of sylk / horses / and mulettis / they sente 
hym moche largely / ffor whiche cause Tancre 4 lefte them in peas. 
Thus dyde he wel his honoure and his prouffyt 6 in alle places 
that he went by / in suche wyse that it semed wel to euery 6 man / 36 

1 Fr. "fortresses," not “forests." 3 Orig. ta. * Orig. Taucre. 

6 Orig. pronffyt. 6 Orig. enery. 



Ch. LXXVII.] Baldtvin apologizes before the Army for his Conduct. 123 

that oure lord god adressyd his way and mayntened his werkes 
vertuosly. 

How bawdwyn conquerd a grete contre vpon the 
4 turkes by the counseyl 1 of a knyght hermyn, 
named pancrace 2 / ca° lxxvij 0 

n Ow ye haue herd how Tancre mayntened hym in sylyce / the 
grete hoost that folowed hym cam vnto marase / Bawdwyn 
8 that had seen his brother the due hool and sound, had herd Baldwin, 
agayne tydynges of Tancre, 3 how he dyde by the contre where he Tancred'a 
wente / he had moch grete desire to gadre to gydre peple, & goo 
serche the coretre lyke as he dyde to fore / But he had! lost moche likewlae - 
12 the good wyl and grace of thoost, ffor they of thoost had! herd tolde Bathew»» 

much dis* 

thoultrage that he had don to tancre and to his men. And! ther- lfea, 
fore many doubted! for to entreprise the way with hym / Buymont 
and his men also had not lyghtly suffred this thyng vnauenged, ne 
16 had it ben for the loue of the due his brother / Therfor bawdwyn and few men 

v would accona- 

founde but few felawes that wold goo with hym / GodefEroy the pany him. 
due, whiche was a moche wyseman / and of good wyll / blamed and 
repreuyd moche his brother of this werke / he brought hym herto 
20 that he knowleched his folye to fore alle the peple, and sayde that Fmany, he 
he had made amendes to tancre / after his will & yet wolde 
amende it vnto his playsyr / & swar that he had doon it more by J^ndshf** 
the counseyl and atysement of other / than of hym self. By thyse Tancred. 

24 wordes he appeasyd! the hertes of many men; for he was a moche 
valyaunt man and! moch curtoys / & neuer was perceyued in hym 
vylowye. he had an hermyne with hym moche pryue / named 
pancrace / he was right wyse and an hardy knyght. But he was 
28 ouermoche trycherous and! 4 vntrewe, he was escaped oute of the t 1 if. 57 , tk.i 
prison of themperour of constantynoble. And cam in to the hoost 
at nycene, where he acqueynted hym with bawdwyn / And he 
prayd hym and admonested that he shold take men and goo in to a 
32 countre where he shold lede hym to / whiche was moche plentyuous 
and ful of goodes / And yf he wold goo / he shold conquere 5 it 
lightly / so ofte he said to hym herof that he began to take his way Baldwin and 

, . . two hundred 

and* departed! with two honderd! knyghtes and! other men of armes k night8dj^ 
36 ynough and feotemen grete nombre / They folowed pancrace alle / fhe p gm<kn«r 

tiU9. 

1 Orig. couuseyl. 2 Lat, Pancratius. 3 Orig. Tancre. 

3 Orig . couquere. 



124 


III a >liort 
time ha con¬ 
quered all 
the land, as 
fkr os the 
Euphrates. 


The Chris¬ 
tians of the 
country 
helped him. 


The Chris¬ 
tians of Rages 
send word to 
Baldwin to 
come and 
deliver them. 


Saint Jude 
the Apostle 
converted 
this city to 
the Christian 
faith. 

[• leaf 58, 
sig. 71.] 


The Turks are much afraid of Baldioin. [Ch. LXXVIII. 

whiche brought them toward byse in a moch ryche lond / they that 
dwellyd in this londe were alls cristen men, sauf a fewe turkes 
which helde the fortresses / they were lordes of the contre / and 
suffred? not the cristen men sholcf meddle with ony armes in no 4 
wyse / whan they that were of oure 1 fayth sawe bawdwyn and his 
men, they were glad and! ioyeful / ffor they loued not the turkes, 
they delyuerd ouer the contre where they had puyssaunee / in 
suche wyse that in a short tyme that he had conquerd alle the 8 
londe vnto the flood eufrates: Bawdwyn was moch drad & 
doubted thurgh alle the contre ther about in such wyse that for 
drede / they lefte hym alle the fortresses wel garnysshed!, and toke 
them without debate / the cristen men whiche had receyued hym 12 
in to his londe, bycam so fiers and! hardy / that they hunted alle 
the hethen men out 2 of the contre. ther were somme barons of 
the contre that seruyd bawdwyn with alle theyr puyssaunee / and 
heelpe hym to brynge alle thyng to his wylle / 16 

How they of rages sente theyr messagers to bawdwyn, 
prayeng hym that he wold come to them. 

cap 0 lxxviij 0 

t He renomme of this grete man, of whom his prowesse & 20 
wytte spredde oueral, cam vnto the cytezeyns of rages, 3 hopyng* 
by hym to be delyuerid of the seruage in whiche they had ben long. 
The grettest men that had! the gouemaunce of the toun sente cer- 
tayn Messagers to Bawdwyn, and! prayd! hym for the loue of God, 24 
for his honours and! prouffyt, that he wold 1 come vnto theyr cyte, 
whiche was named rages 4 (21) / as is founden in the byble / Thether 
sente thobye his sone, yong 1 Thobye, for to demaunde the moneye 
that Gable his cosyn ought hym / and on the way wedded sara his 28 
wyf / the Cytezeyns of this cyte receyued cristen fayth anon after 
the deth of oure lord! Ihesu criste / by the prechyng* of seynt Iude 
appostle, brother of seynt Symon 5 / as it is founds wreton 6 the book 
of Eusebee of cesaire / they helde yet fermly this lawe that tyme / 32 

1 Orig. onre. 8 Orig. ont. 

8 Fr. Rohdes. Lat. Bhages. 

4 Lat. “ eat autem Edessa nobilis Mesopotamia, quae,, alio nomine, Bhages 
appellator." 

5 Fr. “ Si comme I’en treuve ou premier lime (A. inserts here 'de Vestoire’) 
de sainete Eglise, que Eusebee de Cesaire, etc ."—as is found in the first book of 
the Ecclesiastical History of Eusebius of Cesarea. 



125 


Ch. LXXVill.] Raldvnn goes to Rages. 

but 1 the turkes that were about 2 them constreyned them so moeh 
that they made them paye greuous and grete tributes euery 3 yere, 
in so moche / whan tyme cam for to gadre theyr fruytes, of 
4 theyr vynes and other / they raunsouned 4 them and muste paye at 
theyr wylle / or ellys they wolde destroye alle / Neuertheles in the «»**>• 
toun 5 durst noman 6 dwelle but he byleuyd in Ihesu criste, ffor this 
only toun was holden hool and entierly in the fayth. the liethen C0Ulltr y- 
8 peple had conquerd 7 the other townes / and therfor they greued 
moche the cristen peple of this toun / ne wold not suffre them yssue 
out of the toun for to doo theyr nedes, ffor on alle sydes of them 
was the puyssaunce of the turkes / In this toun had the seygnorye The lord 
12 a greek that was moche oold(22) / and had no childeren, he had an age/md 
ben there syth the tyme that this londe was vnder themperour of Tllrk - 
Constantynoble, ffor he was sente thyder by themperour for 8 to be 
baylly. And whan the turkes toke alle the countrey / he departed 
16 not thens, but abode alwey in his baylliage / Neuertheles he was 
that made neyther hoot ne cold / ne kept not the peple / but at 
theyr wyll / whan the Cytezeyns were aeorded for to sende for 
bawdwyn he knewe it wel and was content / whan Bawdwyn herde 
20 that they of rages had sente for hym by comyn counseyl and 
acorde / he toke couwseyl with his men & fonde by his couuseyl 
for to goo theder. he ordeyned lxxx horsmere without moo for to Baldwin went 
goo with hym / he passed the ryuer of eufrates / and lefte the hommm to 
24 remenaunt of his peple in the fortresses that he had conquerd 7 in 
the contre to kepe them surely / the turkes that dwellyd in this 
lawde knewe the tydynges how bawdwyn shold come to rages with 
a fewe men, & made an embusshement by the waye where he 
28 shold passe / and sette there grete plente of men of armes / thyse The Turks set 
tydynges wer sayde to bawdwyn, & therfor he torned to a castel attnckjiim 
by, wliiche an hermyn helde / he receyued hym gladly & al his 
men moch honorably, & was lodged there ij days / the turkes that 
32 were ennoyed to be so long so embusshed, yssued out and cam with 
baners displayed to fore the castel where bawdwyn was Inne / none 
yssued out for ther were ouer many men / The proye that they 
founde in the pastures / they brought alle with them. And after 

1 Grig. bnt. 2 Orig. abont. 3 Ong. enery 

4 Caxton has omitted, “estovoit," they were obliged, to ransom their lands 
and fruits. 

8 Ong. tonn. 

8 Orig. fro. 


8 Orig. uoman. 


7 Orig. conqnerd. 



126 The Citizens of Rages receive Baldivin joyfully. [Ch. LXXIX. 

Baldwin tomed in to theyr countrey 1 / On the thirde daye Bawdwyn yssued 
wenfcm to d out and toke his waye and* cam to Rages / The due of the toun 2 that 
was a greek, as I haue sairf to fore, cam ayenst hym. And alle the 
where he other on horsbak & a foote with trompes and* busynes / The peple 4 

was received . , - ,, 

withgj|at of the toun receyued? hym 3 with procession the moost honorably 
p if. w, bk.]f they niyght, euerych peyned hym to make hym feste after his 
puyssaunce. 


How the due that was at rages varyed for to holde 8 
this that he had promysed to Bawdwyn / 

capitulo lxxix 0 

g Kete suspection had! the due in his herte whan he sawe this 
Ioye that alle made to Bawdwyn. thenne by enuye he began 12 
to fynde occasions by whiche he myght / parte fro the couenauwtes 
Baldwin i» suche as he had sente, whiche were suche / Bawdwyn shold haue 
of the income half the Rentes of alle the Cyte and* of alle thexploy tes / as long as 
at present, the due lyued / After his deth, whiche was olde, he shold! haue alle 16 
after the old the seygnorye entierly and? hool. Now the due wold? not holde 
The old Duke this / But sayde, that yf bawdwyn wold deffende the cyte fro the 
tMsTgre** 1 strengthe of the turkes, and fro theyr gryeues that they made in 

the countre he wold! gyue to hym, and his men resonable souldye 20 
and good wages / whan Bawdwyn herd this that he was come 
theder for to be a souldyour / he had moche grete desdayne, aftd 
sayd that he wold not abyde there so / but wold ordeyne for hym 
& his men for to retome / the Cytezeyns of the toun sawe that 24 
The people this thynge wente not wel / And cam to the due / and shewde hym 
wereeoin-^t that grete euyl & peryll shold folowe yf he lete this noble man 
was forced to d e P ar *' e / fi° r by thayde of hym they and alle theyr thynges shold 
bargain^ llis be kept in peas and deffended 4 / and they shold be in grete fran- 28 
chyse. The due sawe wel by thyse wordes that he shold do folye / 
yf he sette hym ayenst them of the toun / therfore he couerd his 
herte for that tyme / not withstondyng he considered many thynges 
and thought / But sayde that he wold acorde therto / and made 32 
semblaunt that he dyde it with good wille in the presence of alle 
them of the toun, 2 and avowed bawdwyn to his sone / and graunted 
hym the half of alle that he had and shold haue his lyf duryng / 
And after his decees to haue alle as his heyr / Grete ioye had they 36 
in the cyte whan this was made / And had moost ferme hope for to 
1 Orig. couutrey. a Orig. tonn. 


4 Oriy. tlcffeuded. 



127 


Ch. LXXX.] Baldwin assails Famosette. 

recouure 1 the franchyse of the tributes 2 that the turkes haft charged 
them with, ffro that day forth they began to remembre in tlieyr 
hertes the wronges and! gryefs that theyr due 3 had! don to them 
4 in tyme passed / And thought moche that yf tyme and place cam 
to poynt / they wold suffre it no lenger / But thought how they 
myght auenge this that they had! suffred! alle the tyme that he had 
be due. 


8 4 How Bawdwyn wente to assay lie famosette, the cyte 
nyghe to Rages / Capitulo lxxx 0 

a Cyte was there nyghe by / moche stronge and! wel gamysshed / 
named famosette. An vntrew turke named! blanduc 5 was lord! 
12 therof / he was a trychour / but he was noble and 1 hardy in armes / 
This sarasyn had don moche harme to the cytezeyns of Rages : he 
sette on them trybutes and dyuerse demaundes ofte, as they had 
ben his bondemen / And for to haue thyse thynges he had good 
16 ostages. he helde theyr childeren so fowle as they had ben in 
seruage, he made them to here donge and fylthe, and doo fowle 
werkes / herof they of rages were moche greuyd. They cam to fore 
bawdwyn, and kneled to hym at his feet, and prayd hym with 
20 ioyned handes right humbly, wepyng 1 grete teres / that he wold 
delyuer them fro this turk forsayd, in suche wyse that they myght 
recouure theyr childeren / whom he helde so shamefully / Bawdwyn 
wold fayne doo theyr requeste, after theyr desire at this theyr first 
24 requeste / And to gete theyr lone and thanke / he dyde do arme 
hym and alle them that he myght haue / And yssued with them 
out of the toun / And cam to fore famosete / And assaylled the 
toun moche vygorously / But they within deffended them as men 
28 wel gamysshed and in a strong place / whan Bawdwyn had ben 
there, I wote not how many dayes, and! sawe it coude not lightly 
be taken, he lefte in a fortresse nyghe by Ixx knyghtes / and put 
in it garnyson of men of armes and vytaylles, And commanded them 
32 that euery day they shold renne to fore the toun of famosete, And 
suffre to yssue of the toun neyther man ne beste. and after he cam 
agayn to rages / the Cytezeyns of the toun sawe wel that bawdwyn 
was a moche curtoys man / wyse, noble, and valyaunt in alle his 
36 thynges / And had despyte and grete desdayne, that this old due 

1 Orig, recouure. s Orig. trnbutes. 3 Orig. dnc. 

5 Fr. Baudus. Lat. Balduc. 


[* leaf 59. 
»lg. 73.] 


B lan due 
was lord of 
Famoeette, a 
neighbouring 
eity. 


He held the 
children of 
the people of 
Rages as 
hostages, 
and treated 
them cruelly. 


They en¬ 
treated 
Baldwin to 
recover their 
children. 


Baldwin left 
a party of 
men to be¬ 
siege it, 


and returned 
himself to 
Rages. 



128 JBaldwin is made Lord of hages. [Cli. LXXXl. 

whiche was nought worth, and 1 that had don to them moclie 
sorowe / 1 and! was not his felaw, but his lord in the toun 1 / thcrfor 
they toke counseyl emonge them-/ and sente for a puyssaunt man, 
whiche had many fortresses by 2 them in the montaynes, named! 4 
The^ decided constantyn, & acorded! alle to gydre for to slee their due, & 
duke^im/to wold make bawdwyn due & lord vpon them, ffor they moch 

make Bald- J A 

hated this old man, that without fayll had greued 3 them long tyme 
in many maners / for he toke fro them gold & syluer, & all that 8 
plesyd hym in the toun, & ther was none so hardy that durst 
withstande hym ne displese hym, ffor yf they dide, anon by the 
turkes with whom he was acqueynted!, made them to destroye theyr 
C* ir. 59 , bit.] vygnes 4 and! fruytes, and! brenne theyr whete and come / and! lede 12 
away theyr beestes / And! yf ony of them went out of the toun, 
they had fere for to lese theyr hoedes / 


win their 
lord. 


How they of the toun of rages slewe theyr due, and 
chees bawdwyn for to be theyr lord / cap® lxxxi 0 16 

t Hey had! not forgeten the wronges and! Iniuryes 6 that they 
hatt suffred! of- theyr due / they hoped al, that yf he were deed / 
They went that bawdwyn shold deffende them better than he. Therfore they 
to ti.e tower wente al armed, as it was enterprised 1 , vnto a tour where as he lave. 20 
Duke lay. And began strongly tassayle it, and enuyronned! 6 round! about / The 
due sawe that the peple was so sore meuyei and angry on hym / And 
called bawdwyn, and prayd hym to take of his tresour as moche 
Baldwin tried as he wolde, and repease the peple / Bawdwyn cam emong them, 24 
but ?n°vain ant * trauaylled moche by prayers and? menaces for to haue supposed 
to haue repeased them / but he myght doo nothyng, ffor al way 
ther cam moo and! more, in suche wyse that the companye encreced / 
Bawdwyn departed thus fro them, and spak to the Due, and! said 1 28 
that he shold! take to hym suche counseyl 7 / that he myght eschewe 
the furye of the peple / ffor 7 he myght not remedye it. thenne the 
The Duke in due, as a man despayred, bonde a corde to a wvndowe and de- 

descending it, ' 

rromawin- seendeu doun therby / But whan they apperceyued? he was thurgh 32 
nrrowe and sme * on w >th arowes e'r he myght come to therthe. Thenne they 
dead. 0 '™ *°ke hym al deed! / And drewe hym thurgh the toun / And! after 

1 — 1 “ and ” should be omitted, and “ not only ” supplied here, to make the 
translation correspond with the original. Fr. “estoit non mie settlement son 
pareil inais son seigneur." 8 Fr. "pres d’eulx," near them. 

3 Orig. grened. 6 Orig. Ininryes. 8 Orig. ennyronned!. 

7-7 Fr. ‘ ‘ comme il powrrait pour miculx chevir auccques eulx. ” 



129 


Ch. LXXXII.] Baldwin becomes Lord of Rages. 

smote of liis heed / And? coude not doo ynowgh to satisfie theyr 
crueltees. On the morn they toke bawdwyn hy force, ayenst his The^mncie,^ 
will in deffendyng hym self / and lyft hym vp as theyr kyng 1 and b r force - 
4 lorde / They made to hym oth of feaulte / And after delyuerd! 1 to 
hym the grete fortresse of the toun / And 2 gaf to hym at his will 
Eychesses and moche grete tresours that the grekes had assembled 
by long 1 tyme / Thus was the cyte of Eages delyuerd withoute con- 
8 tradiction to bawdwyn / Banduc, that was lord of ffamosete / sawe 
how Bawdwyn conquerd alwey the londes and eontrees, and 
encreced his puyssaunce / And sente to hym messagers whiche lete 
hym wete how that his Cyte was moche strange / and myght not 
12 lightly be wonne, but he wold selle it hym yf he wold gyue Banduc »oid 
hym .x / M / besauntes / Bawdwyn aduysed hym herupon / & 
by counseyl acorded to bye it, and payd to hym that somme, & 
receyued the toun entierly / & Banduc rendred thostages that he 
16 had liolden alle thenne / And thus he conquerd the hertes and 

loue 3 of them of the toun / that they called hym theyr fader / And [* s ' e g af 7 ™' 
they dyde alle that plesyd hym to theyr power, and redy tobeye 
hym to the deth. 

20 How bawdwyn wente and assieged the toun of serorge, 
nygh to rages, and toke it / And of his orden- 
aunces. cap 0 lxxxij 0 

i N this londe was a Cyte named serorge, 4 wherin dwellyd none 
24 other peple sauf hethen men / The lord of the toun was named Bniaii 

- r ' tit lord of the 

balak. the turkes that were therin dyde many traueyls and vylayn- city Serorge. 
ous oultrages / so many that they prayde bawdwyn theyr lord for 
the loue of god / and for thaffection that he had to them / that he 
28 wold take counseyl and sette a remedye of this thyng / he answerd 
curtoysly / And sayde that he wold doo it gladly, thenne he com- 
maunded that euery man shold arme hym dylygently / And whan 
they were redy / they shold yssue out of rages, and goo strayt for to 
32 assiege the cyte of sororge / Thenne dressyd they theyr engyns, and be- 
began to leye the siege / And brak the walles ond torettes. The city. 
Turkes that were within the toun were moch abasshed, ffor they 
thought wel that bawdwyn ne his peple wold not leghtly departe 
36 fro the siege / no they vnderstode of no socours fro noo syde / wher- 

1 Orig. delyncrdl. 2 Orig. Aud. 4 Sororge. 

GODFREY. K 



130 


Godfrey and his Arrjiy arrive at Marese. [Ch. LX XX III. 

fore they sente theyr messagers to bawdwyn / And so entreted that, 

Th« Turks theyr lyues saued, they wolde yelde the toun to hym. Bawdwyn 
town to him. receyued the toun / And put in the grettest fortresse, one ins bayly, 
that shold doo his commauwdement in that countrey / And! ordeyned 4 
a moche grete tribute on them of the toun, 1 and lefte hem therin / 
fEor he had not other peple ynough 2 for to people the toun yf they 
By this con- wente theyr waye / By the prise of this cyte, was alle the way 
way from 116 delyuerd of the hethen, fro rages vnto anthyoche / fEor to fore myglit 8 
tehe was none goo vnto the ryuer 3 of eufrates for. the peple of sororge / Thus 
the Turks, cam 4 Bawdwyn to grete honour and to moche ioyous feste in the 
cyte of rages / Now we shal leue to speke of Bawdwyn / And shal 
speke now of the grete hooste that cam be hynde after. 12 


How the grete lioost cam to fore marese. 5 And how 
the turkes that were within fledde. And how 
our peple payned them to conquere countrees / 

* capitulo lxxxiij 0 16 


[* If. 60, bk.] 
Godfrey and 
hU army ar¬ 
rived before 
the city 
Marese, from 
which tbe 
Turks fled. 


There was a 
rich city near 
by, called 
Artaysse. 


t He due godeffroy & the grete plente of the barons & knyghtes 
and noble men and other with them, they passed moche 
6 greuous wayes, and were comen by valeyes and montaynes vnte- 
a Cyte named Marese. this is not that toun that I spak of to 20 
fore, ffor that is named Maraze / This cyte named Marese was 
enhabyted with Cristen men. Neuerthelesse the Turkes helde the 
fortresses, And had the seignorye of the toun. And euyl entreted 
the cristen peple. thyse hethen peple herd of the comyng of our 24 
peple, & fledde by nyght for fere of them / And ther abode none 
of the toun sauf they of oure fayth / whan the hooste approuched, 
the barons knewe the trouth of this toun. Thenne they defEended 
generally that none sliold doo no harme to them of the toune ne to 28 
theyr thynges / They lodged them in a moche fayre place and 
delytable / And had vytaylles ynough and good cheep. They of 
the countre lete the barons of thooste haue knowleche / that ther 
fast by / was a ryche Cyte and ful of goodes named Artaysse / 32 
And dwellyd in the fortresses of the toun none other but hethen 
men. The prynces toke counseyl herupon / And sente Robert the 
Erie of fflaundres theder / he toke with hym Robert de Rosoye 


1 Orig. tonn. 8 Orig. ynongh. 8 Orig. ryner. 

4 Fr. revint, returned. * Orig. marese. 



Ch. LXXXIII.] The Turks lay, in Ambush for the Christians. 131 
And 1 Gossolyn the sone of aconon 1 de montagu / they were wel a Robert of 

, - , T . Flanders 

thousand men of armes whan they cam to fore the toun / Anon went to be- 

" ‘ (.hjg 

they assieged it. The turkes that were within trusted! not the city. 

4 walles of the toun / And wold haue withdrawen them to the gretter 
fortresses of the toun. But the hermyns and the other men of our 
fayth / to whom the turkes had don loreg tyme grete shames & 
moch harme in the toun / whan they sawe oure men they had "grete 
8 affyance and! truste in them / And! toke ynto them moche grete 
hardynesse / And! ranne to armes / and er the turkes. myght with 
drawe them in to the fortresses 2 and toures / they slewe them / and 
threwe their heedes ouer the walles to our men / & aftir opened The elms- 

, ' , tians iu the 

12 the gates & receyued them in to the toun with grete ioye, & gjy opened 
therin they fonde al that they had nede of / ffor the cytc was our ,,ie "- 
merueyllously ryche. fEro thens ynto Anthyoche was hut xv myle / 
this cyte of whiche I speke is vnder the patriarke of anthyoche / 

16 & for fere of oure peple were the moost parties of the turkes fledde 
in to anthyoche. whan they herd saye that artayse was thus 
taken / & they had slayn them that were lordes, they toke couwseyl 
emonge them for to aduyse how they myght hurte thoost. they The Turks 

. . . , iii. resolved upon 

20 choos out / x m / to whom they comawled taccowplysshe this vengeance, 

11 ° 1 J and planned 

thyng* / they wente forth / and whan they approched thoost / they ™ d * ,nbn ®* 
put 3 them all in a husshemewt sauf / xxX. wel horsed and lightly 
armed, whom they sente forth for to drawe men fro thoost. they 
24 approched so nygh / that the hooste of the toun sawe them / ffor 

4 they made semblauwt for to take fourriers 5 and the horses nyghe [* leaf 6i, 
them / oure peple ran to armes / & began to folowe so ferr that *'*’ 
they fought to gydre folyly vpon theyr watche / they sprange out, 

28 and wold haue ronne bytwene them and the toun for tenclose them 

in, but our men assembled them and ran to gydre / and cam def- out our man 

. escaped, and 

fendyng 1 them / vntyl they cam into the toun in suche wyse that bom# 
they loste noman / The turkes sawe wel that they myght not 
32 recouure the toun, and began to assiege it / ffor they had peple 
ynowgh, and after began tassayle it. they within deffended them 
wel that they without loste more than wan. whan the turkes sawe 
that the grete hoost made them redy and approuche / Aud that 
36 they prouffyted not, they toke counseyl / and retomed in to tu# ruvks 
anthioche / But® the brygge that was bytwene they gamysshed turned to 
moche wel / The Erie of fflaundres and the other that were with 

1 Fr. Conon, not Aconon. 2 Orig. fotresses, 3 Orig. pnt. 

5 Fr .foriers, foragers. 6 Orig. Bnt. 


£ 2 



132 


The Crusaders start once more for Antioch. [Ch. LXXXIV. 

Goseiyn, son hym within artayse went not out, but kept the toun / but that day 
Montagu, a maladye toke goseiyn, the sone of aconon of montagu, a yong 
tmricd with man, curtovs and! moche valyaunt. he deyde of that maladye / 

great lament- ° v . . , , , 

Htiou. And 1 was buryecP in that toun with moche worship aud. grete 4 
lamentacion. 


How it was commaunded vnto alle the barons to 
come vnto thoost for to goo vn to anthyoche, 
aud of som recountres that they had in the 8 
waye / cap® lxxxiiij 0 

w Han the turkes that were come fro anthyoche for to recouure 
artayse were departed from thens / at the spryngyng 4 of the 
day / tydynges cam that the grete hooste was lodged' nygh by, ffor 12 
they had! herd! saye / how therle of fflaundres was besieged! / And 
therfor by comyn counseyl they had! sente xv / C / horsmen to 
fore to socoure them yf they had nede. They commaunded! them 
that yf the siege were departed / they shold leue peple resonably to 16 
Kepe the toun / And shold saye to therle of fflaundres, and! to them 
The great that were with hym, that they shold come agayn in to the hoost. 

barons were 

aii ordered to Tancre, whiche had conquerd* alle sylyce, had in commaundement 

the siege of 1 ^ J J ’ 

Antioch. to C ome agayn / and he retorned, and alle the other also that were 20 

departed fro the hooste generally were comen agayne / sauf Bawd- 
Baiduin wyn, whiche abode aboute Rages, where he did! wel his thynges. 
at°n.iges rcd 1 whan the hoost was thus coimseylled & ordeyned, 1 they dyde 

do crye thurgh out al thoost that noman shold! departe without 24 
leue. Thenne toke they al theyr way for to goo strayt vnto 
[> if. 6i, bit.] Anthyoche / they herd 2 wel saye that ther ran a water whiche 
they muste passe. But the brygge vpon this water was moche wel 
garnysshed! of theyr enemyes, to thende thenne that the hoost 28 
shold 1 not be destroubled! for to passe whan they shold arryue 
Hubert of there / by eomvn counseyl of them alle, Robert, the due of 

Normandy 

vance'toee uorman dye, shold! goo to for to knowe yf he myght delyuere the 
could be'* 1 ' 6 I )assa o e / an d to sende worde to the barons what he founde. with 32 
passed. hym wente euerard! du puysaut and! Rogyer de barneuylle, thyse 
two he made conestables of his hooste, and had! thauaunt garde / 

1—1 Fr. “Se fu rasemblett enterinement," viz., “when the army was again 
entirely assembled.”. 



133 


Ch. LXXXIV.] Antioch is strongly defended, 

ffor they were bothe moche cheualrous and proued in armes. thus 
departed they fro the hooste and! cam to the brygge / 1 the brygge This bridge 
was lift vp whiche is named esenclaues / And in scripture Orontes. 

4 Orontes 1 / Also it is called in the contre helle. 2 The brygge was 
moche strong / And! had! at thentre on this syde hye towres and 
stronge / In euery tour were .1 / men of Armes for to deffende with rt was well 

. , , , , ' . , , defended, and 

bowes and arabalestres the entree of the brygge and the passage of there was a 

0 sharp skirm* 

8 the water. On that other syde toward? antyoche were comen seuen ^re. 
honderd! .horsmen for to kepe that syde of the water toward them / 
this ryuer of helle renneth on the syde of Antyoche, And cometh 
by another cyte named! cesaire / But it sourdeth by another cyte 
12 named Eliopee, And is called mallec, 3 and descendeth in to the 
see by there as I haue sayd / whan our peple were comen to this 
brygge / thentre was wel denyed them, ffor grete plente of turkes 
were descended doun to the bariers / The other toures rested not 
16 to caste stones and shots so sore that it was a moche grete scar- 
muche and fiers. they fought so moche to gydre that tydynges cam 
in to the hoost which alwey meuyd, and was thenne not fer fro 
the brygge. they auaunced theyr paas and sowned! trompes and! our main 
20 busynes / and! smote on them that held ayenst them the paas / they up, and soon 
that were in the toures durst holde them no lenger there for fere of bridge, 
the grete peple that they sawe come with the grete hoost / ffor they 
thought they shold not he there sure. The other also descended / 

24 And were put alle to flyght / in suche wyse that oure men toke the 
brydge / the other knyghtes of oure peple that myght not come to 
the baryers for the prees whilis the scarmuche was, were moche 
anguysshous and descended doun, where as there was a place to 
28 passe whiche they of the contre knewe not of, And passed ouer and 
discomfyted the seuen honderd sarasyns that kepte the bancke / ■ 

So moche dyde one and other that alle the hooste passed delyuerly Our men «n 
ouer, And caryage after / they lodged them in a moche / fayr place, over!* 1safely 
32 a / vj / myle fro the toun / On the morn they 4 approched alle the [* leaf 82 ] 

1—1 Mistake arising from a corrupt text. The correct French is, “liponz 
estoit sur Vcaue qui a non cs andennes cscripturcs, Orontes .’’—In Caxton’s French 
text, “ esandennes" is written as one word.—Caxton read it “ cscuilaves," and 
then left out part of the sentence in order to make an intelligible sentence with 
his new word. 

2 Caxton follows his French text, and translates “ VEnfer ’’ by Helle. The 
correct form is “ El Fer," the Fer. Lat. “ Orqntes appelatur, verbo vulgari, Fer 
dictus." 

* Fr. Maubec, Lat. Malbec. 



134 


Antioch is a 
noble city, 
whose patri¬ 
arch is third 
after that of 
Rome. 


Saint Peter 
was the first 
bishop here. 


The first 

council was 
held here. 


Saint Peter 
converted it 
with his 
preaching. 


The different Names of Antioch. [Ch. LXXXV- 

grete waye bytwene the montaynes and! the ryuer, in suche wyse 
that they lodged but a myle fro the cyte. 

How Antyoche, by succession of tyme, had dyuerse 
names, and of the noblesse of auncyente / 4 

cap” lxxxv 0 

a Nthyoclie is a moche noble eyte / which conteyneth the third 
place emong the patriarkes, after the chirche of Rome. This 
cyte was named somtyme Esencianes 1 / after that the wrytynges 8 
witnesse / Nabugodonosor, kynge of habylone, brought sedechyas, 
kyng of Iherasalem, theder, whau he had taken hym / And slewe 
his sones to fore hym / And after put out his eyen, as is founden in 
the fourth book of kynges. whan Alysaupdre, kyng of macedone, 12 
was deed, Anthyochus had this part of the londe, & enforced 
moche the cyte of grete toures and wallys / And wold haue it 
named after hym Anthyoche, and ordeyned it chyef of alle the 
Royame / the prynce of thappostlys, seynt Peter, was first bisshop 16 
there, in a cliirehe that theophilus made to hym of his hows, which 
was a noble and a myghty man in the toun / Seynt luke, the holy 
euangelyste, was born in this toun 2 / to the same theophle wrote he 
thactes of thappostles / wliiche was the .vij / bisshop in anthyoche / 20 
ther was the first counseyl of them that byleuyd in Ihesu Criste 
after his deth. And thenne was establysshed that they shold be 
called crysten men of crist; ffor byfore they were called nazaryens, 
of the cyte that he was of / this cyte was conuerted 3 by the precliyng 24 
of Seynt Peter, therfore he gaf it the name of theopoble / whiche is 
as moche to saye as of god oure lord / vnder Antyoche ben ,xx. 
grete cytees / of whiche ben / xiiij Archebisshopriclies / The sex 
haue two Primates, whiche ben called catholicos / that one is in the 28 
cyte whiche is named Amene, And that other is at bandras. 4 5 And 
alle this clay me tli thoryent 6 / 

1 Caxton’s text has the same corruption here as in p. 133. The correct 
sentence reads ‘ ‘ eeste ot non cs anciennes escriptures Rebladal" 

- Grig. tonu. 

s Grig, connerted. 

* Fr. Baudas, Lat. Baldacenses. 

5-5 Fr. “et tout\ce claime cn l'orient," viz. “and all this is called the 
Orient.” 



Ch. LXXXVI.] The Situation of Antioch. 


135 


Of the situation of Anthyoche. capitulo lxxxvj 0 

t His cyte, of -whom I haue spoken, is anthyoche / And! stondeth 
in the londe of this Surye / And is parte of the londe of the 
4 gvete surye. It stondeth in a moche fayr place and delytable / Antio* h«w a 
How I shall reeounte to you how it stondeth / It is a moche grete 
towne / And aboute moche good londe, for to here habondannce of 
1 whete, of corn, of fayr fontaynes and smale rennyng waters / and p it 62 , bkj 
8 it is emong the montaynes toward the eest, whiche contre dureth North of it is 
wel xl myle of lewgthe, & wel vj myle of brede / aboue ther is a twootj« r 
lake or mere, assembled of sprynges & wellya, that renne therin / m o un,ai “ s - 
whiche is ful of fysshe / Of this lake yssueth a rennyng* water, 

12 whiche cometh nygh the cyte, And renneth in to the ryuer that 
renneth by the toun / the montaynes closed the two sides of the 
toun. Neuertheles, ther ben vnder them fressh waters and erable 
londe. The mount whiche is toward the south is named Oronte / one moan- 

- - - - _ . . . „ tain is named 

lo lyke as I sayd you of the ryuer; ftor seynt Gregoire sayth that orontes; 

antyoche is sette bytwene oronte the ryuer & oronte the montayne / 
one partie of this montayne, that goth toward the see, is moch hye, 
in such wyse that it hath a name by hym self. Somme peple wene 
20 that this hylle be pemasus, a montayne of whiche scripture 2 speketh 
moche / by cause of a fontayne that is atte the foote of the same 
hylle, which is named leschielle buymand / But, without faulte, 8 
this is not the mount 4 of whiche the auctors 5 speke: ffor this 
24 montayne pemasus stondeth in the lande named Thessaylle / That the other one 

, . , . , . , „ , is called The 

other montayne, whiche is toward the south, is named the black Black Mou»- 
montayne, fulle also of sprynges and wellys / of wodes and of 
pastures / There were wonte aunciently thermytes for to dwelle / 

28 thurgh this valeye renneth the Ryuer that I spak of to fore / And 
renneth to ward the see / In the montayne toward the south, 
begynneth the walles of Antyoche, and come vnto the Ryuer® / hit 
is a grete espace within the closure, ther ben enclosed within the Ti'eenciwure 
32 walles two montaynes 7 / vpon the hyest stondeth a fortresse, so ver 3 r lar s e . 
stronge that it is not prenable, but by famyne. Bytwene thyse two 
montaynes, whiche ben moche hye, is a valeye right depe, but it is 
strayt / in that renneth a litil water, right faste and swyfte, and J“]j^ a nnd a 
36 entred in to the toun : 8 and doth moche good to the toun / In the river - 

3 Fr. escriptures, the books, the ancient writings, not “the Scriptures. 1 ' 

3 Fr. sans faulte, without doubt. 4 Orig. mount. 5 (frig, anctors. 

8 Orig. Byner. 7 Orig. montayues. 8 Orig. tonn. 



136 


All the walls 
are marvel¬ 
lously thick, 
and there are 
many towers. 


P leaf 68] 
The town is 
two or three 
miles long. 


Ancean was 
lord of 
Antioch. 

Belphet, son- 
dan of Persia, 
had con¬ 
quered all 
tnis country. 


He had given 
Nicsa to 
Solyman, and 
Damascus to 
Ducar. 


Ancean is now Lord of Antioch. [Ch. LXXXVII. 

Cyte ben many fontaynes / but 1 the beste is the fontayne whiche is 
named the fonteyn of seynt poul, And is nyghe to the eest gate / 
ther is another fontayne without the toun, which by crafte and 
conduytes is brought in to the toun right subtylly / Alle the walles 4 
of the toun / that is to wete, they that ben on the montaynes, and 
they that ben hangyng / And also they that ben in the playn, ben 
merueyllous thycke, ffor they ben of ouer stronge werke / Ther ben 
toures moche hye and! wel defeneable, that is toward! the sonne 8 
goyng* doun / The ryuer renneth so nygh the toun / that the brygge 
on whiche men passe ioyneth to the walles and to the gate of the 
cyte / The lengthe 2 of the toun is wel two or thre myle / hit is 
nyghe vnto the see / xij myle of. 12 

Who that was thenne lord of antyoche / And in what 
manere he was comen vnto this seygnorye / 

cap 0 lxxxvij 0 

o F this cyte of Anthyoche was lord 3 a turlc, named Ancean of 16 
the mesque / ther hod ben a puyssaunt sowdan of perse 3 / of 
whom we haue spoken to fore, named belphet, which had conquerd 
alle thyse londes. And after, whan he wold retorne agayn in to his 
coutrey / he departed entierly his conquest to his neueus, and to 20 
somme of his meyne / by cause that he wold that they that were 
his trewe men and frendes, shold holde peas, eche in his partye / 
and .shold be as defendours and the closyng* of the londe / he gaf 
to his neuew solyman, nycque, or nycene, with alle theyr ap- 24 
pertenauntes, as ye haue herd to fore / to another neuew, named 
dutar, 4 he gaf the- Cyte of damaske / And alle the eountre about / 
and wold that eche of them shold here the name of soudan / and 
lyke dygnyte / Solyman, 6 by cause he marched on the grekes, had 28 
euery day debate ayenst themperour of Constantynoble / Ducar was 
ayenst them of Egypte / And ofte made warre eche to other, ffor 
they loued not to gydre / To thende thenne that thyse two, Solyman 
and ducar, myght the better mayntene theyr warre, he wold that 32 
they were puyssaunt and hye men as soudans. To one his seruaunt, 

1 Orig. bnt. 

3 Caxton has spoiled the sense by dividing his sentence incorrectly. Fr. 

“ tin Turc gui avoit ntm Ancean; de la maignie awit esti d’v.ng puissant Soudan 
de Perse.”' * Fr. Ducar, Lat. Ducar. 

‘ Fr. “Soliman pares guil marehissoit awe-grecs," L e. “because he was 
neighbor to the Greeks.” 



Ch. LXXXVIII.] Ancean sends to the Sultan of Persia for Aid. 137 

named assougur, which was fader of sangum, And graunt fader of 
Noradyn, of whom ye shal here here after / he gaf the renommed 1 
cyte, called halappe / To this Ancean, of whom I spak to fore, he To Ancean 
4 gaf this liye and noble cyte antyoche, and lytil lond about / ffor Antiocii. 
the Calyphe of Egypte helde alle the conntre vnto the boundes of 
Surye. this ancean, whan he herd that the grete hoost of cristen 
men cam, he sente messagers and lettres to the barons of thorvent / Anoean sent 
8 and hym self spak to them by mouth expressedly, and requyred the of the 
caliphe of bandras and the soudan of perse, which was more 
myghty than ony other / that they wolde socoure his londe and 
hym. They beleuyd al this lyghtly / ffor Solyman was comen to 
12 them / that had wel assayed what oure men coude doo / therfore 2 
he also requyred moche to greue oure cristen men, And that they 
wold auenge 3 hym / Ancean requyred that they wold deffende 
hym / The grete barons of thoryent, and other hye and noble men, 

16 promysed hybi that they wold helpe hym certaynlye / Ancean [4 lf 63 bk] 
forgate not in the 4 mene whyle /but gadred as moche peple as they l.eaiao 
myght haue in the contreye aboute hym / as they that fro day to men, and got. 
day abode the siege, he assembled vytayllcs, Armures, engyns, and everything^ 
20 alle other thynges necessarye to peple assyeged / And prayd moche « 
ententifly the cytezeyns of the torn} that euery man shold make 
prouysyon and garnyson for hym self as moche as he myght. 

Thenne wente the cytezeyns of the toun to vyllages and other 
24 places ther aboute / And brought alle in to the cyte, whete, wyn / He was so 
Oyle / and alle maner of beestes / so moche that the toun 5 was tiuntown was 
merueyllously garnysshed. many hye, puyssaunt and noble men, garnished, 
were comen fro the contrees that oure peple had! passed / whiche 
28 were fledde in to this stronge toun for to kepe them self / in so 
moche that it was sayde / and was trouthe / that ther were in the 
cyte / vij. M / horsmen, alle armed and wel in poynt / And of 
footemen there were, that bare liarnoys, moo than / xx. M / 

32 Dyuerse oppynyon of our men to fore they assieged 
Anthyoche / And how they acorded alle for 
tassiege it / cap 0 lxxxviij 0 

1 Orig. remommed. 

a Fr. “pour ce, s'crUre semonaient moult efforcement de grever nos xpiens." 

Caxton has also omitted ‘‘MtSjian prioit" before “that they would avenge 
him.” 3 Orig. aueuge. 6 Orig. tonn. 



138 Debate as to when Antioch should be besieged. [Ch. LXXXVIII. 

o Vre men were approched so nygh the cyte, that they sawe it 
nygh to them. After, they assembled for to take counseyl 
Our men were how they shold procede forth / ffor there were somme of the barons 
etaiapsUfr- that eounseylled 1 / that they shold tarye the siege vnto the newe 4 
The winter tyme of the yere / ffor the wynter cam on / whiche shold be moche 
greuous to lye out / On that other parte, ther were many of thooste 
that were sprad about in the cytees and! eastellys, whiche myght 
not fyghtly be assembled tyl after the wynter. And fertliermore, 8 
they sayde that themperour of Constantinople shold sende grete 
peple for to helpe them / Therfor it were wel reason that they 
shold abyde them / Also, on the other syde of the montaynes, they 
sayde they shold liaue peple al fressh, of whom they had grete 12 
nede for tassiege suche a toun. 2 And, in the mene whyle, myght 
the peple and theyr horses soiourne alle the wynter in the countre 
about, And shold be the fressher, and harder, and strenger for 
tendure 3 trauaylle and payne whan it shold nede / The other 16 
barons acorded that they shold sette the siege forth with withoute 
delaye / ffor yf thenemyes that were in the Cyte had the respyte / 
they shold garnysshe them better of men / of Armures, of Engyns / 
and of other estorementes than they had thewne: They also that 20 
were comyng, shold haste them the more yf the cyte were beseged 
[♦ leaf m] for to helpe 4 them / To this counseyl acorded fynably alle. they 
Finally they ordeyned theyr bataylles / & cam to fore the toun / there they 
before the lodged them the x day of octobre. In oure hooste were men wel 24 
October. armed to the nombre of C / C. C / M./ without wymmen / chil- 
deren / and other men that bare no harnoys. And yet myght not 
alle they besiege alle the cyte / ffor without the montaynes / where 
was thought to leye no siege, 6 was at the foot of the hylle vnto the 28 
ryuer, a grete part of the walle in a fayr playn, which myght not 
be leyed about with peple 5 / In the comyng of this grete hoost / 
was a moche grete bruyt and noyse of buysyns / of horses, of peple, 
of Cartes and charyottes / But this daye, ne on the morn folowynge, 32 
Ti.e town was no noyse / but semed that the toun had ben alle voyde, and 
job very noman therin; but 6 this was don by cause they had! moche grete 
garnyson of peple & of other thynges. 

1 Orig. eounseylled. 2 Orig. tonu. 3 Orig. tendnre. 

5_5 p r _ “ avoit il grant partie des mura, dca le pie du tertre jusques au 
fleuve, en beau plain, qui ne pent estre acaint de gens," a large part of the 
walls, from the foot of the hill to the river, were exposed, which could not be 
surrounded by the army. 

6 Orig. bnt. 


wan coining 
on, their 
number was 
not large 
enough, and 
they needed 
help from 
Constantin¬ 
ople. 



Ch.. LXXXIX.] The Position of the Great Barons in the Siege. 139 

How, after the situacion of the toun, eche of the hye 
barons of the hoost were lodged at the sayd 
siege. cap° lxxxix" 

4 a Nthyoche had, conteynyeng in the cyte / v / yates / toward Antioch had 
thoryent / ther was one, & was named the porte seynt poul, toward* the 
& that was by cause it was vnder the monastery of seynt poul 
whiche is hangyng 1 on the territoire 1 / the second was toward! 

8 thoccident. And 2 the lengths of the toun 3 is bytwene both thyse 
yates, and that is named! the porte of seynt george / On the syde On the side 
toward! byse ben thre yates, whiche alle yssue toward the Ryuer / North were 
that yate aboue is named! the porte of the hound!, ther is a yate 
12 to fore this yate 4 5 / by whiche men passe the mareys which is vnder 
the walles of the cyte / The seconde is named! the porte of the due: 
the ryuer is ther wel a myle long fro thyse two yates. The thirds 
is named the yate of the brygge, by cause the brygge is there / by 
16 whiche men passe the Ryuer / ffor bytwene the port of the due, 
whiche is in the myddle of thyse thre / and this that is the laste on 
that syde, approuche so the flood of the toun, that fro thens it 
renneth costeyeng 15 the toun alle ioynyng to the walles. wherfor it 
20 was that this yate, ne the yate of seynt george, our men myght not 
assiege, ffor noman myght come theder but yf he wente ouer the 
Ryuer / Buymont 6 assieged this yate aforsayd, with them that were Bohemond 
comen in his companye. beside hym, in 7 aualyng* doun, were upper gat*. 
24 lodged Robert the due of Normandye, Robert therle of fflauudres / 

Steuen therle of bloys, and huon 8 le mayne / Thyse had pourprised 
fro the lodgys 9 of buymont vnto the yate of thounde / ffor the [> if. m, bk.] 
frensshemen / the normans and the bretons, were with them to fore 
28 this gate / thenne were lodged therle Remont of tholouse, and the Raymond of 
bisshop of Puy, with them that were come in theyr companye; that 
were the prouynceaulx, the gascoyns, and the burgoyuons / ther ”£***» 
was moche grete peple / They toke alle the place, vnto the gate Frenchmen. 

1 Fr. ‘‘ gui est ou pendant du tertre," viz. “which is on the slope of the 

hill," Lat. “posito in clivo mantis." 

1 Orig. Aud. 3 Orig. tonn. 

4 Fr. “ it y a un port devant la porte.” 

5 Fr. cotoiant, extending along the side of. 

6 Fr. “ Buymont assiega la porte dessus,’’ (i. e. the upper gate, of the three) 

instead of “the gate aforsaid." 6 Orig. Buymont. 

~ Fr. en avalqnt, as you go farther down. 

8 Lat. Hugo Magnus, Hugh the Great, 



140 


Godfrey and 
hia friends 
extended 
almost to the 
Gate of the 
Hridge. 


The towns¬ 
people 
watched the 
encampments 
of our men 
with great 
curiosity. 


They were 
much 
alarmed at 
the prepar¬ 
ations. 


Our men had 
great diffi¬ 
culty in find¬ 
ing food for 
their animals. 


The Turks 
killed many 
of them while 
foraging. 


Fright of the Inhabitants of Antioch. [Ch. XC. 

next after / At this gate were lodged! the due Godeffroy / Eustace 
his brother / Bawdwyn therle of henawd / Reynold therle of Toul / 
Guemes 1 de montagu / And! other barons, many whiche alwey helde 
them with thyse prynces. ther were the loraynes, the henewers, 4 
they of sessougne / they of bauyere, and! they of francoine / They 
toke vp alle the place almoost to the yate of the brygge / And 
helde the Ryuer that ranne there. In this partye, to wal'd! the toun, 
was grete plente of apple trees / of fygtrees, and! of other trees 8 
beryng fruyt / whiche our peple cut, & hewe of alle for to lodge 
them, they of the toun 2 byhelde, by the hourdeys 3 and batyllemens 
of the walles, the manere ant? contenaunee of thooste / And* 
meruaylled! moche of the Ames / of the tentes / and of the facion 12 
and! manere that they had! for to lodge them / They were in grete 
doubte / ffor they were wel adeerteyned! / that so moche and! grete 
peple wold! not lightly departe fro this siege without doyng 1 them 
grete dammage and harme / Ther were many that were so gretely 16 
effrayec? for theyr wyues, theyr childeren & theyr other frendes, 
that they wold! that they had 1 ben deed and 1 buryed! long to fore / 
to thende that they shold not see the destruction which they 
doubted for to see. 20 

How our peple assembled in counseyl for to fynde 
the moyen, for to sende for vytaylle / & of a 
brydge that they made, ea° / lxxxx. 

o Wr peple, that were thus lodged, founde not about them 24 
pastures for theyr horses ne for theyr other beestes / Therfore 
them behoeued ofte to passe the ryuer / and to renne thurgh the 
contrey / thus dyde they many tymes / by cause they of the toun 
meuyd not yet / And! it was a noyous and! greuous thynge to passe 28 
the Ryuer / ffor 4 ther was no brygge / but feried 1 ouer 6 m botes 
bothe horse and! man. whan the turkes of the Cyte apperceyued 6 
this, they sente secretely ouer theyr brygge theyr peple, which toke 
and slewe our men, that they fonde so sprad in the contre. And 32 
this dyde they surely ynowgh / by cause they myght not retourne 

1 Fr. guennes de Montaigu. Lat. Canon de Montacuto. 3 Orig. toun. 

3 Fr. “• 'Archtires et hordeis," i. e. from the openings for the archers, and 
from the palisades. 

4 Fr. “ Car il n'y avoit point de gut/ 1 for there was no ford there. 

5 Orig. oner. 6 Orig. apperceyned. 



141 


Cli. XCI.] The Bridge made by the Crusaders. 

but by 'the ryu er / ds they of thoost myght not socoure them, [‘leaf65] 
wherforour barons cowseylled them to gydre, and concluded 2 that 
they wold make a brygge in somme maner by whiche they myght 
4 passe without dauwger 3 of them of the toun / they fonde shippes in 
the laye, and 1 aboue in the ryuer they toke and! ioyned them ourbarom^ 
to gydre, and sette plankes on them, and nayled them in suche of »mi* 
wyse that thre or four men myght passe on a front / this brigge 
8 dyde moche ease to alle thoost / This brygge was nygh the lodgys near God- 

¥ frey’g camp. 

of due godeffroy, right ayenst the yate that he kepte; And therfor 
the yate was named the yate of the due 4 / ffro this brygge of tree 
vnto the brygge of stone was a grete myle, as I sayd to you to fore / 

12 by this yate & by this bryge was moche harme don to our peple / 

And by the yate named the porte of the hounde, they greued tim people 

„ 1 ’ J ° of Antioch 

moche our peple; ffor 5 they had a brydge of stone by the toun, of 

dyuerse waters gadred to gydre, that ran there / by that brygge gjjjwsfo 

16 they made theyr assaylles day and nyght vpon the peple of therles Hound, 
of tholouse, which kepte the gate. Oftymes they opened the yates / 
and yssued out vpon theyr lodgyes, and dywerse they hurted, and 
slewe many. And whan they had don, they retorned in to the 
20 toun / ffor oure men myght not poursiewe them but by the brygge. 
therfore hit happed that the bisshoppe of puy, therle of tholouse, 
and the other barons 6 that were there / were more hurte in theyr 
mounture 7 than alle the other of thoost. 

24 How our peple stopped a yate of the toun without 
forth / And of a castel of tree that they made. 

cap 0 lxxxxj° 

i His peple had grete despyte & grete shame of the domages 
28 and liarmes that were thus don to them / And toke counseyl our mm 

-took counsel 

that they wold bete doun the brygge. And theder they cam alle how to gut a 
Armed 8 vnder theyr targes and sheldes of yron and grete plente of 

8 Orig. concluded. 

8 Fr. “Sans dangicr de ceuU de la vile." 1 Orig. dnc. 

6 Caxton’s text is corrupt here, the sense being ruined by omissions. A. 

gives the correct version : “ Car il y avoit img port de pierre, pour passer le 
palaz qui estoilfetz de diverses eaves,” etc. 6 Orig. barous. 

7 Fr. montcures, i. e. their mounts (horses, mules, etc.). Lat. “in equis 
et mulis." 

8 Fr. “ Et soubs leur escuz granz marteaulx eurent defer, et grant planti de 
pis." Caxton has spoiled the sense here by his omissions. 



142 


They made 
a wooden 
engine, and 
eet it against 
tlie bridge. 

[» if. 65, bk.] 


The Turks 
burnt it to 
the ground. 


Our men then 
stopped up 
the bridge 
with big 
stones. 


The Christians attempt to destroy a Bridge. [Ch. XCII. 

pyquoys / And began to smyte for to breke the brydge, but the 
walles were so strong and harde that they myght not hurte it. 
And on that other syde they of the toun were on the walles and 
tourettes, whiche threwe grete stones and thycke on them that .so 4 
pecked! to breke the brygge, that they were fayn to leue their enter¬ 
prise and retome fro thens / After this they thought of another 
thynge and! made a newe castel of tree / And! sette it ayenst the 
brygge for to kepe it that they shold not passe ouer it / on them / 8 
it was moche werke and payne to make it / whan it was 1 sette and 
dressyd / Therle garnysshed it with his men / they of the toun 
adressyd theyr gonnes and engyns at this castel, and smote it with 
grete stones / And they in the toures shotte ther at grete plente of 12 
Arowes, so many in such wyse that none durst abyde in this castel 
lie about 2 it / On a day it happed that our men withdrewe them 
fro the brydge and fro ther about / And they within opened the 
yate and yssued out 3 by the rowtes / They that were in the castel 16 
of tree fledde / And the other sette fyer on it / And brent it to 
asshes / Our men sawe wel thenne 4 that they warred not wel thus, 
And ordeyned thre gonnes 5 for to shote stones at the brygge, 
whyles they shotte none of the' turkes yssued! oute there / But as 20 
sone as they cessed 1 , they cam oute & made theyr assaylles as they 
dyde to fore. It displesyd moche to oure barons that they myght 
not sette no remedye ayenst the comynge oute of thyse turkes / 
Atte laste 6 they acorded that they wold take grete stones of the 24 
Koche^gjich as were conuenyent 7 for a gate, and stoppe the passage. 6 
They toke an honderd men and more, and stopped the gate ouer 
the brydge. ther were so many' that it was doon in suche wyse 
that it coude not be lightly broken agayne / They had grete 28 
trauaylle and payne to make it / But they that were lodged there 
kepte alle armed them that brought the stones. Thus was the gatq 
stopped in suche wyse that thoost abode alle in peas there / ffor the 
Turkes myght nomore make theyr assaylles there. 32 


How our peple were in grete mesehyef for as moche 
as they of the toune yssued and entred in and 
oute with grete rowtes. Capitulo lxxxxij® 

1 Orig. about. 3 Orig. ont. 4 Orig. thenue. 8 Orig. gounes. 

8-6 Fr. “ilz s'accorderent A ce qu'ilz prinrent grans roches, tels quit can- 
vcnoit bien A Vune porter, C hommes on plus, et estouperent la ports." 

7 Orig. conueuyeut. 



Ch. XCIL] Skirmishes between the Turks and Christians. 

o No a day it happed? that ther wente out of thoost as wel on 
foote as on horsbak a thre honderd! men / and* passed ouer 
the brydge of tree. And sprad the contreye 1 as men that wente 
4 on foragyng / It is the custome of an liooste for to goo out 2 so 
oftymes & retorne without dammage or hurte / Therfor they had 
supposed to hane ben sure / They of the toun apprceyued it and 
yssued out with grete plente of peple / And wente ouer the brydge 
8 of stone and ranne on them that they sawe goo so folyly / And 
somme they slewe / And other fledde to the brydge 3 of shippis 
where they supposed to haue passed / But thenemyes were there 
to fore. And deffended them the waye / in suche wyse that many 
12 of 4 them were drowned in the water that supposed to haue passed 
ouer / other of oure men recouwtred the turkes that had slayn & 
discomfyted our men & bare away with them their proyes and 
despoylles, And ran on them / The Turkes fledde / and our men 
16 poursiewed them sleyng and 5 betyng* them vnto within the brydge 
of stone / They of the toun 6 that sawe theyr men so poursiewed 
Sprang 1 out with grete prees and passed the brydge, & ran on our 
men / whiehe wold haue deffended them / but they myght not 
20 suffice so grete nombre of peple and fledde. they folowed them 
doyng to them grete dommage, til they cam to the brydge of 
shippis / there they assaylled them so harde 7 / that many men 
aimed fyll in the wafer whiehe were there drowned and loste 
24 Oure 8 men lost there many men on foote and on horsbak / In this 
manere were they of thooste in grete mesease / ffor they were better 
besieged than they of the toun / There were many of theyr enemyes 
in the woodes and montaygnes whiehe ofte ranne vpon our peple 
28 whan they sawe them goo without ordenaunce, and they of the toun 
yssued out whan it plesed them / in suche wyse that our 9 men 
durst not goo fer fro thooste for to fourage ne for none other thyng / 
And also in theyr lodgys were they not assured, ffor the tydynge 
32 was that the turkes assembled moche grete plente of peple for to 
smyte in thooste on that one side / & they of the toun on that 
other side shold yssue on them / 


143 


One day 300 
men went 
forth from 
the army to 
forage. 


The towns¬ 
people fol¬ 
lowed and at¬ 
tacked them. 


[« leaf 66, 
sig. 81] 


The Turks 
fled, and our 
men in turn 
pursued. 


More of the 
townspeople 
came out to 
assist their 
fellows. 


After thi«, 
our men did 
not dare to 
go far from 
the army, 
foraging. 


1 Fr. "el s'espandircnl pai le pays." 2 Orig. ont. 3 Orig. brdyge. 
8 Orig. aud. 6 Orig. tonn. 

1 Fr. s'entasscrcnt, i. e. they crowded ou so thickly. 8 Orig. Oure. 
^ Orig. onr. 



144 


Victuals be* 
gan to fail 
our men. 


Both men 
and beasts 
suffered 
greatly. 


[* If. 66, bk.] 

Parties of 
men went 
forth into the 
country to 
find pro¬ 
visions. 


The Turks 
slew many of 
these parties, 
so that they 
dared go no 
more. 


Many died 
for hunger. 


The Christians suffer greatly by Famine. [Ch. XCIII. 

Of the famyne and mortalyte of thoost after that 
they had be at the sayd siege the space of 
two monethes. cap" lxxxxiij 0 

f Or to recounte alle thauentures that were in so grete a siege 4 
shold be ouer greuous and a moche long 1 thyng / Therfor 1 I 
shal saye to yon this that longeth to the comyn / tliooste had 
holden siege vnto the thyrde nioneth, vytayll began to faylle / 
And! was grete suffrete and scarsenes in thoost / they had! in the be- 8 
gynnyng 1 largely and grete hahundaunce both for men and horses; 
but they made grete waast & more than neded, & so by their 
oultrage & folye they lacked in short tyme / which myght haue 
long susteyned them yf they had kepte it wel & gouerned! by 12 
mesure. they suffred grete penurye in thoost of vitayl for men 
& beestes, in such wise that the pour peple were in grete peryl / 
euery day assembled / ij / or iij / C mew of armes to gydre for to 
serche the contrey and fetche vytaylles / they swore to gydre that 16 
alle the gayne that they myght fynde & conquere / they shold! 
departs egally emonge them. They wente forth 2 fer fro thoost / 
and! fonde the townes moche wel garnysshed! by cause they were 
fer fro thoost / they thought that noman shold robbe ne take 20 
nothyng fro them / And thus brought \jytayll to tlioste. But 
whan the Turkes of the toun, and! also other in the countrey, had 
apperceyued this / they made embusshementes and ranne vpon our 3 
men whan they retorned, or other whyle whan they went forth, & 24 
slewe them somme tyme alle that none retorned for to brynge 
tydynges to thoost / And therfor durst they goo nomore a four- 
agyng / The derthe was moche grete in thoost / & euery day grewe 
the famyne 4 in suche wyse that a maw ete wel at a mele in 28 
brede 6 four / d / a cowe was worth 6 four marc weyght of syluer, 
which a man myght haue at begynnyng 17 for 8 echt or ten shyllyngis / 

A lambe or a kyd was at sex shyllyngis, wliielie to fore was worth 
but thre or four pens / the mete for an horse for a nyght cost .xvj / 32 
pens / ther deyde many for honger in suche wyse that at the 
begynnynge of the siege the horses were nombred at .lxx / M / 

1 Lat. “ unde omissis specialibus, generalia prosequemur." 

3 Orig. onr. 4 Orig. fainyme. 6 Fr. “pour deux souk do pain." 

6 Lat. duabus mania. 7 Orig. legynnyng 1 . 

8 Fr. V. B. A v livreq m iiij. A A cinq souks, ou iiij. Lat. quinqus 
solidus. 



145 


Ch. XCIV.] The Christians send out Foraging Parties. 

And at that tyme were searse / ij.M. And they were so poure, 
feble, and lene that vnneth they myght helpe ony man / the tentes 
and pauyllons roted / ffor it rayned continuelly a rayne so thycke 
4 and grete that no cloth myght susteyne it, wherfor rnoche peple in 
the liooste deyde for colde and mesease. Theyr clothes roted on 
theyr backes by cause they myght fynde no place to drye them, 
ther was one so grete mortalite in thoost / that vnnethe myght be 
8 fonden men for to burye them that deyde / Many that sawe this 
grete daunger and peryll in thooste wente and departed pryuely to 
Eages where bawdwyn was / & in to Soilice where other cytees 
were also / Thus were many slayn. And grete plente deed of 
12 famyne and of other maladyes / And the hoost was so mynuysshid 
that ther were not half so moche peple as they were at begynnyng. 

How our peple ordeyned grete rowtes for to goo for 
vytayll, & to reteyne the peple which fled for 
16 hungre / ea“ lxxxxiiij" 

o Ftymes assembled the barons for to fynde counseyl how 
they myght reteyne the peple that thus departed / & also in 
what maner & how they myght aduyse & ordeyne for vytayll for 
20 thoost, & they concluded that one partye of the barons shold haue 
grete plente of men with them, & go right depe in to the londe 
of the paynems for to brynge vytaylles and alle that they myght 
fynde and gete on theyr enemyes / to this were chosen buymont 
24 & the erle of fflauwdres, Thoost was delyuerd to therle of thoulouse 
and to Huon le 1 mayne to goueme, ffor the due of normandye was 
not there, And due godeffroy laye seke moche greuously / They 
departed for to goo on fourage, many folowed for to gete somme 
28 gayne / whan the turkes of the toun 2 sawe thooste thus voyde 
and waxe lasse, And knewe for certayn that therle of fflaundres 3 / 
Buymont / and the due of Normandye went not there / And that 
the due godeffroy laye in his bedde seke / They preysed and doubted 
32 moch the lasse the remenaunt. And toke counseyl that they wold 
make an assayllyng by the brydge / but they that kept thoost had 
knowleche lierof / And were aduertysed 4 / And were al armed on 
horsbak and cam ayenst them and slewe many of the turkes that 
36 were come to fore and were many grete men of the toun / whan 
the other barons sawe this what for sorow and for fere were discom- 

2 Orig. toim. s Orig. fflanudres. 4 Orig. adnertysedt 
GODFREY. L 


Tlie pavilions 
and tents 
rotted be¬ 
cause of the 
continual 
rains. 


Many men 
left the siege, 
and went to 
Rages. 


The barons 
took counsel. 


They sent 
large forag¬ 
ing parties 
out for food. 


[» leaf 67, 
Big. 82 ] 


The Turks 
sallied forth, 
and attacked 
those who 
were left 
behind. 



146 Loss of the Christians in a Skirmish. [Ch. XCV. 

fytecfc and? fled agayn in to the toun / But a grete mesauenture 
happed! to oure peple / ffor as the turkes fledde dyscomfyted! one of 
them was beten doun of his hors / And his hors fledd toward 1 the 
lodgys / And many of our men ran after to Wynne hym / The mene 4 
peple and other that sawe the horse supposed that our men had 
been disconfyted and that they had fled to fore theyr enemyes / 

By mistake And they began to flee / And other that sawe them flee / fledde 
theday l0Bt “ so * n suc ^ ie w y se that alle torned* to discomfyture ouer fowle / 8 
whan the turkes behelde this and sawe that our men disconfyted 
them self, anon they retorned and passed the brygge / And began 
to chace them that so fledde, and bete and slewe them fro the 
brydge of stone vnto the brydge of the shippis / there were slayn 12 
of our men on horsbak a / xx / And a foot yet moo. the turkes 
retorned in to theyr cyte demenyng grete Ioye and 1 feste for this 
iourneye. 


How buymont and therle of fflaundres mayntened hem 16 
beyng in fourage / Of theyr recountrees and of 
the gayne that they made. Capitulo lxxxxv 0 

b Vymont And therle of fflaundres tliat were sente by comyn 
counseyl in fouragyng 1 , entred fer in to the lande of theyr eue- 20 
Bohemond myes. And founde 2 a moche Ryche toun good and ful 8 of 

Foundarich ™yng “Uit they hadf nede of in thoost ■ they toke all / ffor they 
town full of fonde ney tlier man ne woman that empesshed ne letted them / 

Thyse two barons had sente theyr espyes in dyuers partyes of the 24 
londe for tenquyre & serche where they myght gete more vytayl 
for to lede the hooste / Now it happed that one of the spyes cam 
to buymont & sayde that a grete company of turkes were em- 
busshed iu a place nyghe by them, for to renne on them whan 28 
[‘ a 07. Mi-] 4 they wente on fouragyng*. Thenne they ordeyned that therle of 
fflaundres shold goo forth with his men, & buymont 5 shold come 
fer after. And so was doon / Therle of fflaundres fonde thyse men, 
And assembled to gydre fiersly, the batayll was long & cruel / 32 
The Bari of ffor the turkes had mo men than therle of fflaundres. At the laste 

Flanders was 

fnanengage- our men were discomfyted, for the flemynges myght not endure 
tSeTurks er buymont cam / And so were lefte of our men there 

and fled. we l an hunderd or more in the place / And thenne our men retorned 36 
in to thoost with grete good and gayn that they had gadred to 
1 Orig. aud. - Orig. fonude. 3 Orig. fiiL 3 Orig. buymout. 



147 


Ch. XCVI.] Victory of the Christians. 

gydre / whyles they were there cam to them other espyes of an 
other contre / that aduertysed them of other turkes that wayted to 
hurte them whan they sawe theyr aduantage / they were thenne 
4 moo men and better armed than they had ben to fore / they were 
in counseyl / & therle of fflauwdres wold! that noman shold enter- The Earl of 
prise the batayl but he. But he toke mo men with hym than he terminer> to 
dyde tofore / Buymont 1 cam after with as many as he rnyght defeat. 

8 haue. Therle of fflaundres hasted hym and surprised the Turkes He surprised 

. r ,v the Turks ill 

in a valeye stray t, in suclie wyse that they myght not renne netner a narrow 
ne theder for to shote. But were constreyned! to deffende them 
strongly with theyr swerdes and maces / whiche was not sure for 
12 them / By cause whan oure meyne discarged! on them they myght 

not susteyne it, but fledde anon / Oure men folowed them in hew- endronted 
yng & sleyng* them / and ouerthrewe many of them, They wanne 
horses / mules / Armoures and robes grete plente, & after retorned 
16 in to the hoost with grete victorye & grete gayne. Grete ioye 
was made therane in thoost whan they were comen / alle they were 
refresshyd & alleged of their meseases that they had longo suffred / 

They had vytaylles resonable a certeyn tyme. But it endured not 
20 longe that whiche they had brought with them / 

How a grete rowte of Cristen men were in this tyme 
slayn by the turkes bytwene fynemyne and 
terme / cap! lxxxxvj 0 

24 i N this tyme cam tydynges fro Rome 2 that 3 doubled theyr s»dn®w«^ 
sorow and anguysshis 4 and theyr mesease doubled, it was Bouma " ,a - 
sayd & trouth it was that an hye noble man & puyssaimt of 
denmarke, named guorenes, 5 of moch fayr beaulte & of good manors, 

28 herd say that the barons of ffraurace & the valyauwt men of that 
lo/ide were goon in pylgremage ouer the see for to make warrc to 
the sarasyns / this noble man to fore named whiche had a valyaunt 
herte and hye 6 had grete wylle for to goo after them / he toke of [6 B 1 ® g a, 8 ^' 
32 his fader certeyn good / and ledde with hym wel / v/ C/knyghtes Gue™esoi 
and other men yong 1 and wel armed, he hasted moclie for to ouer- 

1 Orig. Bnymout. 

2 Fr. lioumanic, Hounianutj not J.oDic. Lat. “ intcrea dc partibus Ho- 
mania:. ” 

3 Fr. “ qui moult lew mist grant doulcur et grant angoissc escuers, et leur 

mcsaise doubla." 4 Orig. angnysshis. 

5 Fr. guenncs. Lat. Danorum regie filius Sucno nomine. 



148 


The Treachery of Latyns. [Ch. XCVII. 

take thoost of the ffrensshemen, but he myght not ouertake them / 
ffor he cam ouer late / And had? none in his companye sauf men of 
his countrey / he cam by constantinoble 1 / where themperour dyde 
to hym honour / and after he wente to Nycene with alle his com- 4 
lmden- panye / And! lodged liym bytwene 2 two cytees / that one was 
tween ti!? named fynemyne / And that other terme, there they dyde not as 
mine nnd they ought to doo, by cause they were in the londe of theyr ene- 
myes / but they assured! them ouerinache / in suche wyse that on a 8 
Here lie was nyght a grete partye of the turkes that had 1 espyed! them smote in 
sodanly on them and 1 began to slee them in theyr beddes / Neuer- 
theles somme ther were that apperceyued! them and! ran to theyr 
arrnes / & cam ayenst the turkes and! sold! theyr lyf dere / but in 12 
tuTurk by ^ende they were alle slayn, and'none escaped of alle thoost except 
a thre or 3 foure atte moste. 

How the vntrew greek latyns (23) departed fraudelously 
fro the hoost. And other moo by thensample of 16 
hym / cap® lxxxxvij. 

Latins, tin 1 Atyns this disloyal greek of whom wc liaue spoken to fore, 
t»7efoiiy ,< ' whom themperour had! delyuerd! to oure peple, for to lede and 

?n t iy ,e<l our conduyte them had foynously taken heede of the gouernaunce of 20 
thoost vnto this day / and! of the rewle of the barons, & ahvay 
peyned hym for to deceyue them in alle the maners that he myght. 
Now apperceeued! he wel, that tliaffayres of thooste were not in 
good poynt / ne in good disposicion and doubted moche, for he was 24 
seeing how ful of cowardyse, and thought the pylgryms shold! somme day be 
stood, he ad- surprised! of the turkes of the toun, and! shold! alle be slayn, therfor 
5?ege ave the s P a k secretely to one and other, and counseylled! them to leue 

the siege. And that al thooste shold departe in to the cytees that 28 
our men helde vnto the newe tyme, ffor it was certayn he sayde that 
themperour had sente for the grettest hooste, that he myght assem¬ 
ble for to come and socoure them as sone as he myght fynde grasse 
on the ert-he for the horses / And he hym self / By cause he loued 32 
and promised the werke of oure lord with the noble men that he had, wold enter- 

to bring aid 7 

Emperor in P r ' se v P on f° r the comyn prouffyt a grete trauayll, And he 
the spring, hyjjj se jf e wo i c j g 00 dylygently to themperour for to haste hym with 

his hoost and alle the vytaylle that he myght fynde / And to make 36 
C* if. 63. bkj hym come / Many of the Barons knewe vpon 4 this poynt his 

1 Orig. constantinoblL 3 Orig. bytwnee. 8 Orig. on. 



149 


Ch. XCVIII.] Great Suffering for Food. 

falsenes / And 1 appereeyued that he sought manere by this waye for 
to flee. And! byleuyd! hym not / but acorded! that he shold! goo his Tire Barons 
waye ; he made semblaunt for to retourne and come sone ageyn, believed him 
4 and lefte his pauyllons and som of his men to whom pereaduenture 
he had sayd that they shold folowe and come after / or ellys that 1 he 
neraught what myght come of them. Thus departed he whom the He departed, 
deuyl had brought, And! lad hym away agayn; ffor by the wordes 
8 that he had sowen / and by thensample of his departyng, began and menv 

... A - .. , followed liia 

many men to departe fro thoost / And toke no regarde to theyr example, thus 
auowe ne to the oth that they had! promysed! / but wente secretly *•>«>■ °ath. 
one after another J The famyne was moche grete in thooste. The 
12 barons eoude 2 fynde no remedye ne counseyl therfore. Trouth it 

was they sente ofte two and! two of the grettest lordes with grete The cmsnd- 
companye 3 of men for to pourchasse vytaylies, They wente moch inVreaT" 0 " 
surely in the landes of theyr enemyes right deep and ferre. And! ’ tra1 "’’ 

16 sleyng 1 many of them that wold haue deff ended theyr passage / but 

vytaylles brought they none, ffor the turkes of the contre that had and conid 
appereeyued that oure peple wente for to seche vytalles had do victnai*. 
ledde away alle theyr beestes and theyr vytaylles vnto the mon- 
20 taynes and deserte places where none myght come, & somme had 
they hydde in the wodes and caues vnder the erthe, whiche our 
men coude not fynde. 


How the prelates of the hoost counseylled to doo 
24 penaunce for tappese god, And of thorden- 
aunces that were made teschewe synne / 

Capitulo lxxxxviij 0 

f Amyne / mortalyte / and many other peryllys cessed not to Famine and 

. / mi ii i /v death were oi 

28 renne on the peple of oure lord 1 / The noble and 1 wysemen of ail aides, 
thoost that were trewe, good, and relygyous as the bisshop of puy, 
that was legate for oure holy fader the pope, and other spak to 
gydre thenne / And sayd it was moche to drede and doubte that 
32 our lord were angry with his pylgryms for their synnes. therfor 
they aduysed that they wold speke with the barons for to make 
peas and acorde vnto our lord. And was ordeyned by the consente- 
ment of alle them of thoost, that they shold faste in prayers and in 

1 Fr. “ oil peut estre ne lui en chaloit ce qu’ih devenoient," or perhaps it 
made no difference to him what became of them. 

2 Orig. conde. 3 Orig. compauye. 



150 Dulee Godfrey suddenly recovr/rs. [Ch. XCIX. 

They cried penaunee for to crye mercy vnto our lord by the space of iij dayes, 
m!ioUie y to fhende that he wold! pardone theyr trespaces & beholde them 
three day.. in pyte. this was don with grete wepyng & wayllynges of herte / 
after this they commanded that alle the comyn wymmen of euil lyf 4 
shold be voyded & cast out of tlioost / & was cryed thurgh out 
al the hooste / that who that after that were taken in adulterye or 
[i leaf « 9 , in 1 fornyeacion shold! haue his heed! smeton of / Incontinent the 2 
Great reforms droncardys of the tauernes, the players of dyse, and! the grete othes 8 
ed'ifi the 111 " 1 " were deffended vpon the same payne, fals mesures and! thefte / alle 
; ' rmj ' suche thynges were commaunded to be lefte and! eschewed / there 
were choosen wise men and trewe, that shold take heed! for to 
punnysslie the malefactours 3 / After thyse ordenaunces and! statutes 12 
were somme founden culpable in the same / where were so puu- 
nysshed therfore / that the other were 4 chastysed! therby / whan 
the .peple were amended vnto our lord, the mercy of our lord cam 
without taryeng on them / ffor the due Godeffroy, whiche was all 16 
the surote of thoost / And as theyr estandart / had ben longe seke 
by thoccasion of his hurte, that he had taken in the londe of 
pysside by a bere, as it hath be sayd to fore, nygh by lytil 
nuke Godfrey Anthyoche, and was now sodenly come to good helthe / wherof alle 20 

now suddenly J . . . 

tiT V rearo? ^hey ^ ooste h a( * moc h e grete loye / and? byleuyd? fermely that 
ofaS. 15 theyr penaunce and prayers had lengthed his lyf and respyted it. 


How Buymont fonde a subtil remydye for to delyuer 
and purge the hoost of the espyes of the turkes / 24 

cap® lxxxxix® 

The news of g Rote renommee was spradd thurgh out al thoryent / and 

AnthlcK toward the conferees of the south / that ouer grete nombre of 

the Crusaders _ 

spread all peple of the con trees where the sonne goth doun were comen, and? 2o 

Eaat - had besieged the noble cyte of Anthyoche / hit was a grete thyng 1 

in trouth / But the tydynges were moche more gretter withoute 
coraparyson / Eueryche of the puyssaunt 6 lordes of that countrees 
and londes had sente theyr espyes in to the hoost / and ther were 32 
so many that they cessed not to come and goo, and continuelly / 

& vnnethe myght ony thyng be don or sayd in thooste ne in the 
lodgys, but that it was anon 0 knowen in the panemye 7 / It was a 

3 Fr. “ les beuverics, les lavernea," etc. 5 Orig. malefactonrs. 

* Fr. “ qne les autrea e'en chastierent." 6 Orig. puvsaannt. 6 Orig. auon. 

7 Fr. paiennie, heathendom. 



151 


Ch. XCIX.] How the Spies were driven away. 

light 1 and easy tliyng' for them to be with our peple in thost / Ther 
were of the turkes that coude speke greek / and! the langage of Greek, Syrian 

- . . _ £ and Arme- 

Ermenye / And toke thabyte of the surreyens, of grckes / and! of niana piw ^ 

4 them of hermeny / ther were many of suche maner of peple / the . 

barons toke counseyl emong them how they myght voyde & purge >»«• 
thoost of this pestelence of espyes, ffor they helde them in grete 
paryll & grete daunger / that theyr couyne & purpoos shold be 
8 knowen in the londes of theyr enemyes, and it was no light thynge it w a dim- 

, , cult thing to 

to knowe them that were suche espyes / Emonge 2 alle other thynges gat ria of 
they coude 3 fynde none other remedye / but to holde theyr coun- P i f . m . bk.i 
seyl secrete / and! fro them forthon saye lasse to the peple than 
12 they were woont to doo / Buymont, wliiche was of moche grete 
wytte and! hye lierte, spak to the barons, and sayd in this manere / 

“ ffayr lordes, I praye you that 4 ye wil late me cheuysshe with this b*b«i 
matere / ffor I haue remembryd how we shal be delyuerd of this of thta 
16 peryl 4 / wherfor, I praye you, gyue to me the charge therof ” / The 
barons helde Buymont 5 for a moche.wyseman, and! prudent / And! 
gladly sette the charge therof on hym, and departed! fro the coun- 
seyll / Buymont 6 forgate not this that he had promysed / whan 
20 tyme of soupper cam / he disposed and ordeyned hym for to 
souppe / he made the knyghtes 7 of his contre to take out somme 
turkes that he had in prison, And made theyr throtes to be cutte / 

And after smote them in pyeces and arrayed them for to be rosted. 

24 Thenne began they to demaunde what he wold doo / Thenne 
Buymont 8 sayd to his men / And bad his men also to saye to other / 

“ that alle the barons had thus ordeyned and sworn, that alle the h. 
espyes that myght be taken in thost shold be rosted and seruyd at «t»u 
28 the tables of the barons / And the barons shold ete them by their 
oth.” thyse tidynges were anon spred thurgh out thoost / that 
suche Iustyce was don in the lodgys of buymont. Alle men ran 
theder for to see this merueylle / The turkes them self that were y 

32 comen in to thoost for to espye, were moche affrayed, And euerych this, And 
of them thought longe® or he was departed fro the lodgys, by cause “<« 

they doubted that they shold be seruid in lyke wyse / Aftir whan 

1 Orig. lihgt. 2 Orig. emonge. 

4 —i F r _ “ pous rue laissiez convenir el chevir de ceste chose, car jai pensi une 
dclivrance, de cc peril," viz., let me settle this matter for you, for I have 
thought of a way to deliver us from this danger. 6 Orig. Buymout. 

6 Orig. Bnymont. 

7 The correct French text gives “ bouchiers ** (butchers), instead of ‘ cho- 
valiers.” Lat. carnijices. 8 Orig. Bnymont. 9 Orig. louge. 



152 


The Messengers of the Caliph appear. [Ch. C. 

they were retorned home to their lordes / that had sent them, they 
They went sayd to them, And tolde al ahoute the countrey / that suche men 
as were come for tassiege Anthyoche suffred moche mesease / And! 
were harder ayenst trauayll ant? laboure than stone or yron / Of 4 
reported that cruelte they passed! alle beres and Lyons / ffor the wylde beestes ete 

the Crusaders J r J ^ 

surpassed ail men alle Rawe, But thyse men roste them afore, & after deuoure 
cruelty. them. This tydynge was in suche wyse knowen and! publysshyd! 

in alle paynemye / that after the Soudan ant? the grete admyrals 1 8 
After thie no myght neuer fynde man wolde come ant? espye the hoost. They that 
willing to go were in the cyte assyeged were so effrayed and had so grete liydour 
Christians, of this / that fro that tyme afterward the counseyl of the barons was 

better kept and more secretely than it was to fore. 12 


How the Calephe of Egypt sente his raessagers with 
grete yeftes vnto our hoost / Capitulo C" 


[»leaf 70] 


There Iihs 
long been 
great hate 
between the 
Turks of the 
Orient and 
those of 


Egypt. 


2 e Mong other mescreanntes grete lordes and prynces, The caliphe 
of Egipte was the moost myghty of'men and! moost ryche of 16 
goodes; he sente his messagers vnto the barons that were in thoost, 
And I shal saye how and by what occasion / (24) Grete hate and moche 
hers hath ben bytwene the Turkcs 3 of thoryent and! the Turkes 3 of 
Egypte / And hath, be of auncyent and! long tyme, By cause they 20 
discorde in theyr creannce and! mysbyleue / An(? eclie sayd to other 
and yet doo that they be fals sarasyns / as I haue sayd to fore in 
the begynnyng of this book, And therfore they ben ofte in warre / 
Somtyme one partye is aboue / Am? another tyme that other / In 24 
the tyme that our peple were to fore Anthyoche / this caliphe of 
whom I speke now, helde alle the londe of Egypte vnto the Cyte 4 
of Sureye / whiche conteyneth wel / xxx / Ioumeyes longe / The 
Soudan of Perse, a lytyl tofore that oure peple cam, had conquerd! 28 
the toun of Anthyoche, whiche is by the Royame of egypte / and 
alle the londe entierly vnto the braas of seynt george, as I haue 
sayd! to fore / Now had! the ealyphe of egipte in moche suspection 
the Sowdan of Perse, and moche plesyd hym his destruction and 32 


Tiie CaUph of dommage / And had! moche ioye that Solyman had! lost Nycene, 
much pleased whiche Solyman was neuew to the sayd Soudan / and was so 

that Solyman J J 1 

Nicia St enfebled! of his men. And also he was plesyd that our cristen 

peple had besieged the Cyte of Anthyoche / Therfor he sente good 36 


1 Fr. Amiraulx, i. e. Emirs. 3 Orig. Tnrkes. 

4 Fr. La Liche de Surie. Lat. usque Laodiceam Syriae. 



153 


Ch. Cl.] Ancean sends in all Directions for Aid. 

messagers to speke to them whiche fyrought right grete yeftes / And He sent rich 
moche ryche presentes / yf they wold receyue them / And they the Chris- 0 
sayde that the Caliphe was redy for to gyue to them socoure and Antioch, and 

* * promised to 

4 ayde right largely of men / of good? and? of vytayll, and prayd them » ie, P them - 
moche derely that they wold mayntene and contenue theyr siege. 

The barons of our hoost reeeyued the noble men that were comen, 
and sent from hym honorably, and made them to soioume with 
8 them / And they that were wyse knewe anon the wytte & vygour 
of our barons, and begonne to haue moche grete doubte & suspection 
that our peple were so valyauwt / & that yet they sholde do grete 
dommage in theyr londe / so that they deuysed in this thyng* as ye 
12 shal nowe here in redyng hoolly this book. 

How Ancean, the lord of anthyoche, and his barons 
sente vnto the turkes, theyr neyghbours, for to 
demaunde socours 1 / cap° Cj" 

16 t He lord of Anthyoche and the other grete and noble men of The Lord of 

ft «» i Antioch was 

the toun, seyng that our 2 men sufrred so moche famyne and much aston- 
s mesease / as we haue sayd to fore / and fore alle thyse thynges p if. to, bkj 
wold in no wyse leue theyr siege, but shewed by theyr counton- fheChroT ° f 
20 aunees that this trauayl greued them not / wherfore they were Sending 
moche abasshyd. And thenne Ancean, by the eounseyl of his men S|'” uirer ’ 
and them that were moost pryue with hym, sente messagers and 
lettres to his moost ryche neyghbours / And prayd hym right 
24 derely for the honour of theyr lawe, for the sauyng 1 of them self / *» 

And for his loue, that they wold come and socoure them without 
taryeng. And he sente them word in what maner they shold 
approehe secretely to Anthyoche. And after they shold couere 
28 them in a busshement nygh by / And there abyde the pylgryms as 
they had hen acustomed, and at suche tyme as they shold come 
to the brydge / ffor there shold they sprynge out of the toun / And They devised 
shold assaylle them, & whyle they were besy in fyghtyng, they nttMkin^the 
32 that were embusshed shold sodenly breke & come by hynde on al1 si,!es - 
thern & fyght, And so shold they he enclosed bytwene them 
within And them withoute, in suche wyse that none shold escape / 

They that herd thise lettres and thyse messagers doubted them 
36 moche of oure peple / wherfor they acorded gladly to this eounseyl. 
they assembled them of hallape / them of cezayre, them of haman / 

1 Orig. soconrs. 


3 Orig. onr. 



154 


A large num¬ 
ber assem¬ 
bled, and 
approached 
Antioch. 


The native 
Christians 
revealed this 
plan to the 
Crusaders. 

The Crusad¬ 
ers took 
counsel. 


[* leaf 71] 


At night, 
they went 
out to meet 
the enetrty, 
secretly. 


In the morn* 
iog they ar¬ 
ranged them¬ 
selves in six 
battalions, 


and the battle 
commenced. 


How the Native Christians aid the Crusaders. [Ch. CII. 

and -of other cytees about, tyl # they were a grete nombre of peple / 
And! this dyde they the moost secretely they myght, as was to them 
commaunded, and began to departe and* approuehe Anthyoche / 
And cam to a castel named harant, whiche is fro thens a .xiiij / 4 
myle. there they lodged and thought on the morn as sone as the 
scarmuche shold be bytwene the pylgryms and them of the toun / 
they shold smyte in with theyr spores vpon oure men. And oure 
cristen men were in grete peryl / But one thyng ther was thenne / 8 
that tho and other tymes dyde them grete good / fEor ther were 
cristen men, hermyns and surryens in the cytees of whiche the 
turkes were departed, whiche anon lete the barons of thooste haue 1 
knowleche how it was concluded bytwene the turkes / They 12 
assembled anon for to take aduys herupon, And was acorded 
emonge them / that alle they that had ony horses to ride on shold 
be arayed And 2 on horsbak as sone as it were nyght / And that 
euery man shold drawe in to his bataylle lyke as they were 16 
assygned / And after shold yssue out of thoost without ony noyse. 
the peple on foote shold abyde styll alle, and be redy to deffende 
the lodgys, yf ony thyng sourded ayenst them. 

How oure peple knewe the couyne of the turkes / of 20 
thenbusshe 3 that they made, and of their victorye 
and gayne that they had. Capitulo Cij" 

a S sone as it was nyght they yssued out lyke as they were com¬ 
manded / They passed the brydge of shippes, And they were 24 
not passyng / vii / C / men on horsbak / they that wewte cam to a 
laye, whiche was bytwene the lave of whiche I haue spoken to fore / 
And the Ryuer named 4 helle / whiche ben that one fro that other, 
nyh a myle / there they rested them this nyght. theyr enemyes {hat 28 
knewe nothyng of theyr comyng / were this nyght passed the 
brydge, whiche is vpon the Ryuer of helle. In the momyng, as 
sone as our men apperceyued the day, they armed them and made 
vj bataylles of 6 them / The turkes had sente by fore their corrours / 32 
which cam & sayde that the grete peple cam ayenst them / they 
sente to fore ij of theyr bataylles, & aftir cam the grete peple / 
whan they approuched they were in grete desraye / the Archers 
approuched first, whiche shotte thycke; But oure men smote in 36 
with the speres moche asprely in suche wyse that they made them 
1 Orig. hane. s Orig. Aud. 4 Orig. uamecD. 8 Orig. ef. 



155 


Ch. ora.] Great Victory over the Turks. 

to flee, and chaced them to theyr grete bataylles. There were they 
in suche a destrayt bytwene the Ryuer, and the laye that they 
myght not shote ne flee after theyr customme. There was the The confli< t 
4 medlyng grete and! fiers / And! the barons and men of armes dyde and 
moche wel, But the turkes that had lost the maner of fyghtyng / 
myght not deffende them, ne endure the strokes of oure peple, but 
fledde theyr way al that they myght. Thenne whan our barons 
8 sawe this / they began to doo wel, And commaunded that noman 
shold faygne, but folowe the chaas asprely / The turkes fledde vnto The Turk, 
hemant. Oure men folowed alwey, sleyng and hewyng of heedes men followed 

, . . forten miles. 

and armes, that al the waye that they passed! by was sowen with 
12 dede men / This chaas endured! wel .x / myle / The turkes that 
were within the castel of hemant sawe that that theyr men cam 
alle discomfyted / They sette fyere on the castel, & they them self 
fledde / But the hermyns and the other cristen men of whom were 
16 many in the castel rec.ouuerd the fortresse / and yeldecl it to oure 

men whan they cam. This daye were slayn of the turkes moo More than 

“ * ° 2000 Turk 8 

than / ii / thousand / They toke .v / C / heedes of them that were were slain 
best arrayed, And brought with them in signe of vyctorye. They 
20 war there wel a / M / horses for Armes, grete and myghty, wherof 'P 0 ' 1 *- 
they had grete nede. Thus retomed they to theyr lodgys charged 
ful of prayes of armures & of dispoylles, makyng* grete ioye, and 
tliankyng 1 oure lord that had comforted 'them in theyr meseases. c l if. 7i, bk,] 


24 How the turkes of Anthyoche 2 sprange out 3 and 
assayled the lodgys of oure peple. Capitulo Ciij° 

t He cytezeyns and habytantes of Anthyoche had herd tydynges / 
how the turkes that had ben so discomfyted were departed, and 
28 meuyd fro theyr contrees for to come socoure them, Therfor they 

had tlieyre eres opene to here tydynges of theyr comyng / And The inhabit- 
were alle armed and redy for to make thassaylle by the brydge alle jj«h. jp *j» 
incontinent 4 whan they shold see them / but whan they sawe that 
32 the nyght passed, and that the day cam without hauyng 5 ony 
knowleche of theyr approuchement / Theyr espyes made them 
certayn that our men were goon on horsbak ayenst them, Therfore assailed our 
they toke herte / And yssued vnto the lodgys, ffor our men 


Orig. Authyoclie. 


3 Orig. ont. 

6 Orig. hauyug. 


4 Orig. incontiuent. 



156 The Christiana victorious in another Skirmish. [Cli. CIV. 

were not yet comen agayn in to thooste. 1 They assaylled them 
moche asprely and! harde / so longe that somme of them that were 
in the playnes within the toun wente vpon the toures and! vpon the 
walles, by cause that oure 2 men that fought 3 shold! be abasshed by 4 
thoccasion of theyr peple that shold come 1 / And as oure peple 
From the approuched the turkes / they apperceyued that the other that they 
returning* 6 " a ^ 0< ^ e / were discomfyted, by cause oure men cam ioyously with 
victorious, alle theyr despoylles. Thenne aroos the sorow grete thurgh alle the 8 

and were very u J ° ° 

sorrowful, toun. Our men approuched the toun / And! dyde do throwe ij. C / 
threw aw heedes of the turkes that they had brought with engyns in to the 
Turkiniito cyte for to make them certayn of theyr victorye, And yet to thende 

that they shold not forgete theyr sorowe that was entred in to theyr 12 
hertes. The other iij C / that were lefte they pyght them on 
stakes at the foote of the walk / And sette there men for to kepe 
them / By cause they shold be alwey in theyr syght. whan they 
cam to the deffence / the nombre of them that were disconfyted 16 
were / xxviij / M. Thus 4 were somme grete turkes taken & 

Tills was brought prisonners / This was don in feuerer the / vi / day the 

done the 6th ° J J 

■lay of Febm- yere of thyncamacion of our lord / M / lxxxxvy”. 

Of a castel that our men made of somme pylgryms 20 
that arryued at the porte, and how they Were 
discomfyted by a busshement of turkes / 

cap" Ciiij" 

a lie the barons of thoost toke counseyl, and acorded that vpon 24 
a territoire, whiche was at the tentes of Buymont, 6 shold be 
[•leaf72] 6 made a fortresse, which shold be wel gamysshyd with good men 
decided to of armes, to thende that yf the turkes made theyr assayllies, as they 
fortrefs near were acustomed / they of this fortresse shold renne on hem. And 28 
tent?"* 0 " 8 this towr was a barbycane of thooste / like as they had deuysed 

1-1 Caxton has exactly followed his original here, which is very faulty; 

A. gives the correct reading: “Durement i assaillirent, et longu&ment, taut 
que cil qui estoient mr lea beates lea virent, lors leur firent aigne qu'il a'en relur- 
vnsaent, car il veoient venir genz. Cil entrerent en la rile , et montcrent aur lea 
tors, et aur lea mura por conmnstre ai e'eatoit leur gent qui venoicnt." Lat. 
“pene tota die nostris gravissima intulerunt ccrtamina, quousquc de aupcriori- 
bua civitatis significantibus cxeubiis nostrorum adventum in urbern se redperunt, 
vbi super turns et moenia et loca eminentiora constitui adventare quidcrn 
considerant legiones ignari, tamen nostrorum an suorum essent, castra que 
accedercnt." 2 Orig. onre. 3 Orig. fonght. 4 Orig. Thns. 

6 Orig. Bnymont. 



Oh. CIV.] Pilgrims and Victuals brought by a Genoese Shtf. 137 

& ordeyned, so was it made without taryeng: and valyaunt men 
and hardy were sette in thi3 fortresse largely, thenne was alle 
thost assured as they had ben within the walles of a good! Cyte / 

4 The 1 siege had endured thenne .v. monethes / A shippe of genewes me siege imd 
cam theder, whiche had! brought pylgryms and vytaylles. they UnTmonSSf 
aryucd at the porte, & sette them in the Ryuer of helle, as it 
falleth in to the see / they had sente ofte messagers in to the hoost / 

8 that they shold fetche them by som of the grete barons, with so' 
good company that they myght be saufly conduyted in to thoost. 
they of the toun had thenne apperceyued! that messagers wente and! Messengers 
cam fro the shippe in to thoost / And sente out men, that slewe between the 

in pi ' *t town and the 

12 sorame ol them: And therfor durst none goo more -without grete sea, to a 
companye. Our barons had aduysed to make a grete fortresse at 
thende of the brydge, in a mahommerye 2 / that the turkes had, and 
wold sette men of armes there for 3 to kepe and deffendc thyssue of 
16 the brydge, yf the turkes wolde come / But by cause that there 
were peple yssued out of thoost for to goo to the ship, were chosen 
somme of the barons, whiche shold goo and fetche them, if or they 
were peple that were goon for to here tydynges of theyr contrees / 

20 and wold liaue comen agayn, but they durst not. therto was chosen Bohemond 
buymont / the Erie of tholouse, Euerard du puyssat, And therle of men wars 

chosen to 

gamyer of grece, whiche also shold conduyte the messagers of the 
calyphe vnto the port of the see, and at retornyng shold brynge se *- 
24 agayn and conduyte them of thooste / they of Anthyoche herd saye 
that the sayd Barons were departed fro thoost, and descended 
toward the see / And sent out four / M / knyghtes 4 of the moost 
noble that they had 1 , for to lye in a wayte at theyr retornyng. It 
28 happed that the fourth day that our men sette them on the way for 
to retome, and brought Armures and many horses laden with 
vytaylles and other thynges / And toke none heede of them that 
laye in a wayte / The turkes brake sodenly on them / And surprised AjUwy w«^ 
32 oure men at a paas. The erle of tholouse had the vaward 5 / And Turks 
Buymont cam after. The eryc began moche grete. 6 whan the 
Turkes sawe thyse noble men, they held them al sty lie 6 / And 

1 After city Caxton has omitted ‘ ‘ Car devers Orient estoit cclle gamison 
venue. Devcfs midy Us murs dc la palus qui eostoient le mur. Devers Occident 
et devers bise le gardoit le fleuve, qui se espandoit vers la mer. ” 

1 Fr. Mahomerie, Lat. “ ubi end quoddam eorum superstitionis oratorium." 

3 Orig. sor. 4 Orig. kuyglites. 6 Fr. Vavantgarde. 

*-* Fr. "quand lea Turcz vindrent, les preudhommcs se tindretU tout 
coyement.” 



158 


[i If. 72, bk.] 
Many of our 
men fled. 


At least 300 
were slain. 


Duke Godfrey 
assembled 
five battalions 
to aid those 
who had been 
Uni® sur¬ 
prised. 


He exhorted 
them either 
to die as 
Christians, or 
to avenge 
their fellow- 
soldiers. 


** As for my- 
self,” said lie, 
“ I would 
rather die 
than not be 
revenged. 


Godfrey addresses the Army. [Ch. CIV. 

began tenseigne the peple on foote, that they shold! holde them to 
gydre. They of the gfete affiraye that they herde, ffor drede that 
they had*, hydde them Hn the busshes, and! fledde in to the 
montaynes and woodes, and! toke none heed to that they brought / 4 
whan our barons sawe this, they knewe wel that theyr strengthe 
was not lyke theyres, And began to come to the lodgys dylygently 
with as many men as they myght conduyte. Tlie other, that wold! 
not folowe, ne myght not, were alle there slayn / there were slayn 8 
wel of men and wymmen to the nombro of iij C. / this duryng 
tydynges cam to the boost, that alle they that were comyng were 
al slayn & put to deth by the turkes, that had espyed them / Of 
the barons 2 them self, that conduyted! them, was not knowen 3 12 
whether they were a lyue or deed!, the due Godeffroy, that was 
not ydle, had grete anguyssh in his herte for the peple of our lord! 
that was thus lost, And lete do crye that alle m.en shold arme them 
in thoost on peyne of deth / and! that none shold! abyde behynde 16 
in so grete a werke / alle assembled, & passed the brygge of the 
shippis / and they made .v / bataylles / robert, due of Normawdye, 
lad that one; The .ij / lad therle of Fhumdres / the thyrd!, huon le 
mayne / The forth, Eustace / brother to the due 4 Godeffroy / And 20 
the due 4 hym self had the fyfthe. whan they were all ordeyned, 
the due 4 called them ; And! alle they heryng, sayde in this manere / 

“ Fayr lordes, yf it be trouthe thus as the tydynges renne, that for 
oure 6 synnes 6 tliise cruel houndes and fals / haue 7 slayn so valyaunt 24 
men, and! of so grete counseyl, whom ye sente to the see side / And 
with them be perysshed also our felows, whom they shold haue 
conduyted / I see not but of two wayes that one / or that we deye 
with them as good! cristen men in this world, and certeyn to receyue 28 
the reward! of Ihesu Criste, whom we shal serue vnto the deth j Or 
yf oure lord wyll that oure seruyee be to hym acceptable / that we 
take vengeaunce on thyse mastyfs, that haue thus enpayred cristi- 
ente, and endommaged and destroyed thyse valyaunt men. As for 32 
my self, I saye to you 8 certaynly / I had leuer to deye presently, 
than to lyue without to be aduenged on them / Now vnderstonde 
ye what I shal saye to you; me semeth that thyse turkes, yf they 
haue the victorye vpon oure men, as it is sayd / they shal be now 36 
mounted in grete pride / And by grete bobance, for to angre vs, wyl 
come to the cyte / And brynge theyr proyes and fardellys to fore 

2 Orig. barous. 3 Orig. kuowen. 4 Orig. dnc. 5 Orig. onre. 

3 Orig. fyunes. 7 Orig. liane. 8 Orig. yon. 



Gfa. CV.] Preparations to receive the Enemy. " 159 

vs / And ye shal wel see that they shal not kepe them wel in 
ordenaunce, but shal goo folyly; And this shal be grete auantage to 
vs / Therfore, a by my counseyll, yf it be so / that 1 we hold! vs al " we must 
4 redy for to doo the seruyse of oure lord, ffor whiche we departed! seWw^ready 
oute of oure countrees / late vs haue in hym stedfast hope, ffor he gnj«> of our 
2 guerdonneth right wel his souldyours / whan our enemyes shal [* leaf 73 ] > 
come to vs, late vs receyue them vygorously with glayues / speres 
8 and! swerdes / late eueryche of you remembre wel in his herte of the 
wrunge and shame that they haue don oure lord!, and! to oure self.” 

This worde, that the due sayde, was wel vnderstande of alle / And 
plesyd them merueyllously well. They began to warne eche other, The Cruead- 

. . . ers then be* 

12 and somone to doo well / As 3 there they knewe to gydre, And gan to exhort 
there helde them al redy / And thenne buymont aryued, & cam do their best, 
emong them / And a lytil whyle after cam therle of tholouse: And Bohemond 
they tolde to them of theyr mesauenture. They had moche grete there was 
16 ioye of their comyng, and that they were escaped / They moche ■aii’y. 
comforted eche other / And after sayd to them the counseyl of due 
godeffroy / They acorded therto / and sayd that it ought so to be 
doo; And so abode there alle they to gydre / Ancean, Capytayn of 
20 the Cyte, by thyse semblaunces that he sawe, knewe that his peple 
had discomfyted the oures. Moche doubted he of theyr comyng 1 
agayn, by cause'that our men were yssued ayenst them / therfor he Ancean 

. , , . , 1 11 ill 1 8tat '° ,ie d sol- 

dyde do crye in the toun / that alle men shold arme them and diere at the 
24 come to the yate of the brydge, for to be redy in araye for to 
socoure their peple, yf nede were / Our men had sente their espyes ne «d it. 
and theyr courreurs in dyuerse partyes, for tenquyre and knowe 
whan the turkes shold come, and fro what parte. 


28 Of a batayll, where our men auenged them of the 
turkes / and of a stroke that due godeffroy gaf 
in this bataylle. cap 0 Cv° 

i T was not longe after, but whyles as they taryed there, and 
32 had theyr hertes desyryng to doo prowesse, yf they had tyme 
and place, that theyr messagers arryued alle rennyng 1 , whiche told 
to them that the turkes were nygh / They began to recomande them 
self to oure lord, and wente forward in theyr bataylles like as they 
36 were ordeyned / whan they sawe tyme and place, they smote theyr 

1-1 Fr. "Pour cc e'est irum consett, si vous voiez qu’il soil bon, que," etc. 

8 Fr. “ si commc ilz se cognoissoienl. “ 



160 The Great Barms- do wonderful Beats of Arms. [Ch. CV. 

Our men hors with theyr spores / Anil cam to so fiersly that the turkes were 

attacked the , r ' . .. ... . 

Turk'" 5 a abasshed / thenne they began to smyte asprely on the right syde 
fiercely , and lyft, And flewe in to the presse in suche wyse that euery man 
wold be the best and! moost valyaunt / in so rnoche that they gaf 4 
to theyr enemyes no leyser to aduyse them what they shold! doo / 
so that they They myght not endure the grete strengthe of oure men / but wold 
the bridge, haue drawen toward the brydge / 'But the due godeffroy / that 
C if. 7s, bk.] k newe 0 f suc he thynges, was 2 pourueyed! therof to fore / And 8 

had taken a lytil territoire, whiche was ayenst the brydge / And 
Duke Godfrey there he lielde hym in his bataylle / Alle the turkes that they 
el'eTtifem or °^ ace< l toward! hym / he slewe them, or he made retorne ayenst 
back 6 t,wm ^hem f ro whens they cam, where they slewe them alle and! hewe 12 
them / the erle of fflaundres dyde right wel this day, as a good, 
valyaunt & hardy man in armes / the Due of Normandye brak 
the presse, that no turke durst 3 approche hym / the Erie of tholouse 
hym self wold auenge this / that they had made hym to spore his l(i 
ba'om did bors the daye to fore / huon le mayne forgate not to sliewe of what 
ofanua**" lyS lla o e l 16 was, and of what contre / 4 but 5 semed! that lie dyde to 
liis enemyes / that alle the werke and charge had! ben his / thenne 
eustace, brother of due godeffroy; Bawdwyn, erle of lienawd / 20 
hughe, therle of seynt poul; 'And alle the other barons, knyghtes 
and noble men, in theyr eountrees dyde meruaylleS of armes, ther 
was neuer man lyuyng 1 that sawe ony werk better enterprised and 
more valyauntly achyeuyd, and that communely of alle / Ancean 24 
bumon'to' 1 sawe ^' s bataylle so grete / 6 And! sawe his peple yssue out 7 for to 
?n tunr° urs gy uu them herte and courage® / And to put awaye tliesperaunce of 
theyr flyght, commaunded! to shette the yates after them, they 
cam pryckyng ayenst oure men / & wold! haue made theyres to 28 
retorne whiche were discomfyted, but the affraye and! the drede was 
so grete in them that they neuer made semblaunt therto / they them 
self, that frely cam on, whan they sawe the prowesse of our men, 

2 Fr. “a’estoit par avant moult prom” i. e. he had thoroughly prepared 
himself in advance. 

3 Orig. dnrst. 

4 Caxton is veiy obscure here, although he seems to have understood his 
French. Fr. “aincois sembloU A ce qu’il faisoit sur scs ennemis quo toute la 
besoigne estoit sionne" viz. it seemed, to judge from what he did to his enemies, 
that the whole burden of the fight lay on him. 

6 Orig. buf. 

6—* Fr. “si fist cos gens issir hors, ct pour eulx donner cuer." Caxton 
seems to have read vist (saw.) instead of fist (made). 

7 Orig. ont. 



161 


Ch. CV.] The Great Stroke made by Duke Godfrey. 


and the 1 grete strokes that they gaf, tomed theyr backes with the 
other / ne neuer made grete resistence / there was the fyghtyng 
grete, and merueyllous 3 betyng* doun of the turkes, that men myght 
4 not but with grete payne passe / ther was so grete noyse, so grete 
crye, & so terryble neyhyng* of horses oueral, that a maw sholcL 
not liaue herd thondre. they that had made the yates to be shette 
after them, 3 were ofte this day in peryl to lese theyr lyues. 8 the 
8 wyues of the turkes, the maydens and! feble peple of the toun, M ere 
vpou the walles and tourettes, where they sawe theyr peple tome to 
meschyef and to destruction / ye may wel thynke that they had! 
grete sorowe / wepynge, and! moehe crye and! noyse. wel cursed! 
12 they that tyme, that they so longe had. lyued that they shold see 
suche meschyef happen to them / Ancean sawe that he loste alle his 
men, and had none hope for to recoure them / commaunded! that 
that yate shold! be opened! for to receyue in to the toun them that 
16 were lefte / whan the turkes sawe the yate opene / they had! so 
4 grete wylle to entre in to the toun / that vpon the brydge they 
pressyd! so euyl for haste, that they fylle in to the water of them 
grete plente. The Due GodefEroye, that al that day had! so wel 
20 don, And whan it cam for to departe to fore the bridge / he gaf a 
stroolc 1 moche valyaunt / and! suche one / that it shal perpetually 
and! euermore be spoken of in wele and! in honour / ffor I trowe 
ther happed neuer none suche to fore / ne neuer shal happen here 
24 after. There were this daye many heedes smeton of / Armes and! 
sholders at one stroke / he wel apperceyued! one of his enemyes, 
whiche lielde hym nygh to Godeffroy, And auaunced hym ofte, and 


The conflict 
was terrible. 


The Turks 
were worsted. 


and Ancean 
opened the 
gates of the 
city to receive 
the fugitives. 


[♦ leaf 74, 
sig.9t] 


pevned to greue hvm / The valyaunt Due smote hym with his uuke Godfrey 
28 swerde by suche myght and? vertue, that he smote hym in two jntwowith f 
pyeces in the myddle / in suche wyse that the ouerste part of hym i™ sword, 
fyl to the ground! / And 1 that other parte abode styll syttyng on the 
bora / whiche entred! in to the Cyte with the other / And! knowe 
32 ye certaynly that this sayd Turke was armed with a good hauberk, 

and moche stronge / Alle they that sawe this merueylle / were ah who «»w 

' mil ,p i this marvel 

gretely abasshedf; And the Turkes them self had grete fere and were greatly 
drede. 5 0 mercy ful God, what myght and strengthe gyuest thou 
36 to thy seruauntes, that liaue their faytli and truste in the / Suche a 
stroke hath not® be herd of to fore this tyme 5 / That same daye 


1 Fr. sentirent, left out by Caxton. 2 si omitted. 

3-3 p r _ “jlrent A maintz, le jour, perdre les vies," he caused many, that 
day, to lose their lives.” 8—5 Inserted by Caxton. * Orig. uot. 
GODFREY. M 



162 


tthe Turks suffer great Loss. [Cb. CVI. 

they of Anthyoche loste moo than two thousand men. And yf the 
nyght had not comen so sone on, they shold haue ben so enfebled 
of men / that with payne shold they haue conne holden and kept 
The Turks the toun ayenst oure men. It semed wel that at the brydge were 4 
imiXr» of many Turkes slayn, ffor it was thycke there of deede bodyes. The 
ryuer that descended to the see / was alle blody vnto the See / 
Somme Cristen men of the londe yssued oute of the toun, And cam 
end twelve to our peple / that told them that .xij / grete admyrals had the 8 
Turkes loste in the bataylle / For whom they were ouermoche 
sorouful; For they were so endommaged / that neuer in theyr lyf 
shold they be therof restored. 

How the Cristen men thanked oure lord of this 12 
yyctorye / And made a Castel in theyr mahom- 
merye, where there they fonde grete gayne. 

Capitulo Cvj° 

pit 74 , bkj 1 1 He next day, whan the daye was wel cleer, the barons 16 
The barons assembled alle, for humbly to thancke our lord of the victorye 

give thanks 

for thiB great that lie had gyuen to them; And after, spak of the cornyn besynes. 

Comynly was deuysed and acorded of alle / that there shold be 
made a tour, as they had enterpiysed at thende of the brydge, for 20 
to take away the yssue fro them of the toun / And for to kepe and 
warante oure peple whan they ramie to fore it / There had the 
Turkes buryed by nyght the dede men that had ben’ slayn in the 
The common bataylle to fore / whan the peple afoote knewe this, they ranne, 24 
bnned tbe^ And there vnburyed them / And toke them out of theyr sepultures 
plundered and graues / And toke and bare away Gold / Syluere / And theyr 
robes, the whiche they had buryed with them in their sepultures, 
after theyr customme / They of the toun had moche sorowe, by 28 
cause they sawe to fore theyr eyen the corses taken vp of theyr 
frendes, whiche they had buryed with grete costes and despenses. 
And it displesyd them moche that the nombre of theyr deed men 
shold be knowen / whom they had supposed to haue kepte secrete / 32 
ffor without them that fylle in the flood or Kyuer, And withoute 
them that were buryed in the toune / And them that were hurt 
1500 men vnto the deth, and buryed in the toun, were taken vp oute of 
taken up out theyr graues in the mahomerye a thousand and fyue honderd. 36 
graves. They smote of thre honderd heedes, and sente them to Themperour, 
for to late hym haue certayn tydynges of the bataylle that they had 



16S 


Ch C'VTI.] The Sarorts make a strong Portress. 


ayenst 1 the turkes / The messagers of the Calyphe of Egypte were 
not yet departed 1 fro thens. And whan they sawe this, they were 
ioyous of the deth of theyr enemyes / But they were alway after 
4 afeerd, and dred oure peple / There were many of oure owne men 
that had fledde in to the woodes and montaygnes, whiehe after men - 
retourned in to thooste / There cam many in to thooste / that men 
supposed had ben deed / the barons commanded that the fortresse a fortress 
8 shold be made, & adressyd? moch hye and strowge, hastely. It was “ade by^the 
made of such stones as they drewe out of the tombes & sepultures 
of the turkes / & after, the barons began to aduyse to whom the 
kepyng of this tour shold be delyuerd, which was fayr & strong; & 

12 to fore was made a dyche, moche depe. ther were Barons ynowe, 
whiehe excused them by many reasons why they myght not kepe it / 

But the valyant Erie of Tholouse proufEred hym self / And prayde wreEari of 
that it myght be delyuerd to hym ffor to gouerne / f£or by the grace-”®™ 4 *^ 
16 of God he shold kepe it wel / Alle the Barons coude hym moche 

good thaucke / And 2 by this recouerd 3 he the grace and loue of the I s leaf 75 , 
comyn peple / whiehe he had alle loste / ffor fro the somer to fore, 
by thoccasion of a sekenCs and maladye that he had / 4 he had don 
20 none auauncement of ony werkes and nedes of the hoost, 4 Eueryche 
of the other barons had don his power / But he dyde right nought j 
therfore thempyre coude hym thank / ffor it was supposed that he 
was the rychest. but for tentreprise of this thyng, they sayd wel 
24 alle that he was not a ferd, lie euyll. And 011 that other syde, yet 
he dyde more, ffor he leyd out .v / C / marck weyght of syluer in 
the hand of the Bisshop of puy, and other good men, for to helpe 
to restore the dommages of the horses that the poure men had 
28 taken in the bataylle. there were many after, that were the more 
hardy for to goo ayenst theyr enemyes, for hope to haue, and 


recouere theyr horses / ffor thyse thynges was therle of tholouse Hewas^ 
moche louyd and preysed, in so moche that they callyd hym fader f. a j!® t 4 h ‘r e and 


32 and wardeyn of thoost. 


Warden of 
the Host.” 


Of a fortresse that Tanere made ouer the Ryuer and 
deffended it valyauntly. capitulo C / vij° 

1 Orig. ayeust. 8 Orig. reconerd. 

*—* Fr. “ s’cetoil si forfait (var “ soustrait," which is the correct reading), 
de tonics les besongnes de I’ost." Lat. “Nam ab aestate praeterita, per totam 
insequentem hyemem, occasione cujusdam aegritndinis, ita remissus jacuerat, 
el pene inutilis." 

u a 



164 


Tattered builds another Portress. [Ch. CVII. 

i N this news fortresse of the brydge therle of tholouse sette 
thyrin / v.C. men of Arines, hardy and valyaunt knyghtes and 
By this new oiner / And by cause of this fortresse the yssuyng and goyng out 
Turks*were 6 of them of the toun was deffended / Oure men thenne wente surely 4 
Komgniand in. the countre / the turkes myght not yssue but by the west yate / 
town. whiehe is bytwene the foot of the hylle, And! the ryuer of helle. 

And! this yssue myght not moche greue ne hurte oure men / ffor 
alle the lodgys were ouer the ryuer / but alway by that waye cam 8 
vytaylles and! fresshe metes to them of the toun 1 / And thus they 
were not ynowgh coustreyned / by so moche as they had this 
yssue / The barons assembled and counseylled 2 how they myght 
take this waye fro them / they acorded wel that this myght not be, 12 
But yf ther were a fortresse made ouer the Ryuer whiehe muste be 
They decided delyuerd to one of the Barons for to kepe. They acorded well alle 
••con’d a that the fortresse shold be made / But none proferd ne sayde that 

he wold kepe it / Many of them sayde that Tancre was ryght pro-16 
pyce to this thynge. But he excused hym, And sayd that he 
was ouer poure for tendure and here so grete dispence. Therle of 
l» if. 75, bk.] Tholouse sterte forth to 8 fore / and gaf to hym an / G / marck of 
of which syluer for to make it with. And It was ordeyned that he shold 20 
should be haue euery moneth .xl marke of the comune. Tancre, whiehe was 

placed in J . 

command, moche valyaunt and wyse, dyde do make this tour, in a lytil tertre 
nygh ynowgh to the gate, And after receyued it in to his warde and 
kepyng. And god gaf to hym so moche worship / that he loste 24 
nothynge / But kepte it al hool vnto the ende of the siege. In the 
On the rivsr syde bynethe by the Ryuer was a moche fayr playne in whiehe 
fwr nw tures haboureded many fayr pastures 4 / And grete plente of trees a / iij / 
horses THh ' 01 ^ our m yl e fro the Cyte. They of the toun by cause they had not 28 
pastures ynowgh / they had sente grete plente of theyr horses and 
mounture in to that place / whan they of thoost apperceyued it / 
They assembled knyghtes ynowe and other valyaunt men of 
Arrnes / And wente theder / but not by the right waye / but by 32 
The Crusad- pathes and hyd wayes, so longe that they assayled them that kept 
«aiiy, and them and slewe them. They brought in to the hoost / ii / M. 

captured w ° 1 ' 

many of horses for men of Armes grete gente, and fayr / besyde the mules 

and other beestes, wherof they had largely. Of this gayne had 36 
they grete ioye / ffor they had of nothyng so grete nede in thoost as 
of horses / ffor they had ben mynnysshed moche aud lassed in the 
bataylle / And many deyed that tyme for hungre and mesease. 

1 Orig. tonn. a Orig. connseylled. 4 Orig. paBtutures. 



Ch. CVIII.] Great Gifts from Baldwin. 


1G5 


How tlienne the turkes of the toun began to haue 
mesease and sorowe / And our peple ease / 

Capitulo Cviij" 

4 t Han 1 the Cyte was thus on alle sydes assyeged that the turkes 

myght not yssue oute / they began within to haue mesease, TheTurks ^ 
2 ffor the Turkes had not vytayll ynowgh, 2 wherof it happed that 
they myght not helpe them in theyr nede / ffresshe mete ffaylled 
8 them, whiche greuyd them moche / Oure men had bandon to goo 
vnto the Porte of the See / 3 4 * By whiche they had so moche to suffre 
as they had endured all the wynter 8 / ffor the pryme 4 temps and 
swete tyme was come in suche wyse that shippes myght goo and ships brought 
12 come by the See / whiche brought vytaylles ynowgh. There were provisions by 
many of oure people that had soiourned all the wynter in the 
Townes, whiche thenne cam agayne in to thooste alle fressh & wel 
armed. / bawdwyn the brother of due Godeffroy / of whom ye 
16 haue wel herd speke to fore / whiche had so moche ryehesse / had 

herd tydynges 6 that the barons 6 had suffred many meseases in [«leaf 78, 
thoost / And sente to them alle grete yeftes and presentes / not Baldwin sent 
only to the grete prynces / But also to the moyen peple / And to the t0 
20 the leste gaf he also ynowgh of his owen, wherfor had the lone & 
grace of alle this companye / he gaf to his brother the Due alle 
thyssues of his londe that he had on this syde the Byuer of 
Eufrates / with which he gaf to hym the Cyte of torbesel & the 
24 eontre ther about 7 wherin was moche whete / wyne & oyle. And 

yet aboue al this he gaf to hym / L / M. besauntes / And there He sent bis 
was a noble man of hermonye whiche was named INycose, whiche 
was wel acqueynted with bawdwyn. And for his loue sente vnto 
28 due Godeffroy a pauyllon, the moost fayr and moost ryche, that 
myght o wher be seen / It was of ouer straunge facion and mer- 
uellously grete / But whan his messagers bare it in to the hooste 8 / 

One pancrace a moche ryche man of Hermonye / Of whom I haue Poneratius 

seized the 

32 spoken to fore, dyde do espye them by the waye / And dyd to take * ent 

1 Fr. Quand. 

2—8 Fr. “ car leurs chevaulx n’amienl mie asses viandes—" for their horses 
—(not “ the Turks ") had not food enough. 

8—3 Fr. ‘‘dont ilz n’avoient mais tel souffrete comme ils avoient endwrie 
Urns Vyver.” Lat. 11 Nude et ni castris ex parte plurima relevata erat ilia 
rictus inopia qua periculose nimis per totam hyemem labor aver at cxercitus. ” 

4 Fr. doulx temps, spring time. 8 Orig. tydyuges. 

7 Orig. about, 8 Orig. haoste. 



166 


and {rave it 
to Bohemond. 


Godfrey was 
very angry at 
this, 


and de¬ 
manded the 
pavilion from 
Boheraond. 


Bohemond 
Anally, to 
keep the 
peace, sur¬ 
rendered it 
to Godfrey. 


[i If. 76, bk.] 


It was re¬ 
ported that 
the Soudan of 
Persia was 
coming with 
a vast army. 


Steven, Earl 
of Chartres 
and Blois, 


left the Cru* 
sadent, and 
went to 
Alexandria 
the Lease. 


Duke, Godfrey gets back his Pavilion. [Ch. CIX. 

it from them /. And after sente the pauyllon to Buymont. And! 
was presented! to hym in his name, whan the seruantes of Nycose 
cam to Due Godeffroy / And! had! told! hym alle this that pancrace 
had! don to hym / he had! therof moche grete desdayne / Syth he 4 
toke with hym the Erie of fflaundres, to whom he had! more loue 
and! acqueyntaunce than to ony other of the barons / And wente to 
buymont and demaunded! his pauyllon that was gyuen to hym / 
Buymont answerd! that therof he knewe not / that it was longyng 8 
to hym / ffor a noble man of the countre had gyuen it to hym. 
But whan he knewe that the due wold not suffre it / By hys cur- 
tosye and atte- prayer and requeste of the other barons he rendred 
and delyuerd! to him his sayd! pauyllon, to thende that no noyse 12 
shokl gourde ne arryse betweno them and! myght lette the werke 
of oure lord! / Thus were they good frendes / Many men merueylled! 
them how that so valyaunt a man as the Due Godeffroy was / In 
whom was no thynge founden to be reprehended was so meuyd / 16 
ayenst so hye and! noble a man for so lytil a thyng as was a pauyllon. 

Ne I can see none other reason, But that a noble herte mays not 
suffre shame / And! it was late hym vnderstande that it shold! be 
to hym a grete shame / And also it shold be ayenst his honour yf 20 
he suffred it to be taken away from hym, ffor couetyse he dyde 
it not / 

How the Erie Estyeuen of Chartres and of Bloys fledde 
'fro the hooste shamefully / Capitulo Cix® 24 

t He renommee sourded! 2 moehe grete / & grewe euery day how 
the Soudan of Perse, Avhiche was so ryehe and! puyssaunt, 
by the requeste of them of Anthyoche had! doo somone his peple 
of alle his power for to come socoure this cyte / he had! assembled! 28 
merueyllous grete peple, ffor the tydynge cam not only to them of 
thooste / But it was sayd of many men that yssued! out of the 
Cite for to come in to thooste as hermyens and surryens, whiche 
were cristen / wherof it happed that Steuen, therle of chartres & of 32 
bloys, whiche was so noble puyssaunt and wyse, that for his 
wysdom the other barons of thooste named hym the fader of couw- 
seyl, 3 made hym self seke as was sayd / he toke leue of his frendes. 

By cause he sayde he wold 1 goo in to Allexandrye the lasse / whiche 36 
was nyghe to the porte / And wolde abyde there til he were deed 

3 Fr. se fist malade, fell ill. 


a Orig. sourded*. 



167 


Ch. CX.] Many Men desert the Army. 

or ellys hool / Thus he departed and lad away with hym grete 
good / & with hym departed .iiij/M. men, whiche were of his 
eompanye and* of his countreye, he wente strayt in to Allexandrye 
4 the lasse / And there helde hym to thende / that yf our peple had There he 

' ** ^ ^ Btsysd to 

vyctorye of the bataylle whiche they awayted dayly, he wold the radtof 
retorne in to thoost as guarysshyd and hool of his maladye; and yf AntiocS. 
it had meshapped them, anon he wold haue entred in to shippis 
8 whiche were all redy for to retourne in to his country / Of this 
thynge all the barons of thooste were so abasshed & angry that aii the ha- 

. rona were so 

they wepte hoote teeris for pyte, that they had of so hye and noble 
man that toke none liede to his gentilnesse, 1 to his wytte / ne to 
12 the worshyppe that men dyde to hym / But departed so euyl in JJjJJjJJ?” of 
poynt / (26) that many men had no shame to withdrawe them after steven - 
hym / Thus departed many / The Barons had counseyl to gydre / 

And dyde do crye thurgh the hooste, that noman shold be so hardy 
16 to departe withoute leue / ffor yf ony wente, they shold be holden 
for murdyrere, And Iustyce shold be doon to suche men / By this 
ordenaunce for teschewe the payne and for to kepe theyr honour The great^ 
they held them in peas in thoost / And obeyed alle in pees in the brought the 
20 hooste, And obeyed debonayrly to the barons of tliooste, 2 As obedience. 
Monkes or Cloystrers to theyr Abbot, withoute departyng 1 ony of 
theyr company. 2 

How a Cristen man, Emyrferius, whiche was in An- 
24 thyoche, 8 acqueynted hym with Buymont / 

ca° Cx° 

a Nthyoche, this holy cyte that I haue spoken of to fore, Antioch wn« 

J J r converted by 

was conuerted by the prechyng of seynt peter thappostle / pP”“ c J|j" B 
28 alway it helde wel this fayth, and yet holdeth certaynly, god be »pt»tie, 
thanked. Whan the disloyalte and falsenes of mahomet ran thurgh 
thoryent this cyte wold neuer 4 receyue his lawe, 5 and whan the 
myghty men of the countre wold constrayne them by force to this 
32 euyl lawe, they deffended them well ayenst alle suche, wherof it 
happed that whan the dcuyl had sette this false byleue thurgh alle 
the londe of Perse vnto the braas of seynt George / and fro Inde 
vnto spayne / this cyte abode alway in the fayth of the trouthe of and abode 

l v f j j «/ always in tlie 

36 Ihesu Criste / Trouthe it is that fourten yere to fore that our peple f»ab®r ,csus 
1 Fr. “so gmtillcssc,” etc., to his rank, etc. 

a — 3 Fr. “aomme moines cloistriers a leur ab(, sans partir nullement de leur 
compaqnie. ” 4 Orig. nener, 6 Fr. loi, religion, faith. 



The Chin** 
tians had no 
power in the 
city, but were 
ruled by the 
Turks. 


168 The Armenian Emirferius smds Messengers to Bohemond. [Ch. CX. 

cam theder / the grete Soudan of Perse had conquerd alle the londes 
vnto Anthyoche / And by cause they were not myghty to hold it 
ony lengev, they yelded 1 it ynder the puyssaunce of this grete man. 
Thenne after cam oure men for tassiege it. Almost alle they of the 4 
toune helde the fayth of oure lord. But withoute faylle they had! 
no power ne noo seygnorye in the cyte, ffor they medled of nothyng 
sauf theyr craftes and theyr merchaundyses to Wynne theyr breed / 

1 the turkes had the bataylles / and wente to armes whan it was 8 
nede. 1 ther was none so hardy of the cristen men that durst arme 
hym / and specially syth our peple cam to fore the toun The cristen 
mew that were therin were holden suspect that they durst not yssue 
ne goo oute of theyr howses / there were many of suche cristen men 12 
that wore of grete lygnage, to whom was don moche shame, there 
was a lygnage of noble men that were heremyens. They were 
named in theyr langage Bam and Cyrra 2 / that is to saye the 3 sones 
of haubergyers / And for certeyn of the same langage were descended 16 
theyr lygnages, and yet ben ther somme that make hauberks / they 
had a toure whiche was named the tour of the two sustres. In this 
toure were / ij / bretheren that were lordes of this lygnage. The 
oldest 4 had to Name Emerferyus, 8 a moche sage and prudent man / 20 
Acqueyuted he was and pryue with the lord of the toun, in suche 
wyse that he had made hym his notarye within the palays / This 
man herde men speke moche good of Buymont fro the begynnynge 
of the siege. And wel vnderstode by the comyn renommeo that he 24 
was a wyse man, And trewe of grete herte and enterpryse / Ther- 
fore he sente to hym his Messager / And acqueynted with hym 
moche 6 pryuely, and lete hym knowe alle the beyng & state of the 
Cyte / and the purpoos of the turkes / but they were bothe two 28 
wysemen, therfor coude they, wel eouere theyr counntenannces / 
There were but few peple about buymont that knewe hym. 


There waa 
among the 
Christians a 
noble family 
of Arme- 


The eldest 
waa called 
Emerferius. 


He sent mes¬ 
sengers to 
Bohemond to 
P If. 77, bk.] 
reveal to him 
the plans of 
the Turks in 
the city. 


1—1 Mistranslation owing to corrupt original. A. gives the correct read¬ 
ing. “ Les Turcs amount, les baillies ct aloient as armes quant mestier estoit," 
“ The Turks possessed all administrative power, and went to war when neces- 
sary. ” Lat. ‘ ‘ solis Turds ct injidelibus militarc liccbat , ct majorcs civitatis 
admmistrare dignitatis.” 

8 B. gives “ Bam and Oyrra followed by Caxton. A. gives Bar. zarra. 

3 “ sons of the cuirass makers.” Lat. “ Qui dicebalur Beni Ferra, quod in 
lingua latina interpretatur, filii lorieatoris.” 

4 Orig. oldesc, 6 Fr. Emirferius. Lat. Emirfeirus. 



109 


Ch. CXI.] He offers to deliver Antioch to him. 

Of somme deuyses that the sayd Emyrferius sente 
to buymont, & in what maner he acorded to 
delyuer to hym the toun. ca° Cxj° 

4 s Euen monethes had tho endured! the siege to fore the toun / 
Buymont the wyse and subtil / had! many tymes essayed! his 
frende of the toun / how the cyte myght be yolden to the cristen 
men. So ofte he sente to hym by his sone that sayd thus to hym 
8 in this manere / “ fayre swete syre, I trowe certaynly that our lord! 
Ihesu Criste wold that I had! this aequeyntaunee with you and this 
loue; 1 ffor euer syth I haue be acqueynted with you, myn herte 
neuer rested to drawe and acorde euery day more and! more in 
12 your bonnte, 1 ami your maner plesyd me moche / I haue veray 
forme & fast hope that I and the myne shal be yet in tyme 
comynge moche holpen and honoured by you 2 of this thynge that 
ye haue discouerid to me / of which I haue ben merueyllously 
16 pensyf j syth I haue herd! of it / I haue moch counterpeysed 8 the 
wayes of that one side and of that other, ffor I thynke wel certeynly 
that yf I may delyuer my countrey fro the peple that ben enemyes 
of oure lord!, and rendre and! delyuere it to the seygnorye of my 
20 fayth, I shal haue grete guerdon of oure lord! and grete honour in 
the world! / But yf it so happed thus that this werke were des- 
couered that 1 haue enterprised, to fore er it cam to an ende or 
conclusion / I shold be delyuerd to alle the tormentes of the world / 
24 & alle my lygnage effaced! and destroyed, that it neuer shold be 
spoken of after. 4 And! neuertheles many thynges be put in aduen- 
ture, 4 therfore I wylle discouere to you alle my herte, as to hym 
that I hold! for a trewe frende / yf the barons that be in your com- 
28 panye wylle graunte as trewe men as they be, that this Cyte shal 
be youres for euermore and your heyres yf it may be conquerd / 
5 1 shal put me in aduenture 5 so that I shal delyuer to you this tour 
that I holde / whiche is moche strong and wel garnysshed / And 
32 this I shal doo for goddes loue ami youres / But yf they entende 
that euery men shal haue his part / as of thyng goten by warre / 

1—1 Fr. “ Car oncqucs puis que je fus de vous acointc, ne me fina le aier dc 
traire >1 aceorder chascun jour de plus en plus a vostre bouM.” 

2 Orig. yon. 3 Fr. conlre pensecs, carefully weighed. 

*— 1 Fr. "ct neant moins de plusicrs choscs sc met I'en avcnturc" —via. ‘in 
several respects great risks are to be run.” 

5—5 p r itj e me me ttrai en avcnturc.’' “ I will take the risk on myself {i, e, 
of delivering the city to you).” 


Emirferlus 
kept sending 
friendly mes¬ 
sages to 
Bohemond, 


and promis¬ 
ing to deliver 
the city to 
him, 


notwith¬ 
standing that 
he would be 
put to tortnre 
if discovered. 


This he 
would do for 
God's love, 
and for love 
ofBolieinond. 



170 Bohemond reveals this Offer to the other Princes. [Ch. CXII. 

therupon wyl I not laboure ne doo payne / ffor I wote neuer to 
[i leaf 78] what ende it shold 1 come. therfor I pray you, fayr swete syre and 
HohemorKUo trew frende, that ye put you in deuoyr & payne that this toun be 
eatly forjthe" youres / not for couetyse, but for the prouffyt of the cyte Cristen / 4 
same object. & j promyse to you that the day that I shal knowe that it shal 
be thus graunted to you, I shal delyuer to you the entree of the 
did mustlbe touri ' Alway one thynge I saye to you for certayn, that yf it be 
done quickly, no t mayde within short tyme that ye shal neuer day of the world 8 
as succour reeouere it / ffor euery day come to the lord of this toun lettres and 

from beyond ' - 

theEughrate* messagers certefyeng 1 that they that come to socoure the toun ben 
expected. about the ryuer of eufrates whiche is not ferre / And they ben wel 

a .ij / C / M / men of Armes. yf they come an you on that one syde / 12 
And they of the Cyte on that other / ye may not suffre ne with¬ 
stands them / but ye shal be alle deed or taken / And therfore take 
ye here vpon hasty counseyl.” 

How buymont discouerd this thynge to due godeffroy, 16 
to huon the mayne, to the due of Normandye, 
and to therle of fflaundres / Capitulo / C / xij° 

f Ro the day that buymont 3 had herd this / he began tenquyre 3 
moche subtylly and examyne the hertes of the barons / And 20 
demaunded them otherwhyle what they wold doo with this Cyte yf 
it were taken / Of the ansuer sonune of them thought that it was 
Bohemond fer of / Therfore taryed buymont to discouere his herte and his 
meJiateiym bought till he sawe better his poynt and tyme / neuertheless he 24 
barons otlier drewe a part due godefroy, huon de mayne, the due of normandye, 
and therle of fflaumdres. To them he sayde that he trusted so 
moche in oure lord, that yf the cyte myglit be graunted to liym it 
myght be wel in short tyme conquerd. They acorded it and moche 28 
preysed in theyr courage the wytte of this man that had in wylle 
ah but the to accomplysshe so grete a thyng / By thaccord of them this thyng 
louse agreed was discouerd to therle of tholouse / he ansuerd that he wold neuer 

that the town 

Bohemond,a the Cyte were taken / gyue his parte to another man / The 32 
dercd ren ' barons prayd hym moche, but he wold not consent e therto for 
nothynge / Therfor the thynge was in suche daunger / that almost 
the thynge was alle loste / ffor Buymont put not the payne / ne 
his frende of the toun wold not but yf the toun shold be alle his. 36 
Neuertheles for alle this, Buymont sente to hym ofte grete yeftes for 

8 Oriy. tenqnyre, 


3 Orig. buymont. 



Ch. CXIII.] Corbagat collects a great Army. 


171 


to kepe hym in acqueyntaunce 1 and in the loue that was begonne 
bytwene them. 


Of the grete socours that the Soudan of perse had 
4 sente to them 2 of anthyoche, and how Corbagat p if. 1 % bkj 
assyeged rages / capitulo / Cxiij 0 


i N the whyle that thyse thynges ran thus in Anthyoche / the 
messagers that fro Ancean were goon to the soudan of perse 
8 for to demaunde ayde / were retorned as they that had wel don 
theyr thynges,9 ffor that grete prynce atte requeste of them of 
Anthyoche, And atte prayer of his men, had enterprysed to efface 
and destroye alle our pylgryms that theder were comen / And ther- 
12 fore he sente theder grete plente of Turkes and of cordyns 4 in to 
this countre / And had delyuerd all the seygnorye and gouemaunce 
of the hooste to one his acqueynted 8 / ffor he trusted moche in his 
wytte / in his loyalte / and in his prowesse / This man was named 
16 Corbagat, he eommaunded alle men to obeye to hym. he sente 
lettres pendantes 6 oueral his londes, and eommaunded that they 
shold be delyuerd ouer all. that where he shold lede them / that 
they shold goo / And alle that he eommaunded them they shold 
20 doo without contradiction / he departed fro his eountrey with alle 
his peple and his power / he passed so ferre that he cam in to the 
countre of rages / Tber was told to fiym that one of the barons of 
ffraunce helde the Cyte of Rages whiche he had conquerd, and alle 
24 the londe aboute it. He had therof grete despyte / and sayd to 
fore and er he passed the Ryuer of Eufrates / he shold take the 
toun and destroye alle the frensshemen that he shold fynde within / 
Bawdwyn was not of lityl courage, And had wel herd tydynges of 
28 this peple / he had wel gamysshed his Cyte with armes, vytaylles, 
and noble men / And doubted but lytil his eomynge / ne the 1 men¬ 
aces, ne the grete wordes of thyse peple that were reported to hym / 
Corbagat eommaunded that the cyte of rages shold be assieged / And 
32 after dyde do crye to assault / grete peyne dyde they, wenyng to hane 
taken the cyte and alle them that were therin / But they that kept 
the toun deffended them moche wel, in suche wyse that they en- 


Ancenn’s 
messengers 
now re¬ 
turned. 


and reported 
that a great 
army was 
coining to aid 
Antioch, un¬ 
der Corbagat, 


who ordered 
the city of 
Rages to be 
attacked at 
once. 


But Baldwin 
was well pre¬ 
pared with 
arms and 
men. 


and defended 
his town well. 


1 Orig. acqneyntaunce. 

3 Fr. bcsnngnes, duties. 4 Lnt. Curdinorum. 

8 Fr. “un sien acointe," one of his trusted friends. 

6 Fr, Xettres pendantes, letters with hanging seals. 



172 Corbagat's Delay before Rages saved the Crusaders. [Ch. CX1V. 

dommaged! nioehe them that were without, And they within loste 
After three no thynge. They helde them about the toun thre wekes, he had* 
tees siege, no worship ne prouffyt there. At laste the grete and noble men of 
thooste cam to hym / And sayde and connseylled hym to departs 4 
fro the siege / ffor he ought fyrst do that thyng for whiche he cam / 
corbagat was that is to saye, for to take and slee alle them that Were to fore 

kdvlscd to go 

onto An- Anthyoche. And after in his retornyng in a morowtyde he shold 
haue the toun of Eages. And* Bawdwyn, yf he were not deed, 8 
[i leaf 79 ] they shold take and* bynde ‘hym, And* presente hym to tlieyr lord 
as a sheep or a moton. he acorded! to theyr counseyl and departed 
But this delay fro thens. But allewaye the taryeng that the turkes had made 

iiftii saved 

the crimders sauyd oure pylgryms 2 / ffor the mater was not so acorded bytwene 12 
tiocii. Buymont and his frende, that yf they had* comen strayt to Anthy¬ 
oche / oure men had* ben in ouer grete meschyef bytwene them that 
he brought 3 / and the other turkes that were in the toun. 

How our men beyng aduertysed 4 of the grete hooste 16 
of corbagat, sente somme of theyr knyghtes for to 
esteme them / And what they reported of that 
they had seen / ca° Cxiiij 0 

t He tydynges began strongly to growe of this people that cam / 20 
And it was no merueyll yf they were effrayed* in the hooste of 
the pylgryms / The barons assembled* in counseyl / And* ordeyned 
The chri»- by comyn acord / that somme of theyr wysemen that understode / 

Mans sent J , ( , , 

some of their them in suche thynges as to esteme peple in the felde shold goo 24 

best warriors ° 

to inspect the and knowe their eouvne / to this were chosen Dreues de Nelle, 
report^* Clarembault de venduel / Euerard* 6 de cherysy / & Eenaud*, therle of 
toul / They ledde with them other knyghtes, knowen and preuyd* 
in Armes / they departed! fro thoost so ferre, that they approuched* 28 
the turkes, whom they sawe and folowed them fro fer / Neuertheles 
they wel appereeyued, that lyke as water renneth in the see, cam 
fro alle partes grete rowtes and! merueyllous plente of peple in this 
hooste of Corbagat. Thise noble men wente so ferr that they sawe 32 
They re- and knewe alle theyr beyng and! strengthe / And! syth drewe them 

turned, end , ' J 

reported that to the barons, and! sayd to them the trouthe / The barons prayde 
«rmy. and deffended them also, dere as they had! the werk of oure lord / 

that they wold not descouere this thyng to the foote men of thoost 36 

2 Orig. prlgryns. 8 Orig. brought. * Orig. aduertysed. 

6 Caxton’s text gives, JEverard de Cherisi, A., and the Lat. Girart de Cherisi. 



Ch. CXV.] The Crusaders prepare for the Coming of Corbagat. 173 

in no wyse / but kepe it secrete fro them / ffor it shold be grete 
peryll yf they knewe the trouth that they shold flee away by 
nyght / And be alle in despayr / 

4 Of the counseyl that our peple toke for to ordeyne 
theyr nedes whan they knewe the comyng of this 
right grete hoost 1 / ea° Cxv° 

t He barons toke counseyl / on whom the faites and burthon of The barons 

' . took counsel 

8 this werke laye, how they myght conteyne them in this " t» what 
greuows poynt in whiche they were / som ther were that gaf coun- dtme - 
seyl that they shold departe fro the siege / And that somme of 
them 2 on horsbak / and they on foote shold! abyde for to kepe that p if. 79, bk.] 
12 they of the toun 3 shold! not mo we ioyne to the other. And somme 
other the best horsed! shold! lede of them on foote a grete partye 
ayenst Corbagat, and fyght ayenst hym / The thyng was in grete Everybody 
doubte, And wyste not how to accorde. Buymont, whan he sawe pwpiexfty. 

16 them so surprised called the Due Godeffroy, therle of fflaundres / 

Huon de mayne, the due of normandye, & therle of tholouse / 

And syth sayd to them thise wordes / “ ffayr lordes, I see you in 
moche grete doubte, and it is no merueyl / ffor the comynge of this Bohemond 
20 puyssaunt man that cometh on vs and bryngeth with hym so grete Spewh%iiow. 
plente of our enemyes. Ne ye be not yet acorded in what maner gjratenessor 
ye shal attende, ne what slial be your countenaunce whan he shal dition, 
come / Ne I can not saye to you as me semeth thyng that by this 
24 way may moche auaylle / ffor yf we yssue alle ayenst the turkes / 
lyke as somme men counseylle, somme in one partye / And that 
other to abyde / as other counseyl, we haue loste our payne and 
oure dispencis in the siege of this toun, ffor as sone as we shal 
28 departe fro hens, or alle, or half / they that comen shal sende in to 
the toun grete plente of vytaylles, and fresshe men put in to it. yf 
nomaii abyde at the siege this shal be good for them to doo. And 
yf ther abyde a parte they shal not leue for them, for whan we be 
32 alle to gydre, vnnethe maye we constrayne them of the toun. thenne 
the fewe that shal abyde / how may they haue the force and myght 
ayenst them within / Therfor me thyncketh that we nniste seche and declaring 
other remedye and counseyl, 4 that we may fynde maner how this means than 

forcible ones 

36 cyte maye be yolden to ^s, And? that we maye be within to fore er must be 
thyse turkes come, this slal be a more sure thyng / yf ye demaunde 
1 Orig. hooost. 8 Orig. tonn. 4 (frig, connseyl. 



174 The Barons decide to accept the Offer of Emirferius. fCh. CXV1. 


He then re¬ 
vealed the 
plan of 
Kmirferius. 


This can be 
carried out 
only on con¬ 
dition that 
the city be 

f jiven to Bo- 
temond and 
his heirs for 
ever. 


[3 leaf 80 ] 


how this maye be / I slial she we you the way and! man eve how it 
shal wel be as me someth / I haue a frende in this Cyte, a trewe 
man ancf wyse, after that I can apperceyue. we haue couenaunted, 1 
he and I to gydre, wherfor he ought to delyuer to me a tour moche 4 
strong and wel garnysshed of alle that nedeth, whiche he holdeth / 
whan I shal demaunde hym / I muste gyue to hym thus doyng a 
grete' partye of my good and hauoyr and franchyses and other 
alyaunces muste kepe to hym and hys. But this maye not be / 8 
but that eche of you gyue ouer his part to me, And quyte hym of 
ony part of the cyte, that it shal abyde to me & to myn lieyres 
for euermore, ffor other wyse he entendeth not that shall delyuer 
hit. yf it plese you, in this nianer ye may haue the toun. And if 12 
ye wil graunte this, 2 I somone and wame you to fere in suche wyse, 
that thyse couenauretes 8 be wel accomplysshed by godes grace 2 / 
And yf it plese you not / And ye maye fynde ony other maner, I 
am redy tacquyte alle my parte to one of you / or to another of oure 16 
■companye / yf he wyl delyuer to vs the Cyte / And god knoweth 
It shal plese me wel, And I shal he right ioyous in good faytb.” 


How after that Buymont had declared his fayte to alle 
the hooste, they acorded that the toun shold be 20 
his / sauf the Erie of Tholouse / Capitulo Cxvj 0 

The barotu w Han the barons herd this / they had grete ioye in their hertes, 

.itf'rStotElie, and anon acorded to this that buymont requyred / euery man 

Toulouse grauntea his part that he shold he quyte therof, except only therle 24 
of tholouse, whiche, 4 in a reuerrye wheryn he was, sayde / that he 
wold not acquyte his part, ne gyue it ouer 6 to noman lyuyng 1 . The 
other barons promysed certeynly to holde it / And gaf to hym theyr 
fayth that they shold not discouere it to noman / They prayd hym 28 
that he wold wysely brynge this mater aboute, And dylygently 
labours taccomplisshe it / ffor grete peryll myght come in the 
taryeng of it / The counseyl departed / thus. This Buymont, which 
was wyse and trewe, spak to the messager 6 that knewe theyr 32 

1 Orig. couenauuted. 

3—2 Caxton seems to have misunderstood his French text. Fr. “je le (i. e. 
Emir ferius ) semondrai de convenances, telement que la chose sera Hen accompli 
A Vaide Duu," viz., I will summon him to keep his agreement,” etc. 

4 Fr. "qui par unc reverie <m il estoit cwtrf” L e. who on account of a fit 
of obstinacy into which he had fallen. 5 Orig . oner. 

* Lat. “ Amicum colitis convenit nuntiis." 



175 


Ch. CXVJ.] Emirferius arranges for the Swrrender. 

couyne / And? sente hym to his frende / And bad hym saye that Bobemond 
the barons had graunted to hym that the toun shold be hoolly his messenger, 
with moche glad chere / Therfor he somoned! hym by his fiiyth / summoning 
4 that lie shold aecomplysshe this next nyght hooly that he had to tuiai ins 

•ii i r\ i i i . _ , promise, and 

promysea? hym / One thynge happec* this same day that was moch gjUve^up 
helpyng to this werke / & to thaccomplisshyng therof / fEor this 
frende of buymont named Emyrferyus entremedled moche of 
8 thaffayres and! thynges of ancean and of the toun. This same day Tim same 
whan he was besy in this werke / he sente his sone, that 1 was tho fermf™' 
grete to his hows for to fetche somwhat / whan he cam to the tour wrothwith 
hastely / he founde that one of the grete admyrals of the toun great emirs 
12 pleyed 2 and deled with his moder. whan he sawe this / he had 
so grete sorowe in his herte that he ran agayn to his fader / 

And! told! to hym lyke as he had founden it. The fader was a 
moche wyseman, And was moche sore angry, And sayd! thyse 
16 wordes to his sone: “Fayr sone, it semeth not ynowgh to thyse 
fals houndes that they take fro vs alle that we haue, and kepe vs 
fowle in thdir seruage. But with this / they doo vs alle the shame 
that they maye / By the ayde of Ihesu criste, 3 in whom I byleue / p if. so, t>k.j 
20 I shal labours and! doo payne to fynde the maner by whiche theyr 
power and myght shal be lassed, mynnysshed, and! shorted! / And! 
they shal haue guerdon for the euyl that they haue don to vs.” he 
made tlienne no semblaunt 4 of Angre that he had / But sente his He concealed 
24 sone to buymont anon by the maner that he was acustomed to goo, •entrokto* 
And! baddo hym that he shold be redy. ffor a§ to hym he wold hold that he 

^ should be 

hym this nyght alle his couenauntes 5 / he badde hym also that alle 
the Barons of thooste shold! yssue oute about 6 none, euery man 
28 armed! in his bataylle, And make semblaunt for to goo ayenst 
Corbagat. And! after in the begynnyng* of the nyght to retome 
agayn pryuely without® noyse / And kepe them so armed! and! redy 
to doo that shal be sayd! to them aboute mydnyght. Buymont 7 Bobemond 
32 was moche ioyous / whan he herd this message / And aftir ledde barons were 
hym to fore the barons, to whom this thyng was discouerd / And they beard 

this message. 

made hym saye in theyr presence the wordes as he had brought / 

The barons, whan they herd hym, were moche Ioyous / And 8 sayd 
36 wel that this counseyl was good and faythful, and of grete courage 
acorded therto / 

1 Fr. “quit avoitja grant," viz. “who was now grown up.” 

3 B. jouoti cm icc sa mere. A. gisoit avec sa mere. * Orig. semblannt. 

5 Orig, couenauutes. 0 Orig. abeut. 7 Orig. Bnymont. 8 Orig. Amd. 



176 The people of AntioGh were suspicious of Treachery. [Ch. CXVII. 


The people 
of the town 
had begun 
to suspect 
treachery. 


Ancean sent 
for Emlrfe* 
rius, ami 
asked his 
advice in this 
matter. 


t l leaf 8t] 


fimirferlus 
replied that 
in two ways 
this danger 
of treason 
might be 
averted. 


How they of Anthyoche had fere of treson / And 
how they assembled in counseyl / And of that 
whiche Emyrferius deposed there at / 

Capitulo .0 / xvij 0 4 

o Ne thyng happed in this toun / that is acustomed ofte to come 
in grete werkes / They that had the kepyng and! charge of the 
toun / began to haue suspection within theyr hertes, and! deuyned 
that the Cyte shold be by trayed / they knewe no reson ne how / 8 
ne they apperceyued no grete semblaunce / But alway that one spak 
to that other of the grete men / And 1 them seined that it shold falle. 

So moche aroos this murmur and wordes, that they assembled to 
fore Ancean lord of the toun / And told to hym that his men 12 
had such fere, & it was not without reson, ffor the cristen men 
were in the toun, and were in doubte that by them dommage 
myght come to the Cyte / They ledde so Ancean with wordes that 
they made hym to be aferd! also / Anon he sente for hym that was 16 
named! Emyrferyus, And! told! to hym how this worde ranne about / 
And! by cause he helde hym for a wyseman / he demaunded! what 
counseyl he wold gyue here on / he, that was sharp of entendement 
.& apperceyuyng 1 , knewe anon / that his lord 1 demaunded thyse 20 
wordes for to knowe, yf he shold 1 answere ony thyng 1 , By 1 whiche 
he shold! be suspecte. And! knewe wel that this assembles was there 
made by cause they had suspection / he thought wel to brynge them 
out of this wenyng by his answere / and sayd : “Eayr lordes, ye be 24 
liye, noble, and wysemen, 2 ye ought to conne them good thancke / 
And! the lord specially of this that they ymagyne and! doubte of 
trayson 2 / ffor in so grete a thyng as ye haue to kepe / ought to be 
doubted! alle that may be falle / ffor we be in peryll of our lyues of 28 
oure franchyses / of wyues, of Chylderen / and! herytages / 8 Thise 
ben thynges that ought to be well vnderstanden and kepte 3 / But 
me semeth that by two wayes maye be gyuen 4 counseyl in this 
thyng in suche wyse, that yf ony were vntrew & suche a traytre 32 
that wold destroye his countrey he shold haue no power / This 

2 — 2 Caxton’s translation is unintelligible. Fr. “Moult vos doivent toils 
ceaulz de la vile scavoir bon gri , et le seigneur principalement, de ce que voue 
ymaginez et doubtez de tray son," etc., viz. “all the people of the town ought 
to be grateful to you, especially the lords, because you are on your guard 
against treason.” 

8-8 Fr. “ce sonl choses ou ten doit bien entendre a garder." 

* Orig. gynen. 



Ch. CXVIII.] Good Advice given the Turks by JSmirferius. 177 

thynge myght not be don ne spoken of but by them that haue the 
toures in kepyng / Therfor me thynketh yf ye haue suspection 
her of ye may wel remedye it, By ofte remeuyng them fro theyr First, change 
4 places, ffor this thynge may not be deuysed but 1 by moche grete theta™™ 
leyser. And whan ye chauwge them thus ofte / in suche wyse that 
they that be here this nyght / shal be sette the next nyght fer 
thens / 2 where he shal haue no knowleche, 2 & her by ye shal take second, do 
8 fro them alle the ease for to commune or speke of ony trayson ” / 
whan they herd this couwseyl that this cristen man emyrferyws gaf •"‘jjj* 
to them / they aeorded alle well therto / & by this fylle from them 
alle the suspection fro theyr hertes that they had ayenst them / & 

12 thus as he had deuysed shold haue don yf it had not ben so late, 
for it was nyght / and so grete remeuyng 3 myght not be made but 
by space of tyme / The lord commaunded them to kepe alle the cyte 
hoolly / Thus departed they fro the counseyl / Emyrferyus that EmMmiw ^ 
16 sawe wel that the thynge that he had enterprised / yf he and Buy- 
mont 4 hasted not / that it shold neuer take good ende / Therfor he 
thought moche to brynge his purpoos to effect without that ony man 
shold perceyue it / 

20 Of the meschyef that the turkes made euery daye to 
the cristen men that were in Anthyoche enhabyt- 
yng with them. ca° Cxviij* 

f Ro the begynnyng 5 that the Cyte was assyeged / the turkes of in the begin- 
24 the toun had in great suspection the Grekes, Surryens and aiegMiie^ 
heremyns, and generally alle the other Cristen men that duellyd in 
Anthyoche. wlierof it happed that the poure Cristen men that had am| r- 
not in theyr bowses garnyson sufficiant for longe tyme / they made 
28 °thein to voyde the toun and alle theyr meyne, ffor they wold not [«if. si, bk.] 
that the Cyte were charged ne encombred with them / They reteyned 
the ryche men within by cause they had vytayll ynowgh / they 
kept*? them strayte, and by fals occasions robbed them euery daye, The rich onee 
32 and toke fro them alle theyr thynges. They chaced them to the Jje{* 
labours and werkes of the toun / yf they had walles for to make an(i »t>u«ed. 
or amende / They bare the stones, the morter, and sande; yf they 
wolde adresse engyns for to caste stones / or other Instrumentes of 
36 warre they muste drawe the cordes, And neuer as longe as they 

1 Oritj. bnt. 2—3 Fr. “on ilz n'auront mille cognoimncc." 

8 Orig. remeuyug. 4 Orig. Buyuont. 6 Orig. begynuyug. 

GODFREY. N 



178 


Treatment of the Christians in Antioch [Ch. CXVIll. 

fonde cristen men they sought none other for to doo suche werkes / 

The Turks And! whan they had trauaylled longe / in stede of rewardes / they 
and drove’ ledde them and bete them thurgh the stretes in suche wyse, that 
labour. they had leuer to haue ben caste out 1 of the toun atte begynnynge 4 
with the other 2 than to be receyued with thyse fals houndes, 
that thus greued them of the toun that were cristen / Thus were 
they acorded. viij / dayes to fore to speke to Emyrferyus, frende of 
decided ® u y mon ^ / that they wolde slee alle the cristen men, and had! don 8 
to kifi aii the it 2 yf one of the admyrals of the toun had not letted / and empes- 
the city. shed it / which was alway pry ue and frende of the cristen men. lie 
made to delaye it / vij dayes by this reason, ffor he sayd! to them : 

“ Fayr sirs, I hope that the cristen men that haue assieged vs shal 12 
departe fro the siege with in viij dayes for doubte of corbagat which 
cometh / & yf they departe, why shal we slee the cristen men 
that ben in this toun / And 1 yf they departe not, thenne maye ye 
doo as ye haue deuysecf.” Thyse .viij. dayes were now passed, in 15 
suche wyse that it was commauuded! moche pryuely to them that 
This very had 1 the charge, that they sliold! slee them the same nyght. thenne 
wf for the the same day at none it was cryed! thurgh the hooste of the 

musancre. “ 

pylgryms / that alle they that had horses were armed!, and to 20 
drawe euery man to his bataylle, where he was constituted and 
ordeyned / for to doo that theyr Captayns shold commaunde 
them. The men on foote knewe notliyng 1 what they shold doo / ne 
the horsmen neyther / sauf they that buymont had aduertysed. 24 
The cruse- thus 3 departed they fro thoost alle in ordenaunce / It semed wel 
ordered their’ that they wold goo ferre / They wente forth tyl it was nyght / 
outorcainp— whan it was derke it was commaunded that they sholde retorno 
night eiier a S a y n secretely without ony noyse / And that they shold holde them 28 
a»rk. armed in theyr lodgys. This valyaunt man Emyrferius, of whom I 
haue spoken to fore, had a brother with hym, But he was not of 
suche courage as he was / the good man had sayd no thynge to 
C* leaf 8« hym of that he purposed to doo / ffor he doubted moche 4 lxe wold 32 
Emirferius not be agreable therto / They were to gydere in the tour at the* hour 

was with hia , „ , , , , 

brother in of none whan the bataylles yssued of thooste, they behelde it by the 
1 Orig. ont. 

The wrong division of the sentence, and the omission of some words, 
has rendered the translation obscure. Fr. “ que cCetre ntenuz. Ce nc souffisoit 
mie a ces desloyaulz chiens quilz grevoienl ainxi la chrestiente de la ville, aim 
s’esloient accordis VIII jours avanl — qu'ih pasrlassent a Vamy de Buymont, 
quilz Us oceiroient tous; et pieca il oust itifaict." * Orig. thns. 



Ch. CXlX.J Emirferius tries his Brother about the Christians. i79 

batayllementes. Emyrferyus wold! preue and! knowe the courage of a. the army 
his broder whiche was yonger than he / And! sayd! to hym / “ Fayr 
swete broder, I haue moche grete pyte of thyse hye men that thou Emirfertaa^ 
4 seest tliere, fEor they be of oure creaunce, moche faythful and! good! 
cristen men. Now ryde they also surely, As yf they ought nothyng < l “ !rer - 
to doubte, And their deth is ful nygh them, ffbr it may not be that 
they may resist® ayeust them that come / and ayenst them of the 
8 toun 1 / And! yf they knewe it I trowe they wold! take other coura- 
seyl.” his broder answerd / “this is a moch folysah pyte that thou 
hast / And 2 I see the in a grete musardye. Certainly it shold! plese But the 

' « brother an* 

me wel / that the turkes had no we smeton of alle their heedes, and? swevedthat 
12 slayn them alle that thou seest there depart® / And! alle the other 

in lyke wyse, fEor neuer syth they entred! in to this londe / we had 311 cut ° a - 
neuer good day ne one good! nyght, but haue made vs sufEre many 
euilles by thoccasion of their eomyng / & therfor I may not loue 
16 them. But 8 I wold that they shold haue 4 an euyl endyng*, and that 
right soone.” whan emyrferyws had herd thyse wordes he doubted 
to fore what to saye to his broder of his purpoos. but fro this forth 
he doubted nomore / and began to hate hym moche in his courage / 

20 he thought wel that by hym myght be destroubled the grete 
avauncement 6 of Cristendom. Therfore he was in grete anguysshe 
how 8 he myght delyuer hym / 

Of the dilygence that buymont made in this werke / 

24 And how Emyrferyus slewe his brother, and 

delyuerd the toun to the cristen men / 

Capitulo Cxix 0 

b TJymont slepte not this nyght, ffor he shold haue ben moche 
28 displesyd! / yf by his neclygence this werke shold 1 be taryed!. 

He wente ofte to the Barons, that knewe of this thynge, for to be That night, 

Bobemond 

counseylled / He helde in his honde a laddre of cordes, moche p™J a ™ o d f a 
subtylly made / Aboue, it shold! be fasted! to the creneaux 7 of the cords, with 
32 walle, with good! and stronge crochettes of yron, And! for to fastne 
also in therthe. whan it cam about® mydnyght / he toke his 
messager, that knewe his secrete pryuely / And! sente hym to his 

1 Orig, tonn. s Fr. “de grant musardde te voipenser." 

8 Orig. Bnt. 4 Orig. hane. 6 Orig. auauncement. 

* Fr. “Comment il s'en porroit delivrcr," viz. “how he might get rid of 
him.” 7 Orig. creueaux ; Fr. creneaux, loop holes. 


N 3 



180 


Bohemond’s 
messenger 
went to 
Emirferius 
[i If. 82 , bk.] 
to see if the 
time had 
arrived. 


He waited 
until the 
watch passed 
b3’, then sent 
word to Bo- 
hemond. 


Emirferius 
let down a 
cord and drew 
up the ladder. 


Bobemond 
mounted the 
ladder first. 


Emirreriui 
showed him 
Ills brother's 
dead body. 


Emirferius kills his Brother. [Ch. CXlX. 

frende to knowe / yf it were yet tyme that he shold! approuche to 
the wallys, ffor hym thought that alle the Cyte was in moehe peas 
and 1 reste / whan this messager cam / he had! hym abyde 1 there 
stylle, and saye no worde tyl that the mayster of the watche were 4 
departed and passyd by; ffor the custome was suche in the cyte, 
that aboue the watche that was ordeyned and! aduysed^that a 
noble and wyseman shold serche and vysyte euery nyght the 
watche, And amende that as they founde amys. And he wente 8 
thus thre or four tymes in the nyght, with a grete companye of 
peple, that bare light. It was not longe after, that he cam & sawe 
in the tour where Emyrferyus was, and! sawe alle thynges wel 
ordeyned and in good disposieion; And it plesyd! hym wel, and! 12 
passed! 2 forth / This man sawe thenne that it was tyme to performe 
his werke, And sayd! to the messager: “goo thy way dylygently, 
and! saye to thy lord! that now is tyme to doo well, and! that he 
come to fore this tour; and see that he haue good companye with 16 
hym and trewe ” / The messager departed! forthwith / Emyrferyus 
entred! in to the tour, and! founde his broder slepyng moche faste. 
he had fere that he shold awake er the werke were accoraplysshyd, 
and that he myght destrouble it; therfore he toke his swerd, & 20 
roof hym thurgh bothe sydes, and slewe hym. The messager cam 
to Buymont, and told hym his erande. he cam incontinent to 
fore the tour, And the other barons with hym, that knewe of the 
werke. Echo of them had but a fewe with them, but they were 24 
good & trew. emyrferiws put out his heed & salewed them, & 
they resalewed hym ; and after aualed a corde doun the wall, they 
toke it, & boujide it faste to thende of the laddre of cordes / whan 
it was bounden and drawen vp, fastned & attached with the 28 
crochettes of yron aboue, there was none that was so hardy that 
wold fyrst goo vp. whan Buymont sawe this / he toke thenne the 
laddre first, as a valyaunt man & ardant taccomplysshe the werke, 
And wente vp til he cam to the batillement. Emyrferyus 3 knewe 32 
anon that it was buymont; 4 And toke hym by the arme, and 
kyssed his honde. Buymont wente vpon the walle, And kyssed 
hym 5 swetly. He thanked hym of the seruyse that he had don / 
Emyrferyus ladde hym in to the towre, And sayde to hym: 36 
“Beholde, and see what I haue don for god and you. This man, 
that ye see here deed, is my brother Germayn / I haue® slayn hym 

1 Fr. “ilptma oultre." 8 Orig. Emyrferyns. 4 Orig, buymont. 

5 Orig. hym. 6 Orig. hano. 



181 


Ch. CXX.] Bohemond mounts upon (he Walls of the City. 

by cause he wolde not acorde to this werke that ye and! I haue 
euterprysed 1 .” Buymont 1 had! moche grete Ioye, ffor fro thenne when Bohe- 
forthon knewe he well that his frende dyde alle in good! fayth / that, he no 
4 Thenne cam to the creneuls, 2 and! put oute 3 his heede and! called! his or 
peple, and! sayd! that they shold! come vp dylygently by the laddre. 

They durste 4 not go vp / But alway supposed it had be deceyu- [* leafssj 
aunce. Buymont, that was moche valyaunt and lust, put doon his The other 
8 foote on the laddre / And descended doun to the erthe, and sayd to not follow, 
them : “ fayr lordes, ye tarye ouer longe / there is no doubte / ffor Bohemond 

p “ descended 

knowe ye certavnly that this good man hath shewde to me his and assured 

J J J # them that 

brother, whom he hath slayn for loue of vs ” / whan they herd this, everything 
12 they all toke the laddre, he that myght best heste / And mounted 
vp so many, that ther were men ynowgh on the walle / Therle of 
fflaundres went vp, and Tancre, for tenseyne the other how they They then 
shold doo / whan the fyrst towr was wel garnysshed with men, they took the 
16 ranne to the other by, And slewe the watche men. and helde the rfaying the 

watch, 

toures. 

Of the mayntene of the cristen men in this pryse, 

And of the affraye of the turkes of the toun. 

20 Ca° ,C.xx“ 

a T the foote of the laddre abode somme of the Barons, for to 
conduyte 5 thooste / whan they sawe that they had vpon the 
walles men ynowe that myght gamysshe dyuerse / towres / They 
24 ran hastely to the lodgys for to make the peple arme them / And to 
drawe nerer / to thende that they myght al be redy for to entre in 
6 whan our men were on the walles / they were not ydle 6 / but were 
noble and hardy / in such wise that they had anon .x / towres 
28 taken 7 alle in arenge / And had slayn alle them that they founde 

therin, And the cyte was not yet meuyd ne awaked / ffor the grete The people 
men of the toun, whan they herde the noyse, had supposed eertaynly hear"4°the 
that they had slayn the Cristen men / lyke as they had com- thought that 
32 mauwded, And that this affraye had be for none other thynge: And Christians 

' being mas- 

they meued not oute of theyr beddes. In this partye, where oure B “"e<i. 

1 Orig. Buymout. 2 Orig. creueuls. 

* Orig. onte. 5 Orig. condnyte. 

Caxton has made a “bourdon " by'leaving out all between the two 
"siir les murs.” Fr. "qiiand leur gens q\ii estoient sur les murs, leur en 
feroient signe. Nos gens qui estoient montees sur les murs riestoient mie 
oyseaux," etc. 7 Fr. "toutes en un rent" all in a row. 



182 


Our men now 
opened the 
gates of the 
city. 


P If. 8S, bk.] 


The Turks 
now awoke, 
and saw that 
they were 
taken. 


Some fled, 
others were 
beaten and 
killed. 


There was 
great pil¬ 
lage and 
slaughter: 


more than 
10,000 bodies 
lay bare in 
the streets. 


Bohemond’s Banner is •placed on the Tower. [Ch. CXX. 

men were goon vp, was a posterne. Our men that were 1 on the 
walles descended and! brake vp the lockes, and! opened! the yate, in 
suche wyse that many entred! of oure, peple. And! after cam to the 
grete gate, that was called! the gate of the brydge / And 1 alle the 4 
watche that kepte it they slewe, And after opened the gate / A 
squyer of Buymontys ran til he cam to an hye towre, whiche was 
vpon the tertre by the dongeon of the toun / there he fyxed the 
Baner of Buymont his lord, whan oure peple that were in the 8 
toun apperceyued that the daye was nyghe, And the dawenyng 
appiered, thenne they made to sowne theyr trompettes and busynes, 
for to calle al the people of thehooste / The Barons 2 vnderstode the 
signe, and smote the hors with the spores, And entred by the yates 12 
whiche they foundq opene with alle theyr bataylles. The foots 
men of thooste awooke, that knewe notbyng of this eounseyll. 
They sawe the tentes empty and-vroyde, and apperceyued that the 
toun was taken, thenne began they hastely to renne to the gayne, 16 
in suche wyse that none abode other. The turkes of the toun 
awoke, and herde the noyse, and sawe the men of armes thurgh the 
stretes. Thenne apperceyued they in what poynt they were. They 
began to flee out of theyr howses, and lede theyr wyues and 20 
chylderen with them, whan they fledde fro one rowte of our men, 
they recountred another gretter, whiche slewe them alle. The 
surryens, the hermyens, 5 and the other cristen men of the toun 
apperceyued that the thyng wente so. they had moche grete ioye, 24 
and toke the armes hastely, and wente forth with our men and 
tolde to thein the places where mooste peple were, And where the 
tresours were: They them slewe the turkes moche gladly. They 
payned them moche to rendre to them the guerdon of betynges and 28 
tormentes that they had don to them. Thoost was theime entred 
in to the toun; The barons had sette their baners on the toures; 
grete occision and slaughter had be in the toun; they spared 
noman, ne woman, ne childe / they brak vp doves and chestes; ye 32 
shold haue seen gold and syluer departed in the stretes; 4 It someth 
well a thyng conquerd 5 and wonne by warre. what shal I make 
long deuyses, 4 ther were slayn of them of the toun that day moo 
than .x. M., of whom the bodyes laye alle bare in the wayes and 36 
stretes. 

1 Orig. wire. 3 Ong. hermyens. 

*-* Misunderstood by Carton. 1' r. “JBien sembloil chose) conquises et 
gaigniispar guerre, tant enfaisott on larges devises." 3 Orig. conqnerd!. 



183 


Ch. CXXI.] Ancean flees, and is killed. 

How Ancean, lord of anthyoehe , 1 fledde by a posterne 
out of the toun, And he was recountred and put 
to deth. ca° Cxxj" 

4 w Han Ancean sawe that the cyte was thus bytrayed. And that 
his peple that myght escape fledde an hye in to the fortresse 
of the dongeon. he doubted moch to goo theder, ffor he thought 
wel that the cristen men wold euuyrowne incontinent this tour yf 
8 he entred; therfor he yssued out at a posterne out of the toun^and Ance»n^the 
wente allone as he had be oute of his wytte / Ne he knewe not through the 
whether he myght goo And flee for to kepe hym. whan he wente 
thus by the feldes meche ferre fro the Cyte, Certeyne Hermyns 
12 mette hym, and knewe hym, And moche merueylled what this 

myght be; And after, thought that the Cyte was taken. 2 And pfeat84] 
they approched hym / lyke as they wold 3 haue enclyned to hym, 
as they were woonte / but 4 thenne they toke hym, & smote hym 
16 doun to therthe / and after, with a swerde smote of his heed, and ws head was 
bare it in to the toun / And presented it vnto the barons to fore the ^ k c ^™ 4 
peple / one maner peple was comen in to awthyoche, which were ,own - 
not of the toun, that were come for to deffende theyr lawe / and 
20 other for to be souldyours / And other for prowesse of armes, & 
to gete honour and prys. thyse knewe not wel the beyng of the 
toun / and were mounted vpon their horses alle armed, and begonne 
to renne ayenst the hylle toward the dongeon / and by aduenture a party of 

*' " . mercenaries 

24 they mette a route of our men, thus as they wente sechyng in the 

toun, whiche ran on them moche hardyly. Thyse maner of peple our men: 
wold haue eschewed them, and smote theyr hors toward the valeye / 
and fylle doun of a bancke in suche wyse that they were alle to 
28 brused, men, hors, harnoys and abyllementes / ther were deed wel 
a / iij / C. som ther were that in the toun were born / whan they 
apperceyued in the mornyng that our men were within. They toke 
their hors and rode out by the yates that our men had opened. 

32 ther were of oure men that wente aftir and sued them, and brought 
many of them agayn, whom they put in pryson / som other escaped, 

& ran vnto the montaynes / about the hour of tierce, whan the tains, 
toun was serched. Our peple assembled, and anon apperceyued 
36 that in alle the toun was no vytayll; and it was not wondre / ffor No victaais 
the siege had thenne endured nygh ix. monethes, and moche peple fo™ 4 in ths 

1 Orig. authyoche. 3 Fr. VeTiclinercnt, i. e. saluted him. 

4 Orig. bnt. 



184 


The Crusaders found great spoils in Antioch. [Ch. CXXII. 

Great wealth had ben therin duryng the siege / but gold, syluer, preeeows Iewellis, 
t>y thepoor^ and vessel of dyuerse facions / clothes of sylke, & ryche tappets, 
wereinjfreat & of other thyiiges they fou«de so moeh, that eche of our mew 
was all charged, as moch as they niyght here /. It cam wel to poynt 4 
to oure poure pylgryms for to fynde suche rychesse / after the grete 
mesease that they had suffred / ther were fouwden in the toun 1 
/ v / C. good hors of armes / But they were right lene and wery. 
Antioch wa» thus was the cyte of Anthyoche taken, the yere of thyncarnacion of 8 
srd?io98. ne our lord a / M. lxxxxviij / the iij day of the moneth of Iuyn. 


How after that our men made grete slaughter of 
theyr enemyes, our men helde counseyl for to 
take the dongeon / thenne beyng seased of the 12 
turkes / ca° .C.xxij" 


t He pylgryms that were theder comen fro many counttees by 
grete labour, were thewne ful of shedyng of the blood of their 
P ir. gt, bk.] enemyes / The Barons assembled! in counseyl, amt aduysecl 2 emonge 16 
them that this werk was not yet parfyglit, but that ther was yet 
trauayll and peryll tyl that the dongeon were taken and goten, 

The donjon whiche was right stronge / and wel gamysshed with walles of the 
the Turk! of *' oun / they sette good warde and kepers of alle the yates, And dyde 20 
do crye thurgh alle the toun to assault, and commanded! that all 
shold come to the tour / that was on the montayne / whan they 
cam theder, they knewe wel certaynly that this was not a thynge 


The cmsa- lightly to be goten, fifor the fortresse myght not be goten but by 24 
this fietSw famyne; therfor they trauaylled but lytil, but withdrewe them, and 

could be ill , . 

takenoniy made the peple to retorne. this montayne, that is aboue the toun, 
is deuyded in tweyne, like as I sayd to fore, by a depe valleye / 
whiche is as stepe as it were plom doun / The syde whiche is 28 
toward thoryent is moch fayrer, vpon a playne wel brode, ful of 


vygnes and! londe erable. That other partye, toward! the weste, is 
Thi> donjon moche hyer, 3 as a man shold! goo vp right / And! right vpon the 
top of n sommet, at toppe of the tertre, stondeth the dongecn, 4 ferme of 32 
ouer stronge walles and! thyeke toures / they be hye and! grete 
toward thoryent; and toward northeste, about the valeye, it is so 


1 (frig. tonn. 

3 Fr. ‘‘si s'en va contremont en aiguisant," viz. “grows steeper and steeper 
towards the top.” 

* Fr. “fermez de tropforz murs," surrounded by very strong walls. 



Ch. CXXIII.] The Barons take Counsel how to get the Donjon. 185 

deep that it semeth a right helle / And it is an hydous thynge to it<°nid not 
beholde; It eoude neuer be ymagyned how it myght be myned 1 / "h"* 4 - 
and fro this dongeon vnto the toun is a way, whiche is so strayt 
4 that with grete payne one man allone maye goo or come. The 
barons acorded! that they wold close this litil terter and waye, to 
thende that they of the dongeon shold! not mowe descende, ne doo 
euyll ne harme to oure men in the eyte / They made a walle moche The baron* 

8 stronge of lyme and! sonde, In whiche they put men of Armes the P path, up 
ynowe, and wel in poynt. They sette on the walles 2 stones and jonjiownthe 
engyns, redy for to caste stones yf the turkes descended & cam “ «ii. 
doun. the barons wente in to the toun for to take couaseyl of 
] 2 other werkes. It was ordeyned and deuysed that alle men shold 
retorne & abyde there about this newe walle tyl that the dongeon 
were taken, sauf the Due Godeffroye, whiche by comyn couwseyl of Oodfreywae 
alle, shold abyde for to kepe the gate of the est / & the fortresse the East *at«. 
16 that our men had made withoute the gate, that was delyuerd to 
buymont. They herde tydynges that this grete prynce Corbagat, of 
whom I haue spoken to fore, shold arryue shortly / ffor he was 
thenne entred in to the londe of anthyoche / It was acorded that 
20 they sholde sende a wyse man vnto the see, and saye to them that 
were goon for to doo theyr thynges / that they shold retoume 
hastely, and brynge in to the Cyte alle the vytaylles that they 
myght fynde. They them self, that were in Anthyoche, 3 ran alle P leafss] 
24 the countrey abeut for to seche vytaylles, but they founde but litil. g* uujj ^ 
The laborers of the playne countrey were moche ioyous that the the 
Cyte was in the handes of the pylgryms,for they were of our fayth. roun4 ubollt - 
all that they had hyd they brought; but it was not moch, For the 
28 longe siege had destroyed the countre without, and emptyd the 
toun within. 

How whyles thooste garnysshed the toun, 4 Somme of 
thoost of Corbagat 6 cam rennyng to fore it. 

32 cap" .O.xxiij 0 . 

t He second day after the toun was taken, whyles oure peple The eecoud 
entended to gamysshe the Cyte, cam thre honderd men of the town ™ tU * 

1 This sentence is rendered unintelligible by omissions. After “ myned " 
must be inserted “ towards the west, the hill is lower. Between this hill and 
the donjon is a valley, which is not very large or very deep : in this place a path 
descends." 2 Fr. perriires, not pierres. 

4 Orig. tonn. 5 Orig. Crobagat. 



186 


Death of Roger de Barneville. [Ch. CXXIV. 

a band of hoost, al in poynt of Corbagat, wel armed! and horsed vpon lyght 
men appeared horses, for to see yf they myght fynde ony of oure men that rode 
town. folyly by the eountre. They embusshed! them alle sauf .xxx., the 
beste horsed, whiche cam to fore the toun; They began to renne 4 
nycely, 1 for to drawe oure men out of arraye. whan oure men 
sawe them, they had grete desdayne / And wende that it had be a 
grete shame yf they founde not to whom to speke to / syth they 
were come so fer to fore / A noble man of whom I have spoken 8 
to fore / by whom the hooste had had many prouffytes by his 
Roger de wytte & prowesse, & was named Rogier de barneuylle, And was 

went out of the companye of the due of normandye, he toke with hym 

ag °' * .xv. knyghtes that he had of his meyne. And cam out of the 12 

toun ayenst the turkes, as he that was noble, valyaunt and 
hardy / And acustomed to doo fayr faytes. whan he sawe them, 
lie smote his hors with his spores toward them, And they 2 by 
cautele torned and fledde. Our men folowed hastely so ferre that 16 
they launced vpon theyr watche, they sprange oute of the embusshe- 
ment, And ran vpon oure men / ffor they were many, and wel 
proued in armes. Rogier 3 relyed his lytil felawship / And cam 
deffendyng hym toward the toun. whan they were nyghe, A turke 20 
He w«i gamysshed with a stronge bowe smote Rogier thurgh the body, in 

through the suche wyse that he fyl doun deed to fore his hors. Anon his felaws 

killed. withdrewe them in to the toun. The turkes descended vpon hym, 

and smote of his heed, seeyng they that were on the walles / they 24 
bare away the heed, and thus departed / they of the toun yssued 
oute with grete crye and lamentacion, as they that had a grete losse. 

He was They toke the body, and buryed it honorably and with grete sorowe 
buried, in the porche of the chirche of seynt peter / The barons 4 com- 28 
great lumen- pleyned moche aboue the other, this noble man, as they that beste 
bis death, knewe hym / 

pif.s5,bk.] s How the thyrde day after the getynge and pryse of 
Anthyoche, Corbagat with his hoost arryued to 32 
to fore it. ca® Cxxiiij® 

Prince Cor- a Tte the thyrde day after that Anthyoche was taken / this 
neft day* grete prynce Corbagat cam to the cyte in the momyng at the 

1 Fr. nicermnt, viz. in a foolhardy way. 

2 Fr. par barat, i. e. to draw them on. 

8 Fr. ralia, rallied, reassembled. 4 Fr. plaingnoienl, mourned. 



187 


Ch. CXXIV.] The Arrival of Corbagafs Army. 
sonne rysyng with so grete plente of peple, that alle the couwtre appeared 

. . . , with a great 

that myght be seen fro the hyest place of the toun was couertf with army: 
them / The barons sawe mocl)e more peple / than they herd saye of, 

4 For theyr hoost enereced euery day / he passed the brydge / And 
lodged hym bytwene the laye / and! the ryuer of helle, whiche is 
wel a myle fro that one to that other / he had! so grete plente of 
knyghtes, and! so grete nombre of tentes and pauyllons, that the thegreat 
8 grete playne wherof I haue spoken to fore, where Anthyoche each coum 

,7, , , „ , ’ notconttin 

stondeth ne yet it myght not alle receyue them / But many of them them, 
lodged them in the terrytoryes 1 by / whan Corbagat had be thus 
thre dayes lodged hym thought that he was ouer far fro the cyte / 

12 And by his eounseyl wold be more ner the dongeon / whiehe the 

turkes helde / for to ayde and comforte them / And thought for to corbagat 
put men in to the toun by the yate that was vnder the dongeon. putTm? 11 ° 

11 ill ,, , , „ . ° , men into the 

whan he was lodged on that partye, he comprysed fro the yate of town bytbe 
16 the eest to the west yate all the syde of the toun toward the south / the donjon, 
by syde the parte of the eest was a fortresse, whiche oure men had 
made / vpon a litil tertre as I haue sayd, and was delyuerd to 
Buymont 2 / But whan the toun was taken and the yate / he 
20 delyuerd this fortresse to other for to kepe / Therby lodged som 

turkes of thooste of Corbagat / They began tassaylle this tour / They They assailed 
that were within dyde grete payne to deffende them / But it was towers e 
ouemioche charged with grete plente of peple that were there, and the cmaa- 
24 also with Archers, of whom they had many. The due, whiche was 
bye at the yate, sawe that his men had ouermoch to doo / & had 
good wyll for to helpe them / and wold haue dislodged them that 
were come ouer fer forth / he yssued out with al his bataylle / And The Doke 
28 smote his hors with his spores toward the fortresse / And sawe that 
there were ouer grete plente of turkes to fore hym / which smote in 
to his men, and began to demene them euyll / ffor ayenst one of 
them ther were .x. turkes. the due knewe that his strewgthe was 
32 not like theyres, and began to withdrawn hym toward the toun / but m him- 
But to fore that they myght reentre in to the gate / The turkes back. ve “ 
assayled them so euyll that ther were / ij C / of the batayll of the 
due 3 taken & deed. 


1 Fr. tertres, hills. 


3 Orig. Buymont. 


Orig. due. 



188 The Turks enter the Town through the Donjon. [Ch. CXXV 


[i leaf 86] 


The Turke 
were very 
proud of this 
victory, 


and entered 
safely into 
tlie town by 
the donjon. 


The Crusa¬ 
ders then 
made a broad 
ditch and a 
fortress be¬ 
tween the 
mountain 
and the town. 


The Turks 
attaeked this 
often, but 
were always 
repulsed. 


'How after that the due 8 was within the barres of 
the toun / and many of his men slayn, the turkes 
entred in to the toun / ca° C. xxv. 

t He Due cam in to the toun moche angry of this dommage. 4 
But whan the turkes knewe that this had be godeffroye of 
boloyne that they had thus put abak. They 8 aroos in moche grete 
pryde / therfor they wente thens vnto the montayne / & entred 
in to the toun by the yate of the dongeon / And surprysed somme 8 
of our men that toke none hede / wyth bowes & with swerdes 
they slewe them / but whan they were apperceyued our men chassed 
them, But they put them in to the dongeon where they were sauf / 
thus dyde they oftymes harme / ffor they knewe another way to 12 
descends than that whiche our men had garnysshed / The barons 
assembled for to take counseyll what they shold doo of the peryll 
wherin they were. By comyn acorde it was ordeyned / that Buy- 
mont and The Erie of Thoolouse shold make there a dyche moche 16 
depe and brode ynowgh bytwene the toun and the pend aunt of the 
montayne. they made it there as it was deuysed / And made there 
a fortresse whiche they garnysshed wel with men wel armed. The 
turkes that were in the dongeon, And they also that were comen in 20 
by this gate descended ofte / by a way couerte vnto this fortresse, 
And assaylled it moche fiersly, in suche wyse as they lete them 
haue no reste, that it happed on a day / that so grete plente of 
turkes descended that the cry aroos in to the toun / that and yf 24 
the other barons and knyghtes whiche were a brode in the toun 
had not come and ronne to them they had slayn or taken thyse 
noble men / that is to wete Buymont / Euerard du puyssat / 
Baoul de la fontayne / Bembault crecon 4 / And somme other lordes 28 
that were in theyr companye / Alle they were grete men and good 
knyghtes that were put in this newe fortresse for to defends it / 
But therle of Flaundres, the due 5 of normandye / And liuon the 
mayne ranne moche hastely theder / And mette with the turkes er 32 
they myght entre in to the dongeon. They slewe many, and many 
they receyued 6 prysonners / The other turkes that escaped cam to 
fore Corbagat / And counted to hym that thyse men of the toun 
were ouer feers and hardye. And it semeth whan they ben in werke 36 

3 Orig. dne, 

3 Fr. “en moult grant orgueil montcrent," viz., “they became very much 
elated.” 4 Lat. Croton, 1 Orig. dnc. • Orig. receyned. 



18 & 


Ch. CXXVI.] The Christians, in turn, are now besieged. 

that 1 they doubte 2 nothyng the deth, ne this, ne that. 1 Corbagat, corbagat, 
whiche was lodged in the montayne as 1 haue sayd, dyde not theron todgedin u» 
moche his prouffyt ne his honoure, ne he founde not there pasture jjjjjwj* 1 
4 for his hors, as he 8 dyde bynethe in the valeye / whan he sawe this 
he commaunded! that he shold be dislodged, and descended in to the 
valeye with his men he passed the riuer of helle. there deuised he 
the places to his barons about the toun. on the morn it happed 
8 that I can not say how many turkes approched the cyte / and 
descended fro theyr horses / for to shote at our peple that were on 
the walles for to come more ner. Tancre yssued by the gate toward Tancred 
the eest, and stopped the way fro them in suche wyse that er they and^w6 
12 myght take theyr horses he slewe .vj. of them / And* brought them 
in to the toun for to recomforte our peple for the deth of Kogyer de 
berneuylle / 

How our cristen men that a lytil to fore assiegede the 
16 toun / were now assieged in the same / 

Capitulo Cxxvj? 

i N this tyme durynge / the peple of the cristen men that had Th»chri«. 

tl&llB W6T0 

assieged Anthyoche but a litil to fore as ye haue had / They jwy* i J 1 tu,n » 
20 were now them self assieged! within. Thus goon the chaunges and them.eive«. 
mutacions of the world; they had moche grete trauayll for to kepe 
and* deffende the Cyte. -It was to them ouer peryllous that the 
dongeon was so strong* and so wel garnysshed! as it was. They 
24 made to them ofte grete assaylles by daye and! by nyght, ffor they 
of the hooste cam in by the yate vnder the dongeon as ofte as it 
plesyd them. Our men began to be moche abasshed. Tber were They 
many that toke no regarde to theyr oth that they had! made to t _ 

28 mayntene the companye ne to theyr honoure, But by nyght fear- 
descended! doun of the walles by ropes and! cordes and* fledde to 
the see.(26) And! many of them the turkes toke whom they slewe 
and* brought in prison. They that myght escape cam vnto the Somaran 
32 porte, sayeng* to the marchauns and to other pylgryms that were "’s* 11 . 
there comen, that they shold! disancre theyr shippes and flee anon / 
ffor this prynce Corbagat, whom so moche peple folowed, had taken 
Anthyoche by force, and had! slayn alle the barons and alle them 
36 that he founde within / And that they were escaped by ouer grete 

i— 1 Fr. “ Ilz doubtent la marl, ne tant 'nc quant," i. e., they have absolutely 
no fear of death. 8 Oriy. donbte. 



196 


and begged 
the sailors to 
flee from the 
port with 
them. 


P leaf 87J 

Even well 
bom men 
behaved 
shamefully. 


Some even 
surrendered 
themselves 
to the Turks, 
out of fear. 


fiohemond 
guarded the 
town dili¬ 
gently, 


especially 
the four 
fortresses, 
which must 
be kept. 


Some of the JBarons fee shamefully. [Ch. CXXV1. 

peryll and fiers aduenture / Therfore, sayd they to the maronners, 
that they shold departe and flee withoute taryenge / ffor yf the 
turquee cam serehynge the countre vnto the see and founde them 
there they shold be alle delyuered to deth / Thus they fledde alle 4 
for feere / And they them self that brought thise tydynges wente 
with them. And to thende that ye shold not suppose that thyse 
were but mene peple, 1 for the trouthe of this hystorye spareth 
noman / I shall name somme that thus departed shamefully, that 8 
is to wete, Guyllamme' de Gratemenyl, a noble man born in Nor- 
mandye / whiche held grete londe in puylle, And had to his wyf 
the suster of Buymont. Aubery charpenter, Guy croseaulx (27) / 
Lambert le poure / 2 And many other had they with them. Somme 13 
there were that wente for pyllage, 2 And for the messease of hungre 
and drede for to be slayn, yolde them to the turkes / And they 
tolde the eertaynte of the meschief that oure men suffred alle a 
longe to the turkes. Many abode in the toun that gladly wold 16 
haue goon / But buymont by the counseyl of the bisshop of Puy 
dyde so make watche atte alle the gates and vpon the walles, And 
toke 3 kepe bothe by daye and nyght that none shold goo vp ne 
doun 4 / And they swore alle that they shold not departe fro the 20 
companye, ne breke the commaundementes ^ of Buymont.® He hym 
self wente euery nyght thurgh the toun wyth grete plente of men, 
and with grete lyght to thende that no peryll shold happe ne 
trayson. Foure fortresses had he whiche he muste nedes kepe, and 24 
better than the other. That one was on the lasse tertre ayenst the 
dongeon / And that other was lower ayenst the assaylles that they 
made. The thyrde was withoute the eest gate, the whiche was 
made to kepe thooste er the toun was take / the 7 fourthe was at 28 
thende of the brydge, by whiche the port of the brydge was kept / 
And therle of tholouse kept it fyrst. But whan the Cyte was taken 
he lefte it, and entred into the toun. Therle of fflaundres toke it 
and gamysshyd it with fyue honderd men of Armes, of knyghtes, 32 
and other wel in poynt, ffor he thought yf the turkes toke it our 
men myght not after yssue by the brydge, by which their strengthe 
be moche employed / 

a — 2 Fr. “de tels en y avoit qui en faisoient pis." One of Caxton’s hasty 
translations, he seems to have mistaken faisoient pis —“did worse,” for 
‘ ‘ went for pillage. * Fr. " qui prenoient garde," who kept watch. 

4 Grig. donn. 6 Orig. oommauudementes. 

8 Orig. Bnvmont. 7 Orig. thhe. 



Ch. CXXVII.] Corbagat assails the Marl of Plunders* Portress. 191 


How CJorbagat dyde do assayUe a fortresse which 
therle of Elau^dres kepte withoute the gate and 
of that ensiewed / ca° Cxxvij? 


4 o N a daye it happed that Corbagat thought that they of the 
toun hacf ouermoche lyberte to yssue oute 1 and to entre agayn. 
Therfor he eommaunded to a bataylle of his peple, in whiche were 
.ij. thousand turkes wel in poynt, that they shold so longe assaylle 
8 the fortresse of the brydge tyl they were taken, and it happed so 
that therle of Flaundres was thenne wythin the same fortresse. 
Tliassault beganne at sonne rysynge, moche fiers and moche grete. 
there were so many Archiers aboute it that none myghte shewe his 
12 2 head atte creneulx / hut that anon it was couerd with arowes / 
they that were within deffended them moche well in suche wyse, 
that they lost nothyng of the fortresse / And thassault endured tyl 
the sonne went doun / The turkes departed alle wery. Therle of 
16 fflaundres 3 doubte that they shold come on the morn to thassault / 
ffor they myght not longe suffre them there / therfor, as sone as it 
was nyght, he put out alle his men preuyly / and sette fyere therin, 
and brent the fortresse without fayllyng. The turkes had deuysed 
20 that in the moraynge erly they shold haue begonne agayn thassault 
and that two / M / men more shold haue comen than had ben the 
nyglit byfore. It was not longe after that a Rouete of turkes 
departed fro thooste of Corbagat / I wote not how many poure 
24 pylgryms that wente pourchasshyng 1 yf they myght fynde ony 
vytaylles in the countre / they toke them and brought them alle 
in the state that they were in to fore Corbagat / when he sawe 
them he / moche despysed them, ffor they had no Armures / And 
28 but feble bowes of tree, Their swerdes rusty, their gownes and 
habellemens were old and roten / Thenne sayd Corbagat by des- 
dayne : “ Thyse peple seme well men that shold take away fro the 
soudon of Perse his Enipyre / And conquere the londe of thoryent / 
32 Thyse shold be wel content and payd yf they had breed, and 4 a 
gobet of bacon / their bowes ben not stronge ynowgh for to slee a 
sparowgh. Now I shal saye to you what ye shal doo / ye shal lede 
them bounden in this poynt as they now be in vnto my lord the 
36 soudan that hath sent vs hether / And telle hym that he dar not 


Corbagat 
assailed the 
fortress of 
the bridge. 


[* If. 87, bk.] 


The Chris¬ 
tians de¬ 
fended them¬ 
selves until 
sundown, 
when the 
Turks de¬ 
parted. 


At night 
the fortress 
was burnt 
down. 


Many poor, 
famished 
Christiana 
were taken 
prisoners 
and brought 
before Cor¬ 
bagat. 


Corbagat, 
in ridicule, 
ordered them 
to be sent to 
the Soudan 
of Persia, 


1 Orig. onte. * Orig. fflaundees. 

4 Fr. "cn ung toti & porceaulx,” in a pig-stye. Caiton evidently did not 
understand “toit." 



192 The Christians suffer from Famine. [Ch. CXXVIll. 

be fore aferd of thyse men that he comen hether / ffor we haue 
to show him enterprysed and! begonne warre aycnst suche men as he may see / 
wrTo’mV 1 late me allowe with this werke, ffor there shal not abyde many of 

ho woo 

waging war. them / but I shal efface and destroye them alle in suche wyse as 4 
there shal nomore be spoken of them, as they had! neuer be born " / 
Thus ledde they thoo cristen men vnto the soudan. he we»de wel 
to haue don his honour / in this that he sente them to the soudan / 
This turned but it torneif hym afterward! to his shame / hym thought a light 8 
his shame, thynge to vayiiquysdie the cristen men whiche had not yet wel 
assayled! them / 

Of the grete famyne and messeage that oure men 
suffred in the cyte of Anthyoche, beynge 12 
assyeged on alle sydes by the sayde Corbagat / 

Capitulo C. xxviij 0 

o N alle partyes was the cyte thus assieged / They of the toun 
|i loot8s] ne myght not yssue out for to pourchasse vytaylle for them. 1 They 16 
a grievous were euyl at ease of this meschyef / A famyne aroos in the toun 
huhTtown? moche grete and greuows for deffaulte of vytayll / in suche wyse 
that they ete camels asses and tho horses, and yet toke they werse 
thynges / whan they myght gete it, ffor who that had! founden a 20 
deed hound or Catte, They ete it delyciously in stede of grete 
delices, 2 ffor the hongry wombes made no daunger to seche suche 
as-they myght fylle them with. 2 the grete, hye, and noble men that 
were acustoihed to be moche honoured / had now no shame to 24 
Each one come there wher they ete suche mete / but wente oueral moche 
whweverhe fowlly, and demaurcded playnly such as they neded / The ladyes, 

might find it. . . .. . . . r _. 

gentil wymmen and 1 maydens, had alle langour of hongre. I hey 
were alle pale and lene / Many were compelled! to begge, and aske 28 
with moche grete shame / There was none that myght haue 3 so 
harde an herte but that he shold haue had grete pyte to haue seen 
it / ther were many men and wymmen that aduysed them of what 
some were lygnage they were of bom / that had! suche courage ferme in theyr 32 
do this, ami hertes / that for none anguysshe that they suffred of hongre wold 
theSrhouees no * ® 00 axe ™ eir u Tee< t 4 fro dore to dore / Thyse peple hydde them 
in theyr howses. Somme that knewe it / dyde to them yet somme 

2-3 Fr. “ Car let ventris familleux ne faisoient dangier de querre dont ilz 
futsent remplis,” i. e. “the hungry stomachs did not refuse to seek that with 
which they might be filled.” 3 Orig. hane. * Orig. beed. 



Ch. CXXIX.] There was great Suffering from Hunger. 19S 

socour / But ther were many that deyed for hongre that had not for 
to ete / There myght men see knyghtes and* other valyaunt men Even the 
that had be to fore stronge and! noble in theyr werkes / that now tooSXioST 
4 were so feble' and! poure that they wente by the stretes lenyng on .'™* k upr>Bbt- 
their staues / and theyr heedes enclynyng doun askynge breed for 
goodes loue / There shold ye haue seen the lytil Childeren that soke 
theyr moders pappes. And the moders had nothyng to ete / But 1 
8 tlirewe them doun in the stretes to thende that other shold norysshe 
them, with grete payne shold ye haue founde one onely man emong 
so moche peple that had! sufficiently that hym neded! / ffor yf ony 
had 1 be that had! Gold! or Syluer, It auaylled hym nothyng, ffor he One could 
12 founde no, mete for to bye with it / the barons and the hye prynees to eat for 
that were acustomed! to holde the fayr "courtes / and to gyue mete 
and drynke to many men. they hydde them now / by cause none 
shold fynde them etyng ne drynkyng, they had! gretter anguysshe 
16 in theyr hertes of this famyne / than had the poure peple / ffor 
they mette euery day theyr knyghtes and theyr men of theyr 
countrees that deyde for hungre, And they had no mete to gyue to 
them / It were a long thyng to recounts alle the meseases and 1 the it would take 
20 meschyefs that.were suffred within Anthyoche whyles the tempeste torecount'aii 
endured / But so moche may wel be sayd, that selde or neuer slial suffered in 
ye fynde in hystorye / that so grete prynees, and 1 2 one so grete an [» if. ss, bk.] 
hooste suffred suche anguyssh of hungre. 

24 How the turkes, felyng that our men were in suche 
meschyef of hongre,' enforced them for tassaylle 
the cyte / ea° Cxxix. 

Hyles that the Cyte was thus on alle partes, assieged! with 
28 w turkes, And! the famyne ran so anguysshous, They that were 

without / and lcnewe the euyl couyne of our people lefte not to Those out- 
assaylle the walles alle the longe daye, They of the dongeon, And! vigorously, 
the other that cam in by the yate / cam and! made grete assaylles in 
32 the toun. they had made them so wery / that oure men myght not 
wel deffende them, and! vnnetho kepe the toun. ffor whan they had! 
defended them alle the longe day / at euen they had riothynge to 
ete / wherof it happed that a tour by that syde where our men Our men left 

& tower u?i* 

36 entred was euyl kept, and on a nyght the turkes cam withoute defended, 
forth / And! apperceyued! wel that noman was within the tour. 

1 Orig. Bnt. 


GODFREY. 


O 



194 


The Turks 
mounted 
and entered. 


The trusad- 
ere rushed 
thither, and 
threw them 
all down to 
the ground, 
breaking 
their lege 
and necks. 


t* leaf 89] 
Many ran 
away rather 
than Buffer 
hunger. 


The Turks 
burnt all the 
ships in the 
harbour. 


Our men are 
now in great 

despair. 


Some Turks mount into.-the Towers. [Ch. CXXX. 

thenne they toke laddres that they had made, And mounted vpon 
the walles / ther were .xxx. that wente vnto this tour for to entre 
in / And! this was at the begynnyng 1 of the nyght. The maister of 
the watche wente serchyng 1 right there / And! sawe the turkes 4 
comen vp there, And cryed! treson, treson. And thenne awoke 
fyrst and ran theder harry dasque / and two of his cosyns with 
hym / that one named ffianke, And that other Semer. 1 They were 
bothe of the toun called Mathale 2 vpon the mase. Thyse tlire 8 
smote in emong the .xxx. turkes at theyr fyrst comyug they slewe 
four. They of the toures sawe them, but not so sone. the other 
.xxvj. turkes deffended! them. But this durecf but a whyle, ffor 
they of the toures tlirewe them doun to the ground / where they 12 
brak their legges and! neckes. Ther was none that fylle, but he was 
deed or maymed. Ther was slayn Semer, ffor he was hurt with a 
swerd thurgh the bely. ffrank ucas bom away, whiche was hurte 
peryllously. 16 

How Corbagat sente bis men of Armes for to slee the 
maronners that were at the porte / wherof oure 
men hade a grete losse. Oapitulo .C. xxx® 

a 3 Han the famyne grewe thus euery day in anthyoche, many 20 
there were in the toun that had! leuer be slayn, than to abydc 
thus the hongre. They put them in aduenture / & by nyght 
yssued! 4 oute of the toun whan they myght escape After they wente 
to the porte of the see. Somme shippis there were yet of grekes, 24 
and! of hermyens that brought vytaylle / many ther were that 
bought it / And! cam and! solde it in the toun 5 by nyght in® hydles. 
whan the turkes apperceyued this / many t.ymes they awayted 
them / and slewe many of them / Atte laste for to take away this 28 
lytil socour that they had. the turkes sente two thousand horsmen 
to the see / whiche slewe alle the maronners and marchauntes that 
they founde, And brente their shippes. Somme ther were that 
laye at an ancre in the see, and they fledde / Thenne had our men 32 
loste alle theyr hope for vytayll, ffor the yles of the see as Cypres 
Rhodes / And other lyenge on the see side, As Cylyce, pamphyle, 
and of other costes durste nomore sende theyr Shippes theder / 

1 Fr. Soemer. Lat. Sigemaro. 3 Fr. Machale. 

* 1 1 or w. 6 Orig. tonn. 

3 B. en musceteus, A. en tapinage, i. e. secretly. 



Ch. CXXXI.] The Common Soldiers refuse to obey the Barons. 195 

They of the toun 1 of Anthyoche were no we euyl demenect j ffor to ana in a 
fore to them cam somme comforte of the marchauns. Now they »ituation. 
had alle loste it / whan the turkes retourned fro the see they 
4 recouretred our pour pilgryms whiohe wente that way / they slewe 
them alle, sauf somme whiche hydde them in the busshes / whan 
they of the toun herde tydynges herof how they were slayn they 
were moche sorowful, ffor they had ouer grete anguysshe in theyr 
8 hertes as ofte as ony mesauenture fyl to their peple. In this poynt 
were they with in the Cyte, and wold take none hede to theyr The common 
wards, ne wold not obeye to the barons, whiche myght thenne doo iw^onjjer 
to them no good. Thus were they in grete perylle / leaders. 6 "' 


12 How guyllem de grateuylle and his felaws fugytyfs 
cam in to Allexandrye the lasse / ca° Cxxxj*. 

g 2 Vyllem de Grateuylle & the other that fledde with hym cam AtAiexan- 
in to Allexandrye the lytyl. There they fourade steuen, Therle the deserters 
16 of Chartres, Of whom they of Anthyoche abode his comynge fro Stephen of 
daye to daye / ffor the barons and the mene peple supposed that 
he wold remembre how he departed / and retorne agayn / They 
told hym the grete sorowe of the famyne that was in Anthyoche, 

20 and to thende that they excused them of their departyng / truly 

the trouthe of the mesease was grete, But they told moche more and Per¬ 
th an it was / It was a light thyng to reteyne this erle, ffor he had not to go to 
no grete talente for to 3 retorne. They toke counseyl bytwene them / m 
24 & made theyr shippes to be in poynt and redy / And after entred 
in to them / and so wente to the see / and whan they had ben, I 
wote not how many 4 dayes in the see. they arryued at a Cyte of pir. so.bk] 
themperours of Constantynoble, whiche as was sayd to them cam Hearing mat 
28 with alle his boost moch greet and merueyllous, of grekes and of ofConstanti- 
latyns, and hasted moche for to goo to Anthyoche. he was thenne rinimme on 
in a Cyte not ferre from thens named ffynemyne, he wold well Antioch, 
holds couenaunte / that he had made to socour our peple with the 
32 peple of his Empyre. And ther cam in his companye wel / xl. M 
pylgryms that had abyden in his londe of the grete hooste, by cause jjjw 
of sekenes or for other causes. And grete nombre were comen syth s rim »> 
fro theyr couwtrees for theyr pylgremages, whiche durste not passe 
36 his londes vnto Anthyoche by them self / And thenne siewed 
themperour. whan the Erie Stephen knewe that the Emperour was 


1 Orig. tonn. 


Orig. to for. 
o 2 


a Fr. guillaume de gratemenil. 



196 Stephen discourages the Emperor of Constantinople. [Oh. CXXXI1. 

they went so nygh, he wente strayt to hym, And* brought his felaws cowardes 
with hym. whan themperour sawe them / he made grete ioye / 
The Emperor And receyued therle esteuen honorably, ffor he helde hym in pass- 
themhonour- yng thurgh his londe for a moche wyseman and a valyaunt, and 4 
wondered was wel acqueynted with hym. he demautided hym moche entent- 
companions y% °f the remenauut 1 of the barons / And sayde he had grete 
merueylle / how he was thus departed fro their companye. 


How therle of chartres discoraged themperour of Con- 8 
a stantinople that he shold not goo and socoure 

our peple in Anthyoche. Capitulo C xxxij 0 

t He Erie answerd in this maner, and sayde to themperour / 
Sire, the barons of ffraunce whiche passed this yere by your 12 
empyre, whom ye receyued so curtoysly & with grete honour, 
whan they had* taken Nycene, whiche they rendred to you, They 
The Eari passed vnto Anthyoche. They assieged that cyte wel ix monethes. 
that they They haue taken it entierly, Resented* a dongeon, whiche stondetli 16 
Antioch nine upon an hylle within the walles, whiche the turkes holde so 

months } 1 “ 

strongly that it is unprenable / They supposed to haue wel 
exployted whan they had goten this Cyte / But thenne they fylle 
but juet as in grettcr peryll than to fore, ffor on the thirde day after that they 20 
it'corbagat^ eutred Cam Corbagat, a puyssaunt prynce of perse, whiche brought 
besieged go moche peple that alle the countrey by was couerd with them. 

Oure peple suffred gret anguyssh -2 thenne, ffor this Corbagat, with 
his peple, enuyronned them on alle partes in suche wyse that oure 24 
men myght not yssue, and dyde to them moche payne in assayllyng 
them with out 3 forth. And* the dongeon made to them grete 
pieaf so] assaylles within 4 forth by whiche our men suffred grete mesease / 
They were ^ And also thanguyssli of hongre was so grete, that they had no 28 
great anguish power to defende them. On that other syde / they had other- 
whyle comfort of youre londe / ffor the yles of the see, And also 
fro other portes cam somtyme vytaylle / that was brought in to 
Anthyoche, But now late ben comen the turkes, And haue skiyn 32 
alle the maronners and the marchauntes that they fonde atte porte 

1 Fr. “ de la demouranee des autres barons." A. gives “de la contenance," 
which is the correct version. Lat. ‘ ‘ interrogans igitur ah eo Imperator diligenter 
de vita et salute el statu prineipium, et guaenam esset causa quod ah aliis rediret." 

2 Orig. angyussh. 2 Orig. ont. 



Ch. CXXXII.] Guyon, Brother of Bohemoncl, is very angry. 197 

in suche wyse, that nowe ther dare nomoo arryue there / wherfore 
they haue loste alle theyr socours of vytaylle / And ahoue alle this Above «n 

° ' tliey were 

they of the toun be greuyd nyght and day by them of the dongeon, 

4 ffor by the yate ynder it the turkes may entre and yssue whan it 
plesyth them / we sawe that this werke myght come to no good 
ende in this maner, wherfor we warned them, bothe my self and 
thyse that be in my companye, whiche be moche noble & wyse- 
8 mon oftymes, that ayenst the wylle of god they shold not enter¬ 
prise to conquere this countrey / But shold departe with the lest Nor would 

J i tliey heed 

losse they myght, And the peple that folowed them / they shold steyheu^^ 
cowduyte in to such a place that they shold not be delyuerd to r| lilceof 
12 doth / Many tymes we sayd to them in this manere / And neuer 
wold they here vs ne byleue, But mayntene theyr reuerye, ffor 
ther be many emonge them in whom is lytil reson / we our self 
had ben deed yi we had abyden there / ne we myght doo none 
16 honour to our lord ne to our prouffyte, Therfor we departed, And Therefore be 

. departed and 

commaunded them to god / whiche saue them and kepe, for they ^ thera - 
haue nede / Ye, syre, to whome I am bounden in good fayth / I 
aduyse you, that ye take counseyl of your wyse men to fore ye goo 
20 ony ferther / Trouth it is that ye be the moost hye man of the 
world / But for al that ye haue not here now in your companye so 
moche peple as Corbagat hath aboute Anthyoche, And ayenst one 
of you he hath seuen / therfore myn oppynyon is yf the other so Stephen 

- , . _ . advises the 

24 acorde, t^hat to fore your men be put in so gret aduenture ye retorne Emperor not 
home agayn. For yf ye approuche them / And that they haue Antioch, 
achyeued theyr werke in the Cyte, ye shal fynde them redy / A 
the more ner ye approuche them / the more shame and vyle shal it 
28 be to retorne fro them whan ye be so nyglie them, thise thynges 
that I haue acouwted to you, knowe wel thise valyaunt men that 
be here with me / & also a grete parte maye ye knowe by this 
good man that ye delyuerd to vs / that is wete tantyn your 
32 seruaunt, 1 whiche is so wyse and trewe, whiche departed fro vs for 
many defaultes, that he apperceyued with vs. whan he had sayd all 
this / themperour was moche ameuyd of thise wordes, 2 with hym [> if. w, bn.j. 
was a brother of Buymont named guyon, that whan he had herd was m'X™' 
36 therle Stephen thus speke / he was alle wroth and angry / And as tlXiX’h. 
half araged for despyte sayde al on hye / that he sayd not the 
truths / But that they were departed as Cowardes. He had moo 
grete wordes / but guyllem de gratemenyl, which was a gentilman 
1 Orig. seruauut. 



198 The Emperor returns to Constantinople. CXXXIII. 

bom of lygnage, And not of courage, And! bad to liis wyf the 
suster of the same guyen, made hym to holde his peas, And blamed 
hym by cause he spak ayenst therle steuen. And so this guyen 
forbare hym. 4 

How by the warnynges of the sayd Erie / themperour, 
whiche wold haue goon & socoured our 1 men, 
retorned shortly. ca° C xxxiij. 

v Pon thyse wordes that themperour had herd / he wolde be 8 
The Emperor counseylled, and! called his barons. And alle they acorded 
council ot hie that themperour shold retome fro thens, wher he was withoute 

barons, and . 

retum d bome S°y n g* on y farther / ftor they thought it were better to remeue his 

peple withoute perylle and hurte than for to fyght in so grete 12 
meschyef ayenst Corbagat, And to meue ayenst hym in hate and 2 
in wane all the londe of thoryent / He byleuyd so fermely the 
wordes of therle Stephen / that he doubted that the turkes had 
HcwasTO^ slayn them of Anthyoche / And wold thenne goc in to his londe 16 
of corb.igat. for to receyue the Cyte of Nycene / And alle the londe of Bythynie, 
whiche oure men had delyuerd to hym / he wold garnysshe it / 
whan he departed fro thens he brente and destroyed alle the londe 
fro 3 the cryne vnto Nyeene on both sydes, 4 By cause the turkes 20 
shold not folowe hym, vytaylle began to faylle him, And so he 
toeOhiS* 1 mus *' e re t°urne 4 / Thus it happed that by the wordes of this grete 
Antioch loit raan / that so fowly departed fro the other barons / themperour 
thatoiey" re t° rne< J> & the Cristen peple beyng 1 in Anthyoche lost so grete 24 
fif* have socours / by whiche myght haue comen alle theyr delyueraunce in 
so grete necessyte as they were thenne, But consydered this that 
was gyue to be vnderstonde to Themperour, yet he dyde not / But 6 
The result his deuoyre. Certaynly it was the werke of our lord, ffor yf this 28 
work^of the* ^mperour that cam with his peple, and grete power of men al 
Lord, fresshe had reysed the siege / & discomfyted the turkes / oure 
lord shold not haue ben so - honoured ne thanked / And yf of the 
trauayll that the barons and the other pylgryms had suffred, them- 32 

1 Orig. onr, s Orig. and'. 

* Caxton’s French MS. is here corrupted, “ Des le Ooine jusques ct Niqut.” 

A. givos the correct reading, “Des Icoine (Lat. Iconium), jusques & Nique." 

4 1 Fr. “ Afin que se lee Turn, lee voulsissent mime, vitaille leur faulsist, 
se les eust couvenu retoumer," viz., “in order that if the Turks should desire 
to follow them, food would fail them, and they would be obliged to return 
home." 6 Orig. Bnt. < 



Ch. CXXXIV.] The Crusaders in Antioch are wholly discouraged. 199 

perour that come laste shold hauc had the vyetorye, theyr payne in order that 
shold not haue ben so wel guerdonned / Therfor om 1 lord suffred tiam might 
that themperour departed / And that the 2 werke shold be accom- pieaf si] 

4 plysshed, as ye shal here to his glorye and honour of his peple / Hi'» giory,’ 9 

and to their 
own honour. 

How our 8 peple of Anthyoche beyng aduertysed herof 
were all discouraged, And Corbagat enhauneed 
in pryde / ca° C / xxxiiij 0 

8 r Enowmee cam in to Anthyoche, that themperour that was 
approched by the wordes of therle Stephen, of Guyllem de 
gratemenyll / And of theyr felaws was tomed back / They had on 
alle sydes anguysshes / But thyse tydynges empoysonned them alle, The chris- 
12 And put them as in despayr / thenne began they to curse the Erie Anuoch.w,?™ 
Stephen and alle his companye that had taken fro them so grete 
ayde / Corbagat'* that had knowleche that Themperour cam, had Era i* ror . 
moch doubte of his comyng / fEor it was a grete thyng of the 
16 puyssaunee of themperour. Now was he certayn that he was 

retomed, Wherof he had moch grete ioye in his herte. he was butcoriagM 

rejoiced 

risen in a moch tiers pryde. He ran the more asprely on them of greatly, 
the toun / Oure men in the toun were so abasshed, that them semed 
20 wel that oure lord god had alle forgete them. They lete them falle 
in despayre, And wold not endure no trauaylle that apperteyned to 
the defence of the Cyte / Alle hydde them in theyr howses / On a 
day it happed that Buymont, 5 whiche had alle the power of thoost, 

24 had to doo with men / ffor thassaultes withoute forth, and for 
thassaylles within forth / He dyde do crye on peyn of deth that 
alle shold come, And there came none. He sente his men for to 
fetche them in theyr howses and somone them to come, And none 
28 wold come oute. He was abasshed / And thought 6 what he shold Bohemomt 
doo. Atte laste he sette fyre in the toun in dyuerse places, And ^ 
thenne yssued in to the stretes grete rowtes / Buymont sawe them, Jjjj" 16 *” 
and sayd to hem his commaundement / And bad what they shold thelr du, y- 
32 doo / they dyd it / A worde sourded -in the toun that many itjras re-^ 
knyghtes and Barons had had counseyl pryuely emonge them that ?“J d ^ r t ° 0 n ’' 
they wold yssue oute of the toun 7 by nyght, And leue the pepole night“ y 
within. 

36 And wold doo the best they myght, and drawe them to the 

1 Orig. onr. 8 Orig. onr. * Orig. Crobagat. 

8 Orig. Buymout. 6 Orig. thought. 7 Orig. tonn. 



200 Godfrey begs the Barons to continue the Pilgrimage. [Ch. CXXXV. 


Duke Godfrey 
begged the 
barons, for 
the love of 
God, to 
abandon this 
thought. 

[* If. 91, bk.] 


His entreaties 
prevailed 
jvith them. 


But they 
complained 
bitterly of 
their priva* 
tione. 


porte for to entre vpon the see. The due Godeffrey knewe this 
word, he sente hastely for the bisshop of puy, And alle the barons 
and grete partye of the knyghtes, and he fylle at theyr feet, 1 and 
requyred 2 them for the loue of god that they wold neuer thynke 4 
suche a thynge, ffor yf they dyd so, god shold hate them / And 
they shold lese theyr sowles, as men that were in despayre of the 
mercy of oure lord. 3 And on that other syde in the world they 
shold lese their honour for euer and also theyr lygnage, whiche had 8 
nothyng forfayted, And shold be shamed euer, and poynted with 
the fingre. The londes out of whiche they yssued shold be the 
lasse renomed and lasse preysed as long as the world shold endure. 

Of alle thise departynges myght they neuer receyue good words ne 12 
honoure. By thyse wordes, and by the prechyng of the bisshop of 
puy they loste this euyl talente, alle that had be in this euyll 4 
purpoos. 5 But they began to affeble in the toun for honger and 
mesease, in suche wyse that they abode not, but the wylle of oure 16 
lord / Ofte cam in theyr remembraunce what goodes / Rychesses, 
and grete eases they had lefte in theyr countrees 6 for the loue of the 
seruyse of oure lord. And now yelded he to them suche guerdon 
that they deyed euery day for honger / And kept hem not fro 20 
thyse dogges cruel, whiche byleuyd not in hym, but they slewe 
and beheded them in despyte & reprouche of the Cristen faytli. 

In this ( maner wold they chyde with our lord often as men that 
wyste not what to do ne saye. 24 


How the spere was founden of whiche Ihesus was 
percyd on the crosse. And of the comfort that 
onr pylgryms toke thereby. Capitulo Cxxxv 0 

w Hyles as they were in this anguysshe therle herman, an hye 28 
man of duche land, was in so grete pouerte 7 / that due godefroy 
dyde do delyuer to hym euery day one loof of breede for pyte 
whiche was not moche grete / But the Due myght no more gyue 
Harry d’as- hym / ffor he had not wherof / Harry dasque whiche was one of 32 
the beat 6 ° f the beste knyghtes of thooste was brought in so grete pouerte, that 
the'ermy' 1 he deyde for hongre. It were a long thyng for to recounte all their 

hunger. meseases; hut our lord that in alle his -werkes may not forgete 

mercy / sente to them grete co?»fort. ffor a clerk bom in pro- 36 

1 Orig. feetr. 2 Orig. reqnyred, 4 Orig. enyll. 

* Orig. purpopB. 6 Orig. conntrees. 7 Orig. ponerte. 



Ch. CXXXV.] The Spear with which our Lord was pierced is found. 201 

uynce named! peter, cam on a day to the bysshop of puy and to The Apmiie 
therle of tholouse, & sayd to them in moche arete drede, that the appeared to 
holy apostel seynt andrew liad appiered to hym thryes in the nyght in * dream, 

4 slepyng, & warned hym that he shold goo to the barons & saye 
to them / that the speer with which our lord was percid in the svde and bade bim 

1 , , . . 1 . > J look in St. 

op the crosse was hyd in the chirch of seint peter in the cyte, the Peter’s 
place where it was he had certainly shewd to hym / he said wel Jhespear h 
8 that he was not come for to saye ne signefye them / hut that seynt °“ r L ° ,d wa# 
andreu had! menaced! hym at the last tyme yf he dide not his 
message / he shold meshappera in his body. J It was no merueylle yf [> leaf 92 ] 
the clerke doubted for to saye this / ffor he was a poure man and 
12-of a lowe lygnage / And! but lytil lettred!. Thyse two hye men 
whan they herd hym they brought hym to fore the other barons. 

They assembled 1 them, and they wolde that he shold saye to them 
the same wordes as he had sayd to them / whan the other Prynces 
16 herd 1 this, they mysbyleuyd not the clerke / They cam in to the 
Chirche of seynt Peter. And! sayd! theyr confessions. And cryed 
our lord mercy in teres, wepynges, and wayllynges / And repent- 
aunces of theyr synnes. Thenne began to delue and dygg depe in tiu> barons 
20 the place that the clerke had shewed to them. They fonde the and found 

the spear. 

spere lyke as he had! sayd to them. Thenne had they a Ioye 
emonge them so grete, lyke as euery man had! had! as moche as he 
myght / They ronge the belles. And! this thynge was anon spred 
24 al about the toun. They ran alle to the chirche hastely. And sawe 
this noble relyquye whiche was doluen out of therthe. Thenne were By tim 

. miracle all 

they recomfortecl alle, both men and wymmen, poure and ryche / werecom- 
as they had our lord emong them and seen hym, there were thus encouraged, 
28 many other good! men that sayde certaynly that certeyn vysyons of 
Angeles and 1 apostles were appered to them (28) / By thyse thynges 
the peple forgate moche of theyr meseases. The bisshop of puy and 
other holy men that were in the eompanye sayd to the pylgryms 
32 that oure lord! shewde to them tokene and! signe / that shortly he and took it 
wold sende to them his ayde and his counseyl, They concluded! they should 
alle, noble and vnnoble, men and wymmen / grete and lytil / And delivered, 
sware vpon the holy relyques / that yf our lord! wold delyuer them 
36 oute of the pevyll in whiche they were, And gyue them vyetorye 
of theyr enemyes, that they shold neuer departe fro this holy com- 
panye vnto the tyme that they had conquerd Iherusalem, that 
noble Cyte, where our lord suffred deth for to saue his peple. 

40 And shold delyuer the holy sepulcre oute of the handes of the fals 



After twenty* 
six days of 
famine they 


P If. 92, bk.] 

decided to 
tight the 
Turks. 


202 Peter the Hermit goes on an Embassy to Corlagat. [Ch. CXXXVI. 

mysbyleuyng houndes, turkes, and saresyns that kept it in theyr 
power. 

How Peter theremyte was sente by our men vnto 
Corbagat / the words what he sayde. And the 4 
answer of the sayd Corbagat. Capitulo Cxxxvj" 

Hey had suffred this famyne .xxvj / days in the Cyte / In 
t so moche that the people to whome our lord god had sente 
good hope in theyr hertes began moch to be comforted / & 8 
fylle alle to one wylle in such wise that they sayd emong 
them that it were good to brynge theyr mesease J to an ende / 
Therfore was theyr comyn acorde that they shold fyght with the 
turkes that had assieged them, ffor they thought a fayrer thyng 12 
that yf our lord wold that they deyde in bataylle, that they shold 
doo it in deffendyng* theyr cyte that they had conquered to the 
Cristiente, than to languysshe and to faylle within without essay- 
eng yf our lord wold ayde them / herof sourded a comyn word 16 
emonge them that alle cryed bataylle, bataylle / the bataylle, whan 
they myght see ony of the Barons. Alle they sayde that they 
taryed alle to longe. This word was thus meuyd of the mene 
peple. The barons thought that this enterprise myght well come 20 
of our lord. And so by comon acord they assembled in couMseyl. 
they alowed muche this that the peple made this request, and 
acorded that they wold sende to this proude prynce Corbagat, Peter 
theremyte, whiche was an holy man, moche wyse and wel bespokin. 24 
And delyuerd to hym for felaw a valyaunt man named hellom(29), 
trewe and of grete wytte that coude wel speke the langage of the 
sarasyns. And 2 specially the langage of perse / They charged them 
with the message, like as ye shal here what they sayde to Corbagat. 28 
Thise two sad men to fore sayd dyde do demaunde trews for to goo 
to the sayd Corbagat / ffor they wold speke with hym in the name 
of the pylgryms / hit was graunted with good wyll, They wente 
out of the Cyte and toke with him good companye, whiche were 32 
assygned to them / they wente so ferre that they arryued at the 
pauyllon of this noble prynce Corbagat. They sawe hym sytte in 
moche grete bobaunce emonge his ryche men / Peter salewed hym 
nothyng, ne made to hym honour ne reuerence. But spak heeryng 36 
alle in this maner / This holy companye of hye & noble men / 
barons, noble knyghtes, and other peple of our lord -god that ben 

3 Orig. aud. 


They sent 
Peter the 
Hermit, with 
Herloin, an 
Interpreter, 
to Corbagat. 


Arriving at 
his tent they 
fonnd him 
surrounded 
by his men. 


Peter ad¬ 
dressed him 
thus: 



Ch. CXXXVI.] Corbagctt is very angry at his Message. 


203 


yonder / within the cyte / sende to the & comaunde that thou 
departs fro this siege / & that thou nomore assaylle them / hut 
late them haue and! kepe the toun in pees, whieh our lord! Ihesu 
4 crist hath delyuered to them for to holde his faith & for to doo 
hym seruyse. ffor seynt peter the prynee of thappostles / vpon the 
cfeaunce of whom our fayth is founded, hath conuerted it fyrst by 
his prechyng / And! by the merueyllous myracles that he dyde / 
8 our peple hath conquerd it not long syth by the wyll and ayde of 
oure lord! vpon the turkes, that haue holden it with wrong and by 
force a certeyn tyme. Therfor thou oughtest to suffre vs to enioye 
our herytage / And! retome thou in to thy countrey, and! yf thou 
12 wilt not so doo knowe thou for certayn that within the thyrde day 
swerdes 1 schal fynysshe and ende this debate. And to thende that 
thou complayne not that we desire and wille the deth pourchasse of 
so moch peple in comyn bataylle, they shal offre to the this / that is 
16 to wete / yf thou wilt fyght in thyn owne persons, they shal sende 
ayenst the, one al so hye a prynee as thou art, to whom thou shalt 
fyght. And whiche of you maye vaynquysshe and 2 ouercome that 
other, shal conquers the quarelle for euermore withoute other debate. 
20 yf this thynge plese the not / take certayn nombre of thy men, 
vj. x. or xij / or as many as thou wylt / & our pilgryms shal sette 
as many ayenst them, withoute ony moo of that one syde and that 
other. And that they that_shal wynne the feelde shal allewaye 
24 haue the gayne of this debate. When Corbagat lierde this message 
he was moclie wrotfi and angry, and had grete desdayne and 
despyte / Thenne he toumed hym toward Peter and sayd to hym / 
Peter they that hath sente the hether, ben not in such poynt as me 
28 semeth that they shold offre to me for to chose of theyr deuyses, 
But they be brought by my puyssaunee and strengthe that they 
maye doo nothynge of theyr wylle / But I shall doo with them 
alls my playsyre / But retourne thou and saye to thyse musardes, 
32 and saye to them that haue made the to meue fro the Cyte and 
come hether, that they vnderstonde not yet the 3 maluerte that they 
be in / And byleue certaynly / that yf I had wold, I had or now 
broken and destroyed this toun and sette my men therm by force, 
36 in suche wyse that the cresten men had be alle slayn / men and 
wymtnen / lytil and grete. But I wyll that ye abyde in more 
caytyfnes and mesease, dyeng & languysshyng* for hongre / lyke as 
other houndes. And whan it shal please me /1 shal entre in to 
* Oria. aud. 3 Fr. maleurtu, misery, misfortune. 


“The Chris- 
tians com¬ 
mand you to 
depart from 
this siege, 


aud leave 
them An¬ 
tioch, which 
was con¬ 
verted by St. 
Peter. 


[} leaf 93] 


They chal¬ 
lenge you to 
single com¬ 
bat, with one 
of their 
number.’* 


Corbagat was 
very wroth at 
this message, 


and said, 

“ Return, 
and tell your 
masters, 
that they nre 
in no con¬ 
dition to 
dictate. 



204 


Peter returns with Corbagat?s reply. [Ch. CXXXVII. 

when i »m the toun, & alle them that I shal fynde, men and? wymmen of 
enter the couenable eage, I shal put them alle bonwden handes & feet in 
unurMce in pyetoas- estate, And! shal lede them alle to my lorde for to 
■lavee^* serue hym. And they shal be his esclaues / Alle the other I shall 4 
slee with the swerd, lyke an euyl tree that wyll here no fruyt / 

How the sayd Peter retorned in to the toun, and 
wold openly haue sayd his message / & of the 
subtyl eounseyll of the due whiche wold not 8 
suffre it / ca° C.xxxvij 0 

J p Eter theremyte vnderstode his pryde whiche was grete, and' of 
p if. as, bk.] grete quantite of peple that he had! 1 / And also of 2 his 
Peter re- Ey chesses whiche were ouer moche / Thenne he departed! and 1 cam 12 

turned home, v 

agayn m to the toun. he wold haue sayd? the message of Corbagat 
openly in the presence of them that wold here hym / ffor theder 
ran grete and! smale. But the due Godeffroy that was moche wyse 
but Godfrey and knewe moche, drewe hym a part, and called only the barons, 16 

would not let , , , , ' , , , „ , , , . , ,, 

and bad hym saye that he hath founden. he recounted to them 
alle, as he that had! wel reteyned! in his mynde / & coude saye anil! 
vtter it in the best manere / The due doubted that yf the peple had! 
hew? this grete pryde and! the menaces that Corbagat had sayd / 20 
that they shold be ouer moche abasshed and feerd. Therfor he 
commaunded to Peter that he shold saye none other thyng / But 
that only Corbagat desyred and demaunded the bataylle ayenst 
them, And that they shold make them redy. Peter acorded wel 24 
therto, And sayd to them lyke as the due had commaunded hym / 
And vnnethe Peter had sayd the worde / But that alle cryed with 
one voys / And we wylle also the bataylle ayenst hym in godes 
name. They shewde wel by tlieyr sight and semblaunce that the 28 
desyre of the bataylle was grete in their hertes. Alle their meseases 
were forgoten for Ioye to haue the vyctorye. The Barons, whan 
they sawe that theyr peple made suche ioye they were moche glad, 
And moche the more trusted in them. By comyn counseyl they 32 
Tbs next day ordeyned the day of the batayll on the morn / And that thus wold 
the battle. Corbagat haue it, they byleuyd? it wel. And? hastely wente every 
man to his lodgyng*. There ye shold haue seen Armourers put in 
poynt, hauberks and helmes fourbousshed / swerdes and custrellis 36 

1—1 Fr. “ Pierre Vermite eniendit son orgueil gui moult grant estoit, de la 
grant quantity de gens qu'il avoit." 


him tell his 
message to 
the people. 


They all 
with one 
accord cried 
to flght 
Corbagat. 



Ch. CXXXVIII.] The Crusaders prepare to attack Corbagat. 205 

whette / This nyght slepte they not in the toun noman / They that No t [ l na ^ l ® pt 
kept the hors toko good hede this nyght / And made alle thynge tint night, 
redy. As soone as it was nyght, It was cryed vpon peyno of deth, 

4 that alle man shold be in the mornyng* to fore the sonne rysynge 
alle armed as he best myght / And drawe hym in to the bataylle 
where as he was ordeyned / And that euery man shold folowe the 
baner of his Captayne / whan the spryngyng of the day apperid in At daybreak 
8 the mornyng the men of the chirehe were redy for to synge masse, church. 
And songe deuoutly / They that shold goo to the batayll were con- 
fessyd, and alle receyued the bodye of oil re lord, which gaf to them 
surete of body and of sowle. Alle rancour and wrath were en- ah rancor 
12 tierly perdonned / by cause they wold be in parfyght charyte, And 
therin doo the seruyse of our lord, whiche sayth in the gospel], 

In this shal alle men knowe that ye be my disciples, yf ye haue 
loue and charyte emonge you / whan they were thus redy / 1 oure [' leaf at] 
16 lord sente to them his grace / which gaf to them so grete hardines, The Lord 
that they that were the daye to fore so ferdful / feble and* lene that them physi- 
they myght not susteyne them self for feblenesse, becam stronge, 
and delyuer 2 in suche wyse / that the armes that they bare weyed 

20 nothyng as them semed, and were hardy and vygorous, so that ther 
was none so litil but he had talente to doo grete tliyng in the 
bataylle. The tyme cam that the bisshops and alle the other men 
of the chirehe were reuested as for to synge masse, they helde the 

21 crosse / and the sainctuaryes with whiche they blessyd the peple 

And recommaunded them to god. They graunted pardon and The priests 

° gave them 

remyssyon to them of alle their synnes, y f they deyde in the absolution for 
seruyse of our lord. To fere alle the other the bisshop of puy 
28 prechyd and spak to the barons. And prayd them that they shold The Bishop 
thyncke to auenge the /shame of our lord Ihesu Criste, that thyse 
vntrewe sarasyns had don to hym so longe in withholdyng 1 of his jj**” 1 *™ 
herytage. Atte laste he blessyd them with his hand, and com- Jraua 
32 maunded them to god deuoutly. 

How to fore er our men departed / they made redy 
theyr bataylles right wel in poynt / & of the 
nombre of them / ca° .C.xxxviij° 

36. N the morn erly our pylgryms assembled / as it was ordenyed 
o & deuysed the thyrde day to fore thentre of Iuyll, to fore the 
3 Fr. deliures, hardy, hold. 



206 


Hugh the 
Great com¬ 
manded the 
first batta¬ 
lion. 


Robert of 
Flaunders 
the second, 

Robert of 
Normandy 
the third, 


the Bishop of 
Puy the 
fourth, 


P If. 94, bk.] 


Reginald of 
Toul had the 
fifth, 

Rembold of 
Orange and 
other Pro- 
veil gal b the 
sixth, 
Godfrey of 
Bouillon led 
the seventh, 
Tancred the 
eighth, 


Huon the 
ninth, and 


the Earl of 
Perse and 
others the 
tenth. 


They go forth in Battle Array. [Ch. CXXXVIII. 

yate of the brydge / to fore thyssue oute of the yate / They, halt 
theyr bataylles ordeyned! and* deuysed 1 lyke as who shold goo to 
fore / And! who shold! come after / The fyrst bataylle had huon 1 le 
mayne, broder of the kynge of ffraunce, And! with hym Ancean de 4 
Rybemont, And! the other Barons and! knyghtes of theyr countrey / 
They thought wel that the men that they ledde shold not lyghtly 
be discomfyted. therfore wente they first / for to perse in the better 
to fore. The second! hatayll ledde Robert therle of fflaundres / 8 
which was called'the ffryson / he had none other in his bataylle but 
peple of his owne countree. The thyrde batayll ledde Robert the 
Due of Normandye with his neueuw, whiche was moche valyaunt, 
therle steuen of Aubuale / And alle them of his owen countreye / 12 
The fourth batayll was delyuerd! to the bisshop of puy / whiche had 
don of thabyt of the chyrche, and rode upon a good stede / the 
helme laced. And he bare in his hond the holy spere of whiche 
oure saueour, Ihesu Criste, was perced in the 2 side, and! conduyted! 16 
vygorously the bataylle of therle of tholouse, whiche was not there. 
The Erie Reignald of toul had the / v. bataylle. with hym was peter 
de stadenous his broder / Therle Gamyer 8 of grece, Henry dasque / 
Reynart of Anmellae / Gaultier of domedart / In the .vj. bataylle 20 
were Rembold!, the erle of Orenge, Loys 4 de moueous, and! Lambert 
sone of Euenam 6 de Montagu. The / vij / bataylle ledde the right 
valyaunt Godeffroy due of Loreyne / with hym was Eustace his 
brother / And! them that he brought out of his countrey. The .viij / 24 
bataylle conduyted the noble, wyse, and* wel preuyd. Tancre, with 
the men that were delyuerd to hym. The .ix. bataylle ledde therle 
huon of seynt poul. Aniaran 6 his sone was with hym / Thomas 7 
de boure / bawdwvn de bourgh, Robert 8 fytz 9 gerard! / Regnauld 28 
de bauuaus 10 / And! Gales de ebamont. 11 The .x. ladde therle of 
Perse. 12 And had with hym Euerard du puyssat, Droon de money / 
Raoul 13 fytz godeffroy and Conayn the breton. Of the .xi. was 
Capytayn Ysachar 14 therle of dys. with hym were Remon 15 pabes / 32 
Gaste de hedyers / Gyrard! de Roussylon, Guyllem de monpellyer, 
And Guyllem ameneux / The / xij / and! the laste in whiclie was 

1 Fr. '‘cut " left out. 3 Fr. garin de gres. 

* Fr. Looys de Mon^on. 6 Fr. Conon de Montaigu. 6 Fr. Anjorran. 

7 Fr. Thomas de Fere. 8 Fr. Robert lefilz Girart, Robert the son of Girart. 

* Orig. fntz. 10 Fr. Reauvoys. 11 Fr. Chaumont. 13 Fr. Ferche. 

13 Fr. Raoul lefilz Godefroy, Raoul the son of Godefroy. 

14 Fr. Ysacart le conte de Die. Lat. Yscardus comes Diensis. 
u Fr. Remon Felez. 



207 


Ch. CXXXIX.] Corbagat learns of their Approach. 

moost peple was delyuerd to buymont 1 / And! was ordeyned that Bobemond 
he shold goo socoure suche bataylles / as had moost nede. Therle withthe 
of tholouse, whiche was merueyllously seke, lefte they in the toun battalion. 

4 for to kepe fro the turkes in the dongeon / ffor yf tlier had be no 
garde / they myght haue sprongen and haue slayn alle the seke timEm-i of 
men, wymmen, and children, and the feble men that abode byhynde left to guard 
in the toun / of whom ther were grete nombre 2 in theyr herberous / 

8 They had made, as I haue sayd tofore, vpon a lytil tertre a stronge 
walle of chalke / in whiche were ordeyned places for to dresse 
engyns, whiche were al redy for to caste / They had left / ij. C. 
men of Armes, noble and hardy for to deffend this paas fro the 
12 turkes, whiche were on hye on the dongeon. 

How Corbagat was aduertysed of thyssue of oure 
peple, and sente his Arehiers for to deffende 
the brydge. And how they were disconfyted. 

16 Capitulo / Cxxxix" 

w Han they had thus deuysed 1 theyr bataylles / in euery batayll 

they had sette men on foots. It was acorded emonge them The footman 
that they a foote shold goo to fore. And the knyghtes that cam and the 

* ^ e/ cj knights fitter* 

20 after shold kepe 8 them. It was deffended and cryed 4 on payne 5 of p leaf 95 ] 
deth that none shold be so hardy that shold entende to ony gayn 
As longe as ony turke deffended hym / but whan oure lord had 
gyuen them the vyctorye, Thenne shold they retorne, and myght 
24 tarye to take & gadre the despoylles. Corbagat fro the begynnyng 1 corbagaUiad 
of the siege of the cyte had alwaye doubte & grete suspection that an attack, 
our peple shold sodanly come vpon his hoost, And specially syth 
that peter theremyte had be with hym in message. And therfor he 
28 had commaunded to them that were in the dongeon, that yf oure and had^ f ^ 
men thought to yssue they shold sowne a busyne / And sette oute ajgmJL «o^ 
a baner where they shold yssue / wherof it happed that whan thyse of uieir 
bataylles were renged to fore the yate to fore they yssued aboute 
32 the houre of pryme / They of the tour made the signe like as they 
were commaunded. Corbagat vnderstode that our men cam. And 
anon he sente two thousend Arehiers to the brydge to kepe it that 
they shold not passe, whan the turkes cam theder for to mayntene 
36 the passage / they descended alle afoote. The yates were opened, 

1 Orig. buymout. 2 Orig. mombre. 

5 Fr. les gwrderoient , viz., should protect them. 4 Orig. ccyed. 



208 


The Crusaders are miraculously refreshed. [Ch. CXL. 


Hugh the 
Great opened 
the attack 
and put the 
Turks to 
flight. 


Ancean of 
Ribemont 

? ;ained great 
lonours by 
bis bravery. 


Our men 
pursued the 
Turks nearly 
to their tents. 


oure 1 men yssued after thordenaunce that was deuysed. Huon 2 le 
mayne with alle his bataylle cam fyrst vn to this paas, whiche 3 was 
kept with his enemyes. his 4 archiers and men a foote laryed a lytil 
and myght not passe in no wyse / whan huon the noble roan apper- 4 
ceyued this he smote the hors with the spores, and so smote in on 
bothe sydes, that it was to late for the turkes a foote to take theyr 
horses / Thenne torned they fleyng 1 , defendyng them & shotyng with 
their bowes. Ancean de Eibemont rode ayenst them, and bete and 8 
helde the 8 rowte so short allone that his men that cam after hym 
myght come and smyte in emong them and! delyuerd many. 5 And 
oftymes he plunged! so depe in the presse that certaynly our men 
had! supposed he had ben lost, but whan he cam agayn / he dis- 12 
couerd hym wel and made large place about hym. Alle men 
behelde hym, he gate there moche grete honour and prys. Huon 
le mayne forgate not his swerd. And he dyde so moche that our 
pylgryms had by hym good luck and hope at this fyrst assembles / 16 
Therle of fflaundres and the due of Normandye, with the valyaunt 
erle of henawd cam to this chaas / The Archiers of the turkes that 
so fledde were so euyl mened / that they were but a fewe whan they 
retomed in to thoost / Our men folowed them tyl nygh theyr lodgys. 20 
many of them they bete doun that neuer releuyd. 


How oure men reioysed them' of a dew or rousee 
[• if. 95, bk,] descendyng 6 thenne fro heuen. And of theyr 

mayntyen in approehyng the turkes. 24 

Capitulo C / xl 

o Ne thynge happed wlian oure men yssued out of the toun / 
that ought not to be forgoten / ffor whan thyse Archiers were 
disconfyted, the latynes cam after in theyr ordenaunce a softs paas / 28 
our men Thenne began to falle a rayne or a dewe, so swete a rousee was 
greatijjre- neuer seen / It semed to euery man verytably, that it was the 
»sweet dew benediction of our lord and the grace of heuen that descended vpon 

which fell. ° 

1 Orig. onre. 3 Orig. Hnon. 

5 Fr. “ qui ainsi des ennemis gamy estoit,” viz., “ which was thus guarded 
by his enemies.” 

4 Fr. “ que tart fat A ceulx qui descendoient A pie qu’ilz fuesent remonUs,” 
i. e., so that those who had descended from their horses were very anxious to 
he remounted. 

•— 5 Fr. “terwit tant la route, tout seal, que ses hommes qui venoient apres, 
y povoientfrapper A deUvre." 



Ch. CXLI.] Men and Morses both feel their Strength renewed. 209 


them / Anon 1 they were as fressh & al so light as they neuer had 
suffred mesease. This refresshement was not only in the men, but 
alle theyr horses were anon so stronge, so fresshe, and! so reioyced / 
4 As they had! had 1 alway al that whiche was nedeful for them. This 
was moche apperceyued! that daye certaynly, ffor the horses that 
many dayes had nothyng to ete sauf leeues of trees and skorches 2 
or Ryndes, were in this bataylle more stronge and! more penyble / 
8 than were the horses of the turkes, whiche had! alwaye as moche as 
they myght / The Capytayns acorded that they shold drawe them 
toward the montaynes, whiche was fer fro the Cyte wel .ij. myles / 
ffor yf the turkes whiche had moch grete plente wold! goo theder- 
12 ward / they shold he bytwene oure men and 3 the toun, and shold 
close them in. In this maner wente one bataylle to fore another 
withoute this / That one touched another in ony wyse / whan the 
turkes sawe them alle they merueylled and were abasshed, ffor they 
16 had supposed / that they had not be but a fewe enclosed in the 
toun / Now they semed by the myracle of our lord that they were 
as many of them / as were of the turkes, and yet moo. Emonge 
the men of armes were the men of the Chirche reuested with 
20 awbes 4 and stooles, they that were preestes. And the clerkys in 
surplys / & eche of them bare a crosse in his ha?id / they that were 
abyden in the toun were on the walles, reuestyd also, in prayers and 
oroysons and teeris cryeng’jnercy to oure lord that he wolde haue 
24 pyte of his peple / And saue them that day, & that he wold not 
suffre that his name and his fayth shold tqrne to reproche by the 
mescreauntes and hethen peple. 


so that ther 
felt perfectly 
strong and 
well. 


The horses 
even re¬ 
covered their 
strength. 


They drew 
off-towards 
the moun¬ 
tains, one 
battalion 
after another. 


Among the 
armed men 
marched the 
priests, in 
their priestly 
garments, 
cross in 
hand. 


How Corbagat ordeyned his bataylles / And how the 
28 two hoostes marched to gydre in bataylle. 

/ C. xlj” 

b Y the signes that they of the dongeon made to them of thoost, 
and by the tydynges that the Archiers brought / Corbagat 
32 6 knewe and vnderstode certaynly that oure men were yssued oute pteafMj 
of the Cyte, and cam toward bym for to fyghte. Thenne 6 of this now under- 
that he was thenne adcerteynedf / he had desdayne to fore and our men 

J ' meant to 

1 Orig. Auon. 2 Fr. ecorces, bark. fight him * 

8 Orig. aud!. 4 Fr. aubes et estoles, albs and stoles. 

o_8 fr. “ tors tint A cartas ce gu’il avoit etc jusqucs adoncqucs cn desdaing, 
el feme po-ur mogueric,” viz., then he began to take seriously that which up to 
this time he had held in disdain, and considered only as mockery. 

GODFREY. p 



210 The two Armies arrange their Battalions. [Ch. CXLI. 

liolden it for mocquerye. 6 he toke counseyl of his barons / And 
He arranged hastely ordeyned his bataylles by the counseyl of his wysemen / 
And specially of them that were bom in Anthyoche, of whom he 
had many with hym. He made a bataylle of moche grete plente of 4 
knyghtes, the best and moost hardy that he had / This bataylle 
delyuerd he to Solyman / of whom ye haue herd* in dyuerse places 
to fore. He commaunded that they shold drawe them toward! the 
see, to fore er our men shold haue taken / and pourprysed alle the 8 
playn bytwene the montayne & the Cyte. This 1 grete bataylle cam 
thenne to fore, And! ,was staked! as bytwene two townes 2 and! 
closed! / His other bataylles he sette in poynt by leyser, And! made 
that one to goo to fore another as he that knowe ynowgh of the 12 
faytes of warre / And! after spak to the Capytaynes, and 1 sayde to 
them, that they shold mayntene them as hye men and good 
knyghtes, and! not to be aferd ne esmayed of thyse Caytyues / men 
enfamyned, euyll armed, and all to brused of the grete trauaylles 16 
that they had suffred, whan our men had pourprised entierly the 
playn in such wise that they doubted not to be closed in / They 
approuched so nyghe the turkes that the turkes myght shote at 
them / They made theyr trompes and! busynes to sowne lowd!, 20 
And! 3 spored! their horses the thre fyrst bataylles to gydre / wel 
founde they that receyued! them, ffor the turkes were grete men 
attacked ,low we ^ armed!. Our men dyde right wel in this comyng on / 
a h aerce"" d -^e 4 5 ffrensshemen, fflemynges conteyned them vygorously in brek- 24 

Mowed! 1 y n 8 e t * le P r esse / But thenne cam so grete rowtes of turkes / that it 

behoued the other bataylles of our men to assemble hastely for to 
socoure the thre first bataylles. They were alle at the medle, sauf 
the laste bataylle, whiche buymont conduyted as ye haue herd. 28 
There shold ye haue seen fiers skarmoebe of swerdes, of maces 
& axesse. the 6 malles were so grete and strokes / that ye shold 
not haue herd yf it had thondred. The due godeffroy sawe a 

1 Caxton has here made a “bourdon" by omitting all between the two 

“cites,” and then in consequence of this omission, he has mistranslated the 

rest of the sentence, Fr. (cecy Jht ilpar tele entencion gue guand nos gensseroient 
desconfitz, et ilz se vouldroient tirer vers la mer ou vers la cite), cctte grosse bataille 
leur venist au devant, et fussent adoneques entachiez centime entre deux moles, et 
et du taut agrevi etforelos. 2 hills, not towns. 8 Orig. Aud 1 . 

4 Fr. “ Lee Flamans se contindrent vigoureusement, et les Normans derom- 
poient bien lapresse." 

5 Fr. “le marteleis estoit si grant," i. e., the hammering (of the arms) was 
so great. 


own 
battalions, 


and sent 
Solyman to 
intercept our 
meu. 


Solyman 
arranged his 
army, and 
exhorted his 
men not to 
fear the 
famine- 
weakened 
crusaders. 



211 


Ch. CXLII.J The Onset is vigorous. 

bataylle come where in were moo men than ony of the other, well 
thought he that yf that were disconfyted / The other shold be moehe 
abasshed. he drewe thederward, And 1 smote in them asprely and Godfrey and 
4 vygorously. there dyde he & his felawship moche wel and? so fought 
valyauntly that they slewe many, and hewe of heedes and! armes 
in suche wyse that the felde lay ful of dede men, of hurt and! 
wounded, in so many that the turkes 2 myght no lenger suffre it ne [ 2 if.»e, bk.] 
8 lenger endure 3 / But were disconfyted and were put to flyght. The Turks 
Solyman that had the grete bataylle, as I haue sayd! to fore / apper- 
ceyued fro ferre his men conteyned! them but febly / And approched 
and sawe the bataylle of buymont / which yet had not be in the 
12 medle with the other / he adressid hym thedre, And dyde do shote. solyman 
at hym grete plente of Arowes at the approuchyng. 4 But after they Bohemontfs 
henge theyr bowes on theyr armes, and ran vpon them with axes greased them 
and swerdes / And smote so sore on them that almost they tourned 
16 the heedes of theyr horses, ffor they myght not abide so grete 
estour ne so sharpe of so moche peple. The due Godeffroye knewe 
& sawe them fro ferre / & drewe hym diligently to that parte. Godfrey, 
Tancre toke hede also of his vncle, & cam dilygently to socoure Sme g to the 

cue mid 

20 hym. at the comyng of them two which brought many men with discomfited 

Solyman, 

them was Solyman discomfyted, and muste parte fro the place. But 
the turkes had made redy fyre grekyssh (30) / And threwe it in to 
the grasse whiche was longe and drye in the felde / Our men thenne 
24 departed for the smoke whiche was blak and thycke / whan the 
turkes sawe that they on horsbak were withdrawen, they ran vpon 
our men afoote, and slewe many of them, our men that were on 
horsbak were yssued out of the thyek smoke, and herde the cryo of 
28 them that they so slewe / And smote the homes with the spores, 

and camen agayn alle / And alle them that they founds of theyr and then 
enemyes they bete and 1 slewe, and put to flyght. So ferre they a long dts- 
chassed them, betyng* and hewyng 1 them, that they cam to the many. Blayi, ' g 
32 grete multitude / whiche thenne were discomfyted and put to 
flyght / 

Of the fleynge of Corbagat / And of som turkes gadred 
to gydre. And agayn discomfyted by our men. 

36 ca°. Cxlij® 

1 Orig. Ano. 3 Orig. endnre. 4 Orig. approucliyug. 

r 3 



212 


The Turks 
rallied on a 
little hill. 


[»leaf 97] 

Our men 
followed, and 
dislodged 
them. 


The rout 
now became 
general. 


Corbagat fled 
beyond the 
Euphrates. 


Tancred 
followed with 
4000 men, 
as far as he 
dared, with 
his weary 
men and 
horses. 


Corbagatfs Army is voided. [Ch. CXLII. 

i N this partye where the bataylle had bee, was in a valeye / 

As where descended in to the see a lytil brook or rennyng 1 
water, vnto that place had our men chassed the turkes / And there 
they drewe and assembled them agayn vpon a tertre right hye / 4 
And made do sowne theyr trompettes and busynes for to brynge 
their peple to gidre, but our men that therene had not to doo in 
none other place camen alle to them / Huon le mayne / Thorle of 
fflaundres. The due of Normandye / the Due godeffroy, Buymont 8* 
and Tancre, And they that were with them, began moclie myghtely 
to 1 assaylle theyr enemyes, thurgh the water so fiersly and by so 
grete hardynesse and force that they passed ouer, and godanly ran 
on that hylle where they were on. And made them to descende 12 
doun moche peryllously. fro tlienne the turkes had 1 none hope, to 
abyde no longer on the felde ne on the champayns, but euery 2 man 
wente and fledde here and there where he myghf and thought 
beste. Corbagat the lord of the hoost, fro the begynnyng that the 16 
bataylles assembled / had eschewed the peryll / And was with- 
drawen vpon an hylle a ferre of, for to see the ende. he sente ofte 
messagers for to knowe how his men conteyned 1 and demened 
them 3 / wherfore he abode there / And sawe how the turkes cam 20 
alle disconfyted without kepyng araye ne ordenaunce of bataylle. 
his frendes that were about hym 4 sayd to hym / Syre, ye see wel 
at this tyme how it gooth, therfore thynke ye dylygently for your 
self / And departe hastely fro this place, he thenne wente his 24 
waye and fledde as hastely as he myght; he had so grete fere and 
drede in his herte that he durst abyde in no place, he passed the 
Ryuer and flood of Eufrates / And by the rennyng of his hors he 
withdrewe hym as fer as he myght. whan his men knewe that 28 
they were without Capytayne they were moche abasshed. thenne 
thought none of them of other, but euery man dyde the best he 
eoude or myghte to saue hymself, & fledde alle as moche as they 
myght / Our valyaunt barons, whiche that had sore trauaylled 32 
theyr horses, durste not folowe them ouer ferre, lest theyr horses 
myght faylle them / Tancre with a companye of four thousand 
folowed, sleyng 1 and betyng 1 doun 5 alle them that they myght 
atteyne, ffor the fere and drede was so grete in the hertes of the 3G 
sarasyns that / x. men myght haue chassed / v / C. sarasyns. Ther 
was it euydently proued and shewd, that there is no counseyl, ne 
none maye be gyuen ayenst our lord god / And that our lord for- 
3 Orig. enery. 3 Fr. si commc il atendoit illcc. 4 Orig. hyin. 3 Orig. donn. 



213 


Ch. CXLIIL] The Crusaders gain great Riches. 

geteth not them that haue stedfast hope in hym, for a smalle peple, 
poure, and! as alle deed! for honger, whiche were come fro fer coun¬ 
trees and londes, by the ayde of Ihesu Criste vaynquysshyd! alle the 
4 power of thoryent in theyr owne londe and countree, whiche were 
so grete plente of peple garnisshyd and replenesshyd of alle that 
they had nede of. 

How our peple retorued fro the chaasse, and wente to 
8 the pillage, and of the grete Rychesses that they 
fonde. ca° Cxliij° 

t He bataylle was thus fynysshyd, in suche wyse that the pil- 
gryms had the vyctorye / They wente strayte to the lodgyses 
12 'of the turkes, there founde they so grete Eyehesses of gold, of 
syluer, of precious stones, of vayssell of dyuerse faciows / tapytes 
and clothes of sylk, so moche that neuer man myght wel preyse. 
Oxen, sheep, and kyen were there grete plente, whete and mele 
16 grounden, of which they had grete nede; ther was so moch that all 
they were encombred to here it / They wan horses in this discom- 
fyture good 1 and fatte, so many that they were abasshed of the 
grete multitude that was there / They toke and gadred the despoylles 
20 and the tentes, wherof they had so grete rychesses / that of suche 
an hoost, was neuer none seen more faire ne ryche / And this cam 
to them merueyllously well to poynt / ffor alle theyr tentes & theyr 
pauyllons were holly rotten / wymmen, Childeren, and other peple 
24 whiche bare none armes they founde ouer many in the lodgyses, 
whom alle they brought in to the cyte Emong the other thynges. 
the barons assembled them for to see the tentes of Corbagat whiche 
was merueyllous, ffor it was made in the forme of a Cyte / It had 
28 towres and crestes of dyuerse colours wrought with fyn sylke. ffro 
the mayster palays were aleys in to other tentes lyke to stretes in a 
grete toun. Ther myght sytte in the grete halle moo than two 
thousand men / whan our men had recuyelled thus the rychesses 
32 and despoylles / they alle made grete trusses full of ryche thynges, 
and charged them on theyr horses and backes and entred in to the 
Cyte of Anthyoche. yf they thenne were glad and ioyous, It was 
no merueylle, ffor in longe tyme to fore, fylle ne happed suche 
36 aduenture in Cristiente / They rendred & gaf to our lord many 
thankes and graces of lawde with alle theyr very hartes humbly 
and deuoutly. ffor wel knewe they that alle was comen fro hym / 


Thus a am all 
famine- 
stricken 
army van¬ 
quished the 
proud Orient. 


The Chris¬ 
tians went to 
the tents of 
the Turks, 

[i If. 97, bk.] 


where they 
found im¬ 
mense riches. 


Never were 
such great 
spoils seen 
before. 


The tent of 
Corbagat was 
especially 
large and 
magnificent. 


They re¬ 
turned to 
Antioch 
joyous, and 
well laden. 



214 


The Donjon of Antioch now surrenders. [Ch. CXLIII. 

Tiie^Turki in The turkes whiche were in the dongeon had wel seen that theyr 
nowsur- peple were vaynquysshyd / And had! none hope thenne to be 
rescowed ne of no socoure. Therfor anon as the barons were entred! 
in the cyte they made them to speke and trete with them. And 4 
acorded to gydre that they alle shold! take theyr wyues and childeren 
and here with them suche goodes as they had / and rendre and 
gyue ouer the dongeon. The baners of our barons were sette aboue 
on it thenne. The werkes of our lord Iheo’u crist ben moche hye 8 
Thus in» and merueyllous, ffor fro right grete pouerte, cam oure peple to 

ndMdhia ouer S re * c rychesses in so short a tyme / It is moche good to affye 

men from and truste in hym that hath such power and myght. It was mer- 

power aml uayl °f the disease & pouerte that our barons had suffred / The 12 

valyauwt Due godefroy was brought to this poynt at the day 
C> leaf98] of the batayl 'that he had not wheron to ryde / But he must 
praye and requyre moche swetly therle of tholouse / whiche re- 
meuyd not oute of the toun, that he wold leue to hym an hors / 16 
but lie had grete payne to gete it, he had despended alle his hauoyr 
and good entierly for to susteyne the pour gentilmen, in suche wyse 
that he had nothynge hym self. There were many knyghtes that 
rychely were come in to the hooste atte begynnyng, that were 20 
brought to so grete pouerte that this day they rode on asses and on 
pour mares. And many hye men as knyghtes valyaunt and hardy 
myght not cheuysshe for to ryde, but wente afoot emong the foote 
men, where they helde moche wel theyr place / ffor they mayntened 24 
and taught the mene peple how they myght doo to theyr enemyes 
The power grettest dommage. The power of perse was moche affebled this 

of Persia was ” _ , ° , 

greatly en- day. For ther wer so many slayn and deed that alle therthe 

feebled that _ _ * * 

day. ther aboute was couerd!. The nombre of them that were slayn was 28 

neuer verytably / knowen / Moche was chaunged the state of our 
men. ffor he that in the mornyng* yssued oute alle poure in suche 
wyse that he had not for to ete / At euen he entred in to the cyte 
ryche of good and of vitaylles / in suche wyse as he myght haue 32 
tms good holden a grete court and companye. This good aduenture whiche 
happened the honoured alle cristiente / and specially the Royamme of ffraunce 

91st day of ' r J J 

June, 1098 . happed the yere of thyncamacion of oure lord .M/lxxxxviij / the 

.xxi / day of the moneth of Iuyn / 36 



Ch. CXLIV.] The Churches of Antioch are purified. 

Of the fayre ordenaunces that oure peple made in the 
chirches of Anthyoche. And in other townes 
by / after this vyctorye. Capitulo Cxliiij" 

4 s Yth that the barons were retorned fro the bataylle / and the 
thynges of the Cyte were wel ordeyned. By the counseyl of 
the valyaunt bisshop of puy, and by the prelates that were in the 
hoost was acorded by them alle, that the chirches of the toun were 
8 entierly made elene, And! ordeyned to doo the seruyse of oure lord! 
God 1 . And! specially the chyef cathedralle chirche / whiche is 
founded! in thonour of seynt Peter. They establysshed therin 
clerkes and! curates that shold! seme in the chirche. And 1 other to 
12 gouerne and kepe the holy places elene / ffor the false and vntrew 
sarasyns 1 had! defowled them. They had sette in the chirches 
somme theyr kyen. Oxen and sheep. And other theyr horses and 
asses / The comyn wymmen and euylle knaues had made theyr 
16 ordure and fylthe in them that it was pyte to see / And also they 
defowled thymages of Ihesu. Crist, of our lady, 2 and of other 
sayntes with fylth, myre and ordure / And lyke as they had ben a 
lyue, they had drawe them and 1 cut of theyr noses / and pyeked 
20 out theyr eyen / The barons and alle the pylgryms acorded that 
there shold be ordeyned 1 and establyssyd rentes to the clerkes 
that shold serue in the chirches. there was offerd gold & syluer 
ynowgh for to make crosses & chalyces. And also clothes of 
24 sylk for to make agayn vestemewtes for men of the chirche, and 3 
aoumementes 4 for aulters. The patriarke of the toun whiche was 
a greek, named Iohan / they ordeyned and sette hym agayn in his 
place with moche more grete honour and solempnyte / The turkes 
28 had caste and put hym oute 5 with grete shame, and had don to 
hym many euyllis for the fayth of our sauyour Ihesu Criste that 
he helde in the Cytees beyng 1 aboute Anthyoche / Oure men sette 
bisshoppes in the cytees where as none were at that tyme, But in 
32 Anthyoche where as they fonde one / they sette none other til 
afterward that the good man apperceyued that he lytil prouffyted 
there, by cause the latyns vnderstode no grekysshe language, And 
lefte his dygnyte / and wente in to constantynoble, with his good 
36 wyll without ony forse or constraynt / Thenne assembled the men 
of the chirche. And they chose and elected for to be patriarke the 

1 Orig. sarasyus. 3 Orig. aud. 

4 Fr. aornements, ornaments, decorations. 5 Grig. onte. 


215 


The churches 
of Antioch 
were cleaned, 
and put in 
order for 
the Lord's 
service. 


The Sarcena 
had greatly 
defiled them. 


P If. 98, bk.] 


Rents and 
incomes were 
established 
for the 
priests in 
the churches. 


The Greek 
patriarch 
John was 
reinstated, 


but after¬ 
wards he 
resigned thiB 
position. 



216 Ambassadors go to the Emperor of Constantinople. [Ch. CXLV. 


Bernard, 
Bishop of 
Tarsus, was 
put in his 
place. 


Bohemond 
was given the 
seignory of 
the city, and 
called Prince 
of Antioch. 


bisshop of Tarse, whiehe was named bernardf, born at valence. He 
was comen with the good! bysshop of puy / And! he had! made hym 
his chappellayn. he was made patriarke / The Seygnorye of the 
Cyte graunted! alle the barons to buymont, lyke as they had! pro- 4 
rnysed and couenaunted, sanf the Erie of tholouse, whiehe helde 
the yate of the brydge / & 1 1 wote not how many dayes he had 
garnysshed it. And! in no wyse wold gyue it ouer 1 / But sayde 
that it was his parte. And by cause that Buymont to fore was 8 
called prynce of the peple of his contre. Therfor that name abode 
to hym and to alle the lordes after hym of the Cyte / and ben 
alwaye called Prynces of Anthyoehe. 


How our peple sente ambassadours to themperour of 12 
Constantinople for to somone hym to come and 
socoure them as he had promysed. 

Capitulo C/xlv° 

He tydynges were thus ordeyned in the cyte as I haue deuysed 16 
to you / Thenne was the counseyl taken emong the barons that 
they shold sends to themperour 2 of constantinoble for to 
somone hym by his fayth, that acordyng to the couenauntes 
that he had made to them that he shold not tarye, but come in his 20 
[* leaf£>9j propre persone for to helpe them, & specially 3 at the siege of Iheru- 
to sum man salem to whiehe they entended for to goo / 4 yf he wold not / 
in.promise, thenne knewe they that he wold not forthon holde his couenauntes 5 

that were made with hym 4 / ne kepe them. And for to doo this 24 
Great and me9sa g e they chaas huon le mayne, broder to kyng phelip of 

Hainau"t nf ^ rauuce > an( * bawdwyn, therle of henawd. Thyse two departed fro 
tws'embas™ thoost for to goo vnto Constantinoble. But in the waye certayn 

turkes assaylled them / in which medle was lost therle bawdwyn, 28 
in suche wyse that neuer after were tydynges herd of hym. Somme 
sayde that he was slayn there / And other sayde that he was taken 

1-1 Fr. et ne scat/ quantes tours que illecqucs avoit garnis, que il ne voulut 
pas rendre, and I do not know how many towers he had fortified here and that 
he would not give up. Caxton evidently read jours (days) instead of tours 
(towers.) a Orig. themperonr. 

*— 4 Caxton has entirely misunderstood his French. Se il ne vouloit faire, 
bien sceust il que ilz ne lui vouloienl ties lors en avant, estre tenus de nulle ant- 
vetnanee, viz. if he would not do it, he might understand that from this time 
on, they would not consider themselves bound by any agreement that had been 
made with him. 5 Orig. conenauntes. 


The barons t 
sent ambas¬ 
sadors to the 
Emperor of 
Constanti¬ 
nople. 



217 


Ch. CXLV.] Adhemar, Bishop of Puy, dies. 

and ladde in to ferre countrees. But the trouthe of hym was neuer 1 
knowen / huon le mayne escaped alle hool with out hurt, and cam hu^u »rmed 
vnto constantinohle to themperour, but there he empevred 2 moche injured hu 
4 his renommee / ffor he that was of so hye lygnage, And alway had thm 
ben in thoost / large / wyse, noble, and a moche valyaunt knyght / 
had thenne no regarde to them that sent hym / no wolde not 
retoume to them agayn, but departed? fro themperour and! went ty gain* on 

. - home to 

8 strayte in to fraunce / hit was a gretter blame in hym than in a France 
lasse man / whyles the pylgryms soioumed 3 in Anthyoche a mor- 
talyte and deth sourded! and roos emong them so grete, that ther age - 
was no day but there were / xxx. or / xl / biers in the chirches / 

12 It was so grete that euery man awayted presently the deth, there 
was none that supposed to haue escaped / Thenne happed a grete 
dommage in thooste, ffor the valyaunt man of grete trouthe and of 
hye counseyl deyde that tyme / Aymart the bisshop of puy. ffor his Adh emar of 
16 deth was grete sorowe thenne thurgh the toun. he was entered and Antioch of 
honorably buryed 4 in the chirche of seynt peter / where as the 
spere that opened the syde of oure lord was founden / he was 
moche bewaylled as the fader of thoost. After deyde a right 
20 valyaunt knyght, a trew wyseman and of grete courage, henry 
dasque, in the castel of torbesel / where he soioumed, and there he 
deyde and was buryed. In the same place / reynard de mollac, 6 a 
good knyght and of hye lygnage, deyde in Anthyoche ; he was 
24 buryed in the porche of seynt peter. Alle the wymmen that were Many other 
in the toun deyed by this pestylence sauf a fewe / in such wyse aied, nnd ^ 
that of this lytil peple deyde in a lytil whyle in this toun L. M. women, 
men and wymmen. The occasion of this mortalyte was many tynies 
28 demaunded of the fisiciens & wyse clerkes. The somme sayde that 
thayer was corromped / The other sayde that the peple had had 
ouer longe moche anguyssh of hongre & of thurst / And whan they 
cam therto & plewte of vytalles / they toke therof ouer oultrage- 
32 ously / By whiche 6 they ranne in a grete Tnfirmyte and sekenes. pitw.bkd 
This shewde they euydently by them that ete but lytil and by 
mesure / ffor they that so dyde cam lyghtly to conualence and 
helthe. 


1 Orig. ueuer. 2 Fr. empira, impaired, damaged. 

s Orig. soionrned. 4 Orig. bnryed. 

5 Fr. Benart de Mellac. Lat. Meinardus de Amesbach. 



218 The Common Soldiers wish to finish the Pilgrimage. [Ch. CXLVI. 

How the pylgryms of thoost desired to goo vnto 
Iherusalem for to eschewe the mortalite, & tac- 
complisshe their vowe / ca° Cxlvj" 

The pilgrims He pylgryms for teschewe the mortalyte of the toun. & also 4 
to Jerusalem, t for taecomplysshe their pilgremage, began to crye for to goo 
to Iherusalem. ffor therfor were they departed out of theyr 
countrees / They moche prayd the barons that they wold! make 
them ^edy. and dylygently lede and! conduyte them theder / The 8 
The barons barons that myght pot be in reste for theyr requestes / assembled! 
to discuscTthe and had! counseyl on this mater. Somme sayde. that it were good 
that they shold anon go forth toward the holy Cyte / by cause the 
comyn peple desyred it / And also that euery man was bounden by 12 
his vowe so to doo / The other sayde that it was not tyme for to 
goo forth, ffor the brennynge hete was / ouer grete. and! the drought 
shold cause that they shold! lacke water. The peple shold not 
fynde whete / the horses shold lacke pastures. But counseylled to 16 
They decide tarye and delaye this passage tyl mychelmasse : thenne shold the 
Michaelmas, tyme be more attempered and moderat. And duryng* the mene 
whyle / men myght do reste theyr horses, and gete newe for them 
that had none and had nede of somrne / and also men myght 20 
refresshe them self whiche were wery and seke. To this laste 
counseyll acorded they alle / And 1 therfor it was late or they 
departed. Thenwe deuysed the barons that they wold remeue for 
thynfyrmyte of the place / & to goo there, as they myght haue 24 
Bohemond vytailles better chepe, Buymont descended in to the londe of 
land of Cylyce. There toke he tarse / Adane, Mamstre, Aunaure. Thyse 

Cilicia, and v ' 

takes four four cytees a fore sayd he garnysshed well with his men, And 

helde entierly alle the countree aboute. The other wente ferther 28 
in the countre, and ladde theder theyr horses for to soiourne. there 
were many knyghtes / and men a fote that passed the Ryuer of 
Eufrates for to goo forth at al auenture thurgh the countrees / tyl 
some of the they come to bawdwyn, broder of due Godeffroye to Rages / whiche 32 

knightsvisit J , „ , ' , 

Baldwin at receyued them gladly / And gaf them vytaylles, and made them 
good chere as long as they were there / And atte departyng 1 he gaf 
to them fayre and good yeftes. It was not longe after that it 
happed that one Rodahan, the lord of halappe, had debate and 36 
warre ayenst a baron of his, whiche was Castelayn of a castel named 
pieaf ioo] Hasart. And 2 ye shal vnderstande for certayn that there was 
1 Fr. pour ce fut lardi le partement. 



219 


Ch. CXLVII.] Godfrey goes to assist the Lord of Hasart. 

founden first the playe of dyse(31), and fro thens it cam, and it is 
named so. This grete man of halappe assembled his peple. And Rodohan, 
assyeged this eastel with alle his power / The lord that was within Haiappe, 

4 sawe wel that he myght not holde it ayenst his lord / And he had Hasart. 
no turkes for to socoure hym. ne helpe hym / Therfor he spak to on 
his frende, a erysten man. which was pryue with hym, and sente to 
due 1 godefroy many grete yeftes. And requyred and prayd hym The lord of 
8 moehe affectuously that he wold socoure hym in his nede / ffor he to Godfrey 
had desire to he his / and wold be bounden to hym to doo hym 
grete playsyrs and seruyses. And sente to hym his sone in hostage 
for surete / The valyaunt due, that had a softe herte and debonayr, 

12 receyued the loue and thalyaunce of the lord of hasart. he thought 
wel that it was not ayenst the wylle of our lord for to afeblysshe 
one of his enemyes for 2 another. Thenne sente he to his brother 
Bawdwyn to Rages for to sende hym peple ynowe / ffor his purpoos 
16 & wylle was to reyse the siege to fore this eastel for to socoure his 
frende / Rodahan had holden .vij / dayes longe siege to fore this 
eastel. The Due godefroy earn by grete ioumeyes / the messagers Godfrey «ent 
of the lord of the eastel were with hym / ffor they myght not goo to Mm by 
20 in to the eastel to their lord / ffor it was besieged round about. l » efrcct , J 

therfor they toke two douues or euluers / which they had taken & soon be there, 
brought with them for to doo this / that is to saye, they toke 
lettres and wrote theryn alle theyr entent. And bonde thoo lettres 
24 to the tayles of the douues, and lete them flee / And the douues 
flewe and cam strayt to hasart, fro whens they were, & had ben 
there nourisshed / they that awayted on them toke them / the lord 
toke the lettres. and fonde therin how he had alyaunce of the due / 

28 his loue and grace. And how he cam for to socoure hym with grete 

strengthe. he had thenne grete Ioye / and toke to hym grete The besieged 
hardynesse in suche wyse that he hym self yssued out of the yates and sallied' ^ 
with his men largely / And assaylled them of the siege vygorously / the besiegers. 
32 whom he had sore doubted not long byfore. 


The dylygence that due godeffroy made for to socoure 
a turke, to whom he had promysed / And how 
he reysed the siege, beyng to fore his castell. 

36 ca° Cxlvij 0 

s Fr. par Vautre i. e. by another. 


1 Orig. dno. 



220 Baldwin assisted Godfrey in this Enterprise. [Ch. CXLVIII. 

n Ow was the due Godeffroy approuched whan his brother cam 
with ,.iii/ M horsmen, noble, valyaunt and! hardy men, & 
[Mf. loo, bk.] 1 right wel armed. They were but on iourneye fro the castel / 
Baldwin Therle Bawdwyn acorded wel to thenterprise of the due his broder / 4 

to 

b e «he 8 i hut sa y d we ^ that Rodohan the lord of halappe had moche grete 

tiii» enter- peple, And that he knewe wel for certayn / Therfore he counseylled 
■ hym that he shold sende for the other barons that were abyden in 
Anthyoche. and praye them- as his frendes that they wold addresse 8 
They sent for them taecomplisshe this that he had enterprysed / Trouth it was 
barons in that he had! moche prayd buymont and! therle of tholouse to fore er 
lie departed, but they had a lytil enuye, by cause the turke had 
more requyred the due than ony of them, but now whan he had 1 12 
sente for them, them thought 2 that they myght not goodly abyde 
behynde. And ordeyned moche dilygently theyr goyng forth / And 
wente so ferre that they ouertoko liym / whan they were alle to 
whenRodo- gydre / they were wel .xxx/ M. men of armes. Bodahan had his 16 

han heard 

of this hs^ espyes, by wliome he knewe certaynly that thyse men cam vpon 
siege, and hym, he doubted them moche, & he had wel ,xl/ M men. but yet 
Hniappe. ]i e durst not abide them / but departed fro the siege / And retorned 

to halappe / The due knewe nothyng that the siege was departed / 20 
but went© strayt toward hasart. There were ynowe in Anthyoche 
of knyghtes, gentilmen, & other whiche knewe that the valyaunt 
due had to doo with men. and departed fro thens, and 3 \vente 
toward hym for to helpe hym. 24 

Of somme pylgryms goyng fro Anthyoche toward 
godeffroy, were diseo?afyted by the turkes / & 
rescowed by the due. ca° C/xlviij 

a Grete quantite of turkes were embusshed besyde the waye 28 
where by they shold passe, for to awayte them, whan our 
fnambuTh 8 P e P le a PP l 'Ouched, as they that toke none hede / the turkes sprang 
SSSraon on them sodanly, whiche were many moo than our men were. 
Hsslrt^ Somme tl »ey slewe / and many moo toke prysonners, and bonde 32 
killed many, them, and retorned to theyr retrayte. The tydynges cam to the 
due and to the hoost, which were out of their wytte for sorow that 
they had. Thenne retorned they hastely for to siewe the male- 
factours. the people of the countre told them which way they were 36 
goon / & addressyd them toward thyse turkes / whan they had 
a Orig. thonght. 3 Orig. aud. 



Ch. CXLTX.] The .Lord of Hasart is very grateful to Godfrey. 221 


ouertaken and! approuehed! them, they ran on them with grete herte, 
and! slewe them som of them. And somme they toke prysonners. 
fewe or none escaped / & 1 delyuerd them that were taken pry- 
4 soners / the Cristen men whom they had taken. Eodahan was 
moche endommaged / ffor they were wel .x. M/ turkes of the best 
and chosen men / whan oure men had 1 don this they toke agayn the 
waye toward! hasart. whan they approuehed, the lord of the toun 
8 yssued out with thre honderd! men on horsbak, And there as he 
founde 2 the due / he descended to therthe, and kneled to fore liym, 
and thanked hym moche / And! after alle the other that were there 
with hym, for the socours that they had! don to hym in this nede. 
12 Thenne swar he to fore them alle / that to thyse barons and! to the 
other Cristen men he shold! be euermore trewe and good! frende, 
In suche wyse that he wold to his power pourchace to them the 
best that he coude, and warne them of tlieyr harme. he lodged 
16 them moch wel and honorably, and made to them grete presentes. 
On the morn therle bawdwyn retorned vnto Eages / And that other 
hoost helde theyr waye vnto Anthyoche / 


The Crusad¬ 
ers in return 
attacked the 
Turks, aud 
avenged their 
companions. 

[1 leaf 101] 



How the Due alway enforced hym to augmente Cris- 
20 tiente, And of somme fortresses by hym beten 
and destroyed. ca° Cxlix" 

He Due Godeffroy knewe well that the pestylence and! mor- 
t talyte endured yet in Anthyoche / and his broder had moche 
24 prayd liym that he wold come and soiourne in his londe vnto 
August, that the tyme shold be better attempered, be toke with 
hym a lytil companye of them that were moost suffrable, and cam Godfrey went 
to torbosel / and! to two other castellys / That one named! hatap / aud H»np 
28 And that other Eauendel. Of thyse lande dyde he eutierly his d»i. 
wylle. his brother visyted and sawe hym ofte whyles he abode 
there / The peple of the countre, and! specially men of Eelygyon, The people of 
eomplayned moche of two hermyens that were bretheren, that one complained 
32 was named Pancrace, and that other conasylles. They had a Armenian 
fortresse in that contre. & were grete & noble men there. But they 
had no trouthe in them; they receyued! the Eobbours and theuys 
that pylled! and defowlled! the holy places / the ohirches. And 1 dyde 
36 moch harme to alle maner of peple. they were enhaunced in so 
moch prydo, that they toke the presente of the pauyllon that 
a Orig. founde. 



222 Baldwin’s Subjects in Rages form a Blot against Mm. [Ch. CL. 


bawdwyn had? sente to his brother to the siege of Anthyoche, And 1 
dyde it to be presented! to Buymont in theyr name, whan the Due 
Tim Duke herde thyse complayntes / he sente .L/ of his men of Armes, and* 
to take the the people of his countre / And! dyde doo take the fortresses of 4 
of these thyse A two hermyens. And? bete and? destroyed? them to therthe / 

[> if. tot. hk.] whyles that the valyaunt due soiourned! in thyse partyes / Many of 
Many of the the peple of the hoost wente to therle bawdwyn to Rages, ffor he 

Christiana ljr . . , - . Q 

visited Bald- dyde them moche good, and refresshyd them wel / and largely o 

win at Rages * ° i n l 

at tins time, departed of his good to them. The way was thenne alle sure and 
good!, Syth that the castel of hasart was alyed entierly with our 
peple, as ye haue herd. 


How the knyghtes of Kages wolde haue betrayed 12 
Bawdwyn theyr lord, And how he was therof 
aduertysed. ca° C.L 

The people of s 0 moche peple of Cristen men cam to Rages that it desplesyd! 

mSdi»' e moche to the Cytezeyns of the toun / And thermyens and 16 

thesTeisite. latyns discorded in many thynges, ffor withoute faylle oure men 
wold haue the seygnorye. They dyde many ennoyes and! vylonyes 
to theyr hostes within their howses. The Erie hym. self, by cause 
lie had so grete plente of men of hys owne countre, he called! the 20 
fewer and lasse to eounseyll of the noble men of the Cyte / By 
whos helpe he was comen to his hyenesse and noble lordship. 
They had therof moch grete desdayne within theyr hertes, And 
repented them 2 of that they had chosen hym & sette hym to be 24 
their lord ouer them / ffor they doubted that therle, whiche was so 
lyberall as he that gaf to euery man / shold on a day take all that 
they had. Therfor they serate to the admyrals of the turkes, that 
They decided were theyr neyghbours, that they wold pourchasse gladly by theyr 28 
tokiii Bald- jjgjpg j ]j 0W therle Bawdwyn shold be slayn, or atte leste put oute 
and chassed awaye fro the Cyte, in suclie wyse that he shold neuer 
retorne. The turkmans acorded wel to this werk. This mater was 
so ferforth that they of Rages toke alle theyr goodes pryuely. And 32 
sette it in the howses of theyr acqueynted neyghbours in Cytees 
and castellys ther about, whyles they spak and aduysed of this 
a friend, treyson / A frende of therle Bawdwyn cam to hym and recounted 

vealed the this fayt al a longe / he merueylled moch therof / And dyde 36 

enquyre of this thyng. And founde that it was soo / He knewe wel 

a (frig. them. 



Ch. CLI.] Baldwin is in great Danger from the Treason of Balak. 223 

them that had ordeyned this trayson. And by whom it shold be 
doo. And secretely he sende his men, and! toke the Capytayns of Baldwin took 
this falsenes : he put out theyr eyen of theyr heedes. Other that acfion in the 
4 had? not so moche trespaced, he chassed them out of the toun, And killing or 

' driving away 

toke alle that they had. Somme there were that he lete dwelle stvlle tlle ™e- 
in the Cyte, but 1 he toke their good as moche as he myght gete / he [>ieano*j 
had wel by thoccasion of this murder that thyse traytres deuysetf 
8 .xx/M/ besauwtes, But he departed alle to the pylgryms, that had 
liolpen hym to take the castellys and! fortresses, and! sommo Cytees 
about Rages / He was moche dradde, and! doubted moche of his After this ho 
neyghbours, in suche wyse that none of them durste 2 enterprise ony fear ^J 7 
12 debate ayenst hym / The grete and hye men of the contre wold 
gladly haue pourchaced the moyens and raaners, for to be delyuerd 
of hym, yf they had myght / 


How therle Bawdwyn was in daunger of deth by the 
16 treson of a turk named Balac / Capitulo C.Lj“ 

i N this Countre was a grete and an hye man, a turk, & was Balac w>« 
named 1 Balac. he was acqueynted and moche pryue with sororge. 
therle bawdwyn / he was somtyme lord of the Cyte of Sorarge, to 
20 fore that our peple cam in to that couwtre. This turke apperceyued 3 
that therle bawdwyn sayde [not] to hym alle his counseyll and secrete, 
as he was wonte, ne shewde hym so good chere. On a daye he cam 
to hym / And shewde hym by fayr langage / that he shold come to He incited 
24 a fortresse of his. whiche he wold gyue to hym and dclyuer, by visit him »t 
cause he had no more, and also he wold haue nomoo, as he saide, fortresses, 
ffor his loue shold suffyse hym. And he wold sende his wyf & his 
childeren in to rages for to dwell there vnder hym. by cause as he 
28 sayde / that the turkes his neyghbours, & specially they of his 
lygnage, hated hym moche, & pourchassed alle the harrne they 
myght, for the grete acqueyntaunce that he had with the Cristen 


men. The Erie thought nothyng but alle wel / And sayd that he Baldwin 
32 wold goo at his requeste to this fortresse at the day appointed and^vent on 
bytwene them bothe / Therle cam theder with an honderd horsmen / P oin >* d yah 
Balac wente to fore, and as a fals traytre had hyd an honderd of horsemen. 


his men, well armed, within the fortresse / whan they were arryued 


8 Orig. dnrste. 

8 Fr. “le conte Baudoin ne lui disoit mais tant de son eonseil." Caxton 
has either exactly reversed the sense of his Fr. original, or else there is an 
accidental omission of the necessary “not.” 



224 


Balak’s Treason is unsuccessful. [Cli. CLI. 

to fore the fortresse, Balac prayd thevle / that he wold come vp on 
But when he hye and see the place how stronge it was, And* that he ahold 1 

arrived Balac * ^ 

invited him brynge but fewe men with hym, ffor he sayd he had certayn 

to enter with J 0 / . .. . . r „. 

hi8m R en° wof Synges which 1 he myght take harme / yf they alle entrea / lhe 4 

good! Erie wold! haue doon soo, hut he had in his company a 
valyaunt knyght, wel aduysod and a wise man / whiche aduertysed 2 
his felaws other knyghtes how it was grete perylle and daunger so 
to lete hym goo. And they wold not sufEre hym, but reteyned 8 
p if. io 2 . bk.] hym by force / fEor 3 they doubted moche the malyce of this man / 
in suche wyse that in theyr hertes they had suspection of treson / 
Baldwin, The Erie abode by their counseyl / & sente vp .xij. of his men wel 

treacheryf armed in to the toure for to see yf ther were ony thyng to duubte / 12 

sent up 

twelve men i ie helde hym emowg his men. they that wente vp anon apper- 
The Thrks ceyued wel the trayson, fEor the Turkes sprange oute of theyr 
tnem'faud places where they were hyd. And toke thise .xij. men by force, and 

made them ^ v nil . „ . 

captives. desarmedf them, and reteyned them bomiden handes and leet. wan 16 
the erle knewe this, he was moche sorouful for his men that he had 
thus lost. Thenne he drewe hym forth and spak to balac / And 
moche prayd hym, and coniured hym by the feaulte and oth that 
he had made to hym, that he wold yelde his men to hym / or atte 20 
Baldwin leste setto them at rawnson / and he wold gyue for them as moche 

bcggGtl Balac 

to allow him as he wold! haue. 4 Balac answerd to hym, that he trauaylled for 

to ransom 

but nought / fEor he shold neuer haue none of them / But yf he wold 
gyue to hym the Cyte of Sororge, whiche had ben his to fore. 24 
Therle sawe that this fortresse was not lyghtly to be goten, ffor it 
was ouer stronge, and stode in a strange place, and rycliely 
Ha returned garnysshyd / And retorned to rages moche anguysshous of the 

paryll that he had be in, whan he wold by thatycemewt of this 28 
felon turk haue goon vp in to the tour, And sorouful he was for 
them that were taken, he had delyuerd the Cyte of Sororge to 
kepe'vnto a moche wise, valyaunt and good knyght, named Foubert 
de chartres / this man kept hit with an /C men of Armes, valyaunt 32 
men / ryhan he herd saye that his lord had hen thus almost be 
bytrayed / and how he had lost .xij. men / he was sory, and 
thought hou he 5 myght helpe them ayenst this fals turk, that had 
don this feet. 8 It was not longe after that in a nyght he sette a 36 

1 Fr. “qu’ils eu33ent peu dommaigier. ” s Orig. adnertysed. * Orig. haitc. 

5 — 5 Fr. “lui aidier contre cellui desloyal Turc qui ce lui avoit fait," viz. 
help him against this false Turk who has done this to him. Caxton has mis¬ 
taken the past participle fail for the substantive fait. 



Ch. CLII.] Baldwin trusted the Turks no more. 


226 


busshement nygh vnto this fortresse, a part of his men. and in the 
mornynge he with a fewe of his conipanye cam to fore this toure, Baiak came 
and' toke the proye of beestes. They that were on hye on the them. 

4 batayllemewt sawe that they were but a fewe / And! told! it to baiak 
and to the other men that were in the fortresse / They toke their 
horses hastely, and! folowed! them / for to rescowe that whiche they 
droof awaye / In suche wyse they exployted that they cam vpon 
8 themhusshement / They sprange sodanly oute and! closed! them in / 

Foubert retovned vpon them, And slewe I wote not how many, but Fouberttodk 
.vj/ he toke a lyue / ffor whom he had incontinent vi of our men, of Turka, whom 

ol J 1 o i he exchanged 

them that he helde in his fortresse / It was not longe aftir that four for «« of our 
12 of the other escaped! out of* the fortresse and brake theyr prison, 
whyles theyr kepars slepte. whan balac sawe / that ther were 
1 nomoo but two, he dyde 2 do smyte of theyr heddes. ffro than [‘leafiosj 
forth on therle bawdwyn, that had! acqueyntance to dyuerse admyrals From ti.u ^ 
16 aboute hym, wold neuer after acqueynte 3 hym more ne truste ony 

turk / But eschewed! theyr companyes and theyr Amytee. And deucei‘to 
that he shewde wel sone after, ffor ther was an hye and grete man, 
a turk, in that contre, named Balduc / of whom I haue spoken to 
20 fore / whiche sold this Auncyen Cyte, named Samoloc, 4 vnto 
bawdwyn / And this turk had encouenaunted and promysed that 
he shold brynge his wyf and childeren within Rages / but he 
sought 5 fals occasions for to delaye this thynge / On a day lie cam 
24 to bawdwyn, as he was acustomed to doo, And Bawdwyn demaunded 
hym why he dyde not that he had couenaunted and promysed; he 
began to excuse hym by thynges that were not trewe. The Erie 
toke hym, and Incontinent dyde do smyte of his heed. 

28 How therle of tholouse toke the cyte of Albane. And 
there constitued a bisshop /. capitulo CLij° 

t He Due Godeffroy soiourned thus as I haue sayd in the land 
of torbesel. Therle of tholouse assembled his peple / and toke 
32 grete plente of pour pilgryms that were there ydle and dyde nought / 

he wente to a Cyte wel gamysshyd named albane / ij ioumeys fro The E»ri of 
Anthyoche; he assyeged it / And so constreyned them within that besieged ai- 
they yelded the toun to hym, and he entred therin and helde it / ™’Jf" dered 
36 And by the moyCn therof he had alle the countre about, he thanked 

a Orig. dype. 3 Orig. acqneynte. * Lat. SamoscUum. 

' 5 Orig. sought. 


GODFREY. 


Q 



226 The Mortality was still great in Antioch. [Ch. CLITI. 

oure lord! humbly of thonour that he had gyueti to liyrn. Thenne 
chasse he a bisshop in the toun, a good wyseman, that was named 
He g»»e hair Peter, and bom in nerbonne. And! he gaf to hym entierly half 
to Peter <$ this Cyte. After this he cam in to Anthioche, and was there 4 
sacred! by the patriarke bernard. And gaf to hym his entememet 1 
and made hym Archibisshop. In the company of therle of tholouse 
was a noble knyght and valyaunt named guyllamme. This man 
whan Anthyoche was taken toke by aduenture the wyf of Ancean, 8 
lord of the toun / and two of his neuewes sones of his broder, 
Sanwdoi now named sansadoL and helde them yet prysoners / But this sansadol 

ransoms liia ______ 

children, and gaf to hym for them grete good and rychesse, whertor he delyuerd 
wire. them, bothe the lady and childeren. In' this sayson cam grete plente 12 
Mriveflvom of peple out of Duchelande, And arryued atte port seynt Symeon, 
p'iTToT'bk ] soiournd within Anthyoche / but the mortalyte endured 2 yet 
almost aii in suche wyse that they deyde almost alle. ther escaped but few 
of the peati* but that they were alle deed in short tyme, ffor this pestylence con- 16 
tinued 1 thre monethes hool vnto thentree of wynter / There were 
deed! of knyghtes only .V.C. of the mene peple, noman knewe the 
nombre. 


How our peple retorned in to Anthyoche, and toke 20 
counseyl for to goo to Iherusalem, and of this 
that foloweth. ca° Oliij® 

t He fyrst day of Nouembre / the barons that were departed for 
the pestelence were alle retoumed in to Anthyoche, lyke as 24 
they had promysed / Theyr counseyl 3 and delyberacion was that 
they shold goo and assiege the cyte of mazran, 4 whiche was stronge 
and wel gamysshyd / ffro Albare that they had taken, it was not 
Thecommon but .viij. myle / Nomau myght holde lenger theyr comyn peple. all 28 
verylm- sre ' v were desirous to goo to Iherusalem / Atte dave named! they were 

patient to go . * 

Co Jerusalem, alle redy. Therle of tholouse / the due godeffroye, Eustace his 
broder, Therle of fflaundres, The Due of Normandye. And 1 Tancre 
Tancred be- cam to the cyte of marran and assieged it / They of the toun were 32 

sieges Mar* 1 

ran, moch ryeh / and ful of grete pryde / And specially by cause that 
the same yere at assemblee of them was a scarmoche ayenst oure 
men. of whome they toke somme, and somme slewe in suche wyse 
that they had the better, ffor that cause they preysed the lasse our 36 

1 Fr. B - interinement. A qui lui dona paule. Lat. “ Suscepto ab eodem 
pallii genio faetus archiepiseopus.” 3 Orig. eonnseyl. 4 Fr. Marran. 



Ch. CLIII.] 


Siege of Ma/rran . 


227 


pylgryms, They blamed and Iniured our barons, And despyted them whose people 
and alle thoost / They beyng on the walles / vpon the hye towres meufrom the 
they sette vp crosses and spytte on them in despyt of our fayth. 

4 and? made other shameful thynges for to angre with alle oure peple / 

The barons were moche wroth / And dyde do crye do assault, & The barons 

.... . . were much 

assailled the toun asprely m suche wyse that yf they had had* wroth. 

laddres they wolde haue entred in to the Cyte by force / the / ij. 

8 daye after that they cam theder. The thyrde day cam Buymont / Bohemood 

arrived, and 

whiche brought men with hym largely, And! lodged! where as the 
Cyte was not assieged. Thenne had! our men grete despyte of this 
that they dyde nothyng / And liastely dyde do make engyns and the siege w«> 
12reysed them castellys, 1 belfroyes, and slyngea to caste stones, and moat vigor, 
fylled the dyches for to goo and vnder myne the walles. they within 
deffended them moche wel / And! threwe vpon them grete stones, 

Fyre, brent / lyme, Oyle boyllyng, and shotte at them with arba- 
16 lasters and bowe turquoys arowes passyng thycke / but god be 

thanked they hurted 2 but fewe of oure men. they within began [* i«af kmj 
moche to be mery / Oure men apperceyued that. And theyr 
volente and hardenesse grewe and encreaced, anon they dressed 
20 the laddres ayenst the walles / & wente vp dylygently / Emong alle 
other ther was a noble & valyauret man, & was of limosyn, named 
geffrey de tours ; he 3 mayntened the fyrst tyme merueyllously well / 

Other folowed hym. ther were ynowe that entred in to the toures / 

24 they had taken the Cyte yf the nyght had not come on and 
destroubled them, therfore they left of til on the morn, ffor that 
assault had eredured fro the somie rysyng tyl that tyme / they kept 
wel the gates that thay of the toun shold not yssue and made good 
28 watche in thooste. But the mene peple sawe that none shewde 

hym vpon the walles / And entred in to the toun, And fonde that when the 
it was all voyde of peple / they toke alle that they wolde and had entered the 

town tlioy 

nede of, as they that longe had saffred famyne and grete pouerte. found that 
32 Alle thay of the Cyte were entred in to longe caues and depe, and-hadfledto 
supposed to haue saued and kept them there. On the morn the 
barons sawe that the cyte was taken, And entred in, but they 
founde but lytil gayne, ffor the comyn peple had takyn suche as 
36 they founde / they knewe wel that the turkes of the toun were hyd 

vnder the erthe; they sette fyre in the mowthes of 4 alle the caues / Th«y ..t a™ 
and sente in to it so moche smoke / that by force they muste come ofthaMoavM. 


1 Fr. berfroiz, movable tower of wood. 

* Fr. se cantimt, conducted himself * Orig. cf. 


4 8 



228 


Many they 
slew, and the 
rest were 
taken prison¬ 
ers. 


Godfrey ad¬ 
monished the 
barons to 
start for Je¬ 
rusalem. 

He himself 
went to Rages 
to visit Bald¬ 
win. 

[a If. 104, bk.] 


On the way 
home lie had 
h fierce skir¬ 
mish with 
some Turks, 


in which he 
was victori¬ 
ous. 


Bohemond 
and the Earl 
of Toulouse 


Godfrey goes to Rages to visit Baldvnn. [Ch. CLIV-V- 

out. Oure men slewe ynough of them. And the remenaunt they 
toke prysonners. there deyde of sekenesse the good man holy and 
relygyous, whiche moehe louyd and dredde our lord god 1 , Guyl- 
lauwme the bisshop of Orenge / whan the due had abyden there 4 
.xv dayes with the other he departed with therle of fflaundres and! 
cam in to Anthyoche, where they had to do / 

How the due Godeffroy wold goo to rages to vysyte 
his brother er he began his way to Iherusalem / 8 
And of somme of his aduentures / ca° CLiiij. 

g Odeffroy the valyaunt due of Loreyne sawe how the men a 
fote made them redy for taccomplysshe theyr vowe and! goo 
toward Iherusalem, and moehe requyred! 1 and! admonested! the 12 
grete lordes to the same / But the valyaunt due would see and 
vysyte his brother to fore that he shold separate fro this countre / 
And toke his pryue 2 companye, and wente to Bages. whan he had 
seen his broder, and doo suche thynges as it plesyth hym / he wold 16 
retome to 3 Anthyoche to the other barons and other pylgryms that 
abode there for hym. whan ho was approuched, that he had! but six 
or seuen myle to ryde / they founde in theyr waye a moehe fayre 
place for to dyne and ete in by a fayre welle, moehe delectable and 20 
ful of grete herhes and grasse / Alle they acorded gladly for to dyne 
in this fayre place, whyles they made redy theyr dyner he ye 
certayn that oute of moehe reed whiche was nyghe a mareys by 
aroos certayn Turkes wel armed!, whan the noble Due and the 24 
other barons sawe them come / they toke theyr Armes hastely as 
they myght / And toke theyr horses and ran vpon them vygor- 
ously. And there was the skarmoche grete & fiers. The due dyde 
moehe wel and valyauntly, ther were many turkes slayn / And the 28 
remenauret fledde. Our men lost there nothyng, But cam with 
moehe grete ioye vnto Anthyoche / 

How after that the .cyte of Albare was conquerd, a 
grete debate arose bytwene 4 therle of tholouse32 
and buymont. ca? CLv. 

o F this noble Cyte of Albare which was taken as I liaue sayd 
to fore, aroos a grete debate bytwene buymont and the erle of 

1 Oriq. requyred. 8 Orig. pryne. * Orig. btywene. 



22 if 


Cli. CLV.] The People murmv/r at so many Delays. 

tholouse, ffor therle wold haue alle*albare. buymont sayde he wold 1 
not gyue away his part / yf he yelded not and gaf ouer certeyn 
towres that he held in Anthyoche. And herupon buymont departed, 
4 And made the towres to be assayled, that the men of the erles of 
tholouse helde, and toke them by strength and made them to goo 
out that kept them in the name of therle, and fro then forthon he 
helde alle Anthyoche withoute felaw or partener. Therle sawe that 
8 Buymont was departed fro the Cyte so conquerd / And gaf the 
toun 1 entierly to the bisshop of Albare, whyles they ordeyned and 2 
disposed bytweue hym and the bisshop, how the eyte myght be 
mayntened and kept in suche wyse that the turkes shold not 
12 recouer it / The peple a foote began to murmure of this that the 
hye & noble men taryed for to take this euyl Cytees, and made 
debate and noyse emong them for theyr conquest. But the pryn- 
cipal 3 cause wherfor they departed fro theyr couwtrees lefte they, as 
16 forgetyng* and settyng not therby / And as it semed they sette 
nothynge by thaccomplysshyng 1 of theyr vowe / Therfor the mene 
peple acorded emortge them self, that as sone as therle of tholouse 
shold be departed fro the Cyte of marran they shold confounde 4 and 
20 6 destroye it alle vnto the erthe, in suche wyse that they wold not 
tarye for hym 6 fro than forthon. It happed that the barons assem¬ 
bled at Rouge, a Cyte whiche is half waye bytwene marran and 
Anthyoche. ffor to haue a counseyl there emonge them / yf they 
24 shold fro thens drawe forth toward to Iherusalem, ffor the mene 
peple languysshyd moche and hasted for to goo theder. There the 
barons coude not acorde / so that there was no conclusion taken / 
whyles that therle of tholouse abode at this parlement, The foote 
28 men that were lefte at marran, ayenst the wyll and deffence of the 
bisshop / bete doun the walles and toures of the Cyte of Marran / 
ffor they wold not for thoccasion of this toun 7 abide lenger in this 
countre. 8 whan the erle retorned; he was moche angry of this / 
32 that they had don, but for that he coude not amende it 9 / he couerd 
well his courage without forth. The men a foote began alway to 
crye and requyre moche the barons that they wold conduyte them 
for taccomplysshe theyr pylgremage / or yf they wold not / they 
36 wold chese a knyght and make hym Capytayn ouer them / And 


had a quarrel 
over the city 
of Albare. 


Albare was 
finally given 
to the bishop 
of the city. ' 


The people 
still murmur¬ 
ed against 
the barons 


for not ful¬ 
filling their 


leaf 105] 

The barons 
assembled to 
take counsel 
as to future 
movements, 


but no de¬ 
cision was 
reached. 


The people 
grew still 
more uneasy. 


1 Orig. tonn. 3 Orig. aud. 3 Orig. pryucipal. 

4 Orig. confonnde. 6 Orig. hyin. 7 Orig. tonn. 8 Orig. conntre. 

9 Fr. bien couvrit son courage, par dehors, i. e. he dissimulated perfectly his 
l eal feelings. 



230 The Earl of Toulouse appoints the Day to depart. [Ch. CLVI. 


They Buffered 
greatly from 
hunger at 
this time. 


Enjorrau, 
ion of Hugh 
of St. Paul, 
died. 


The Earl of 
Toulouse was 
much dis- 
tressed at the 
condition of 
thing*. 


[*lf. 105, bk.] 


and fixed a 
day to depart 
for Jerusa¬ 
lem. 


As the day 
approached 
the common 
people were 
determined 
to depart. 


they shold folowe hym vnto the-Cytq of Iherusalem / On that other 
syde was grete scarsete in thoost of vytaylles, in such wyse that the 
poure peple deyde for honger / Men sayde that many of them ete 
flesshe of men and other thynges that were not fayr ne good 1 , clene / 4 
ue honeste for to ete / herof sourded a grete mortalyte / ffor they 
had! holden siege about this Cyte of Marran with suche meschyef 
of famyne that they had lost moehe of theyr peple, and not so 
many by avmes, but by mesease that they suffred!. Ther deyde a 8 
meeh noble, valyaunt yonge man, Emorran, 1 sone of huon, Erie of 
seynt poul of a sekenesse j of whom was grete donimage, and moeh 
was bewaylled iu thoost. 

How atte request of the cornyn peple the erle of 12 
tholouse ordeyned day for to conduyte them / 

ca°. CLvj. 

o F thyse Inconuenientes that ran in thoost of the pylgryms the 
vygorous and valyaunt erle of tholouse was in moch grete 16 
anguysshe / ffor he wyste not wel what he myght doo. On that 
one syde he had pyte and grete sorowe of the meseases that he 
sawe the poure peple suflfre / And was moche meuyd by theyr 
requestes whan they so swetly prayd hym and the other barons to 20 
lede them for taccomplysshe theyr vowes & pylgremage. On that 
2 other syde he had wel vnderstonden that the barons acorded not 
to this that the comyn peple requyred. And therfor he that was 
of grete courage and valyaunt man, sayde that he wold 1 no longre 24 
suflfre thus the pour peple languysslie ne deye. And ordeyned to 
them a daye that he wolde departe withoute faylle for to goo strayt 
vnto Iherusalem / And that shold be the / xv / day folowyng, 
And for talledge the mesease of famyne / he toke with hym a part 28 
of his knyghtes and of foote men the strengest and most delyuer, 
And lefte the remnaunt in the Cyte, and went forth and entred in 
to the londe of his enerliyes and brake vp tounes, stronge howses / 

& brought grete plonte of beestys & other vytaylles, & brought also 32 
esclaues men and wymmen. whan he cam to Marran / he departed 
all the gayn that he had goten as wel to them that abode as to them 
that he had with hym / in suche wyse that they all were ryche 8 
of goodes and of vytaylles / The daye began tapproche that therle 36 
had named / The comyn peple cryed fast for the departynge / And 
sayd alle playnly that he shold liaue no lenger respyte of them, he 
1 Fr. Enjorrau. 3 Orig. ryhe. 



Ch. CLYII.] They went by Way of the Sea. 281 

wist not what to doo / ffor he knewe certaynly that the peple 1 had The E»ri felt 
right. But he had but a lytil company on horsbak, therfore he people we™ 
requyred the bisshop of Albare to goo with hym / he graunted it r ' 8ht ’ 

4 to him gladly. And lefte his londe in the haude of Guyllamme de 
euuylly, valyaunt, wyse, and trewe knyght, And delyuerd to hym 
but xxx horsmen and / xl. men afote. But it was not longe after, 
that the good knyght amended soo that he had xl on horsbak and 
8 lxxx / a foote / whan the day cam that was appoynted, therle put bo he burnt 
fyre in the Cyte of mavran and brente it alle to asshes. And after ashe^and^ 
toke his way. he had 1 in his companye aboute a .x.M. men, of 10.000 men. 
whom there were not but / iij / C. on horsbak. whan he was de- 
12 parted the due of normandye & tancre departed after, & abode for to The Duke of 

•wi _ Normandy 

goo with hym. Eche of thyse two had? but .xl / men on horsebak and Tancred 
But 2 they had moche peple afote with them / In theyr waye they him - 
fonde plenty of vytaylles, ffor they passed by Cezaire / by haman, 

16 and by chamele / Of the lordes of thyse townes had they grete Theyreceived 
yeftes gold / syluer and other rychesses, they presented to them : &<j™the* 
Oxen, Kyen, Motons and other vytaylles / They dyde them haue theypaeeed. 
resonable cheep of alle thynges / eche of them conduyted them 
20 surely thorugh his countre. And where as they had power / Thoost 
encreced and grewe more and more fro day to day / ffor they founde 
many good passages oueral where they wente, of horses also wherof 
they had grete nede fowde they grete cheep / in such wise that many 
24 s bought fressh horses / And so moche dyde thyse to fore that the P leaf iosj 
other barons cam, that dyde so moche that they had in theyr com¬ 
panye a / M men wel horsed, they cam thus a ferre fro the see The am; 
syde. But after they acordect that they wold drawe them to the every day, 

28 see syde, for to here more lyghtly 4 tydynges of the Barons that were wards the 
abyden in Anthyoche / and for to fynde the better and bye theyr 
necessytees at the shippes that were in the hauenes and portes. 

How therle of tholouse auengyd hym of somme turkes 
32 robbours that robbed his hoost / ca° CLvij 0 

i N alle the waye syth they departed fro Marran they were wel 
comen in peas and sauete, sauf only of one thyng / that is to 
wete that somtyme turkes theuys cam after thoost and slewe somme They «•«■« 
36 of our peple, and toke the feble and seke that abode behynde the by Tur'kuh 

thiev es 

other / Therle was moche wroth of this Inconuenyent, therfor he 
1 Fr. emit droit, were in the right of it. 2 Orig. Bnt. 4 Orig. lygytly. 



232 


They received Great Gifts everywhere. {Ch. CLVII. 


The Earl and 
the bishop of 
▲lbare lay in 
ambush lor 
these men. 


and won 
great spoils 
from them. 


Every one 
sent them 
presents, 

except the 
lord of one 
castle, 


which our 
men attacked 
and burnt to 
the ground. 


p If. 10«, bk.] 


After this 
they had 
greater pre¬ 
sents, and an 
easy passage 
through the 
whole 
country. 


made the other 1 to goo to fore. And he and the bSsshop of Albare 
reteyned a fewc men wel horsed, embusshed them behynde the 
hoost for to see yf they wold come that thus endommaged the 
hoost. whan they had a litil whyle taryed the turkes cam & 4 
sprawg vpon somme of oure men j whiche al wyllynge made sem- 
blaunt that they myght not goo. Therle sawe them / and sprange 
sodenly on them out of his embusshement / & smote of alle theyr 
heedes / sauf somme that he ladde with hym. There wan lie good* 8 
horses and* armures many / And after he cam agayn in to thooste 
with grete ioye / ffro this daye forth they wente thurgh 2 the londe 
moche surely without ony lack of vytaylles, 3 of Cytees and of 
castellys on both sydes whan they passed. Ther was no lord*, but 13 
he sente 3 to them grete yeftes, ffor to gete theyr loue, and dyde 
them haue resonable cheep of vytaylles oueral / Reserved* one castel, 
where the men that were therm trusted ouermoche 4 in theyr for- 
tresse. Therfor they sente to them neuer presente ne message / 16 
But descended alle Armed ayenst oure men for to deffende them 
a passage. But our men, whan they sawe them, assaylled them 
vygorously, in suche wyse that they were ai\pne disconfyted. There 
were hut fewe but they were alle slayn or taken, whan the barons 20 
sawe that they were rebelle ayenst them / anon they wente in to 
the fortresse and toke it alle at the fyrst comyng, smote doun the 
walles vnto therthe, And the bowses they brente, after they had 
6 taken out ail that they fynde therin. They ledde away horses 24 
ynow whiche they founde 6 in the pastures, emong our men were 
dyuersc messagers of the eontre that the grete lordes and men ther 
aboutes had sente for to see theyr couyne, whiche whan they sawe 
that oure barons dyde thus 7 theyr wylle / And that nothynge 28 
myght resiste them, they wente to theyr lordes, And told them 
that they were ouer cruel and tiers peple / aspre and hardy. 
Thenne shold ye haue seen brought, And presented to oure men 
grete presentes and honorable, and vytaylles as for nought fro alle 32 
partes / In so moche they doubted them / 8 that they dyde grete 
cure for tacqueynte them, 8 and to brynge them in to theyr loue / 


1 Orig. othrr. 2 Orig. thnrgh. 

3-3 Fr. des ciUs et des chasteaulx a desUre et d senestre, quant ilz passoient 
n’y eut oneques nul seigjieur qu’il ewvoyast, there waa not a single lord of the 
cities and castles, both on the right and on the left, who, as they passed, did 
not send them, etc. 4 Orig. oeuermoch. 6 Orig. fonnde. 7 Orig. thns. 

»—8 jy Hz mettoient grant cure d les acointicr, they took great pains to 
make their acquaintance. 



233 


Ch. CLVIII.] They approached the City of Archie. 

It was not longe but they passed alle the contre til they cam to the They arrived 
playnes of an Auncyent cyte by the see syde, named archys, they 
lodged nygh by the toun. 

4 How therle of tholouse approuchecl with his host vnto 
arch is, A.nd of the situacion of the same. 

ca° CLviij" 

a Rchys 1 is a Cyte of the lande of Fenyce, 2 and? standeth ai-cMs u an 

ancient city 

8 atte foote of a montayne named Lybane, in a tereitorye moche or Phoenicia, 
stronge / and is a four or ,v / myle fro the see / & hath moche 
plenteuous londe aboute it, and delectable of pastures & of waters. 

The scriptures saye / that it was founded! 3 moche auncyently. For 
12 Noe that was in the arke had .iij / sones, that one of them was 
named Caym (32) / he had a sone named Canaham / Of hym cam a 
sone that was Arracheus / he founded / this cyte. And.after hym this named after 
cyte was named! Archys. lher were pnsonners of oure men in this defendant* 
16 toun. hit was sente worde by the prysonners to therle of tholouse Many cim.- 
that he shold assiege this cyte, & also to the other barons / ffor wenhuu?* 
they shold haue grete good therby. the cite of trip!, which was '^’ ln the 
moch noble & rych, was but vj myle from thews, there were city orTripie. 
20 also of our peple prysonners / For syth the begynnynge of the 
siege of Anthyoche, and after that it was goten / our peple began 
to renne in the contree nycely & folyly for to feche somme vytaylles 
& other neeessitees 4 that they lacked / they were taken in many 
24 places in such wyse / ther was vnneth cyte ne castel in the contre, 
but ther were therm som of our pylgryms prysoners. 5 In the cyte 
of trypple were moo than / ij / C. They them self had sente to 
oure men that yf they wolde make semblaunt to eonquere 6 the 
28 countree / The kynge of tripple wold gyue them grete hauoyr and 

good! for to departe 7 thens, and shold delyuer to them alle theyr p ieano7] 
prysonners. It happeed thewue to them thus that our peple Our men ap. 
approuched the cyte of archis for to see what semblaunt they wold see how they 
32 make, & also for tabyde the other barons that shortly shold come »!>«■• f'liow 

" * pilgrims. 

and folowe them / 

1 Orig. Krhys. 3 Fr. Fenice, Lat. Phoenicia. 3 Orig. fonnded. 

4 Orig. uecessitees. 5 Orig. prysouers. 6 Orig. couquere. 



234 


The Capture of Tortuose. 


[Ch. OLrx. 


Raymond 
Pelet assailed 
the city of 
Tortuose, 


which was 
vigorously 
defended 
during the 
day: 


but at night 
the inhabit¬ 
ants left 
secretly, and 
fled to the 
mountains. 


Our men 
entered the 
next day, 
and found 
great riches. 


The pilgrims 
in Antioch 
start in March 
for Jerusa¬ 
lem, led by 
Godfrey and 
the Earl of 
Flanders. 

[« If. 107, bk.J 


Of a toun named 1 tortuose, wliiche Raymont toke with 
a Rowte of pylgryms, And of the departynge of 
the other barons fro Anthyoche / Capitulo CLix° 

t Her yssued out of our lodgys of oure men / an honderd men on 4 
horsbak, and! two honderd! a foote / And made theyr Capytayne 
Raymont pelet, whiche was a wyseman and a moche valyaunt knyght. 
They wente to fore a cyte whiche was named tortuose, 2 for to see yf 
they myght fynde ony auenture for to gete som gayne / They ap- 8 
prouched the cyte and began tassayle it vygorously and moche 
sharply / They within deffended them, hothe men and wymmen 
valiauntly, 3 but our men left but litil or nought. 3 the nyght cam on 
them, And they left thassault for to be more fressh 4 on the morn / 12 
And abode for more companye of thooste that shold! folowe them / 
And! to begyn on the morn thassault agayn / They of the toun had 
moch grete drede that our men wold assaille them agayn on the morn, 
and myght not 6 resists them, therfor in the nyght they wente 16 
pryuely out of the toun and wente to the montaines, and caryed 
nothyng with them but theyr wyues and ehilderen. Alle theyr 
other geer they lefte in the toun / Oure men that knewe no thynge 
herof aroos erly and! began to make redy ancf encorage eche other to 20 
doo wel at thassault. they approched! the walles alle armed, and 
they herds noman / they entred in to the toun, and opened the 
yates in such wyse that alls entred. thenne sawe they that they of 
the toun were yssued and! goon, they founds the Cyte ful of goodes, 24 
in so moche that they were alle ryche, they trussed all / and bare as 
moche as they myght in to thoost, & recounted theyr aduenture, of 
whiche they were alle glad and ioyous, and thanked our lord, whan 
the moneth of Marche was come, and that the season was more 28 
attempgrat, the people that was left in Anthyoche sawe that it 
was tyme to departs / they spak to due godeffroye & to therle of 
fflaundres, & prayed them moche affectuously that they wold enter- 
pryse & coraducte them to Ihrlm for taccomplysshe their pilgre- 32 
mage / the goyng forth of therle of tholouse, the due of normandye / 

& Tancre, caused them moche to haue the wyll forth, 6 ffor they 
were goon to fore, and ledde with them grete nombre of pylgryms / 
And they happened wel in the waye, and had therby grete prouffyte 36 

1 Orig. uamed. s Fr. Tortouze. 

8 — 8 Fr. “ teUmc.nl gue nos gens neforfirent rien ou pov. 


Orig. feesh. 


Orig. uot. 



235 


Ch. CLX.] Bohemond remains in Antioch. 

and grete honour. By thyse wordes were the barons gretely stered 
and meuyd / They ordeyned! theyr affayres dylygently, and toke alle 
theyr peple, as wel on horsbak as a foote, and wente so fer forth that 
4 they cam to the lyche of surrye / They were / xxv. M / men all in The^we™ 
poynt and! armed, eueryche after that he was / The good man and 
valyaunt knyght buymont conueyed them theder with his men. 

But it was not theyr entente ne wyll that he shold goo ony ferther, 

8 ffor the cyte of anthyoche was newly conquerd, and theyr enemyes 
were fast by / Therfor it behoued hym not to withdrawe hym ferre 
fro it / but therfor he toke good hede continuelly daye and nyght / 

But of his grete courage he had conueyed them thedeL/'And there 
12 toke his leue, and wepte moche at departyng. he recomauwded them They wept 
to god, & retorned agayn to Anthyoche / And the hoost abode there. guting with 
The lyche is a moche auneyent cyte and noble, & stondeth vpon the 
ryuage of the see / That was the only cyte in surye of which them- The Lyche u 

J ° . , , , , 7 , , the only city 

16 perotir of constantinoble was lord / longe to fore oure men cam in Syria 
theder was comen guyneuyers, of whom I spak long to fore that conatanti- 
was born at boloyne vpon the see syde. And arryued at tharse / 
whyles that bawdwyn, broder of the due, helde it. he was comen 
20 to the lyche with his shippe, and supposed to haue taken the toun 
by force / and folysshly he eonteyned hym and assaylled it. They 
of the toun yssued out lyghtly And! toke hym, and yet helde hym Guinemers 

, _ was here held 

in pryson whan oure 1 barons cam theder. The Due knewe that he in prison ; 

24 was born in the londe of his fadre / And that he had been in the 

companye of therle Bawdwyn his brother. Therfor he demaunded Duke Godfrey 

r J ° , demanded hi# 

hym of the grete men of the toun / And? prayde them entierly that release, 
they wold delyuere them to hym / They durst not gayne saye hym / 

28 but delyuerd hym and his felawship with his shippe. the Due com- w^ck was 
maundid hym that he shold goo to the see, and alwaye coosteyeng* 
by the hooste. he dyde it gladly / And saylled forth. 

How the due asseeged Gybelet, and of a trayson by 
32 whiche he lefte the siege / ca° CLx" 

t He hoost departed fro the lyche / whan oure Barons had 

receyued theyr prysonners. They that were late departed 2 fro p ie»rios] 
Cylyce, fro Anthyoche, & fro other cytees aboute, were alle comen The piigrima 
36 and arryued theder in suche wyse, that alle wente to gydre by the 
see syde vnto a Cyte named Gybelet, whiche was fro the lyche 

1 Orig. owe. 



236 


Siege of Oibelet. [Ch. CLX. 

about a / xij. myle / They abode there and assieged the Cyte / A 
a bains of baylly of the Calyphe of Egypte 1 helde this Cyte on the see side 
power here,*" vnder the power of the Calyphe of Egypte 1 / This baylle yssued out 
by sauf cowduyt, & spak to due godefroy, to whom he offred vj. M. 4 
besauntes, anct many grete yeftes aboue that for to departs, and 
who wed in reyse the siege fro thens. The due wold! in no wyse here thyse 
offOodfrey wordes / but sayde that it were treson and vntrouth, and god for- 
men, beJe ^ j ghol(} take guche hyre he t i )6nne departed whan he 8 

sawe he myght not make his bargayn with the noble due. After 
he sente his messagers to therle of tholouse, and offred to hym this 
grete somme of moneye / yf he myght fynde 2 the moyen to reyse 
but was more the siege fro this toun. It was sayd that he receyued the moneye / 12 
Stthtto Earl and for to make the barons to departs / he founde a lesynge 3 / ffor 
who took hie be dyde to be sayd! to them, that he was wel aeerteyned! by mes¬ 
sagers and! lettres / that the Soudan of Perse had! so moche J angre 
and! desdayne of this that Corbagat his conestable had be diseon-16 
fyted, and so moche peple of his slayn, that he assembled alle his 
power, And! cam with grete peple for to fyght, and to destroye them 
alle that he coude fynde of the cristen fayth. Thise tydynges sente 
therle of tholouse by the bisshop of Albare to the due 4 a fore sayd!- 20 
and sent word and to therle of fflaundres, and sente to them his lettres, by whiche 
leaveoibeiet he prayd them moche swetly and expresly, that they wold leue 
and come to g j e „ e an( j come dylygently to hym, in suche wyse that they 

myght be alle to gydre whan this peple cam. whan the Due and 1 24 
other Barons herde this thynge, they were moche anguysshous and! 
meuyd, ffor they supposed! certaynly that alle this had! be trewe. 
Anon they departed! fro gybelet. by the cyte of valeme 5 they 
wente / whiche was aboue the castel of margat. syth they cam to 28 
mardee / whiche is the first cyte of the londe of fenyce. whan they 
wente toward the northeest, fro thens they cam to the cyte of 
tortuose. There is an Isle / where somtyme was a Cyte / there 
abode the Shippes, theyr nauye. I wote not how many dayes after 32 
Tancredro- they hasted and! cam to fore the Cyte of Archys, Tancre yssued! 
treachery 8 of oute of thoost and! cam ayenst them / And! tolde to them alle a 
Touioureto longe the tromperye and the barat that therle of tholouse had don / 

the pilgrims, 

1-1 “tenoit celle cite. Ceste-cy estoit la premtire cite dc la marine sur he 
pouvoir <V Egypte," viz., this was the first city on the sea-coast under the power 
of Egypt. Caxton has made a “ bourdon ” here by omitting all between the 
two cites. 2 Orig. fyude, 3 Fr. men^onge. 

* Orig. dne. 8 Fr. Valenie. 



237 


Ch. CLXI.] Unsuccessful Siege of Archis. 

They were moche angry / therfore they lodged them a part fro who were 
them / that had doo broken theyr syege. The Erie knewe that he 
had x not the loue of the barons that were newe comen, therfor he pw.ios.bkj 
4 sente to them messagers / that sayde to them in his name moche 
fayre wordes / And brought to them grete yeftes / wherfore in 
short tyme it happed that they were alle repeased and amyable and 
good frendes to gydre / sauf only Tancre, whiche acorded not with 
8 hym, but accused hym of many thynges. A fore the comynge of <*pt Tancred. 
tliise laste barons / the peple of therles of tholouse myght nothynge 
auaylle and 1 prouffyte ayenst the Cyte whiche they had assieged. 

But now they had grete hope / that it shold now soon be brought 
12 to an ende / and accomplysshyd by thayde of them that were newe 
come / Neuertheles it fyll not so as they supposed, ffor alle the The 
tymes that they contryued by ony engyne for tassaylle the walles chislnvain, 
alway it fyll contrarye to that they purposed / and they of the toun 
16 brake all theyr ouurages / in suche wyse that they loste their costes 
and payne. It appered wel that our lord had withdrawen fro them 
his ayde and his good wyll. They within the toun slewe many of ^' a d n lo J t sliant 
them without. There deyde tweyne noble and valyaunt knyghtes. men. 

20 That is to wete, Ancean of Ribemont / that alway dyde valyauntly 
where sommeuer he cam / And potom de baladon, an hye mau and 
wel acqueynted with therle of tholouse. This siege displesyd ouer 
moche to alle them of thooste. And in especial to the footemen 
24 whiche had moche grete desyre taccomplysshe theyr vowe to Iheru- 
salem, & also whan the due was comen they that had ben there to 
fore / began to withdrawe them fro the werke in suche wyse that 
euery man dyde nought, ffor it plesyd them wel that therle were 
28 greued and ennoyed that he myght departe and lede them forth 
with the other barons. 

How thoost murmured of the spere founden in 
Anthyoche / & of the grete myracle that happed 
32 in the presence of alle the hdste. 

Capitulo CLXj 0 

t Here was renewed a word by whiche the comyn people & / Tbs people 

* began to talk 

also sonime of the barons whiche 2 began to doubte of the against the 

° spear found 

36 spere / that was founden in Anthyoche, lyke as ye haue herde to in Antioch, 
fore, ffor somme sayde certaynly that it was the very spere that 
a “which,” interpolated by Caxton. 



238 


The Trial by Fire. [Ch. CLXL 

some be- opened the Syde of oure Lord on the crosse / And that was with 
be the true his Drecious blood bvdewed, And by reuelacion of onre lord had 

spear that r J J 

pierced our be founden by an holy good man for to recomforte his people 
[' leaf 109 ] whiehe had grete neeessyte and nede. Other 1 sayde that it was 4 
othere were not but fals barat / tromperye and abuse / ffor therle of tholouse 
mcr one. fonden this & qontryued / for to meue the peple to drawe and 
gete syluer of theyr offrynges / And this altercacion was meuyd by 
a preest named Arnold, 2 chappellayn, 8 and moche acqueynted with 8 
the noble due of normandye. he was wel lettred / but he was not 
of good lyf. he was ouer malycious and pourchassoure of discordes / 

As ye shal here afterward in this book. (33) This rumour was grete 
in thoost, as I haue sayd. The man that had fonde the spere herde 12 
Tin mnn who the doubte of the peple / And cam to fore the barons moche 
came before hardily, And sayd to them in this maner / “ Fayr lordes, doubte ye 

the barons, J ' 

notfeyng that this werke hath ben by barat ne by tromperye, For 
theryn hath be none / But it is comen of god / And certaynly for 16 
the comfort of the cristen peple. Seynte andrew appered to me by 
the wylle of our saueour Ihesu crist, whiehe deuysed to me alle the 
maner, how I haue founden it / And for to shewe to yow / that 
•nd aeked this that I saye is trouth / I praye you that ye make a grete fyre 20 
by are. and merueyllous / And I shal entre in to it / And holde the spere 
in my hand, and shal passe and goo thurgh hool and sauf.” whan 
they herd this they acorded alle therto. The fyre was made and 
hrennyd lyght, which was greets & merueyllous. And this was on 24 
the blessyd good fryday / And it plesed them th^t this thynge 
shold be thus preuyd the same day that our lord was smeton to the 
herte with the same spere / he that thus offred hym self thus, and 
enterprysed for to preue it was named Peter bertilmewe, 4 elerk / 28 
and but litil lettred, after that it coude be vnderstonde without 
forth, 4 and was a moche symple man / Thewne was alle thooste 
Tins mm, ( assembled aboute the fyre / Peter cam forth & kneled doun for to 
the'or<ffl Md recommall< ^ e hym vnto god / whan he had made his prayer / he 32 
^ientiy iii toke the spere And entred in to the fyre / And passed thurgh it, 
and was nothynge on hym perysshed ne hurte that ony man coude 
see or knowe. whan the peple sawe this alle they ranne for to kysse 
hym / And made to hym moche grete ioye. Of this doubte thenne 36 

2 Fr. Ernoul. 3 Orig. chppelayn. 

*—* Fr. “ clere asses pou lettri, selonc ce quo Ven posit congnoistre par de¬ 
hors," viz., an illiterate enough clerk, according to what could be judged by 
his outward appearance. 



239 


Ch. CLXII ] Ambassadors come from, Egypt. 

they wende veryly that it had be quenchid, But yet sourded a 
gretter errour and murmur than to'fore / ffor it was not longe after, butsoon after 
but that this Clerke deyde / thenne sayde somme that by than- 
4 guysshe of the fyre he toke his deth / And that shold be thoccasion 
therof. The other sayde that he yssued oute al hool and sauf fro 
the fyre. But it was the wylle of oure lord syth the trouthe was 
knowen that he shold deye thus, or peraduenture the prees that 
8 cam vpon hym was so grete whan he 1 yssued out of the fyre / that [Uf.mbfc] 
he was therby hurte that he deyde / In this maner murmured yet and the 
the peple emong them. murmured. 

Of thambassade of Egipte comen with our men in to 
12 thooste of pylgryms / & of the reuerence that 
was don to them / ca° / C / lxij 0 

s Omme messagiers that were sente in to Egypte by our barons 
atte requeste of them that cam vnto Anthyoche fro the Calyphe 
16 of Egypte, had he reteyned and holden there by force and barat 

wel a yere / But now they were retourned, And with them were The me«»en- 
comen the messagers of the Calyphe / which brought to our barons Egypt"now 

, . ' ° returned, 

fro hym wordes moche dyuerse & moch chaurcged fro that they had 
20 sente to them to fore Anthyoche, ffor thenne he sente to them that 
they shold conteyne them vygorously ayenst the Sowdan of Perse. 

And they shold haue of hym grete ayde of gold, of syluer, and of 
vytaylles. Now had he chaunged moche his langage, ffor he sente 
24 them worde that he thought that he dyde moch grete thyng for 

them / yf he suffred that the pilgrims myght goo to Iherusalem brining ^ 

•ij. C / to gydre / or .iij. C / alle vnarmed. And whan they had only joo or 
made theyr prayers and don theyr pylgremage to retorne saufly * time, 

28 agayn. whan oure barons herd this, they had herof grete desdayne / ’" , *, r d me ^’ t0 
And sayde to the messagers, that they shold retorne agayn to theyr Jerusalem, 
lord / and telle hym that by his licence ne leue wold they not goo 
to Iherusalem vnarmed one after another. But they shold goo The cruea- 

ders sent 

32 maulgre hym / alle to gydre in bataylles renged / and the baners wort back 
reysed and desployed / Now I shall say to you why the Calyphe of 
Egypte was reysen in so grete pryde / whan our men had discom- “" r d a ^ n battl * 
fyted Corbagat to fore Anthyoche, The power of the Soudan of 
36 Perse was moche affebled, in such wise that none of his neyghbours 
doubted hym / ne fered to make warre agaynst hym, ffor he had 
alwaye the werse. By whiche occasion it happed that a conestable 



240 


The Caliph of 
Egypt now 
despised our 
people- 


p leaf 1103 


Messengers 
from Con¬ 
stantinople 
eame, com¬ 
plaining be¬ 
cause Bohe- 
mond held 
Antioch con¬ 
trary to liiB 
covenant, 


forgetting 
that the em¬ 
peror had 
not kept his 

E art of the 
argain. 


The barons 
reminded 
them of this, 


and then the 
messengers 
said that the 
emperor 
would surely 
come. 


An Embassy from Constantinople. [Ch. CLXIII. 

of the Calyphes of Egypte named 1 Emites 1 / had taken the Cyte of 
Iherusalem fro the men of the soudan of Perse, whiehe had 1 holden 
it .xxxviij yere. Therfore sawe nowe the Calyphe that he was at 
his aboue / by the disconfyture that our men had don to Corbagat, 4 
And had! wende that he sholdf not haue had nede of ony ayde / 
Therfor he despysed now our peple. 

2 Of an ambassade fro themperour of constantinoble 
comen to our pylgryms / & of thanswer to the 8 
sayd ambassade / ca Clxiij” 

o N that other syde were comen messagers fro themperour of 
Constantinoble, whiehe complayned! moche on buymont 3 / and 
also on the other barons, ffor they sayde that all the barons were 12 
becomen his men, And had sworn vpon the holy ewangelyes that 
alle suche Cytees and! Castellys by them conquerd! / whiehe had be 
vnder the power of Constantynoble shold be rendred to hym as his 
owen thurgh out alle the londe / to Iherusalem. Now buymont 16 
dyde contrarye tills whiehe helde Anthyoche / and the other Barons 
that had gyuen it to hym. Thus spak they of the couenauntes / 
But they spak not of alle / ffor withoute faylle trouthe it was that 
they had couenaunted this / but themperour had promysed to them 20 
that he ahold folowe them with his grete hoost / And shold fur- 
nysshe to them grete plente of vytaylles by see. he was the fyrst 
that had broken the couenaunt and promesses, ffor he had not don 
that one ne that other / And he myght wel haue don it / And 24 
therfor they were not bounden to holde his couenauntes made by 
oure barons, by cause he helde not that he had promysed / ffor the 
lawe wyll not that a man shal holde couenauwt to hym that holdeth 
not his. Thus answered the barons to them. And therfor sayde 28 
they that the yefte that they made to buymont of the Cyte of 
Anthyoche ought to be ferme and* stable, And so wold they mayn- 
tene it to hym and to his heyres for euer / whan the messagers 
herd this, they moche prayd the barons that they would tarye (heyr 32 
goyng to Iherusalem til that themperour were comen / ffor they 
sayde that without faulte he wolde come to fore thentree of Iuyll, 
And brynge with hym moche grete plente of peple / And yf they 
wold doo thus moche for hym, he shold conne them grete thanke / 36 
And shal gyue to eche of the barons many grete & ryche yeftes / 

1 Lat. Emvrtiut. * Orig. bnymont. 



241 


Ch. CLXIII.] A Dispute arises among the great Barons. 


& also shal departe largely to the gentil men & to the footemen. 
whan our barons herd this they sayde that they wold counseylle The barons 
them to gydre and drewe them a part. Therle of tholouse acorded whether 

. to believe 

4 wel to this that they shold abyde so grete an ayde as was the puys- u»i* <* «<*• 
saunce of themperour / And sayd he supposed! certaynly that he 
shold come / as it was sayd!. but the other supposed! that he sayd 
so for to kepe the barons and other men atte siege til the cyte were 
8 taken / ffor it shold be moche deshonour and fowl for 1 hym to fir. uo.bkj 
departe fro thens without accomplysshyng 1 that whiche he had 
entcrprised. The other barons 2 acorded nothynge therto, but Most of them 

o , ,t ill li i . i°it „ wished to go 

wolde that they shold goo dylygently assiege the holy cyte of o» without 

iti . j jo j o j j waiting any 

12 lherusalem for to doo theyr pylgremage & accomplysshe theyr longer, 
vowe / For whiche they had suffred so many trauaylles 3 and! 
deseases, For they knewe moche wel the delaye of themperour / 
and his fayr wordes full of tromperyes and deceytes. Therfor it 
16 was not theyr oppynyon 4 for to truste ony more his couert dissimy- 
laeions 4 / Thus sourded a grete debate bytwene the barons, And a great 
myght not acorde / of whiche it happed that he that lielde the cyte abont ti™ 
of trypple whiche had offred to them so moche good by couenaunt 
20 that they shold departe fro the siege / and goo out of the londe. 
whan he knewe that the barons were emonge them self in diseorde, 
he wold no more offre to them ony thyng / but enterprised so grete 
hardynes that he wold fyghte ayenst them / The barons acorded 
24 therto / and lefte the Bissliop of Albare for to kepe the lodgys. 


And whan they had so doo, they wente so alle in bataylles The barons 

in the mean 

ordeynod? toward trypple / wlian they cam there they fonde ^jne^ttacic 
the lord of the toun and the Cytezeyns out with grete plente of 
28 men on horsbak and afoote where they had ordeyned theyr 
bataylles and abode our peple / whiche they doubted not moche. 

For they had seen that the Erie of tholouse had holde siege to fore 
this Cyte, And! had no thynge preuayled, wherfor they preysed our 
32 men moche the lasse than they dyde byfore. But whan oure men 
approuched so nyghe that they 5 sawe them 6 / anon they ranne on 
them moche fiersly 7 in suche wyse that they loste anon .vij.C / of and s iw 

* „ seven hun- 

theyr men whiche oure men slewe. And? of oures were slayn but 8 area or the 

J enemy. 

36 .xiiij. There helda they the feste of ester or pasque, the x day of 
Apryll. 

a Orig. barous. 3 Orig. tranaylles. 

*—* Lat. “ ne ejus labyrinthis et ejus ambagibus iterwrn involuerent." 

• i. e. our men (the Crusaders). * The Turks. 7 Orig. firersly. 

8 Orig. but. 


GODFREY. 


B 



242 The People murmur for not going to Jerusalem. [Ch. OLXIV. 

How the comyn peple complayned them / of this that 
they wente not hastely to Iherusalem. 

ca°. Clxiiij® 

o Wr barons that had disconfyted thise men / Retourned in to 4 
The people theyr lodgys with alle theyr gayne / Thenne recommenced 1 

pfeinedoTthe and began agayn the playnte and! the clamour moche grete that the 
to JeruenieiiK peple made by cause they wente not hastely to Iherusalem. all they 
cryed with liye vois that they shold departe fro the siege / so long 8 
contynued theyr crye that the valyaunt Due GodefErey / Therle 
of Flaundres, The Due of Normandye and Tanere sayde that they 
p leaf ni] 2 wold doo the requeste of the peple afoote. And! thenne recuylled 

thej r theyr tentes and pauyllons, brent theyr lodgys, and departed. 12 
The Earl of It displesyd moche therle of tholouse / he prayde them moche affec- 
diepieaeed tuouslv to abyde. but it myght not be. ffor they them self that 

that the J J , , „ , , ,, 

other barons fyrst were comen with hym were wery, and 1 anguysshous ot the 

people. siege, And strayt helde they the way toward trypple. whan therle 16 

of tholouse sawc that he myght none other wise cheuisshe ne accom- 

plysshe his enipryse / he wold not abyde there allone, & he had 

The whole right, But dislodged hym / and Mowed the other / whan they were 

fOTwardt'and a .v / niyle fro trypple / they lodged them, the baylly that helde 20 

before 1)6,1 the cyte and the countre about in the name of the Calyphe / sente 

Trippie, ^i lec j el . to them his messagers / he had moche leyd donn his pryde / 

ffor as I sayd to you to fore / he wende to liaue faughten peer to 

peer / his messagers knewe wel that he was to feble, and that it 24 

was folye. He thenne desyred and moche requyred that oure men 

wold take of hym right largely / and goo out of his power. The 

whose baiiif mater was so demened that he gaf"/ xv. M. besauntes, and delyuerd 

iMoobeeante to them alle the prysonners that he had of our pilgryms. And 28 

*» leave aboue that he gaf to them grete yeftes and ryche presentes, as 

unharmed, horses, mulets, Cloth of sylk, and vessel of dyuerse facions. And 

they promysed to hym that they wold doo none harme to the 

Cytees that he had and helde / That is to wete, archys, trypple, and 32 

Ybelyn, ne to their appertenauntes. And he hym self sente to them / 

oxen / Kyen, sheep, and moche grete plente of other vytaylles, to 

some Chris- thende that they shold not destroye his londe / Thenne cam in to 

from Mount thoost somme surryens whiche dwellyd upon the mount of lybane, 36 

came into whiche is nyghe vnto thyse Cytees toward the est moche hye / 

They were of oure fayth wyse men and trewe, And were come for 

1 Orig. recommeucecK 



243 


Ch. CLXV.] The Christians of Syria give good Advice. 

to see our barons for to salewe and feste them. The good men of 
thoost called! them, and! desyred of them affectuously / that they 
wold! teche them the moost strait way & easiest for to goo to 
4 Iherusalem. They toke aduys and coureseylled to gydre, and 
behelde alle thynges that in suche a caas behoued, and cam to our 
barons, and sayd to them that they counseylled! to holde the waye These ™un- 
by the see coste for many reasons / Fyrst, for the surete and com- men to take 
8 forte of theyr shippes / fifor in the nauye were not only the shippes along the «e« 
of guyneuyers that cam fro fflauwdres, but ther were shippes of 
gene / of venyse, of Cypres / of Rhodes, and of other yles of grece / 
charged with vytaylles and marchaundyses whiche dyde moche grete 
12 good in thoost. The surryens wente to fore for to conduyte the 

hoost. the baylly of trypple delyuerd 1 to them also men that knewe pit m,bk.) 
wel the countrees and! the londe. They passed! alle the see syde The army^ 
and the cyte of ybelyn / and lodged! vpon a Ryuer that renneth advice, and 



peple that were not comen ne arryued. they soioumed! there a day. 


Of the grete dylygence that our men made for to 
approehe to Iherusalem / & of thalyaunces of 
20 somme turkes made vnto them. Capitulo CLXV? 

t He thyrde day they cam to fore the Cyte of Baruth, And! Threedaye 
lodged! them upon a Ryuer that ran to fore the toun /-The came to 
baylly of the toun gaf to them grete good!, And! made do come 
24 plente of vitayll and good cheep, for to spare the trees & the 
fruytes of the contre. On the morn cam they to the Cyte of 
Sayette, there they lodged! them vpon a Ryuer therby. he that 
gouerned and! kepte the Cyte wold 1 not doo thynge ne bounte to 
28 them / 1 wote not wherin he trusted, but he sente out many of his The Governor 

' , of Sayette 

men for to doo hurts to thoost, and for to atteyne certayn knyglites / attacked our 
which were lodged by for tassaylle them / but our men toke theyr 
horses and ran on them vygorously / And! slewe of them I wote tl,e »Mnniei» 
32 not how many. And! the other fledde in to the cyte, And had 
nomore talente to atteyne our peple / in suche wyse that our men 
rested them in pees that nyght / On the morn for to reste and 
refresshe the mene peple / they departed not thens / But sente oute 
36 for fourage many men a foote, and certayn men of Armes to kepe 
them in to the contre and vyllages about. They brought largely 

R 2 



244 The Pilgrims go on their Way towards Jerusalem. [Ch. CLXV. 

1 vytaylles and horses 1 wyth grete quantite of beestes, grete and 1 
smale, and cam agayn without lesyng of ony thyng, alle to gydre 
in foraging sauf only a knyght 2 named Gaultier de ver / he wente by his valy- 

tlie knight 

Gautier de auwce ouer ferre / nor he retorned neuer agayn. ne neuer was 4 

Vete was lost. ' 6 J } 

knowen where 3 he becam / they were all moch sory for hym in 
The next day thoost / The day aftir passed they by a moche sharp & aspre way, 
went™f“mi & after descended by a destrayt in to a playne. and on the right 
syde they lefte this auwcyent Cyte named Sarepte, wherin helyas 8 
the prophete was in. After they pessed a water whiehe is bytwene 
Sur and Sayette. They wente so fer that they cam to this noble 4 
encamped cyte of Sur. There they lodged them by the^ioble fontayne, and 

near a noble , , . . 

fountain. pytte of water lyuyng lyke as scripture sayth. They r lodged this 12 
P leaf 112 ] nyght in gardyns 5 moche delectable, whan it was daye they sette 
them forth on theyr Iourneye. And passed by a 6 strayt moche peryl- 
lous, whiehe is bytwene the montaines & the see. They descended 
in to the playnes of the Cyte of Acres there vpon, and by a water 16 
At Acres they rennyng 1 they sette vp theyr pauylions / he that had the charge of 
victuals at a the toun made them to haue vytaylles at resonable prys, 7 and made 

reasonable J J , 

price. acqueyntaunces good and honorable in this maner, that yf oure 

people myght 7 take the Cyte of Iherusalem, and dwells there after 20 
xx. dayes in the Royamme, in suche wyse that they were not put 
oute of it by force / or yf they myght disconfyte in the felde the 
puyssaunce of egypte / that fro thenne forthon they shold yelde 
and gyue ouer the Cyte of Acres / without makyng of ony resist- 24 
ence. The pylgryms wente fro thens on the lyft syde / they lefte 
galylee bytwene the mount 8 of Carmely 9 and the see / they cam in 
to Cezaire, whiehe is the second Archebisshoprich of the londe of 
palestyne. they lodged them vpon a water that yssueth oute of the 28 
They cels- palus or maryses, whiehe ben by the toun. there helde they theyr 
tecost at penthecost or wytsontyde / thre dayes after thentre of Iuyn they 
tiie'twrdof a ^ 0( ^ e ^here. on the .nj. day they toke their way. On the right 
June. side they lefte Iaphe / And by a grete playn and euen waye they 32 

cam in to the Cyte of Lide, where the bodye of the glorious martir 
seynt george lyeth. In thonoure of whom / Iustynyen, that was 

1—1 Fr. “ viduailles et & hommes et d chevaulx.” 5 Orig. kuyght. 

3 Fr. qu'il devint, what became of him. 4 Orig. uoble. 

6 Fr. "par ungs destroiz moult perilleux," viz., by a very narrow and 
dangerous pass. 

7-7 The sense is ruined by Caxton’s omissions. Fr. "et fist accointances 
bonnes et honorables d. noz barons, et aussi fist a eulx teles conuenances quo se ilz 
povoient," etc. 8 Orig. monnt. 9 Fr. Carmel. 



245 


Ch. CLXVI.] They find great Spoils in Rames. 

Emperour of Home, made there a moche / fair chirche and! ryche / 

But whan the turkes herde tydynges that our men cam / they bete The Turk, 
it doun and brente the tymbre werke, whiche was moche grete / 

4 For they doubted! that oure pilgrims shold take them for to make 
engyns to caste stones, and castellis to assaile with / thenne herde 
our barons saye that ther fast by was a moche noble Cyte named! 

Rames. they sente the erle of Flanndres with / v. C / horsmen to 
8 fore the toun for to knowe what semblaunt they wold make / None 
yssued out whan they approuched it. they cam ner / and founde 
the yates open. And entred! in to the Cyte. And! founde neyther 
man ne woman. For the nyght to fore they had! herd tydynges 
12 how oure pilgrims cam, & ladde to the montaynes wyues and deMrted - 
childeren / and alle their howshold! j whan therle knewe herof he 
sente to the barons how the mater was, and counseylled them to 
come in to the toun. they were moche glad of thyse tidynges / 

16 they made deuoutly theyr prayers at the tombe of seynt George / 

And after cam in to the Cyte, whiche was al ful of wyne, of whete, 
of oylle, and of other vytaylles to them necessarye / they abode 
there .iii. dayes / they chose ther 1 abisshop of the cyte / and 2 was p if. m, ba.j 
20 a normant named Robert, whiche was bom in tharchebisshopryche Se » nJ 
of Roen / They gaf to hym entierly the two Cytees for euermore, whom* they 
that is to wete, Lyde and? Rames, and! the countree and vyllages and Ramea. 
about them / ffor they gaf it to honoure god and seynt George for 
24 the fyrst gayne of the same holy londe. 

How the Cristen men of bethlebem receyued wel 
Tancre and his rowte, And sette his baner on the 
chirche of our lady. Capitulo CLxvj” 

28 t He turkes beyng in Iherusalem herde wel tydynges of the TjwTurtain 
comyng of our pylgryms / wel knewe they certaynly that alle 
theyr entencion was to come to the holy cyte, ffor whiche thynge {>“"“8°^ 
they were pryncipally meuyd and departed fro the countrees, approach. 

32 whan they herde this they were moche esmeuyd / And sayd that it 
was reason to deffende it 3 / The Cristen men that were in bethle- 

2 Orig. aud. 

8 Here a whole chapter, and part of a second has been omitted by Caxton’s 
French text. This missing chapter gives details about the arming and fortify' 
ing of Jerusalem by the Turks, when they heard of the approach of the 
Crusaders ; of the great cruelties inflicted upon tho Christiaua of Jerusalem ; 



246 


The Cliria- 
tiani of Beth¬ 
lehem offer to 
deliver that 
town to the 
pilgrims. 


Tancred and 
100 men 
went to re¬ 
ceive it, 


and saw the 
holy places 
with great 

joy. 


They could 
hardly sleep 
this night, so 
anxious were 
[i leaf IIS] 
they to go on 
to Jerusalem. 


The common 
people of the 
army could 
no longer 
restrain 
themselves. 


Bethlehem is delivered to the Pilgrims. [Ch. CLXVII. 

hem sente certayn messagers to the barons, & desyred of them that 
they wold delyuere the toun in to their handes / if they wold sende 
men to reeeyue and kepe it. They sayd that it was reson to doo 
that they requyred. They toke an honderd men of Armes wel 4 
horsed, noble, valyaunt, and hardy, and delyuerd! to them Tancro 
for a Capytayn, They that cam to fetche them conduyted them in 
such wise that erly in the momyng they entree* in to the toun. 
Alle they of the Cyte clerkes and laye men receyued! them honor- 8 
ably and with moche grete ioye with procession brought them in to 
the chirche whiche standeth in the place, in whiche the gloryonse 
vyrgyne marye was delyuerd & chylded oure lord Ihesu criste, the 
saueour of the world, they sawe the crybbe in which was leyde in 12 
to reste the swete childe that made heuen & erthe / whan our peple 
sawe thyse holy places they were moche ioyous, and! had! grete 
tendrenes in theyr hertes / The Cyterzeyns of the toun for signe of 
ioye Amt for demonstraunce that oure lord! and his dere moder 16 
oure lady shold gyue to them vyctorye, toke the baner of Tancre / 
and 1 sette it on hye vpon the chirche of oure lady / They that were 
lefte in thoost had moche grete desyre to see and vysyte the holy 
places that were nygh by / as it was sayd. ffor for the loue of god, 20 
& for to honoure hym were they departed fro theyr countree / and 
had suffred many annoyes and grete trauaylles. And! they myght 
not slepe this nyght, suche brennyng 1 desire had they forto see the 
cyte, 1 which shold be thende of their trauaylle and thaccomplysshe- 24 
ment of theyr vowe. Them thought longe er the day cam, and them 
semecf that thys nyght was moche lenger than the other / ffor 2 to a 
corageous desire ther is not haste ynowgh. 

Of thardaunt desire that the peple had for to see 28 
Iherusalem / And how thoost approehed and 
were lodged by ordenaunce. Capitulo C/Lxvij 0 

s Yth that it was knowen certaynly in the lodgys that the Due 3 
hadde receyued this nyght the messagers of bethlehem, And 32 
that he had sente his men in to the toun. The peple afoote abode 
neuer for leue of the barons / ne myght not suflfre til the daye was 

and, especially, of the taxes laid upon them, which were so heavy that the 
Patriarch was obliged to go to Cyprus for aid in paying them. 

a Fr. “ car a courage desira/nt, ne haste Ven mie asses," viz., for one can 
never hasten enough tq satisfy a desiring (or eager) heart. 3 Orig. Dnc. 



247 


Ch. CLXVII.] Skirmish before the Gates of Jerusalem. 

come, but begun to calle alle the nyght for to goo vnto Iherusalem. bat started 
whan they were goon a whyle forth / One of the noble men of unprotected, 
thooste named Gaste de bedyers had moche grete pyte of this 
4 peple that they shold be slayn in the waye. And therfore he toke 
his hors, and toke .xxx / men of Armes with hym wel horsed, and Gaste de 
ord6yned in arraye, And thought that he wolde goo nygh to Iheru- }JJ e J^J n pr0 ' 
Salem for to see yf they myght fynde out of the toun beestes and J^ t J 0 i f n4 
8 other gayne for to take and lede away with hym. Alle thus as he possible. 
thoughte 1 / it fylle thus' in partye, fifor whan he cam nygh 2 the 
toun he fonde Oxen / & kyen largely in the pastures / and but fewe 
that kept them, they fledde away whan they sawe our 3 men come 
12 Gaste and his men began to gadre the beestes to gydre and droof 
them hastely toward thoost / but the herdmen and kepars of them 
made a grete crye / In the toun were turkes hardy, and desyryng* 4 
to doo armes / They armed them dilygently, & ronne hastely after He w.. 

16 for to rescowe the prove / gaste & his men sawe them come, & attacked 6y 
knewe well that they were not strong ynough for the turkes / ther- 
for they lefte this that they brought, & mounted vpon an hye mon- 
tayne, therby moche angry of this mesauenture. whan they had 
20 abyden a whyle vpon this montayne, They behelde in to the valeye / 

And sawe Tancre come fro bethlehem retomyng 1 to thoost with Tanrred, 

returning 

an / C. men on horsbak. whan Gaste sawe them he smote his hors from Betide- 

/ hem, came to 

with his spores & cam to hym / and told hym of his mesauenture 
24 and moche anguysshous, and sayd that the turkes were not ferre / the Turks, 
they ran alle to gydre after them and ouertoke them er they myght 
come in to the cyte. In theyr comyng they discomfyted the turkes 
5 that they that myght fledde in to the Cyte / The remenaunt they [• if. us. t*.] 
28 slewe, And oure men recoueryd theyr proye, And brought it in to 
thoost with grete ioye / Alle they that were in the lodgys assembled 
about them. And demaunded of them ententyfly fro whens this 
proye cam. They answerd that they had take it to fore the yates 
32 of Iherusalem / whan they herde named the holy Cyte of lheru- 
salem, and knewe certaynly that it was so nygh / thenne began they 
tendrely to wepe / And fylle doun on theyr knees, and rendred Tim 
thankynges to oure lord with moche grete syghes, of this that he ^“ d r4 f t, ^‘ i t r t ' e 
36 had so moche loued them, and conduyted that they myght see £ l ®2£ aei! is 
shortly the ende of theyr pylgremage / that is to wete, the holy Cyte 
of Iherusalem, whiche oure lord so moche louyd, that he wold dye 

1 Orig. thonghte. J Orig. uygh. 8 Orig. onr 

4 Fr. “desiraus dcfaire armes,” eager to fight. 



248 Situation of Jerusalem. [Ch. CLXVIII. 

therin for to saue the world. Grete pyte was it to see and 1 here 
the teres & the cryes of this good peple. They departed in this 
some went same maner. And wente so forth that they sawe the towres and the 
eeetLe walls’ walles of the toun / Thenne lyft they vp theyr handes toward 1 4 

of Jerusalem. ' 

heuen and dyd? of theyr liosen and shoes, men and wymmen / and 

kyssed therthe / who that had seen this / though he had had an 
herd herte he shold haue be meuyd to pyte. ffro thens ferthon the 
ah were now waye greued them nothynge, but they wente moch lyghtly til they 8 

reconciled to _ _. _ , _ _ 

their labours cam to fore the toun / There they lodged them all aitir thordenaunce 

and trials. ' 

and deuyse of the barons / whiche delyuerd to them the places. 
Thenne semed verytably that the worde of the holy prophete was 
entierly accomplysshyd, whiche sayd longe to fore. “Leua Iheru- 12 
salem / &e.” Aryse vp Iherusalem / and! lyft vp thyn eyen, And! 
beholde the puissaunce of the kyng thy sauiour / which cometh 2 to 
ontbynde the and put the oute of the bonde wherin thou art. 2 0 
lord! god, how the hye barons, the knyghtes, the gentylmen of our 16 
hoost, and alle the other generally, men and wymmen, were recom¬ 
forted and reconcyled of the grete trauaylles and meseases that they 
had longe endured / whan they founde them to fore the holy Cyte 
of Iherusalem, And how eche of them had good wylle to conteyne 20 
hym self in this nede and werke. 


Of the situacion of Iherusalem and deseripcion / and 
also of many other cytees, townes, & countrees/ 
ther aboute. ea° CLxviij" 24 

The uoiy city t Routhe it is that the holy Cyte of Iherusalem stondeth by- 

stands be* 

tween two twene two montaynes, wherof dauid sayth in the psaulter, 3 

mountains. . 

[* leaf ii 4 ] 4 u Fundamenta eius in montibus sanctis / The fondementes of it 

ben in the holy montaynes / toward the west is the see and the londe 28 
of the philistees, xxiiij mile vnto port Iaphe / and that in the next 

Near by is part of the see / Bytwene bothe is the castel of Emaus, where as 

Emmans. oure lord after his resurexion appered to two discyples. There is 

modyn the cyte and the fortresse of the machabews. There is the 32 
place & temple, where abymelech the holy preest gaf to dauid and 

1 Orig. aud. 

s—2 Fr. “ deslier et mettre hors de lien ou tu fs,” i. e. to loose thee, and free 
thee from the bonds in which thou now art. 

2 This Latin quotation was inserted by the French translator ; it is not in 
the original text. 



249 


Ch. CLXVIII.] Description of the Holy Places. 

to liis squyres the loues of breed to ete that were offred! vpon the 
table of our lord, wherfor saul dyde do slee hym / and the other 
admvnystratours of the chirche and men of the toun / There is lyde Here is Lydia 

' where St. 

4 where seynt Peter heeled a lame man named Eneanx, 1 and had i£unu» l ed 
leyen / viij. yere paralityk / There is also Iaphe, as I haue sayd, 
where seynt Peter reysed a dede woman named thabyte 2 / There 
was seint peter herberowed in a tanflers hows, that tanned leder 
8 whan he receyued the message fro Cornelle, whom he baptysed, as Here^s where 
is sayd in thactes of the apostles, toward the eest is the Home <*>' - ed the 
Iordan / And the deserte is by yonde where the holy prophetes Cornelius, 
were woont to repayre / There is the vale sauage, 3 whiche is named! 

12 the dede see / whiche was a moche fayr and! delectable countre, 
lyke a paradys, to fore that oure lord made do synke .v. Cytees / 

Sodome and? the other / as is sayd! in Genesys / On this syde on^thUeide 
Iordan is the cyte of Iherycho, that Iosue wan more by prayer than jjjjejg“ r 
16 by bataylle. Theder wente oure lord! Ihesu Criste / and! made a 
blynde man to see / There is galgala, where helyzeus the proophete 
dwellyd. Toward the south is the cyte of Bethlehem, where our 
lord! was born, and! leyde in the crybbe emonge the beestes. There 
20 by is tecua, the cyte where Amos and Abacuc the prophetes were 
born / Toward northeest is Gabao, 4 where atte prayer of Iosue the 
sonne rested, til he had vaynquysshed / the batayll / There is Tiwrou 
Sceirs, 5 where as our lord! spak to the woman of Samarye. There *&*»°ur e 
24 is bethel, where as the peple of Israhel worshipped the calf of god!g B J n "“ l “ an 
ayenst the wylle of oure lord! / There is Sebaste, whiche is named 1 
seynt Iohan de sebaste. There is the sepulcre of seynt Iohan Thsr^uti^ 
baptist / helizeus and! Abyas the prophetes were there buryed! / It 
28 was sommetyme named Samarye. 6 The Cyte of naples is there / 
which somme tyme was named Sychem. And! it was there where 
Symeon and 1 leuy, sones of Iacob, for to venge theyr suster, whiche Hmstmeon 
had ben enforced, slewe them of the toun / and 7 brente alle 
32 the cyte. 

1 Fr. Aeneas. 

2 Caxton has here omitted a line or two after “ Thabite.” Fr. “et estoit 

pleinc d’aulmosnes et de bonnes oeuvres, et la rendit aux vevfves femmes et aux 
povres gens w- qui elle faisoit moult grant bien ,”—Lat. 11 Tdbitham plenum 
operibus bonis et elymosynis, defunctam suscitavti, et sanetis ac viduis resignavit 
vivam." 8 Fr. li vans sauvage, Lat. vallem sylvestrem. 

4 Lat. Gaboon. 8 Fr. Siehors. 

6 Caxton has omitted “pour le moot de Somer qui est illecques encore 
rwmme L’en toutc cetle terre," viz., from Mount Somer which is situated here 
all this country is still named. 7 Orig. aud. 



250 


[ilf. 114, bk.] 


Jerusalem is 
the chief city 
of Judea. 


David im¬ 
proved it 
greatly, and 
gave it its 
name. 


After the 
death of 
Jesus Christ 
Titus con- 
auered and 
destroyed it. 


In rebuilding 
Jerusalem 
the Holy 
Sepulchre 
was brought 
within the 
walls. 


The city is 
longer than it 
is broad. 


Different Names of Jerusalem. [Ch. CLXIX. 

How lherusalem had many names after dyuerse lordes 
therin 'rennyng, and yet of the situacion wel at 
a longe / ca° Clxix® 

i Horusalem is the chyef cyfce of Iudee / It is withouto medowes 4 
and! withoute Ryuers, ne no brooke ne welle. It was first 
called! Salem / & after Zebus* / After in the tyme what tyme were 
caste out the Iheruhesees, 3 whan dauid! had! regned! / vii. yere in 
Ebron / he grewe 4 and amended moche this cyte / And! wold that 8 
it shold be the chyef and hede place of alle the Royamme / Thenne 
was it named lherusalem. To fore that dauid assaylled! the toun / 
lie toke the towre of Syon / whiche was named the cyte of Dauyd. 
Thenne made dauyd the cyte to he made about the place whiche 12 
was named Mellon. Ioab made the remenaunt of the toun / After 
whan Salamon regned! in lherusalem / It was named Iherosolima, 
That is to saye, lherusalem of Salamon. As they seye that made 
thystoryes / Aftir the deth of Ihesu criste, Titus the sone of vas-16 
pasian was a moche grete prynee of Rome, And assieged this cyte 
with a grete boost / & toke it by force / and 1 destroyed it, and 
threwe it doun to therthe / Aftir cam Elyus Adrian the fourth 
Emperour after hym / and called it after his name elye / ffor he 20 
reedefyed it moch wel / 6 ffirst it stode in an hangyng of an hylic, 5 
6 in suche wyse as toward theest and south it was sette in the 
roundnesse of the tertre of the mount of Syon, 6 And of another 
mount named Moria. The temple only and the toure named 24 
Anthone 7 was on the toppe of the tertre. But the same Elyus 
made alle 8 the Cyte to be born and reedefyed! right on the toppe or 
sommet of the-tertre, in suche wyse that the place where oure lord 
was crucyfyed / and the holy sepulcre, where his blessid body was 28 
leyed in, whiche to fore were without the Cyte, were then enclosed 
within the walles. The Cyte was not ouer grete, ne ouer lytle. It 
was more long than brood / hit is on the four quarters enuyronned 
with depe valeyes, toward the eest is the valeye of Iophat 9 / There 32 
stondeth a moche fayr chirche made in thonour of the glorious 

2 Fr. Jehus. 3 Fr. Gebustes, Lat. Jebuseo. 4 Fr, creut, i. e. increased. 

5- 5 Fr. “ premierement die, estoit assise en un pendant," at first it was 
situated on the brow of a hill. 

6 — 6 Fr. “si que vers soleil levant et vers midi estoit assise el roifte del monte 

de Syon,” so that towards the east and south, it was situated on the steep side 
of mount Sion. ?, Fr. Antoine, Lat. Antonia. 

8 Fr. fist porter, caused the city to be moved. 8 Fr. Josaphat. 



251 


Oh. CLXX.] Wonderful Buildings in Jerusalem. 

vyrgyne Marye, where it is sayd that she was buiyed. & ther is Here is the 
shewed yet the sepulcre. Ther vnder is the reimyng water of 
which seynt Iohn euangelyste sayth / that Ihesu Criste passed / 

4 Toward the southe is a valeye named! Ennon, there is the felde that 
was bought 1 with the pens that Iudas sold onre lord! fore, which is 
made in sepulture of pilgrims / & named acheldemach. toward! the 
weste is a parte of the valeye where as the piscyne 2 is, whiehe was [* leaf u»] 
8 a grete thynge whan the kynges of Iude were there: and it stratcheth 
vnto the Cy3terne, whiehe is called! the lake of the Patriarke. By 
the old 1 Cymetyer whiehe is in the caue, named the Lyon, toward 
the north-eest, may men goo vp playn to the Cyte. There is Here u tho 
12 shewed the place where seynt Stephen the prothomarter was stoned 1 Stephen th* 

A A x martyr was 

of tbe Iuys, whan he praydf vpon his knees for them, that so pytte by the 
hym to deth / And so deyed! a very marter. 

Here thystorye deuysetk of many merueyllyus edy- 
16 fyees conteyned in the same Cyte of Iherusalem. 

And who made them. Capitulo Clxx 0 

s 0, as I haue sayd, two montaynes ben enchaynert within the t«-o moun- 
walles of Iherusalem, a litil valeye is bytwene them both, moiled 
20 wliiche departed the toun as in the myddle / Syon is toward! the wait, of 

' Jerusalem. 

weste / on the sommete or toppe theron stondeth the chirche which 
is named Syon / And after there is a tour of dauyd, whiehe is the 
dongeon of the toun / made of moche stronge werke, walles and 
24 barbycans there be many that ben aboute the toun. 3 Trouthe it is 
that to fore oure pylgryms cam in to this holy lande, the place 
where our lord was crucifyed, whiehe was named ealuarye. Amt 
there where the very crosse was founden, And! where our sauyour fi» tn» 

cross was 

28 Ihesu Criste was taken doun of the crosse, And enoynteit with pre- found on 
cious oynementis / & envoluped in whyte lynen cloth, this places 
were strayte as lytil ehapellys / But after that oure cristen men had 
the power, them thought that the chirche was made ouer strait anil 

1 Orig. beuglit. 

s Here several lines are omitted by Caxton, which were probably unin¬ 
telligible in the text which he translated. Lat. of the missing lines: “In 
eodem guoque sed in devexo quod ad orientem respicit, sita eat sanctae Remrrec- 
tionis eeelesia, forma quidem rotunda, quae quoniam in deelivo praedicli montis 
sita est, ita ut clivus eidem imminens et contigmis ecclesiae tectum habet, erectis 
in sublime trdbibus et mi/ro artificio in modum coronae contextis apertum et 
perpetuo patens, unde lumen ecclesiae infunditur necessarium. Sub quo hiatu 
patulo Salvatorispositum est monumentim." 



252 


They walled 
it all in 
newly. 


On the elope 
of Mt. Moriah 
etandeth the 
temple. 


On the west 
of the temple 
are two gates. 
[» If. 115, bk.] 


Towards the 
east is the 
Golden gate. 


Within thiB 
enclosure 
dares no man 
dwell. 


In every 
corner were 
oratories 
where the 
Saracens 
used to pray. 


Further Description of Jerusalem. [Ch. CLXX. 

lytil wnere so grete ami noble thynges were. Therfore they made 
it al newe walled about with good strong werke and hye, which 
conteyned and enclosed within it the fyrst chirche, 1 and the holy 
names that I haue named! / Toward the parte of the oryent is the 4 
other mount named mona. 2 On the hangyng therof as who be- 
holdeth toward the south stondeth the temple, whiche the laye 
peple calle it Templem domini. There as Dauyd! bought 3 the place 
for to sette in the Arke of oure lord. And Salamon his sone made 8 
there the temple by the commaundement of God / At the begyn- 
nyng of this book we sayde to you, that Omar the sone of Captap 
dyde make the forme in this manere / There is a place square longe 
as moche as an Archer may shote at twyes, And as brood / closed 12 
with good walles / stronge and 4 hye / And there toward the wests 
ben two gates by whiche men entre, 5 That one is named Speciosa / 
where seynt peter heeled hym that was lame fro his birth, and satte 
to fore the gate for to demaunde Almesse. That other gate had no 16 
name toward the north eest. Toward the thoryent is another gate 
named the Golden gate / Toward the south is the hows Eyall / 
whiche is the temple of Salamon. vpon echo of thyse. yates, By 
whiche men entre in to the toun, And on the comes 6 ben hye 20 
towres / vpon whiche the prouostes 7 were woonte to goo vp at 
certayn howres for to wame and somone the peple to praye and 
saye theyr orysons / and to honoure our lord after theyr custommes / 
Somme endure yet, & the other ben falle. in the cloysture of this 24 
place, ther dar noman dwelle / ne noman is suffred to entre but 
bare foot and clene washen / ffor there ben porters sette at alle the 
yates that take hede therof / In the mydle of this place, whiche is 
thus closed, is another place, more hye and square, toward the 28 
weste men goo vp therto in two places, by degrees or stappes / and 
in lyke wyse toward the souths. But toward the south goth noman 
vp, but by one place / In eueryche of the angles or comers wore 
woont to be oratoryes, where the sarasyns made theyr orysons and 32 
prayers / Somme endure yet / And many ben beten doun / In the 
myddle of this hye place stondeth the temple, whiche is made .viii / 
square / And with out ben the walles couerd with tables of marble 

1 Owing to his misunderstanding of the passage above omitted, Caxton has 
also failed to understand this line. hr. ‘ 1 qui enclot et corUient dedans soy la. 
premiire iglise et les sains lieux que je mus ai nommis ,” which enclosed and 
contained the first church and the holy places which I have mentioned to you. 

3 Lat. Moria. 8 Orig. bought. 4 Orig. aud. 

6 Fr. angles, comers, 7 Fr. provoires, priests, Lat. sacerdotes. 



253 


Ch. CLXXI.] Water Supply of Jerusalem. 

wrought with fyn gold moche rychely / The couerture aboue was The roof t« of 
of leed! alle round! right wel made / eche of thyse places aboue and! made, 
bynethe is paued with moche fayre wkyte stone / in suche wyse 
4 whan it rayneth, alle the waters of the temple, of whiche ther 
falleth grete plente, falleth doun cleene anti! cleer in the cysternes 
whiche ben within the cloystre. There bytwene the temple and 
the place which is emonge the pylers, There stondeth an hye Roche wthinu* 

8 and lowe bynethe a dyche or a fosse. It is sayd that the Angele 1 i>>g*> rock 
stondeth there on, whan he slewe the peple for the synne that 
dauyd hat} nombred his peple, vnto the tyme that oure lord! com- 
maunded! that he sliold! put the swerde in to the shethe. there made on which 

David made 

12 Dauyd? after an Aulter. To fore that oure men entred? m to the an altar, 
toun, it had! been a certayn tyme all discoueryd! / But after they 
that holde it, they couerid it with a fayr wbyte marble, & made an 
aulter aboue where the clerkes dyde the seruyse of oure lord 1 . 


16 2 How the turkes of Ihemsalem, whan they knewe the c* leaf n*j 
comyng of our hooste, stopped the pyttes and 
fontaynes of the toun. ca° Clxxi" 

He londe in whiche Iherusalem stondith is named Iurye, by Jerusalem i» 

in the land 

20 t cause that whan the .x / lygnages / or try bus departed fro the* otJvfoa** 
heyer of Salamon / And! helde them to Ieroboam / The tweyne ‘ l | l e d “ ibe of 
abode in Iherusalem with Roboam that were the try be of Iuda 1 / 

And the trybe of beniamyn / And 1 of the name of Iuda it is named! 

24 Iurye 6 / It is named! also palestyne for the phylystees. This Cyte 
standeth as it were in the nauyll of the londe of Byheste or of 
promyssion / after the termes that were named by Josue / whiche 
endure 6 fro deserte of the mount of Lybane, and! fro the grete flood! 

28 of Eufrates vnto the see. The place in whiche the cyte standeth 

in is moche ayerye & drye / Ther be no waters in the toun but only Tim only 
of the rayn; ffor in wynter tyme whan it is acustoramed? to rayne toj^i^that 
moche in the londe, it is receyuyd! in to the Cistemes / of whom be cisterns. 

32 many in the toun / and they occupye 7 this water in all thynges that Fmmerly 
they haue nede of / Neuertheles somme scriptures saye that they 
were woonte to haue fontaynes, whiche were without the toun, and the town 

1 Fr. s'assist la, sat there. 

* Fr. Voir, the heir. 4 Orig. Iuda. 6 Fr. Judee, Lat. Judaia. 

6 Fr. ‘ 1 da desert et du mont de Libcrne," from the desert and from Mt. 

Libanus. 7 Fr. usent, employ, use. 



254 


The Turks stop up the Fountains. fCh. CLXXII. 

topped up ran * n ^ / 1 ^ u *' ^ey were stopped* by the warre 1 / The leste 2 of 
war»' K * he alle the fontaynes was gyon, whiehe Ezechyas the kyng stopped*, lyke 
as the scripture sayth. Gyon is now a place in the toun toward 
the south, within the valeye that is named* Ermon. There is a 4 
chirche founded* in the worship of seynt pretopt marter. There in 
that same place was Salamon enoynted, as is red in the thirde book 
of kinges. without the toun a two myle or thre ben founden somme 
fontaynes, but they be but fewe / and they rendre but lytil water. 8 
uietownls' ^e P ar ty e toward* the south, where as the two valeyes assemble / 
fouiS of led ' 8 a f°ntayne moch renommed, whiehe is named Syloe / our lord 
siioum. commaundes 8 to the blynde man that neuer had seen that he shold 

goo wasshe hym in the water there of this fontayne, and he sawe 12 
clerely & incontinent was made hool / this forctayne is but a lytil 
myle fro the toun. It semeth that it boylleth a lytil / som tyme it 
spryngeth not, somme saye that alwaye the .iij / daye the water 
eometh agayn atte ferthest. whan the turkes of the toun knewe that 16 
The Tmke oure men cam / they stopped* the mowthes of thyse fontaynes & of 
siitfefoun- the Cysterues a fyue or .vj myle aboute/ ffor they thought that the 
™»e. pylgryms for lacke of watres sholde not mayntene theyr syege to 
[* if. no, bk.] fore the toun / And* 4 without fawte that they had grete lack and 20 
mesease therby, as ye shal here folowyng: they that were within 
within the the cyte had grete plente of water in Cisternes / and fro the fon- 

eity they had . , , , , ' 

greatpienty taynes without cam grete haboundannee by conduytes, whiehe 
while the pii- descended in to .ij / pyscynes right grete by the temple, that one 24 
ou^euffered endureth yet in to this day / and is named* probatica piscina / 
where as they were wonte to wasshe the flesshe of the sacrefyses / 
of whiehe the gospel speketh, and* sayth that it had .v. porches 
where the angele descended' and meuid the water / And he that 28 
fyrst entred after the meuynge of the water was made hool of what 
dysease that euer he had*. In that place oure sauyour Ihesu Crist 
heeled a lame man that had* leyn there many yeres. 


Of the nombre of them of thoost / of them of Iheru- 32 
salem, and how oure men lodged them in the 
siege to fore Iherusalem. Capitulo Clxxij 0 

l - 1 p r “ ma ,is ellesfurent estoupiespar la guerre," but they were stopped 
up by war. a Fr. "la moindre, de Unites Usfimtaines 

5 Orig. commaundes. 



255 


Ch. CLXXII.] The Barons take up their Positions. 
i N the yere of thyncarnasion cf our sauyour Ihesu Criste / Tt>e pilgrims 

encamped 

Mlxxxxix in the moneth of Iuyn, the vij daye of the 8aydf ^ f »wJera- 
moneth, was lodged the boost of cristiente to fore the holy Cyte of 7tll > 1099 - 
4 Iherusalem / The nombre of them that were there, as wel men and Their number 

was about 

wyraraen, were / xl / M. There were not men defensable of the 
foote men aboue / xx. M. On horsback were not passyng* a / xv.O. 

Alle the other were feble men, as seke men and wymmen, and also 
8 old peple. within the toun were men able to here Armes .xl. thousand, 
whiche were comen in fro cytees and castellys ther aboute. And they 
were the best men of Armes, and chosen for the valyauntest that 
they conde fynde / After that oure men were arryued to fore the 
12 toun: They hadde a grete counseyl emonge them, And called the They held 
Cristen men of the Countree for to demaunde of them in what syde 'T hi0 !> »•<*• of 

" the city to 

they myght beste assiege the Toun / They sawe wel that toward ;ltti * ck 
thoryent, Ne toward the Sou the they myght nought doo for the 
16 deepe valeys that ben there. Therfore they accorded to sette the They decided 
siege to fore the northeste / Wherfore it was so that fro the yatc sKth-Aet; 
named the yate of Seynt Steuen, whiche stondeth in the Northeste the greet 

barons took 

vnto the other yate that standeth toward the weste / And is named «p *»• poei- 

v 1 tion near the 

20 the yate of Dauyd, were lodged alle the Barons and the other pyl- wal1 '- 
gryms. The valyaunt Due of loreyne had the fyrst place / In the 
second was therle 1 of fflaundres, In the thyrde was the due of t 1 ie*f ml 
Normandye / The fourth place held Tancre besyde a tour of a 
24 Corner, whiche yet is named the tour of Tancre / And other grete 
men were lodged there with hym. ffro this toure vnto the yate of 
Occident comprysed therle of tholouse the place, and the people 
that were with hym / But after Tancre sawe that by cause the tour 
28 defended the yate so wel / and also for the valeye that was so 
nyghe he myght but lytil proufyte there, therefore by the counseyl 
of the wyse men that knewe wel the beyng of the toun he remeuyd 
fro thens / and 2 wente on the tertre on whiche the cyte is sette on Tancred 

1 * established 

32 3 bytwene the toun and the chirche of seynt Symeon 3 / whiche is jljX'/orr 
withoute the Cyte as far as an Archer maye shote at ones / There 
he lodged hym to thende that he myght beste greue the toun there. |i“” h c * u * 4 
And for to deffende the turkes this sayd chirche, whiche is holy, 

36 ffor there sowped our lord with his discyples / and weeshe humbly 

3 Orig. and. 

3 — 3 Fr. “ entre la villa et Vegliac qui a non Syon," i. e. between the city and 
the church whose name is Sion, not ‘‘Simeon." Lat. “inter urbem et 
ecclesiam quae dieitur Syon." 



256 


The Pilgrims assault Jerusalem. [Ch. CLXXII1. 

theyr feet. There descended the holy ghoost in fyry tonges on 
This is the witsondaye. In the same place passed oute of this world! the glo- 

place where __ . . . , , .. . . . ,, 

tje virgin ryous vyrgyne Marye / whiche bare in her precious body the saueour 
of the world, ther is shewde the sepulture of seynt steuen. 4 

How oure men began tassaylle Iherusalem / And of 
the grete dilyge»ce that they dyde to make 
engyns for to take it / ca° Clxxiij 0 

w Han the barons were thus lodged fro the yate toward north- 8 
este, as I haue sayd, vnto the tour on the corner which is vpon 
the vale of Iosaphat / And! fro thens vnto that other corner of the 
cyte whiche is on the pendaunt of the same vale toward the south, 
thenne was it thynge euydente that the one half of the toun was 12 
wyth payne or vnnethe assieged!. ffor fro thens that I haue sayd! 
vnto the yate named! mount Syon, the Cyte was no thynge assieged. 

The fifth day The fyft daye after that thoost was lodged to fore the Cyte / it 
took their was acorded comynly, and cfyed thurgh alle the lodgys, that alle 16 

aesauit wae nien shold be armed the best wyse they myght and come to 

ordered. * " * u 

thassault. They cam alle, and? began moche strongly thassaylle 
aboute the toun. They hadde the hertes moche hardy, and bren- 
nyng desyres and! wylle to doo the werke of oure lord! / In theyr 20 
comyng on they toke the barbycannea that were right ayenst them. 

1 And the turkes embatilled! them within the grete wallys 1 / They 
p lf.iw.bk.] of the toun were so effrayed 1 of the grete hardynesse 2 and prowesse 
inthecity that they sawe with oure peple and! had oner grete fere, in suche 24 
aiamied'at y wyse that they loste alle theyr hope for to deffende the toun, and 
’ was wel knowen afterward / that yf the talent of our men had 
endured, and 1 that they had had skalyng laddres & castellys by 
whiche they myght haue approuched the walles of the toun, 3 They 28 
had taken it certaynly. but whan thassault had endured fro erly 
momynge that same daye vnto one of the clok of the same daye at 
but the pH- after none / They apperceyued wel that withoute engynes they 
?imt without no * i d°° grete hurte ne dommage to the toun / therfor they 32 

w»?they f withdrewe them abak, & purposed to come agayn to thassault, 
taketh«city w ^ aDl theyr engyns shold be better ordeyned. The barons toke 
counseyl emong them for taduyse / how they myght fynde manere 
to make engyns for tassaylle the toun. ffor them semed that in alle 36 


Fr. “ etles Tuns embatirent dedans les grans murs." 
3 Orig. tonn. 



257 


Ch. CLXXlV.] They make Engines of War. 

the countree shold not be founds trees ne wode ynowe for to make 
suche thynges as they sholde nede. But a valyaunt 1 man of the They found 

trees for their 

countre aam forth and! told to them of a valeye .vj / or vij. myle engineein^ 

4 tliens, whiche was ful of trees and grete ynowghe for to make b r- 
engyns / They sente theder grete nombre of Carpenters, And! somme 
of the barons to conduyte them / Eche of them hewe doun the 
tres, and dyde do brynge them in charyottes / Thenne made they 
8 come alle them of thoost that coude medle with suche thynge, and 
dyde do make engyns, perierers / Magonneauls, castellys, chattes / 
and! wayes couerd!, moche grete plente / The pylgryms that coude ah worked 
werke toke none hyre ne wages yf they had as moch as they myght u'w n"u gave 

• ,| .. . mi i i their time, 

12 entretiene and kepe them self / The other that were pour receyuec? and the poor 

* ~. were p&KL 

theyr wages of the comyns / fEor of all the barons of thoost / tlier 
was none that myght paye the costes of this werke sauf therle of 
tholouse. fEor he hym self allone susteined of his propre good all the 
16 werkemen without thaide of ony other, & also to many knyghtes 
that had despewded theyr good dyde he gyue many grete yeftes. 
whyles that the barons were thus besy, that eueryche dyde do make 
his engyns for hym self / The other knyghtes & the mene peple ran 
20 into busslies and hedges / ffor to fetche stockes and roddes with 
grete dilygence for to make pynnes. 2 None was ydle, but alle men 
heelp to this werke. Ther was noman had shame ne despy te to No man wa« 
doo thynge that myght auaylle; fEor they sayd! well that alle theyr do anything 
24 trauaylle and! despences that they had! don & made in alle theyr >"'p- 
waye were nothyng worth yf this enterpryse for to take this toun 
were not wel accomplysshed. 

3 How our peple were in grete meschyef at the sayd pieanw] 
28 siege, & how the turkes deserted them by cause 
they myght entre and yssue in and out of the 
toun. ca° Clxxiiij 

i N thoost had they grete mesease of thurst, ffor as I haue sayd They suffered 
32 to you the place where the cite stondeth in is moch ayerye & facko?water, 
drye, withoute fontaynes, withoute wellys & pyttes of water spryng- 
ynge / fEor they of the toun, whan they herd! saye / that oure peple 
cam, they fylled somme pyttes that were 4 withoute the toun nygh 
36 to the Cysternes where as was rayn water* / and they had couerd 
1 Orig. valyaunt. * Fr. cloyes, i. e. hurdles, wattles, not “pynnes.” 

*—* Fr. "Lots de la ville pres. Les citemes mesmes au il awit eaue de 
pluie." Caxton divided his sentence here wrongly, and spoiled the sense. 

GODFREY. S 



258 


The Chris¬ 
tians of the 
country told 
them of 
fountains and 
cisterns near 
the city. 


The suffer¬ 
ings from 
thirst grew 
more and 
more intense. 


All their 
animals died 
for lack of 
water. 


[2 If. 118, bk.] 


Great num¬ 
bers of men 
also died. 


They suffer from Thirst. fCh. CLXXlV. 

and! stopped! them, to thende that the pylgryms sholde haue none 
ease of water / But the cytezeyns of bethlehem, and 1 they of a lytil 
cyte called tecua, that knewe the countre al aboute / told! and 
ensseygned to them somme fontaynes / brokes, pyttes, and Cisternes. 4 
ther was grete prees and! grete mesease / suche tyme there was, that 
whan the pour peple myght brynge theyr barellis & vessellys ful of 
troubled water and thycke, They sold it rychely in thooste / The 
fontayne of syloe, of whiehe I haue spoken to fore, myght not 8 
suffyse them, ffor it spryngeth not alway, and yet that was not 
right good. Thanguysshe of thurste grewe moche of the heete that 
was in Iuyn / And! of the trauaylle that they suffred!, and for the 
duste that entred in theyr mowthes / whan two or thre had founden 12 
ony water rennyng or welle / alle ran theder / in suche wyse that it 
faylled anon / The men a foote were not in so grete desease as they 
that had horses / ffor they ledde them somtyme thre or foure myle 
ferre for to watre them, & yet vnnethe founds they ynowgh. there 16 
were many that lefte theyr horses / and habandouned to goo where 
they wold, and other beestys for defaulte of water, ye shold haue 
seen mules, Asses / Oxen, Kyen, and horses goon withoute garde or 
kepar in the feldes / Atte laste, whan the beestys had long languys- 20 
shed / they deyde / wherof cam grete stenclie in thoost, wherof the 
ayer was corrupts ouer peryllously / The peple was not in lasse 
anguysshe there for thurste, than they had ben to fore at Anthyoche 
for hongre / Oure men were acustomed for to seche pasture for theyr 24 
horse moche ferre fro the toun in vyllages ther about. The turkes 
of the toun 1 marked it, and yssued where as the siege lay not / and 
cam ayenst them and slewe many, and toke away theyr horse / And 
brought them in to the Cyte. Many escaped that fledde vnto 28 
thooste. Euery daye lassed the 2 nombre of the pylgryms by many 
suche aduentures / and by grete Infyrmyte and sekenesses that were 
in thooste / and by many other causes, wherof many deyed / And 
in the place of them cam none other / But they in the toun 32 
encreced and grewe euery day, ffor to them cam newe ayde & grete 
refresshementes of men and vytaylle that myght. entre and yssue by 
the yates beyng oute 3 of the siege. 

How the turkes enforced them to make merueylleous 36 
engyns ayenst 4 the owres, And of the meschyef 

1 Orig. tonn. 3 Orig. onte. 

4 Fr. “enconbre Us noatree," against our men. 



259 


Ch. CLXXV.] The Turks make Engines of Defence. 

that they dyde to the cristen men that dwellyd 
in the toun. ca° Clxxv° 

m Oche were our barons in grete payne for to make & adresse the 
4 engynes. The mens peple payned them enfcentyfly to seche 
and ponrchasse suehe ayde and! helpe as they myght / They that 
were, in the toun fayned! nothyng, but made 1 grete cure and grete The Turks 
entente to make other engyns ayenst oures. they toke good! hede to also mode 
8 the Instrumentes that oure men made for tassaylle them. And w »r, 
they adressyd as good or better to defende them / ffor they had for which 
gretter plente of tymbre within the toun than they hadde that were great at>un- 

. * dance of 

without, the toun was moche wel garnysshect of alle thynges that material. 

12 they neded to fore that our peple cam. they had grete plente of 
Cordes, stones 2 wel fetyced, and other thynges more than they 
neded. the cristen men of the toun were more trauaylled and They made 

u the native 

charged with thyse werkes than ony other men. And! also they heavy 
16 were be ten cruelly, And somme they slewe. And with alle thyse work - 
mesauentures 3 4 they bare them on honde that they were tray tours, 4 
and descouerd theyr counseyl to theyr enemyes / there was none of 
the cristen men that durst goo vpon the walles / But yf he were 
20 charged or laden with stones or tymbre, and yf they had ony vytaylles 

in their howses it was take from them, in suche wyse that they and treated 
suffred many meseases / whan one had nede of ony tree 5 / anon 
they bete doun the hows of a crysten man / for to haue a lytil 
24 pyece of tymbre. yf they taryed a lytil to come at the hour assygned, 
anon they were beten and hurt ouer sorowfully. they were brought 
to so moch sorow / that there were but fewe / but they had leuer to 
haue been deed than a lyue. they durst in no wyse yssue out of 
28 their howses without commaundement. 

6 In this tyme arryued a shippe of Genewys 7 atte pleams] 
porte of halappe / and how theyr messagers cam 
in thoost, and how to the barons they made 
32 theyr requeste. Capitulo / Clxxvj® 

1 Fr. “ Mettoient grant cure" took great pains. 

3 Fr. “pierres Unties fetices," i. e. stones cut the proper size. 

J Orig. mesaueutures. 

4-4 Fr. “Us mettoient sus qu’ih estoient traitres," they accused them of 
being traitors. 

4 Fr .fust, timber. 


’ Fr. Oenewris, Genoese. 



260 Skirmish betiveen the Turks and Christians. [Ch. CLXXVI. 


Some Genoese 
ships arrived 
at the port of 
Aleppd 


The Earl of 
Toulouse sent 
some men to 
conduct these 
new-comers 
to the army. 


On the way 
they had u 
skirmish 
with the 
Turks. 


An Egyptian 
fleet now ap¬ 
peared in the 
harbour. 


f 8 If. 119, bk.] 


a T the Siege of Iherusalem the pylgryms conteyned them as I 
haue sayd / Thenne cam a messager that brought tydynges / 
that somme shippes of the Genewes 1 were arryued atte porte of 
halappe, And moche requyred the barons of thoost, they that were 4 
come in the shippes, that they wold sende to them somme knyghtes 
for to conduyte them vnto thooste. The Barons prayde therle of 
tholouse, whiche was most ryehest of them / that he wold sende 
theder somme of his men / he dyde that they requyred!, And! sente 8 
a knyght of his named wyldemart Carpynele, and delyuerd to hym 
.xxx. horsmen / and .L / men a foote / After that they were 
departed / the barons sayde to therle that he had sente ouer fewe 
men, and! prayd! hym that he wold sende yet moo; he agreed wel, 12 
And! sente Bemon pelet and Guyllarame de Arsbran with .L / 
horsemen. But er they had ouertaken this wyldemart / whiche 
wewte alway forth til he was come bytwene Lyde & rames in the 
playnes that ben there / ther mette hym .vj. C turkes on horsbak 16 
which ran vpon hym rudely. At this fyrst reeountre they slewe 
four of oure horsmen, & moo of them a foote / yet our men were 
not disconfyted / but helde them to gydre, And warned! eche other 
to doo well. In this tyme, whyles they fought to gydre / Thyse 20 
two knyghtes that cam after, and theyr companye sawe this scar- 
muche, and so moche hasted that they cam and ioyned with our 
other men. Thenne began they to doo wel, in such wise that they 
disconfyted the turkes and put them to flyght, and slewe .ij C. 24 
turkes of them / Of our men were slayn two valyaunt knyghtes, for 
whom alle the other were sory, that one was named Gylbert 2 de 
treue, And that other Achart 3 de mountuille. whan our men had 
thus disconfyted the turkes, they cam to Iaphe, where they were 28 
receyued with moch grete ioye. the maronners Qf Gene receyued 
them moche honorably / whyles as they soioumed there, and dis¬ 
charged theyr shippes for to aduyse and ordeyne how they myght 
come in the hooste. Sodanly or ony man toke hede of hit, the 32 
nauye of them of egypte, whiche was more redy in the porte of 
Sklauonye, 4 sawe theyr tyme for to hurte our peple, cam to fore 
Iaphe. whan oure men and the genewes apperceyued this / hastely 
they descended to the see / fyrst they 6 essayed for to deffende 36 
them / but they, whan they sawe that there cam so moche peple 
that they myght not resists them, they disgamysshed theyr shyppes 

1 Fr. Oenevois, Genoese. 2 Orig. de trene, but Fr. “de Treve." 

3 Fr. Achart de Montmelle. 4 Fr. Escaloine. 



Ch. CLXXVII.] The Pilgrims work diligently ; on the Engines. 261 
as faete as they myght, and bare away cordes, cables and! saylles, The Genoese 

* v dismantled 

and the other takle, and bare it and leyde it in the fortresse. One their ships, 
shippe of the genewes, whiche was goon for somme gayne vpon the 
4 see / cam alle laden with grete gayne / and wold 1 arryued at the 
porte of Iaphe / but they of the shippe knewe wel fro ferre that the 
nauye of the turkes helde the porte. Therfor they caste about and 
tomed theyr saylle, and wente to the Lyche / The cyte of Iaphe 
8 was thenne alle deserte and voyde of peple, ffor the cytezeyns of 
the toun trusted not wel in theyr fortresse / Therfor they were goon 
a litil byfore that our men cam, of which it happed that oure men 
kepte nomore than the tour / And whan they sawe theyr tyme, they then came 
12 made them redy, am? sette theyr thynges all in ordenaunce, and and joined 
wente tneyr waye and cam m to thoost, where they were receyued 
with grete ioye / ffor the maronners of gene were moche good ceived. 
Carpenters, & coude wel make engynes & other Instrumentes of 
16 warre, in suche wyse that syth they were comen / the barons began 
more delyuerly, and the better theyr enterpryses to brynge to 
an ende. 

How alle the pylgryms, eueryche after his estate 
20 payned them to make thengyns for thassault. 

ca° Clxxvij” 

t Hey that abode in thoost dyde theyr power for tadresse their The work on 
engyns / ffor the due godefroy, the due of normawdye, & therle of 
24 fflaundres had a valyaunt man which was moch wise & iuste named 
Gace 2 de veer / he had the charge for to take hede to the werk- 
men / This man dyde do make theyr werkes Iustly and wel / The 
barons conduyted the men a foote for to gadre to gydre the Rodcles 
28 and bowes of trees for to make witthes and pynnes for to couere 
the engyns, And also to hewe the grete tymbre and brynge it to 
the hoo3t to the werkmen / they toko the hydes of the beestes that 
deyde and stratched them vpon thengynes for to kepe & defende 
32 them fro fyre / In this partye toward the northest the barons entre- ti» barons 
medled vygorously, as I haue sayd, for to assay lie fro the tour of city on the 
the angle or corner vnto the west gate / Tancre trauaylled also 
moche, and the other knyghtes that were there lodged for taduyse 
36 how the cyte myght be wel assaylled on theyr syde. On the syde 

toward the 3 south / there was therle of tholouse and his peple. he p laaf izoi 

1 Fr. vouloit arriver, wished to l&nd. 2 Fr. Qace de Bear , Lat. Beart. 



262 


They set the Day for the Assault. [Ch. CLXXVII1. 


Guilliam 
Ebryac di¬ 
rected the 
work of the 
Genoese 
sailors. 


The work is 
finished, and 
all quarrels 
settled. 


was moost ryche of them / and therfor he had the moost peple that 
wrought. They of Genes were drawen alle to hym / whiche had a 
Capytayn, a moche excellent workman named 1 Guylliam 1 Ebryac. 
he made them to haste moche the werke, and to amende it / Thus 4 
was alle thoost occupyed in this werke four monethes all hool / 
They had so moche exployted that eueryche of the barons had doo 
made right that whiche he had begonne and entreprysed. Therfor 
they counseylled enionge them, & ordeyned at a day sett to goo to 8 
thassault / But for as moch as therle of tholouse and tancre had be 
grete .Rancour and wrath / and somme of the other Barons and 
knyghtes that loued not wel to gyder for dyuerse reasons / The 
barons, by the admonestacion of the bisshops, wolde that of alle 12 
debate shold be good peas / and that eche shold pardone other all 
euyll wyll and talente / by cause that pur lord shold helpe them 
the better in doynge and accomplysshyng 1 his worke. And yf it 
happed them to dye, the surer myght they attende the deth. 16 


Of the fayr processions that oure pylgryms made to 
thende that god shold gyue them vyetorye / and 
how they pardonned eehe other theyr mal talentes 
and euyll wylles / ca° .Clxxviij 20 

t He daye was ordeyned and taken by comyn acorde of alle, 
that procession shold be made, & the relyquyes shold be borne 
They go in a suche as were had in thoost. They shold 1 alle goo- vnto the mount 
jearinjpi of Olyuet, And they shold mayntene them this day in fastyng, In 24 
of the army, repentaunce of theyr synnes / and in orysons and prayer vnto our 
lord to thende that he wold haue pyte of his peple / and receyue 2 
in gree theyr seruyse, in suche wyse that by them his herytages 
myght be reeouerd fro the handes of his enemyes which helde it 28 
Peter the ^ in their possession / Peter theremyte on that one part, and arnold, 
Arnold,’ the chappellayn of the Due of Normandye / whiche was a grete 
clerk and wyse, of that other parte, made the sermon to the peple. 
preach to the They exhorted them by swete wordes to enterpryse vygorously the 32 
werke of oure lord / wherin it were better to deye than to lyue. The 
mount of Olyuete is ayenst Iherusalem in the eeste partye, about a 
myle fer fro the toun / ffor the vaal of Iosaphat is bytwene bothe. 
pif. m, bkj there assembled our lord, his discyples, and styed 3 and ascended vp 36 
to fore them alle in to heuen the day of thassension / and wente vp 


1 Orig. Gnylliam. 2 Fr. “receiist en grt leur service.” 



263 


Ch. CLXXIX.] Change in the Position of the Assaihrs. 

in a clowde which toke hym / whan alle the peple had ben there in au the people 
grete wepynges and prayers / and alle the debates appeased that pray, 
were emong them / they descended fro the hylle in to the chirche 
4 of mount syon, whiche is by the Cyte, as I haue sayd, in the side 
toward the southe on the toppe of a tertre / The sarasyns of the 
toun that were in the toures and! vpon the walles of the toun, 
merueylled! moche. what this myght be that oure men made there / 

8 and where they myght see the presse nygh to them within shotte. 

They cessed! not to shote arowes, and 1 quarellys in suche wyse that 
they hurted somme. Thenne addressyd they crosses vpon the The Turk» 

J on the walls 

walles / and in despyte of our sauyour, and in reproche of oure insult the 
12 fayth, spytte on them, and made other shames and 1 fowle thynges 
whiche be not for to be sayd. The people 2 of our lord, which 
were in holy wylle for to seme hym / sawe wel thise thynges that 
the turkes made / theyr desyre grewe and encreaced moche in theyr 
16 hertes for tauenge the shame of our 3 lord Ihesu Criste / whan they 
had made theyr orysons and prayers in the chirche of mount Syon / 

The day was to them ordeyned and named for to make thassault by The a#y ie 
comyn acorde / Thenne they retoumed! to theyr lodgys, yf ther was assault. 

20 ony thyng to be made on theyr engyns, anon it was accomplysshyd! / 
for euery man toke good hede aboute hym that no thynge faylled 
that shold! be necessarye to make thassault ayenst theyr enemyes. 

How oure men sodenly transported in the nyght 
24 theyr engyns vnto the other part of the toun for 
tassaylle on that side. Capitulo / Clxxix" 

w Han the day approched that they had named for tassayle the 

Cyte / the nyght to fore, the valyaunt due godeffroy, the erle The ntght 
28 of fflauudres / and the due of normandye sawe that this partye leaders of the 

army change 

of the Cyte that they had assieged! was moche wel garnysshed of the pi«u of 
alle maner of engyns, and! 4 the moost defensable men 4 of the Cyte 
they had sette there. Therfore they doubted more this part, than 
32 ony other / The noble men had henipon counseyll / They knewe 
wel that they myght not endommage the toun there. And enter- 
prysed a thynge of a right grete affayre and of moche grete trauaylle / 
for alle thengynes that they had by them, And the castel to fore 

1 Orig. aud. 2 Orig. peole. 3 Orig. onr. 

i_4 jr,. »i es homines les phis defensctbles," their most capable men. Lat. 
viris fortibus. 



264 


[i leaf 121] 
and carry 
their engine* 
to the north¬ 
east Bide, 
which was 
not so well 
defended. 


They draw 
up a great 
castle to the 
walls. 


The Turks 
were asto¬ 
nished in the 
morning at 
this change. 


Each of the 
great barons 
brought his 
engines up 
near the 
walls. 


Astonishment of the Turks. [Ch. CLXXIX, 

the sydes were Ioyned to gydre, they bare 'them alle. On that 
other syde whiche is bytwene the gate of seynt Stephen & the tour 
of thawgle / that is toward the northeest / ffor them semed & it was 
trouthe, that by cause that the cyte had not be assieged on that 4 
syde that ther shold 1 be the lasse defence / wherof it happed that 
they woke al the nyght as wel they as theyr peple, in suche wyse 
that theyr engyns were alle ioyned and reysed vp byfore day or er 
the sonne aroos, in the places where they ought to be. The castel 8 
was so approuched the walle / and was moche hyer, in so moche that 
they that were therin were almoost as hye as one of the toures / and 
knowe ye for certayn / that this was noo lytil trauaylle, ffor fro this 
place where they were fyrst lodged vnto the place where they sette 12 
theyr engyns was nygh half a myle. And the thynges were so wel 
and so hooly ordeyned, that to fore the sonne rysyng all thyng was 
redy at them, on the mornyng the turkes byhelde on the walles 
and" toures, And merueylled what this myght be that our men so 16 
trauaylled all the nyght / they sawe that the lodgys of the Due and 
of the other barons aboute hym were remeuyd. They sought them 
about that other side of the toun, And founde 2 them there, where 
as they had sette no garde, whan they sawe thengyns and the castel 20 
dressyd / they merueylled ouer moche, how they myght doo this 
werke in so lytil tyme. ffor this cause they doubted moche the more 
them that had thus enterprysed and accomplysshed so sodeynly in 
the nyght about that syde of the toun / the barons that were lodged 24 
as ye haue herd to fore / were not ydle, but reysed theyr engyns 
eueryche in his parte / And therle of tholouse had made tapproche 
the walles a castel that he had made with moche grete trauaylle 
bytwene the chirche of mount Syon and the Cyte / the other 28 
that were nyghe the corner, whiche is called the tour of tancre, 
redressyd a castel of tree moche hye. Thyse thre castellys that 
were about the toun were nyhe alle of one facion, ffor they were 
alle square / the sydes that were toward the toun were double / in 32 
suche wyse that one of the panes 3 that was without / myght be 
aualed vpon the walles, and thenne it shold be lyke a brydge. 
But for alle that the side was not vnclosed ne diseouerd, But it was 
hool for to deffende them that were in the castel. 36 


* Orig. fonnde. 


Lat. lotus. 



265 


Ch. CLXXX.] The Christians commence the Assault. 

H(7vv the day folowyng our peple made a merueyllous 1 
assault, And how the turkes defended them sub- 
tylly and wel. Capitulo Clxxx 0 

4 2 t He daye begonne strongly to wexe clere / Thenne, as it was pif.m.bk.] 
enterprysed and deuysed, our men were alle armed for tap- tarmmvtn 
proche the walles. They alle were and had one purpoos. That is SlUauf” t,ie 
to wete, 8 or they wolde take the toun vpon thenemyes of our lord, 

8 And delyuer the ordures of the mescreauntes fro the holy places, or 
ellys in this seruyse they wold! rondre theyr sowles to hym that 
made them. Ther were none that had wylle to drawe aback fro 
this werke / the old men forgate theyr age / the seke men theyr ti» old men, 
12 maladyes, the wyues and childeren euterprysed! in theyr hertes 4 to even the wo- 
doo grete thynges. Alle generally payned them to drawe forth dren were #n 
the castelles, to ioyne them to the walles in suche wyse that they ***”' ° P 
myght approche them that defended it; they of the toun cessyd 
16 not to drawe and! shote Incessantly grete plenty of arowes and! 
quarellys, 5 And! with theyr engyns caste grete stones / the moyen 
peple with theyr handis 5 threwe fro the walles and towres / their 
entente was therwith to make oure men to withdrawen fro the 
20 walles / The good cristen men that doubted nothyng to deye coiflerd 
them with targes & sheldes / thise & other habyllemens they sette 
to fore them, for to kepe them fro the stones & shotte. they that Thoae within 

* the wooden 

were within the castellis of tree lefte not to shote & caste stones *i;°J 
24 vport the turkes Incessantly. And other had grete leuers and incessantly, 
plente of ropes and Cordes with whiche they laboured and payned 
them to drawe forth the castellys / they that were put for to throwe 
the stones and to occupye thengyns were not ydle, but had theyr 
28 thynges wel adressyd, and threwe to them that defended the toun 
grete stones moche asprely, and trauaylled moche for to do thynge 
that myght greue their enemyes / But they that wold haue put Onjuooma 
forth the castellys myght not doo that they wold: for ther was a a>a*tiiey^ 
32 dych moche depe to fore the barbycane, ffor whiche they myght not 
make theyr engyns ioyne to the walles. the strokes of the stones 6 
that were throwen on the walles dyde not moche harme to the walles 
of the cyte, ffor the turkes had sackes ful of heye & of coton, And 

‘ Orig. merueyllons. 8 Orig. wcte. 4 Orig. lertes. 

5—6 Fr. “ les grosses pierres jettoient & leurs engine, les menues et manidbles 
aux mains" viz., they threw the large stones with their engines, the smaller 
and more easily handled stones, with their hands. 6 Orig. stones of. 



266 IVhich lasted until Nightfall. [Ch. CLXXXI. 

grete peces of tymbre bounden with cables of shippes, whiche henge 
a longe by the walles and towrea / in suche wyse that whan the 
stones of thengyns smote thyse softe thynges / the strokes were lost 
The Turks and made no hurte to the walles. On that other syde the turkes 4 
themselves within the toun had moo engyns adressyd than we had without / 

& more quantite of other artyllerye, of Arbalestres withoute 1 com- 
paryson that we hadde / by whiche they slewe many of the pil- 
p leaf 122 ] grims, & it myght not he but that our peple were 2 sore aferd. 8 
Theaasauit Thus was thassault moehe grete & peryllous fro the momyng vnto 
morning to euensong tyme / and duryng thassault it cessed neuer of Arowes 
and! stones fleynge more thy eke, than was in a / M. yere to fore / 
There were so many that ofte the stones mette & hytte eche other 12 
in thayer / in suche wyse that they brak and 1 flewe in pyeces. 
Thassault was in thre places. And the barons payned them sore to 
greue the turkes / men myght not wel knowe whiche partye had 
the better / Oure pylgryms were put to grete payne to bere erthe 16 
for to fyll the dyche, to thende that the castellys myght ioyne to 
threw are hin walles / They within threwe fyre moche thycke in to the 
oil'on'our”* cast ellys / men m yght see many arowes brennyng, 8 brondes, pottes 
men ' ful of sulphre / of oylle / and other thynges, nourysshyng to fyre. 20 
4 The stones to brak that the pyeces flewe thurgh out the sydes / 4 
And it myght not be but that many were hurte that were aboue for 
tassaylle / hyt semed many tymes that alle shold falle to the 
who quench- ground, but our men quenehyd the fyre with water and vyneger / 24 
with water and had redy pynnes for to stoppe the holes / and also for to holde 
to gydre theyr castellys moche lustely, in suche wyse that theyr 
contenaunces were in alle thynges good and hardy. 


The nyght departed the sayd assault, Our peple with- 28 
drewe them / and how they watched wel theyr en¬ 
gyns / and the turkes the toun / Capitulo Clxxxj“ 
t His grete assault & peryllows, that so long endured the derk 
remSto nyght departed. Our men retomed to theyr lodgys for to ete 32 
camp to cat an( j r e 8 te, they lefte grete watche aboute theyr engyns / by cause 
people Tea'll the turkes s hdd not brenne them, and they of the toun made grete 
watchonthe wa tche to kepe theyr walles, ffor they / doubted moche that oure 

peple, whom they had seen so vygorously assaylle / and defende 36 
1 Orig. wtthoute. 3 Orig. brennyug. 

4—1 Fr. “ lewrs perrieres y frappoient si grans coups guclles s'emoloimt par 
my les costes oultre.” 



267 


Ch. CLXXXII.] In the Morning they recommence. 


them, myght by nyght come vp on the walles by laddres and entre 
in to the toun. Therfor they peyned them to make good watche 
alle this nyght / and to goo round about the walks and serche the 
4 towres / The stretes also made watche within the toun with grete »i»o in u.e 

' ° streets, for 

nombre of people, by cause of fere of trayson. They sette heron 1 fe«rottrea- 
grete entente, ffor it was for the sauacion of theyr lyues / theyr 
wyues, theyr childeren, & alle theyr goodes hoolly. Our peple that 
8 were in the tentes and in the lodgys had not theyr hertes in reste, 
but they remembryd of thassault that had! be / Euery man 2 remem- [»it m, bk.] 
bryd hym what he had! don, And 1 hym semed! that he had left 
many thynges vndon that he ought to haue don. And moche 
12 desired they alle to come to the poynt for to doo prowesse. the 
daye taryed long er it cam as they thought / them semed that they 
had no greef ne ennoye of the trauaylle that they had suffred that 


day. They had grete hope in theyr hertes / that assone as they The pilgrims 
16 shold come agayn to gydre for tassaylle, that they by the helpe of hopesthat^ 
our lord they shold haue the better. And they were in grete ^r^ouid^ 
anguysshe / by cause them semed to be in more mesease in their 


lodgys than in thassault. 


20 How our peple retorned agayn on the mom to thas¬ 
sault / And of the sorceryes 8 that they wold haue 
charmed one of our engyns. Capitulo Clxxxij® 
t He sprynge of the daye appiered, the peple Incontinent were 
24 awaked. Eche wente to the place where he had ben the daye At daybreak 

every one was 

to fore / Thenne sholde ye haue seen somme renne to thengynes in his place 
and other goo vpon the castellys for to shote with bowes and 
arabalestres. And many abode vnder for to drawe the sayd cas- 
28 tellys forth. Nowe were they of the toun anon redy for to defende 
vygorously ayenst the assayllers. There deyed ynowgh on bothe 
sydes as wel of stones as of quarellys / but not for that, the other 
lefte not /. but gretelv they dyde theyr deuoyr / ne neuer was never was 

A seen less 

32 founden lasse cowardyse in so peryllous aftayre & werke. One cowardice in 
thynge happed that ought not to be forgoten / that is, that our men work- 
had an Instrument called Caable, so strong and 4 so wel made that 
5 it threwe thre grete stones attones. 5 And dyde moche hurte in 

1 Orig. heron. 3 Fr. sorciires, Sorcerers, witches: not “sorceries." 

4 Orig. and. 

5—5 iy. “elle getoit trap grosses pierres," it threw very large stones instead 
of three large stones. 



268 


The Turks 
brought two 
old witches 
and three 
maidens to 
charm the 
engines of 
our men. 


Our men 
threw stones 
and killed 
the three 
maidens. 


f* leaf 123] 


Our men 
Iwgan to wax 
weary, 


and their 
engines were 
smoking 
with fire- 


Our Men grow weary. [Ch. CLXXXIII. 

the toun where it atteyned. the turkes sawe wel that they coude 
not breke it / ffor it threwe fro so ferre that their engine myght not 
come ther to / therfor they dyde do come vpon the walles -ij. old! 
wytches or enchaunteresses, whiche shold charme this engyne / and 4 
they had? with them iij maydens, for to helpe to make theyr charme / 
Alle they of oure hooste behelde them moche ententyfly / ffor they 
made their enchantemewt vpon the walles / they abode so longe 
there that thengyne threwe the stones / & atteyned the two old 8 
wytches and! the thre maydens in such wise that they were smeton 
alle to pyeces, and fyl douu deed fro the walles, of whom the sowles 
wente forthe to helle. Thenne oure peple made an hu and! a crye 
so grete / And! 1 2 so grete ioye therof / that euery man of them was 12 
refresshyd! of this good! strook / They of the toun were ouer sorow- 
full and! moche abasshed, in suche wyse that they semed 3 that they 
had! loste alle theyr good! ewr and! fortune for the losse of thyse two 
wytches that thus were slayn. 16 

Of the despayr of our peple at the sayd assault. And 
how they were recomforted by a knyght vn- 
knowen, and euydent myracles. 

Capitulo / Clxxxiij 0 20 

i if this poynt endured! thassault vnto after myddaye / that men 
knewe not whiche of them had the better / Our men began to 
wexe wery / 4 And> thassault tourned! them to annoye and! grief / ffor 
they had longe don alle theyr power / And the werke was not 24 
moche amended, but were falle in a desperaunce / in suche wyse 
that they had talente to leue the castell of tree, whiche was nygh al 
to broken of the stones and shotte / and wolde drawe abak the 
other engyns that smoked! of the fyere that the turkes had! caste 28 
therin, therfore 5 wold! they prolonge thassault til on the morn / 
And herof to doo thus they had good! wylle. 6 Theyr enemyes ap- 
perceyued! this / that they lefte thassault 6 thus, & were reysed! in 

1 eurent; had, omitted. 3 Orig. seed. 

4 Fr. “et tew torna l'affaire A ennui," and the affair began to annoy 
them.—This is a good sample of Caxton’s “literal ” translations. 

s Orig. herfore. 

6 Fr. "lews ennemis s’estoient aperceuz qu'ilz se lasaoicnt moult chilre- 
ment,” i. e. their enemies perceived that they were becoming seriously tried. 

C ax ton ha3 mistaken se lassoiei tf^were becoming fatigued), for laissoicnt (were 
leaving). 



260 


Ch. CLXXXIII.J A wonderful Miracle encourages them. 

to grete pryde. They mocqued oure peple, & sayd to them many The Turk* 
fowle and 1 shamefull wordes, and more asprely defended them self / with foul 
and! hurted thengyns. In moche feble poynt was the conduyt of 
4 oure pylgryms. And yf ne had be the debonayrte of oure lord / 
whiche by myracle comforted them, like as ye shal here, ffro the 
mount 1 of olyuet appiered a knyht whiche was not knowen ne At tine 
neuer myght be founden. This knyght began to shake and meue knightap. 

8 his shelde, whiche was moche cleer and shynyrg*. And made the Mt. of 
signe to our peple that they shold now retome , 2 and come agayne ‘ hil,il ' K 
to thassault / The Due godeffroy was in his estage of the castel, 

And eustace his broder with hym, for to deuyse and ordeyne there 
12 that ought be don, & to kepe that holde whiche moch was good, as* 
sone as he sawe this signe that this knyght made, he began to call 
all thet peple agayn with a moch hye voys, & cryed & affenned that 
yf they wold retorne the toun shold be taken / herof it happed that 
16 by the debonayrte of oure lord, whiche put'in the hertes hardy- 

nesse / In suche wyse that they cam agayn with so grete ioye, our men now 

took heart, 

as that euery man had* be in certayne of the vyctorye. So grete and renewed 
4 hardyues was come in to their hertes / that they were entierly o if. 123 , wc.] 
20 refresshyd / as they that in al that day had suffred no trauaylle / 
and one thyng happed whiche was grete meruaylle / ffor they that 
were hurte peryllously / and ! 5 laye in theyr beddes / sprange vp 
anon and reprysed theyr harnoys and! armes in suche wyse that 
24 more dylygently and of greter herte than the other / [they] began to 

assay lie. The Barons of thoost that were Capytayns of the people The great 

. . barons ex- 

for to gyue ensaraple to other men / put them self alway to fore / posed them- 
where the grettest dauwgiers were / were foundere the moost hye th * 
28 mew of thoost / by whiche the mene peple were the more hardy / sangere. 
The wymmen that myght bere no armes ran with theyr pottes ful of 
water thurgh thoost / and gaf to all them that were wery of assayl- 
lyng to drynke / And moche admonested them by fayr wordes for 
32 to doo wel / And to serue our lord vygorously. Oure pylgryms had 

so grete ioye in theyr hertes that they laboured and toke the werke Themen 
so hertely, that within the 6 space of half an hour they fylled the 
dyche. And a barbycan, whiche was moche stronge / in suche wyse 
36 that they brought the castel vnto the walle . 7 The turkes of the fiBed - 
toun had hanged, as I haue sayd, with cordes long pyeces of tymbre 

1 Orig. tnouut. * Orig. retorue. * Orig. a5. s Orig. aud. 

8 Fr. “ I’cspace d’une heure," within the space of an hour. 

7 Fr. "St avoient priiue," omitted by Caxton in translating. 



270 


Two great 
pieces of 
timber were 
cut down 
from the 
walls, 


which our 
men used to 
strengthen 
their castle. 


On the other 
side, the Earl 
of Toulouse 


had brought 
his castle up 
to the wall. 


[» leaf 124] 


The Chris¬ 
tians fought 
with great 
boldness and 
hardiness. 


in the hope 
that our Lord 
would help 
His soldiers. 


They continue vigorously. [Ch. CLXXXTV. 

a long the wall for to receyue the strokes of the stones / Emong all 
other there were two grete pyeces of tymbre moche longe, of whiche 
our men that were in the castel cutte the cordes in suche wyse that 
they fylle to the ground. They that were vnder toke them with 4 
grete perylle / and drewe them ner the castel for to helpe to staye 
and sette vnder the brydge of the castel whan it shold be aualed / 
fEor the side of the castel that shold be lete falls vpon the walle / 
was of feble tymbre / in suche wyse / that yf thyse two pyeces of 8 
tymbre had not be / the men of Armes mocht not haue passed 
on it. 


How therle of tholouse assaylled vygorously toward 
the south & of thardaunt desire that eche man 12 
had to doo wel. ca° C lxxxiiij. 

Hyles as they conteyned them thus vygorously in the partye 
w toward th# northeest / the erle of tholouse and the other that 
were with hym on the side toward the south assaylled there 16 
with grete strewgthe : they had fylled a dyche, in whiche they had 
laboured, I wote not how many dayeg, in suche wyse that by force 
they 1 had drawen theyr castel, so ferre forth that it was nyghe the 
walle / In suche wyse that they that were aboue 2 in the last stage, 3 20 
myght smyte the turkes with their glaues that defended the tour.. 

A man coude not thynke thardaunt desyre, ne so grete anguysshe 
as eueryche 4 of the cristen men had in his herte for to do wel in 
this assault / one thinge there was that gaf to them moche grete 24 
courage / And merueyllously grete hardynesse / ffor a man that was 
an heremyte on the mount of olyuete had promysed to them moche 
certaynly / that that same daye shold be taken the holy cyte of 
Iherusalem. Ne they had not forgoten the demonstraunce that the 28 
knyght made to them / whan he shoke his shelde, ne neuer after 
was seen, they had moch hope of the vyctorye by thise signefy- 
aunces that were shewed to them. It semed that thassaultes were 
bothe in one poynt in eyther syde that I haue named. They dyde 32 
bothe right wel / And certaynly it appeered wel that cure lord wold 
helpe his souldyours, and brynge theyr pylgremage to an ende, 
whiche so longe had suffred so many maners of mesease for to doo 
to hym seruyse. 36 

1 Orig. that they. 2 Fr. “ au derrenier estage, ” on the top story. 

4 Orig. eneryche. . 



Ch. CLXXXV.] Godfrey and Eudache eider Jerusalem. 


271 


Of the pryse and takynge of Iherusalem / And how 
the Due godeffroy entred fyrst vpon the walles. 

And who folowed after. Capitulo Clxxxv® 

4 t He people of the due godefroy and the other barons whiche 
were with hym, as I haue sayti, fought moche asprely ayenst 
theyr enemyes on theyr syde / & delyuerd to them a moch mar- 
ueyllous assault. They had don so moche that theyr enemyes The Turks 
8 wexed wery / and! weryly and slowly defended them / 1 Oure men wear^andto 
were drawen forth, and the dyches fylled, the barbycans taken, and! slowly, 
in suche wyse they cam playn to the walles / ffor they within 
entremeted not moche, but launched and! shotte vpon the walles 1 / 

12 The due commaunded to his peple that were vpon the castel, that The Duke^ 
they sette fire in the pokes of coton & in the sackes of heye that J«to 
henge on the walles / They dyde his commaundement / thenne 
aroos a smoke so blacke and 1 so thycke that they myght nothynge 
16 see. The wynde was northeeste, and! blewe vpon the Turkes that 
were at defence vpon the walles, in suche wyse that they myght not 
opene theyr eyen ne theyr mowthes, But by force they muste ti™ Turks, 
avoyde the place that was delyuerd! to them to deffende / The withdraw. 

20 valyaunt Due Godeffroye, whiche 2 soynously entended! to the werke, 
apperceyued first that they were departed / therane he commaunded 
that they shold drawe diligently the .ij/ pyeces of tymbre that were 
fall era fro the wall / as ye haue herd to fore / this was don anon, in 
24 suche wyse that the two endes of the two trees were leyd vpon the 

3 castel, And the two other endes vpon the walle / Thenne com- pif. iu, bkj 
maunded that the syde of the castel that myght be late doun / Godfrey now 
shold be late doun vpon the two pyeces of tymbre / Anti thus was bridge of th« 
28 the brydge made good and! strong vpon the tymbre of theyr 

enemyes / The fyrst that entred and passed by the brydge vpon and^used 
the walles was the Due Godeffroy of boloyne / anti Eustace his waifc ja- 
brother with hym. After thyse tweyne cam two other knyghtes / 

32 that were also bretheren, whiche also were fyers, noble & hardy. 

That one was named lutol, and that other gylbert. They were 
borne in tornay / Anon ther siewed! them grete nombre of knyghtes 

i-i Fr. “ li nostre s’estoient tirez amid, les fossez avoient empliz, les barbe- 
canes prises, si quc dc pUin venoient aits murs ,* car csulx dedans ne s eidrc~ 
mettoient mais guaires de traire, ns de lancer par dessits les murs , ne par les 
archUres. ” The last part of this sentence, Caxton has thoroughly misunder¬ 
stood, and has completely inverted the sense. 2 Fr. soigneusemerd. 



272 


Ati the others follow. [Ch. CLXXXVI. 

and of peple a foote, whiche ranne moche thycke, as moche as they 
myght susteyne / Anon the turkes apperceyued that our men were 
entred in to the toun, and sawe the baner of the due vpon the 
The Turk* wallys. And were disconfyted and gaf ouer the toures, and descended 4 
towers. in to the toun, and put them in to the strayt and narowe stretes for 
to defende them / Oure peple sawe that the due and grete partye of 
the knyghtes were now entred / and that they had taken I wote 
The Knights not how many towres / they abode no commaundement, but adressyd 8 

mount the 1 . . 

walls, with- Iaadres to the walles anc? wente vp. It was commaunded a good 

out waiting 

further whyle to fore that euery ij knyghtes shold haue a laddre, Therfor 
ther were grete nombre in thoost whiche anon were adressyd 1 vp. 
The due ranne moche dylygently vpon the walles / and sette the 12 
peple as they cam in the towres. he moche hasted for to take the 
ah the great fortresse. Anon, after that the due was entred, entred in the due 
ed the city, of Normandye, Therle of fflaundres / Tancre the valyaunt, Therle of 

seynt poul / Bawdyn deltors, 2 Gace de barce 8 / Gaste de bedyers, 16 
Thomas de fere / Gyralt de Roussylon / Lowys de Monco / Conam 
lybres / Therle Eemboult of Orenge, Conain de Montagu, Lambert 
his sone, and many other knyghtes whiche I can not name / whan 
the valyaunt Due knewe certaynly that they were in the toun / he 20 
called them, and commaunded that they shold goo hastely to the 
yate, named the yate of seynt Stephen / And that they shold opene 
and the gates it / whan it was open / Alle the people cam in with moche grete 
sverylxKty : ° prees, In suche wyse that there abode but fewe withoute / But alle 24 
thishajpened were comen within the toun / This was vpon a frydaye, aboute 
about noon. None / It is a thynge for to be beleuyd, that oure lord dyde this by 
grete sygnefyaunce, ffor on this daye and 4 about that hour suffred 
he deth on the crosse right cruel in the same place, for the Redemp- 28 
cion of man. Therfore wold the swete lord that the peple of his 
[• leaf i25] trewe pylgryms shold 5 gete 6 this toun, 7 and delyuer it oute of the 
seruage and thraldom of the hethen men, and make it free vnto 
Cristen men, that his seruyse myght be had therin and encreced. 32 

Of the mayntenyng of our peple entred in to the 
toun toward the northeest / And therle of tho- 
louse, herof alle ygnorant, assaylled alle way / 

ca° Clxxxvj 0 36 

1 Fr. drecUs, i. e. set up. 3 Fr. Saudoin de Ultore. 

3 Fr. Oastes de Bearz. 4 Orig. and. 

3 Fr. “a cejtmr," on this day, omitted. 7 Orig. tonn. 



273 


Oh. CLXXXVI.] The Slaughter is terrible. 

t He valyaunt due godeffroy of buyllon / the knyghtes, and the 
other men of armes that were with hym, descended fro the 
walles all armed in to the toun / They wente to gydre thurgh the 
4 stretes with their swerdes in their handes, & glayties, alle them that aii the in- 
they mette they slewe & smote right doun, men, wymmen and ^J^tered 
childeren, sparyng none. There myght no prayers ne cryeng of merc y- 
mercy auaylle. They slewe so many in the stretes / that there were 
8 heeps of dede bodyes, and myght not goo ne passe but vpon them 
that so laye deed. The foote men wente in the other partyes of 
the toun by grete rowtes, holdyng 1 in theyr handes grete polaxes, 
swerdes, malles and other wepens, sleyng 1 alle the turkes / that they 
12 eoude fynde / ffor thei were the men of the world whom our men 
had grettest hate vnto, and gladlyest wold put to deth / They were 
thenne comen vnto the mydle of the Cyte. Therle of tholouse ne Tbe Eari of 
his men knewe nothyng yet that the toun was taken, but assaylled? ^^notwnp 
16 moche fyersly the toun ayenst syon / The turkes that defended <*pt«i»oftiM 
them ayenst hym apperceyued not that our peple were in the toun. 

But whan the crye and! the noyse of 1 them that men slowe began 
to growe / The turkes behelde and sawe fro the walles / And 
20 knewe wel the baners and Armes of the cristen men, And were 
moche abasshed. They lefte alle theyr deffences, & fledde there 
where they supposed! best to be saued, And by cause that the 
dongeon of the toun whiche was by, and was the grettest strengths 
24 of the cyte, Alle they that myght entre entred therm / And shette 
faste the doores on them / The erle of tholouse made the brydge of 
his castel auale vpon the walles / and entred there in the toun, he butonumd 
hym self / and the Erie of dye, yso[c]ar, remon pelet, guyllem de 
28 sabram / the bisshop of albare / & the other barons moche hastely, 

& wende that they on that part of the toun had be the first that clt y- 
had entred. thenne they wente doun of the walles / And alle the 
Turkes that they founde 2 in the 3 stretes and in the howses they pif.i 25 ,bk.] 
32 brought to deth and slewe doun right / ffro than forthon myght 
none escape, ffor whan 4 they that fledde to fore Due Godeffroye 
and his rowte, mette with other rowtes of oure peple, whiche smote 
them doun and slewe them without mercy / I may not reherce ne 
36 can not to you the faites of euery man by hym self / But there was 

so moche blood shedde that the eanellys and ruissheauls 8 ronne Tbe streets 
alle of blood / and alle the stretes of the toun were couerd with blood. 

i n ccicx qu?on occioit " of those that were being killed. 

8 Orig. fouude. * superfluous. 6 Fr. ruisseauls, 

GODFREY. T 



274 


It had been 
a great pity, 
had they not 
been the 
enemies of 
our Lord. 


Many fled to 
the inner 
Temple. 


Tancred 

followed, 


and found 
therein great 
spoils. 


[* leaf 126] 
10,000 Turks 
were slaugh¬ 
tered in the 
enclosure of 
the temple. 


10,000 Turks are slain in the Temple. [Gh. CLXXXVII. 

dede men, In suche wyse that it was grete pyte for to see, yf it had 
not be of thenemyes of our lord Ihesu Creste. 

How .x/ M. turkes were slayn in the temple / And of 
the grete tresour that Tancre founde in the sayd 4 
temple / ca° Clxxxvij 0 

i N to thynner part of the temple were fledde moche grete peple 
of the toim / 5 by cause it was the moost seynorously and rial 
place of the toun. 1 And the sayd place was fast shette and closed 8 
with good walles / of towres and yates / But this auaylled them 
but lytil, ffor incontinent Tancre, which ladde a grete partye of 
thoost with hym / ranne theder and toke it by strengthe, and slewe 
many therin / And it was sayd that Tancre founde therin grete 12 
hauoyr / and gold / syluer, precious stones and cloth of sylk. He 
made alle to be born a way. But after, whan alle was settcin 
reste / he rendryd all / And made it al to be brought in to the 
comyn. The other barons, that had enserched the toun / and slayn 16 
alle the turkes that they eneountred, herd saye / that within the 
cloysture of the temple were fled alle the remenaunt of theyr 
enemyes / They alle cam to gydre theder / And founde that it was 
trewe. Thenne commaunded they to theyr men that they shold 20 
entre in to the place, and put them alle to deth. And so they 
dyde / It was wel couenable thyng that the hethen men and fals 
mysbyleuyd, whiche had fowled and shamefully had maculated 
with theyr mahometry and fowle lawe of machomet, shold abye 24 
there theyr fals rytes / And that theyr blood shold also be shedd, 
where as they had spred the ordure of mescreaunce. It was an 
hydeouse thyng to see the multitude of peple which were slayn in 
this place. They them self that had slayn hem were sore ewnoyed 28 
so for to beholde them, ffor fro the plawte of the foot vnto the heed 
was none other thyng but blood / Ther was founde that within the 
closyng of the temple we 2 re slayn .x/M/ turkes, without© them 
that leye in the stretes and other places of the cyte. Thenne the 32 
mene peple of the pylgryms ran serchyng the lanes and narow 
stretes. whan they fonde ony of the turkes that had hyd them, 
were it man or woman, anon he was put to deth / the barons had 
deuysed to fore that the toun was taken, that euery man shold haue 36 
the hows in the toun that he toke and fyrst seased / and it shold 

1-1 Lat. “ eo quod locus in parte urbis esse, videretur secretwr." 



Ch. CLXXXVIII] The Christians give Thanhs for their Victory. 275 

be his with alle appertenauntes: Wherfor it was so that the Barons The knight* 
sette vpon the howses that they had conquerd theyr baners / The took 
lasse knyghtes and 1 men of Armes theyr sheldes; the men a foote {Jo® 6 /'" 1 
4 sette vp theyr hattes and 1 theyr swerdes, ffor to shewe the tokenes, 
that the howses were thenne taken and 1 seased, to thende that none 
other shold come in to it. 

Of the fayr ordenaunces that the Cristen men made 
8 to fore they wente for to vnarme them, after the 
toun was taken / Capitulo Clxxxviij" 

Han the holy Cyte was thus taken, and alle the sarasyns that 
w coude be founden were slayn, the barons assembled! them to 
12 gydre to fore they vnarmed them / and commaunded! to sette TheCbrie- 
men in the towres for to make good watche, and kepe the toun. commenced 
And sette porters for to kepe the yates, that noman from without ^“ ir * of th ” 
shold come in to the toun without leue vnto the tyme -that they had 
16 ordeyned and chosen a lord, by comyn acorde, that shold holde the 
toun, and goueme 1 it at his wylle. It was not meraeylle if they 
doubted 2 yet, ffor alle the countre was ful of sarasyns, And myght 
peraduenture assemble and sodenly come and smyte in to the toun 
20 yf ther were not good watche and hede taken, thenne departed 
the barons, and disarmed them and toke of theyr harnoys in theyr 
hostellys / and wesshe theyr handes and feete moche wel / and 
chaunged theyr clothes / Thenne began they goo bare foot, and in Theyaii went 
24 wepynges and teeres, vnto the holy places of the Cyte / where oure grocer™ t0 
sauyour Ihesu Criste had ben bodyly. they kyssed the place P |ace “’ 
moche swetly where as his feet had touched / the Crysten peple 
and the clergye of the toun, to whom the turkes had many tymes 
28 don grete shames for the name of Ihesu Criste, cam with procession / 

& bare suclie relyquyes as they had ayenst the barons : and brought 
them, yeldyng 1 thankes to Almyghty God, vnto the Sepulcre / and 
there it was a pytous thyng to see how the peple wepte for ioye and fell down 
32 and pyte / And how they fylle doun a crosse to fore the sepulcre / bef«jc 
3 It seined to eueryche of them that eche sawe there the bodye of pir.i 26 .bk.] 
our 4 lord there deed, there were so many teeres and wepynges that 
euery man thought certaynly oure lord was there / whan they cam 
36 in one of the holy places, they coude not departe, but yf it were for 
thardaunt desire that they had for to goo in another. They had so 
1 Orig. gonerne. 3 Orig. doubted'. 4 Orig. onr. 



276 


They had 
great joy that 
our Lord had 
suffered them 
to see this 
day. 


They gave 
great gills to 
the churches, 


and thanked 
our Lord 
devoutly for 
his goodness. 


Many of the 

f nlgriins who 
iad died on 
the way ap¬ 
peared to 
their com¬ 
rades. 


[} leaf 127] 


They give large Stims to the Churches. [Ch. CLXXXVIll. 

moche ioye and gladnesse of this honour, that our lord! had gyuen 
them the grace to see the day that the holy Cyte was delyuerd fro 
thenemyes of Ihesu Cryste by theyr trauaylles / in such wyse that 
they rought not ne sette not by the remenaunt of theyr lyues. 4 
They offred! and! gaf largely to the chirches, and! to men of the 
chirche / and made vowes to yeue yeftes in their countrees, whiche 
thenne sette lytil by temporal thynges / ffor them thought that 
they were atte yates and! entree of paradys, ffor neuer in this world! 8 
myght gretter ioye entre in to the herte of a man / than was in 
them in sechyng and! goyng to the holy places where our sauyour 
Ihesu Criste had ben. One shold haue had a moch harde herte, 
and lytil pytous, that had seen this syght / and myght haue holde 12 
hym fro wepynge / whan thyse barons and alle the other peple had 
made thus glad chiere of this that they had accomplysshyd theyr 
pylgremage, The Bysshoppes, and generally alle the peple of the 
chirche, myght not departe fro the chirche of the sepulcre, ne fro 16 
the other holy places. They prayd our lord moche deuoutly and! 
ententyfly for the peple, and rendred grete graces and thankynges 
vnto Ihesu Criste of this that he had suffred them to see thyse holy 
places, where the fayth of Cristendom was fyrst gyuen / In this 20 
daye happed certayn thynge that was seen of many men in the 
Cyte of Iherusalem, that was, the valyaunt man Aymart, the 
besshop of puy, whiche was dede in Anthyoche / lyke as ye haue 
herd to fore / many noble men whom men ought to byleue, affermed 24 
certaynly that they sawe hym first mourete and goo vpo« the walles 
of the toun, & that he called other to come aftir hym / Of many 
other pilgryms also, that were to fore by the waye deed / It was 
certayne that they appiered to many / men the daye whan they 28 
vysyted the chirches of the Cyte. By thyse thynges may wel be 
knowen that our lord loueth this holy cyte aboue alle other, And 
that this is the hyest pylgremage that may be, whan deed men ben 
reysed by the wylle of oure lord for taccomplysshe theyr pyl- 32 
gremage / whan oure lord Ihesu Criste aroos fro deth to lyf, the 
gospel sayth that the same day aroos many bodyes of them that 
had ben deed, and appiered to many in the cyte / This myracle 
1 was renewed this day by Ihesu Criste, by this cyte whiche had 36 
ben longe holden in the seygnorye of the paynems / whan it was 
vnder them that serued the lawe of machommet. So grete noyse 
was thurgh the toun of the ioye that was made, that they remem- 
bred not the grete trauaylle that they had suffred by alle theyr 40 



Ch. CLXXXIX.] The Christians of Jerusalem, thank Peter. 277 

wave / Thenne was accoinplvsshed alle euvdentlv this that the Then wa« 
prophete sayd / 1 hmoye ye with Iherusalem / and! make ye loye the «»ying of 
within them that ye loue. 1 


4 How the Cristen men, that had charged their message 
for their delyueraunee to peter theremyte, knewe 
hym / ca° Clxxxix 0 

a S many pour cristen men as had dwellid in the toun / which 
8 had! seen Peter theremyte four or fyue yere to fore / whan 
they delyuerd! to hym lettres for to here to our holy fader the pope, 
and! to the barons of fTraunce / to thende that they myght sette 2 
remedye for theyr affayres, they knewe hym emonge the other. 
12 therene they cam to hym, and! fyl doun 3 to his feet and wepte for 
ioye / And moche gretely thanked hym of this that he had! so wel 
performed his message, ne they cessed not to yeue preysyng and 
lawde to our lord that had gyuen suche counseyl to the barons and! 
16 to the peple, by which they had performed such an hye werke, 
which was aboue the hope of alle men, sauf by thayde of oure lord / 
Alle the gree and thanke they gaf to Peter theremyte, whiche so 
vygorously had enterprysed 1 for to delyuere them by thelpe of our 
20 lord fro the caytyfnes and seruage dolorous, in whiche they had ben 
so long holden by the cruelte of the sarasyns, lyke as ye haue herd 
to fore. The Patriarke of Iherusalem was goon in to Cypres / for 
to demannde Almesse and ayde of the cristen men there, for to 
24 helpe and socoure the cristen men of Iherusalem to paye the cruel 
taillages that the turkes had sette vpon them, ffor he doubted yf 
they faylled! of their payment / that they wold bete and throwe 
doun theyr chirches or put to deth the beste of theyr peple, lyke as 
28 they had don many tymes / to fore. This good man, the Patriarke, 
knewe nothyng of this good auenture that oure lord had don of the 
delyueraunee of the toun / But supposed to haue come and to haue 
founden 4 it in suche seruage as it was whan he departed. 


The poor 
Christians of 
Jerusalem 
recognize 
Peter the 
Hermit, 
and give 
thanks to 
him who has 
delivered 
them by his 
energy. 


The Patri¬ 
arch of Jeru¬ 
salem was in 
Cyprus, and 


knew nothing 
of what had 
happened. 


32 How they clensed the toun of the dede bodyes / Of 

many other ordenaunces. 5 And how the turkes pif.iw,bkj 

i—i Mistranslation i Fr. “ esjoyesses-vous avec Jerusalem, et faites joye 
dedans, ceulx qui I'aimes," Lat. “ Laetamini mm Hierusalem, et exsultate in 
ea omnes qui diligitis earn. ” 

a Orig. settte. 8 Orig. donn. 4 Orig. fouuden. 



278 


They cleanse Jerusalem. 


[Ch. CXO. 


After the 
barons had 
visited the 
Holy Places 
they met 
together. 


rendred the dongeon vnto the erle of tholouse. 

Capitulo Clxxxx° 

w Han the barons and! the other pylgryms had! made theyr 
prayers and vysyted the holy chirches thurgh the Cyte of 4 
Iherusalem / The hye men of the hoost assembled!, and sayd that it 
was a peryllous thynge yf the toun were not voyded! of the dede 
bodyes, and purged of the blood and ordure, ffor in short tyme the 
ayer shold be corrupt / by whiche sekenesse and Infyrmytes myght 8 
ensiewe and folowe / There were somme turkes yet that were not 
slayn, but were kepte in yrons. to them was commaunded this 
werke for to bere the bodyes out of the toun / but by cause they 
were but fewe of them / and myght not suffyse to doo it shortly. 12 
and net about they toke the poure men of thoost / and gaf to them good hyre for 

cleansing the 1 f 

town ie»t a to helpe taccomplyssho this werke / whan the barons had this 
deuysed thyse thynges, they wente in to theyr howses and made 
moche grete ioye / they gaf largeli to ete & drynke / ffor the toun 16 
was repleneshed of alle goodes, in suche wise that they were to fore 
poure fonde in the howses alle thyng that was nedeful to them, 
wherof they had endured to fore grete anguysshe and penurye, ffor 
on the third they fonde the cystemes alle ful in alle the howses. On the thyrd 20 
a marina to ld day was ordeyned that market shold be holden in the toun / And 
thXapoiii. that they shold bye and selle suche thynges as they had conquerd 
in the Cyte. They were moche refresshyd and rested, ffor 1 they 
abode now no trauayll. They forgate not our lord, whiche had 24 
brought them in so grete honour as for taccomplysshe his werke by 
them / And by comyn acord of the prelates, of the barons, and of 
alle the people was ordeyned, that this daye, in whiche Iherusalem 
was goten and conquerd, shold euermore after be holden feste and 28 
holy day / in remembraunce of the cristen men to thanke and preyse 
our lord / and also praye to our lord for the sowles of them that 
some Turin thyse thynges had accomplysshed. A grete partye of the turkes 
•tin in the that were in the dongeon of the toun named the tour dauid 2 / sawe 32 

dtmgeon of ° ■ ' 

David mir w6 ^ that a ^ e the cyte was taken / And that they had [no] more hope 
rendered, 0 f rescows ne socour ayenst our men. Therfor they requyred by 
mes^agers therle of tholouse whiche was next to them f And dyde do 
be sayd to hym, yf they myght departe with theyr wyues, children, 36 
and suche goodes as they had in the tour / they wold go theyr waye / 


1 Fr. “ ear ilz n’atendoient mais nul travail," fpr they did not expect any 
more trouble and work. 3 Orig. danid. 



279 


Ch. CXCL] Hie Barons assemble to choose a King. 
and delyuere 1 ouer the tour / he agreed and acorded it- to them. »ndwere 

J lb given a safe 

And! 2 so they departed! / And he dyde them to be conduyted saufly 

vnto Escalonne. Thus was the tour yolden / They that had the [> leaf i»] 

4 charge for to purge and! voyde the dede bodyes oute of the toun 
dyde it ententyfly and! dylygontly / in suche wyse that in shorte in» «hort 
tyme this thynge was alle don. ffor they beryed them in depe j^weii 
pyttes withoute the toun the moost parte / The remenaunt they 
8 brente in to asshes, that the cendres with the wynde was blowen 
away. Thenne were our men in good sewrte and ease within the 
toun to goo and walke thurgb the stretes and other places, and dyde 
dayly goo in pylgremages, that vnnethe myght they departs thens, 

12 They abode so gladly there. In this manere, as ye haue herd, was intau 

J u . manner was 

taken the holy cyte of Iherusalem. In the yere of thyncamacion of 
oure sauyour Ihesu criste / M.lxxxxix. the .xv / daye of the moneth [ s ^. 
of Iuyll on a fryday at the hour of none / The / iij. yere after that 1099 - 
16 the pylgryms had enterprysed this Triage. Tho was pope of Eome 
Urban, And Henry Emperour of the Romayns. Alexis emperour 
of Constantynople, And phylyp kyng of ffraunce. 

Howe the hye barons of thoost assembled for to chese 
20 a kynge of Iherusalem, And thoppynyon of the 
clergye vpon the same. Capitulo. Clxxxxj 0 

1 Yke as ye haue herd, the pylgryms whiche had grete nede of 

reste soioumed in the toun. The barons deuysed the affaires The barons 

arranged 

24 of the cyte. In moche grete ioye were they there vij dayes / On the affairs of 
the viij daye assembled alle the barons for to chese one of them, §J 1 y t j i \' e <i3hth 
to whome the garde, gouernaunce / and kepyng of the toun shold 
be delyuerd, and the seygnorye of the holy cyte, and the charge of 
28 the Royamme entierly / as it was reason and right. They made 
theyr prayers and orysons, And with alle theyr herte called the 
holy ghooste, that he wold counseylle them that daye, and to yeue 
to them grace to chese suche a man as were worthy and couenable 
32 to susteyne the faytes 3 of the Royamme /. whyles as they were in 

this affavre, and moche entended with good fayth ther about, An There w«. a 

J 1 . meeting of 

hepe of clerkes assembled, whiche had not good entencion, but the clerks at 
thought on malyee by pryde and couetyse / They cam where as the * 

36 barons were assembled, And sente to them for to speke to them a 
short word or two / They suffred them to come in. whan they were 

1 Orig. delynere. s Fr. fais, i. e. the responsibility, burden, 



280 


Some Objections made. 


[Ch. CXCI. 


[i If. 128 , bk.] 


They sent 
word to the 
barons that a 
patriarch 
should be 
chosen before 
a hint?. 


if not, they 
would not 
accept the 
new King. 


Arneld and 
tire Bishop of 
Calabria had 
made a bar¬ 
gain between 
them 


that Arnold 
should be 
patriarch of 
Jerusalem, 
and the other 
the Arch¬ 
bishop of 
Bethlehem. 


comen in / One of them spak in this manere / “ Fayr lordes, we 
haue vnderstanden / that ye be assembled here for 1 to chese a kyng 
that shal gouerne this londe, whiehe thyng plesith vs moche. And 
we holden it for right wel don / yf ye doo it in the manere that ye 4 
ought to doo it, ffor without doubte the spyrituel thynges be more 
digne and! worthy than the temporall / Therfore we saye to you, 
that the moost hye thynges ought to goo to fore / And! thus wolde 
we that ye sliold doo / And thordenaunee shold! not go forth other 8 
wyse than it ought to be. Now tliewne we praye you and! requyre 
you in the name of oure lord!, that ye entremete not you to make a 
kynge / til that we haue chosen a patriarke in this toun that can 
goueme the cristiente. yf it plese you that this be don fyrst, it shal 12 
be good and weel for you. And we shal thenne holde hym for 
kyng that ye shal gyue to us. but if ye wylle do otherwyse / we 
shal not holde it for good!, ne wel don / But we shal discorde / And 
after that ye doo shal not be ferme ” / This worde semed outward to 16 
haue 2 somme apparence of weel / But it cam of euyl purpoos. Ther 
was therm but deceyt and trecherye / Of this complot / and! barate / 
was mayster & capytayne, a bisshop of Calabre, born of a Cyte / 
whiehe was named lamane. 8 This bisshop acorded! moche to one 20 
Arnold!,(33) of whome I haue spoken to fore, whiehe was ful of des- 
loyalte. he was not yet subdeken, and! was a preestes sone, and of 
so euyl and! fowl lyf / that the boyes and garsons had made songes 
of hym thurgh thoost. and! yit not with stondynge alle this the 24 
bisshop of Calabre, ayenst god! and! reson, wolde haue made hym 
patriark, ifor they knewe ouermoche euyl, therfor were they both 
acorded to gyder. 4 They had made a bargain bytwene them that as 
sone as this Arnold! shold be patriarke the sayd bisshop shold haue 28 
tharchbissoprych of bethlehem. But oure lord ordeyned this thynge 
in another maner as ye shal here / Ther were in thoost many clerkes 
of euyll eontenaunce, that lytle entended to the seruyse of our 5 lord, 
they litil preysed relygyon and honneste / ffor syth the tyme that 32 
the valyauwt bysshop of puy was dede, which was legat of our holy 
fader the pope, the bisshop william of Orenge was in his place, 
whiehe was a relygyous 6 man, and moch doubted 7 our lord / but 

1 Fr. apparence de bien. 

3 Caxton’s text gives Laturane; the correct reading is Maturane. Lat. 
Marturanensis. See p. 284, ]. 2. 

4 Orig. gydrr. 8 Orig. onr. 

* Orig. relygyong. 

7 Orig. donbted.' 



Ch. CXCII.] Godfrey is spoken of as a suitable King. 281 

he abode not longe after / x but was deed in suche wyse lyke as ye 
haue herd 1 / Thenne was the clergye without pastour and garde / 

And lete them falle in euyl lyf / The Bisshop of Albare conteyned! Manyoftiu^ 
4 hym holyly in this pylgremage, And! somme other that were noble. 

But the comyn of the clerkes made it alle ylle. *e e - 

2 How the due Godeffroy was chosen kyng of Iheru- [•>“«*>] 
salem, and how he was presented to our lord in 
8 his chirehe of the holy sepulcre. 

capitulo Clxxxxij 0 

t He wordes that the Clerkes had! brought to the barons in theyr The baron* 
eleetyon was not moche preysed, but aretteef it to grete folye / 

12 ne therfore letted! not to doo that they had bygonnen. To thende thecurk., 
thenne that they myght knowe the better the couynes of alle the 
barons, they ordeyned! wyse men that shold enserche the lyf of 
eueryche of them and the maners. They dyde do come to fore 
16 them suche men as were moost pryue of the barons / and toke eehe 
of them a parte by the leue of theyr lordes. And! toke of them 
theyr othes to saye the trouthe of that they shold be examyned that buunveati- 
was of the lyf and manere of theyr lordes withoute lesynge 3 and |^ e s r “ 1 J he 
20 fayllynge of the trouthe. Thus it was acorded! emonge them. It Jj’^Vuu- 
was a grete thynge whan the lordes abandounecF them self tenserche for 
theyr lyues / But the wyse men that made this enquest were trewe 
men, and! helde alle thyng secrete that as ought not to be knowen / 

24 Many thynges were sayd to them of whiche they toke but lytil 
hede. Emonge alle other thynges they that were moost pryuee of 
the due Godeffroye / whan they were demaunded of his maners and! 
his tetches, 4 they answerd! that he had! one manere right greuous and Tiieon^ ^ 
28 ennoyous, ffor whan he herd masse and the seruyse of oure lorde, DukeQodfrey 
he coude not departe out of the chirche, but sente after payntours *“ h ^ c J°" d 
& glasyers(34) vnto the clerkes & gouernours 5 of the chirches / he ® oln 8- 
herd gladly the ryngyng of the belles, and 6 entendeth moche yf 
32 they discorded / so long that it / displesyd 6 moche to his felawship 

1-1 Caxton has here omitted several words, owing to his obscure French 
text, which was unintelligible. A. gives the correct version, “aiwtfu mors; 

Enterrez fu en Veglise de Marran, si comme vos oistes," but he died. He was 
buried, as you have heard, in the church of Marran. 3 Orig. lesyuge. 

4 Fr. letches, qualities, characteristics. 3 Orig. gonemonrs. 

3-8 Fr. “et trop y entendoit telement gue mainUfoys desplaisoti," and spent 
so much time in this way, that often he displeased, etc. 



282 


Godfrey is chosen King. [Ch. CXCIII. 

and seruauntes. And oftymes his mete appayred by cause of his 
when the long 1 taryeng in the monasteryes and holy places / whan the wyse- 
HeM-dthat men herd this, and that this was the grettest vyce that coude be 
tbey'were 1 ” ^ oun ^ e11 111 th® •i' 10, they had! moche grete ioye / ffor they thought 4 
muchpieeeed. ^el that he dyde this for the loue of oure fayth and for thonour of 
our sauyour / whan they had herd alle that they wold enquyre of 
the Barons / they spak to gydre / And! grete partye of them were 
After some acorded upon therle of tholouse, if it had not be for one thynge / 8 

the sari of ffor alle they of his countre, that were moost pryue with hym, 

thought that yf he were chosen kyng that he shold abyde there 
and reteyne the peple of his countrey. And yf he were not chosen 
he shold sone retorne in to his countrey fro whens he cam / and 12 
pit 12 «,bit.] 2 that desyred they moche. Therfore men wene that they were 
forsworn wyllyngly, And sayde vpon hym somme euyl tatches of 
whiche he had no blame / Neuertheles he had neucr Intencion to 
retoume to his londe, as it appered after / ffor euer after he abode 16 

in the seruyse of our lord, whiche he had enterprysed / whan the 

they ail barons herde all the tetches after many wordes they acorded al vpon 
mSft*y U °f n Godeffroy of boloyne / And named hym to be kyng / and was lad 

with alle the peple with grete ioye vnto the chirche of the holy 20 
sepulcre / And presented to oure lorde. Euery man was glad grete 
and srnal / fEor he was the man that had the hertes of alle the 
comyn peple. 


How the due godeffroy, after his election, requyred 24 
therle of tholouse that he shold delyuer to hym 
the tour dauid. ea° Clxxxxiij. 


in thia i ET this maner was the due godeffroy chosen to be kyng, and 

manner was ^ v u 

Godfrey lord of the holy Cyte of Iherusalem. Therle of tholouse helde 28 

of Jerusalem, the grettest 3 fortresse of the toun, whiche was called the tour dauyd / 
The turkes had delyuerd 4 it to hym lyke as ye haue herd to fore / 

It is sette in the hyest parte of the Cyte toward the weste, strongly 
walled with square stones, and ther on mera may see ouer al the 32 


Cyte entierly. whan the Due sawe this tour was not in his power, 


immediately^ It semed to hym that he had not the seygnorye / whan the grettest 
ofToulouM 1 fortresse of alle.the countre was not in his possession. Therfor he 
up°his tower demaunded therle of tholouse, in the presence of the barons, & 36 
held; prayd hym debonayrly that he wold delyuer it to hym. Therle 


1 Orig. loug. 


Orig. gtettest. 


4 Orig. delynerd. 



283 


Ch. CXCIV.] The Earl of Toulouse returns home. 

answerit that he hail conquerd 1 it, and thenemyes of oure lord had 
yolden it to hym / And therfor he helde it / But he had concluded 
to goo in to his countre at ester / And thenne he wold delyuer it whopromiMd 
4 with a good wylle. But in the mene whvle he / wold kepe it / over to Ood- 

1 frey when he 

This requyred he for to be more honoured, and in the gretter surete. ^ r °jj£j n 8 “ rt 
The due ansuerd playnly, that yf he had not the toure / he wold 
leue all, ffor how myght he be lord of the countre whan another 
8 had gretter power and gretter strengthe in his londe than he. 

Thus 2 were they in debate. The Due of Normandye and therle of Thereupon 
fflaundres 3 helde with the due godeflroy / Of the other barons tlier State. grea * 
were 4 that counseylled, that he shold doo his wil with therle of 
12 tholouse. 4 They of therles countre 5 attysed and counseylled hym 
that he shold not leve the tour, by cause 6 they wolde gyue hym 
occasion by 7 this discorde to retorne in to his countre / Atte laste p leaf iso] 
they acorded that the fortresse shold be put in the hande of the 
16 bysshop of Albare vnto the tyme that they were acorded what shold 
be doo therin. whan he had it / within a short tyme after he 
delyuerd it to the due. It was demaunded hym why he had so Finally God- 
delyuer# it / Thenne he answer# that it was taken from hym by of the 
20 force. It was not knowen for trouthe whether it was taken from 
hym by constraynt / or yf he delyuerd it with his gree and wyll. 
whan therle of tholouse sawe this / he was moche angry. 8 And 
hym seined that the barons were not wel content with hym lyke as 
24 they ought to be, 8 consyderyng that by the way he had don to 
them many grete bouwtees and goad seruyses, whiche they remembryd 
not, as it was sayd / ffor desdayne herof, And by atysement that 
his knyghtes made to hym, he enterprysed to retoume in to his And^the Eari 
28 countre, 9 And descended vnto the fflome Jordan / And there bayned ua^tiie 
hym / After he ordeyned his affayre for to departe out of the londe. 

Of a Patriark chosen and elect in Iherusalem / And 
how ther was founden a part of the very crosse. 

32 Capitulo Clxxxxiiij. 

1 Orig. conquerd. a Orig. Thus. * Orig. fflaundres. 

* Fr. " Qui amseillouni que Ven feist la voulentS au conte de Toulouse 

e Orig. conntre. * Orig. canse. 

a-8 « Jyui fut avis que les barons ne s’estooient pas contenuz vers lui, amme 
ilz devoient," viz., it was his opinion that the barons had not behaved towards 
him as they should. 

* Orig. conntre. 



284 


The Bishop 
of Maturane 
stirred up 
discord be¬ 
tween the 
barons and 
the people. 


Arnold wub 
chosen 
Patriarch of 
Jerusalem. 


[> If. IS*, bk.] 


A part of the 
true cross is 
found. 


Then was 
there great 
rejoicing. 


All were 
delighted 
that Godfrey 
was chosen 
king. 


A Part of the True Gross is found. [Ch. CXCY. 

t His euyl man of whom I haue spoken to fore / the bisshop of 
maturane, was ful of grete malyce and of desloyalte / And 
payned hym moche in alle maners to sette discorde bytwene the 
Barons and the people / ffor they sayde / that the Barons wold not 4 
suffre that a patriark shold be chosen by cause they helde the rentes 
of the chirche / And! wold! not delyuer them / he fonde moche peple 
that byleuyd hym and! acorded to hym, in suche wyse that by 
thayde of them / ayenst the wylle of other / & also by thayde of 8 
the due of normandye / to whom he was moche pryue / & had be 
at his table in all this work, he chose for patriark this arnold that 
was his felaw in alle euyl condicions / & by force they sette hym 
in the seete of the patriarchs in the chirche of the sepulcre / This 12 
was ayenst reason & ayenst alle right / Therfore it happed ne fyll 
not wel to hym ne to that other / Thenne it happed that a parte of 
the very Crosse was founden in therthe by the Chirche of the 
sepulcre in a secrete place / ffor the cristen men that were in the 16 
'toun to fore it was taken, in so grete meschyef as ye haue herd, 
doubted that the turkes wold haue taken it fro them. Therfore 
had they hyd it moche surely, and fewe knewe of it. But a good - 
man, a suryen, whiche that knewe it / discouerid it to the barons. 20 
And whan they had doluen and dygged a good whyle / they fonde 
it in a cheste 2 of syluer, lyke as he had to them sayd and deuysed. 
Thenne was the ioye moche grete / and they bare it a procession in 
syngyng vnto the temple, all the peple wente after, which wepte 24 
for pyte, As moch as if they had seen our sauyour Ihesu criste yet 
hangynge on the crosse / They alle helde them for moche recom¬ 
forted of this grete tresour 8 that our lord had thus discoueryd. 

How the due godeffroy payned hym to amende the 28 
Royamme of his good constitucions and estatutes. 

c° Clxxxxv 0 . 

g Rete ioye was it thurgh the londe of this, that the valyaunt 
due godefroy was chosen kyng. Alle they obeyed hym with 32 
good herte. he amended dylygently alle the discordes thurgh the 
londe, And alle the other thynges that had nede of amendement, in 
suche wyse that his power grewe fro day to day moche appertely / 

Of hym shal I saye in shorte wordes the very trouthe / he regned 36 
not but one yere / and that was moche grete dommage / ffor he had 
3 Fr. “ chasse d'argent,” i. e. reliquary of silver. 3 Orig. ttesour. 



285 


Oh. CXCV.] Something about Godfreys Early Life. 

the wylle, wytte, ami power to doo grete good in the Royamme for 
tenfeble thenemyes of oure lord Ihesu Crist, and for tenhaunce and wit and will 
exalte the Cristen fayth / But our lord called hym fro this world! to 
4 hym, to thende that the malyce of it shold! not chaunge his herte in 
thonour wheriu he was / he was bom in the Royamme of Fraunce He wee born 

' J at Boulogne 

at boloyne vpon the see / whiche was somtyme a Cyte / And nowe in France, 
it is but lytil more than a castel. he cam of hye and noble folks 
8 and good crysten peple. his fader was named eustace, noble & 
puyssaumt erle in that countre, whiche had doon many hye werkes 
& bountees vnto our lord & noble werkes vnto the world / his 
moder was a noble lady of gentilesse / more noble of herte than of 
12 hyenes of lygnage. She was named! yde, & was suster to the due 
of Loreyne, whiche was named godeffroy bouce. he deyde withoute 
heyer. Therfor he lefts alle the duchye and! the Countreye to his 
neuewe whiche bare his name, And adopted! hym in to sone and ^ 2omdn hy 
16 heyr / Therfore he was due of Loreyne whan 1 his vncle was deed / c leaf isi] 
he had thre brethren, whiche were moche wise men and good Hehad aree 
knyghtes / and also moch fathful and trewe / That one was Bawd- Baldwin, 
wyn, therle of Rages / whiche after hym was kyng of Iherusalem / 

20 The second was named Eustace, whiche bare the name of his fader, Euetache, 
And was Erie of boloyne / The kynge Stephen of Englond toke his 
doughter to wyf, whiche was namde Maulde. 2 The barons of 
Surye sente for this Eustace for to make hym kyng after the deth 
24 of his broder bawdwyn, whiche deyde withoute heyer. But he 
wold not goo / ffor he doubted the barats & discordes of the londe 
whiche he knewe wel. The fourth broder was william, a good and william, 
knyght and a trewe. 3 ne he discorded not in the bounte of his 
28 bretheren 3 / Bawdwyn and Eustace folowed theyr lord and broder 
in the pylgremage to Iherusalem. the fourth broder guylliam abode 
in his countre for to kepe the londe. Alle the four bretheren were 
of moche grete valeur. But the due GodefEroye lyke he was the bu^Duka^ 
32 oldest, so bare he awaye the prys and! auantage of the other / as he tiiafineet^ 
that was ful of vertues, of bountes, and was moche noble and right- u>e four, 
ful withoute couetyse / he dredde and louyd oure lord aboue alle 
thynge / he honoured relygyous men and good, he was moche ferme 
36 and constant of his worde / he despysed merueyllously bobaunces, 
pompes / and dishonestees, and hated them / he was in almesse 

2 Fr. Mahaut, Lat. Mahaldem. 

a —3 jf,-_ “nc se discordant mie & la bonlc dcs ses freres ,” i. e. he was just as 
good as his brothers. 



286 


Further Details. 


He prayed 
long with 
many tears. 


He was great 
ofbody,hand¬ 
some, and 
well skilled 
in arms. 


P If. 181 , bk.] 
The mother 
of these four 
brothers 
was a holy 
woman. 


As they 
played 
around her 
one day, 
she prophe¬ 
sied that the 
first should 
be a Duke, 
the second a 
King, and 
the third an 
Earl. 


[Ch. CXCVI. 

large and plentyuous, 1 gladly he herd the seruyse of our lord, and 
moche wel vnderstonde it. And in liis prayers and orysons prayeng 
our lord / he was right longe /jknd fylle ofte in wepyng habound- 
antly teeris. And vnto alle men he was pytous and amyable. By 4 
this it semed wel that oure lord louyd hym, wherof he was worthy 
to haue the grace of the world. And so he had certaynly / he was 
grete of body, not of the grettest 2 / Bnt of mene gretnesse, more 
stronge than an other man / his armes grete and wel 3 quartred, the 8 
breste moche brode and large, and vysage wel made and coloured, 
heeris abourne 4 / And in his harnoys and armes wel enducte and 
acustomed, that it semed that hit greued ne coste hym nothyng to 
to here them. 12 

Of the sayeng of the countesse of boloyne, moder of 
the sayd due, that she sayde of her thre oldest 
sones was verified. Capitulo Clxxxxvj. 

o Ne thyng 1 is sayd for trouth. And it happed in the tyme of 16 
the yongthe of thyse four bretheren, whiche ought not to be 
lefte vnremembryd ne forgoten / The Moder of thyse four 5 bretheren 
of whom I haue spoken, was an holy woman / and entendable to 
good werkes. It was nothynge merueylle though oure lord spak 20 
by her mouth a prophecye, ffor it happed on a daye that her thre 
oldest sones, whiche were yong and smale, pleyde eche with other / 
And as they chaced eche other in theyr playe / alle thre fledde vnto 
tlieyr moder / where she satte / and hydde them vnder her mantel / 24 
Theyr fader Eustace cam there where the lady was, And he sawe 
her mantel meue, where the childeren playde vnder it / he de- 
maunded the lady what it was. She answerd that she had thre 
grete prynees / The fyrst of them shold be a due, The second 28 
sholde be a kyng 1 , And the thyrde an Erie, ffor Godeffroye was / 
due 6 of 7 Loreyne after his vncle, And had also after the Royamme 
of Iherusalem. But he was neuer crowned, ne wold not be callyd 
kynge. The second was bawdwyn, whiche had after hym the sayd 32 
Royamme, and was crowned / The thyrde was Eustace, which after 
the deth of his fader was erle of boloygne. now late vs retorne for 

1 Orig. plentyuons. * Fr. “ ma/is de moyenne grandeur." 

3 Fr. “ bras avoit gros el quwrriz.” Quarriz signifies literally square, t. e. 
stout, not well quartered. 4 Fr. blons, blond. 

6 Orig. dnc. 7 Orig. 6f. 



287 


Ch. CXCVII.] Of Godfrey's Feats of Arms. 

to apeke of. tlie valyaunt Due Godeffroy, ffor moche honour 1 may Much honour 
be sayd of hym / And also of the valyaunces don by hym. Godfrey 

Of the wagyng 6f a bataylle that was bytwene 2 the 
4 due godefroy and an hye baron of Almayne. 

ca° Clxxxxvij 0 

e Mong 3 all other hye feetes that he dyde, I shal recount© to 

you one withoute lesynge / hit was so certaynly that one of He had a 
8 the hyest barons of Allemayne, a grete and strong knyght / valyaunt a high baron 
and noble, 4 siewed the due godeffroy, whiche was his cosyn, in 
plee 4 in the court of themperour of Almayne / to whom they were 
men both two. This man demaunded of due godefroy grete parte 
12 of his londe that he helde in the duchye of Loreyne. And this 
baron sayd that it was his right, & apperteyned to hym. So longe 
wente the plee forth by dayes & respytes, that they of the court 
iuged that it shold be determyned by wagynge of the bataylle, & 

16 named to them a day to fyght for it. At the daye named they They decided 
cam in to the felde Armed and aparaylled of that they ought to by tin^ia 
haue / Thenne Bisshops and good men laboured moche, And other 
Barons that were there payned them moche, for to seke moyen and 
20 manere how the pees myght be made / And shewde to them how 

they were of 6 one blood and lygnage, And that they ought 6 to P leans*] 
deporte them tenterpryse thynge of whiche muste nedes falle to 
one of them shame & dishonour. 6 They payned them moche, one 
24 & other / but in no manere coude t,hey fynde the peas to be made 
bytwene them / Thenne began the bataylle bytwene thyse two 
barons moche fiers and sharp, ffor they were bothe good and strong 
knyghtes. They smote to gydre right vygorously / This bataylle which was 
28 endured so long that the valyaunt due godeffroy smote that other (| l er “] y * 1 n<1 
so grete a strook with his swerde that it flewe in pyeces / In suche 
wyse that there abode nomore in his hande therof but half a foote 8Word - 
longe aboue the crosse of the swerde / The barons that behelde the 
32 felde, sawe how the due 7 had broke his swerde and had the werse, 

& were moche sory & wroth therof / And cam to themperour, & 

1 Orig. honour. a Orig. lytwene. 8 Orig. Moug. 

Fr. “lira en plait” i. e. brought suit against him. 8 Orig. ef. 

8-8 Fr. “et guile s'en deportassent d’entreprendre chose parquoy il convenist 
que Vung,” etc.—misunderstood by Caxton.—It should have been translated, 

“ and that they should desist from undertaking an affair in which one or the 
other would be brought to shame." 7 Orig. dnc. 



288 


Of a Fair Feat of Arms. [Ch. CXCVIII. 

they prayd hym swetly that he wold suffre that 1 they myght 
comene of the peas bytwene them 1 / he graunted it gladly / The 
some friende frendes spak to gydre and! acorded vnto a peas, whiche was ynowgh 
fora ciMnjfro- resonable. But they lefte somwhat of the dukes right j whan they 4 
but Godfrey brought this acorde and pees to them / The Due in no wyse wold 1 
satiefied, and here herof, But 2 began the bataylle more cruel and fiers than it was 
combatwith to fore / That other that had his swerd hool, doubted ne fered not 
•word, nioche the strokes of the due, whiche had but a tronchon 8 / but 8 
ranne vpon the due and oppressid hym that he had no leyzer to 
reste hym, til the due began to thynke and to take herte / Thenne 
he dressyd hym on his steroppes / And smote his aduersarye with 
and thus the pommelle of his swerde that he helde / vpon the lyfte temple 12 
quisiied his suche a strook thurgh the helme that he fyl doun astonyed, that it 

AdvfiTtHTJi ^ 

semed that he was deed / ffor he remeuyd no foote ne hande / 
Thenne the noble due a lyght doun and descended fro his hors / and 
threwe a way his tronchon 3 of his swerde; And toke the swerde fro 16 
hym that he had beten doun, and mounted vpon his hors. agayn / 
Thenne called he the barons / that had made and brought to hym 
to fore the peas / and sayd to them : “ ye, lordes, suche maner of 
And then m peas as ye offred to me right now / is now to me agreable, and am 20 
cepted the redy nowe to take and abide / ffor though I haue the dommage and 
he hid losse, Atte leste I haue no shame ne dishonour / And it plesy th me 

thought die- ' 

when 1 ™? 8 we ^ gyue & departe of my right, to thende that I slee not this 
quished. whiche is my cosyn.” whan the barons herd! this, alle they began 24 
to wepe. The peas was made suche as he sayde / he had! more 
honoure and! loos 4 / for the pees to whiche he adressyd hyni so 
swetly, than of alle the prowesses that he had! in this bataylle, In 
whiche he dyde many. 28 

4 

[5 if. 132 , bk.] 8 Of a fayr feat of Armes that the due dyde in 
a bataylle that the Emperour of Almayne had 
ayenst them of Saxojae. Capitulo Clxxxxviij" 
Another a N other feat of prowesse I shal recounte to you, lyke as it 32 

great prowess * ” . 

i will relate. happed, without lesynge. The peple of Saxone, whiche ben 

the meoste felle and! moost cruell of alle them of Almayne, had! 
desdayne and! despyte tobeye to themperour / And! sayde that they 
wold doo nothynge for themperour henry. But sayde that they 36 


1_1 Fr. “qu’on parlast de paix enirc cux," that peace might be arranged 
between them. 2 Orig. Bnt. 3 Orig. trouchon. 4 Fr. los, praise, La*, laudis. 



289 


Ch. CXCVIII.] Godfrey chosen Standard-Bearer. 

wold! haue a lord 1 vpon them sell, whiche shold obeye to none 
other. And made an hye noble man of the countre, whiche was 
emonge them, an Erie named Eaoul, for to be kynge vpon them, by Tornado 
4 whom they wold be Iustised and gouerned. whan themperour herd their king, 
this he was moche wroth / and desired moche to be auenged of so 
grete oultrage. Therfor sente he for alle the barons of thempyre, 
and assembled moche grete court / and made to be sayd and shewde 
8 in the presence of them alle the pryde and rebellyon of them of 
Saxone, wherof he demaunded debonayrly counseyl and theyr 
helpe. They acorded alle that this thynge was for to be auenged 
asprely. They habandouned bodye and power to themperour for 
12 thamendynge of this trespaas. They departed, and eche wente in 

to his countre. Themperour somoned his hooste as strongly as he The Emperor 
myght at a castel on the marche of Saxone. whan they were assembiedhis 

J m^n at a 

entred in to the londe, theyr enemyes sayde that they wolde fyglite <*«»>“ CMt,e - 
16 ayenst them, ffor they were prowd and tiers, in suche wyse that 
they sette but lytil by the power of themperour / whan they knewe 
that they must fyght / they ordeyned theyr bataylles / ffor they 
had moche peple / And 1 had ynowe / Thenne demaunded them- 
20 perour / of whom they were acorded that shold here tliaygle / which 

is the fawcon 2 of thempyre / They choos to fore alle other for to doo Godfrey of 

tii *«/<«/ # Lorraine was 

that, the valyaunt due of Loreyne, worthy and? moost sumciant to chosen to 
do it. They reputed it for a moche grete worship that he was e«s l «- 
24 thus chosen by comyn acord of them alle / Neuertheles he with 
sayde it, and refused as moche as he myght. But he muste nedes 
take it on hym 3 / This daye cam 4 / and that one partye approuched 
that other in suche wyse that they assembled fiersly / ther were They met tin 
28 many men put to detli, ffor they were merueillously wroth eche battle, 
ayenst other, whyles thus as the bataylle was grete and fyers in 
many places, the due Godeffroye, that conduyted the bataylle of 
Themperour, espyed a grete Rowte of men, wherin was this Raoul, 

32 whiche was lorde 5 of saxone / ayenst them. 6 the due dyde do [* leaf is*, 
assemble the peple of themperour. The due knewe this Raoul, 
and smote the hors with his spores ayenst hym. And with the 
gonfanon that he bare / lusted ayenst hym in 7 suche wyse that he 
36 bare hym thurgh the bodye and slewe hym, that he fylle doun Godfrey, 
deed in the place. And Incontinent he redressyd and reysed on 

1 Fr. "si en firent assez," viz. “so they made plenty of them (». e. of 
battalions).” 2 Corruption or mistranslation for Gonfanon. Fr, gonfanun. 

3 Orig. hyin. 4 Orig. cain. 6 Orig. thein. 

7 “ tclemcnt qu'il lui envoya parmy U corps oidtrc." 

GODFREY. u 



290 


Godfrey establishes Canons of the Church. [Ch. CXCIX. 

heygthe his baner alle blody / his peple sawe that they had* loste 
theyr lord*, and anon were disconfyted* / Somme fledde, & somme 
The rest sur- fylle doun vnto the feet of themperour, and* put them in his mercy / 

rendered to J , A 

the Emperor. Alle the gentilmen and? other gaf good hostages ior tobeye euer 4 
after to hym, and be at his commaimment / Many other prowesses 
made the valyaunt due godeffroye / hut it behoueth not to put 
them alle in this historye, if or my purpose now is for to recountre 
of the holy londe by yonde the see, and not of them on this syde, 8 
but of them of whom ye may vnderstande that he was in his 
Godfrey pve eountre noble and* a valyaunt knyght. Of his largesse ayenst oure 
the church. Ion? I shal saye to you one thynge, by whiche ye maye vnderstande 

the other. In the duchye of Loreyne was a castel, whiche was 12 
moost renommedl and chyef of thonour of buyllon / And* bare that 
wiienhe name / whan he shold meue to goo in his pylgremage by yonde the 
pilgrimage, see, he gaf this castel as the mooste noble and hyest of his herytage 

vnto oure lord in Almesse, in to the chirche of lyege, for to abyde 16 
there for euermore. 

How the valyaunt due godeffroy augmented the holy 
chirche, And how he wold neuer 1 here crowne. 

ca° Clxxxxix. 20 

s Yth that he had thus by election the Eoyamme / like as a 
h* loved the deuoute and a relygyous man as he was, he louid moeh holy 

service of our ^ > °. . . 

Lord, cliirch & the seruise of our lord, by coraseyl of the bisshops & ol 

other wise clerkes that were in thoost / he ordeyned fyrst in the 24 
chirche of the sepulcre of our lord, and* in the temple, clerkes for to 
serue, & establysshed chanonnes, & gaf to them grete rentes & 
large herytages, 2 of which they shold take theyr prebendes. 2 & he 
•nd ordained wold that the chirches in thoo partyes there shold be ordeyned 28 

the churches . . . 

in Palestine after the establementis / vses, and? eustommes of the grete chirches 

as they were 

in France. 0 f fraunce 3 / He began moche hyly / & wel had accomplysshed, yf 
our lord had gyuen to hym lenger lyf / He had* brought with hym 
oute of his eountre relygyous Monkes, whiche sayde and songe 32 
[‘if.m.bk.j theyr 4 howres and seruyse al a longe the wayo as he cam. he gaf 
anabbqTftr to them an Abbaye in the vale of Iosaphat, and establysshed them 
richly! Tery there, And endowed them there moche Kychely with good rentes 

1 Orig. nener. 

2 Fr. “ou ilz dement prendre leurs provendes," from which they should 

draw their revenues. 3 Orig. frannee. 



291 


Ch. CC.] He refuses to be crowned King. 

and reuenues 1 / And* gaf to them grete pryueleges. he was a very 
relygyous and deuoute man, And had his herte moche large vnto 
holy chirche, And gaf therto many grete thynges. whan he was whence w™ 
4 chosen to be kynge / alle the barons requyred hyin that he wokl do 
hym be crowned, and receyue thonour of the Koyamme as hyly as 
the other kynges in Cristendom doo / he answerde / that in this 
holy cyte, where onr sauyour Ihesu Criste suffred doth, and had 
8 born a crowne of thornes vpon his heed for hym and! for the 
synners / he wold neuer bere, yf it playsyd god, crowne of gold ne *>e nnued, 
of precious stones, but hym semcd! that it was yuowe of that»ouia nut 
coronacion that he had! the daye of his passion for to lionoure alle "; th s° ld 
12 the kynges Cristen that shold be after hym in Iherusalem / ffor this Jj°rd thorns, 
cause he refused the crowne. Ther ben sownne men that wyll not 
aecompte hym emong the kynges of Iherusalem / but me thynketh 
that therfore he ought not to be lassed! ne dymynued of his 
16 honoure, but the more and 1 hyer exalted* and! enliaunced!; ffor he 
dyde not this for despysyng of the sacrament of holy chirche, but 
he dyde it for teschewe the bobaunce and pryde of the world, and 
for the grete mekenes & humylyte that he had in his herte / wher- 
20 fore thenne I saye not only that he was not kynge, but he was 
gretter than ony kynge that hokleth ony Koyamme syth that the 
holy londe of Iherusalem was conquerd. 2 

How the turkes of Arabe and of Egypte made theyr 
24 somau«ce for to come in to Surye tassaylle our 
cristen men / ca° CC" 

n Ewly whan the cyte was taken / yet er that the Barons were 
departed, cam tydynges in to the toun of Iherusalem, & trew 
28 they were / that the Calyphe of Egypte, which was the mooste The caliph oi 
puyssaunt and! myghtiest of all the londe of thoryent, had somoned summoned a 
alle his power, knyghtes, gentilmen, and alle other that myght bere 
armes / in suche wyse that he had assembled a grete hooste 
32 merueyllously; ffor he had grete desdayne and despyte of this that 
so lytil peple, whiche were of a straunge londe and ferre countrey, 3 
were so hardy and durst come in to this londe and Ro 4 yamme, and leaf 1353 

had taken the cyte whiche he had conquerd vpon his enemyes / he The com . 

36 made come to fore hym his conestable, whiche was prynce of his ti',c n a™y f 
hoost: he was named Elafdales. To this man he commaunded KbfdaiM^ 

*! Orig. reuennes. s Orig. conqnerd. * Orig. conntrey. 

U 2 



292 


born in 
Armenia, of 
Christian 
blood, but a 
proselyte to 
Mohammed¬ 
anism. 

He bad 
already once 
conquered 
Jerusalem 
from the 
Turks, 


and was now 
coming to 
reconquer 
it for his 
master. 


The Egyp- 
tians and the 
Turks loved 
each other 
not. 


Elafdales invades Syria. [Ch. CC. 

that he shold take all this peple with hym & goo in to Surye / And 
renne vygorously vpon this peple, that were so folyssh and oult- 
rageous, that had torned his peas 1 and made warre to his peple. 
Therfor he commaunded 2 hym that 3 he shold efface and destroyr 4 
them alle / In suche wyse that neuer worde be spoken of them 3 / 
This Elafdales was of Ermenye born, And! was called! Cimireenx 4 
by another name. Of the Cristen men lie was comen / But for the 
Rychesse that was gyuen hym, and! for the lecherye that he fonde 8 
emonge the mescreauntes / he renyed! our lord and Cristen faytli 
for to become sarasyn. This same man had conquerd the Cyte of 
Iherusalem vpon the turkes, and sette it in the puyssauuce of his 
lord the same yere that the cristen men had besieged it, And had 12 
not yet holden it .xj/ monethis whan thoost of the pylgryms toke it 
vpon them, and rendred it to Cristiente / hit was a thynge that it 
moclie displaysyd his conestable that his lord had hold it so short 
a whyle / And enioyed nomore his conqueste: ffor this cause he 16 
enterprysed in hym this werke / and for to renne vpon oure peple. 
And hym thought it but a lytil thynge and a light for to doo, 
consyderyng 1 the grete plente of peple that he had for to disconfyte 
them that had taken the Cyte. He cam in to Surye, & brought 20 
with hym alle the power of Egypte. h'e had grete pryde in his 
lierte by cause of the grete people that he had / Ami! was moche 
angry toward our men / But our lord, that can sette wel counseyl in 
alle the purpoos of men / ordeyned this werke all in another raaner 24 
than he deuysed / he cam with alle his men to fore the Cyte of 
Escalone. There they lodged them, and pourprised grete space of 
ground, with them were ioyned alle the dukes of damaske, and 
they of arabe that were in thoo partyes / moche grete peple / 28 
Trouthe it is that to fore er oure peple entred in to the londe / 
They of Egypte and the turkes of arabe louyd not to gydre / 5 but 
doubted 6 moch thencreacyng of the one and other 5 / But after, 
they accompanyed them togydre to come vpon oure men, more for 32 

1 The MS. which Caxton followed reads “ trouvec sa paix," which makes 
no sense, and was rendered turned his peace by him. The correct reading is 

“ qu’il avoit brizii sa pes," that it had broken the peace. 

3 Orig. commannded. 

3—3 Lat. “et populwn praesumptuosum deleat dc superfide tcrrac, ita ut 
non memoretur nomen illius ultra.” 

4 B. Cimirieulx, A. Emirieux, Lat. Emirius. 

s — 5 Fr. “ains doubtoient moult le croissement les ungs des aultres," but 

each feared greatly the growth and increase of the other. 8 Orig. donbted. 



293 


Ch. CCI.] The Christians fray for Victory. 

hate of oure peple, than for loue that they had emonge them self. 

They were alle to gydre to fore Escalone, And 1 they there concluded! but united 
to come after to fore Iherusalem for tassiege the toun 1 / ffor they Jjy, 0 ™ t e 
4 supposed veryly, that oure barons durst in no wyse yssue out ayenst Jerusalem, 
them in bataylle. 

2 How our Cristen men, whan they knewe thyse tyd- p if. ism*.] 
ynges, eryed to god for mercy / and for to haue 
8 the vyctorye. ca°. CCj'! 

w Han thyse tydynges were spradd thurgh the cyte of Iherusn-Tiie chHs- 
lem, Alle the peple were gretely afrrayed', grete and* stnale / 

By comyn acord of the bisshoppes they cam 3 wullen and barfote 3 this news, 

12 in the chirche of our lord. There were alle the peple, and cryed 

mercy to oure 4 lorde with syghes and teeris, And besought Ihesu and prayed 
Criste moche swetly that his peple, whiehe he had kept and protect them, 
defended vnto that day / he wold delyuer fro this peryll, ne suffre 
16 that the cyte and holy places that they late had rendred and yeuen 
to his name and to his seruyse, and that he wold not that they 
shold be remysed agayn and liabandouned in ordure and fylthe, 
and in the desloyalte of the hethen men. ffro thens they wente a 
20 procession, 6 syngynge with moche grete pyte, vnto 6 the temple of 
oure lord. There dyde the bisshops and the clerkes the seruyse / 

And the laye peple prayde with moche good herte and pytous / 
whan this was don, the bisshops gaf to them the benediction / And 
24 after they departed, The due ordeyned barons and 1 knyghtes that Thenuke 
shold kepe the cyte. After this he yssued out, and therle of 
Iflaundres / And cam in to the playnes of Rames. The other 6 ’ , p! l “ e j) u ' 
Barons abode in Iherusalem / The cytezeyns of nappies had sente 
28 to fetche eustace, broder of the due, and Tancre for to come theder 
to them, & they wold yelde to them the cyte. They were goon by 
the commaundement of the due, and garnysshed moche wel the 
toun with peple and vytaylle, of which the countre was moelie 
32 fertile / therfor they abode there, and knewe nothynge of thyse 

tydynges / But the due sente for them, And they cam hastely / “^ n c | 7or 
and were with the other barons, whan the due and the erle of and Tancred, 

who were in 

fflaundres" arryued atte Cyte of Rames, they knewe wel the trouthe Tnppie. 

1 Oriij. tonn. 

3—s p ri “ en lange et nuz pies." The Lat. gives only “ nudis pediiws." 

4 Orig. onre. 5 Fr. en procession. 6 Orig. vuto. 7 Orig. fflanndres. 



294 


He alao sent 
back to Jeru¬ 
salem for the 
other barons, 


P leaf 1S6] 


who came 
speedily to 
the place 
where he 
was. 


Our men now 
saw an im¬ 
mense body 
of animals 
approaching, 


which they 
captured. 


Our Men capture a large Body of Animals. [Ch. CCII. 

certaynly that this admiral was lodged to fore Escalone with so 
grete peple that the contre was couerd. Thenne sente they hastely 
messagers in to Iherusalem vnto the other barons, which abode and 
awayted the eertaynte of this thynge / And he bad them hastely to 4 
come alle, sauf suche as shold kepe the cyte / And shold brynge 
alle the peple moche hastely, as for to fyghte ayenst grete plente of 
theyr enemyes. 

How our men assembled and ordeyned theyr bat-8 
ay lies for to 1 fyghte ayenst the turkes. And 
how the turkes were disconfytecF. 

Capitulo / CCij" 

t Herle of tholouse & the other barons that were with hym 12 
knewe the eertaynte how theyr enemyes cam vpon them with so 
grete power / therfor they gadred to gydre alle theyr men that were 
in Iherusalem, and yssued out and come to them moch dilygently 
in to the playnes, where the due 2 was, atte a place named now 16 
ybelyn. whan they were alle assembled! / they nombred theyr peple 
and fonde / xijC. horsmen / and of footemen / ixM. whan thoost 
of our men had been there one day or therabout, after euensonge, 
whan it began 3 to wexe derk / they espyed a fer a greet prees that 20 
cam takyng vp the couwtrey, and! couerd grete partes of the playnes / 
Oure men hail! supposed certaynly that it had be thoost of the 
sarasyns / Anti merueylled! moche how they cam ayenst them at 
that hour. Thenne they sente oute .ij.C / horsmen armed! lightly, 24 
& wel horsed, for to see more nygh what peple they were that cam & 
how many were of them ; they roode forth a good paas, and whan they 
approached them / they knewe that it were Oxen, Kyen, and mares / 
ther were so many of them, 4 that them semed there were no moo in 28 
alle the world, and! that it myght suffyse 4 for alle the peple ther 
about, with thyse beestes were comen men on horsbak, whiche 
kepte them from theuys, And! commaunded! to the herdmen what 
they shold doo. They that were sente forth by the barons retorned! 32 
and sayde that ther was none other but beestes. Thenne alle oure 
men ran theder / The kepars of them fledde that myght / Somme 

2 Orig. dnc. 3 Orig. began. 

4-4 Fr. “il leur estoit avis que s'il n’en eust plus en Unite cette terre, si 
deiissent ilz soxifire." Caxton has omitted the si viz. if there were no more 
in alf-this country, etc. 



295 


Ch. CCII.] They arrange their Battalions for Battle. 

ther were that were taken, whiche tolde the trouthe of the turkes, 

In suche wyse that it was wel knowen, that this grete hooste of They named 
sarasyns were lodged! but. vij / myle from them. And! that theyr saracena^ 

4 purpoos was to come on them and to slee them alle. Our barons ^'“ t mile * 
were thenne certayn of the bataylle / And! deuysed! emonge them / 
ix. bataylles / And! commaunded! that thre sholct goo to fore on that They then 

' ^ arranged 

one syde. For the playnes were greet. And thre sholct go in the |{J e ^“ en 
8 rnydle / and thre shold come behynde / Of the sarasyns myght h» to i‘onj. 
noman knowe the nombre / ifor ther was so grete plente that euery 
daye they enereaced and grewe of the contre about / whiche ranne 
to them in suche wyse that it was not for to be estemed / whan our 
12 men had goten this grete gayne that I spak of, that is to saye of 
alle the beestes / they had grete ioye and ioyously restyd them 
that nyght; but they that had the charge made good watche upon ni s ht . 
Hhooste. On the morn whan the sonne was rysen, the due dyde do [ur.isa.bk.] 
16 crye that euery man shold arme hym and goo to his bataylle, and 

after wente forth a soft paas 2 right theder where they thought to ana went 

. . forth early in 

fynde theyr enemyes / they had stedfaste hope in our lord / to U e m ““ r ™5 
whom is a lyght thynge to make that the lasse in nombre vayn- enemie »- 
20 quysshe the more & gretter / they of egypte, & the other mescre- 
auwtes that were with them, cam in moche grete desraye vnto the 
place that they sawe oure peple alle in the playne. 3 whan they 
sawe and knewe that our men had noo talente to withdrawe them 
24 ne eschewe them, but cam for to seche them / they began moche to 

doubte. whau they sawe that oure men had taken and pourprised ',“ a a t ™| ed 
so grete a place on the playns, wel supposed they that they had ben J“”' < J 1 to 
mochemore people and in greter nombre. But the trouthe was 
28 suche as I hane sayd / Our men were but fewe on horsbak and a 
foote. the grete company of beestes, as I liaue sayd, were with 
them 4 / whan they drewe forth on / the beestes wente with them / 
the turkes wende that they had ben alle men Armed and had ouer 
32 grete fere and drede / the grettest men and they that men supposed 

shold best haue born the fayte 5 of the bataylle, they began to with- TheE^y^ 
drawe them lytil and lytil and lefte theyr bataylles the one after (Mr - 
the other & fledde all pryuely. w"han the lasse knyghtes of the 
36 turkmans apperceyued this / 6 they neuer toke hope on them, 8 but 

2 Fr. tout le pas, briskly. 3 Fr. tout a plain, plainly. 

4 Fr. quant ceulx se tiroient, when these advanced. 

. 5 Fr. fais, burden, responsibility. 

®—* Fr. “neprinrent oneques nul despit rnr eitlx.” 



296 


On this day 
was lost the 
Bishop of 
Maturane. 


When the 
barons saw 
their victory 


they gave 
thanks to 
God. 


[* leaf 187] 
They found 
immense 
riches and 
spoils in the 
heathen 

tents, 

and returned 
laden to 
Jerusalem. 


The Duke of 
Normandy 
and the Earl 
of'Flanders 
start for 
home. 


Our Men find great Spoils. [Ch. CCIII. 

tomed their horses & smote with their spores, & fledde euery man 
where he supposed best to saue hym / On this daye was he lost / that 
had sette al his herte for to sowe & pourchasse discordes ouer al 
where he was byleuyd. Noman wote wher he becam / this was the 4 
bisshop of maturane. Somme men sayde that the due had sente 
hym for to fetche the barons that were lefte in the cyte / and whan 
he retorned Sarasins shold haue take hym & slayn hym, or brought 
hym in pryson. what sommeuer cam of hym it was no grete harme, 8 
so that he were effaced out of this holy company / whan oure 
Barons sawe that our lord had foghten for them,'And that he had 
put in the hertes of the turkesso grete fere & drede / that they 
were fled without smytynge of stroke, they had grete ioye and 12 
rendred graces and 1 thankynges to oure lorde deuoutly; they had 
counseyl that they shold not folowe them withoute araye thurgh 
the feldes / ffor they were ouer grete nombre of peple vnto the 
regarde of them. And yf they happed to relye 1 and gadre to gydre 16 
agayn, they myght perauenture put oure men to the werse. Oure 
men rode alle in ordenauwee vnto the tentes of the hethen men, 
ffor they that fledde 2 loked neuer behynde them / There founds 
oure men so grete plente of Gold, of Syluer, of Robes, of Iewellys, 20 
and of vessell, that the leest of them had ynowgh / Thus gadred 
they alle that they fonde there / & retorned and wente agayn to 
Iherusalem euery man laden and charged with despoylles, thank- 
yng and preysing our lord, by whom was comen to them this vyc- 24 
torye / honour, and gayne. Thenne made they within the cyte 
moche ioye & grete / As doon the vaynquers and conquersurs 3 whan 
they departe theyr gayne. 

How somme of our 4 barons wolde retorne home after 28 
they had don theyr pylgremage / ca° CCiij 0 

i N this maner they conteyned them in the Cyte of Iherusalem / 
The two valyaunt men that had ben long tyme in the seruyse 
of our lord, and had perfourmed theyr pylgremage, that is to wyte 32 
the due of Normandye / And therle of ffkundres / they toke leue 
of the other barons and toke theyr waye for to retorne in to theyr 
countrey / they cam by shippe to Constantinople / Themperour 
alexys which had seen them to fore receuyed them with moche 36 

1 Fr. “ se raliassenb" if they should rally. 

* Orig. onr. 


* Orig. couquerours. 



297 


Ch. CCIIL] History of the Duke of Normandy. 

fayr chiere, & gaf to them moche fayre yeftes at theyr departyng* / 
After they cam in to theyr countre hool and ioyous / That one of 
them, that was the due of Normandye / founde the thynge alle 
4 chaunged otherwyse in his countre than he lefte it / ffor whyles he 
was in mayntenyng this holy pylgremage, lyke as ye haue herd, his 
oldest broder deyde without lieyer of his body, wylliam Rous, 
whiche was kyng of englond by right / And after the customes of 
8 the countre the Royamme was fallen to this due of normandye; 
but his broder whiche was yonger, named Henry, cam to the 
barons of the countrey and! made them to vnderstande 1 / that the 
due his broder was kyng of Iherusalem / And had no talente / ne 
12 purposed! neuer to retorne on this syde the montaynes. By this 
lesynge they made hym kynge of Englond!, and they becam bis 
men. whan his broder retorned fro the holy londe, he demaunded 
of hym his herytage entierly / And he wold not delyuer it to hym. 
16 The due made redy a grete nauye / and gadryd as moche peple as 
he myght in normandye and other places, and passed the see / he 
arryued by force. 2 His broder that was kynge cam ayenst hym 
with alle the power of the lande / The bateylles were al redy for 
20 tassemble. But the noble and wysemen sawe that it shold be ouer 
grete s hurt & damage yf thyse two bretheren shold fyght thus. 
Therfor they spak of pees, and made it in this manere / that the 
sayd henry shold holde the Royamme / but he sholde gyue euery 
24 yere to his brother a greet somme of good / of whiche he made 
hym sure / And thus retorned the due agayn, and cam in to his 
londe. after it happed that the kyng whiche had somme castellys in 
normandye to fore that he had the Royamme 4 of Englond / them 
28 wolde he kepe as his herytage / The, due demaunded them. And 
he wold not delyuere them / thenne the due assieged them, and 
toke them by force, whan the kyng herd this / he was moche 
angry, he assembled grete peple and passed ouer in to Normandye / 
32 his brother cam ayenst hym / And they fought to gydre at tynche- 
bray 5 / ther was the due disconfyted and taken, his broder put hym 
in pryson, wherin he deyde / Thenne had this henry alle to gydre 
the Royamme of Englond, and the ducliye of Normandye / Therle 

1 Orig. vuderstande. 

* Fr. “il arnva en Angletcrrc A force," he arrived in England with an 
army. 

4 Orig. Royamme. 

5 The Latin does not specify the name of this place, which is added by the 
French translator. Fr. Tanchebray. 


The Duke of 
Normandy 
found great 
changes. 


His eldest 
brother 
William 
Ruftis had 
died without 
heir. 


His younger 
brother 
Henry had 
by treachery 
obtained the 
kingship. 


[»If. 137, bk.J 


A compro¬ 
mise was 
effected 
between the 
two brothers, 


which was 
soon broken, 
and a battle 
was fonght 
at Tinclie- 
bray. 


Henry was 
victorious. 



298 


W'ise Measures of Tancred. [Ch, CCIY. 


The Earl of 
Toulouse 
went to Con¬ 
stantinople 
on a visit. 


Tancred 
stayed in 
Palestine 
with Godfrey, 


and governed 
wisely the 
lands allotted 
him. 


of thoulouse cam Vnto the lyche in surye / there lefte he his wyf, 
the Countesse, and wente vnto Constantynople, And shold hastely 
retorne / Themperour made to hym grete ioye and receyued hym 
moche wel / and gaf to hym grete yeftes / And after cam agayn to 4 
his wyf hoole & sauf / to his felawship in Surye, but it was two 
yere after, as ye shal here / The due godeffroy was in Iherusalem / 
wel gouerned he the Koyamme whiche oure lord had gyuen to 
hym, he reteyned with hym the Erie Gamyer 1 of grece / Ami* 8 
other Barons, suche as he myght have. Tancre the valyaunt abode 
with hym, to whom the Due gaf for to holde in herytage the cyte 
of tabarye, whiche stondeth on the laye of Geme. 2 And with that 
alle the pryncipalyte of Galylee with the Cyte, whiche was woned 12 
to be named porphire, And nowe named Cayphas, and alle thap- 
pertenaunces of thyse thynges / Tancre helde thyse londes so wel 
and 1 so wysely, that he was slowed of god / & honoured of the 
world / he founded chirches of this countrey 3 moche rychely / he 16 
gaf to them grete rentes / and endowed them with Aournementes 
fayr and of grete valure. Specially the chirche of Nazareth, of 
tabarye, and that of mount Tabor, he lefte them in hye estate and 
in moche ryche poynt. But the barons that after hym haue be 20 
lordes of the countrey haue taken from them ynowgh of their ten- 
ours / This Tancre was wyse and trewe / And delyted hym to doo 
wel to the chirches / as it appereth after whan he was prynce of 
Anthyoche. ffor he enhaunced the chirche of seynt peter, and the 24 
pryncipalyte and seygnorye of anthyoche made he moch tencrece & 
enlarged, as ye shal here. 


[Meafiss] 4 How buymont and bawdwyn beyng certayn of the 

pfyse and conqueste of Iherusalem wolde accom- 28 
plysshe theyr pylgremage / Capitulo / CO.iiij 0 

w Hyles that the Royamme of Iherusalem was in such estate / 
and* Baldwin Buymont 5 the prynce of Anthyoche, And Bawdwyn Erie of 

newao/the Ka 2 es > ^roder of the due godeffroy, had herd certayn tydynges that 32 
jeSem° f 6t k® ot ^ er Aarons that helde them to gydre as bretheren for the 
accompanye of theyr pylgremage, had by thayde 8 and helpe of our 

1 Fr. Gamier de Gres. 3 Fr. B. Gene: A. Geitcsar. 

3 Orig. conntrey. 5 Orig. Bnymont. 

6-6 Fr. ‘‘que Us aultres barons quilz tenoient a freres, pour la corrlpaignie 
dupelcrinage, avoient, par I'aide,” viz., that the other barons whom they con¬ 
sidered as brothers in this pilgrimage had, by the aid, etc. 



Ch. CCIV.] Bohemond and Baldwin finish their Pilgrimage. 299 

lord Ihesu Criste conquerd vpon the turkes and recouerd to oure 
fayth the holy Cyte of Iherusalem / by whiche they ha*)* accoin- 
plysshyd theyr vowes and theyr pylgremages. Therfor they assem- 
4 bled on a day named for to goo to the holy sepulore, to thende 1 that and decide 
they were assaylled of theyr vowes. 1 And desired! moche for to thefrown 1 " 11 
see the Due and! the other Barons, to whom they wold! gyuo ayde 
yf they had nede / that is to wete of their bodyes / of theyr goodes 
8 and! of theyr men that were vnder them. Thyse two hye men were 
not at the takynge of the holy Cyte of Iherusalem, ffor by the 
wylle of the pylgryms that one of them abode in Anthyoche / And o»« w»> in ^ 
that other at Rages, for to kepe soygnously / and defende the ^" lhe ” r in 
12 turkes fro thyse 2 two Cytees whiche were fer fro Cristiente. 2 Eche 
man had to doo ynowgh in his countrey. But they lefte alle for to 
come to the other / Buymont cam fyrst fro his cyte with a moche 
fayr company, grete nornbre of men of Armes on horsbak and a 
16 foote. he cam vnto a Cyte vpon the see, named valeme, on the They met at 

Valeme, and 

castel of margat / there he lodged hym maulgre them of the cyte. 

Bawdwyn cam fro his countrey sone after and so moeh iourneied 
after, that he ouertoke the prynce buymont to fore this Cyte / And 
20 there they assembled / In that same tyme were arryued pylgryms 
of ytalye at the lyche in surye. Emong them was a good man 
wyse and wel lettred, Relygyous and of grete honneste, named 
daybart, Archebisshop of Pyse / Another was in his company, 

24 Archebisshop of puylle, of a Cyte named Aciane. 3 Thyse men with 
theyr meyne cam in the companye of thyse two barons for to passe 
more surely vnto the Cyte of Iherusalem. Of them was moche en- 
creced thoost of thyse two prynces / in suche wyse that they were 
28 wel .xxv / M. on horsbak and a foote. Thus thenne helde they 
theyr waye by suche manere / that they fonde no Cyte but of theyr 
enemyes / wherfore they passed with moch grete payne / They 
suffred moche in theyr way for lack 4 of vytaylles, ffor they fonde [* if. iss, bkj 
32 none for to bye. And suche as they brought fro theyr countrey 

was faylled. They had grete cold / & so grete rayne that nothyng They suffered 
mvght endure: it was so merueylous. It was in the moneth of way fr °p> , 
luyll, 5 whiche is moche rayny customably in that countrey / ffor 

1- 1 Fr. “afin quilz fussent absouz de leurs veuz," that they might be ab¬ 
solved from their vows—assayled is probably a misreading for assoylcd. 

2 — 2 Fr. “deux cites qui liennent grant lieu d la xpientc,” viz., two cities 
which occupy a great place in Christendom. 

* B. Atiene-: A. Arriene. Lat. Episcopus Arrienensis. 

6 Caxton follows his corrupt French text here. That it is a mistake can 



300 


also from 
lack of food. 


At last they 
arrived in 
Jerusalem, 


where all the 
town received 
them with 
great joy. 


There they 
celebrated 
Christmas. 


The barons 
now assem¬ 
bled to choose 
a patriarch 
for Jeru¬ 
salem. 


Their choice 
fell upon 
Daimbart, 
Archbishop 
of Pisa. 


{* leaf 139] 


-The Reception try the Christians of Jerusalem. [Ch. CCY. 

this cause many deyed of mesease in that companye, ffor in alle this 
longe way, they myght fynde none that wold selle to them ony 
vytaylle, sauf they of Tryple, and they of cesaire. They had! grete 
scarcete 1 of vytaylles for theyr horses / Atte laste by the mercy of our 4 
lord they cam to Iherusalem / There were they receyued with modi 
grete ioye, of god 1 , of the barons, of the clergye, and* of alle the peple. 
They vysyted the holy places of the cyte in teeris and! grete sorowes 
of herte / they fylle doun flat and stratched in the chirches / they 8 
kyssed and ete 2 therthe that our lord had bought 2 / After they cam 
in to theyr hostellys / where alle they of the toun made to them 
grete ioye / whan the hye feste of the natyuyte of our lord Ihesu 
Criste approuched, Alle the prelates and barons yssued out of Iheru- 12 
salem & wente to Bethlehem / There helde they theyr Cristemas. 
There behelde they gladly and moche ententyfly the holy crybbe, 
wherin the sauyour of the world laye bytwene the beestes, deuoutly 
made they theyr prayers & orysous in the place / whiche is as a lytil 16 
dyche where the swete lady that was inoder and vyrgyne after that 
she had chylded / wrapped her sone with lytil and smale clothys, & 
gaf hym souke of the Mylke of her pappes. 

How our Cristen men chosen a very Patriarke in 20 
Iherusalem and assigned to hym rentes / 

ca° CCv° 

v X to this tyme had the See of Iherusalem ben without 8 
pastour and patriark that duely and truly had entred / It was 24 
wel therane v monethes that the cyte was conquerd / Thenne assem¬ 
bled the Barons for to counseylle to haue suehe a man that were 
worthy of honour & myght to here the faytes / Ther were wordes 
ynowgh / The somme wolde haue one / and other wold haue an- 28 
other. Atte laste by the counseyl and good wyll of alle they chees 
this Daybart, Archibisshop of pyse, whiche was but newly come. 
They constituted and sette hym in the siege of Patriark / ffor he 
that had be made by this baratour arnold, of whom I haue spoken 32 
4 to fore, lyke as he was made ayenst right and reson, In lyke 
wyse he retorned agayn to nought / whan this good, wise man was 

easily be seen by the context. The “July" should of course read “De- 
umber.” 1 Orig. sarcete. 

1-3 Fr. “La terre que nostre Seigneur avoit rn archie." Caxton confounds 
marcher (to walk) with marchier (to'buy), to bargain. It should be, the earth 
where our Saviour had walked. s Grig, without. 



301 


Ch. CCVI.] A Quarrel arises in Jerusalem,. 

sette in his dignyte / The due godeffroy and the prynce buymont 
cam to fore hym / whiche had gyuen to hym this honour as for to 
he the vycayre of Ihesu Criste in that londe, and thanked and 
4 preysed alle to gydre oure lord / whan this was don they assygned Rents were 

assigned to 

rentes to the newe Patriark, suche as his predecessour, whiche him suitable 
was a greeke, had? holden. And? other gretter aboue that, in suche 
wyse that he myght honorably mayntene a good and honest com- 
8 pany of peple / Thenne bawdwyn and buymont toke leue of the Baldwin and 
chic and of the other barons, and descended vnto flom Iordan,»«took 
and there bayned them / ffro thens they wente by the Byuer syde w«j|^o tl,8ir 
til they cam to tabarye. Thenne passed by the londe- named 
12 Fenyce / And lefte cesayre on the right syde. After they cam to 
the Cyte named manbec. 1 After helde they the see syde and so 
moche exployted that they cam al hool and sound to Anthyoclie. 

How by thatysement of somme men a grete debate 
16 sourded bytwene the due and the patriarke of 
Iherusalem / ca° CCvj° 

He customme of somme men is suche / that they may not 
t suffre the peas emong the peple, where they may sette dis- 
20 corde / By thatysement of suche maner folke sourded a debate a nuputa 
bytwene the due and the patriarke / 2 ffor the patriarke demaunded tween the 

A ... iii new patriarch 

of hym the chyef tour of the toun, whiche is named the toure jndiim 
daujrd, and the fourth part of Iherusalem 2 / aboue that he wold 
24 haue the cyte of Iaplie and alle thappertenauntes, ffor he sayde 
that they were the droytes and rightes of his chirche of the sepulcre / 
whan this debate had a whyle endured bytwene them, the due 
whiche was humble and mesurable & moche doubted our lord / on 
28 candlemas day, in the presence of alle the clergye & all the peple, Finally the 
lie gaf the iiij part of Iaphe moche debonayrly to the patriarke and misea to 
to his chirche to holde for euermore. After this whan it cam to patriarpMie 

fourth part of 

the day of Eester, to fore all them that were assembled at this 
32 feste / he gaf in to the honde of the patriark, the fourth part of »f Jaffa, 
Iherusalem & the tour dauyd with alle the appertenauntes / Alway 

1 Fr. Malbcc. 

2 —n Fr. Car U patriarch: lui demandoit la saincte cite de Jherusalem, et la 
maitresse fortresse de la ville t qu'on nomine la tour David , oultre plus. The 
patriarch demanded the whole of the city of Jerusalem, not “a fourth” as 
Caxton translates. Lat. “ domino patriarcha reposcente ab eo civitatem sanctam 
Deo ascriptam, et ejvsdem civitatis praesidium," etc. 



302 Reasons for the Quarrel. [Ch. CCV1T. 

forseen by couenaunt that the due 1 shold holde thyse Cytees and 
as soon as lie the londes aboute vnto the tyme that by the ayde of oure lord 1 he 
two q other d * ia| i conquer’d vpon the turkes two other Cytees / By whiche the 

theTurks 1 Roy amme myght be enlarged. And yf it happed that he deyde in 4 
piti89,bk.] the 2 mene whyle without heyer, Alle thyse thynges withoute con¬ 
tradiction shold come in to the lionde of the patriarke / and to the 
chirche. The trouthe was suche as I haue sayd, But it is oner 
grete merueylle, ff'or what reson this holy man that was so wyse, 8 
demanded thus thyse cytees of this noble man, the due, as I haue 
sayd. They that knewe the state of the londe / helde and reputed 
them self for lasse, whan they vnderstode this werke and couetyse 
Every one in the chirche, and merueylled therof 1 / ffor the barons that had 12 
patriarch conquerd the cyte gaf it to the due so frely / that they wold not / 
thtademamf ^ la *' on y Inan tyuyng shold haue no right aboue hym, but that he 
shold holde it hym self entierly without making to ony other ony 
obeyssaunce. 16 

Hier recounteth thystorye how the fourth parte of 
Iherusalem cam vnto the patriarke of the same / 

ca" CCvij° 

From this a Lway it is certayn, that fro the tyme that the latins entred in 20 

time on, the 

Eadafourth “ ie °y te > And y et niore Auncyente / the patriarke of 

part of the Iherusalem had the fourth part of the cyte of Iherusalem / And 
helde it as his owen / how this happed, and by what reson / I slral 
saye to you shortly / ffor the trouthe therof hath ben serched. It 24 
is founden by thauncyent historyes, that whyles this Cyte was in 
Jerusalem the hondes of the hethen peple / It myght neuer haue peas that 
peacerui city, longe endured, But was ofte assieged of hethen prynces that were 

about it, ffor eche of them wold conquere 3 it and put it in his seyg- 28 
■norye / Therfor they toke ofte the proyes, and mesdyde and tres- 
aiwaytbeiug P ace< ^ to ^e Cytezeyns of the toun / They brake the towres & 
besieged. walles moche oultrageously by theyr engyns, And for the oldenes 

of the walles / the Cyte was disclosed and open in many places / 32 
In this tyme the Eoyamme of 4 Egypte was more ryche and more 
1 Orig. dne, 8 Orig. couquere. 

*— 4 Fr. “Egypt estoit plus riche et plus puissant et d'avoir ct de sens,” 
Caxton has here m^de a common paleographic error by reading fens instead of 
sens, and then making one word of it with the de. Lat. “ Cum, igitur ea 
tempestate, Aegyptorum. regnum virihus et divitiis, sed et prudentia Saeculari 
caeteris quae in Oriente, vel in Austro erant regnis esset^praestantius." 



303 


Ch. CCVII.] Conduct of the Mohammedan Bailiff. 

puyssaimt of hauoyr and good and defence 4 than ony other of the 
Royammes of Turkye / ffor the Oalyphe helde fhenne Iherusalem TheCaiiph 
and the londe therabout, and with his grete boost that he sente posefKou 
4 theder he couquerd alle surye vnto the Lyche, whiche is by thM - 
anthyoche. Thus had he encreeed his empyre. he establysshyd his 
bayllyes in the cytees that stonde on the see syde, And in them 
also on the londe / Thenne commanded he that alle sholde paye 
8 hym trybute, & ordeyned & deuysed what he wold haue of euery 
cyte. after this he wold that the cytezeyns shold make agayn the He decreed 
walks of euery 1 Cyte / And mayntene in good poynt the towres j should be 
and redresse alle aboute suche as neded / by the aduys of his men. p i ea f uoj 
12 And after theyr establysshement / The bayly of Iherusalem com- 
maunded to them of the toun to repayre theyr walles and sette 
them entierly in poynt lyke as they to fore had ben. Thenne 
ordeyned he and deuysed how moch euery strete of the toun shold 
16 make. By grete cruelte and malyce he commaunded that theTjwimr 
captyfs cristiens that were in the cyte shold make the fourth part were ordered 
ot the walles / They were so pour and so greued of tayllages and of 
excises, that vnnethe they had among* them alle wherof to repayre 
20 two towrettys / They sawe wel that he sought occasion for to 
destroye them alle / Therfor they assembled and cam moche 
humbly to fore the bayly / and fyl at his feet, And moch requyred 
in weping / that he wold comande them to doo thynge that they They pnjyoj 
24 myght doo, ffor this that he had! commannded them to doo was released on 
ouermoche ouer theyr power / That Inhumayn baylly, whiche was their poverty, 
ful of cruelte and of pryde, louyd not the Cristen men, and menaced 
them moche fiersly / And sware that yf they accomplisshyd not the 
28 commaundement of this lord the Calyphe, he wold do smyte of 
theyr heedes as traytours / whan they herd this / they were moche 
aferd / and on that othersyde they sawe wel that they myght not 
bere the charge that he leyde on'them / therfor they dyde so moche 
32 atte laste by the prayer of somme turkes / whiche had pyte on them, 
that the Baylly gaf them respyte, til that they had sent to them- so they 

, „ , V . finally sent to 

perour of Constantynople, and to requyre hym for the loue of god «> e Emperor 
that he wold sende his almesse to performe this horrible werke, for beg 
36 to delyuer them fro the peryll of deth in whiche they were con- 
dempned yf it were not by them made. 



304 


Messengers sent to the Emperor. [Ch. CCVIIl 


Of the same mater / ea” CCviij 0 

Messengers t He messagers cam fro them to themperour in to constanty- 

went to tell ° , . . 

their mis- nople / they seyd to hym the trouth of their message, how 

fortunes to c 

tiie Emperor, they were in subiection, and what meseases, what fylthes the turkes 4 
made them to suffre. And fynally they muste a lie deye yf he 
soeoured them not / all they that herde them began to wepe for 
compassion / therene was emperour a valyauret man, wyse, & of grete 
who was corage named 1 constantyn, and! surname monamaques. he gouerned 8 
Constantine moche vygorousl}' thempyre. whan he herd! the requeste of the 
poure cristen 1 men he was meuyd! with grete pyte in his herte / 
and sayd that he wold helpe them gladly, and shold gyue to them 
so largely of his good that the iiij part of the wallis which was 12 
t»if. i4o, hkj coreunareded 2 them to make shold be accomplysshyd, but he pro- 
mysed! them wel that he shold doo nothyng but by couenaunt. 
That is to wete that yf they myght pourchace of the lord! of the 
londe, that within the partye of the cyte that shold be closed with 16 
his money, none shold dwells but cristen mere / on this condicion 
wold he doo it / and! other wyse not. Tn this fourme 3 he delyuerd! 
to them his letlres patentes, And sente to his bayly of Cypre / that 
Heproimsea yf the cristen men of Iherusalem myght pourchace of the Calyphe 20 
part of Jem'' ^gyptc this that ye haue herd, that of the rente that he ought 

«iiem should haue in that londe, lie shold! lete make the fourth 4 part of the 

►ive!y eMlu ’ wa % s of this holy Cyte. The messagers that had! thus don theyr 

message Retorned vnto the Patriarke and to them that had sente 24 
them / And! recounted 1 to them truly how they had! don and sped / 
They ansuerd! that it shold! be hard! to be had, not withstondyng 
they muste essaye, ffor they myght passe in none other maner. 
they sente good messagers and trewe to this grete lord the Calyphe 28 
of Egyte / Our lord helpe hym in such wyse that thei forede in hym 
Thecapph of this that they sought; & shortly to say / he delyuerd! to them a good! 
them a chartre sealid! with his seal, & confermed with his propre hared, 5 that 
this effect, g0 elosyng the / iiij / part / he graunted to them the fourth part of 32 
Iherusalem. 5 The messagers retorned. They that had sente them 
made to them grete ioye whan they knewe how they had achyeued 
their message. The bailyes of Cypre passed in to Surye / And 
they made the fourth part of the walles with the goodes of them- 36 

1 Orig. ceisten. 3 Orig. fourme. 1 Orig. fourth. 

8 — 5 Fr. ‘ ‘ que par ce faUant leur oetroya la quarts parte de Jerusalem, ” viz., 
that by so doing he delivered to them the fourth part of Jerusalem, 



305 


Ch. CCIX.] Settlement of the Difficulty. 


perour, lyke as he had commaunded. And! this werke was made in This 
the yere of thyncarnacion 1 of oure lord .M.lxiij. thenne was calyphe yw »««• 

& kynge of egypte bommensor / And! this was / xxxvj. yere to fore 
4 the cyte was eonquerd. vnto this tyme the cristen men were lodged 
in the toun emonge the turkes comynly one by another, but fro 
thens forth that the Calyphe had commaunded, the fourth part of 
the toun was delyuerd to them / Thenne were the cristen men Then was the 
8 moehe eased!, ffor whan they dwellyd emong the turkes, they that cimstwne in 
were theyr neyghbours / dyde to- them grete ennoyes and shames / much easier. 
But whan they were by them self / they dyde them not so moche / 
yf they had ony debate emonge- them self it was brought to fore 
12 the patriark. ffor fro therene forth was in that part of the toun none 
other iustice but he / thus gouerned he it as his 2 oune. his iiij part 
is bounded as I shall saye to you. ffro the yate that the so/me goth 
doun, whiche is named the yate dauid by the tour of the angle, 

16 otherwyse named the tour tancre. The walles that they made 

within is bounded fro 3 the chyef way 4 that goth fro that gate vnto C* leafinj 
the 6 chaunge, And fro thens agayn vnto the west yate / In this 
space stondeth the mount of Caluarye where our sauyour Ihesu Tiusifomtii 
20 Criste was crucified / & the holy sepulcre / where he laye deed in, 

and out wherof he aroos fro deth to lyf / The hows of the hospytal, J5“^ s h “J y the 
Two abbayes, one of monkes & another of nonnes / The hows of city - 


the patriarke / And the Cloysture of the chanonnos of the sepulcre. 


24 How the due Godeffroy for to augmente the Cristi- 
ente / assieged one of the townes of the turkes / 

ca°. CCix 0 

i N this tyme after that alle the Barons that were come in pyl- 
28 gremage were departed fro the londe, and retorned in to 
theyr countrees, The valyaunt due, to whom the Koyamme was 
delyuerd / & tancre whiche was abiden with hym, they were 
almost alone in tho partes, they were moche pour of good and of Godfrey and 

t i.i itiiii Tancred were 

32 men. vnnethe myght they make, whan they dyde all theyr power, now very 

47 ° . poor, and had 

thre honderd men on horsbak, and two thousand a foote / The but few men. 
Cytees that the pylgryms had eonquerd were ferre a sondre / And 
none myght come to other without grete peryll of theyr enemyes / 

1 Orig. tliyncaveion. a Fr. comme sienne, as his own. 

3 Fr. est bornee de, i. c. is bounded by, not from. 

5 Lat. “ ad riiensas nummularwrum." 


Godfrey. 


x 



306 


Tlie Turks 
did every¬ 
thing pos¬ 
sible to injure 
them. 


They would 
not plant 
their lends, 
so that the 
Christians 
should have 
no profit. 


Many Chris¬ 
tians loft and 
went home. 


I* If. 141, bit.] 


Duke God¬ 
frey, notwith¬ 
standing, 
enlarged hie 
kingdom 
steadily. 


He besieged 
Aram in vain, 


Treatment of the Christians. [Ch. CCIX. 

The vyllages that were about the cytees vvhiche were called! easians 1 
therm dwellyd the turkes that were tlieyr subgettis, and! obeyed! to 
the lordes of the cytees / but thise turkes hated nomen more than 
they dyde the cristen men, and pourchaeed incessantly alle the 4 
harme & euyl that they myght. whan they fonde ony of our men 
allone oute of the way / gladly they murdred them. And somtyme 
they ledde to the Cytees of the sarasyns for to selle them / yet 
thought they of gretter meschyef and folye / ffor they wold! not ere 8 
ne laboure theyr londes to thende that the lordes and men of the 
cytees shold not take theyr rentes / and! desired 1 them self lyuer to 
suffre mesease / rather than our 3 peple shold haue ony good or 
auaylle. The Cristen men were not well assured! within the Cytees / 12 
ffor they had but fewe people / And there cam theuys by nyght 
that Robbed theyr houses, and slewe them in theyr beddes / And 
bare awaye alle theyr thynges. By this occasion many there were 
of the Cristen men / that lefte theyr fayr tenementes 3 and houses in 16 
the Cytees, and retoumed pryuely in to theyr countreyes / ffor they 
hadde grete drede / that the Turkes, whiche that dwellyd aboute 
them / sholde assemble somme daye, and take the townes by 
strengthe & destresse, and destroye them for euer in such wyse that 20 
neuer sholde be memory of them, ffor hate of them 4 that thus 
wente was establysshyd fyrst in that londe, that who that helde a 
yere longe in peas his tenement-and his londe / he shold neuer after 
answere therof to ony other, by cause ther were many that for fere 24 
and for cowardise lefte alle theyr thynges and fled away. After 
whan the countrey was better assured / they cam agayn, and wold 
haue recouerd them / but by this lawe that was thus establysshyd 
they were neuer herd, whyles that the Royamme was thus in grete 28 
pouerte / the valyaunt due godeffroy, which had moche grete courage 
and good hope in our lord, enlarged his Royamme. he assembled as 
moche peple as he myght / And wente for tassiege a Cyte nygh to 
Taphe on the see Syde, named Arsur. But he fonde it wel gamys- 32 
shed of vytaylles, of men of Armes, and other engyns. And ther 
were therin turkes many, hardy and defensable. The hoost of the 
Cristen men that were withoute / were but fewe and suffretous by 
cause they had no shippes by whiche they myght defende the waye 36 
of the see, where they myght entre & yssue whan it plesyd them / 
ffor thise thynges the due was constrayned to leue the siege, and 

1 Fr. Casiaux, not in the Latin original. s Orig. onr. 

8 Fr. tenmrea, tenures, holding^ 



307 


Ch. CCX.] Ambassadors cpme to Godfrey. 

departed thynkyng to come agayn to the same place / •whan the 
tyme shold be more couenable / 1 And* that he were better pour- j^^'more 1 ' 
ueyed of men / wherof he had nede for to take the toun. 1 And so men - 
4 had he don yf our lord had! gyuen hym long* lyf in this world. 

How the turkes brought presentes to the due gode- 
ffroy at the sayd siege and of theyr deuyses to 
gydre / ca° CCx°. 

8 i T happed!, in this siege of whiche I haue spoken, a thynge that 
ought not to be forgoten. ffro the montaynes of the londe of 
Samarye, in whiche is the londe of Nappies, cam summe turkes jjjougijt ^ 
whiche were lordes of Casians theraboute, and brought vnto the " odfrey ’ 

12 valyaunt due godeffroy 2 presentes of brede, of wyn, of dates, and 
of other frnyte. 2 It myght wel be that they cam more for tespye 
the beyng and eontenauuce of our men than for other thynge. 
they prayde so moch the men of the due that they were brought to 
16 fore hym / Thenne they presented to hym suche as they had 
brought / The noble due, as he that was humble and without bob- 
aunce, sat in his pauyllon on the ground, & lened vnto a sak full of 
stuff / There abode he a part of his peple that he had sente in ™«« 

20 fourage. whan they that had made thyse presentes / sawe the due 

sytte 3 so lowo, they merueylled them ouermoche, and began to de- pieariwi 
mande of the peple that vnderstode theyr langage, where fore it 
was so, that so hye a prynce of the weste, whiche had troubled alle 
24 thoryent, and had slayn so many men, and taken and conquerd so 

puyseaunt a Koyamme, conteyned hym so pourely, ne had not vnder r > unlilli ‘y- 
hym tappytys ne clothes of sylk, ne habyte of a kynge on hym. ne 
had not aboute hym sergeantes or knyghtes holdyng 1 naked swerdes 
28 or haches or axis danoys, by whiche alle they that sawe hym shold 
doubte and fere hym / but satte so lowe 4 as he were a man of lytil 
affayre. The valiauret due demaunded of them that knewe & vnder¬ 
stode theyr langage what they sayde / It was told & answerd of this ™^ ishmeilt 
32 which they merueylled. Thenne 5 he sayd that it was no shame to to 
a man mortel to sytte vpon therthe / ffor theder muste he retome 

“ct que Us homines fussent mieuz pourveuz de cc que mesticr fust A 
prendre la ville," viz., and when his men were better supplied with what was 
necessary to take the city. 

2—3 L a t t “def erodes secant, exenia panis ct vini caricatum, quoque, et vaioc 
passae." 4 The original is here damaged. 5 Orig. Thenue. 

X 2 



308 


They de¬ 
parted, filled 
with admira¬ 
tion for the 
Duke. 


Gabriel, lord 
of Melitene, 
waa much 
afraid of an 
invasion of 
Persians, 


and decided 
to give his 
city over to 
Boliemond. 


[l If. H2, bk.] 


Boheinond 
started to 
receive this 
gift. 


On the way 
he was at¬ 
tacked by 
the Turks 
and taken 
prisoner. 


The Capture 1 pf Bohemond.. [Ch. CCXI. 

after his deth, and lodge there in his body and become erthe. whan 
they herd this answere, they that were comen for tespye and* essays 
what he was / began moche for to allowe and preyse his wytte and 
his humilyte. They departed fro thens / sayeng that he was shapen 4 
and lyke for to be lord of alls that londe, and to gouerne the peple / 
that was so withoute pryde / And knewe pouerte and the fragilyte 
of his nature so wol. This word was spradd ouer al by them that 
had! herd hym. he was so moche dradde and doubted of his enemyes / 8 
that enquyred of his affayres / whiche founde not in hym but 
vygour, Raysou and inesure, without ony prydo or oultrage. 

How buymont was taken in goyng to Meletene / 
whiche cyte the lord of the same wold yelde to 12 
hym. ca" CChtj" 

i N the Royamme of Iherusalem they conteyned them thus as 
ye haue herd. Thenne it happened that a ryche man of 
ermenye named Gabryel was lord of the cyte of meletene, which 16 
stondeth by yondc the Ryuer of Eufrates in the londe of mesopo- 
tayne. This gabriel doubted moche that the turkes of Perse shold 
come on hym / ffor the men that they helde / ran ofte on hym / in 
suche wyse that he myght not wel suffre it / Therfore he toke coun- 20 
seyl, And sente messagers to buymont, prynce of Anthyoche / that 
they shold saye to hym in his name, that he shold haste hym in to 
his londe / ffor he wold gyue ouer to hym his Cyte by certayn 
coueuauntes resonable ynough whiche he sente to hym. he louyd 24 
1 buymont / And sayde that he had leuer that buymont had his cyte 
by his agremewt, than the turkes sholde take it from 2 hym ayenst 
his wyll / whan Buymont herde thyse tydynges, as he that was 
hardy hasted hym moche for to 'make hym redy, And toke with 28 
hym a good company, and went forth on his way / he passed the 
Ryuer of Eufrates and entred in to mesopotayne / And was nyghe 
the Cyte of meletene / ffor whiche he wente for to receyue / whan 
a puyssaunt amyral of the turkes named domsmayn 3 / that had 32 
eertaynly the very knowleche of his cotnynge, And laye in a wayte 
for hym / and ranne vpon hym sodenly, and his men beyng 1 alle 
out of arraye and dispourueyed / They that abode were alle slayn / 
ffor ther were ouer grete plente of turkes / The other fledde, Buy- 36 
mont was taken and reteyned, and they ladde hym the handes 
2 Orig. from. 


3 Fr. Danisman. 



Ch. CCXII.] Baldwin goes to the Rescue. 

bounden with cordes / And! his feet chayned* with yron / Of this 
auenture mounted the turke in grete pryde / And trusted moche in 
his hoost that he ledde / that he cam to fore the cyte of meletene, 
4 and assieged it, by cause he supposed that they wold haue delyuerd 
it without taryeng* / But somme of them that escaped fro thens 
where the prynce was taken cam fleyng in to the cyte of Rages. 
They told to therle Bawdwyn this grete mesauenture that was fallen 
8 to them / whan the valyaunt Erie herd this / he was moche angrye, 
And had grete pyte of the prynce / whom he helde for broder for 
the companye of the pylgremage. And by cause they had theyr 
countrees so nygh to gydre x It shold haue displesyd hym 1 yf the 
12 turkes shold conquere this cyte that buymont shold haue had. 
Therfor he somoned hastely alle his men that he myght haue on 
horsbak and a fote, and toke with hym that was necessarye for 
suche a vyage and wente toward thoo partyes. wel a thre daye 
16 ioumeye was Rages fro meletene. he had sone passed this waye in 
suchewyse that he was nyghe the cyte. But the sayd donysmayn 
knewe wel the comyng of therle and durst not abyde ne fyght 
with hym, But lefte the siege and departed and ledde forth with 
20 hym buymont faste bounden and straytly. whan Bawdwyn herde 
that he durst not abyde hym / but fledde to fore hym / he ran after 
with his men and chaced hym thre dayes longe / whan he sawe 
that he myght not ouertako hym / he retourned in to the cyte of 
24 Meletene. Gabryel the lord of the toun receyued hym with moche 
grete ioye with alle his men, and made to them good chere, And 
after gaf ouer the cyte to hym by the same couenauntes that he had 
offred to buymont. 2 whan he had 3 don this he retomed 4 home 
28 agayn to Rages. 


309 


The Turk* 
elated went 
on to besiege 
Melitene, 


but Baldwin 
went quickly 
to the relief 
ofBohemond. 


The Turks, 
hearing this, 
left the siege 
of Melitene, 
and fled. 


Baldwin 
chased them 
three days, 

and then 
returned to 
Melitene, 
which sur¬ 
rendered to 
him. 


[> leaf 143] 


How the due 5 godeffroy assembled® alle liis peple, 

And entred in to Arabye, And of the gayn that 
he made, And of his deth. Capitulo CCxij 0 

32 g Odeffroy the valyaunt Due and his men that were lefte with Godfrey 

hym for to kepe the Royamme began to haue moche grete jn gr»»t du- 
mesease / and suffre suche pouerte that vnnethe it may be deuysed. 

Thenne it happed that good espyes and trewe brought to hym 

i—i jp r . moult leur eust displeu se ilz conquissent les cites," viz., it would 
have displeased them much, etc. 3 Orig. bnymout. 

* Orig. rebomed. 6 Orig. due. 6 Orig. asseinbled. 



31Q 


The great Strength of Godfrey. [Ch. CCXII. 

tidynges that in the partyes of arabye on that other syde of flom 
Iordan were moche ryche peple whiehe doubted! nothynge. And 
therfore they dwellyd out of fortresses, yf they were surprised! 
and made a there shold! be moch grete gayne wonne / The valyaunt Due that so 4 
AraMato moche had suffred toke with hym peple a foote and on horsbak as 
and money, many as he myght, sauf the garde of the Cy te. Thenne entred! he 
sodeynly in to the londe of his enemyes. There gadred! he many 
There they grete proyes, that is to wete, horses / beufes, Kyen and sheep, And 8 
»poiE eat ryche prysonners brought he grete plente. Thenne retomed! he 
toward Lherusalem / Somme turkes ther were hye anc? puyssaunt of 
them of Arabye whiehe were moche hardy, and noble in Armes, 
And had grete prys. Emonge all other ther was one that had longe 12 
desired for to see the due Godeffroye of boloyne / & wold fayn 
knowe yf it were trewe that was said of his force & strengthe / & 
acqueynte hym with his peple of ffraunce, of whom he had herd so 
moche / that were come fro the Occident vnto thoryent / And had 16 
conquerd so many londes / And sette them in theyr subiection. 
one of the Aboue alle other he desired to see due godeffroy and knowe yf it 
Arable came, were trouth that was sayd of his prowesse & his strengthe / he dide 
curiosity, to so moch to such me?j as he spak, that he had good surete & triews 20 
visit Godirej, ^ come Ynto t ^ e j uc> j le sa i ew ed hym moche lowe enclynyng lyke 

as is theyr customme. And after he prayd and desired of the due 
and naked moche humbly / that it wold plese hym to smyte with his swerd a 
him some feat Camel that lie had brought moche grete. ffor as he sayde it shold 24 
of strength. ^ gjgj-g honour to hym in his countre / yf he myght recounte ony 
of his strokes that he had seen hym self. The due knewe wel that 
he was come fro fer to see hym / And dyde that he requyred hym. 
he drewe his swerd / and smote the camel on the neck where it was 28 
grettest, And smote it of as lyghtly as it had been a sheep, whan 
P if. its, bko the turke sawe this / he merueylled ouer moche. In 1 such wyse 
that he was all abasshed / whan he had a litil bethought hym / he 
sayd in his langage, I see wel, sayd he, that the due hath a good 32 
swerd & wel trenchant & cuttyng / But I wote neuer yf he coude 
smyte so grete a strook with another swerde. The valyaunt due 
demaunded what he sayde. And whan he knewe, he began to 
smyle a lytil / And 1 after sayd, that he shold delyuer to hym his 36 
Godfrey owen swerde. The turke dyde so. the due thenne smote therwith 
headoff * another Camel, In suche wys that he made the hede to flee of moche 
at one stroke’ lyghtlyer than of the other / thenne merueylled ouermoche the turk, 

And sayde that it was more by the strengthe of the Arme than by 40 



Ch. CCXII.] . Death of Godfrey. 311 

the bounte of the swerd 1 . he had wel preuyd! that it was trewe that 
was sayd! of the Due in his Countreye. Thenne he gaf to the TTwastonith- 
due many fayr Iewellys of gold and of ryche stones, and moehe 
4 acqueynted with hym. And after retorned home in to his countre. 

The valyaunt due cam vnto Iherusalem with alle his proye / & the 
trusses & fardellys of his gayn, which wer so grete that all the men 
of his companye were ryche. In that moneth of Iuyll the velyaunt Godfrey w«» 
8 due godefroy whiche was gouemour of the Iioyamme of Iherusalem haretum 
ha<t a maladye and sekenes moch grete / Alle the phisiciens of the expedition, 
contre were sente for. They dyde alle that in them was possible / 

But alle auaylled not, ffor the payne encresyd alway more. After au the 
12 this he sente for men of relygyon, as prelates / curates & other good of the land 
& deuoute men, for to haue counseyll of them for the helthe of his avail, 
sowle / he was moche wel confessyd and veray repentaunt with 
grete wepynges / And in his right mynde with grete deuoeion 1 
16 departed out of this world / Certaynly we ought to thynke that the 
sowle was brought vp with angelis to fore the face of Ihesu crist. 
he deyde the .xiij day of Iuyll the yere of thyncarnacion 2 of oure He died the 

^ 13fh day of 

lord .M / i / C / he was entiered and buryed in the chirche of the July lioo. 

• II " and was 

20 holy sepulcre vnder the place of the mount of Caluarye / where our ^j^ under 
lord was put on the crosse / That place is kept moehe honestly for calvary, 
to entere and burye the kynges vnto this day. 

Thus endeth this book Intitled the laste siege and conquest of Thus endeth 
24 Iherusalem, with many other historyes therin comprysed / Fyrst of 
Eracles / and of the meseases of the cristen men in the holy londe / 

And of their releef & conquest of Iherusalem / and how Godeffroy 
of boloyne was first kyng of the latyns in that royamme & of his 
28 deth, translated & reduced out of ffrensshe 3 in to englysshe 4 by me [‘ leaf ui] 
symple persone Wylliam Caxton to thende that euery cristen man out of French 
may be the better encoraged tenterprise warre for the defense of wimam 
Cristendom, and to recouer the sayd Cyte of Iherusalem in whiche 
32 oure blessyd sauyour Ihesu Criste suffred deth for al mankynde, 
and roose fro deth to lyf / And fro the same holy londe ascended in 
to heuen. And also that Cristen peple one vnyed in a veray peas / 
myght empryse to goo theder in pylgremage with strong honde for 
36 to expelle the sarasyns and turkes out of the same that our lord 
myght be ther seruyd & worshipped of his chosen cristen peple in 
that holy & blessyd londe in which he was Incarnate, and blissyd 
1 Orig. denocion. - Orig. thynearuacion. s Orig. ffreusshe. 



312 


Dedication of the Book. [Ch. CCXII. 

it with the presence of his blessyd body whyles he was here in 
erthe emonge 1 vs / by whiche conquest we myght deserue after this 
present short and transitorye lyf, the celestial lyf to dwelle in heuen 
"present 011 e ^ ema ^y * n i°y® without ende, Amen / Which book I presente vnto 4 
EdwardTv mooste C listen kynge, kynge Edward the fourth, humbly 

besechyng his hyenes to take no displesyr at me so presumyng, 
the'12thof°" book 2 I began in marche, the xij daye, and! fynysshyd the 

fini8he'd“ d V *J day °f Iuy n / the yere of our lord .M.CCCC.lxxxj, & the xxj 8 
Ju°™i 48 i. y ere the regne of our sayd! sauerayn lord kyng Edwatd the 
fourth, & in this maner sette in forme & enprynted! the xx day of 
nouembre the yere a forsayd in thabbay of westmester, by the sayd 
wylliam Caxton. 12 

1 Orig. emonge. 2 Orig. boook. 



313 


NOTES. 


Note 1, p. 4. This Edward was Edward IV., who died April 9th, 1483. 

Note 2, p. 5. “My lord Prynce and my lord Pychard, due of yorke a/nd 
norfolke” mentioned here by Caxton, are the two young princes who were so 
cruelly murdered in the Tower by Richard III. in 1483. 

Note 3, p. 19. William here gives the story of the capture of the Cross as 
believed in his time, and still received by the Catholic Church ; Chosroes’ trophy, 
however, was not the whole of the Cross, as only part of it was left in Jerusalem 
by the Empress Helena, at the time of its discovery. The rest was sent to Con¬ 
stantinople, when it was again divided, one half being inserted by Constantine in 
the head of a statue of himself, while the other half was sent to Rome and deposited 
in the church Santa Croce, in Gerusalemme, which received its name from the 
sacred relic. In 614, Chosroes carried off the piece that had been left in Jerusalem 
to his capital, Ctesiphon; fourteen years afterwards, in 628, Heraclius brought it 
back. The feast of the Elevation of the Cross still commemorates the day of its 
restoration. 

Note 4, p. 19. The Cosdroe of William of Tyre is Chosroes, or Khosru II., 
called Parviz the Conqueror , who ascended the throne in 590, in the midst of a 
civil war, and was assisted in maintaining his position by Mauritius, Emperor of 
Rome. When Phocas killed Mauritius in 602, and seized the imperial power, 
Chosroes decided to avenge his ally, and attacked Phocas, taking Jerusalem in 614. 
Heraclius, who succeeded Phocas as emperor, invaded Persia in return, and con¬ 
quered Chosroes, who was killed soon after, on the 29th of Feb., 628, but by the 
hand of his own son. William’s authority for his version of the whole story was 
the Arabian Said Ibn Baktrik. 

Note 5, p. 20. William refers here without doubt to Zacharias, patriarch of 
Constantinople, who was at this time taken prisoner, and carried into Persia by 
Chosroes. Theophanes of Byzantium tells us in his Chronographia, that this 
Zacharias was a contemporary of St. John of Alexandria, called Eleemosynarius,— 
the St. John Elymont from which the church in Jerusalem was named. According 
to Theophanes, Zacharias himself brought back the Cross from his captivity, and 
died soon after. According to others, Modestus, the successor of Zacharias, was 
patriarch when the Cross was reinstated. The Catalogue of Nicephotus states 
that Zacharias was bishop (or patriarch) from 609 to 631, which would give him 
three years after his return from captivity in 628. 

Note 6, p. 22. This is the great and famous hero of the Arabian Nights of our 
childhood, Haroun al Raschid, or Ressit. His name is more properly Harun er 
Rashid, Aaron the Orthodox. He was the fifth of the Abasside Caliphs of Bagdad, 
was born at Ray, Feb. 15th, 766, and died in 808. He was the most accomplished, 
eloquent, and generous of all Mohammedan princes. Ascending the throne at the 
age of twenty-two, he soon ruled the greater part of the Eastern world. The 



314 ffotes. 

account of his relations with Charlemagne has, however, no trustworthy historical 

Note 7, p. 24. Hyart, the Idraot of Tasso’s Jerusalemn Delivered, a prince of 
Damascus, and uncle of Armida, whom Tasso sends to the camp of the Christians 
to seduce their chiefs. 

Note 8, p. 36. According to Paulin Paris, the first church of St. Mary de la 
Latyne was constructed between 1014 and 1023, by some Amalfians, permission 
having been granted them by the Sultan of Egypt. It was built near the church 
of the Holy Sepulchre, in the street of the Paumiers, and was called Latyne, because' 
the Latin instead of the Greek rites were used: a monastery was added to it to 
receive the pilgrims, and a hospital for the sick. Godfrey of Bouillon and others 
gave it large donations. This was the origin of the Knights Hospitallers of the 
order of St. John of Jerusalem, called later Knights of Rhodes aud Malta. 

Note 10, p. 37. For this conversation between Peter and Simeon there is no 
historical authority. It is not found in any of the known sources, and seems to 
have been introduced by William for rhetorical effect. 

Note 11, p. 40. This Gilbert (who is known in history as the Anti-Pope) held 
the Seat from 1080 to 1101, under the title of Clement III., but has never been 
numbered among the legitimate popes. 

Note 12, p. 47. This Gaultier without knoivleche is called in English Walter 
the Pennyless, bis French title being not Gautier sans Savoir, wliich Caxton 
translates Gaultier without knowleche, but Gautier sans Avoir. P. Paris says that, 
far from being a term of reproach, the title Sans Avoir was often applied to sons 
of noblemen to distinguish them from their older and wealthier brothers: Albert 
of Aix calls him Walterus eognomento Zenzavehor; Tudebodus, Gualterius sine 
habere; Foucher of Chartres, Gualterius sine pecunia; Foulques d’Anjou, Gualterius 
sine Avero; and William of Tyre, Waltariw sine Habere. The Dictionnaire des 
Oroisades, Migne, tome 18, says that his true name was Gautier de Perejo, that 
he was a nephew of Gautier de Perejo, who died en route for the Holy Land in 
Bulgaria. Gautier sans Avoir succeeded his uncle in command of 15,000 men, 
who with eight knights formed the advance guard of Peter the Hermit. Gautier 
was killed in 1097, during the siege of Nicasa. 

Note 13, p. 54. These speeches of the Grecian ambassador to Peter are quoted 
almost verbatim by William from Albert of Aix. 

Note 14, p. 56. Soliman, son of Kuntul Misch, and a direct descendant of 
Seljuk, passed into Asia Minor in 1074, at the head of an army of Turks, carrying 
his conquests as far as Nicsea. His eldest son, Kilidge Arslan, called also Soliman 
the Younger, and David, is the Solyman here mentioned. William of Tyre makes 
him a nephew of the Soudan of Persia, and confounds the father and son. 

Note 15, p. 62. There was at this time a universal uprising against the Jews, 
especially in Germany, due, without doubt, to the general state of exaltation. 
At Spiers, Worms, and Treves, as well as at Cologne and Mayence, there were 
terrible massacres, at least a thousand being slain in Mayence alone. In England 
the feeling was also very bitter against them, and notwithstanding Richard’s efforts 
to protect them, large numbers were slain in Lincoln, Stamford, and Lynn, and 
also in York after Richard's departure. 

Note 16, p. 79. Caxton’s Entyses is a corruption for Eutyches, founder of the 
sect of the Eutychians, presbyter and archimandrite at Constantinople. He affirmed 
that after the union of the two natures, human and Divine, Christ had only one 
nature, that of the Incarnate Word, and that therefore His human body was 
essentially different from other human bodies. At the Council of Chalcedon, in 
451, this theory was declared heretical, and it was affirmed that two natures were 
united in Christ, but without any alteration, absorption, or confusion. Eutyches 
died in exile. , 

Note 17, p. 79. Discretus is a corruption or mistranslation for Dioscurus, 



Notes. 315 

bishop of Alexandria, from 444 to 454. He also was condemned for heresy at the 
Chalcedon Council. 

Note 18, p. 95. Belphet is known in Oriental history as Alp Arslan, Sultan of 
Persia, born in 1030. He was celebrated for his justice, his courage, and his 
generosity. His features were noble and fine, and his character gentle and good. 
His glory and power were so great that he is said to have had at one time 1,200 
subject princes around his throne. 

Note 19, p. 115. Without doubt Caius Julius Solinus, a Latin historian and 
grammarian of the third or fourth century, author of a book called Collectanea 
Rerum Memorabilium, a collection of the memorable things to be found in different 
countries. His work is divided into seventy chapters. The best ancient edition 
is that of Salmasius, the best modern, that of Mommsen, Berlin. 1864. He lived 
after the time of Pliny, and copied him so closely that he is often called Pliny’s ap.e. 

Note 20, p. 122. Guynevers is a corruption of Guinemers, as can be seen from 
the Latin form of the word, Guinemerus. 

Note 21, p. 124. William has made a mistake in his statement in respect to 
Rages. This is not the Rages where Tobias went for the money of Gabael, as that 
city is in Persia, five miles south-east of Teheran. 

Note 22, p. 125. The name of this Greek prince, who ruled Edessa, was 
Theodore. It is given thus in the history of Matthew of Edessa. 

Note 23, p. 148. Latyns, a corruption for Tatinus or Estatin, called Tatinus 
the Noseless. He was a prefect of the palace of the emperor of Constantinople; 
Anna Comnenus calls him Tatikios, and says that he was a Saracen by birth. He 
is called Tatice L’Esnase in the Chanscm d’Antioche. 

Note 24, p. 152. When the Crusaders arrived in Asia Minor, the situation of 
the Mohammedans was exceedingly favourable for the accomplishment of their 
purpose ; all was confusion, and civil conflicts prevailed everywhere; the power 
of the Seljukes was greatly broken, several pretenders were quarrelling for the 
Sultan’s throne, and the emirs or governors of provinces, having made themselves 
independent, were waging war with each other. Several subject Christian princes 
—Armenians—had risen in arms in Taurus, and on the banks of the Euphrates in 
Mesopotamia. On the south, the Caliph of Egypt had just commenced a general 
war against the Seljukes, and was advancing towards Palestine. The Emir of 
Nicaea was fighting against the Prince of Mitilene; the Emir of Aleppo was 
besieging his neighbours of Damascus and Emessa ; and the Emirs of Sebasta and 
Mosul were engaged in war with the Armenian leaders, who were awaiting the 
arrival of the Crusaders with great impatience. For a further account of the 
situation, see von Sybel's Geschichte des JErsten Kreuzzttges. 

Note 25, p. 167. Steven paid dearly for this desertion of the Holy Cause ; and 
although he arrived safely in France, was so reproached and condemned by both his 
subjects and his wife, that he was forced in order to satisfy public opinion, and to 
retrieve his character, to return to the Holy Land and fulfil his vows. He shared 
the misfortunes and perils of the Lombard, German, and French pilgrims, who 
were led by the Archbishop of Milan, the Duke of Bavaria, and the Duke of 
Bourgogne. Arriving safely in Antioch, he was received by Tancred, and went on 
to Palestine, where he was killed in 1102 at the battle of Ramla. William, in 
recounting his death, observes that God had permitted him by a glorious death to 
atone for his previous sin and cowardice. 

Note 26, p. 189. Some of the most influential men departed in this way, by 
night; among those that are not given by name were Lambert le Pauvre, son of 
Conon of Montaigue, and Godfrey’s own nephew, Guillaum de Grantemesnil, Aubery 
his brother, Guillaume Charpentier, and Guy Trosselle. They were called hereafter 
the rope-runners, or funambnli, in derision, and were regarded as most ignominious 
cowards and sinners: William refused to name them, because they were blotted 
out of the Lamb’s Book of Life for ever. 



31G Notes. 

Note 27? p. 190. Guy Croseaulx, a corruption of Guy Trosseaulx, or Guy 
Troseelle 

Note 28, p. 201. William follows Raymond of Agiles in his story of the finding 
of the lance, who tells of infinite signs and wonders from heaven. As usual, 
William omits the greater part of these, and speaks very cautiously of the whole 
matter: he evidently is not a great believer in miracles. All of the different 
historians mention this miracle. Paulin Paris, in a note to-his edition of William 
of Tyre, speaks of an early tradition that the lance with which St. Mercury pierced 
Julian the Apostate was preserved in the crypt of this church of St. Peter. 

Note 29, p. 202. This man, who accompanied Peter the Hermit to Kerbogha, 
is called in French Herluin. He can speak Turkish, and Tudebodus calls him 
Drogomandus. Albert of Aix does not mention him, because he wishes Peter to 
have all the honour of the embassy. 

Note 30, p. 2X1. This is not supposed.to have been the real Greek fire, as used 
in ancient times in the Levant. William says, “ Mt ignem, solito excutientes arti- 
ficio, svbjiciunt in stipulcm," they simply set fire to the bundles of hay, and made 
8. dciiGC smoke 

Note 31, p. 219. Monsieur Littr4, in his dictionary, accepts this origin of the 
word hasard. It did not come, however, from William of Tyre, but is an inter¬ 
polation of some French translator, who put in “ Sachiez que Id fu trovez et de Id 
vint li jeus des dez qui einsint a non." 

Note 32, p. 233. This Cham, or Caym, as other French editions give it, is our 
Ham: Clianaan is naturally his son Canaan, and Aracheus is the son of Canaan, 
who is called in our English Bible ,tbe Arkite. The Latin version of William of 
Tyre states that he was the seventh son , Septimus Jilioi-um Clianaan. 

Note 33, pp. 238, 280. There seems to have been a difference of opinion as to 
this Arnold of Rohes or Roches. William of Tyre dislikes him, and loses no oppor¬ 
tunity of speaking slightingly of him, in this agreeing with Raymond d’Agiles and 
l'Abb4 Guihert; for a rehabilitation of his character, see Description des Tombeaux 
de Oodefroid de Bouillon, etc., by the Baron de Hody, Bruxelles, 1855. 

Note 34, p. 281. Mistranslation by Caxton, which is very curiouB. The French 
reads, “ Aims dememda/is des peintwres et des verri&res, aux elms et aus provoires, 
Mout oois volentiers les estoires, et les vies des sainz et trop entendoit." This last 
sentence is not in the original Latin, but was interpolated by some French trans¬ 
lator. As can be easily seen, it was the paintings and the stained windows, not 
the painters and glaziers, that he desired, and he sat a long time listening to the 
stories and lives of the saints. Paulin Paris remarks that this passage proves the 
early use of stained glass. 



317 


VOCABULARY. 


Abandoned (himself), v. pret., p. 102, 
109, exposed himself 
Abasshed, p. 129 ; abasshyd, p. 55 ; O.F. 
dba[h]isser, extended from stem of 
Fr. ebahir, confused, disconcerted 
Abeut, adv., p. 185 ; A.S. eibutan, round 
about 

Abide, vb. trans., p. 138; A.S. abidan, 
pret. sing, abad — Goth, usbeidan, to 
await, to expect 
Abode. See Abide 

Abourue, adj., p. 286; O.F. auborne, 
albome, whitish yellow, auburn 
Abyden, v. int., p. 195, remained 
Abye, v. t. pret., p. 274, aboughte; A.S. 
abycgan, to pay the penalty of, to 
atone for 

Abylliments, p. 183. See Habylliments 
Abyte, n., p. 27; O.F. habit, external 
dress, the costume appropriated for a 
particular use or vocation 
Accompte, v., p. 291; O.F. aconter, to 
reckon as, to bold to be 
Accorded to, v., p. 120; O.F. accorder, 
to be reconciled to or with 
Achyeuyd, v., p. 2, achyeued, p. 197; 

O.F. achever, to accomplish, to achieve 
Acounted, v., p. 197; O.F. aconter, to 
relate, to narrate 

Acowarded, v., p. 64; O.F. couarder, 
coarder, to make afraid 
Acqueynted hym with, v., p. 123, O.F. 
s’accointier de, to make oneself ac¬ 
quainted with 

Adcertayned, pp., p. 140; O.F. acer- 
tainer from a + certain , to make 
certain 

Addressement, n., p. 44; O.F. adrice- 
ment, according to Cotgrave, a direct¬ 
ing or guiding in the nearest course 
Admonested, p. 43, admonished 


Admyral, n., p. 152; O.F. admiral, 
amiral, originally from the Ar. Emir, 
an Emir or prince under the Sultan 
Adommaged, v., p. 40; O.F. a + domager, 
domagier, damaged, injured 
Adressyd, p. 123, 259; O.F. adrecier, 
set up, directed 

Aduowe, v., p. 105; O.F. avouer, ac¬ 
knowledge 

Afeblysshe, p. 219 ; O.F. afeblir, to en¬ 
feeble 

Affectuously, adv., p. 219; F. affectuemx, 
affectionately 

Affraye, n., p. 44, 57, disturbance, broil, 
fear 

Affrayed, v. t., p. 293; O.F. afrayer, 
affrayer, esfrayer, etc., frightened, 
terrified 

Affyance, p. 131, trust, confidence 
Affye, p. 214; O.F. afier, to trust, to 
confide in 

Aftirst, adj., p. 51, superlative of after, 
.the last, the hindmost 
Aitre, p. 25; O.F. aitre, churchyard 
porch 

Alalonge, adv., p. 3, exactly, truly, at 
length 

Alledge, v. tr., p. 147, 230, etc.; O.F. al- 
leger, alegier, to lighten, mitigate, allay 
Almesse, n., p. 35, 252; A.S. aelmesse, 
aelmysse, alms 

Alowed, v., p. 55; F. alouer, praised 
Alyed, p. 222; O.F. alier, united, allied 
Ameuyd, v., p. 197, moved, influenced 
Amytee, n., p. 225; F. amitid, friendship 
Anguysshously, adv., p. 58; O.F. an- 
guissus, angoisseux, fiercely, strenu¬ 
ously 

Annoyes, n., p. 113; O.F. anoi, anui, 
enni, discomfort, vexation, trouble 
Aoumed, p. 122; O.F. adorner, adorned 



318 Vocabulary. 


Apparayllement, n., p. 46 ; F. apparadle- 
mmts, equipments 

Appayred, v. pret., p. 282; O.F. empirier, 
injured, spoilt 

Appert, adj., p. 82 ; O.F. appert, capable 
Apperte, aidj., p. 90; open, present 
Appertenauntes, n., p. 276; O.F. aperte- 
nanee, appurtenances 
Apperteyned, v. pret., p. 40; Fr. uppar- 
tenir, belonged, appertained 
Appertly, adv., p. 284, plainly, openly 
Appese, v. tr., p. 61 ; O.F. apaisier, to 
appease 

Approuchement, n., p. 155, from v. ap¬ 
proach ; O.F. aprochier, approach 
Araged, p. 112 ; O.F. rager, ragier, mad 
Aretted, pp., p. 281; O.F. areter, as¬ 
signed, ascribed 

Armures, n., p. 46 ; O.F. armivre, armor 
Arrayed, v., p. 46; O.F. areier, aroyer, 
to array, arrange, or dispose in order 
Arreche, v., p. 75; A.S. ardecan. Cf. 
Mod. Ger. erreichen = to attain, get 
at, to strike 

Arryved, pp., p. 261; arriver, landed 
(the word has here its primitive 
meaning) 

Asondre, adv., p. 30; A.S. on sundran, 
asunder 

Aspre, adj.; O.F. aspre, severe, cruel 
Assaylles, n., p. 141 ; O.F. assailler, 
assaults 

Assieged, v. pret., p. 19; O.F. assegier, 
besieged 

Astonyed, pp., p. 288, either from A.S. 
astunian, or from O.F. estoner, esbwner, 
estormer , probably of A.S. origin, 
stunned 

Aswage, v., p. 54; O.F. asouager, asuager, 
assuage 

Attemperat, adj., p. 116, moderate 
Atteyne, v., p. 243; O.F. attaindre, 
attain, reach, strike 

A tty Bed, v. pret., p. 117; O.F. atisier, 
urged on, instigated 
Atysemeut, n., p. 121, instigation, en¬ 
ticement 

Aualed, v. trans. pret., p. 119,180; O.F. 
omler, lowered 

Auctors, n., p. 135; O.F. autor 
Aune, adj., p. 305, own 
Aulter, p. 253, aultres, p. 25; O.F. alter, 
outer, altar 

Auysed, p. 102; O.F. aviser, to notice, 
observe 


Auowe, n., p. 149, vow 
Avowed, p. 126. See Aduoxve 
Avoyde, v., p. 271, to quit. For deriva¬ 
tion see Voyde 

Awbes, n., p. 209, albs, a white linen 
vestment, and also a close-fitting vest¬ 
ment worn by officiants at mass, of 
black or other colour.—Cot. See the 
Lay Folks’ Mass Book, p. 167 
Ayerye, p. 253, airy 

Bandon, n,, p. 165 ; to have bandon = to 
have full and free permission 
Bar at, n., p. 236; Fr. barat, origin 
uncertain; trickery, deceit 
Barayn, adj., p. 116; O.F. barain, bra- 
hain, brehaing, sterile 
Barbycane, n., p. 156; Barbycam, n., p. 
251; O.F. barbicane, supposed to be 
of Arabian or Persian origin, intro¬ 
duced into Europe by the Crusaders ; 
cf. Barbicane, a casement or hole in 
a parapet or wall to shoot out from ; 
some think it also a sentry scout-house 
or hole. See Cotgrave, Ar. Pers. bab- 
khanah 

Barellys, n., p. 119 ; O.F. baril, barrels 
Bataylles, n., p. 56, 138, etc.; O.F. 
bataille, from battere, battnere, bat¬ 
talions 

Baylliage, n., p. 125, a bailiwick 
Bayly, ji., p. 24, 125, etc. ; O.F. bo,Hi, 
earlier bailif, a derivative of bail, a 
bailif 

Beestes, n., p. 48; beestys, p. 48; O.F 
beste, bete, beasts 

Befylle, v., p. 20; A.S. befeallan, befel 
Belioued, p. 110, pret. of behoove ; A.S. 

behofian, behooved 
Behoueful, adj., p. 44, needful, fit 
Berde, n., p. 36; A.S .'beard, beard 
Besaunt, n., p. 35,165 ; O.F. besant, M.L. 
Bezantius, from Byzantium, a gold 
coin issued by the Emperors of Con¬ 
stantinople, in the Middle Ages 
Besy, adj., p. 153 ; A.S. bysig, busy 
Besynes. n., p. 162, busy and ness, 
business 

Bette, v., p. 47 ; A.S. bedtan, beat 
Beuffes, pi. of beef, p. 33; O.F. boeuf, 
boef, buef, beeves 
Bihalue, p. 89, behalf 
Bobaunce, p. 27; O.F. bobance ; cf. M.L. 
bombicus, from L. bombus, boasting, 
pride 



Vocabulary. 319 


Bote, v. pret., p. 113 ; A.S. bitan, = 
Goth, beitan, to bite 
Bowe turquoys, n., p. 102, a Turkish 
bow 

Brede, n., p. 135 ; A.S. bredd, breadth 
Brende, v. pret., p. 51 ; A.S. baernan; 

pret. baemde, burnt 
Brent, v., p. 20. See Brende 
Brokes, n., p. 258 ; A.S. broc, brooks 
Bruyt, ii., p. 138; O.F. bruit, report, 
rumor, noise 

Busshement, n., p. 131, abbreviation for 
anibushment; O.F. embuschement, am¬ 
bush 

Bueynes, n., p. 53, 108, etc.; O.F. bus- 
tine, buisime, trumpets 
Bycam, v. pret., p. 124; A.S. becumen 
— Goth, bikmman, became 
Bye, v., p. 61; A.S. bycgan, pret. bohte 
= Goth, bugjan, atone for 
Bygonne, v. pret., p. 53 ; A.S. beginnen; 
pret. began, begun 

Byheded, pp., p. 52; A.S. beheafdian, 
beheaded 

Byleve, p. 38; A.S. be + liefan, believe 
Byse, n., p. 124; F. bite, North-east or 
North 

Bytwene, prep., p. 121; A.S. betwedn, 
between 

Byyonde, p. 46 ; A.S. begeondan, beyond 

Caable, n., p. 267; F. chaable, L.L. 
cadabula, quadablum, Gk. xar/3oXij, a 
machine of war for throwing stones 
and demolishing walls 
Caityfnes, n., p. 37 ; O.F. caitif, chetif + 
nes; wretchedness, misery 
Canellys, n., p. 273; F. canal, canals 
Cariajp, p. 51, caryage, p. 52, n.; 
O.F. carriage, chariage, the act of 
carrying, also that which is carried, 
the burden 

Castelles, n., p. 2, castellys, p. 99; 
O.F. chattel, a rolling gallery, flanked 
with towers for attacking a forti¬ 
fied place, called sometimes a chat, 
castel 

Cautele, n., p. 186; O.F. cautelle, cau¬ 
tion, subtlety, cunning, fraud 
Cendres, n., p. 279 ; O.F. cendre, cinders, 
ashes 

Chaas, v. pret., p. 2; A.S. cedscin, pret. 

ceds = Goth, kiutan, to choose 
Chaas, n., p. 64; A.S. ehace, cace, v. sub. 
chase 


Chalyces, n., p. 36; O.F. chalice, calice, 
calix, chalice 

Champayns, n., p. 212; O.F. champatgne, 
plain, field 

Channones, n., p. 290; O.F. canone, 
chanone, chanoine, canons or pre¬ 
bendaries 

Charged, v. j>ret., p. 213 ; O.F. chargier, 
cargier, loaded 

Charyotte, n., p. 33; O.F. chariot, dim. 

of char, a two-wheeled waggon 
Chattes, n., p. 257; O.F. chat, a frame 
of heavy timber, with projecting pins 
or teeth, hoisted upon battlements to 
be dropped on assailants 
Chees, p. 45, pret. of choose 
Chere, n., p. 218; O.F. chere, chiere, cheer 
Cheuysshe, v., p. 151; O.F. chevir, to 
accomplish, get, provide 
Chiere, n., p. 276. See Chere 
Childed, v., p. Ill ; A.S. cildian, gave 
birth to 

Childeren, n., p. 46; A.S. cild, children 
Choos, v., p. 131, pret. of choose 
Chylded, v., p. 246. See Childed 
Cirurgens, n.,p. 114; O.F. cirurgien, ser- 
urgien, surgeons 

Claymeth, v., p. 134; O.F. claimer, 
c lei/mer, clamer, call or name 
Closure, n., p. 135; O.F. closure, after¬ 
wards extended udder influence of 
Lat. clausirum to dosture, L. clausura, 
enclosure 

Cloysture, p. 252. See above. 

Cole, vb., p. 88, to cool 
Comene, v., p. 288, to talk of a weighty 
matter in counsel (Palsgrave), to dis¬ 
cuss, treat of 

Commysed, v., p. 21; O.F. commit, pp. 

of commettre, committed, perpetrated 
Compleyned, vb., p. 186; O.F. com- 
plaimdre, to lament, to bewail 
Conduyte, v., p. 34,181, etc.; F. conduit, 
pp. of condmre, to conduct 
Conduytes, n., p. 254; O.F. conduit, 
conduits, tubes, canals 
Conestable, n., p. 132, 236 ; O.F. conne- 
stable, general-in-chief of an army 
Conne, v., p. 162; A.S. cann, can, pi. 
cunnon, to be able 

Contened, v., p. 31; O.F. contenir, to 
conduct one’s self 

Conteyned them, p. 37. See above 
Contre, n., p. 48, contreye, p. 63, countree, 
p. 48; O.F. countrde, cuntre'e, country 



320 Vocabulary. 


Convalence, n., p. 219, convalescence 
Coosteyeng, pres, part., p. 235; O.F. 
costeier, to sail along the coast, to go 
along by the side of 
Come, n., p. 252 ; Fr. crnne, a corner or 
projecting point 

Corromped, pp., p. 217; O.F. corrompre, 
L. corrumpere, corrupted 
Corrours,n.,p. 154;.O.F .coureor, coureur, 
runners, messengers 
Costeyeng, p. 139. See above. 
Couenable, adj., p. 274; O.F. convena- 
ble; earlier, convenable, suitable, proper 
Couine, n., p. 19, 151; O.F. covine, coiir 
vine, from covewir, manner, condition, 
appearance 

Counterpeysed, vb., p. 69; O.F. contre- 
peser = to weigh in the balance, to 
consider 

Courage, n., p. 178 ; O.F. corage, cowage, 
heart, mind, thought, desire 
Courreurs, n., p. 159. See Corrours 
Creancers, n., p. 44, creditors 
Creaunce, n., p. 24, 152 ; O.F. creance, 
faith, confidence 

Creneul, n., p. 181 ; O.F. crenelle, dim. 
of arena, an embrasure, a battlement, 
one of the open spaces of a battle- 
mented parapet which alternate with 
the merlons or cops 

Creuache, n., p. 102; O.F. crevace, a 
crack, fissure, clift 

Crochette, n., p. 103; F. crochette, dim. 
of croc, a hook 

Crose, n., p. 40; O.F. croce, crozier, 
a bishop’s staff 

Croysyng, v. sub., p. 3, the putting on 
of the cross 

Crybbe, n., p. 246 ; A.S. crib, cryb, a 
crib, a manger 

Culpe, n., p. 120; O.F. cwlpe, coupe, 
colpe, fault, guilt 

Culuer, n., p. 219 ; A. S. cvlfre, culufre, 
probably a corruption of Lat. columba, 
a dove, a pigeon ; used by Spenser 
Cursour, n., p. Ill; O.F. corsxer, coursier, 
a war-horse, a runner 
Custrellis, n., p. 204; O.F. coustdle, a 
sabre with two edges 
Cymetyer, n., p. 251; O.F. cemetiere, 
a cemetery 

Dampned, p. 79, damned 
Daunger, n., p. 192; O.F. danger , dan¬ 
gler, difficulty, hesitation, power 


Debate, n., p. 49; O.F. desbat, debat, 
contention, strife 

Debonair, adj., p. 50; O.F. de bon air, 
courteous, affable 

Debonairly, adv., p. 22, courteously 
Decevalle, n., p. 81; O.F. decevaille, 
deception, treachery 
Deduyt, n., p. 118; O.F. deduit, diver¬ 
sion, spor£ pastime 

Defaulte, n., p. 52 ; O.F. ddfemte, a fault, 
a failure 

Deffended, pp., p. 24; O.F. defendre, 
forbidden 

Deflated, pp., p. 21; O.F. defeter , defeated 
Defowled, pp., p. 36; O.F. defoler, 
trampled underfoot 
Degrees, n., p. 252; O.F. degree, steps 
Delue, v., p. 201; A.S. del/an, pret. 
dealf, pi. didfon, pp. dolfen, to dig, 
6XC ft V fltc 

Delytable, adj., p. 118, 130; O.F . delit- 
aUe, delightful, delectable 
Dolyuer, adj., p. 205 ; O.F. delivre, free, 
prompt, nimble 

Delyuerid, pp., p. 124; O.F. delivrer, 
freed, delivered 

Delyuerly, adv., p. 133. promptly, actively 
Demayne, n., p. 106; O.F. demaine, 
demeine, var. of domain, power, do¬ 
minion 

Demened, v., p. 28,31,37 ; O.F. demener, 
conducted, managed, treated 
Demonstraunce, n., p. 246; O.F. demon- 
strance, demonstration, proof 
Departed, v., p. 251; O.F. departir, di¬ 
vided, separated 

Deporte, v., p. 26; O.F. deporter, to 
protect, take care of 
Desheryted, pp., p. 43; O.F. desheriter, 
disinherited 

Despenses, n., p. 162; O.F. despences, 
expenses, expenditures 
Desperpled, p. 64; O.F. despaipaillier, 
etc. — to scatter, to disperse 
Desployed, pp., p. 239; F. de + player, 
unfolded 

Desraye, n., p. 295; O.F. desarrei, 
disarroi, disroi, disarray, confusion 
Destourmed, p. 75, probably a corrup¬ 
tion for destourned ; O.F. destoumer, 
to hinder, avoid, turn from 
Destrayt, n., p. 244; F. destreit, destroit, 
a narrow passage 

Destrobled, v., p. 30; O.F. destourbler, 
var. of destourbier, troubled 



Vocabulary. 321 


Deuoyr, n., p. 65; IV devoir, duty, or 
service 

Deyehe, n., p. 270; A.S. die, a ditch 
Deyde, p. 43, pret. of Beye 
Deye, v., p. 32; M.E. dien, dyen, deyen 
= Goth, diwan, pret. dan, to die 
Disanere, v., p. 189, dis + anchor ; A.S. 

ancor, to weigh anchor 
Discarged, v,, p. 147; O.F. discharger, 
desehargier, discarricare, discharged, 
fired 

Disconuenyentes, a., p. 52; O.F. descon- 
venance, inconveniences, discomforts 
Discoueryd, pp., p. 253; O.F. desconvrir, 
uncovered 

Displaysyd, v., p. 60; O.F. desplaiser, 
displeased 

Dispourveyed, adj., p. 308; O.F. de- 
pourvu, needy, deprived of 
Dispoylles, n., p. 135; O.F. despowilles, 
spoils 

Distourblyng, n., p. 48. See Bestrobled 
Dolorous, adj., p. 277 ; O.F. doloreux, 
mournful, dismal 

Dominage, n., p. 26; O.F. damage, 
domage, damage, harm 
Domyned, v., p. 2 ; O.F. dominer, ruled, 
controlled 

Dongeon,n.,p.251; O.F. donjon, the inner 
tower, keep, or stronghold of a castle 
Doubted, v., p. 108; O.F. cUyater, feared 
Doughtres, n., p. 25; A.S. dohtor, 
daughters 

Drad, adj., p. 5,124; A.S. draedan (only 
in comp.), dreaded 

Dressed, v., p. 227 ; O.F. dresser, drecier, 
set up, arranged, prepared for action 
Droef, v., p. 48, pret. of drive; A.S. 

drifan = Goth, dreiban, drove 
Droncardys, n., p. 150; drunk + ard, 
drunkards 

Droytes, n., p. 301; O.F. droits , rights 
Duchemen, n.. p. 51; Dutchmen, i. e. 
Germans 

Duellid, v.. p. 21, pp. of dwell (A.S. 
dwellan, dwelt 

Dychte, v., p. 114; A.S. dihtan , pret. 

dihte, to dress, to clean 
Pylyure, v., p. 39. See Ddynerid 
Dymynued, v., p. 291 ; O.F. diminuer, 
to diminish 

Eerying, v., p. 29. See Ere 
Effrayed, v., p. 113, 140; O.F. effrayer, 
frightened 

GODFREY. 


Egally, adj., p. 144 ; F. dgal, equally 
Eght, adj., p. 47, eighth 
Elis, n., p. 93, eels ? 

Ellys, adv., p. 109 ; A.S. dies = Goth. 

alis — L. alius, else 
Embusshed, v., p. 125; O.F .enbuscher, 
emhuscher, embuissier, to place in am¬ 
bush 

Embusshement, n., p. 125, an ambush- 
ment 

Empesshement, n., p. 89; O.F. empesche- 
ment = hindrance 

Empeyred, v., p. 42; O.F. empirier, to 
injure, damage 

Empryse, v., p. 1, 21; F. empris, pp. of 
emprendre, to undertake 
Enchassed, v., p. 121; O.F. enchaeier, 
enchasser, encachier, chased 
Endeuoyre, v., p. 1, 4 ; O.F. in + dever, 
devoir, to endeavor 

Enducte, adj., p. 286 ; probably a syno¬ 
nym for accustomed. ? trained 
Endure, v.; O.F. endurer, to persist 
Enforced, v., p. 249; O.F. enforcer, 
enforcier, violated, ravished 
Enforced, v., p. 134 ; same origin as 
above; strengthened 
Enforced them, v. ref., p. 25, 98 ; same 
origin as above; to encourage one’s 
self, to put forth one’s greatest 
exertion 

Enhabited with, adj., p. 130; O.F. in- 
habiter, inhabited by 
Enliaunced, v., p. 22; O.F. enhancer, 
en + hancer, enhancier 
Ennoyed, v., p. 125, annoy + ed, O.F. 

anoi, enoi, emit, troubled, vexed 
Enpayred, v., p. 158. See Empeyred 
Enpesshe, v., p. 107; O.F. empechier, 
to hinder 

Entente, n., pp. 19, 93; O.F. entente, 
attention, heed, intention 
Entented, v., p. 52, etc.; O.F. entendre, 
to be busy, attend to, occupy one’s 
self with 

Ententifly, adv., p. 21, 137, diligently 
Entermeted of, v., p. 53; O.F. entre- 
mettre, to concern one’s self with, to 
have to do with 

Enticed, v., p. 20; O.F. enticer, entieher, 
en + teche, persuaded, enticed 
Entierly, adv., p. 105, entier + ly; 

O.F. entier, entire, whole 
Entreated, v., p. 22; O.F. entraiter, en- 
traitier, to treat, to behave towards 

Y 



322 Vocabum'v. 


Entredeux, loc. adv., p, 83; O.F. entre¬ 
deux, of two minds, undecided 
Entreprysed, v., p. 44; from entrepris, 
pp. of F. entreprendre, undertook 
Entretiened, v., p. 22; Fr. entretenir, 
supported, taken care of 
Enuyronned, v., p. 47; O.F. environer, 
environner, en + viron, surrounded 
Entysed, v., p. 62. See Enticed 
Erable, adj., p. 135; O.F. arable, L. 
arahilis, prob. confused with the M.E, 
to ear, arable 

Ere, v., p. 306; A.S. erian — Goth, ar- 
jan = L. arare, to plow, to till 
Eschewe, v., p. 128; O.F. eschuer, es- 
chiver, to avoid 

Esclaues, n., p. 204; O.F. sclave, slaves 
Escumours, n.,p. 120; pirates O.F.; see 
Escumerie = piracy, of German origin 
Eshewe, v., p. 43. See Escheu'e 
Esmayed, v. int., p. 210; O.F. esmaier, 
Goth, magan, daunted, filled with 
fear 

Esperaunce, n., p. 160; O.F. esperance, 
hope 

Estandart, n., p. 150; O.F. etendard, 
standard-bearer 

Ester, n., p. 241; A.S. edstra, Easter 
(given by Beda) 

Estorementes, n., p. 138; O.F. estore- 
ments, soldiers’ equipment, arms 
Estour, n., p. 211 ; O.F. estor, O.H.D. 

sturm, vb. sturman, attack, contest 
Eurous, adj., p. 4 ; O.F. heureux, ewreux, 
happy, lucky 

Ewr, n., p. 268; O.F. heur, luck 
Excusacion, n., p. 66; O.F. excusation, 
excuse, apology 

Exployted, v., p. 196; O.F. exploiter, 
exploitier, achieved, accomplished 
Exploytes, n.. p. 126; O.F. exploit, ex- 
pleit, achievements, performances 
Eyen, n., p. 134. pi. of eye, eyes 

Facions, n., p. 23; O.F. fagon, fazon, 
etc., fashions, manners, ways 
Faite, n., p. 173; O.F. faix, burden, 
charge, weight 

Faitis, n., p. 273; O.F. fait, deeds 
Fardellys, n.; O.F. fardel, fardeau, L. 
fardellus, Baid to be of Arabic origin, 
bundles, packs 

Fawcon, n., p. 289; O.F. faucon, banner 
= gonfcmon, Faico = vextUum in 
Med. Lat. 


Fayned, v., p. 259; O.F. feindre, to 
make a false appearance, pretend 
Fayte, n., p. 62. See Faite 
Feaulfo, n., p. 30; O. F. feaulte, feaute, 
etc., fealty, faithfulness 
Feeldes, n., p. 61; A.S. feld, fields 
Feerd, adj., p. 204, abb. of afeerd; A.S. 

afceran, a + fceran, frightened, afraid 
Feers, adj., p. lo8; tiers, 124; O.F. fers, 
old nom. form of fier, fierce, bold, 
savage 

Fel, adj., p. 40; A.S. fd, felo. Cf. O.F. 

fel, O.D. fel, grim, fierce, ruthless 
Felaw, n., p. 128; Ice. felagi, a com¬ 
panion, comrade 
Felawship, n., p. 44, fellowship 
Felly, adv. used adjectively, p. 107; 

same origin as Fel, and same meanings 
Felonnous, adj., p. 113; O.F. fdon + 
ous, wicked, malignant 
Feotemen, n., p. 123, footmen 
Fer, adv.; A.S. feorr = Goth, fairra, far 
Ferde, v. pret., p. 122 ; A.S. faran, to 
fare 

Ferdfulness, n,, p. 31 ; A.S. fair, fear 
Ferre, adv., p. 33. See Fer 
Feste, n„ p. 278; O.F. feste, feast 
Fetysed, adj., p.259; O.F. faitis, faitice, 
well made, neat, properly cut 
Feuerer, n., p. 156; O.F. Fevrier, 
February 

Feuytes, p. 125; a misprint or corrup¬ 
tion for fruytes = fruits 
Flawe, n., p. 33; literally a flake, but 
probably a corruption for fleau = 
scourge, of which it is a translation 
Flowred, v., p. 3 ; O.F. Jlorir, to flourish 
Folyly, adv., p. 143; O.F. folie + ly, 
foolishly 

Fundament, n., p. 21; O.F. fundament, 
fondement, foundation 
Forgate, v. pret.; A.S. forgitan, pret. 

foi-geat, forgot 
Forleton, n. adj., abandoned 
Fosse, n., p. 253 ; F. fosse, a ditch 
Fourage, n., p. 55; O.F. fourage, forage 
Fourbusshed, v., p. 204; O.F. fourbiss, 
furbir, M.L. forbare = A.S. feormian 
for feorbian, furbian, to furbish, scour, 
polish 

Founders, n., p. 131; O.F. foriers, fora¬ 
gers, forage-merchants ‘ 

Fowle, adv., p. 33; A.S. fill = Goth. 
fids, fo.ully 

Fowlly, adv., p. 192, foully 



Vocabulary. 823 


Fowragyng, n., p. 48, foraging 
Franchises, n., p. 33 j O.F. franchise, 
liberties 

Fyers, adj., p. 19. O.F./era, fierce 
Fynably, adj.; fine + able + ly, finally 
Fysslio, n., p. 135; A.S. fisc, pi .fiscas — 

fish 

Fyxed, v., p. 44; O.F. fixer, fichier, 
ficher, fixed 

Gadryd, pp., p. 297; A.S. gaderian, 
gathered 

Garnyson, n., p. 177; O.F. garnison, 
garrison 

Gamysshed, v., p. 124; O.F. garniss, 
garnir, Germ, stem; fortified, garn¬ 
ished 

Garson, n., p. 280; O.F. garson, a boy, 
a servant 

Gaynable, adj., p. 85, tillable 
Gaynsay, v., p. 62; by abbreviation, 
from A.S. agein seyen, to speak against 
Geer, n., p. 234; A.S. gearwe, gear, 
property 

Ghestes, n., p. 119; A.S. gaest, gest, etc. 

= Goth, gasts, guests 
Glayues, n., p. 97, 273; O.F. glare, 
glaive, glaves, a weapon made of a cut¬ 
ting blade at the end of a stick or staff 
Gobet, n., p. 191; O.F. gobet, goubet, 
dim. of gob, a morsel, lump 
Gonfanon, n., p. 289; O.F. gonfanon, 
L. gonfano(n) = A.S. guthfana, gon¬ 
falon or banner 

Gossib, n., p. 20; A.S. godsib, sponsor 
Gree, m, p. 277; O.F. gre, grei, etc!, to 
accept in gree, means to accept kindly, 
or with favour 

Greues, n., p. 29; O.F. grief, gref, greu, 
etc., afflictions, grievances 
Guarysshyd, v., p. 167 ; O.F. guariss, 
guarir , cured, healed 
Guerdon, n., p. 182; O.F. guerdon, M.L. 
widerdonum, Gni. wider lonum, a re¬ 
ward 

Gybet, n., p. 25; O.F. gibet, a gibbet, a 
. gallows 

Habylled, adj., p. 19 ; O.F. hdbiUer, clad, 
dressed 

Habyllemens, n., p. 104; O.F. habille- 
ment, clothes, habiliments 
Haches, n., p. 307; O.F. hache, axes 
Happed, v. pret., p. 141, 198; Ice. happ, 
happened 


Harberowed, v., p. 249, same origin as 
Herberous = O.F. herbergier, to give 
shelter to, to harbor 
Hardynes, n., p. 63; hardy + ness; 
O.F. hardi, O.H.G. harti, herti, hardi¬ 
ness 

Harnoys, n., p. 137, 138; O.F. harnas, 
harnois; of Celtic origin; harness, 
armour 

Haubergyers, n., p. 168; makers of 
hauberks 

Hauberks, n., p. 204; O.F. hauberc, hal- 
berc, Gm. halsberc, halsberge , hauberk 
Hauene, n., p. 231; A.S. haefen, a haven, 
harbour 

Havoyr, n.; Fr. avoir, property, riches 
Heelpe, v. pret.; A.S. helpan, pret. 

healp, pi. holpon, to help 
Heer, n., p. 36 ; A.S. koer, hair 
Heeryng, pres, part., p. 4 ; A.S. hieran, 
heran, hyran = Goth, hausjan , hearing 
Henge, v. pret., p. 211; A.S. hongian, 
hung 

Herberous, n., p. 207, O.F., G. or Scand. 
origin ; H.G. hen 4- O.H.G. bergan, a 
camp, lodging 

Heremyte, n., p. 3 ; L.L. eremita, hermit 
Hethenes, n., p. 23; A.S. hcethen = 
Goth, haithenis, pagans, heathen 
Hether, adv., p. 60; A.S. hider, some¬ 
times ; hidres = Goth, hidre, hither 
Hewing, pres, part., p. 147; A.S. heau'an, 
pret. heow = Goth, haggvxm, to cut, 
to inflict cutting blows 
Heyer, n., p. 302 ; O.F. heir, eir, oir, an 
heir 

Heygtlie, n., p. 289; A.S. hedthu = 
Goth, hau-hitha, height 
Heyr, n., p. 126. See Heyer 
Holpen, pp., p. 106. See Heelpe 
Hool, adj., p. 125, whole 
Hourdeys, n., p. 140; O.F. hourdeis, from 
the Gm.; cf. Goth, haurds, M.H.G 
horden, hort, palisades of wood placed 
on the tops of towers 
Hu, n., p. 268; O.F. hu, hui, a cry or 
shout 

Hydles (in), p. 194; A.S. hydels. See 
Wiclif, Deut. xxvii., secretely 

Inconuenyent, p. 231; O.F. inconveni¬ 
ence, a disagreeable situation, mis¬ 
fortune 

Indigne, adj., p. 5; O.F. indigne, un¬ 
worthy 



Vocabulary. 


§ 2 * 

Intituled, pp., p. 18; O.F. intituler, 
entitled 

Iourneye, n., p. 34 ; O.F. journee, a day’s 
journey 

lusted, v., p. 289; O.F. jouster, to joust 
Iustised, v. pret., p. 289; O.F. justicier, 
judged 

Iusticer, n., p. 29 ; O.F. justicier, a judge 

Knowleche, n., p. 64; know + leche, 
asaibilated form of leke; Ieel. leikr, 
leiki = A.S. lac, knowledge 
Knowleched, v., p. 123, abbreviation for 
acknowleched, acknowledged 
Kyen, n., p. 33, pi. of cow, kine 
Kynred, n., p. 29; A.S. cyrm + reeden, 
kindred 

Labourable, adj., p. 112; O.F. labor + 
able, that which can be tilled 
Laddre, n., p. 272, ladder 
Largesse, n., p. 22; O.F. largesse, gene¬ 
rosity, bounty 

Lasse, adj., p. 44; A.S. laessa, less 
Lassed, adj., p. 164 ; O.F. lasser, lassare, 
wearied, fatigued 

Late, v., p. 48; A.S. liietan = Goth. 
letan, to let 

Launced (on), sb., p. 82; O.F. lancier, 
to attack 

Lawe, n., p. 22; A.S. lagu, religion, law 
Laye, adj., p. 42 ; O.F. lai, lay 
Laye, n., p. 141, 154; A.S. lagu, lake 
Layetee, n., p. 43; lay + ty; O.F. lai, 
laity 

Layser, n., p. 37 ; O.F. leisir, loisir, etc., 
leisure 

Lecherye, n., p. 32; O.F. lecherie, lechir, 
M.H.G. lecken, lechery 
Leed, n., p. 253; A.S. ledd, lead 
Leep, v., p. 113; A.S. Medpan = Goth. 
Maupan, to leap 

Lese, v., p. 114, partly from A.S. losian, 
but chiefly a var. of lesen; A.S. ledsan, 
to lose 

Lesyng, n., p. 244. See Lese, losing 
Lesynge, n., p. 236,281; A.S. leasing = 
Icel. lausung, falsehood, lying 
Letted, v., p. 146, 281; A.S. lettan = 
Goth, latjan, to strip, retard, hinder 
Letier, adv.; A.S. ledf = Goth. Hubs, 
used in the expression “ to have 
liefer,” to prefer 
Leyser, n., p. 160. See Layser 


Leyzer, n„ p. 5. See Layser 
Lodgys, n., p. 110; O.F. logis, M.L. 

laubia, of Gin. origin, camp 
Longed, adj., p. 53, contraction for 
belonged 

Loos, n.,p.288; O.F. laus,los, praise,fame 
Lyguage, lynage, n., p. 26, 29; O.F. 

linage, family, race, stock 
Lyttier, n., p. 113; O.F. litiere, a litter 
Lyuess, n., p. 58, pi. of life; A.S. lif = 
Goth, leif, lives 

Maculated, pp., p. 274, stained, spotted 
Mahometry, n., p. 274 ; Mahomet + ry, 
Mahommedanism 

Mahommerye, n., p. 157, 162; O.F. Ma- 
homdrie, a mosque 

Maistres, n., p. 23; O.F. maistre, masters 
Males, n., p. 51; O.F. mode, medle, bags 
or sacks 

Malle, n., p. 273; O.F. mal, mail, a mall, 
or heavy hammer 

Malles, n., p. 210, same origin as word 
above = blows 

Maluerte, n., p. 203; O.F. malheurte, 
misfortune 

Mangonneaul, n., p. 257 ; O.F. mangonel, 
a mangonel, or engine for throwing 
stones 

Marchaunte, v., p. 115; O.F. march- 
ander, to buy and sell, to trade 
Marchauntes, n., p^69, merchants 
Marche, n., p. 289; partly A.S. mearc, 
partly from O.F. marche, frontier, 
border 

MeSched (on), v., p. 136 ; A.S. meareian, 
to border on 

Mareys, n., p. 139, 228; O.F. mareis, 
marais, marois, a marsh 
Marryd, v.; O.F. marrir, Gm. marrjan, 
to injure 

Marueylles, n., p. 55; O.F. merveiUe, 
marvels, wonders 

Maulgre, prep., p. 55,117 ; O.F. maugre, 
malgre, in spite of 

Maymed, v., p. 194'; O.F. mehaing, ma- 
hain, to disable, maim 
Mayntene, n., p. 61, conduct, behaviour 
Medle, n., p. 53, 97; from verb medle, 
a hand-to-hand fight, a melee 
Medled (with), v., p. 115; O.F. medler, 
mesler, to concern one’s self with, to 
deal with 

Medlyng, n., p. 49, 155; medle + iny, 
contention in battle, fighting 



Vocabulary. 


Meobles, n., p. 32; O.F. meuble, furniture, 
movable property 
Meuable, adj., p. 5 ; movable 
Mescliyef, n., p. 161; O.F. meschief, 
misfortune, calamity 
Mescreauntes, n., p. 3; O.F. mescreaunt, 
infidels, unbelievers 

Mesease, n., p. 25, 153; O.F. meseise, 
mesaise, tries + aise, discomfort,trouble 
Mesfeates, n., p. 29; O.F. mesfait, bad 
actions, misdeeds 

Meshapped, v., p. 167; mis + happen, 
minus + Icel. happ, to happen ill, to 
go wrong 

Messager, n., p. 18, 163; O.F. message , 
messenger 

Messagier, n., p. 239. Sec Messager 
Mesurable, adj., p. 301; O.F. memrable , 
moderate, temperate 
Meyne, n., p. 136, 177; O.F. megnie, 
menie, suite, members of a household 
Monethe, p. 41, 183; A.S. moneth , 
monoth = Goth, menoth, month 
Moo, adj., p. 52, more 
Mounture, n., p. 141 ; O.F. monture, a 
mount, a saddle-horse 
Mowe, vb., p. 185, be able 
Moyen, adj., p. 59; same derivation as 
below; literally, medium, but used 
here in the sense of common 
Moyens, n., p. 119; O.F. moien, meien, 
means 

Mulettis, n., p. 122 ; O.F. mulct, mules 
Muraylles, n., p. 21; O.F. muraille, 
walls 

Murdred, v,, p. 36; A.S. myrthrian — 
Goth, mawrthrjan, killed, murdered 
Murdrier, n., p. 32; same origin as 
above, murderer 

Musardes, n., p. 203; O.F. musard, 
vagabond 

Musardye, n., p. 179, vagabondage 
Myllenes, n., p. 51; A.S. mylen,myln = 
O.F. moulin, mills 

Mynnysshid, v., p. 145; O.F. menusier, 
memiisier, to diminish __ 
Mysauentures, n., p. 54; O.F. mesaven- 
ture, ill luck, mischance 
Mysbeleue, n., p. 152 ; A.S. mis + belief, 
false opinion, heresy 
Myschiefs, n., p. 25. See Mescliyef 
Myscreauntes, n., p. 23. See Mescre- 
auutes 

Natyuyte, n,, p. 3 ; O.F. nativdte', nativity 


325 

Nauyll, n., p. 253 ; A.S. nafela = Goth. 

nabcdo, the navel, the middle 
Ner, adv., p. 108, near 
Neraught, v. pret., p. 149, neg. combined 
with reckon; A.S. recan, pret. rShte, 
not to heed, or pay attention to, or care 
Nette, adj., p. 25; O.F. net, neat 
Neueus, n,, p. 136 ; O.F. neveu, nephews 
Noye, v., p. 104; by aphaeresis from 
annoy, to damage, injure 
Noyous, adj., p. 140, injurious, trouble¬ 
some 

Noyse, n., p. 23, 138; O.F. noise, L, 
nausea, disturbance, noise 
Nycely, adv., pp. 187, 233; nice + ly; 

O.F. nice, L. nescius, foolishly 
Nyle, n., p. 85. See note, p. 85 

Obeyssaunt, adj., p. 2; O.F. obeissant, 
obedient 

Occisyon, n., p. 62; O.F. occision, 
slaughter, the act of killing 
Occyent, n., p. 55; O.F. Occident, the 
Occident, the West 

Oost, n., p. 55; O.F. host, osl, the army 
Orguyel, n., p. 20; O.F. orgoil, orguel, 
etc., of Teut. origin ; cf. O.H.G. urgilo, 
ur + gel, pride 

Orguyllous, adj,, p. 19 ; O.F. orgueilleux; 
cf. A.S. orgdlic, same origin as or- 
gayel, proud, haughty, ostentatious 
Orisons, n., p. 26 ; O.F. oraison, orisons, 
prayers 

Oroysons, n., p. 269. See Orisons 
Ostages, n., p. 50, 127, etc.; O.F. ostage, 
hostages 

Ottroye, v., p. 5 ; octroyer, to grant, to 
give 

Ouerste, adj., p. 161, superlative of over; 

A.S. ofer, the highest 
Ought, v., p. 124, pret. of to owe; A.S. 
dhte 

Oultrages, n., p. 49, 120; O.F. outrage, 
outrages 

Outbynde, v., p. 248, un + bynde, to 
loosen 

Ouurages, n., p. 237; O.F. ouvrage, 
works 

Oynementis, n., p. 251; O.F. oignement, 
oigner, oindre, ointment, unguent 

Paas, n., p. 133; O.F. pas, pace 
Palfroye, n., p. 46 ; O.F. palefroi , a 
saddle-horse 

Pal us, n., p. 244 ; Lat. palus, marsh 



326 Vocabulary. 


Pamente, n., p. 39 ; O.P. pavement, pavi- 
ment, pavement 

Pane, n., p. 264; O.F. pan, a piece, 
division, part 

Panemye, n., p. 150; O.F. paieimie, 
heathendom 

Parfygt, adj., p. 122; O.F. parfait, parftt, 
perfect 

Parteyes, n.,p. 18; partie, parts, countries 
Paryll, n., p. 151; O.F. peril, peril 
Pasque, n >Jk p. 241; Fr. Pasques, Easter 
Pauyllon, n., p. 46, 165; O.F. pavilion, 
pavilion, tent 

Paynem, n., p. 145; O.F. paienime, a 
pagan, a heathen 

Payssyble, adj., p. 81; O.F. paisible, 
peaceable 

Peas, n., p. 51 ; Fr . paix, peace 
Pecked, v., pret., p. 142; A.S. pyccm, 
picked 

Pees, n., p. 43. See Peas 
Pendaunt, n., p. 188; O.F. pendant, a 
slope, a hanging 

Penyble, adj., p. 209 ; O.F. penible, cap¬ 
able of enduring hard work, pains¬ 
taking 

Percid, v., p. 201; F. percer, percier, 
pierced 

Perierer, n. ; O.F. pierribes, an engine 
for throwing stones 
Perylle, n., p. 35. See Paryll 
Peyned, v. ref., p. 64; O.F. peiner, to 
make an effort, to give one’s self great 
trouble 

Pieres, n., p. 3 ; F. pair, peers 
Pierrye, n., p. 78; O.F. pierreries, 
precious stones 

Piscyne, n., p. 251; O.F. piscine, a pool 
Playsyr, n., p. 5; O.F. plaisir, plesvr, 
pleasure 

Plom, n,, p. 184; O.F. plcm,plomb, plumb 
Popelican, n., p. 94; O.F. popelican, a 
heretic 

Popeliquans, n., p. 80; same as above 
Potes, n., p. 113; V.patte, of Gm. origin, 
Cf. Low Gm. pote, Gm. Pfote, paws 
Pourchassed, v., pp. 22, 23; O.F. por- 
chacier, etc., captia/re, obtained, gained 
Pourchassoure, n., p. 238; O.F. pur- 
chaceor, one who acquires or obtains. 
? pursuer, seeker after 
Pourprised, v., p. 139; O.F. ponrprise, 
porprise, seized, occupied 
Poursue, v v p. 39; O.F. pursuer, pour- 
suivre, to pursue 


Poursyewe, v., p. 60. See Poursue 
Pourueyaunce, n., p. 36; O.F. porvei- 
ance, porveance, cure, foresight 
Pourueyed, v., p. 160; O.F. porveier, 
powvoir, provided 

Prechid, v., p. 18; O.F. prechier, precher, 
preached 

Prees, n., p. 133; O.F. grease, a press, a 
crowd 

Prenable, adj., p. 135 ; O.F. prenable, 
that which may be taken 
Preuyleges,*n., p. 24; O.F. privilege, 
rights, privileges 

Preysed, v., p. 36, 145; O.F. prisier, 
priser , prized, estimated highly 
Prime temps, n., p. 166 ; O.P.printemps, 
the spring-time 

Prise, n., p. 130; O.F. prise, the taking, 
the capture 

Priue, adj., p. 106 ; O.F. privi, private, 
intimate 

Proef, n., p. 40; O.F. prove, proeve, 
preuve, proof 

Promyssyon, n., p. 253, promise 
Propice, adj., p. 40; O.F. propice, pro¬ 
pitious, suitable 

Prothomarter, n., p. 251; Fr. proto¬ 
martyr, M.L. protomartyr, from Gk. 
vptoroyuprvt:, the first martyr. 
Prouffred, v., p. 163,164; O.F. proferer, 
proffered 

Prouflfyt, n., p. 122; O.F. profit, profit 
Prouostes, n., p. 41; A.S. prdfost, pro¬ 
vosts 

Puissaunt, adj., p. 19, powerful 
Puyssaunce, n., p. 61, 124; O.F. puis¬ 
sance, for power 

Pyece, n., p. 259; O.F. piece, piece 
Pyetous, adj., p. 204 ; O.F. piteux, com¬ 
passionate 

Pyked, v. pret., p. 63 ; A.S. pycan, to 
pick or strike with an instrument 
Pykoys, n., p. 63 ; O.F. pecois, pyquois, 
etc., a sort of dart 

Pyler, n., p. 253; O.F . pilier, a pillar 
Pylle, pyle, v., p. 55, 60; O.F. pilier, to 
pillage 

Pynnes, n., p. 257 ; A.S. pinn, pins 
Pytte, v. pret, p. 251 ; A.S. potian, to 
put 

Quarellys, n., p. 263; O.F. quarrel, 
arrows having a four-edged head 
Quyt, adj., p. 60; O.F. quite, quit 
Quyte, n., p. 17, See Quyt 



Vocabulary. 327 


Raced, v., p. 34; O.P. rater, freq. of L. 

radere, to destroy, to put; used with out 
Raunson, n. ; O.P. Jlangon, rengon, 
ransom 

Rawnson, n., p. 224. See Raunson 
Recomforte, v., p. 27, 63 ; Fr. recon.- 
forter, re + comfort, to give new 
strength to 

Recouere, v., p. 43 ; O.P. recouvrer, to 
recover 

Recountred, v., p. 195; O.F. rencontrer, 
to encounter 

Recuperacion, n., p. 4; O.F. recuper¬ 
ation, recovery 

Reouyelled, v., p. 213; O.P. recueUler, 
gathered, collected 

Redde, v. pret., p. 5; A.S. rcedan , read 
Reedefye, v., p. 27; O.F. reedifier, to 
rebuild 

Refresshyd, v., p. 50; O.F. refraischir, 
refreschier, refreshed 
Reherchyng, v., p. 2; O.F. reherser, re + 
herse, recount, relate 
Releuyd, v., p. 208; O.F. retever, lifted 
up, raised 

Relyed, v., p. 56, 296; O.F. rattier, 
united, rallied 

Remuled, adj., p. 93. See note, p. 93 
Remyse, v., p. 1, 293; F. remit, stem 
from remettre, to put back 
Rendrid, v. p. 51; O.F. rendre, returned, 
rendered 

Renged, adj., p. 108 ; O.F. renger, rent), 
O.H.G, hring, arranged, drawn up in 
line 

Renomed, adj., p. 200; O.F. renomer, 
renowned 

Renomme, n., p. 5, 37; O.F. renemme'e, 
renown 

Renye, v., p. 25, 45, etc.; O.F. renier, 
to deny, renounce 

Repeased, pp., p. 128; O.F. rapaisier, 
appeased 

Repreef, n., p. 25, 28; O.F. reprover, 
reprouver, reproof 

Repreuyd. v., p. 123; same origin as 
repreef, reproved 

Reprysed, v., p. 262; F. repris, pp. of 
reprendre, taken back 
Respyted, v., p. 150; O.F. respiter, 
delayed, postponed 

Resseyue, v., p. 106; O.F. recever, re- 
coivre, to receive 

Retched (not), pret., p. 83, an assibi- 
lated form of reck = cared (not) 


Reteyne, v., p. 89 ; O.F. retenir, to retain 
Retrayte, n., p. 220; O.F. retraite, place 
of refuge 

Reuerrye, n., p. 174, 197 ; O.F. resverie, 
resver, a fit of obstinacy 
Reuested, v., p. 205; O.F. r evestir, to 
clothe, to put on 

Rial, adj., p. 274 ; O.F. roud, regal, royal, 
royal, magnificent 

Rightwys, adj., p. 37; A.S. rightwis, 
righteous 

Roted, v., p. 145; from the noun root, 
A.S. rot, rooted 

Rought, v. pret., p. 276; A.S. recam, pret. 

rShte, to reck, heed, care 
Rousee, n., p. 208; O.F. rosde, dew 
Rowte, n., p. 47; O.F. route, a troop, 
band 

Royame, n., p. 60; O.F. royaume, king¬ 
dom 

Ruissheauls, n., p. 273—probably a cor¬ 
ruption of ‘ ruysseaulx, ruisseaux ’— 
brooks or gutters 

Ryuage, n., p. 112; O.F. rivage, bank, 
brink 

Ryall, adj., p. 252. See Riall 

Sad, adj., p. 38, 202; A.S. saed, sober, 
serious, wise 

Salewed, v., p. 40; O.F. saluer, saluted, 
greeted 

Sauely, adv., p. 41 ; O.F. sauf + ly, 
safely 

Sauf, prep., p. 21, except 
Sauf, adj., p. 48, safe 
Sauf eonduyt, n., p. 236; O.F. saufcon- 
duit, safe-conduct 
Saufly, adv., p. 56, safely 
Saufte, n., p. 104, safety 
Scaffholde, p. 63 ; O.F. eschafavlt, escha- 
faud, scaffold 

Searmuche, n., p. 97, 121 ; O.F. escar- 
mouche, It. schermngio, skirmish 
Scarsenes, n., p. 144, scarce + ness, 
scarceness 

Scarsete, n., p?230; O.F. escarsete, origin 
uncertain : scarcity 

Scysme, n., p. 41 ; O.F. scisme, cisme, 
schism 

Seaaed, v., p. 106,274; O.F. saisir, seiser, 
M.L. sacire till 8th cent.; after, satire, 
to be put in possession of, seize 
Seche, v., p. 35; A.S. srcan, pret. sohte, 
Goth, sokjan, to seek 
Seece, v., p. 52 ; O.F. cesser, to cease 



328 Vocabulary. 


Selde, adv., p. 193, seldom 
Sensours, n., p. 32, censers 
Seruage, p. 58, 277 ; O.F. servage, servi¬ 
tude 

Sewed, v., p. 58; O.F. suir, sewir, sevir, 
suivre, followed, chased 
Sewr, adj., p. 48 ; O.F. seiir, sur6 
Sewrte, n., p. 58 ; O.F, seiirtd, security 
Seynorously, adj., p. 274; O.F. seig- 
noureux + ly, magnificent 
Shadde, v., p. 33. See Shedde 
Shamely, adv., p. 120; A.S. scedmelic, 
shamefully 

Shedde, v., p. 270 ; A.S. seeddan = Goth. 
skaidan, to shed 

Shewde, v., p. 201. See Shewyd, showed 

Shewyd, v., p. 4, showed 

Shippis, n., p. 34, 63, pi. of ship; A.S. 

scip = Goth, sleep, ships 
Sholder, n., p. 45, shoulder 
Sholdre, n., p. 45. See Sholder 
Shytte, v., p. 48; A.S. scyttan, shut 
Siewed, p. 62, 195. See Sewed, fol¬ 
lowed 

Signefyaunce, n., p. 270 ; O.F. signefi- 
anee, sign 

Skalyng laddres, n., p. 256, scaling 
ladders 

Skarmoche, n., p. 210. See Scarmuche, 
skirmish 

Skorches, n. ; O.F. Scarce, bark, skin 
Slee, v., p.54; A.S. sledn = Goth, slalian, 
to slay 

Slowe, vb., p. 73, pret. of slee, slew 
Smeton, v., p. 19; A.S. smltan, pret. 
smat, pp. smiten = Goth, smeitan, to 
smite 

Socours, n., p. 35; O.F. sucurs, secours, 
aid 

Sodenly, adv., p. 58; O.F. sodam + ly, 
suddenly 

Sommyers, n., p. 46, 51; O.F. sommier, 
beast of burden 

Somoned, v., p. 50; O.F. somener, 
semondre, summoned , 

Sonde, n., p. 185; A.S. sand, sand 
Sorouful, adj., p. 42; A.S. sorgful, sor¬ 
rowful 

Souldye, n., p. 126; O.F. soldie, pay, 
salary 

Souldyour, n., p. 126; O.F. soldier, one 
who receives pay 

Sowdan, n., p. 136; O.F. souldcm, soudan, 
M.L. sultanus or soldanus, a Moham¬ 
medan ruler 


Sowles, n., p. 200; A.S. siiwel, saivol, 
etc., soui 

Sowne, v., p. 53, 104 ; O.B’. soner, miner, 
sound 

Sowped, v., p. 255; O.F. souper, M.D. 
soppe, sop, supped 

Soynously, adv., p. 271; O.F. soigneux + 
ly, M.L. sonia, sunnia + osus; of Gin. 
origin, carefully 

Spede, v„ p. 63; A.S. spedan, to be 
successful 

Spores, n., p. 154 ; A.S. spora, spurs 
Sprad, v., p. 18, to spread 
Stage, n., p. 270; O.F. e'tage, a story 
Stalled, v., p. 2 ; A.S. steallian, installed, 
placed, set 

Stedes, n,, p. 46; A.S. steda, steeds 
Stered, v., p. 235, stirred 
Steroppes, n., p. 288 ; A.S. stirap, stiger- 
up — stirrups 

Stooles, n., p. 209; O.F. estole, stoles, 
robes 

Strayt, adj., p. 47, 135; O.B'. estreit, 
estrait, narrow 

Stryf, n., p. 51; O.F. estrif; of Gm. 
origin, strife 

Styed, vb., p. 262, pret.; A.S. stigan, to 
mount, to ascend 
Subget, adj., p. 20; O.F. sujet 
Sued, v., p. 183. See Sewed 
Suffrable, adj., p. 221; O.F. souffrable, 
souffrir, capable of endurance 
Suffre, v., p. 29, 115 ; O.F. soffrir, sonf- 
frvr, to suffer 

Suffrete, n., p. 144 ; O.F. soufreU, want 
Snffyse, v., p. 30 ; O.F. suffis, stem from 
souffire, L. suffire, to suffice 
Surplys, n., p. 209; O.F. surplis, snr- 
pelis, a surplice 

Suspection, n., p. 207, a var, of suspicion, 
from suspicion 
Sustre, n., p. 46, sister 
Swote, n., p. Ill; A.S. swat, sweat 
Syghes, n., p. 36, var. of sike, sik; cf. 

Sw. such = Dan. soh, sigh 
Syres, n., p. 60 ; O.F. sire, sirs 
Syth, adv., p. 51, since 

Taillage, n., p. 277; O.F. taillage, toll, 
tax, tribute 

Takle, n., p. 261 ; M.D., L.G. takel — Sw. 

tackel = Dan. tackkel, tackle 
Tappet, n., p. 184; A.S. taepped — L. 

tapetum, F. tapis, carpet, tapestry 
Tapre, n., p. 36 ; A.S. tapor, tapep 



Vocabulary. 329 


Tapyte, n., p. 313. See Tappet 
Targe, n., p. 63; O.F. targe, a shield 
Taryed, v., p. 64; taryen, developed 
through influence of targen, to wait 
for, to delay 

Tatche, n., p. 282; O.F. tache, teche; 

(origin uncertain), defect, vice 
Tayllage, n., p. 24. See Taillage 
Tere, n., p. 127; A.S. tear, tadr — Goth. 

tagr = O.L. lacruma, lacrima, tear 
Tereitorye, n., p. 233; O.F. territoire, 
used by Caxton in the sense of 

Tertre, n., p. 182 ; O.F. tertre, a little hill 
Tetche, n., p. 281. See Tatclie 
Theuys, n., p. 231 ; A.S. thedf = Goth. 
theubs, thief 

Throte, n., p. 151, throat 
Tliye, n., p. 113, thigh 
Tierce, adj., p. 183; O.F. tiers, hour half¬ 
way between sunrise and noon 
Tofore, adv., p. 42, before 
Torette, n., p. 129 ; O.F. tourette, dim., 
turret, a little tower 
Tourette, n., p. 99. See Torette 
Towres, n., p. 60; A.S. tur — O.F. tour, 
towers 

Trauailled, v., p. 22; O.F. travailler, 
to work, to labour 
Trauaylle, n., p. 24, labour, pain 
Trayson, u., p. 61; O.F. trahison, traison, 
treason 

Trecherye, n., p. 280; O.F. tricherie, 
tricher, treachery 
Trewe, adj., p. 19, true 
Trewes, n., p. 43, pi. of trew; same 
origin as above, truce 
Tromperye, n., p. 236; O.F. tromperie, 
deception 

Trusses, n., p. 213; O.F. trousse, a 
bundle, a pack 

Trybus, n., p. 253; O.F. tribu, tribes 
Trycherye, n., p. 60. See Trecherye 
Trychour, n., p. 127; O.F. tricheor, 
traitor, cheat 

Twyes, adj., p. 252, twice 

Unprenable, adj., p. 196; F. un + prcn- 
able, impregnable 

Utterist, adj., p. 30, superlative of A.S. 
fit, doublet of outerest, outermost, ex- 
tremest 

Valyaunce, n., p. 287 ; O.F. vaillance, a 
deed of valour 


Vaward, n.,p. 157, reduction of vantward, 
short for avant + ward, advance-guard 
Veray, adj., p. 2, 169 ; O.F. verai, wai, 
etc., true, real 

Veri, adj., p. 25. See Veray 
Very, adj., pp. 3, 19. See Veray 
Viage, n., p. 44; O.F. voiage, viage, etc., 
voyage 

Vnnethe, adv., p. 33 ; A.S. unedthe, not 
easily, hardly, scarcely 
Voyde, adj., p. 21; O.F. voide, vuide, 
empty 

Voyded, v., p. 20; O.F. voidier, vuider, 
to empty 

Vycayre, n., p. 301; O.F. vicaire, vicar, 
substitute 

Vyletees, n., p. 40; O.F. vilitd, insults 
Vysytyng, pres, part., p. 4; O.F. visiter, 
to examine, inspect, visit 
Vytaylle, n., p. 47; O.F. vitaille, victu- 
aille, victual, food 

Waast, n., p. 144 ; O.F. roast, gast, L. 
vastus, confused with M.E. weste; 
A.S. western — M.II.G. wueste, waste 
Warantise, n., p. 45 ; OsF. warantise, 
guarantiee, warrant 
Weder, n., p. 36, weather 
Weeshe, v,, p. 255, to wash 
Wellys, n., p. 257, wells or springs 
Wende, v., p. 97. See Wene 
Wene, v., p. 39; A.S. roman, pret. 
wende — Goth, roenjan, to be of the 
opinion of, to think 

Wete, v., p. 108 ; A.S. roitan, pret. wiste 
= Goth, witan, to know, to become 
aware of 

Wexe, v., p. 55, to grow, to wax 
Weyed, v., p. 205 ; A.S. wegen = Goth. 
gawigan, to weigh 

Whilis, adv., p. 133; abbreviation of 
A.S. thahuklc, the while that, while 
Wode, p. 36, 257; A.S. wudu, supposed 
to be of Celtic origin, wood 
Wood, adj., p. 112; A.S. wod = Goth. 
wods, mad, raging 

Woonte, adj., p. 39, contracted from 
waned = Gra. gewohnt, accustomed, 
wont 

Worship, u., p. 116, respect, worship 
Wote, p. 296, pres, ind., of witen, 1st 
pers. wot; 2nd wost; 3rd wot, know 
Wreton, pp., written 
Wullen, adj., p. 293 ; A.S. wyllen, wul + 
en, woollen 



330 VoeaJnuary. 


Wysedomme, n., p. 4, wisdom 
Wyst, v. pret., p. 57. See Wete 

Yate, n., p. 47, gate 
Yefte, n., p. 55, gift 
Yeldyng, pres, part., p. 275, yielding 
Yeris, n., p. 2; A.S. gedr, ger = Goth. 
jer, years 

Ynowe, adv., p. 54; A.S. genoh, adv. 
neut. acc. of adj., enough 


Ynowgh, adv., p. 34, same as Ynowe 
Ynowhe, adv., p. 19, same as Ynowe 
Yolden, pp. See Yeldyng 
Youen, pp., given 
Yow, pron., p. 25 ; A.S. edw, you 
Yssued, v., p. 33; issue, pp. of O.F. 
issir, eissir, to issue, to come out, to 
descend from 
Yu, pron.; A.S. gi, ge, ye 



331 


INDEX OF NAMES. 


Aaron Remt, p. 22, 23, the Caliph 
Haroun al Raschid, fifth Abasside 
Caliph, b. 766, d. 808 

Abacuc, p. 249, Habakkuk the prophet 

Abyas, p. 249, corruption for Abdias; 
Lat. Abdiae, Fr. Abdies ; the prophet 
Obadiah 

Abymelech, p. 248, Abimelech 

Aeharye, p. 20, Zacharias, patriarch of 
Jerusalem, 609 — 631. See ‘ Pat. 
Graec.,’ tom. 86 

Adryan, p. 94, Adrian I., Pope from 
772—795, son of Theodore, a Roman 
gentleman 

Alexandre, p. 94, patriarch of Constan¬ 
tinople 

Alexes Conius, p. 71 ; Alexys, p. 296. 
Alexius Conain = Alexius Comnenus 
I., Emperor of Constantinople, 1081— 
1118, successor of Romanus Diogenes 

Alysawndre, p. 2, Alexander the Great, 
King of Macedon 

Amanaix (Guillem), p. 46 ; Guillem de 
Amaneux, p. 84 ; Guyllem Ameneux, 
p. 206; Guillaume Amanjeu d’Albret, 
Gascon nobleman 

Amos, p. 28, 249, Amos the prophet 

Ancean, p. 136, 226, etc., Accien, prince 
of Antioch, called Garsian in the 1 Chan- 
sond’Antioche.’ Tudebodusand Robert 
the Monk call him Casskmus, Foucher 
de Chartres, Gratianus, William of 
Tyre, Alexicmus; Abulfeda calls him 
Baghistan, while he is known in other 
Oriental historians as Ahby Syran. 
His title among English historians is 
Baghasian 

Arnold, p. 238, 300, etc., Arnoul or 
Emould de Rohes, family tutor of 
Robert of Normandy, having educated 
Cecilia, Robert’s sister; a man of 


great influence, but called Amolph 
Mala Corona, on account of his dis¬ 
solute and unclerical habits. See 
‘ Palgrave,’ IV. p. 554. 

Arracheus, p. 233, seventh son of 
Canaan, the founder of the City of 
Archis 

Arryus, p. 94, Arrius the heretic, sup¬ 
posed to have been a native of 
Cyrenaica, in Africa. He was ex¬ 
communicated by the first Nicene 
Council, and banished to Illyria 
Arsbran (Guyllaume de), p. 260 
Arthur, p. 2, King of the Britons 
Assche, Aske, Henri d’, p. 74,100, etc., a 
German knight; Bongars calls him 
Henricus de Asca. Ho was buried in 
Turbessel, where he died of an epi¬ 
demic. William of Tyre says that he 
was a knight celebrated by birth as 
well as by bravery 

Assougw, p. 137, paleographic error 
for Assongar, the Sultan of Aleppo, 
father of Sanguin, and great-grand¬ 
father of Noureddin. His real name 
was Acsencar Cacim Eddaulah 
Aubmable (Steven d’), p. 92, Aubuale, 
p. 206. Etienne d’Aubemarle, in Eng¬ 
lish, “ Steven of Albemarle and Holder- 
nesse”; “leJUsau Comte Odon,” the 
‘ Chanson d’Antioche ’ calls him. He 
was the grandson of Etienne, Count 
of Champagne, and son of Odo, the 
Champenois, whom his usurping uncle 
Thibaut of Blois had disinherited. His 
mother was Aalis of Normandy, sister 
of William the Conqueror. He died 
in 1126 

Aumellae (Reynart d’), p. 206 
Ayerne, p. 94, Irenaeus, father of the 
Emperor Constantine 



332 


Index of Names. 


Aymart, p. 45, 276, etc., Adliemar de 
Monteil, Bishop of Puy, Papal 
Legate among the Crusaders 


Balae, or Balak, p. 129, 223, etc., Emir 
of Serorge, prince of the family of 
Ortoc, who possessed many places on 
the Euphrates, and reigned in Meso¬ 
potamia and Aleppo 
Bcuadon (Potom de), p. 237, Fr. Pons 
de Baladin, a great friend and com¬ 
panion of .the Count of Toulouse 
Balduc, p. 225, Blanduc, p. 127, Ban- 
due, p. 129, a Turkish Emir, lord of 
Samosata 

Barce (Gace de), p. 272. See Centon de 
Beart 

Barneuylle (Rogyer de), p. 92, Rogier de 
Barneuylle, p. 97, etc.; according to 
Bongars, a gentleman of Normandy; 
Barneville sur Mer is a very ancient 
chateau in the department of La 
Manche. Roger de Barneville is 
called by Raymond d’Agiles, Miles 
clarissimus et rarissim/us omnibus. He 
was killed by an arrow near Antioch 
Bartelmewe (Peter), p. 201, 238, etc., 
Pierre Bartelemy, a priest of the 
diocese of Marseilles, finder of the 
Sacred lance. He was attached to 
the suite of Raymond St. Gilles 
Basilie, p. 70, Basil II., Emperor of 
Greece from 976—1025 
Baugenel (Raoul de), p. 46, Raoul de 
BaugencA He accompanied Hugh 
the Great to the Holy Land, whose 
daughter Mahaut he married for his 
second wife 

Bawduryn, p. 45, 77, etc., Baldwin, 
brother of Godfrey of Bouillon, second 
king of Jerusalem, third son of Eus- 
taehe de Boulogne and Ida. He had 
been destined for holy orders, and 
had held many prebends in the 
churches of Rheims, Cambrai, and 
Liege, but marrying Godechilda or 
Gandechilda, daughter of Ralph' de 
Soeny and Isabelle de Montfort, he 
cast olf the sacerdotal habit. See 
‘Palgrave,’ IV. p. 547. 

Beart (Centon de), p. 46, 84. Gace de 
Barce, p. 272. Gaston, fourth Vicomte 
of Bdarn, called Gastus de Berdeiz by 
Albert d’Aix ; killed in 1130 by the 


Moors of Spain. His blood flows in 
the veins of the Bourbons 

Beauvays (Regnault de), p. Ill, Bauuuus, 

p. 206 

Bedyers (Gaste de), p. 84, 111, 247, 272, 
etc. 

Belphet, p. 33, 36, Alp Arslan, or Abul- 
fath, Sultan of Persia from 1059— 
1072 

Beniamin, p. 253, youngest son of Jacob 

Bernard, of Valence, p. 216, 226, Bishop 
of Tarsus, made patriarch of Antioch 
in 1099 

Blois, Steven, Earl of Chartres and Blois, 
p. 91, etc. See Chartres 

Boce (Godeffroy), p. 285, Godefroi le 
Bossu, Duke of Lorraine, so called 
because he was humpbacked, uncle 
of Godfrey of Bouillon 

Boloyne (Godefroy of), p. 3, 64, etc., God¬ 
frey of Bouillon, second son of 
Eustache of Boulogne and Ida, b. 
1061, d. 1100. He was of the lineage 
of Charlemagne, through Mahaut de 
Lorraine, his grandmother 

Boloyne (Eustache of), p. 121, etc., Eub- 
tache de Boulogne, father of Godfrey 
of Bouillon 

Boloyne (Eustace of), p. 206, etc., brother 
of Godfrey of Bouillon, eldest son 
of the Eustache above mentioned; 
married after the First Crusade, Mary 
of Scotland, daughter of Margaret and 
Malcolm 

Bommensor, p. 305. El Mustansir, Caliph 
of Egypt, from 1035—1095 

Boryh (Bawdyn de), p. Ill, 112,206, etc., 
also called Bourg, Bort, Borgh, Bors, 
Bourgh, by Caxton ; cousin of Godfrey 
of Bouillon, and son of Hugh, Count 
of Rethel, one of the seven peers of 
Champagne, ancestor of the house of 
Burgundy 

Boure (Thomas de), p. 206, misreading 
or corruption for Thomas de Fere. 
Lat. Thomas de Feria. See Thomas 
de Fere 

Broyes (Reygnald of), p. 58. Michaud 
conjectures that he is perhaps Renaud 
de Bre'fs, one of the knights in Peter 
the Hermit’s army. He was slain 
before Nicsea 

Bureau (Godefrey), p. 57, Godefroy 
Burel d’Etampes, one of the knights 
in the army of Peter the Hermit 



Index of Names. 333 


Burgoyn (Gelplies of), p. 117 
Buymont, Prince of Tarente, p. 46, 76, 
77, etc., Bohemond, Prince of Taren- 
tum in Italy, son of Robert Guiscard, 
originally from Hauteville in Nor¬ 
mandy 

Canaham , p. 233, Canaan, son of Ham 
Canderou (Bawdyn),p, 99,originally from 
Bassigny in Champagne; William of 
Tyre calls him nobilis et magnificus 
vir in armis strenuus. He was killed 
at the siege of Nicasa 
Cannae (Aubery of), p. 80 
Captap, p. 252, Lat. Catab, father of 
Omar 

Cariaintes (Johan), p. 27, a Greek, living 
in Jerusalem at the time of the First 
Crusade 

Carpynelle or Campinelle (Wyldemart), 
p. 260, Gandemar Carpinelle, from 
Languedoc, although in the suite of 
Godefrey 

Caryn (Herman of), p. 80. According to 
Bongars he was a Norman nobleman, 
who accompanied Bohemond to the 
Holy Land. Palgrave (IV. 551) calls 
him Herman de Cogny 
Gaym, p. 233, Ham, second son of Noah 
Chamont (Gale de), p. Ill, or Giles de 
Chaumont. This family is mentioned 
in ‘ Camden ’ as from Cornwall 
Charlemagne, p. 3, Charlemagne the 
Great 

Charpentier (Guyllame), p. 72, etc., 
William, viscomte of Milun, called 
the Hammerer or the Carpenter. 
Guibert de Nogent says of him that 
he pillaged his villages and burghs.to 
get the money with which to start for 
the Holy Land. Robert le Moine tells 
us that he was of royal lineage, and 
related to Hugh the Great. He was 
called the Carpenter from his vigorous 
style of fighting — “ Ensy comme 
Carpentier aloit carpcntant.”— 1 G. de 
Bouillon,’ 1. 18,042 
Chartes (Ogan of), p. 80 
Chartres (Foubert de), p. 224, 225 
Chartres , Steven, Earl of Chartres and 
Blois, p. 91, etc., son of Thibaud 
III., Count of Blois and Champagne. 
He was a brother-in-law of Robert 
of Normandy, whose sister he had 
married. He was a man of wisdom 


and prudence, and was made presi¬ 
dent of the council of war, which 
directed the military operations of the 
Crusade 

Cherisy (Gerard), p.46. Geart de Cherysy, 
p. Ill, a knight of Picardy, who ac¬ 
companied Godfrey of Bouillon to the 
Holy Land. History calls him Querise, 
Kerisi, or Quierizi. Rogier (‘ Noblesse 
Franjaise aux Croisades') says that he 
belonged to an ancient and knightly 
family near Soissons 
Cimirie ux, p. 292, misreading for 
Emirius. See Elafdales 
Colemant, p. 47, Coloinan, King 
Hungary, had just mounted the 
throne as the armies of the First 
Crusade crossed his country. He was 
called Bibliophilus from his love of 
books. Thurocz, in his ‘ Chronicle of 
Hungary,’ gives this portrait of him : 
“Coloman was hideous and ignoble 
in appearance, but artful and crafty 
in mind. He was hairy, humpbacked, 
blind in one eye, lame, and a stutterer.” 
Conasylles , p. 221, corruption for Cova- 
siles, an Armenian, whose real name 
was Kogh Basil, according to von 
Sybel; Paulin Paris calls him Cova'- 
siles; Albert d’Aix gives his name 
as Corrovasilius; William of Tyre 
calls him Covasilio 

Conayn of Brytayne, p. 92, Conayn the 
Breton, p. 206, an illustrious knight of 
Brittany, son of Alain Fergant 
Constantyn, Monamaques, p. 304, Em¬ 
peror of Constantinople from 1042— 
1053 

Corbagat, p. 194, 196, etc. Kerbogha, 
Sultan of Aleppo at the time of the 
First Crusade. He besieged Antioch. 
He is called Corbaran by the French 
poems on the Crusades 
Cornelle, p. 249, the Centurion, Cornelius, 
mentioned in Acts x. 

Cosdrove, p. 19, 20, etc., Cbosroes, or 
Khosru II., son of Hormizd IV., King 
of Persia; called “ Parvez ” the Con¬ 
queror. He was killed in 628 by the 
treachery of his own son, after a 
glorious reign of thirty-eight years 
Cregon (Rembault), p. 188. The Oregon a 
corruption for Creton. The person 
here designated was Raimbaud Creton 
d’Estourmel. Estourmel is a village 



334 


Index of Names. 


about a league from Cambrai. Grain- 
dor de Douai gives us a portrait of 
this Rairabaud Creton. Ordericus 
Vitalis says that he mounted the 
ladder fourth at the assault of Anti¬ 
och. He returned safely from the 
Holy Land, and was killed at the 
6iege of Montmorency in 1101. The 
family is called indifferently, Estour- 
niel or Creton, but since 1500 Estour- 
mel has prevailed 

Croseavlx (Guy de), p. 190, a paleo¬ 
graphic error for Trosselle—Guy de 
Trosselle 

Ouuylly (Guyllautne de), p. 231, corrup¬ 
tion for Cumilly. The Latin gives 
Cumliaco ; another variant is Cimilli 
Daher, p. 27, Daher, surnamed Ledimil- 
lah, son of Hakem Biamrillah, Sultan 
of Egypt from 1021—1036 
Dancdle (Doene), p. 72, corruption for 
Dreue de Neele 

D’Anse (Robert), p. 112, 121, Robert de 
Hansc, according to Palgrave, a Nor¬ 
man from Caen, who accompanied 
Bohemond to the Crusades 
Dansique (Henry), p. 46; D’asque, 
Henry, p. 65, etc. See Assche 
Dares, p. 2, a Trojan priest, said to have 
lived at the time of the Trojan war, 
to whom was attributed an account of 
that war. A work in Latin, purport¬ 
ing to be a translation of this account, 
and entitled, ‘Daretis Phrygii de Ex- 
cidio Trojae Historia,’ was much read 
in the Middle Ages, and ascribed to 
Cornelius Nepos; but the language 
belongs to a much later period than 
the time of Nepos. Dederick, who 
has given an excellent edition, is in¬ 
clined to ascribe the work to a Roman 
of the sixth or seventh century 
Dasque, Godefrey, p. 65, 67. See Assche 
Davyd, p. 2, David, King of Israel 
Daybart, p. 299, 300, corruption for 
Daimbart, Archbishop of Pisa; made 
patriarch of Jerusalem by the Cru¬ 
saders 

Deltors (Bawdyn), p. 272. Caxton makes 
the best of the text of his faulty orig¬ 
inal here, which gives Baudoin de 
Ultore. The Latin text shows this to 
be a corruption for Baudoin de Bugh ; 
Lat. Balduinus de Burgo 
Discretus, p. 79, paleographic error for 


Dioscurus, the heretic patriarch of 
Alexandria in 4«jl 
Domedart (Gaultier de), p. 206 
Donysmayn, p. 309, Danismain, a Tur¬ 
coman Emir 

Ducar, p. 136, Durcas, Sultan of 
Damascus 

Duchelond (Herman of), p. 100 
Dutar, p. 136, corruption of Ducar, 
same as above 

Dyctes, p. 2, Dictys Cretensis, a Grecian 
historian, who wrote probably about 
the time of Nero, although tradition 
assigns him to a much earlier period. 
The main interest of his work consists 
in the fact, that it was the source from 
which the Homeric legends were in¬ 
troduced into the Middle Ages 
Dye or Dys (Ysachar, Erie of), p. 206, 
273, Isachar, or Isard Count of Die, a 
Provencal nobleman 

Ebriac (Guylliam de), p. 262 
Edward, p. 4, Edward IV., King of 
France and England 
Elafdales, p. 292, Emirieus, or the Emir 
A1 Dioyousoh, called also El Afdel, 
took Jerusalem from the Turks in 1098 
Eliopolitans, p. 27, Emperor of Con¬ 
stantinople. See Bomayn 
Elyus (Adrian), p. 250, Aelius Hadrianus, 
Emperor of Rome after Titus 
Emycon, p. 62, 64, Emicio, leader of one 
of the bands of Crusaders. Roriclit, 
‘Zur Geschichte der Kreuzziige,’ calls 
him Graf Emicho von Leiningen from 
Nahegau, and says that he was dis¬ 
liked on account of the persecution 
of the Jews in the middle Rhenish 
cities, which was vigorously carried 
on by him 

Emyrferyus, p. 168, 175, etc., Phyrrus 
or Phirrus, the renegade Christian who 
delivered Antioch to Bohemond. Ac¬ 
cording to Michaud (I. 157), he em¬ 
braced Christianity and followed the 
Crusaders to Jerusalem. His ambition 
not being satisfied, he returned to 
Mohammedanism, and died abhorred 
by both Christians and Moslems. He 
is called Mufero in 1 La Gran Con- 
quista,’ which also says that he was 
an Armenian. Some historians give 
him the name Adrian; Abul Faradge 
calls him Kuzebach, and says that he 



Index of Names. 335 


was of Persian descent. Anna Com¬ 
nena assigns to him an Armenian 
origin. William of Tyre, as we see, 
calls him Emir Feirns, while Sanuti 
gives his name as Hermiroferns. In 
the ‘Chanson d’Antioche’ he figures 
as Dacien, while von Sybel gives his 
true name, probably, as Feruz az 
Ferrad 

Emytes, p. 240, corruption for Emires. 
The Latin gives Emireius, the Egyptian 
Emir who captured Jerusalem from the 
Persians 

Eneanx, p. 249, Eneas, the man men¬ 
tioned in Acts is. 34, who was healed 
by Peter 

Entyses, p. 79, Eutyches, Archimandrite 
of Constantinople, condemned for 
heresy in 451, at the Council of 
Chalcedon 

Eracles, p. 18, etc. 

Eusebec of Cceswrea, p. 124. Eusebius of 
Caesarea—b. 276, d. 340—known aB 
the father of ecclesiastical history 

Ezechyas, p. 254, Hezekiah, King of the 
Jews, from 717 b.c. to 688 b.c. 

Fedre (Thomas de), p. Ill, Thomas de 
Fferre, p. 46, 272, etc., Thomas de la 
Fere, Sire de Marie. He belonged to 
the house of Coucy; he was a most 
famous fighter, who filled the Orient 
with, the renown of his valour. He 
married Ida of Hainault. M. Michaud 
calls him Thomas de Feu. He was the 
son of Enguerrand de Couci, whose 

• motto Palgrave gives in IV. 559, Roi 
ne Due, ne Prince je suis; Je suis le 
Sire de Couci 

Fergaunt (Alayn), p. 92, Alain Ferguant 
the sixth Duke of Brittany, father of 
Conain 

ffiaundres (Robert of), p. 84, 206, etc. 
Robert of Flanders was the leader of 
the Frisons and the Flemings. He 
was the eldest son of Robert the 
Frison, a brave and dashing noble¬ 
man, called the “ Lance and Sword of 
the Christians ” by the Christians, 
and the “son of St. George” by the 
Saracens 

ffoca Ce»7/r, p. 20, Nicephorus Phocas, 
Emperor of the East from 602—610. 
He was a Cappadocian of humble 
origin. A revolution caused Mauritius 


to abdicate, and Phocas became em¬ 
peror. He was an ignorant, brutal, 
and deformed man, and was deposed 
by his successful rival, Heraclius, in 
610 

Forestes (Guillem erle of), p. 84, 99, etc. 
According to Van Hasselt, he was a 
Belgian nobleman 
Fytz Christen (Robert), p. 80 
Fytz Gerard (Robert), p. 206 
Fytz Godeffroy (Raoul), p. 206 
Fytz Raoul (Humfrey), p. 80 

Gable, p. 124, Gabael of the Bible, cousin 
of Tobias 

Gabryel, p. 308, a wealthy Armenian. 

Albert of Aix calls him Gaveras 
Gaultier, Sans Avoir, p. 48, 49, etc. 
Walter the Pennyless, one of the 
leaders of the First Crusade. (See 
note on this subject.) 

Gaunt (Bawdwyn of),p. 99, etc. Bauduin 
de Gant or de Gand, called Bauduin 
le Grand, Baudouin second lord of 
Alost. He perished at tho siege of 
Nicsea 

Gaivayn, p. 2, Gawain or Gauvaine, a 
knight of the Round Table, nephew 
of King Arthur 

George (St.), the Martyr, p. 244, born in 
Cappadocia of noble parents. He fell 
a martyr under Diocletian at Lidda, 
or, according to some, at Nicomedia. 
He is the patron saint of England, 
and of Genoa and Venice. His popu¬ 
larity in England dates from the time 
of Richard Coeur de Lion, who suc¬ 
cessfully invoked his aid. His greatest 
achievement in life was the conquest 
of a dragon by which he delivered a 
king’s daughter from death 
Ghalehot, p. 2, Sir Galahad, one of the 
knights of the Round Table, son of 
Sir Lancelot and Elaine 
Gilbert, p. 40, Archbishop of Ravenna, 
the anti-Pope who deposed Pope 
Gregory VII. He was known as 
Clement III., and occupied the Holy 
See from 1080 —1101. He is not 
numbered among the legitimate popes 
Godechan, p. 59, 61, etc., Gottschalk, a 
German priest of the Palatinate, who 
preached the Crusade in Germany, 
and started after Peter the Hermit 
with 20,000 men. According to Roll- 



336 


Index of Names. 


richt, he was called in derision, “ Der 
Falsche Schalk Gottes ’’ 

Grateeylle (Guyllem de), p. 195; Grate- 
menyL, p. 197, 199, etc.; William of 
Grandmenil or Grantemesnil, the 
second son of Robert, founder of the 
Abbaye St. Evreult. He was attached 
to the house of Robert Guiscard, whom 
he had followed into Apulia, and 
whose daughter Mabille he married, 
thus becoming a brother-in-law of 
Bohemond. He quarrelled with 
Bohemond, and left his service for 
that of Godfrey, under whom he 
served in the First Crusade. He ran 
-■ away during the siege of Antioch with 
his two younger brothers, Yves and 
Alberic, and returned to Apulia, 
where lie died soon after 
Grece (Garnyer de), p. 206, 298, etc., 
Gamier de Gres or de Gray, from 
Franclie Compt4, one of the nobles 
who accompanied Godfrey of Bouillon 
to the Holy Land. In the Historical 
Gallery of Versailles he is called de 
Gray. In a MS. of the Arsenal he has 
the title, Gamier de Gresse. Wilken (I. 
p. 102) writes it Werner von Grees. 
He died a few days after Godfrey 
of Bouillon, and was buried in the 
Basilica of St. Mary, in the Valley of 
Jehoshaph&t 

Gregory, p. 40, Gregory, the seventh 
pope of Rome, died May 25, 1085. 
He greatly extended the power of 
Rome; through his pretensions he 
involved himself in violent disputes 
with tire Emperor of Germany 
C?«ennes of Denmark, p. 147. Sweno, son 
of the King of Denmark, was attacked 
while bringing succour to Godfrey of 
Bouillon, by Solyman. He was killed 
on the field of battle. This hero figures 
in Tasso’s 1 Jerusalem Delivered ’ 
Guyllam, p. 109, brother of Tancred 
Gutier, p. 115. Gandeschilde, or Gode- 
childa, daughter of Ralph de Soeny 
and Isabel de Montfort, and wife of 
Baldw in, brother of Godfrey of Bouil¬ 
lon. She accompanied her husband 
on the First Crusade. She died, and 
was buried in Meraasch in Asia. 
Frobese calls her Godehild von 
Conches 

Guyehart (Robert), p. 46, etc., Robert 


Guiscard, Norman Duke of Apulia 
and Calabria, 1015—1085, sixth of 
the twelve sons of Tancred de Haute- 
ville in Normandy 

Guyllanime, p. 226. Paulin Paris con¬ 
jectures that this is the same William 
who distinguished himself at the siege 
■ of Marrah. The ‘ Chanson d’Antioche ’ 
states that he was from Montpellier 
Guynemer, p. 121, Guy Nevers, p. 122, 
etc., Guinemers of Boulogne, a cele¬ 
brated pirate captain. He was taken 
prisoner by the Emjreror of Constanti- 
nople, and kept in prison in Laodicea. 
Godfrey of Bouillon restored him to 
liberty 

Guyon, p. 197, Guyen, p. 198, Guy the 
Seneschal, brother of Bohemond, and 
attached by a brilliant marriage to 
the fortunes of Alexis, Emperor of 
Constantinople, according to Anna 
Comnena 

Handeron (Bawdyn), p. 99. See Can- 
deron. Handeron, a corruption of 
Canderon or Cauderon ; Lat. Calderon 
Hanse (Robert the), p. 80. Lat. Robertus 
de Anxa. See lI’Anse 
Harry, p. 40, 42, 279, Henry IV., 
Emperor of Germany 
Hecam, p. 24, Hakim Biamrillah, Caliph 
of Egypt, 996—1021, third of the 
Fatimite Caliphs 

Hector of Troy, p. 2, eldest son i of 
Priam 

Hdlom, p. 202; Fr. Herluin, the inter¬ 
preter who accompanied Peter the 
Hermit on his embassy to Kerbogha 
Helyas, p. 244, Elijah the Prophet 
Helyzeus, p. 249, Elisha the Prophet 
Henawde (Bawdwyn, erle of), p. 45, 
208, Baldwin, Earl of Hainault, a 
Flemish nobleman who went with 
Godfrey of Bouillon to the First 
Crusade 

Henry, p. 297, Henry I., King of 
England 

Herman, p. 62, 200. See Duchelond 
Hetam, p. 27, a corruption for Hecam 
Homa/r, p. 19, 20. See Omar 
Homer, p. 2, the poet Homer 
Huon le Mayne, p 71, 206, 208, etc., 
Hugh de Vermandois, younger brother 
of King Philip of France. He was 
the second son of Henry I. and Anne, 



337 


Indeo) of Names. 


daughter of Jaroslaw, Duke of Kussia. 
He became Count of Vermandois by 
his marriage with Adelaide, daughter 
of Count Herbert. He was called 
Hugh the Great (Huon le Mayne), 
either because he was the brother of 
the king or from his great size 
Hyart, p. 24, Lord of Bames, bailiff of 
Hakim; the Hidraot of TaBso’s 
‘Jerusalem Delivered’ 

Iaphet, p. 115, son of Noah 
Ieroboam, p. 253, Jeroboam 
Incita, p. 49, Duke of Bulgaria 
lohan, p. 78, John, son of Alexis 
Comnenus 

lohan, p. 215, John, patriarch of 
Antioch, reinstated after the conquest 
of Antioch 

lohan Eleymont (St.), p. 36, patriarch of 
Constantinople 

Ionen, p. 115, Javan, fourth son of 
Japheth 

Iosue, p. 1, 249, 253, Joshua 
Iude, p. 124, St. Jude, author of one of 
the books of the New Testament 
Iustynyen, p. 244, Justinianus, surnamed 
the Great, Emperor of Constantinople, 
527—565. He was born in Illyria, 
and married the celebrated and beau¬ 
tiful actress Theodora. He is especially 
famous as a legislator 

Latyns, p. 148, corruption for Tatyns, 
which is in turn a corruption of 
Tatinus. 

LaMncelotte de Lake, p. 2, Launcelot du 
Lac, chief knight of the Bound Table 
Leuy, p. 249, Levi, one of the twelve 
sons of Jacob 

Lacan, p. 2, Marcus Annaeus Lueanus, 
grandson of Seneca, born Nov. 3rd, 
39 a.d. Most eminent Boman poet of 
the Silver Age 
Lutol, p. 271. See Tomay 
Lybres (Gonam), p. 272, corruption for 
Conain le Breton 

Lylle (Galles de), p. 99, Galon de Lille, 
killed with Baldwin of Gand at the 
siege of Nicasa. An arrow laid him 
low as he was mounting to the assault. 
The two received burials worthy of 
great and noble men 
Lyon (Pope), p. 79, Leo I., called Leo 
the Great, Pope from 440 to 461 

GODFREY. 


Lyonel, p. 2, Sir Lionel, brother of Sir 
Launcelot, son of Ban, King of Ben- 
wick, a hero of the Arthurian legends 

Machabeus (Judas), p. 2, Judos, called 
Maccabasus or the Hammerer, title 
given to Judas Asmonoeus, the first 
great hero of the Jewish revolt against 
Antiochus Epiphanes. He was killed 
in 110 B.c. 

Machomet, p. 18, Mahomet 

Marcyen, p. 79, Marcianus, Emperor of 
the East from 450 to 457. He was a 
native of Thrace, and became emperor 
by marrying Pulcheria, widow of 
Theodosius 

Marie, p. 20, daughter of the Emperor 
Mauritius of Borne, and wife of 
Khosru II., Sultan of Persia 

Maturane (Bishop of), p. 280, 284, 296, 

6tc. 

Mavide, p. 285, Maude, daughter of 
Eustache of Boulogne, wife of King 
Stephen of England 

Mauryce, p. 20, Mauricius Flavius 
Tiberius, Emperor of the East from 
582 to 602. He abdicated in favour 
of Phocas 

Maxyme, p. 24, Maximus, patriarch of 
Jerusalem in the time of Constantine 

Modeste, p. 19, ModeBtus, colleague of 
Zacharias, and his successor as patri¬ 
arch of Jerusalem in 514. It is not 
certain how matters were arranged, 
whether Zacharias was brought back 
from Persia and became a colleague 
of Modestus or not. Three homilies 
of Modestus are still preserved. He 
was especially severe against the use 
of unguents by women 

Mollac (Beynard de), p. 217, corruption 
for Aumellac. See Aumellac 

Montagu (Conon de), p. 74 (Aconon de), 
p. 131, etc., one of Godfrey de Bouil¬ 
lon’s companions in the First Crusade. 
He was a Belgian by birth, son of 
Gozelon, Count of Boulogne, and Er- 
mentrude of Haranzey. Conon’s wife 
was Ida, said to be sister of Godfrey of 
Bouillon. He died at the siege of 
Dolheim, April 30th, 1101 

Montagu (Euenam), p. 206, corruption 
for Conon 

Montagu (Lambert de), p. 206, 272, son 
of Conon 

z 



338 


Index of Names. 


Montagu (Gossolyn de), p. 131, 132, 

• Goscelin, son of Conon de Montagne 

'Montague (Guemes), p. 140, corruption 
for Conon 

Montcler (Guyllebert del, p. 112 

MontpeUyer (Guyllem de), p. 84,206, etc. 
William of Montpellier, accompanied 
Raymond of Toulouse and Adhemar 
to the Holy Land 

Montygneux (Umfrey of), p. 80. The 
Latin gives Humfredus de Monte 
Scabioso 

Moucous (Loys de), p. 206, Louis de 
Moncon or Monson, called by Albert 
d’Aix, Mirabilis in opere militare, was 
one of those who entered Jerusalem 
first. According to Dansey (‘Eng. 
Crusaders’) a family of this name 
settled in England soon after the 
Conquest. From this family the 
present Lord Monson is said to 
descend 

Nahugodonosor , p. 134, Nebuchadnezzar, 
King of Assyria, 604—647 n.c. 

Nelle (Dreues de), p. 172, Drogo de 
Nee). He was among the prisoners 
released by Alexius on condition that 
Godfrey of Bouillon should discontinue 
pillaging his country. He was lord 
of Nesles, or Neelies, and Faloy. Lat. 
Drogo de Nahalla. He followed 
Hugh the Great, shared .his captivity, 
and distinguished himself at the siege 
of Nicaea. According to Albert d’Aix, 
Drogon was the son of Yves de 
Nesles. The Castellany of Bruges 
belongs to this family. See ‘ Croisds 
Beiges,’ p. 142 

Noe, p. 115, Noah 

Noradyn, p. 137, Noureddin Mahmud, 
Malek al Adel, the scourge of the 
Christian settlements in Syria and 
Palestine, b. 1116, d. 1174. He is 
one of the great heroes of Moslem 
history 

Normandye (Robert Duke of), p. 45, 
91, etc., Robert Duke of Normandy, 
son of William the Conqueror, sur- 
named in French history Cowrte heuse. 
He mounted the walls among the first 
at the assault of Jerusalem. He died 
a prisoner in England in 1130 or’31. 
He mortgaged his Duchy of Normandy 
to King William, his brother, for 


10,000 pounds in order to obtain the 
funds for the First Crusade 
Nycesores, p. 28, corruption for Nycefores, 
Nicephorus, patriarch of Jerusalem 
Nychofores (Bothoniat), p. 71, Nico- 
phorus, Emperor of the East, 802— 
811. He succeeded Ireneus, and was 
the first Grecian emperor 
Nycose, p. 165, etc., an Armenian 

Olyver, p. 3, Oliver, one of the paladins 
of Charlemagne, the devoted friend 
and companion-at-arms of Roland, 
Charlemagne’s nephew 
Omar, p. 19, 20, 252, etc., Omar, son of 
Captaph, the second, successor of 
Mahomet. He was for ten years the 
head of the Moslem Empire, and died 
in 644 

Orenge (Raybout, erle of), p. 84, etc., 
Rembout, Earl of Orange, one of the 
great Provencal noblemen in the First 
Crusade 

Orenge (Bishop of), p. 84, etc., William, 
Bishop of Orenge. He died at the 
siege of Marran, p. 228 
Oreste, p. 24, Orestes, patriarch of 
Jerusalem in the time of Hakim, 
whose uncle he was 
Orleans (ffoucher d’), p. 58, one of the 
few knights in Peter’s army. Slain 
before Nicaea 

Ovyde, p. 2, Ovid, the Latin poet 

Pancrace, p. 165, 221, etc., Pancratius, 
an Armenian prince, in his youth 
King of Northern Iberia. He joined 
the Crusaders in the hope of retrieving 
his fortunes. See Michaud, I, 120 
Paris (Robert of),-p. 109, Robert of 
Paris 

Pdet (Remon), p. 234, 260, etc., Pabcs, 
p. 206, Peles, p. 84. Raymond Pelet, 
a Provencal nobleman, called “The 
Crusader Vicomte of Narbonne.” He 
was also Count of Miqueil and Alais, 
thus belonging to one of the most 
distinguished families of Languedoc. 
He is the first ancestor known of the 
Pelets of Narbonne, of whom there 
are still several branches 
Perceval, p. 2, Knight of the Round 
Table 

Perche (Routrout, erle of), p. 45; Erie 
of Perse, p. 206; Rotheron of Perse, 



339 


Index of Names. 


P- 92; Routrou, second Earl of Perclie, 
who accompanied the Duke of Nor¬ 
mandy. He commanded a corps of 
troops at the siege of Antioch, accord¬ 
ing to ‘Chroniques Beiges,’ V, 101. 
He lost his life in 1144, while besieging 
the tower of Rouen with the Count of 
Anjou 

Perseus, p. 115, a hero of Grecian my¬ 
thology, son of Danae and Zeus. He 
is said to have founded Tarsus in 
Cilicia, and appears on the coins of 
that city, as well as on coins of 
Pontus and Cappadocia 

Peter the Hermit, p. 36, 37, 38, etc., 
born in Acheris, near Amiens, in the 
diocese of Laon. He returned from 
the Holy Land in 1102 with the Count 
of Montaigue. After his return he 
built the Abbey of Neufmoutie^at 
Huy, on the right bank of the Meuse, 
in honour of the Holy Sepulchre. 
Anna Comnena sayB that he was 
called Petrus Cucullatus, because he 
wore a cowl 

Peter (of Narbonne), p. 226, made Bishop 
of Albare 

Peter, p. 201. See Bartel/me we. 

Phyllyp, p. 279, Phelip, p. 216, Philipe, 
p. 42, etc., Phillipe I., King of France 

Possesse (Guy de), p. 46; Guy du 
Puysett, p. 97, Guyde Porsesse; Lat. 
Guido de Porsesso, a Frencli noble¬ 
man from Champagne. Porsesse is 
near Vitry 

Pretopt (Saint), p. 254, corruption for 
Saint Procope; Lat. Sanctus Procopius 

Pryncipat (Ryehard the), p. 80,112, etc., 
a Norman nobleman, Lord of Princi- 
pata, son of William Fier-a-bras, 
Robert Guiscard’s brother 

Pwyssat (Euerard du), p. 46,206, accord¬ 
ing to Bongars, a nobleman from the 
neighbourhood of Chartres. 

Pymis, p. 70, Pyrrhus, King of Epirus, 
318—272 b.c. 

Quyen. See Guyon 

QuyUehain, p. 285. See William 

Baoitl, p. 289, Rudolph of Suabia, killed 
in 1080 at the battle of Merseburg. 

Baymont, p. 80, Raymond, brother of 
Richard the Principat, son of William 
Fier-a-bras 


Betel (Count Huon de), p. 45, father of 
Baldwin, cousin of Godfrey of Bouillon 
Bichard, son of Erie Ranyol, p. 80, 
Richard, son of Earl Ramol, or 
Ranulf of Roussignol 
Bichard, Duke of York, p. 5, son of 
Edward IV., one of the unhappy 
princes killed in the tower by the 
orders of Richard, Duke of Gloucester 
Bobert (Bishop of Rames), p. 245, a 
native of Rouen in Normandy 
Boboam, p. 253, Rehoboam, son of 
Solomon 

Bodahan, p. 218, 220, Lord of Halappe 
Bomanus Diogenes, p. 33, 95, Emperor 
of Constantinople 1065—1071, a 
member of a powerful Cappadocian 
family, who had risen to distinction 
in the army. The queen-mother 
became enamoured of him as he was 
brought into her presence, condemned 
to death for treason, and released and 
married him. He was disastrously 
defeated by Alp Arslan on the banks 
of the Araxes, returned home dis¬ 
honoured, and retired to the isle of 
Crete, where he died in misery 
Bomayn, p. 27, Romanus Eliopolitanis, 
Emperor of Constantinople from 1028 
to 1034, called Eliopolitanis because 
he was born in Eliopolis. He usually 
has the surname of Argire 
Bosoye (Robert of), p. 130, Robert, or 
Roger de Rozoi 

Boussylon, p. 84, 206, etc. (Girnult de 
or Gyrard de), Gerard de Roussillon, 
of the distinguished Provencal family 
of that name 

Bousygnol (the erle of), p. 80, the Earl 
of Roussignol; Lat. Rosinolo 
Bybemont (Ancean de), p. 206,208, etc., 
Count de Valenciennes in Picardy, 
husband of Agnes de Roney, daughter 
of Eblis de Roney, great-grandson of 
the famous Bernier, who killed Raoul 
de Cambrai. Ancean (Anselme) is 
mentioned with praise by Albert d’Aix, 
Guibertde Nogent, and Raoul de Caen. 
He was killed at the siege of Archas. 
Michaud calls him the Count de 
Bouchain. He went to the Crusade 
with Bohemond 

Sabram (Guyllem de), p. 273 
Salomon, p. 253, Solomon, son of David 



340 


Index of Names. 


Sangum, p. 137, Einad Eddin Zenghi, 
Emir of Mussul and Haleppe, founder 
of the dynasty of the Atabeks of 
Syria, known generally as Zenghi. 
This name was corrupted by the 
Crusaders into Sanquin 

Sansadol, p. 226, Sensadole or Sensa- 
doine, son of Soliinan. Bongars (I, 
239) calls him Sensadonia filius 
Darsiani 

Sara , p. 124, daughter of ltaguel, who 
lived in Ecbatana. See Book of 
Tobit 

Scaruay (Peter de), p. 112, corruption 
for Peter of Stadenois 

Sedeehyas, p. 134, Sedecias, Grecian 
form for Zedekiah, son of Josiah, 
King of Judah 

Selduc, p. 30, Seljuk, grandfather of 
Togrul Bey, the first ruler of the 
Turks 

Selducecs, p. 30, the family or tribe of 
Selduc, Seljuks, a Perso-Turkish dyn¬ 
asty which produced eleven kings 
and lasted 138 years 

Semer, p. 194 ; Fr. Soemer, Lat. Sige- 
maro, p. 194; cousin of Henry d’ABdhe 

Seynt Pol (Huge, the Erie of), p. 65, 
etc., Hugh, second Earl of Saint Paul, 
Count of Champ d’Avene, died in 
1130 or 31 

Seynt Pol (Everard of), p. 65; Seynt 
Poul (Eniorran of), p. 230; Aniaran de 
St. Poul, p. 206; Engerran, or Engel- 
ran de St. Paul, son of Hugh. He 
died at the siege of Marrah, near 
Aleppo 

SoUns, p. 115, C. Julius Solinus, author 
of a geographical compendium about 
a.d. 238 

Solyman, p. 56, 57, 58, etc., Kilidge 
Arslem, also called David, or the 
Sword of the Spirit, and Solyman the 
younger. He was the son of Solyman. 
He was Sultan of Nice at the time of 
its conquest by the Crusaders. Williani 
of Tyre makes him a nephew of the 
Sultan of Persia, and mistakes him 
for his father 

Sophony, p. 21, Sophronius, a monk of 
Damascus, who became patriarch of 
Jerusalem in 634. He opposed the 
endeavours of Cyrus, patriarch of 
Alexandria, to secure general accept¬ 
ance of monothelite views. The 


Emperor Heraclius issued an edict in 
638 to put an end to the discussion. 
Sophronius was patriarch of Jerusalem 
in 638, when it was taken by the 
Caliph Omar 

Sowi, p. 23, the Sonna, or Mishna, the 
oral law of the Mahometans 
Sourdeval (Robert of), p. 80. An ancient 
house of Normandy, bearing the name 
of the fief of Sourdeval, is situated 
between Vire and Mortain. According 
to Kogier (‘La Noblesse Franoaise 
aux Croisades ’), Robert of Sourdeval 
was at the siege of Amalfi with 
Bohemond, and went with him to the 
Holy Land 

State, p. 2, Publius Papinius Statius, a 
Roman poet who lived a.d. 45—96 
Symeon, p. 37, etc., Simeon, patriarch 
gf Jerusalem 

Tancre, p. 80,82, etc., Tancred of Sicily, 
son of the good Marquis Odon or 
William, and cousin of Bohemond on 
his mother Emma’s side. He is im¬ 
mortalized by Tasso 
Tantyn, p. 197; Tacius, p. 105, called 
in French Mstatin VEsnasd, Tatinus 
the Noseless, prefect of the palace of 
the Emperor of Constantinople. In 
the ‘ Chanson of Antioch ’ he is the 
nephew of the Emperor. Anna Com¬ 
nena calls him Tatikios, and says that 
he was of Saracen origin 
Tareste, p. 94, Tharasius, patriarch of 
Constantinople in 787 
Thabyte, p. 249, Tabitha, the young 
woman healed by Peter in Acts ix. 
Theophilus, p. 134. According to a 
story taken from the so-called ‘ Recog¬ 
nitions of St. Clement,’ there was a 
certain nobleman of Antioch of the 
name of Theophilus converted by the 
preaching of Peter, who dedicated 
his own house as a church, in which 
the Apostle fixed his episcopal seat. 
,, William has confounded him with 
the Theophilus of the book of 
Luke 

Thobye, p. 24, the Tobias of the Apoc¬ 
rypha, son of Tobit and Anna 
Tholouse (Raymond de St. Gilles, erle of 
Toulouse), p. 84, 96, etc., leader of the 
Provenqal Crusaders with Adhemar de 
Monteil 



341 


Index of Names. 


Thybauld the old, p. 45, Thibaut, second 
son of Stephen, Count of Chartres and 
Blois ; he died Jan. 1152 

Tomay (Engelbert and Lethold of), p. 
271, two brothers who mounted after 
Godfrey of Bouillon at the taking of 
Jerusalem 

Toul (Bernard, erle of), p. 65, Bernard, 
a corruption for Reynard ; Reynart, 
erle of, p. 112; Reignald of Toul, p. 
206; Pieter, p. 65, brother of Reynard 
of Toul 

Tours (Geffrey de), p. 227,[Guelphe or 
Gouffier de las Tours 

Treue (Gylbert de), p. 260 

Urban, p. 40, 41, etc., Pope Urban the 
II., Eudes or Odo, pope from 1088 to 
1099. He died fourteen days after 
the fall of Jerusalem, but before the 
news had reached Italy 

Faspasian, p. 260, Vespasian the tenth 


of the twelve Caesars, Roman emperor 
from 70 to 79 

Veer (Gace de), p. 261, corruption for 
Gaston de Beart; Lat. Gastonem, de 
Beart 

Vendud (Clarembauld de), p. 72, 172 

Ver (Gaultier de), p. 244 

Viator , p. 41, corruption for Victor. 
This Victor was the third pope of the 
name. He was chosen in 1085, after 
Gregory’s death. He did not consent 
to be consecrated until two years 
after, in May 1087. He died Sept. 
16th, 1087 

William , p. 285, fictitious brother of 
Godfrey of Bouillon 

Wylliam Rous, p. 297, William Rufus, 
King of England 1057—1087—1100 

Yde, p. 285, Ida, mother of Godfrey of 
Bouillon, sister of Godfrey le Bossu, 
Duke of Lower Lorraine 




343 


INDEX OF PLACES. 


Abydon, p. 73, Abydos, town on the 
Hellespont at the narrows of the Dar¬ 
danelles 

Acheldemach, p. 251, the Aceldama of 
the Bible 

Aciane, p. 299, corruption for Ariane 
Acres, p. 244, St. John.d’Acre, modern 
Ptolemais, or Acca, a harbour of Syria 
at the foot of Mt. Carmel 
Ariane, p. 117, 218, to-day Adana, town 
of Cilicia in Asia Minor 
Adre, or Adria, p. 69, town in Northern 
Italy, on the river Po 
Adrycme, p. 69, 79, 85, the Adriatic Sea 
Albane, p. 225. See A Ibare 
Albwre, p. 226, 228, called Lanbare in 
the Chanson of Antioch, the El Barie 
of the Arabian chroniclers, to he found 
in Burckhardt’s map of Syria under 
the name of El Bara; William of 
Tyre says that Albara formed part of 
the province of Apamia, and was a 
two days’ journey from Antioch. The 
modern El Bara is between Apamia 
and Antioch, and about thirty-seven 
miles from the latter 
Alexandrye the Lasse, p. 122; Allexan- 
drye the Lytyl, p. 195; Alexandria 
the Less, or Alexandrette, on the coast 
of Palestine north of Antioch 
AUemaygne, p. 65. 1 

Allemayne, p. 40, etc., > Germany 
Almayne, p. 288, ) 

Alyscmndre, p. 79 ; Alexandrye, p. 23 ; 

the city of Alexandria 
Amene, p. 134, corruption for Aniene; 
Lat. Aniensis 

A myens, p. 36, the city of Amiens in 
France 

A namystre, see Afamsfyye, p. 118, 


MamisPra, the modern Missis, formerly 
called Mopsuetis 

Anauazie, p. 115, city of Cilicia, directly 
north of Antioch, the modem Ani- 
zarha, formerly the metropolitan city; 
Migne, Ency. Ec., is in doubt about it, 
and cites "different authorities on the 
subject 

Ancone, p. 69, Sea of Ancona, part of the 
Gulf of Venice 

Andrenoble, p. 76, or Adrianople, north¬ 
west of Constantinople; on the Mar- 
itza, the capital of Roumania 
Awthone, p. 250, Antonia, one of the 
towers of Jerusalem, on the north side 
of the Temple 

Antibare, p. 85, Antivari, modern name 
Antibaris, city of Dalmatia 
Antyoche, p. 23, 34, etc., Antioch 
Antyoehe the Lasse, p. 112, chief city of 
Pisidia, also called Antiochetta 
Aperon, p. 68, paleographic error for 
Ciperon 

Aqwylee, p. 85, Aquileia, ancient capital 
of the Carni, to-day Aglar or Aqui- 
leya, just at the head of the Adriatic 
Sea, north-west of Trieste 
Arabye, p. 18, 19, etc., Arabia 
Archade, p. 70, Arcadia 
Archys, p. 233, 236, ancient Archis, to¬ 
day Area, between Tripoli and the 
sea 

Aricme, p. 299, town of Ariano in the 
Apennines 

Arsur, p. 306, to-day Arsuf, a town north 
of Joppa, in the pashalic of Damascus, 
said to have been built originally by 
Solomon; it still "possesses a fortress 
and a mosque 

Artaysse, p. 130, Artayse, Artaysis, p. 



344 


Index of Places. 


131, 132, etc., to-day Ertesi, about 
seventeen miles north-east of Aleppo 
Asinepol, p. 70, Asinople 
Asye, p. 55, 73, etc., Asia 
Aufi-ique, p. 23, Africa 
Annaure, p. 218, corruption for Ana- 
varzie 

Auuergne, p. 43, Auvergne in France 


Bagvlars (Mt .), p. 70, the Balkan moun¬ 
tains 

Bandras, p. 134,137, etc., corruption for 
Baudas, the city of Bagdad 
Bar, p. 84, Bari in Apulia, Italy 
Bardare, p. 80, the ancient Achedorus, 
flows into the Gulf of Salonica, in 
Macedonia 

Baruth, p. 243, modern Beirut, Palestine 
Baupere, p. 62 ) Bavaria 

Bauyere , p. 49, 140, ) 

Bellegra/ue, p. 69, etc., mod. Belgrade, 
capital of Servia, on the right bank of 
the Danube, at the confluence of the 
Save 

BethUem, p. 28 1 Bethlehem 

Bethlehem, p. 245, 246, J 
Blaez, p. 69, 70, the Wallachians 
Blaquerne , p. 74, a palace in Constanti¬ 
nople 

Boloyne, p. 235, etc., | Boulogne in 
Bullogne, p. 1, _ ) France 


Bougres, p. 70, Bulgarians 


} Bulgaria 


' Variations of 
• spelling for 
i Bithynia 


Bougrie, p. 49, 

Bougrye, p. 50, 69, etc., ( ‘ 

Bethmc, p. 79, 

Bethyne, p. 34, ( 

Bylhyne, p. 55, 91, etc., | 

Byihynie, p. 198, 

Braas of St. George, p. 34, 35, etc., the 
Dardanelles, called the Braas of St. 
George on account of a monastery of 
St. George built outside of the walls of 
the city. It generally means only the 
narrow straits which separate Asia 
from Europe, but sometimes taken for 
the whole Propontis enclosed between 
the two straits: St. George was a 
Cappadocian warrior 


Calabre, p. 92, Calabria 
Calcedonie, p. 79 ; Ccdcedoine, p. 83, 
Chalcedon, city in Bithynia, near Con¬ 
stantinople : seat of the Council of 451 
Calvarye, Calvary 

Cappadoce, p. 34, Cappadocia, eastern¬ 


most province of Asia Minor, very 
early Christianized, and belonged to 
the diocese of Pontus, erected by Con¬ 
stantine the Great 
Ca/rmdy, p. 244, Mt. Carmel 
Cartage, p. 23, Carthage 
Castore, p. 80, Castoria, city in Mace¬ 
donia 

Celessurye, p. 34, province of which Da¬ 
mascus is the chief city 
Cesaire, p. 300, ) Caesarea, to-day 

Cezaire, p. 231, 244, j called Seidjar 
Chamele, p. 231, also called Ernessa 
Oinintot, corruption for Civitot, p. 55, 
town of Bithynia, on the Gulf of 
Mandania, called, to-day, Ghio or 
Gemlik 

Oiperon, p. 68, now called Schoprony, 
in Hungarian, and Oedenburg in Ger¬ 
man, a town or small fortified place 
on the frontiers of Hungary 
Cleremont, p. 42, Cleremont in Au¬ 
vergne, France; the third Council of 
Pope Urban was held here, in Nov. 
1095, attended by four archbishops 
and 225 bishops, besides an immense 
number of lower clergy and laity 
Clony, p. 42, Abbey of Cluny in Bur¬ 
gundy, France, composed of Bene¬ 
dictine Monks, founded in 909 
Coba/r, p. 30,31, to-day the river Khabur, 
on the frontier of Persia 
Coleyne, p. 62, Cologne 
Comam, p. 69, 

Ccnmthot, p. 105, corruption for Civitot 
Cryne, p. 198. See Lychorvie 
Cylyce, p. 95; Sylyce, p. 123; Cilicia, 
one of the most important provinces 
of Asia Minor, corresponding partly 
to the modern Adana 

Dalmace, p. 85, Dalmatia, between Hun¬ 
gary and the Adriatic Sea, on the 
eastern side of the sea 
Damaske, p. 19, Damascus 
Danemarches, p. 70, Danemarche the 
Mayene is Dacia Mediterranea, or 
Lower Moesia; the Latin gives Dacia, 
which was evidently mistaken for 
Dania, and translated accordingly by 
the French translator, whom Caxton 
follows 

Dorylee, Dorylaeum, to-day called Eski 
Scheke, valley south-east of Nice, in 
ancient Phrygia 



Index of Places. 


345 


Duchdande, p. 226, etc., Germany 
Dunoc, p. 62, 68, etc., the Danube 
Duras, p. 70, 86, etc.; ancient Dyrrha- 
ehiuin, to-day called Durazzo, a Turkish 
port on the Adriatic 

Ebron, p. 250, Hebron 
Eliopee , p. 133 ; this word is a corruption 
of Elyople, the ancient Heliopolis or 
Baalbec. See Mallec or Malbec 
Elye, p. 250, JElia., name given to Jeru¬ 
salem by Aelius Adrianus 
Emails, p. 248; there were two villages 
of this name, one, twenty-two Roman 
miles from Jerusalem, also called Ni- 
copolis; and the Emmaus of the Bible, 
seven and a half miles from Jeru¬ 
salem ; according to McCIintoch and 
Strong, Diet., the Crusaders called 
Emmaus, Meopolis, but confused it 
with a small fortress farther south on 
the Jerusalem road, now called Latron 
Ennon , p. 51, 254, Ennon 
Epyre , p. 86, Epirus 
Eradee, p. 115, etc., to-day called 
Heraclia; called also Eregli, city of 
Lycaonia, between Iconium and 
Tarsus 

Ermenye, p. 292, 308, etc., Armenia; 

Caxton also spells it Hermonye 
Etmon, p. 254, Hermon 
Escalonne, p. 279; Escalone, p. 292, 293, 
etc.; city of Ascalon, on the coast 
south-west of Jerusalem 
Espyfe, p. 70, Epirus 
Eufrates, p. 125, 165, etc., Euphrates 

Famosette, p. 127, etc. 

Fetvyce, p. 233, 236, etc., Phoenicia 
fflaundres, p. 120, 243, etc. Flanders 
fframnee, p. 3, 42, etc., France 
ffryselande, p. 120, Friesland 
Franeone, p. 49, 62, Franconia, made a 
duchy in the 10th century ; its capital 
city Nurenberg. It belongs to Ba¬ 
varia to-day 

Fynemyne, p. 148, 195, Von Sybel calls 
it Philomelium,—ft place near Antioch 
in Asia Minor: also called by Spruner 
Finimium. Its modern name is Ak- 
schehr 

Gabao, p. 249, Gibeon 
Galace, p. 34, Galatia 


Galgala, p. 249, small town south-east 
of Jericho, on the Dead Sea 
Galylee, p. 298, Galilee 
Gertie, p. 298, a corruption of Genesar, 
the lake of Gennesaret 
Gene, p. 243, 260, etc., Genoa 
Genewes, p. 260, etc., Genoese 
Grece, p. 64, Greece 
Gybdet, p. 235, etc., the ancient Gabala, 
to-day known as Jebeil, a town on 
the coast of Syria between Beirut and 
Tripoli 

Halappe, p. 218, 219, etc., Aleppo 
Hamath, p. 231, the ancient Epiphania, 
to-day called Hamal 
Hasart, p. 218, etc., town a little north 
of Aleppo, and called by Arabian his¬ 
torians Azaz, which name it still 
bears 

Hatap, p. 221, the modern Aintab 
Hdle, p. 164, the river Orontes, called 
El Fer; Caxton by a mistake read it 
L’Enfer, and translated it by Hdle 
Hermonye, p. 165. See Ermenye 
Holcmde, p. 120,- Holland 
Hongrye, p. 47, 49, etc., Hungary 


Iadre, p. 19, a city of Palestine 
Iadre, p. 85, etc., Zara, a city of Dalmatia 
with a port on the Adriatic 
Iaphe, p. 248, 301, etc., Joffa or Joppa, 
only sea-port of Judaea on the Medi¬ 
terranean 

Iheruhesees, p. 250, the Jebusees 
Iherusalem, p. 20, etc., Jerusalem 
Iherycho, p. 249, Jericho 

IwapLt,' j Jehoshaphat 
Ister, p. 85, Istria 
Ivdee, p. 250, I Judaoa 
lurye, p. 253, ) 


Lamane, p. 280. See Maturane 
Lasse Asye, Asia Minor 
Lide, p. 244, Lydda 

Lintans, p. 62; Lyntans, p. 65; the 
river Leytha, a tributary of the Danube 
Lombardye, p. 42, 69, etc. 

Lorayne, p. 49, Lorraine 
Lybane, p. 233, 242, Mt. Lebanon 
Lycaone, p. 34, Lycaonia 
Lyce, p. 34, Lycia 

Lyche of Surrye, p. 235; Lystes of 
Surge, p. 34; The Lyche, p. 261; Lao- 



346 


Index of Places. 


dicea; in one of the French manu¬ 
scripts of William of Tyre, no. 8404, it 
is called Le Chef de Surie. This city 
still exists under the name of Lakikieh, 
according to Michaud 
Lychonie, p. 113; Licoine, p. 114; an¬ 
other form is the Gryne, all mistransla¬ 
tions of the French L’lcoine, the city 
of Iconium, to-day called Konieli in 
Lycaonia 


of the Leytha and the Danube, in 
Lower Hungary 

Mdetene, p. 308, 309, called also Ma- 
latia, between the Euphrates and Me¬ 
sopotamia 
Mese, p. 70, Moesia 
Mesopotayne , p. 308, Mesopotamia 
Mona, p. 252, corruption for Moriah 
Moria, p. 250, Mt. Moriah in Jeru¬ 
salem 


Macedomone, p. 92 ,) 

Macedonie, p. 87, > Macedonia 

Machedone, p. 70, ) 

Maehabews, p. 248, the Maccabees 
Magonce, p. 62, Mainz or Mayence, on 
the Rhine 

Malfe, p. 36, modern Amalfi, a city of 
Apnlia in Italy 

Mallec, p. 133, Malbec or Baalbec, the 
same city as Eliopee, or Heliopolis 
MalleriUe, p. 48, 50, etc., said to be the 
modern Semlin ; as the Crusaders did 
not know what to call it, it has been 
conjectured that they duhbed it Malle- 
ville on account of the sufferings 
which they endured 
Mamstre, p. 218. See Anamysbre 
Ma/nbec, p. 301, same as Mallec 
Mcurase, p. 115, ) Marash, formerly 

Maraze, p. 122, etc., j called Germaniea 
Ma/rce, p. 47, a corruption of the word 
Ma/roe, a river of Hungary 
Marche, p. 236, to-day called Merkale, 
the first city of Phoenicia, situated on 
the sea-side between the castle of 
Margat and Tortuose 
Marese, p. 130, mod. Marasch, in Cilicia, 
not far from Aleppo 

Margat, p. 236, 299, to-day Markab on 
the coast between Giblet and Tortuose 
Marran, p. 226 ; Mazran, p. 226; Mar- 
ran, p. 229; modern name Maarrah en 
Naaman 

Mase, p. 194, the river Meuse 
Mathale, p. 194, town of Mechelen, near 
Maestricht in Holland; in French 
called Machale or Machete 
Matwrane, p. 280, town of Martorano in 
Calabria, Italy 

Mans, p. 243, the ancient Adonis; to¬ 
day called Nahr Ibrahim : Tudebodus 
calls it Braym 

Mayene, p. 70. See Danemarches 
Meeszebors, p. 62, town at the junction I 


Naples, p. 249; Nappies, p. 293, etc. ; 
Napoli, or Nauplia, or Nabnlvs, mod. 
Nabloos, supposed to be the same as 
Shechem or Sichem : it is about thirty 
miles from Jerusalem. A Council was 
called here in 1120, by King Baldwin 
of Jerusalem; the object, to reform 
the Church 

Nerbonne, p. 226, Nnrbonne in France 

Nycene, p. 46, etc., Nice, or Nicaea, the 
ancient capital of Bithynia, on the 
eastern shore of lake Ascanius: modern 
name, Isnik 

Nychomede, p. 93; Nycomede, p. 91; 
Nicomedia, ancient capital of Bi¬ 
thynia, situated on the north-eastern 
angle of the Gulf of Astacus, in the 
Propontis, now called Bay of Ismid. 
This city was built a.d. 264 by Nico- 
medes I.; Diocletian and Constantine 
the Great lived there. It is now the 
small town of Ismid 

Nyz, p. 40; Nyze, p. 50, mod. Nissa, a 
fortified city of Servia, on the Nissava, 
south-east of Belgrade 

Olyvet (Mt.), p. 262, Mt. Olivet 

Oronte (Mt.), p. 135, mountain in 
Antioch 

Oronte, river, p. 135, see next 

Orontes, p. 133, ancient name of the river 
Fer, to-day called El Aasay, “the 
rebellious ” 

Osterych, p. 49, Austria 


Palestyne, p. 263, etc., Palestine 
Pamphyle, p. 194, Pamphylia 
Pelaqoine, p. 80, ) t> • • „ 

Pdagorme,p. 86, \ Prov,noe ln Greece 
Pernasus, p. 135, Mt. Parnassus 
Perse, p. 19, etc., Persia 
Phylystees, p. 253, etc., Philistines 
Piside, p. Ill, Pisside, p. 112, Pisidia 
Playsance, p. 42, Lat. Placentia, city of 



347 


Index of Places. 


Piacenza in Italy. The first Council 
of Urban in 1095 was held here 
Porphire, p. 298 

Puylle, p. 70, etc., Apulia, province of 
Italy 

Pay Nostre Dame, p. 42, city of Puy 
Notre Dame in Auvergne, France 

Rages, p. 2J8, etc., the city of Kdessa, 
called Rotia and Arta by the Arabians, 
and Roh or Rhodes by the French of 
the Middle Ages. Poeocke says it is 
supposed to be the Ur of the Chaldees. 
Raguse, p. 85, the ancient Rhaugia, Ra- 
gusiutn, or Ragusa, a fortified city of 
Dalmatia on the Adriatic 
Romes, p. 245, etc., ancient Arimathea, 
to-day called Ramleh, or Ramla, six¬ 
teen miles north of Jerusalem, famous 
for the tomb of Samuel 
Rcmendel, p. 221; there are no traces of 
this castle to-day; M. P. Paris sug¬ 
gests that it may be the modern Ra- 
natna, between Turbesel and Rages 
Rauenne, p. 40, Ravenna 
Redost, p. 87, to-day called Rodasto, 
between Gallipolis and Constantinople 
Rhodes, p, 4, 194, 243, etc., the island of 
Rhodes 

Rome, p. 2, etc., Rome 
Rome., p. 147, Rouinania 
Rouge, p. 229, Lat. Rugiam, to-day called 
ltiha 


Salem, p. 250, ancient name of Jerusalem 
Salenyke, p. 87, Salonica 
Saleme, Salerno on the Gulf of Salerno, 
south-east of Naples, Italy 
Sama/rye, p. 249, etc., Samaria 
Samoloc, p. 225, corruption for Samosac, 
or Samosae; to-day, according to P. 
Paris, Samizat on the Euphrates 
Sarepte, p. 244, the Sarepta of the Bible 
Sayette, p. 243, 244; Lat. Sidonem, 
ancient Sidon 
Saxone, p. 288, 289, ) g 
Sessougne, p. 140, $ Baxony 

Sceirs, p. 249, a corruption of Sicliar 
Scilice, p. 116. See Cylyce 
Sebaste, p. 249, mod. Sebustieh, the re¬ 
puted burial-place of St. John the 
Baptist, a village of Palestine, 6 miles 
north-west of Nabloos 
Sexton, p. 73, the city of Sestos, on the 
European side of the Hellespont 


^ Town near Edessa, 
to-day called Sarug 




Serorge, p. 129, 

Sora/rge, p. 223, 

Sororge, p. 224, 

Sklavonye, p. 260, etc., Sclavonia 
Sodome, p. 249, Sodom 
Spalete, p. 85, to-day, Spalatro, a fortified 
city of Dalmatia 
Spayne, p. 167, Spain 
Stralyce, p. 48, 69 ; this town has not yet 
been definitely recognized, although 
Albert d’Aix calls it Sternitz, which is 
a city of Sordica, to-day called Sofia 
Sur, p. 244, Tyre 
Surrye, p. 19, ) g ■ 

Surge, p. 33, etc., \ byrla 
Syloe, p. 254, Siloam 
Sympole, p. 76, 

Syon, p. 250, etc., Sion 


Tabarye, p. 298, 301, Tabarieh on the 
Lake of Gennesarct; Lat. Tiberia- 
densem 

Tabor ( Mt.), p. 298, Mt. Tabor 
'farce, p. 96, ) 

Parse, p. 115, > Tarsus in Cilicia 

Thaarses, p. 92, ) 

Tarente, Tarentum 

Tayllenborch, p. 65, Tollenburcb, town 
near the junction of the Maretsch and 
the Danube 

Tecua, p. 249,258, city where Amos the 
prophet was born, about six Roman 
miles from Jerusalem—name is still 
Tekua 

Terme, p. 148, town in Pisidia 
Theopoble, p. 134, former name of 
Antioch 

Thessayle, p. 70, 135, Thessaly 
Tinchebray, p. 297, village in Normandy, 
near Domfront 

Torbesel, p. 217, etc., the Tel-Bacher of 
the Arabian historians, to-day a little 
village called Tel Bacher or Tel Be- 
chir, on the right bank of the Sadjur 
Tortuose, p. 234, 236, etc., formerly 
called Antaradus, a large and beau¬ 
tiful city on the sea-side, between 
Areas and Antioch 

Trace, p. 70; Thaarses, p. 92, Thrace 
Trypple, p. 233, etc., Tripoli 

Valerne, p. 299, etc., Vaienia, formerly 
called Balanea, between Giblet and 
Margat 

Venyse, p. 243, etc., Venice 



348 


Index of Places. 

Ybelyn, p. 242, etc., the ancient Biblirn, Ynde, p. 22, India 
also called Gibelet, on the coast below Yrlona, p. 4, Ireland 
Tripoli 

Ydronte, p. 4, called Hydruntum by Zebus, p. 250, mistranslation or corrtip- 
Livy and Pliny, an ancient Roman tion for Jehus 
colony: to-day Otranto, in Italy 



®ai[lij (Bitglislr ®t*l 


OFFICERS AND COMMITTEE: 


Honorary Director: 

SIR I. GOLLANCZ, F.B.A., Litt.D., KING’S COLLEGE, LONDON, W.C. 2. 

Assistant Director and Secretary: 

Miss MABEL DAY, D.Lit., 15, ELGIN COURT, ELGIN AVENUE, 

LONDON, W. 9. 


pv ■ . Prof. Q. L. Kittredqb, Harvard Coll., Cambr., Muss. 

' Prof. J. W. Bright, Johns Hopkins Univ., Baltimore. 
Hon. Sec.: Prof. Carleton Brown, Bryn Mawr Coll., Penn., U.S.A. 


American 
Committee 

Professor R. W. CHAMBERS, D.Lit. 
Mr. S. J. CRAWFORD, M.A., B.Litt. 
Mr. W. A. DALZIEL. 

Sir SIDNEY LEE, F.B.A., Litt.D. 


Mr. HENRY L1TTLEHALES. 

Miss A. C. PAUES, Ph.D. 

Professor A. W. POLLARD, C.B., 
F.B.A. 

Mr. ROBERT STEELE. 


Sir G. F. WARNER, F.B.A., D.Lit. 


Bankers: 

THE NATIONAL PROVINCIAL BANK LIMITED, 
2, PRINCES STREET, LONDON, E C 2. 


The Subscription to the Society, which constitutes membership, is 
£2 2s. a year for the annual publications, from 1921 onwards, due in 
advance on the 1st of January, and should be paid by Cheque, Postal 
Order, or Money Order, crost ‘National Provincial Bank Limited,’ to 
the Secretary, Dr. Mabel Day, 15, Elgin Court, Elgin Avenue, 
London, W. 9. The Society’s Texts can also be purchased separately 
through a bookseller at the prices put after them in the Lists. 



2 


Any Member could save time and trouble by sending the Secretary 
an order on the Member’s Banker to pay the subscription each January, 
until countermanded. A printed form for this purpose would be sent on 
application to the Secretary. 

The Early English Text Society was started by the late 
Dr. Furnivall in 1864 for the purpose of bringing the mass of Early 
English Literature within the reach of the ordinary student, and of 
wiping away the reproach under which England had long rested, of 
having felt little interest in the monuments of her early language 
and life. 

On the starting of the Society, so many Texts of importance were at 
once taken in hand by its Editors, that it became necessary in 1867 to 
open, besides the Original Series with which the Society began, an Extra 
Series which should be mainly devoted to fresh editions of all that is 
most valuable in texts already printed and Caxton’s and other black-letter 
books, though first editions of MSS. will not be excluded when the 
convenience of issuing them demands their inclusion in the Extra 
Series. From 1921 there will be but one series of publications, merging 
the Original and Extra Series. 

During the sixty years of the Society’s existence, it has produced, 
with whatever shortcomings, and at a cost of over £35,000, an amount of 
good solid work for which all students of our Language, and some of 
our Literature, must be grateful, and which has rendered possible the 
beginnings (at least) of proper Histories and Dictionaries of that 
Language and Literature, and has illustrated the thoughts, the life, the 
manners and customs of our forefathers and foremothers. 

The Society’s experience has shown the very small number of 
those inheritors of'the speech of Cynewulf, Chaucer, and Shakspere, 
who care two guineas a year for the records of that speech. The Society 
has never had money enough to produce the Texts that could easily have 
been got ready for it; and Editors are now anxious to send to press the 
work they have prepared. The necessity has therefore arisen for trying 
to increase the number of the Society’s members, and to induce its well- 
wishers to help it by gifts of money, either in one sum or by instalments. 
The Committee trust that all Members will bring before their friends 
and acquaintances the Society’s claims for liberal support. Until all 
Early English MSS. are printed, no proper history of our language or 
social life is possible. 



3 


ORIGINAL SERIES. (One guinea each gear ttp to 1920.) 


1. Early English Alliterative Poems, ab. 1300 a.d., ed. Rev. Dr. R. Morris. 16*. 

2. Arthur, ab. 1440. ed. F. J. Furnivall, M.A. 4*. 

3. Lauder on the Dewtie of Kyngis, Ac., 1556, ed. F. Hall, D.C.L. 4*. 

4. Sir Gawayne and the Green Knight, ab. 1360, ed. Rev. Dr. R. Morris. 3*. 6tf. 

5. Hume's Orthographic and Oongruitie of the Britan Tongue, ab. 1617, ed. H. B. Wheatley. 4*. 

6. Lancelot of the Laik, ab. 1500, ed. Rev. W. W. Skeat. 8*. 

7. Genesis ft Exodus, ab. 1250, ed. Rev. Dr. R. Morris. 8*. 

8. Morte Arthurs, ab. 1440, ed. E. Brock. 7*. * 

9. Thynneon Speght’sed. of Chaucer, a.d. 1599, ed. Dr. G. Kingsley and Dr. F. J. Furnivall. 10*. 

10. Kerlin, ab. 1440, Part I., ed. H. B. Wheatley. 2*. 6d. 

11. Lyndesay’s Monarohe, ftc., 1552, Part I., ed. J. Small, M.A. 8*. 

12. Wright’s Chaste Wife, ab. 1462, ed. F. J. Furnivall, M.A. 1*. 

13. Seinte Marherete, 1200-1330, ed. Rev. O. Cockayne. 

14. Kyng Horn, Floris and Blancheflour, &o., ed. Rev. J. R. Lumby, D.D., re-ed. Dr. G. H. McKnight. 5*. 

15. Political, Religious, and Love Poems, ed. F. J. Furnivall. 7*. 6 d. 

16. The Book of Quinte Essenoe, ab. 1460-70, ed. F. J. Furnivall. 1*. 

17. Parallel Extraots from 45 MSS. of Piers the Plowman, ed. Rev. W. W. 8keat. 1*. 

18. Hali Meidenhad, ab. 1200, ed. Rev O. Cockayne, re-edited by Dr. F. J. Furnivall. (v. under 1020.) 

19. Lyndesay’s Monarche, &o., Part II., ed. J. Small, M.A. 3*. 6d. 

20. Richard Rolle de Hampole, English Prose Treatises of, ed. Rev. G. G. Perry, (v. under 1920.) 

21. Merlin, Part II., ed. H. B. Wheatley. 4*. 

22. Partenay or Lusignen, ed. Rev. W. W. Skeat. 6*. 

28. Dan Michel’s Ayenbite of Inwyt, 1340, ed. Rev. Dr. R. Morris. 10*. 6d. 

24. Hymns to the Virgin and Christ; the Parliament of Devils, ftc., ab. 1480, ed. F. J. Furnivall. 8s. 

25. The Staoions of Rome, the Pilgrims’ Sea-voyage, with Clone Maydenhod, ed. F. J. Furnivall. 1*. 

26. Religious Pieoes in Prose and Verse, from R. Thornton's MS., ed. Rev. G. G. Perry. 5*. [1913.] 

27. Levins’s Manipulus Vooabulorum, aryming Dictionary, 1570, ed. H. B. Wheatley. 12*. 

28. William’s Vision of Piers the Plowman, 1362 a.d. ; Text A, Part I., ed. Rev. W. W. Skeat. 6*. 

29. Old English Homilies (ab. 1220-80 a.d.). Series I, Part I. Edited by Rev. Dr. R. Morris. 7*. 

30. Pierce the Ploughmans Credo, ed. Rev. W. W. Skeat. 2*. 

31. Myro’s Duties of a Parish Priest, in Verse, ab. 1420 a.d., ed. E. Peacock. 4*. 

32. Early English Meals and Manners: the Boke of Norture of John Russell, the Bokes of Keruynge, 

Gurtasye, and Demeanor, the Babees Book, Urbanitatis, fte., ed. F. J. Furnivall. 12*. 

33. The Knight de la Tour Landry, ab. 1440 a.d. A Book for Daughters, ed. T. Wright, M.A. 

34. Old English Homilies (before 1300 a.d.). Series I, Part II., ed. R. Morris, LL.D. 8*. 

85. Lyndesay’s Works, Part III. : The Historic and Testament of Squyer Meldrum, ed. F. Hall. 2*. 

36. Merlin, Part III. Ed. H. B. Wheatley. On Arthurian Localities, by J. S. Stuart Glennie. 12*. 

87. Sir David Lyndesay’s Works, Part IV., Ane Satyre of the Three Estaits. Ed. F. Hall, D.C.L. 4*. 

38. William's Vision of Piers the Plowman, Part II. Text B. Ed. Rev. W. W. Skeat, M.A. 10*. 6d. 

39. Alliterative Romance of the Destruction of Troy. Ed. D. Donaldson ft G. A. Panton. Pt. I. 10*. 6d. 

40. English Gilds, their Statutes and Customs, 1389 a.d. Edit. Toulmin Smith and Lucy T. Smith, 

with an Essay on Gilds and Trades-Unions, by Dr. L. Brentano (reprinted 1924). SO*. 

41. William Lauder’s Minor Poems. Ed. F. J. Furnivall. 3*. 

42. Bernardus De Cura Rei Famuliaris, Early Scottish Prophecies, Ac. Ed. J. R. Lumby, M.A. 2*. 

43. Ratis Raving, and other Moral and Religious Pieces. Ed. J. R Lumby, M.A. 8*. 

44. The Alliterative Romance of Joseph of Arimathie, or The Holy Grail: from the Vernon MS.; 

with W. de Worde’s and Pynson’s Lives of Joseph : ed. Rev. W. W. Skeat, M.A. 5*. 

45. King Alfred's West-Saxon Version of Gregory’s Pastoral Care, edited from 2 MSS., with an 

English translation, by Henry Sweet, Esq., B.A., Balliol College, Oxford. Part I. 10*. 

46. Legends of the Holy Rood, Symbols of the Passion and Cross Poems, ed. Rev. Dr. R. Morris. 10*. 

47. Sir David Lyndesay’s Works, Part V., ed. Dr. J. A. H. Murray. 3*. 

48. The Times* Whistle, and other Poems, by R. C., 1616 ; ed. by J. M. Cowper, Esq. 6*. 

49. An Old English Miscellany, containing a Bestiary, Kentish Sermons, Proverbs of Alfred, and 

Religious Poems of the 18th cent., ed. from the MSS. by the Rev. R. Morris, LL.D. 10*. 

50. King Alfred's West-Saxon Version of Gregory's Pastoral Care, ed. H. Sweet, M. A. Part II. 10*. 

51. The Life of St Juliana, 2 versions, a.d. 1230, with translations ; ed. T. O. Cockayne ft E. Brock. 2*. 

52. P&lladiua on Husbondrie, englisht (ab. 1420 a.d.), ed. Rev. Barton Lodge, M.A. Part I. 10*. 

58. Old-English Homilies, Series II., and three Hymns to the Virgin and God, 13th-century, with 
the music to two of them, in old and modern notation ; ed. Rev. R. Morris, LL.D. 8*. 

54. The Vision of Piers Plowman, Text C : Richard the Redeles (by William, the author of the Vision ) 

and The Crowned King; Part III., ed. Rev. W. W. Skeat, M.A. 18*. 

55. Generydes, a Romance, ab. 1440 a.d. ed. W. Aldis Wright, M.A. Part I. 3*. 


1869 


1872 


1873 


it 

»» 



4 The Original Series of the “ Early English Text Society.” 

5«. The Oeet Hyiteriele of the Seetruetion of Troy, in alliterative veree ; ed. by D. Donaldson, Eeq., 
and the late Rev. G. A. Panton. Part II. 10*. 0d. 

57. The Early English Version of the 4 ‘ Ouraor Mundi " ; in four Texts, edited by the Rev. R. Morris, 

M.A., LL.D. Part I, with 2 photolithographic facsimiles. 10*. 6d. 

58. The Bliokling Homilies, 971 A.D., ed. Rev. R. Morris, LL.D. Part I. 8*. 

59. The “ Cursor Mundi M in four Texts, ed. Rev. Dr. R. Morris Part II. 15*. 

60. Xeditacyuns on the 8oper of our Lords (by Robert of Brunne), edited by J. M. Cowper. 2*. Od. 

01. The Romance and Fropheoies of Thomas of Erceldoune, from 5 M8S.; ed. Dr. J. A. H. Murray. 10*. Od. 

02. The “Cursor Mundi,” in four Texts, ed. Rev. Dr. R. Morris. Part III. 15*. 

63. The Bliokling Homilies, 971 a.d., ed. Rev. Dr. R. Morris. Part II. 7*. 

64. Francis Thynne’s Exnbleames and Epigrams, a.d. 1600, ed. F. J. Furnivall. 7*. 

65. Be Domes Dnge (Bede's Dt DU JudUii ) f Ac., ed. J. R. Lumby, B.D. 2*. 

06. The “ Cursor Mundi,” in four Texts, ed. Rev. Dr. R. Morris. Part IV., with 2 autotypes. 10*. 

07. Notes on Piers Plowman, by the Rev. W. W. Skeat, M.A. Part I. 21*. 

08. The “Ov*or Mundi,” in 4 Texts, ed. Rev. Dr. R. Morris. Part V. 25*. 

09. Adam Davie's 6 Dreams about Edward IL, Ac., ed. F. J. Furnivall, M.A. 5*. 

70. Generydes, a Romance, ed. W. Aldis Wright, M.A. Part II. 4*. 

71. The Lay Folks Mass-Book, fonr texts, ed. Rev. Canon Simmons. 25*, 

72. Palladius on Husbondrie, englisht (ab. 1420 a.d.). Part II. Ed. S. J. Herrtage, B. A. 15*. 

78. The Bliokling Homilies, 971 a.d., ed. Rev. Dr. R. Morris. Part III. 10*. 

74. English Works of Wyclif, hitherto unprinted, ed. F. D. Matthew, Esq. 20*. 

75. Catholicon Anglioum, an early English Dictionary, from Lord Monson's MS. a.d. 1488, ed., with 

Introduction A Notes, by S. J. Herrtage, B.A. ; and with a Preface by H. B. Wheatley. 20*. 

70. Aelfrio’s Metrical Lives of Saints, in MS. Cott. Jul. E 7., ed. Rev. Prof. Skeat, M.A. Part I. 10*. 

77. Beowulf, the unique MS. autotyped and transliterated, edited by Prof. Zupitza, Ph.D. 25*. 

78. The Fifty Earliest English Wills, in the Court of Probate, 1387-1439, ed. by F. J. Furnivall, M.A. 7*. 

79. EIng Alfred'sOrosius, from Lord Tollemache’s 9th century MS., Part I. ed. H. Sweet, M.A. 18*. 

79 5. Extra Volume. Facsimile of theEpinal Glossary, od. H. Sweet, M.A. 15*. 

80. The Early-English Life of 8t Katherine and its Latin Original, ed. Dr. Einenkel. 12*. 

81. Piers Plowman : Notes, Glossary, Ac. Part IV, completing the work, ed. Rev. Prof. Skeat, M.A. 18*. 

82. Aelfrio’s Metrical Lives of Saints, MS. Cott. Jul. E 7., ed. Rev. Prof. Skeat, M.A., LL.D. Part II. 12*. 188J 

83. The Oldest English Texts, Charters, Ac., ed. H. Sweet, M.A. 20*. 

84. Additional Analogs to * The Wright’s Chaste Wife,' No. 12, by W. A. Clouston. 1*. 

85. The Three Kings of Cologne. 2 English Texts, and 1 Latin, ed. Dr. C. Horstmann. 17*. 

86. Prose Lives of Women Saints, ab. 1010 a.d., ed. from the unique MS. by Dr. C. Horstmann. 12*. 

87. The Early South-English Legendary (earliest version), Land MS. 108, ed. Dr. C. Horstmann. 20*. 

88. Hy. Bradshaw’s Life of 8L Werburghe (Pynson, 1521), e<L Dr. C. Horstmann. 10*. 

89. Vicesand Virtues, from the unique MS., ab. 1200 A.D., ed. Dr. F. Holthausen. Part I. 8*. 

90. Anglo-Saxon and Latin Rule of St Benet, interlinear Glosses, ed. Dr. H. Logeman. 12*. 

91. Two Fifteenth-Century Cookery-Books, ab. 1430-1450, edited hy Mr. T. Austin. 10*. 

92. Eadwine’s Canterbury Psalter, from the Trin. Cambr.MS., ab. 1150 A.D.,ed. F. Harsley, B.A. Pt. 1. 12*. 181 

93. Defensor’s Liber Sointillarum, edited from the MSS. by Ernest RhodeB, B. A. 12*. 

94. Aelfric’s Metrioal Lives of Saints, MS. Cott. Jul. E 7, Part III., ed. Prof. Skeat, Litt.D., LL.D. 15*. 1890 

95. The Old-English version of Bede's Eoolesiastical History, re-ed. by Dr. Thomas Miller. Part I, 5 1. 18*. 

90. The Old-English version of Bede’s Eoolesiastical History, re-ed. by Dr. Thomas Miller. Pt. I, § 2. 15*. 1891 

97. The Earliest English Prose Psalter, edited from its 2 MSS. by Dr. K. D. Buelbring. Part I. 15*. 

98. Minor Poems of the Vernon MS., Part I., ed. Dr. C. Horstmann. 20*. 

99. Cursor Mundi. Part VI. Preface, Notes, and Glossary, ed. Rev. Dr. R*. Morris. 10*. 

100. Gapgrave’s Life of St. Katharine, ed. Dr. C. Horstmann, with Forewords by Dr. Furnivall. 20*. 

101. Cursor Mundi Part VII. Essay on the MSS., their Dialects, Ac., by Dr. H. Hnpe. 10*. 

102. Lanfranc’s Cirurgie, ab. 1400 A.D., ed. Dr. R. von Fleischhacker. Part I. 20*. 

103. The Legend of the Cross, from a 12th century MS., Ae,, ed. Prof. A. S. Napier, M. A., Ph.D. 7*. Od. 

104. The Exeter Book (Anglo-Saxon Poems), re-edited from the unique MS. by I. Gollancz, M.A. Parti. 20*. 1895 

105. The Prymer or Lay-Folks' Prayer-Book, Camb. Univ. MS., ab. 1420, ed. Henry Littlehales. Part I. 10*. , 

106. R. Misyn's Fire of Love and Mending of Life (Hampole), 1434, 1485, ed. Rev. R. Harvey, M.A. 15*. 

107. The English Conquest of Ireland, a.d. 1166-1185, 2 Texts, 1425,1440, Pt. I, ed. Dr. Furnivall. 15*. 

108. Child-Marriages and -Divorces, Trothplights, Ac. Chester Depositions, 1561-6, ed. Dr. Furnivall. 15*. 1897 

109. The Prymer or Lay-Folks Prayer-Book, ab. 1420, ed. Henry Littlehales. Part II. 10*. 

110. The Old-English Version of Bede’s Eoolesiastioal History, ed. Dr. T. Miller. Pail; II, | 1. 15*. 

111. The Old-English Version of Bede's Ecclesiastical History, ed. Dr. T. Miller. Part II, | 2. 15*. 

112. Merlin, Part IV: Outlines of the Legend of Merlin, hy Prof. W. E. Mead, Ph.D. 15*. 

113. Queen Elisabeth’s Englishing* of Boethius, Plutarch Ac. Ac., ed. Miss C. Pemberton. 15*. 

114. Aelfrio’s Metrical Lives of Saints, Part IV and last, ed. Prof. Skeat, Litt.D., LL.D. 10*. 

115. Jacob’s Well, edited from the unique Salisbury Cathedral MS. by Dr. A. Brandeis. Part I. 10*. 

116. An Old-English Martyrology, re-edited by Dr. G. Herzfeld. 10*. 

117. Minor Poems of the Vernon MS., edited by Dr. F. J. FumivalL Part II. 15*. 

118. The Lay Folks’ Catechism, ed. by.Canon 8immons and Rev. H. E. Nolloth, M.A. 6s. 

119. Robert of Bnmne’i Handlyng Synne (1303), and its French original, re-ed. by Dr. Furnivall. Pt. I. 10*. 

120. The Rule of St. Benet in Northern Prose and Verse A Caxton’s Summary, ed. hy E. A. Kock. 15*. 1902 


1874 


1875 


1876 


1878 


1879 


188C 


1882 


1884 


1887 


1892 


1893 


1894 


1898 


1899 


1900 


1901 




5 


The Original Series of the “ Early English Text Society ” 


121. The Laud MS. Troy-Book, ed. from the unique Laud MS. 595, by Dr. J. E. Wiilflng. Part I. 15#. 1902 

122. The Laud MS. Troy-Book, ed. from the unique Laud MS. 595, by Dr. J. K. Wiilflng. Part II. 20#. 1903 

123. Robert of Brunne’s Handlyng Synne (1303), and its French original, re-ed. by Dr. Fumivall. Pt. II. 10#. „ 

124. Twenty-six Political and other Poems from Digby MS. 102 Ac., ed. by Dr. J. Kail. Part I. 10#. 1904 

125. Medieval Records of a London City Church, ed. Henry Littlehalea. Part I. 10#. „ 

126. An Alphabet of Tales, in Northern English, from the Latin, ed. Mrs. M. M. Banks. Part I. 10#. ,, 

127. An Alphabet of Tales, in Northern English, from the Latin, ed. Mrs. M. M. Banks. Part II. 10#. 1905 

128. Medieval Records of a London City Churoh, ed. Henry Littlehales. Part II. 10#. „ 

129. The English Register of GodstowNunnery, ed. from the MSS. by the Rev. Dr. Andrew Clark. Pt. I. 10#. ,, 

130. The English Register of Godstow Nunnery, ed. from the MSS. by the Rev. Dr. A. Clark. Pt. II. 15s. 1906 

131. The Brut, or The Chronicle of England, edited from the best MSS. by Dr. F. Brie. Part I. 10#. „ 

132. John Metham’s Works, edited from the unique MS. by Dr. Hardin Craig. 15#. „ 

183. The English Register of Oseney Abbey, by Oxford, ed, by the Rev. Dr. A. Clark. Part I. 15#. 1907 

134. The Coventry Leet Book, edited from the unique MS. by Miss M. Dormer Harris. Part I. 15#. „ 

135. The Coventry Leet Book, edited from the unique MS. by Miss M. Dormer Harris. Part II. 15#. 1906 

1356. Extra Issue. Prof. Manly’s Piers Plowman A its Sequence, urging the fivefold authorship of the Vision. 

5s. [On sale to Members only.] 

136. The Brut, or The Chroniole of England, edited from the best MSS. by Dr. F. Brie. Part II. 15#. „ 

137. Twelfth-Century Homilies in MS. Bodley 343, ed. by A. O. Belfour, M.A. Part I, the Text. 15#. 1909 

138. The Coventry Leet Book, edited from the unique MS. by Miss M. Dormer Harris. Part III. 15#. „ 

139. John Arderne’s Treatises on Fistula in Ano, Ac., ed. by D’Arcy Power, M.D. 15#. 1910 

139 6, c, d, e, /, Extra Issue. The Piers Plowman Controversy: 6. Dr. Jusserand’s 1st Reply to Prof. 

Manly; c. Prof. Manly’s Answer to Dr. Jusserand ; d. Dr. Jusserand’s 2nd Reply to Prof. Manly; 
t. Mr. R. W. Chambers’s Article; /. Dr. Henry Bradley’s Rejoinder to Mr. R. W. Chambers 
(issued separately). 10#. [On sale to Members only.] M 

140. Capgrave’s Lives of St. Augustine and St Gilbert of Sempringham, a.d. 1451, ed. by John Munro. 10#. ,, 

141. Earth upon Earth, all the known texts, ed., with an Introduction, by Miss Hilda Murray, M.A. 10#. 1911 

142. The English Register of Godstow Nunnery, edited by the Rev. Dr. Andrew Clark. Part IIT. 10#. „ 

143. The Wars of Alexander the Great, Thornton MS., ed. J. S Westlake, M.A. 10#. ,, 

144. The English Register of Oseney Abbey, by Oxford, edited by the Rev. Dr. Andrew Clark. Part II. 


10 #. 

145. The Northern Passion, ed. by Miss F. A. Foster, Ph.D. Part I, the four parallel texts. 15#. 

146. The Coventry Leet Book, ed. Miss M. Dormer Harris. Introduction, Indexes, etc. Part IV. 10#. 

147. The Northern Passion, ed. Miss F. A. Foster, Ph.D., Introduction, French Text, Variants and 

Fragments, Glossary. Part II. 15#. 

[An enlarged re-print of No. 26, Religious Pieces in Prose and Verse, from the Thornton MS., 
edited by Rev. G. G. Perry. 5a.] 

148. A Fifteenth-Century Courtesy Book and Two Franciscan Rules, edited by R. W. Chambers, M.A., 

Litt.D., and W. W. Seton, M.A. 7a. 6 d. 

149. Sixty-three Lincoln Diooese Documents, ed. by the Rev. Dr. Andrew Clark. 15#. 

150. The Old-English Rule of Bp. Chrodegang, and the Capitula of Bp. Theodulf, ed. Prof. Napier, Ph.D. 

7#. 6 d. 

151. The Lanterne of Light, ed. by Miss Lilian M. Swinburn, M.A. 15a. 

152. Early English Homilies, from Vesp. D. XIV., ed. by Miss Rubie D.-N. Warner. Part I, Text. 15#. 

153. Mandeville's Travels, ed. by Professor Paul Hamelius. Part I, Text. 15#. 

154. Mandeville’s Travels (Notes and Introduction). 15#. 

155. The Wheatley MS., ed. by Miss Mabel Day, M.A. 80#. 

156. Reginald Peoock’s Donet, from Bodl. MS. 910; ed. by Miss E. Vaughan Hitchcock. 35#. 

167. Harmony of the Life of Christ, from MS. Pepys 2498, ed. by Miss Margery Goates. 15#. 

158. Meditations on the Life and Passion of Christ, from MS. Addit. 11307, ed. by Miss Charlotte 

D’Evelyn. 20s. 

159. Vices and Virtues, Part II., ed. Prof. F. Holfcliausen. 12#. 

[A re-print of No. 20, English Prose Treatises of Richard Rolle de Hampole, ed. Rev. G. G. Perry. 
5#.] 

[A re-edition of No. 18, Hali Meidenhad, ed. O. Cockayne, with a variant MS., Bodl. 84, hitherto 
imprinted, ed. Dr. Fumivall. 12#.] 

160. The Old English Heptateuch, MS. Cott. Claud. B. IV., ed. S. J. Crawford, M.A. 42*. 

161. Three O.E. Prose Texts, MS. Cott. Vit. A. XV., ed. Dr. S. Rypins. 25#. 

162. Facsimile of MS. Cotton Nero A. x (Pearl, Cleanness, Patience and Sir Gawain), Introduction by 

Sir I. Gollancz. 63s. 

168. Book of the Foundation of St. Bartholomew’s, Smithfield, ed. the late Sir Norman Moore. 10«. 

164, Pecook’s Folewer to the Donet, ed. by Miss E. Vaughan Hitchcock. 30s. 

165 Middleton’s Chinon of England, with Leland’s Assertio Arturii and Robinson’s translation, ed. Prof. 
W. E. Mead, Ph.D. 25#. 


1912 

1913 

ii 


1914 

ii 


1915 

1916 

1917 

1918 

1919 


1920 


»» 

1921 
ii 

1922 

1923 

it 



6 


EXTRA SERIES. (One guinea each year up to 1920.) 

The Publications for 1867-1919 (one guinea each year) are 
l. William of Palerne; or, William andth* Werwolf. Re-edlted by Rev. W. W. Skeat, M.A. 1S». 

II Early English Pronunciation with especial Reference to Shakapere and Chaucer, by A. J. Kill*. 
’ F.R.S. Parti. 10s. 

III. Gax ton’s Book of Curtesye, in Three Versions. Ed. F. J. Furnivall. 5s. 

IV. Havelok the Dane. Re-edifced by the Rev. W. W. Skeat, M.A. 10s. 

V. Chaucer’s Boethius. Edited from the two best MSS. by Rev. Dr. R. Morris. 12s. 

VI. Chevelere Assigns. Re-edited from the unique MS. by Lord Aldenham, M.A. 3s. 

VII. Early English Pronunciation, by A. J. Ellis, F.R.S. Part II. 10s. 

VIII. Queene Elizabethes Achademy, Ac. Ed. F. J. Furnivall. Essays on early Italian and German 
Books of Courtesy, by W. M. Rossetti and Dr. E. Oswald. 13s. 

IX. Awdeley'» Fraternity, of Vaoabondet, Harman'a Caveat, 4o. Ed. E. Viles * F. J. Furnivall. 7». M. 

X. Andrew Board.'a Introduction of Knowledge, 1647, Dyetary of Helth, 1642, Barne. in Defence of the 
Berde, 1543-3. Ed. F. J. Furnivall. 18». 

XI Barbour’. Bruce, Part I. Ed. from MSS. and editions, by Kev. W. W. Skeat, M.A. 12». 

XII. England in Henry VIII.’. Time: a Dial oguejiejween Cardinal Me A Thom. ^Starkey, 

Chaplain to Henry VIII. Ed. J. M. Cowper. 


Part II. 12s. (Part I. is No. XXXII, 1878, 8s.) 


1870 


1871 


XIII. A Supplicaoyon of the Beggera, by Simon Fish, 1528-9 *.o. ed. F J. Furnivall; with A Suppli¬ 

cation to our Moate Soueraigns Lordo; A Supplication of the Poore Common., and The Deoaye of 
England by the Great Multitude of Sheep, ed. by J. M. Cowper, Esq. 0s. „ 

XIV. Early English Pronunciation, by A. J. Ellis, Esq., F.R.S. Part III. 10s. ,, 

XV. Robert Crowley’s Thirty-One Epigrams, Voyoe of the Last Trumpet, Way to Wealth, 60 ., a.d. 

1550-1, edited by J. M. Cowper, Esq. 12s. 1872 

XVI. Chaucer’s Treatise on the Astrolabe. Ed. Rev. W. W. Skeat, M.A. 6s. „ 

XVII. The Complaynt of Sootlonde, 1549 a.d., with 4 Tracts (1542-48), ed. Dr. Murray. Part I. 10s. „ 

XVIII. The Complaynt of Sootlande, 1549 a.d., ed. Dr. Murray. Part II. 8s. 1678 

XIX. Oure Ladyes Myroure, a.d. 1530, ed. Rev. J. H. Blunt, M.A. 24s. ,, 

XX. Lovelioh’s History of the Holy Grail (ab. 1450 a.d.), ed. F. J. Furnivall, M.A., Ph.D. Part I. 8s. 1674 

XXI. Barbour’s Bruce, Part II., ed. Rev. W. W. Skeat, M.A. 4s. ,, 

XXII. Henry Bxinklow’B Complaynt of Roderyok Mors (ab. 1542): and The Lamentaoion of a Christian 

against the Gitie of London, made by Roderigo Mors, a.d. 1545. Ed. J. M. Cowper. 9s. „ 

XXIII. Early English Pronunciation, by A. J. Ellis, F.R.S. Part IV. 10s. „ 

XXIV. Lovolich’s History of the Holy Grail, ed. F. J. Furnivall, M. A., Ph.D. Part II. 10s. 1875 

XXV. Guy of Warwiok, 15th-century Version, ed. Prof. Zupitza. Part I. 20s. ,, 

XXVI. Guy of Warwiok, 15th-century Version, ed. Prof. Zupitza. Part II. 14s. 1870 

XXVII. Bp. Fisher’s English Works (died 1535), ed. by Prof. J. E. B. Mayor. Part I, the Text. 10s. „ 

XXVIII. Lovelich’sHoly Grail, ed. F. J. Furnivall, M.A., Ph.D. Part III. 10s. 1877 

XXIX. Barbour’s Bruce. Part III., ed. Rev. W. W. Skeat, M.A. 21s. „ 

XXX. Lovelioh'sHoly Grail, ed. F. J. Furnivall, M.A., Ph.D. Part IV. 15s. 1878 

XXXI. The Alliterative Romance of Alexander andDindimus, ed. Rev. W. W. Skeat. 6s. „ 

XXXII. Starkey’s ** England in Henry VIII’s time.” Pt. I. Starkey’s Life and Letters, ed. S. J. Heritage. 8s. „ 
XXXIII. Gesta Romanorum (englishtab. 1440), ed. S. J. Heritage, B.A. 15s. 1870 

XXXIV. The Charlemagne Romances :—1. Sir Ferumbraa, from Ashm. MS. 33, ed. S. J. Herrtage. 15s. ,. 

XXXV. Charlemagne Romanoes 2. The Sege off Melayne, Sir Otuell, Ac., ed. S. J. Herrtage. 12s. 1880 

XXXVI. Charlemagne Romanoes:—3. Lyf of Charles the Grete, Pt. I., ed. 8. J. Herrtage. 10s. „ 

XXXVII. Charlemagne Romanoes 4. Lyf of Charles the Grete, Pt. II., ed. 8. J. Herrtage. 15s. 1881 

XXXVIII. Charlemagne Romanoes:—5. The Sowdone of Babylone, ed. Dr. Hausknecht. 15s. „ 

XXXIX. Charlemagne Romances:—6. Rauf Colyear, Roland, Otuel, Ac., ed. 8. J. Heritage, B.A. 16s. 1882 

XL. Charlemagne Romances:—7. Huon of Burdeux, by Lord Berners, ed. 8. L. Lee, B.A. Part I. 15s. „ 

XLI. Charlemagne Romanoes:—8. Huon of Burdeux, by Lord Berners, ed. S. L. Lee, B.A. Pt. II. 15s. 1888 
XLII. Guy of Warwiok : 2 texts (Auchinleck MS. and Cains MS.), ed. Prof. Zupitza. Part I. If*. „ 

XLIII. Charlemagne Romances:—9. Huon of Burdeux, by Lord Berners, ed. 8. L. Lee, B.A. Pt. III. 15s. 1884 
XLIV. Charlemagne Romances :—10. The Four Sons of Aymon, ed. Miss Octavia Richardson. Pfc. I. 15*. „ 
XLV. Charlemagne Romances:—11. The Four Sons of Aymon, ed. Miss O. Richardson. Pt. II. 20s. 1885 

XLVI. SirBevis of Hamtcn, from the Auchinleck and other MSS., ed. Prof. E. KSlbing, Ph.D. Part I. 10*. „ 

XLVII. The Wars of Alexander, ed. Rev. Prof. Skeat, Litt.D., LL.D. 20s. 1886 

XLVIII. Sir Bevis of Hamton, ed. Prof. E. KSlbing, Ph.D. Part II. 10s. „ 

XLIX. Guy of Warwick, 2 texts (Auchinleck and Caius MSS.), Pt. II., ed. Prof. J. Zupitza, Ph.D. 15s. 1887 

L. Charlemagne Romances12. Huon of Burdeux, by Lord Berners, ed. S. L. Lee, B.A. Part IV. 5s. „ 

LI. Torrent of Portyngale, from the unique MS. in the Chetham Library, ed. E. Adam, Ph.D. 10s. „ 

L1I. Bullein’s Dialogue against the Feuer Pestilence, 1578 (ed. 1, 1564). Ed. M. A A. H. Bullen. 10s. 1888 

LIII. Vioary’a Anatomie of the Body of Man, 1548, ed. 1577, ed. F. J. A Percy Furnivall. Part I. 15s. 

LIV. Oaxton’s Englishing of Alain Ohartier’s Ourial, ed. Dr. F. J. Furnivall A Prof. P. Meyer 5* 

LV. Barbour’s Bruce, ed. Rev. Prof. Skeat, LittD„ LL.D. Part IV. 5s. ... Jg * g * g 

LVI. Early English Pronunciation, by A. J. Ellis, Esq., F. R.S. Pt. V., the present English Dialects. 25t. „ 
LVII. Caxton’s Eneydos, a.d. 1490, coll, with its French, ed. M. T. Culley, M.A. A Dr. F. J. Furnivall. 13s. 1800 
LVIII. Caxton’s Blanchardyn k Eglantine, c. 1489, extracts from ed. 1595, A French, ed. Dr.L. Kellner. 17s. 1890 



The Extra Series of the “ Early English Text Society .” 7 

LIX. Guy of Warwick, 2 texts (Auchinleck and Caiua MSS.), Tart III., ed. Prof. J. Zupitza, Ph.D. 15#. 1891 
LX. Lydgate’s Temple of Glass, re-edited from the MSS. by Dr. J. Schick. 15s. „ 

LXu Hoocleve's Minor Poems, I., from the Phillipps and Durham MSS., ed. P. J. Fumivall, Ph.D. 15*. 1892 
LXII. The Chester Plays, re-edited from the MSS. by the late Dr. Hermann Deimling. Part I. 15#. „ 

LXIII. Thomas a Kempis’s De Imitatione Christi, englishtab. 1440, h 1502, ed. Prof. J. K. Ingram. 15#. 1893 

LXIV. Caxton’s Godfrey of Boloyne, or Last Siege of Jerusalem, 1481, ed. Dr. Mary N. Colvin. 15#. „ 

LXV. Sir Be vis of Hamton, ed. Prof. E. Kfllbing, Ph.D. Part III. 15#. 1894 

LXVI. Lydgate’s and Burgh’s Secrees of Philisoffres (‘ Governance of Kings and Princes’), ab. 1445—50, 

ed. R. Steele, B.A. 15#. „ 

LXVII. The Three Kings’ Sons, a Romance, ab. 1500, Part I., the Text, ed. Dr. Fumivall. 10#. 1895 

LXVIII. Meluaine, the prose Romance, ab. 1500, Part I, the Text, ed. A. K. Donald. 20#. „ 

LXIX. Lydgate's Assembly of the Gods, ed. Prof. Oscar L. Triggs, M.A., Ph.D. 15#. 1896 

LXX. The Digby Plays, edited by Dr. F. J. Fumivall. 15#. ,, 

LXXI. The Towneley Plays, ed. Geo. England and A. W. Pollard, M.A. 15#. 1897 

LXXII. Hoocleve's Regement of Princes, 1411-12, and 14 Poems, edited by Dr. F. J. Fumivall. 15#. „ 

LXXIII. Hoocleve’s Minor Poems, II., from the Ashburaham MS., ed. I. Gollancz, M.A. „ 

LXX1V. Becreta Secretorum, 3 prose Englishings, one by Jas Yonge, 1428, ed. R. Steele, B.A, 

Part I. 20#. 1898 

LXXV. Speculum Guidonis de Warwyk, edited by Miss G. L. Morrill, M.A., Ph.D. 10#. „ 

LXXVI. George Ashby's Poems, &c., ed. Miss Mary Bateson. 15#. 1899 

LXXVII. Lydgate's DeGuilleville’s Pilgrimage of the Life of Man, 1426, ed. Dr. F. J. Fumivall. Part I. 10#. „ 
LXXVIIL. The Life and Death of Mary Magdalene, by T. Robinson, c. 1620, ed. Dr. H. O. Sommer. 5#. „ 

LXXIX. Caxton’s Dialogues, English and French, c. 1483, ed. Henry Bradley, M.A. 10#. 1900 

LXXX. Lydgate’s Two Nightingale Poems, ed. Dr. Otto Glauning. 5#. „ 

LXXXI. Gower’s Confessio Amantis, edited by G. C. Macaulay, M.A. Vol. I. 15«. ,, 

LXXXII. Gower's Confessio Amantis, edited by G. C. Macaulay, M.A. Vol. II. 15#. 1901 

LXXXIII. Lydgate’s DeGuilleville’s Pilgrimage of the Life of Man, 1426, ed. Dr. F. J. Fumivall. Pt. II. 10*. „ 
LXXXIV. Lydgate’s Reason and Sensuality, edited by Dr. E. Sieper. Part I. 5*. „ 

LXXXV. Alexander Scott's Poems, 1568, from the unique Edinburgh MS., ed. A. K. Donald, B.A. 10*. 1902 
LXXXVI. William of Shorehom’s-Poems, re-ed. from the unique MS. by Dr. M. Konrath. Part I. 10#. „ 

LXXXVII. Two Coventry Corpus-Christi Plays, re-edited by Hardin Craig, M.A. 10#. „ 

LXXXVIII. Le Morte Arthur, re-edited from the Harleian MS. 2252 by Prof. Bruce, Ph.D. 15*. 1903 

LXXXIX. Lydgate’s Reason and Sensuality, edited by Dr. E. Sieper. Part II. 15#. ,, 

XC. English Fragments from Latin Medieval Service-Books, ed. by Hy. Littlehales. 5*. „ 

XCI. The Macro Plays, from Mr. Gurney’s unique MS., ed. Dr. Fumivall and A. W. Pollard, M.A. 

(reprinted 1924). 15#. 1904 

XCII. Lydgate’s DeGuileville’s Pilgrimage of the Life of Man, Part III., ed. Miss Locock. 10#. „ 

XCIII. Lovelioh’s Romance of Merlin, from the unique MS., ed. Dr. E. A. Kock. Part I. 10# „ 

XCIV. Respublica, a Play on Social England, a.d. 1553, ed. L. A. Magnus, LL.B. 12#. 1906 

XCV. Lovelich’s History of the Holy Grail, Pt. V.: The Legend of the Holy Grail, by Dorothy Kempe. 6#. „ 

XCVI. Mirk’s Festial, edited from the MSS. by Dr. Erbe. Part I. 12a. „ 

XCVII. Lydgate's Troy Book, edited from the best MSS. by Dr. Hy. Bergen. Part I, Books I and II. 15a. 1906 
XCVIII. Skelton’s Magnyfycence, edited by Dr. R. L. Ramsay, with an Introduction. 7#. 6d. ,, 

XCIX. The Romance of Emare, re-edited from the MS. by Miss Edith Rickert, Ph.D. 7*. 6d. „ 


C. The Harrowing of Hell, and The Gospel of Nicodemus, re-ed. hy Prof. Hulme, M.A., Ph.D. 15#. 1907 

Cl. Songs, Carols, &c M from Richard Hill's Balliol MS., edited by Dr. Roman Dyboski. 15a. „ 

ClI. Promptorium Parvulorum, the 1st English-Latin Dictionary, ed. Rev. A. L. Mayhew, M.A. 21#. 1908 

CIII. Lydgate's Troy Book, edited from the best MSS. by Dr. Hy. Bergen. Part II, Book III. 10#. „ 

CIV. The Non-Cycle Mystery Plays, re-edited by O. Waterhouse, M.A. 15s. 1909 

CV. The Tale of Beryn, with the Pardoner and Tapster, ed. Dr. F. J. Fumivall and W. G. Stone. 15#. „ 

CVI. Lydgate’s Troy Book, edited from the best MSS. by Dr. Hy. Bergen. Part III. 15#. 1910 

CVir. Lydgate’s Minor Poems, edited by Dr. H. N. MacCracken. Part I, Religious Poems. 15* „ 

CVIII. Lydgate’s Siege of Thebes, re-edited from the MSS. by Prof. Dr. A. Erdmann. Pt. I, The Text. 15#. 1911 
CIX. Partonope, re-edited from its 3 MSS. by Dr. A. T. Bodtker. The Texts. 15#. „ 

CX. Caxton’s Mirrour of the World, with all the woodcuts, ed. by O. H. Prior, M. A., Litt.D. 15#. 1912 

CXI. Caxton’s History of Jason, the Text, Part I, ed. by John Munro. 15#. „ 

CXII. Lovelich’s Romance of Merlin, ed. from the unique MS. by Prof. E. A. Kock, Ph.D. Pt. II. 15#. 1913 
CXIII. Poems by Sir John Salushury, Robert Chester, and others, from Christ Church MS. 184, &c. f ed. 

by Prof. Carleton Brown, Ph.D. 15*. „ 

CXIV. The Gild of St. Mary, Lichfield, ed. by the late Dr. F. J. Fumivall. 15a. 1914 

CXV. The Chester Plays. Part II re-edited by Dr. Matthews. 15#. „ 

CXVI. The Pauline Epistles, ed. Miss M. J. Powell. 15#. 1915 

CXVII. Bp. Fisher’s English Works, Pt. II, ed. by the Rev. Ronald Bayne. 15#. ,, 

CXVII1. The Craft of Nombrynge, ed. by R. Steele, B.A. 15#. 1916 

CXIX. The Owl and Nightingale, 2 Texts parallel, ed. by the late G. F. H. Sykes and J. H. G. Grattan. 

15#. [At Press. „ 

CXX. Ludus Coventriae, ed. by Miss K. 8. Block, M.A. 1917 

CXXI. Lydgate's Fall of Princes Pt. I, ed. Dr. H. Bergen. 15a. 1918 

CXXII. Lydgate’s Fall of Princes, Pt. II, ed. Dr. H. Bergen. 15*. „ 

CXX III. Lydgate’s Fall of Princes, Pt. Ill, ed. Dr. H. Bergen. 15#. 


1919 



8 


ORIGINAL SERIES. 

Forthcoming issues will be chosen from the following :— 

The Alliterative Siege of Jerusalem, edited by the late Prof. E. Kolblng, Ph.D. [At Press. 

A Stanzaio Exposition of the Feasts of the Church and the Life of Christ based on the Legend a Aurea, ed. from 
the MSS. Harl. 8909, Harl. 2250, and Addit. 38666, by Miss F. A. Foster, Ph.D. [At Press. 

The Earliest English Apocalypse with a Commentary, edited by Dr. Anna C. Paues. [At Press. 

Trevisa’sDialogue inter Mititem et Clericum, Sermon by Fitz Ralph, and Begynynge of the World, edited from 
the MSS. by Aaron J. Perry, M.A. [At Press. 

The Sege or Battell of Troy, ed. by Miss Bamide. 


EXTRA SERIES. 

The Publications due up to 1920 will probably be chosen from :— 

Lydgate’s Minor Poems, ed. Dr. H. &. MacCracken. Part II, Seoular Poems. [At Press. 

Lydgate’s Troy Book, ed. by Dr. Hy. Bergen. Part IV, Introduction, Notes, &c. [At Press. 

Lydgate’s Siege of Thebes, re-edited from the MSS. by Prof. Dr. A. Erdmann. Part II, Notes, Ac. 

Piers Plowman, the A Text, re-edited from the MSS. by Prof. R. W. Chambers, M.A., D.Lit., and J. H. Q. 
Grattan, M.A. [At Press. 

King Alisaunder, two parallel texts, ed. from Lincoln’s Inn MS. 150 and Laud. Misc. 622 by L. F. Powell, Esq. 
Caxton’s Paris and Vienne, ed. by O. H. Prior, Litt.D. 

Interlude urn do Clerico et Puella and Dux Moraud, ed. Prof. J. M. Manly. 


Other texts are in preparation. 
July 1925. 


PUBLISHER: 

LONDON: HUMPHREY MILFORD, OXFORD UNIY. PRESS, Amen House, E.C. 4. 









