TITLE: Godeffroy of Boloyne; or, The siege and conqueste of Jerusalem
IDENTIFIER: godeffroyofboloy00willrich
URL: https://archive.org/download/godeffroyofboloy00willrich/godeffroyofboloy00willrich_djvu.txt

I 


JBRARY 

NIVERSHY  OF 
CALIFORNIA 


(bodcfroi)   of  Soloimr, 


CTlic  ^icqc  and  a'onqucste  of  Jerusalem 


translated  by 
William  Caxton 

edited  by 
Mary  Noyes  Colvin 


EARLY  ENGLISH  TEXT  SOCIETY 


Extra  Series,  64 
1893 


KRAUS  REPRINT  CO. 
Millwood,  New  York 


Unaltered  Reprint  produced  with  the  permission  of  the 
Early  English  Text  Society 

KRAUS  REPRINT  CO. 

A  U.S.  Division  of  Kraus-Thomson  Organization  Limited 
Printed  in  Germany 


$tofl*J[J[r<rg  of  gdopq. 


(Barlg   (gnglislj    iitxt   Soridg. 

<£dra   Strirs.     |So.  LXIV. 

1893. 


BERLIN  :   ASHER  &  CO.,  13,  UNTER  DEN  LINDEN. 
NEW  YORK:    C.  SCRIBNER  &  CO.;    LEYPOLDT  &  HOLT. 
PHILADELPHIA  :   J.  B.   LIPPINCOTT  &  CO. 


OR 

Mt  £i$e  ami  olxrn^u^ste  af  ^mmhm, 

BY 

WILLIAM,  ARCHBISHOP  OF  TYRE. 

TRANSLATED  FROM  THE  FRENCH  BY 

Militant  €Mtanf 

AND     PRINTED    BY     HIM    IN     1481. 


EDITED    FROM    THE    COPY     IN    THE    BRITISH    MUSEUM,    WITH     INTRODUCTION, 

NOTES,    VOCABULARY,    AND    INDEXES, 

BY 

MARY  NOYES   COLVIN,  Ph.D. 


LONDON : 
PUBLISHED  FOR   THE  EARLY   ENGLISH   TEXT  SOCIETY 

By  KEGAN  PAUL,  TRENCH,  TRUBNER  &  CO., 

PATERNOSTER  HOUSE,  CHARING  CROSS  ROAD. 
1893. 


I 


<£vfnt  Series,  lxiv. 

R.    CLAY   ii  SONS,    LIMITED,    LONDON    A'    BUNGAY. 


PR 
MA/A/ 


CONTENTS. 

PAGE 

INTRODUCTION 

vii 

TEXT 

1 

NOTES     ... 

...       313 

VOCABULARY 

...       317 

INDEX   OF    NAMES 

...       331 

INDEX    OF    PLACES 

343 

vu 


INTRODUCTION. 

I.  Carton's  text,  and  his  original,  William  of  Tyre,  A.D.  1163— 11S3,  p.  vii. 
II.  Editions,  Manuscripts,  and  Translations  of  William  of  Tyre,  p.  xi. 

III.  William  of  Tyre,  p.  xx. 

IV.  William  of  Tyre's  literary  works,  p.  xxv. 
V.  Godfrey  of  Bouillon,  p.  xxix. 

I. 

Godeffroy  of  Boloyne,  or  the  Siege  and  Conqueste  of  Jerusalem, 
was  printed  by  William  Caxton,  as  he  himself  informs  us,  in  the 
Abbey  of  Westminster,  the  work  being  finished  on  the  20th  of 
November,  1481. 

There  are  ten  copies  still  extant  of  this  edition  :  British  Museum 
(1),  Cambridge  (2),  Imperial  Library,  Vienna  (1),  Hunterian  College, 
Glasgow  (1),  Baptist  College,  Bristol  (1),  and  (4)  in  private  libraries. 
The  present  edition  was  printed  from  the  copy  in  the  British  Museum, 
which  is  described  by  Blades  (Biography  and  Typography  of  Wm. 
Caxton,  London,  1879),  as  follows  : 

"  The  book  is  a  small  in-folio,  containing  144  leaves,  of  which  two 
are  blank.  Excepting  the  first  two  gatherings,  the  signatures  are 
entirely  in  Arabic  numerals. 

11  Collation ;— A  is  A  3n  with  A1  blank,  b  a  2n  b1  being  blank  ; 
1,  2,  3,  4,  5,  6,  7,  8,  9,  10,  11,  12,  13,  14,  15,  and  16  are  all  4ns, 
17  is  a  3n. 

"  Typographic  peculiarities  ;— There  is  no  title  page.  A  full  page 
has  forty  lines,  which  are  of  even  length,  and  measure  4f  inches 
without  folios  or  catchwords.  Space  is  left  at  the  commencement  of 
chapters  for  the  insertion  of  three  to  seven-line  initials.— The  volume 
commences  with  a  blank  leaf,  after  which  follows  the  prologue  or 
preface,  the  text  beginning  on  A2,  with  a  space  for  a  four-line  initial, 
thus,  '  The  hye,  courageous  faytes  and  valyaunt  actes  of  noble,  illus- 
trious, and  vertuous  personnes,  etc.',  and  ending  halfway  down  the 
recto  of  the  6th  folio,  of  sig.  17.,  the  verso  being  blank." 


viii       Introduction.     I.   Caxtoris  Text  and  its  Original. 

Mr.  Blades  also  states  that  the  book  is  translated  from  the 
French,  adding,  "the  author  of  the  book  appears  to  be  unknown." 
Happily,  this  last  conjecture  of  Mr.  Blades  is  a  mistake,  as  the  author 
of  our  text,  far  from  being  unknown,  is  no  less  a  personage  than 
William,  Archbishop  of  Tyre  from  1175  to  1184,  and  Caxton's 
Godeffroye  of  Boloyne  is  a  translation  of  the  first  hundred  pages  or  so 
of  a  History  of  the  First  Crusade,  and  the  French  establishments  in 
the  Holy  Land,  written  by  William,  in  the  second  half  of  the  12th 
century. 

It  is  a  book  which  not  only  was  a  standard  authority  through  all 
the  Middle  Ages,  but  one  which  even  up  to  the  present  time  is 
regarded  as  reliable  in  most  particulars,  and  forms  the  base  of  all 
modern  histories  of  this  period.  The  book  was  written  first  in 
Latin,  but  was  soon  put  into  French,  from  which  Caxton  translated 
it  into  English.  His  translation  is  almost  a  literal  one.  He  turns 
many  of  his  French  constructions  into  English,  without  any  attempt 
at  Anglicizing  them,  even  transferring  a  French  word  bodily  when  he 
does  not  readily  find  its  English  equivalent.  On  the  whole,  he 
understands  his  French,  although  there  are  incorrect  renderings  here 
and  there,  owing  more  to  hasty  reading,  it  seems,  than  to  actual 
ignorance. 

The  editor  of  this  text,  in  preparing  it  for  publication,  read  the 
English  first  with  a  French  Manuscript  of  the  15th  century  edition, 
from  which  without  doubt  it  was  translated.  Curiously  enough, 
MS.  68  of  the  Bibliotheque  Rationale,  Paris,  with  which  it  was  col- 
lated, belonged  originally  to  Louis  de  Bruges,  Seigneur  de  la  Gruy- 
thuyse.     Blades  says  of  him  : 

"  Among  the  nobles  at  the  court  of  Phillip  the  Good  (Duke  of 
Burgundy,  in  1419),  many  emulated  the  literary  taste  of  their  sove- 
reign, but  none  showed  greater  judgment  and  liberality  in  the 
formation  of  his  library  than  Louis  de  Bruges. 

"  This  nobleman,  who  had  risen  by  his  talents  to  the  highest 
position,  received  at  his  chateau  of  Oost>camp,  near  Bruges,  in  1470, 
Edward  IV.  of  England,  when  he  sought  refuge  from  the  Lancas- 
trians, in  Flanders,  and  was  afterwards  rewarded  by  the  King  with 
the  title  of  Earl  of  Winchester.  His  library  was  scarcely  inferior  to 
that  of  his  sovereign,  and  nearly  the  whole  of  its  manuscripts  were 
the  production  of  Flemish  artists,  at  Bruges  or  Ghent.  The  large 
size  of  the  volumes,  the  beauty  of  the  vellum,  the  elegance  of  the 
Avriting,  the  artistic  merit  of  the  illuminations  and  ornaments,  and 
the  luxury  displayed  in  the  bindings  are  evidences  of  the  interest 


Introduction.     I.  Caxton's  Text  and  its  Original.         ix 

tiiken  by  the  Seigneur  de  la  Gruythuyse  in  the  formation  of  his 
library. 

"At  his  death  it  passed  to  his  son  Jean,  and  was  soon  after  added 
to  the  collection,  already  existing,  at  the  chateau  of  Blois,  belonging 
to  the  kings  of  France.  Great  pains  were  taken  to  obliterate  the 
armorial  bearings,  devices,  and  monograms  which  showed  the  former 
owner  of  the  manuscripts ;  but  these  attempts  were  only  partly  suc- 
cessful, as  about  one  hundred  volumes,  now  among  the  most  precious 
treasures  of  the  Bibliotheque  Rationale  of  Paris,  still  attest  that  they 
once  belonged  to  this  celebrated  collection." 

As  Caxton  lived  for  many  years  in  Bruges,  as  the  representative 
of  the  English  nation,  and  was  on  friendly  terms  with  many  of  the 
Flemish  nobility,  there  is  little  doubt  that  he  was  well  acquainted 
with  the  library  of  Louis  de  Bruges,  and  probably  had  himself  spent 
many  an  hour  over  this  very  volume,  which  is  a  magnificent  specimen 
of  Flemish  handicraft — a  layge  in-folio,  with  Avriting  like  copper- 
plate, and  adorned  with  many  beaut ful  artistically-executed  minia- 
tures in  grisaille.  But,  although  as  far  as  execution  and  binding  are 
concerned,  a  book  worthy  of  our  highest  praise,  the  text  itself,  which, 
as  may  be  seen  by  the  headings  of  the  different  chapters,  is  the  same 
as  the  copy  from  which  Caxton  translated,  is  a  very  poor  one,  and 
the  result  is  that  many  of  Caxton's  sentences  are  faulty,  obscure,  or 
thoroughly  unintelligible,  owing  to  the  faultiness  and  obscurity  of 
his  original.  In  many  cases,  the  editor  of  the  present  text,  in  order 
to  get  at  the  original  meaning,  has  been  obliged  to  have  recourse  to 
vol.  ii.  of  the  Recueil  des  Croisades,  published  by  the  Academy  of 
Inscriptions  and  Belles  Lettres,  in  Paris,  which  contains  not  only  the 
corrected  French  text  of  William's  history,  but  also  the  Latin  original, 
to  which  an  appeal  has  been  made  in  doubtful  cases. 

Some  obscurities  still  remaining  have  been  cleared  up  by  Paulin 
Paris's  recent  edition  of  William  of  Tyre. 

For  aid  in  this  preface,  and  in  the  Index  of  Places  and  Names, 
at  the  close  of  the  book,  the  editor  is  also  much  indebted  to  the 
following  authorities  : 

11.  Prutz  :  Studien  Uber  Wilhelm  von  Tyrus,  im  Xeu-Archiv 
Deutscher  Geschichte,  Bd.  viii. 

Paulin  Paris  :  La  Chanson  d'Antioche. 

Paulin  Paris  :  Guillaume  de  Tyr.  et  Ses  Continuateurs. 

Roericht  :  Zur  Geschichte  der  Ersten  Kreuz-Ziige. 

H.  von  Sybel  :  Geschichte  des  Ersten  Kreuz-Zuges. 

Dansey  :  The  English  Crusaders. 


x  Introduction.     I.  Authorities  consulted. 

Von  Hasselt  :  Les  Croises  Beiges. 

Von  Reiffenberg,  in  vols.  iv.  and  v.  of  Les  Chroniques  Beiges : 
Le  Chevalier  au  Cygne  and  Godefroid  de  Bouillon. 

Baron  de  Hod*  :  Description  des  Tombeaux  de  Godefroid  de 
Bouillon.     Bruxelles,  1855. 

Pigeonneau  :    Le  Cycle  de  la  Croisade   et  de  la  Famille  de 
Bouillon. 

Hist.  Litt.  de  la  France,  vol.  xiv.,  article  by  Pastouret  on 
William  of  Tyre. 

Brunet  :  Manual  du  Libraire. 

D.   Martene  et   D.   Durand  :    Amplissima  Collectio.      Paris, 
1724-33. 

Muratori  :  Rerum  Italicarum  Scriptores,  vol.  vii. 

Gdizot  :  Collection  des  Memoires  sur  L'Histoire  du  France,  vols. 
xvi. — xviii. 

Deschamps  :  Dictionnaire  de  Geographie  Ancienne  et  Moderne. 
Paris,  1870. 

La  Gran  Conquista  de  Ultra-Mar.     Madrid,  1858. 

Spruner-Menke  :  Hand-Atlas  des  Mittel- Alters. 

Migne  :  Patrologiae  Latinae  :  Tomus  20  / 
„  „  Graecae         „      86. 

„         Dictionnaire   de  Geographie   Sacree   et   Ecclesiastique, 
vols.  28 — 30  of  the  Cyclopedie  Theologique. 

Freeman  :  The  Historical  Geography  of  Europe. 

Froebese  :  Gottfried  von  Bouillon.     Wissenschaftliche  Vortrage, 
14th  Series.     Berlin,  1879. 

Tasso  :  Jerusalem  Delivered. 

Collin  de  Plancy  :  Godefroid  de  Bouillon.     Paris,  1842. 

Ault-Dumesnil  :    Dictionnaire  des   Croisades   in   vol.   xviii.   of 
Migne's  Nouvelle  Encyclopedic  Theologique. 

Pere  Maimbourg:  Hist,  des  Croisades.     Paris,  1686. 

McClintoch  and  Strong  :  Cyclopedia  of  Biblical  Theology  and 
Ecclesiastical  Literature. 

Gaston  Paris,  on  La  Gran  Conquista,  Romania,  No.  68,  Oct. 
1888  and  Oct.  1890. 

Ticknor  :  History  of  Spanish  Literature. 

Palgrave  :  History  of  Normandy  and  England. 

Rogier  :  La  Noblesse  Francaise  aux  Croisades. 

Reooeil  des  Croisades.      Tomes  i.  and  ii.,  published  by  the 
Academy  of  Inscriptions  and  Belles  Lettres.     Paris,  1844. 


77.  Editions,  MSS.}  and  Translations  of  Win.  of  Tyre,     xi 

Mas-Latrie  :  Chronique  d'Ernoul  et  de  Bernard  le  Tresorier. 
Collection  de  la  Societe*  de  L'Histoire  de  France,  vol.  iii. 

Riant  :  Catalogue  des  Manuscrits  de  L'Eracles.  Archives  de 
L'Orient  Latin,  vol.  i.     Paris,  1881. 

Chevallier  :  Repertoire  des  Sources  historiques  du  Moyen-Age. 
Paris,  1877-1886. 

T.  Fuller  :  History  of  the  Holy  War,  ed.  1840. 

Mrs.  W.  Busk  :  Mediaeval  Popes,  Emperors  and  Kings.  4  vols., 
1854-6. 

II.     DIFFERENT    EDITIONS,    MANUSCRIPTS,   AND   TRANSLATIONS 
OF   WILLIAM   OF  TYRE. 

The  original  history  was  written,  as  has  been  already  mentioned, 
in  Latin.  It  was  composed  in  Palestine,  between  the  years  1163  and 
1183,  and  consisted  of  twenty-two  completed  books,  divided  into 
chapters,  and  of  one  chapter  of  a  twenty-third  book.  The  work  was 
evidently  either  left  unfinished,  or  mutilated  after  William's  death,  as 
he  tells  us  expressly  in  his  preface  that  he  has  divided  his  work  into 
twenty-three  books,  each  of  which  is  in  turn  divided  into  chapters. 
"  Distinximus  autem  volumem  universam  in  libros  xxiii,  eorumque 
singulos  certis  designavimus  capitulis,  quo  lectori  facilius  quicquid  de 
articulis  historic  sibi  viderit  necessarium  occurrat."  The  theory  that 
portions  of  the  history  were  destroyed  after  William's  death,  is  a  very 
plausible  one,  when  we  reflect  that  these  closing  chapters,  if  closing 
chapters  there  were,  must  have  contained  the  record  of  events  which 
did  not  present  his  political  opponents  in  a  very  favourable  light,  so 
that  they  would  have  had  every  reason  for  suppressing  them. 

The  book  commences  with  a  brief  general  account  of  the  situation 
of  affairs  before  and  at  the  time  of  the  first  crusade.  Then  follows  a 
detailed  account  of  that  great  movement,  particular  stress  being  laid 
on  the  part  taken  therein  by  the  French  and  Flemish  chivalry,  and 
especially  by  Godfrey  of  Bouillon.  The  ninth  book  treats  of  the 
taking  of  Jerusalem  by  the  Crusaders,  and  of  the  choice  of  Godfrey  as 
king,  closing  with  his  sudden  and  unfortunate  death.  The  other 
thirteen  books  contain  the  history  of  Palestine  under  French  rule, 
down  to  the  time  of  William's  own  death,  which  is  supposed  to  have 
taken  place  in  1184. 

His  preface,  written  after  he  had  nearly  completed  his  work,  tells 
us  of  its  aim  and  scope  : — 


xii     77.  Ernoul  and  Bernard  continue    William  of  Tyre. 

"Narrationis  seriem  ordinavimus  exordium,  sumentes  ab  exitu 
virorum  fortium,  et  Deo  amabilem  principum  qui,  a  regnis  occidenta- 
libus,  vocante  Domino  egressi,  terrain  promissionis  et  pene  universam 
Syrian  e  in  manu  forti  sibi  vendicaverunt,  et  inde  usque  ad  regnum 
domini  Balduini  quarti,  qui  in  ordine  regum  computato  domino  duce 
Godefrido  qui  primus  regnum  obtiuuit,  locum  habuit  septimum,  per 
annos  LXXXIV,  cum  multa  diligentia  protraximus  historiam." 

This  history  had,  in  the  course  of  time,  several  different  continu- 
ators.  The  first  of  these  was  one  Ernoul,  member  of  a  noble  family 
of  Giblet,  a  town  of  Palestine,  on  the  coast  north  of  Beirut.  Ernoul, 
who  must  have  been  a  well-grown  youth  at  the  time  of  "William's 
death,  served  as  a  young  squire  under  Balian  d'Ybelin,  who  had  been 
made  Lord  Lieutenant  of  the  kingdom  of  Jerusalem,  after  the  capture 
of  king  Guy  of  Lusignan  in  1187.  Young  Ernoul  followed  his  master 
through  all  the  vicissitudes  of  this  critical  period,  and  assisted  in  the 
defence  of  Jerusalem  when  besieged  by  Saladin,  a  few  months  later. 
Years  after, — after  he  had  become  one  of  the  most  able  and  learned 
jurists  in  the  High  Court  of  Cyprus, — Ernoul  of  Giblet  wrote,  in  the 
French  language,  an  account  of  the  events  in  which  he  had  taken 
part,  his  intention  being  to  give  the  world  a  truthful  narration  of 
the  conquest  of  Jerusalem,  and  of  the  irreparable  loss  of  the  Holy 
Cross. 

Ernoul's  story  stops  with  the  year  1228.  Here,  however,  an 
unknown  pen  takes  it  up,  and,  after  some  condensation  of  the  pre- 
vious matter,  brings  it  down  to  about  1231.  This  last  writer  narrates 
especially  the  events  of  the  Crusade  of  Frederic  II.  of  Germany, 
ending  with  the  capture  of  St.  Jean  d'Acre. 

At  about  this  same  time,  in  France,  one  Bernard,  called  the 
treasurer,  Bernardus  Thesaurins,  supposed  to  have  belonged  to  the 
monastery  of  St.  Pierre  in  Corbie,  wrote  a  history  of  affairs  in  the 
East,  ending  also  with  the  year  1231.  Corbie  is  a  little  town  in 
France,  east  of  Amiens.  Here  existed  formerly  a  magnificent  abbey 
of  Benedictines  of  great  wealth  and  antiquity,  said  to  have  been 
founded  by  Queen  Bathilde  in  662.  The  history  of  this  abbey  has 
been  written  by  a  Benedictine  of  Picardy,  but  nothing  has  been 
learnt  of  Bernard,  except  the  fact  that  the  office  of  treasurer  has 
existed  there  since  the  13th  century. 

Already,  before  the  continuation  of  the  unknown  author  was 
'finished,  or  Bernard's  account  was  written,  the  Latin  original  of 
William  of  Tyre  was  known  in  France,  where  it  received,  without  a 
doubt,  the  title  with  which  it  lias  come  down  to  us,  viz.,  Historia 


77.  Bernard's  Continuation  of  William  of  Tyre.       xiii 

He  rum  in  PartibuB  Transmarinis  Gestarum  ;  and  certainly  by  1225, 
if  not  before,  it  was  translated  into  French. 

Now  we  have,  as  we  see,  three  or  four  different  historians,  all 
handling  the  same  subject,  but  at  different  epochs.  What  more  na- 
tural than  that  they  should  be  arranged  chronologically ;  and  by  the 
omission  of  prefaces,  and  by  judicious  condensation,  be  made  into  one 
compact  whole.  This  is  exactly  Avhat  was  done  by  some  one,  per- 
haps by  Bernard  himself,  who,  after  he  had  written  his  account  of 
affairs  in  the  Orient,  as  an  independent  composition,  may  have  con- 
ceived the  idea  of  combining  it  with  William's  and  Ernoul's  histories. 
Be  this  as  it  may,  the  compilation  closes  with  Bernard's  work,  which 
ends  thus  :  Explicit  liber  ;  ceste  conte  de  la  terre  cCOutremer,  fist  fain 
li  tresoriers  Bernars  de  St.  Pierre  de  Corbie  en  la  carnation.  Mello 
C.C.  XXXII. 

Naturally,  for  centuries,  and  even  down  to  the  modern  critical 
examination  of  the  book,  Bernard  was  regarded  as  the  real  author  of 
the  whole  work.  His  compilation  was  the  history,  par-excellence,  of 
the  Crusades  and  the  Holy  Land  through  all  the  Middle  Ages. 
Strangely  enough,  although  the  compiler  left  Bernard's  name  at  the 
close  of  the  book,  he  forgot  to  give  it  any  title  at  the  beginning  ; 
and  as  a  result  of  this  forgetfulness,  each  editor,  or  even  copyist,  felt 
himself  privileged  to  bestow  upon  the  book  what  seemed  to  him  a 
suitable  appellation,  so  no  one  text  probably  in  the  whole  history  of 
literature  has  had  so  many  different  names.  The  most  common  and 
curious  of  all  them  is  that  of  the  Roman  d'Eracles,  a  title  given  by 
some  rubricator,  because  the  first  line  begins,  "  Les  anciennes  ygtoires 
dient  que  Erodes  en  fid  moult  bon  CJirestien,  et  gouverneur  de  V empire 
de.  Romme,"  William  having  introduced  his  history  by  recalling  the 
fact  of  the  conquest  of  Jerusalem  by  the  Persians,  and  their  deliver- 
ance by  the  Emperor  Heraclius,  in  629.  Other  more  appropriate 
titles  are  :  Le  Licre  de*  Passages  d' Outre  Mer  ;  Le  Lirre  dr  V Acqui- 
sition et  de  la  Perie  de  la  Terre  Saint e  ;  Les  Chroniques  d' Outre  M  r  ; 
Livres  des  Voyages  a  la  Terre  Sainte;  Histoires  du  Passage  de  Gode- 
froy  de  Bouillon,  or  simply,  Le  Litre  du  Conquete. 

Ernoul  and  Bernard  form  what  M.  Mas-Latrie, — who  first 
disentangled  the  intricate  relations  of  the  different  editions  of 
William  of  Tyre  to  each  other, — calls  the  "first  epoch''  of  his 
contiuuators. 

A  few  years  later  than  Bernard,  in  124S,  St.  Louis  of  France 
••  put  on  the  cross,"  and  departed  for  the  Holy  Land  ;  the  attention 


xiv     II.  Four  Groups  of  Continuers  of  William  of  Tyre. 

of  the  Christian  world  was  again  drawn  towards  the  East,  and  new 
deeds  of  valour  called  for  a  new  chronicler.  Another  continuation 
was  composed  in  the  French  language,  taking  the  narrative  up  where 
Bernard  left  it,  and  bringing  it  down  to  the  year  1261.  This  con- 
tinuation has  been  published  in  the  French  Academy  edition  of  the 
continuators  of  William  of  Tyre,  under  the  title,  Continuation  d'apres 
le  Manuscrit  de  Rothelin. 

Soon  after  this  appeared  what  may  be  called  the  third  series  of  con- 
tinuators. This  third  series  is  not  a  direct  continuation  of  the  second 
series.  It  does  not  take  up  the  narr-ative  where  that  left  it,  in  1261, 
but  attaches  itself  to  Ernoul  and  Bernard,  that  is,  to  the  first  class  of 
continuators,  and  closes  with  the  year  1275.  This  third  continuation, 
according  to  the  best  judges,  is  the  work  of  two  hands,  and  was 
written  entirely  in  the  East.  The  first  half  is  supposed  to  have  been 
the  composition  of  a  knight  of  Cyprus  or  Syria,  and  contains  the 
history  of  the  kingdoms  of  Cyprus  and  Jerusalem,  united  during  the 
minority  of  King  Henry  III.  of  Lusignan;  the  latter  half,  which 
narrates  the  events  transpiring  between  1248  and  1275,  seems  to 
have  been  written  by  a  monk,  as  it  is  more  scholarly  in  style  and 
character. 

The  fourth  and  last  group  of  continuators  are  only  copies  of  the 
second  series  (that  closing  in  1261),  to  which  has  been  added  an 
account  of  the  taking  of  St.  Jean  d'Acre,  and  of  events  subsequent  to 
1288,  so  that,  in  this  edition,  there  is  a  gap  in  the  history,  from  1261 
to  1288. 

Most  of  these  different  series  exist  only  in  manuscript,  there 
being  several  copies  of  each  known.  M.  Eiant,  in  Les  Archives  de 
V Orient  Latin,  gives  the  following  summary  of  the  manuscripts  of 
William  of  Tyre  and  his  continuators,  suppressing  very  justly  M. 
Mas-Latrie's  last  class,  which  (as  he  observes)  differs  from  the  others 
only  by  the  addition  of  matter  that  is  really  foreign  to  the  rest  of  the 
work. 

I.  Class.  Translation  of  William  of  Tyre;  eleven  MSS.,  two  of 
which  are  now  lost. 

II.  Class.  In  three  subdivisions,  and  containing  thirteen  MSS. : 
a.  Ernoul  to  1228,  five  MSS.;  b.  Estoires  d'Oultre  Mer,  et  de 
la  Naissance  Saladin,  three  MSS. ;  G.  Bernard  le  Treaorier  to 
1231,  five  MSS. 

III.  Class.  William  of  Tyre  translated,  and  continued  down  to 
1231,  twenty-two  MSS. 


II.  Spanish  Translation  of  William  of  Tyre.  xv 

IV.  Class  (Rothelin).  William  of  Tyre  translated  and  con- 
tinued down  to  1261.     (This  is  the  Academy  edition.)     Sixteen 

MSS. 

V.  Class.  William  of  Tyre  translated  and  continued  down  to 
1275.  This  has  been  published  by  the  Academy,  and  by  Doin 
Martene  and  Guizot,  eleven  MSS. 

An  excellent  description  of  many  of  these  manuscripts  is  given  in 
vol.  ii.  of  the  Recueil  des  Croisades,  published  by  the  French 
Academy  of  Inscriptions  and  Belles  Lettree. 

Taking  into  consideration  the  extreme  popularity  of  William  of 
Tyre's  history  in  France,  as  attested  by  the  large  number  of  manu- 
scripts still  existing,  it  is  strange  that  more  translations  into  other 
languages  have  not  been  found.  Of  those  known,  but  one  seems  to 
have  been  in  any  sense  a  popular  book,  namely,  that  into  Spanisb, 
which  is  known  under  the  title  of  La  Gran  Conquista  de  Ultra 
Mar.  This  is  a  vast  compilation,  of  which  M.  Gaston  Paris  has 
commenced  to  give  us  the  first  satisfactory  analysis  in  the  Romania, 
No.  68,  Oct.  1888.  La  Gran  Conquista  takes  as  its  basis  the 
history  of  William  of  Tyre,  inserting  at  appropriate  intervals  other 
French  compositions  treating  of  the  Crusades  or  of  Godfrey  of 
Bouillon,  such  as  La  Chanson  d'Antioch,  La  Clianson  de  Jerusalem, 
Le  Clievallier  an  Cygne,  the  poem  of  Les  Chetifs,  also  the  romans  of 
Berthe,  of  Mainet,  of  Flore  and  Blanchfleur.  It  is  an  immense  work, 
filling  a  volume  of  659  pages  of  two  columns  each,  of  a  quarto 
edition.  The  date  of  this  compilation  is  uncertain.  The  prologue  of 
the  first  printed  edition,  that  of  1503,  states  that  it  was  made  at  the 
suggestion  and  under  the  auspices  of  Alphonso  X.  of  Castile,  who 
reigned  from  1252  to  1284.  The  epilogue  of  a  manuscript  of  the 
15th  century  attributes  it  to  Alphonso  XI.,  who  died  in  1350, 
while  the  epilogue  of  the  oldest  manuscript  known,  that  of  the  14th 
century,  gives  the  merit  of  the  undertaking  to  the  son  of  Alphonso  X. , 
Sancho  IV.,  who  died  in  1295.  M.  Paris  remarks  that  this  latter 
date  is  probably  the  correct  one, — the  first  being  too  remote,  and  the 
second  too  recent,  to  be  accepted.  Both  of  the  epilogues  mentioned 
state  that  the  kings  of  whom  they  speak  caused  the  book  to  be 
translated  from  the  French  into  Castillian. 

There  is  no  doubt  that  the  Spanish  translator  possessed  a  copy  of 
William  of  Tyre  with  the  third  series  of  continuatore,  namely,  that 
bringing  it  down  to  1275,  as  La  Gran  Conquista  follows  that  edition 
closely,  with  additions  (according  to  M.  Paris)  from  a  source  still 


GODFKEY. 


b 


xvi  II,  Enkjlish  Translations  of  William  of  Tyre. 

unknown.  M.  Paris  also  conjectures  that  the  French  MS.  at  the 
disposal  of  the  arranger  of  the  book  may  have  been  a  defective  one, 
as  the  translation  breaks  off  abruptly  in  the  middle  of  a  sentence, 
leaving  the  narration  at  the  beginning  of  the  year  1271.  Ticknor,  in 
a  note  on  La  Gran  Conquista,  in  his  History  of  Spanish  Lite- 
rature, says  that  its  closing  chapters  (those  giving  an  account  of 
Conrad  of  Hohenstaufen,  and  the  assassination  of  Henry,  grand- 
son of  Henry  III.  of  England,  at  Viterbo)  were  added  by  the 
Spanish  arranger ;  but  a  comparison  with  the  original  shows  that 
these  details  were  all  literally  and  exactly  translated  from  the 
French. 

Of  La  Gran  Conquista  three  manuscripts  are  known  :  two  in  the 
National  Library  at  Madrid,  and  one  in  the  Royal  Library.  The 
first  printed  edition  was  that  of  Hans  Giessen,  Salamanca  1503,  in 
folio.     A  later  edition  is  that  of  Madrid  1858,  in  8vo. 

We  have  one  English  translation,  that  made  by  William  Caxton, 
printed  for  the  first  time  in  1481,  and  reprinted  in  the  present 
volume. 

Caxton  made  his  translation  from  the  same  edition  as  La  Gran 
Conquista,  viz.  that  ending  with  the  year  1275. 

Riant  in  his  enumeration  of  the  versions  of  Eracles,  mentions  a 
second  English  translation  contained  in  manuscript,  Reg.  18.  R  26, 
of  the  Rritish  Museum,  and  entitled  The  History  of  the  Holy  Ware. 
This  manuscript  is  a  paper  one,  in  folio,  containing  256  leaves,  and 
written  about  the  middle  of  the  16th  century,  apparently  late  in  the 
reign  of  Henry  VIII.,  instead  of  in  the  15th  century,  as  Riant  gives 
it,  on  the  authority  of  the  old  Royal  Catalogue,  by  Casley,  which  is 
wrong. 

This  History  of  the  Holy  Ware  is  a  compilation  containing : 
I.  An  account  of  Robert,  Duke  of  Normandy,  of  his  visit  to  the 
Holy  Land,  and  of  his  son  William,  afterwards  the  Conqueror  of 
England.  II.  A  narration  of  the  events  of  the  First  Crusade,  taken, 
according  to  the  author,  from  the  book  of  the  Conquest  of  Jerusalem, 
and  from  the  book  of  the  Nine  Worthies  in  French.  III.  An 
account  of  the  adventures  of  Richard,  Cceur  de  Lion,  in  the  Third 
Crusade.  IV.  A  narration  of  the  prowesses  of  Prince  Edward,  son 
of  Henry  III.,  and  of  the  events  of  the  Ninth  Crusade.  V.  A 
"Treatie"  translated  from  the  French  of  a  certain  Frere  Hayton, 
treating  of  the  different  countries  of  the  East,  and  of  their  great 
rulers  and  heroes.     The  book  ends  with  directions  for  making  the 


//.  English  and  German  Translations  of  Wrn.  of  Tyre,    xvii 

journey  to  the  Holy  Land,  and  rules  for  the  behaviour  of  pilgrims 
en  route. 

Part  II.  of  this  compilation  is  supposed  by  Riant  to  be  a  direct 
translation  of  the  compiler  from  one  of  the  numerous  French  editions 
of  William  of  Tyre.  On  investigation,  however,  it  proves  to  be  only 
a  condensation  of  Caxton's  translation. 

The  first  chapters  consist  of  a  genealogy  and  biography  of  Godfrey 
of  Bouillon,  taken  without  doubt,  as  its  author  says,  from  the  "  IX 
boke  of  the  IX  worthies  in  french."  After  this  introduction,  the 
history  of  the  First  Crusade  is  taken  up,  at  the  departure  of  Gautier 
Sans  Avoir  for  the  Holy  Land,  and  continued  down  to  the  death  of 
Godfrey.  The  close  of  this  book,  at  the  same  point  where  Caxton 
ends  his  translation,  together  with  the  fact  that  all  of  Caxton's  mis- 
takes in  translation  and  in  proper  names  are  found  in  it,  is  pretty 
conclusive  proof  that  our  unknown  arranger  did  not  trouble  himself 
to  go  back  to  the  French  for  his  materials,  but  availed  himself  of 
Caxton's  translation.  The  matter  is  very  materially  abridged,  the 
condensations  being  made  with  great  ability  and  discretion  by  omit- 
ting the  long  rhetorical  speeches,  and  giving  their  substance  in  brief. 
Many  minor  and  unimportant  details  are  also  judiciously  omitted ; 
the  wording  is  in  general  exactly  that  of  Caxton. 

The  fifth  part  of  this  compilation,  that  translated  from  Frere 
Haiton,  was  published  in  1526  by  Pynson,  but  the  first,  third,  and 
fourth  seem  never  to  have  been  printed. 

As  to  the  translations  into  German,  it  is  not  easy  to  decide  from 
the  brief  descriptions  given,  whether  those  mentioned  by  biblio- 
graphers are  really  translations  of  William  of  Tyre,  or  of  the  poems 
of  Godfrey  of  Bouillon,  and  the  Chevalier  au  Cygne,  which  were 
extremely  popular  in  the  13th  and  14th  centuries,  and  were  rendered 
into  a  prose  form,  which  caused  them  to  resemble  not  a  little  the 
genuine  history,  and  to  l>e  often  confounded  with  it. 

Brunet,  in  his  Manuel  du  Libraire,  under  the  heading  "Godefroy 
de  Bouillon,"  and  M.  Reitfenberg  (Int.  to  Le  Chevalier  an  Cygne) 
mention  several  German  and  Flemish  translations  of  the  romance  of 
Godefroid  de  Bouillon.  The  oldest  of  these  Brunet  describes  as 
follows : 

"It  was  printed  at  Augsburg  in  1482,  with  this  title  '  Hienach 
folgt.  ein  warhal't  und  bewerte  historie  wie  die  turche  uh  audio 
geschlecht  der  ungleubigen  die  cristeltichen  Kirche,'  etc.;  on  the  back 
of  the  last  leaf  is  printed  '  Disc   warharl'tige  history  hat  gedrucht 


xviii    II.  German,  and  Italian  Translations  of  Wm.  of  Tyre. 

hanns  Bamler  zu  Augsperg,  und  volendet   au  Mantag   vor  Jeorg. 
Anno  Te  JM  Lxxxij  jare  ze'  (1482)." 

The  book  is  a  Gothic  in-folio.  It  contains  47  half-page  wood- 
cuts. This  book  is  mentioned  by  Zapf,  History  of  Printing  in 
Augsburg,  I.%  p.  65,  No.  21,  under  the  title  of  Histoi'ie  von  der 
Kreuz  Fahrt.  It  was  reprinted  at  Augsburg  in  1502  by  Lucas 
Zeizsenmeier  under  the  following  title  :  Herzog  Godfried  wie  er  wider 
die  Turgen  und  hayden  gestritten. 

No  reliable  analysis  of  the  contents  of  these  books  seems  ever  to 
have  been  made ;  but  the  Bibliotheque  Rationale  of  Paris,  according 
to  M.  Brunet,  possesses  a  Flemish  translation  of  this  same  work 
printed  at  Harlem  in  1486,  and  reprinted  in  Antwerp  in  1510  and 
1511.  This  Flemish  copy,  however,  on  the  authority  of  M.  figeon- 
neau  (Le  Cycle  de  la  Croisade  et  de  la  Famille  de  Bouillon),  who 
has  examined  it,  is  not  at  all  a  copy  of  either  the  poem  of  Le 
Chevalier  au  Cygne  or  of  Godefroid  de  Bouillon,  or  of  both  combined, 
but  is  a  translation  of  William  of  Tyre ;  so  the  conclusion  is  that 
the  Augsburg  German  editions  must  also  be  translations  of  William's 
history.  Pigeonneau  gives  the  following  description  of  the  Flemish 
book  :  "  It  is  a  small  in-quarto,  without  title,  date  and  name  of  editor, 
printed  in  Gothic  characters  and  ornamented  (like  the  Augsburg 
edition  of  1482)  with  47  wood  cuts.  It  commences  with  these 
words,  '  Hier  beghient  prologhe  van  der  Scoene  historien  Hertoglie 
Godewort  van  Bolocn.' " 

In  Italy  the  first  translation  into  the  popular  language  that  I 
have  been  able  to  find,  with  the  limited  means  of  research  at  my  dis- 
posal, is  that  by  Lorenza  di  Firenze,  which  bears  the  date  of  1347, 
and  the  following  title,  "  II  Libro  del  Passagio  di  Terra  Sancta,  et  e 
traslato  di  francescho  in  fiorentino,  per  Lorenzo  di  Firenze  cittadino." 
This  manuscript  is  to  be  found  in  the  Laurentian  Library  in  Florence, 
is  written  on  vellum,  is  in  folio,  and  is  translated  from  the  second 
class  of  William  of  Tyre's  editions.  Its  designation  is  Phet  LXI, 
No.  44.  In  1562,  at  Venice,  an  Italian  translation  was  printed  by 
Guiseppe  Horologgi,  entitled,  "  Historia  della  guerra  sacra  de  Gerusa- 
lemme  della  terra  promissione,  et  de  tutti  la  Soria  ricuperata  da 
christiani  da  Guglielmo  arcevesco  di  Tiro,  tradotta  da  Guiseppe 
Horologgi,  Venetia  1562."  Guizot  in  La  Collection  des  Memoires 
sur  VHistoire  de  France,  vol.  xvi,  p.  14,  mentions  a  third  Italian 
translation  made  by  one  Thomas  Baglioni,  in  1610,  and  also  published 
in  Venice. 


2/.  Latin  Re-translations  of  William  of  Tyre.         xix 

The  most  curious  thing  about  the  history  of  our  book  is  its 
re-translation  into  Latin,  at  an  early  date,  showing  that  the  French 
translation  must  have  been  considered  the  original  composition,  and 
tliat  the  Latin  original  was  comparatively  unknown.  In  1725, 
Muratori  published  a  collection  of  Italian  historians,  entitled  lierum 
Italicarum  Scriptores.  Among  these  historians  he  included  Fran- 
cisco Pipino,  a  monk  of  Bologna,  who  lived  in  the  first  half  of  the 
14th  century,  and  wrote  in  Latin  a  history  of  the  First  Crusade  and 
the  events  which  transpired  in  the  Holy  Land  between  the  years 
1095  and  1230.  His  book  is  introduced  by  the  following  statement : 
"Here  commences  the  history  of  the  Conquest  of  the  Holy  Land, 
which  the  author  has  translated  from  French  into  Latin."  He  closes 
thus  :  "  All  these  things,  about  the  life  and  deeds  of  King  John,  are 
taken  from  the  history  of  Bernard  the  Treasurer."  Pipino  trans- 
lated, as  can  easily  be  seen,  from  a  manuscript  of  the  third  class, 
that  containing  the  continuation  of  Ernovd  and  Bernard,  which  he, 
like  everybody  else,  regarded  as  the  work  of  Bernard  alone. 

Riant,  in  his  list  of  the  versions  of  Eracles,  also  cites  two  other 
Latin  re-translations,  both-anonymous  :  one  in  the  University  Library 
at  Leyden  (Voss  110).  This  is  a  paper  folio  of  the  16th  century, 
and  is  supposed  to  be  a  copy  of  an  old  MS.  written  in  Italy.  The 
second  is  at  Utrecht,  No.  285  of  the  City  Library,  a  manuscript  of 
the  15th  century,  although  this  latter  piece  of  information  seems  to 
be  regarded  as  doubtful  by  M.  Riant. 

We  have  also  very  good  evidence  that  a  Latin  re-translation  was 
made  in  England  as  early  as  the  first  half  of  the  13th  century. 
Ralph,  prior  at  this  time  of  the  monastery  of  Coggeshall  in  Essex, 
wrote  a  history  of  the  Holy  Land,  which  he  calls  Chronicon  Terrce 
Sanctce,  describing  especially  the  siege  of  Jerusalem  by  Saladiu,  at 
which  he  himself  had  been  present.  In  order  to  excuse  the  lack  of 
details  in  regard  to  many  previous  events  in  the  history  of  the 
European  establishments  in  Palestine,  Ralph  refers  his  readers  to  a 
Latin  history  treating  of  these  events,  and  lately  translated  from  the 
French  by  the  prior  of  the  Holy  Trinity  in  London,  a  book  which 
could  hardly  fail  to  be  one  of  the  earlier  editions  of  William  of 
Tyre. 

Since  the  invention  of  printing,  there  have  been  many  excellent 
editions  of  William  of  Tyre,  both  in  Latin  and  French.  It  was 
published  for  the  first  time  in  Latin  in  1549,  in  Bale,  in  folio,  by 
Phillibert  Poyssenot  of  Dole.     Henri  Panteleon  issued  a  new  edition 

2  * 


xx  77.  French  Editions.     III.   William  of  Tyre. 

in  the  same  city  iu  1564,  adding  a  continuation,  also  in  Latin, 
written  by  one  John  Herold,  a  learned  German  of  the  16th  century, 
and  a  native  of  Hochstadt,  in  Suabia.  Herold  narrates  the  history 
of  the  Holy  Land  from  1185,  bringing  it  down  as  late  as  the  year 
1527.  The  earliest  French  edition  printed  was  that  published  in 
Paris  in  1575,  in  folio,  under  the  title  "  Histoire  de  la  guerre  Sainte 
Lite  proprement  La  Franciade  orientale,  faite  latine  par  Guillaume 
archevesque  de  Tyr,  et  traduit  en  Francais  par  Gabr.  du  Pieau." 
In  1611  Bongars  published  a  collection  of  Latin  writers  on  the 
Crusades,  under  the  title  Gesta  Dei  per  Francos,  2  vol.  in  folio,  in 
which  he  included  William  of  Tyre.  Between  1724  and  1733,  Dom 
Martene  and  Dom  Duvand,  benedictines  of  St.  Maur,  men  of  great 
learning  and  research,  published  a  second  collection  of  Latin  authors 
on  the  Crusades,  entitled  Amplissima  Collectio,  in  9  vols.,  folio.  The 
filth  volume  of  this  collection  contains  the  Latin  version  of  William 
of  Tyre. 

Other  more  modern  editions  of  importance  are  those  of  Migne, 
Patrologice  Latinm  Cursus,  vol.  201,  and  Guizot,  vols.  16 — 18  of  the 
Collection  des  Memoires  sur  V Histoire  de  France,  Paris  1823 — 25. 
The  Academie  des  Inscriptions  et  Belles  Lettres  commenced  in  the 
first  half  of  this  century  a  collection  of  texts  relating  to  the  Crusades, 
entitled  Recueil  des  Croisades :  vols.  I  and  II,  which  appeared  in 
1844,  contain  not  only  the  Latin,  but  the  corresponding  French  text 
of  William  of  Tyre.  The  latest  edition  in  the  French  language,  and 
without  a  doubt  the  most  accurate  and  scholarly  that  has  yet 
appeared,  is  that  of  Paulin  Paris,  Paris  1879,  which  contains,  how- 
ever, simply  the  history  as  written  by  William,  without  any  of  the 
various  continuations. 

III.     WILLIAM   OF  TYRE. 

Of  William  of  Tyre,  second  archbishop  of  the  name,  but  little  is 
known,  except  what  can  be  gathered  from  his  own  writings.  He 
was  born  about  1130,  without  a  doubt  in  Palestine,  which,  in  the 
prologue  to  his  history,  he  calls  his  beloved  birth-place,  Natalis  soli 
magis  traeti  didcedine.  He  was  probably  of  French  descent,  as 
shown  by  his  familiarity  with  French  ways  and  customs,  people  and 
events,  although  Paulin  Paris  hazards  the  supposition  that  he  was  an 
Italian,  as  he  speaks  of  being  called  to  Home  on  one  occasion,  not 
only  by  public  business,  but  also  by  private  affairs. 


III.    William  of  Tyre.     His  Birth  anil  Rank.         xxi 

As  to  his  rank,  authorities  differ ;  Pratz  (Neues  Archin  der 
Geschichte,  etc.,  vol.  viii.  p.  93),  stating  that  he  was  from  a  middle- 
class  family.  Prutz  bases  his  conclusion  on  a  Cartulary  of  the 
Church  of  the  Holy  Sepulchre,  of  the  year  1175,  in  which  the  name 
of  a  certain  Radolphus,  brother  of  the  archbishop,  William  of  Tyre, 
occurs,  as  belonging  to  a  family  not  of  noble  rank.  On  the  other 
hand,  Pastouret  (Hist.  Litt.  de  la  France,  vol.  xiv.,  p.  588)  affirms, 
on  the  authority  of  one  Etienne  of  Lusigrau,  author  of  a  history  of 
Cyprus,  that  William  of  Tyre  was  related  to  some  of  the  leading 
nobles  of  the  kingdom  of  Jerusalem.  However  this  may  be,  it  is 
certain  that  he  was  brought  up  in  or  near  Jerusalem,  with  which  he 
was  thoroughly  acquainted.  Every  part  of  the  city  is  known  to  him 
intimately,  not  only  as  it  was  in  his  day,  but  as  it  had  been  in  the 
past.  In  mentioning  Jerusalem,  he  always  calls  it  "regio  nostra," 
and  when  speaking  of  anything  in  connection  with  that  city  or  its 
inhabitants,  he  says  "we,"  "ours,"  to  distinguish  it  from  the  Princi- 
pality of  Antioch  or  the  Counties  of  Tripolis  and  Edessa.  On  this 
subject  we  have  also  the  authority  of  the  unknown  continuator  of 
William,  who  tells  us  (Book  XXIIL,  chap.  10):  "The  archbishop 
of  Tyre  was  called  William,  and  was  born  in  Jerusalem." 

As  to  the  exact  date  of  his  birth  it  is  difficult  to  decide,  although 
both  French  and  German  savants  have  spent  much  time  in  investigat- 
ing this  point.  We  can  only  judge  approximately  by  incidental 
remarks  that  William  makes  about  fresh  events  in  his  life.  He  cer- 
tainly studied,  as  a  young  man,  for  a  time  at  least,  in  Europe.  He 
says  of  himself  that  he  was  studying  "trans  mare "  at  the  time  of  the 
divorce  of  Amalric,  king  of  Jerusalem,  from  Agnes  of  Courtenay, 
daughter  of  Joscelin  II.,  Count  of  Edessa  in  1162  (Book  XIX., 
chap.  4)  : 

"  Quaesivimus  sane  nos  postea  diligentur,  tamquam  circa  talia 
curiosi  quoto  consanguinitas  gradu  se  contingent,  qui  non  de  scholis 
redieramus,  sed  trans  mare,  circa  liberalium  artium  adhuc  detine- 
bantur  studia,  quando  Hierosolymis  haec  facta  sunt." 

Just  where  he  was  studying  is  only  to  be  conjectured.  Pastouret 
imagines  in  Paris,  while  other  authorities  remark  that  he  seems  very 
well  acquainted  with  Home ;  and  the  supposition  has  even  been 
advanced  that  his  studies  may  have  been  prosecuted  at  Constanti- 
nople, which  theory  would  account  for  his  thorough  knowledge  of 
the  Greek  language,  and  also  for  his  acquaintance  with  Byzantine 
politics  and  dignitaries.     Wherever  he  received  his  education,  it  was 


xxii         III.   William  of  Tyre.     Archdeacon  in  1167. 

most  certainly  unusually  thorough  and  extensive,  embracing  a  range 
of  studies  which  only  a  man  brought  into  constant  contact  with  both 
the  Occidental  and  Oriental  civilization  and  literature  would  pursue 
at  this  epoch. 

That  he  was  an  excellent  Latinist  is  shown,  not  only  by  his  fine 
style,  which  -compares  favourably  witli  any  other  composition  that  the 
Middle  Ages  produced,  but  by  his  extended  acquaintance  with 
classical  Latin  literature,  citations  and  references  being  found  in  his 
history  from  nearly  all  the  best-known  Latin  authors,  such  as  Ovid, 
Virgil,  Horace,  Lucan,  Juvenal,  Statius,  Terence,  Cicero,  Livy,  and 
Sallust.  Of  hie  proficiency  in  the  Greek  language  there  is  no  doubt. 
He  says  himself  that  he  spoke  it  (Book  XIII.,  chaps.  1  and  2),  and 
the  fact  that  he  was  sent  on  more  than  one  diplomatic  mission  to 
Constantinople  confirms  his  Own  statement.  He  also  spoke  and  read 
Arabic  with  ease.  In  speaking  of  his  History  of  the  Arab  Princes, 
he  tells  us  that  he  followed  mainly  Arabian  authorities.  His  explan- 
ation of  Arabic  terms  also  shows  his  familiarity  with  the  language. 

A  young  priest  of  his  learning  and  abilities  did  not  have  to  wait 
long  for  preferment,  and  in  1163,  which  must  have  been  immediately 
after  his  return  from  his  Western  studies,  we  find  him  figuring  as  a 
Canon  of  the  church  in  Tyre.  Although  not  living  in  Jerusalem, 
William  evidently  soon  became  a  special  favourite  with  the  king, 
Amalric  I.,  at  whose  request  he  was  made  an  archdeacon  on  the  1st 
of  September,  1167.  The  little  kingdom  of  Jerusalem  was  at  this 
time  agitated  by  the  plan  that  Amalric  had  conceived  of  subjugating 
Egypt.  For  many  years  a  civil  war  had  been  waged  in  that  country 
headed  by  two  rival  viziers.  As  each  party  was  threatened  with 
defeat,  it  had  applied  in  turn  to  the  Turks  or  to  the  Latins  for  aid, 
so  that  Amalric  had  had  an  excellent  opportunity  for  obtaining  a 
thorough  knowledge  both  of  the  wealth  and  of  the  weakness  of  his 
neighbours.  Induced  partly  by  cupidity,  and  partly  by  fear  of 
the  Turks, — who  under  the  brave  Noureddin  were  becoming  more 
powerful  every  day, — Amalric  decided  that  the  time  had  come  for  a 
serious  invasion  of  Egypt,  and,  to  this  end,  he  sent  an  embassy  to 
Constantinople  to  ask  for  assistance  from  the  Emperor  Manuel,  whose 
niece  he  had  lately  married.  William,  the  newly-made  archdeacon, 
accompanied  this  embassy,  which  was  composed  of  Greeks  and 
Latins.  He  remained  in  Constantinople,  presumably  on  business  for 
the  king,  until  October  1168,  when  he  returned  to  Tyre  and  to  his 
church  duties.     His  relations  to  his  archbishop  seem,  however,  not 


III.   William  of  Tyre  in  Jerusalem.  xxiii 

to  have  "been  very  agreeable,  and  in  a  few  months,  early  in  1169,  we 
find  him  starting  for  Rome,  partly,  as  he  expressly  states,  on  private 
business,  and  partly  to  get  out  of  the  way  of  his  unfriendly  superior. 
Towards  the  close  of  this  same  year  he  returned  to  Palestine,  but  not 
to  Tyre,  as  Amalric  offered  him  the  tutorship  of  his  nine-year-old 
son,  afterwards  known  as  Baldwin  IV.  or  Baldwin  the  Leper.  From 
this  time  on,  William  lived  in  Jerusalem,  and  seems  to  have  grown 
daily  in  favour  with  the  king,  already  well-disposed  towards  him. 

That  William  was  a  kind  and  able  instructor  is  not  to  be  doubted 
by  any  one  who  reads  the  accounts  that  he  gives  of  his  royal  charge. 
The  most  interesting  is  that  of  Book  XXL,  chap.  1  : — 

"The  child  made  great  progress  in  his  studies,  and  more  and 
more  gave  us  reason  to  centre  our  hopes  upon  him.  He  had  a  fine 
figure,  and  was  more  skilful  in  riding  and  controlling  a  horse  than 
any  of  his  ancestors  had  been.  He  had  a  good  memory,  and  was 
fond  of  conversing.  He  was  economical,  and  remembered  a  kiud- 
ness  done  to  him  as  well  as  an  injury.  He  resembled  his  father,  not 
only  in  face  but  in  form,  and  in  his  walk,  and  the  sound  of  his 
voice.  His  mind  was  quick,  but  his  tongue  was  slow.  Like  his 
father,  also,  he  was  fond  of  hearing  interesting  stories  told,  and  was 
always  ready  to  follow  good  advice." 

The  boy  seems  in  return  to  have  conceived  a  deep  attachment  for 
the  wise  and  learned  prelate. 

In  1173  Amalric  died,  and  Baldwin  succeeded  to  the  throne,  at 
the  age  of  13.  The  future  did  not  promise  tranquillity  or  happiness 
to  the  young  king,  who  was  even  then  afflicted  with  an  incurable 
and  loathsome  malady.  The  political  situation  of  Jerusalem,  always 
one  of  danger,  was  at  this  time  more  precarious  than  ever.  Weakened 
by  the  fruitless  attempts  of  Amalric  to  conquer  Egypt,  it  was  now 
torn  by  internal  dissensions,  as  the  more  powerful  barons  contended 
among  themselves  for  the  supremacy,  foreseeing  the  speedy  death  of 
the  sick  boy.  Amidst  this  confusion  the  fortunes  of  William  throve 
steadily.  He  was  immediately  appointed  Chancellor  of  the  Kingdom, 
as  he  tells  us,  Book  XXL,  chap.  5,  "ut  esset  qui  regiarum  episto- 
larum  curam  habent."  Very  soon  after,  in  1174,  Bishop  Radulphus 
of  Bethlehem  died,  and  William  was  installed  in  the  vacant  bishopric. 
At  about  the  same  time  he  must  have  been  made  archdeacon  of  the 
church  in  Nazareth,  as  the  records  show  him  in  possession  of  this 
dignity  in  December  1 1 74.  The  very  next  year,  his  old  enemy,  Frederic 
Archbishop  of  Tyre,  died,  and  William  was  named  as  his  successor. 
For  the  next  three  years  we  find  William  occupied  with  his  double 


xxiv  III.    William  of  Tyre.     His  Death. 

duties  as  Chancellor  and  as  Archbishop,  keeping  an  attentive  eye  on 
the  political  condition  of  his  land, — which  we  know  from  his  own 
words  was  a  constant  and  ever-increasing  source  of  anxiety  to  him, — 
and  at  the  same  time  defending  firmly  the  rights  of  his  pupil  against 
all  encroachments.  In  September  1178  he  went  with  the  dignitaries 
of  the  Holy  Land  to  Kome,  to  the  third  Council  held  in  St.  John 
Lateran.  There  he  was  deputed  to  draw  up  a  report  of  the  Council, 
of  the  number  of  persons  present,  of  its  proceedings,  and  its  decisions. 
He  remained  in  Rome  until  September  1179,  when  he  started  for  home, 
stopping  on  the  way  several  months  at  the  court  of  Manuel,  Emperor 
of  Constantinople,  on  political  business,  and  arriving  in  Tyre  the  6th 
of  July,  1180.  On  his  return,  William  found  his  native  land  in 
"rcater  need  than  ever  of  wise  counsels  and  energetic  action,  and 
from  this  time  on  he  occupied  himself  much  more  with  statesmanship 
than  with  ecclesiastical  matters.  The  rapidly  increasing  power  of 
Saladin  was  a  source  of  the  greatest  apprehension  to  the  feeble  little 
Latin  kingdom,  and  none  saw  more  clearly  than  William,  the  dangers 
that  threatened  them,  or  strove  more  untiringly  to  prepare  for  the 
struggle  which  was  iuevitably  to  come.  Although  his  home  was 
ostensibly  in  Tyre,  he  spent  all  of  his  time  in  Jerusalem  with  the 
young  king. 

Late  in  the  year  1182  came  the  news  of  Saladin's  approach  at  the 
head  of  a  powerful  army.  After  ravaging  Galilee,  Saladin  commenced 
the  siege  of  Beirut.  Baldwin,  accompanied  by  William,  hastened  to 
Tyre,  where  a  fleet  was  fitted  out  to  be  sent  to  the  rescue  of  the 
threatened  city.  The  two,  pupil  and  master,  celebrated  Christmas  at 
Tyre,  and  then  returned  in  January  1183  to  Jerusalem. 

This  is  the  last  positive  record  by  himself  that  we  have  of 
William  of  Tyre.  The  last  chapter  of  his  history  mentions  the  inci- 
dents of  the  spring  and  summer  of  this  year,  without  any  specific 
information  as  to  his  own  movements.  Of  the  date  of  his  death, 
nothing  certain  is  known.  Ernoul,  in  his  continuation,  gives  the 
following  account  of  it. — In  1180,  Amalric,  patriarch  of  Jerusalem, 
died.  The  question  of  his  successor  was  one  of  great  importance,  as 
the  position  of  spiritual  director  of  the  Holy  City,  and  that  of 
guardian  of  the  Holy  Sepulchre,  was  regarded  by  the  whole  Christian 
world  as  one  of  the  most  honourable  that  the  Church  had  in  its  gilt. 
Sybilla,  mother  of  the  infant  Baldwin  V.,  favoured  Heraclius  of 
Csesarea,  a  man  of  fine  personal  appearance  :  "  Beau  clerc  etait,"  says 
Ernoul,  "  et  pour  sa  beaute  l'ama  la  mere  le  roi."    His  habits,  however, 


IV.   William  of  Tyres  Literary   Works.  xxv 

•were  dissolute,  and  William  opposed  him  energetically,  not  only  on 
the  ground  of  his  personal  unfitness  for  this  lofty  position,  hut  also 
hecause  of  a  prophecy  that  the  Holy  Cross  which  had  heen  hrought 
back  to  Jerusalem  under  a  Heraclius,  should  be  taken  away  again 
under  a  Heraclius. 

Heraclius,  notwithstanding,  received  the  patriarchate.  "William, 
convinced  of  the  evils  that  would  result  from  this  unworthy  choice 
at  such  a  critical  time,  decided  to  appeal  to  Borne,  and  hastened 
hither  to  prevent  if  possible  its  confirmation.  Here  he  died  sud- 
denly, killed,  it  was  supposed,  by  poison  administered  by  a  phy- 
sician sent  after  him  for  that  purpose  by  Heraclius.  As  the  quaint 
old  French  of  the  13th  century  has  it,  "Quand  Eracle  sut  qu'il  ala  a 
Rome,  dist  a  un  sien  lisicien  qu'il  alast  apres,  et  quil  l'empoissonast ; 
et  cil  si  fist ;  si  f  u  mort." 

IV.     WILLIAM   OF  TYRE'S   LITERARY   WORKS. 

The  literary  productions  of  William  of  Tyre,  of  which  we  have 
to-day  any  knowledge,  are  three  in  number. 

I.  The  already  mentioned  Report  of  the  Third  Lateran  Council, 
held  in  Rome  in  1179.  In  his  21st  Book,  chap.  26,  William  refers 
to  this  Report  thus  :  "  If  any  one  would  like  to  know  the  statutes 
of  this  Council,  the  names,  the  number,  and  the  titles  of  the  bishops 
who  were  present,  let  him  read  the  account  that  we  wrote  of  it,  at 
the  request  of  the  holy  fathers  who  were  there  present,  which  we 
have  caused  to  be  deposited  in  the  archives  of  the  holy  .church  at 
Tyre,  among  other  books  that  we  have  placed  there." 

II.  A  History  of  the  Arabian  Princes,  from  the  time  of  Mahomet 
up  to  the  year  1184.  This  book  which  was  entitled  De  Gestis 
Orlentalimn  Principum,  or  De  Orientalihus  Princiinbus  et  em-urn 
Adihus,  is  now  unfortunately  lost,  but  in  the  prologue  to  his  History 
of  the  First  Crusade,  William  speaks  of  having  written  it,  and  saya 
that  he  was  urged  to  undertake  it  by  King  Amalric,  who  procured 
for  him  the  Arabian  books  that  he  used  as  authorities,  especially  the 
history  of  Seith,  patriarch  of  Alexandria,  which  he  followed  mainly. 

"  Cujus  etiam  rogatu  ipso  Arabica  exempleria  menestrante  alium 
historiam,  a  tempore  seductoris  Mahumeth  usque  in  nunc  annum, 
qui  est  nobis  ad  incarnatione  Domini  M.C.L.XXXIV,  per  Annus 
quingentos  septuaginta  decurrentem  conscripsimus,  auctorem  maxime 
secuti  virum  venerabilem  Seith,  tilium  Patrici,  Alexandrinum  patri- 
archum." 


xx vi  IV.    William  of  Tyre's  Literary   Works. 

He  also  mentions  this  same  work  in  several  other  places,  namely, 
Book  L  chap.  3,  Book  XIX.  chapters  15  and  21. 

This  "  venerabilem  Seith "  is,  according  to  the  best  authorities, 
Said  Ibn  Batrik,  born  in  Egypt  in  879.  He  was  a  celebrated  phy- 
sician, and  was  for  many  years  Patriarch  of  Alexandria.  His  book 
was  written  in  Arabic,  and  contained  a  history  of  the  world,  from 
the  time  of  Adam  up  to  the  year  326  of  the  Hegira,  that  is,  up  to 
937  a.d.  The  Arabic  word  Said  or  Seith,  meaning  "  the  fortunate 
oner"  was  transformed  into  Eutychius,  in  Greek ;  and  the  same 
history  was  published  in  a  Latin  and  Arabic  edition,  at  Oxford, 
in  the  17th  century,  by  one  Pococke,  under  the  title  S.  Eutychii 
Patriarclii  Alexandrini  Annates  Lat.  et  Arab.,  ed.  Pococke,  Oxon. 
1658. 

III.  "William's  third  work  was  his  History  of  the  First  Crusade 
and  of  the  Establishments  founded  in  the  East  by  the  Crusaders,  or, 
as  the  title  runs — Historia  rerum  in  partibus  transmarinis  Gestarum. 
This  is  really  the  great  work  of  his  life,  and  the  work  on  which  his 
literary  fame  rests.  Soon  after  his  return  from  his  Eastern  studies, 
in  1163,  he  conceived  the  plan  of  writing  a  truthful  and  unbiassed 
history  of  Latin  affairs  in  the  East.  King  Amalric  encouraged  him 
also  in  this  literary  undertaking,  and  volunteered  to  assist  him  in 
every  way  possible.  The  first  eleven  books  were  finished,  the  internal 
evidence  shows  us,  before  the  summer  of  1173  :  book  fourteen,  after 
"William  was  made  Archbishop;  and  the  first  chapter  of  the  unfinished 
twenty-third  book  must  have  been  written  in  the  last  year  of  his 
life.  According  to  these  data,  the  book  occupied  him  for  twenty 
years. 

When  we  consider  "William  of  Tyre's  merits  as  a  historian  critic- 
ally, and  compare  him  with  other  writers  of  the  same  period,  it  is 
not  difficult  to  see  that  he  far  surpasses  them  all,  and  that  his  work 
is,  in  fact,  the  first  history,  in  the  modern  sense  of  the  word,  and  the 
best,  that  the  Middle  Ages  have  to  show  us.  The  list  of  authors 
who  have  treated  of  the  same  subject  is  a  long  one,  but  none  are  at 
all  worthy  to  be  compared  with  William,  either  in  learning,  ability, 
style,  or  arrangement  of  materials.  "We  have,  first,  the  narratives  of 
those  men  who  were  themselves  eye-witnesses  of  the  events  they 
record — diffuse,  ill-arranged  chronicles,  generally  written  from  a  par- 
tisan standpoint,  to  celebrate  the  prowess  and  doughty  deeds  either 
of  one  great  noble  or  hero,  or  of  one  nation  or  section  of  a  nation. 
Under  this  head  may  be  ranked  Piaymond  of  Agiles,  who  accompanied 


IV.    William  of  Tyres  Literary  Works.  xxvii 

the  Count  of  Toulouse  on  the  First  Crusade.  Naturally,  his  liege 
lord  and  the  hot-headed  superstitious  Provencals  have  the  leading 
places  in  his  account  of  things.  Then  comes  an  anonymous  writer, 
attached  prohably  to  Bohemond,  Prince  of  Tarentum,  whose  adven- 
tures and  prowesses  he  narrates  at  length.  Foucher  of  Chartres  is 
the  next  in  order,  with  his  chronicle,  which  he  calls  Getta  Peregrin- 
antium  Francorum.  Foucher  started  for  the  Holy  Land  in  the  suite 
of  Robert  of  Normandy  and  Steven  of  Blois,  but  soon  left  them  for 
Baldwin,  the  brother  of  Godfrey  of  Boulogne,  whom  he  followed  to 
Edessa,  so  that  his  narrative  recounts  the  deeds  and  conquests  of  the 
North  Frenchmen  and  Flemish. 

In  many  instances  these  accounts  disagree  totally,  and  the  aim  of 
their  authors  seems  to  be,  not  so  much  to  give  a  fair,  dispassionate, 
accurate  statement  of  what  happened,  as  to  make  everything  as  mar- 
vellous and  wonderful  as  possible.  As  to  the  historians  who  were 
not  eye-witnesses— of  whom  Albert  of  Aix  (Albertus  Aquensis)  is  a 
fair  sample— they  seem  to  have  copied  all  the  others,  without  even 
noticing  the  incongruities  in  the  narrations  that  they  were  com- 
bining, or  without  having  the  least  idea  of  regarding  their  sources 
with  any  critical  attention. 

William's  idea  of  the  manner  in  which  a  history  should  be  writ- 
ten was  very  different  from  this.  In  the  first  place,  the  scope  of  his 
work  was  much  greater,  including  not  only  an  account  of  the  First 
Crusade,  but  of  almost  a  century  of  French  rule  in  the  Orient. 
Instead  of  plunging  in  medias  res,  he  went  systematically  to  work, 
and  gave,  in  the  first  place,  a  clear,  well-arranged  description  of  the 
state  of  things  in  the  East,  previous  to  the  First  Crusade,  with  a 
logical  analysis  of  the  causes  leading  up  to  that  great  movement. 
As  to  his  sources,  William  states  in  his  Preface,  that  Books  I.  to  XV. 
are  based  on  oral  communications  of  old  people,  on  letters  and  other  re- 
liable documents.  He  also  states  further,  that  he  has  used  no  previous 
authorities  :  "  In  hoc  vero  nullam  aut  Gracam,  aut  Arabicam  habentes 
praducem  scripturam,  solis  traditionibus  instructi,  exceptis  paucis 
qua?  ipsi  oculata  fide  conspeximus  narrationis  seriem  ordinavimus." 

Notwithstanding  this  elaborate  disclaimer,  it  is  certain  that 
William  was  acquainted  with  all  previous  histories  of  the  Crusades. 
Von  Sybel,  the  learned  German  historian  of  the  First  Crusade,  has 
amused  himself  by  comparing  William's  history  with  those  of  Albert 
of  Aix,  Foucher  of  Chartres,  Raymond  of  Agiles,  and  Tudebodus, 
and  has  clearly  demonstrated  that  William  followed  sometimes  one, 


xxviii  IV.    William  of  Tyres  Literary  Works. 

sometimes  another  of  these  authorities  for  the  first  half,  at  least,  of 
his  work.  But  this  much  must  be  said  for  him,  that  he  followed 
with  discrimination,  always  selecting  the  author  who,  in  his  judg- 
ment, would  be  most  likely  to  have  gotten  the  correct  account  of  an 
event,  and  al  ays  suppressing  whatever,  to  his  mind,  savoured  of 
exaggeration,  or  appealed  too  strongly  to  the  credulity  or  superstition 
of  his  time — in  a  word,  he  weighed  carefully  his  authorities,  and 
strove  to  be  painstaking,  critical,  and  impartial. 

When  it  came  to  the  later  period  of  his  history — to  that  of  his 
own  time — he  was  equally  exacting  in  respect  of  the  testimony  of 
eye-witnesses,  always,  if  possible,  getting  more  than  one  account  of 
an  event  or  a  transaction.  His  historical  and  geographical  data  are 
especially  accurate  and  good.  He  also  seems  to  have  some  idea  of 
the  philosophy  of  history,  and  tries  to  bring  out  clearly  the  relations 
of  cause  and  effect  in  his  nai'ration  of  events.  His  style  is  excellent. 
Although  using  the  Latin  of  the  Middle  Ages,  it  was  founded  on  the 
best  Latin  models,  with  which,  as  we  have  already  seen,  he  was 
thoroughly  familiar.  His  matter  is  well  arranged,  and  his  sentences 
clear.  His  great  fault  is  a  certain  striving  after  rhetorical  effect. 
He  is  fond  of  stately,  well-sounding  sentences,  and  fine  phrases,  which 
he  employs  with  effect  in  his  descriptions  of  battles  and  sieges.  The 
merits  of  a  style  of  this  kind  are  seen  but  dimly  through  the  medium 
of  15th-century  English,  especially  when  we  consider,  that,  often 
owing  to  mistranslation,  or  to  paleographic  errors,  the  long  sentences 
which  were  so  sonorous  in  Latin,  have  suffered  a  reductio  ad  ab- 
surdum,  and  have  lost  not  only  their  pristine  literary  grace,  but 
even  their  original  meanings.  Still,  notwithstanding  these  draw- 
backs, no  one  can  read  Caxton's  Godeffroye  of  Boloyne,  translation  of 
a  translation  as  it  is,  without  feeling  the  vigour,  sincerity,  and  culture 
of  its  far-away  author,  whose  character  the  learned  Thomas  Fuller 
long  ago  so  admirably  summed  up,  in  the  Preface  to  his  Holy  War : 

"  He  was  a  pious  man,  and  an  excellent  scholar,  skilled  in  all  the 
learned  Oriental  tongues,  besides  the  Dutch  and  French,  his  native 
tongue — a  moderate  and  faithful  writer :  treasurer  he  was  of  all  the 
money  contributed  to  the  Holy  War,  chancellor  of  his  kingdom, 
employed  in  several  embassies  in  the  West ;  present  at  the  Lateran 
Council,  the  acts  whereof  he  did  record  ;  cardinal  he  might  have  been, 
but  he  refused  it ;  in  a  word,  unhappy  only  that  he  lived  in  that  age, 
though  that  age  was  happy  that  he  lived  in  it." 


V.    The  Life  of  Godfrey  of  Bouillon.  xxix 


V.    GODFREY  OF   BOUILLON. 

Godfrey  of  Bouillon  is  to  us  of  the  19th  century  a  very  shadowy 
personage,  known  chiefly  as  one  of  the  leading  characters  in  Tasso's 
Jrruxdem  Delivered,  and  it  would  certainly  not  occur  to  us,  were  we 
called  upon  to  name  the  world's  greatest  heroes,  to  place  him  high 

up  in  the  list. 

As  the  dispassionate  modern  judge  reads  the  histories  of  the 
First  Crusade,  it  seems  to  him  that  there  are  half  a  dozen  other 
princes  at  least  who  deserve  as  much  consideration  and  admiration 
as  Godfrey  :  the  clever  scheming  Bohemond,  the  chivalrous  Tancretl, 
the  impetuous  Count  of  Toulouse,  and  even  Godfrey's  own  hrother, 
the  sensible  and  energetic  Baldwin,  all,  according  to  the  records,  seem 
to  have  done  as  good  service ;  all  seem  to  have  played  as  important 
a  part,  and  to  have  distinguished  themselves  as  much  as  Godfrey  of 
Bouillon.  But  it  is  very  evident  that  William  of  Tyre  does  not 
think  so,  nor  does  Caxton,  nor  any  of  the  preceding  or  subsequent 
historians  of  the  Crusades. 

Young,  chivalrous,  and  sincerely  religious,  Godfrey  of  Bouillon 

seems  from  the  very  beginning  of  the  First  Crusade  to  have  aroused 

the  popular  admiration,  and  to  have  been  singled  out  from  among  his 

peers  to  become  the  subject  of  tradition,  legend  and  poetry.     In  fact, 

by  common  consent  he  was  regarded  as  the  central  figure  of  the 

Crusades ;  and  there  is  no  doubt  that  Caxton  only  voices  the  general 

opinion  of  his  time  when  he  "stalls"  him  in  "  thyrde  stalle  of  the 

nioost  worthy  of  Cristen  men,"  and  ranks  him  as  the  world's  greatest 

hero  since  Arthur  and  Charlemagne.     Of  course,  as  is  the  case  with 

all  great  men  who  live  in  an  uneducated  and  uncivilized  age,  a  series 

of  traditions  and  legends  soon  grew  up  around  his  name.     Even  less 

than  a  hundred  years  after  his  death,  at  the  time  that  William  of 

Tyre  wrote  his  history,  these  traditions   and  legends  were  widely 

spread.     Over  some  of  them  the  discriminating  William  shakes  his 

head,  in  particular,  wisely  refusing  to  credit  the  story  of  the  swan, 

which  strangely  enough,  after  having  been  brought  from  the  East  by 

Oriental  story-tellers,  had  attached  itself  to  the  family  of  Bouillon. 

Of  this  very  legend,  William  says,  "  Praeterinus  denique  etudiose 

licet  id  verum  faisse  plwrimorum,  astruat  narratio  cygni  fabulam, 

wide  vulgo  dicitur,  svmenfivam  eis  faisse  originem,  eo  quod  a  vera 

videcdur  deficere  talis  asaertio." 


xxx      V.   The  Life  of  Godfrey  of  Bouillon.     Mis  Birth. 

Other  traditions,  equally  false  but  more  probable  and  natural,  be 
accepts,  and  bravely  incorporates  in  the  interesting  little  sketch  which 
he  gives  us  of  the  life  of  Godfrey,  in  the  ninth  book  of  his  history, 
when  narrating  the  circumstances  of  the  choice  of  the  first  king  of 
Jerusalem.  Indeed,  late  investigations  have  shown  that  much  of 
the  biography  of  Godfrey  of  Bouillon  which  has  been  regarded  as 
authentic,  is  either  without  any  foundation  in  fact,  or  has  been 
obtained  from  unreliable  sources.  In  the  few  pages  following,  I  give 
a  brief  account  of  what  is  really  known  of  the  life  of  Godfrey  of 
Bouillon.  This  account,  although  containing  information  regarding 
our  hero's  early  life — from  outside  sources — yet  on  the  whole  follows 
William  of  Tyre,  and  fulfils  the  double  purpose  of  giving  a  brief 
biography  of  Godfrey  of  Bouillon,  and,  at  the  same  time,  a  short 
resume  of  Caxton's  book,  from  the  point  where  Godfrey  puts  on  the 
cross,  to  start  for  the  Holy  Land. 

Godfrey  of  Bouillon — or  "  Boloyne,"  as  Caxton  incorrectly  calls 
him — was  the  second  son  of  Eustache,  count  of  Boulogne-sur-Mer, 
and  Ida,  sister  of  the  hump-backed  Godfrey,  duke  of  Lower  Lorraine. 
William,  following  the  authority  of  William  of  Malmesbury,  makes 
Godfrey  the  eldest  son  of  his  parents,  but  Ordericus  Vitalis  and 
other  contemporary  historians  state  that  he  was  the  second  son.  In 
the  life  of  his  mother  Ida  (Acta  Sanctorum,  ad  XIII  April,  p.  141), 
we  find  also  that  Godfrey  is  given  as  her  second  son.  He  was  of 
most  distinguished  birth  and  lineage,  as  both  his  father  and  his 
mother  traced  their  descent  back  to  Charlemagne.  Eustache  and 
Ida  had  two  other  sons ;  one  older,  named  after  his  father,  Eustache, 
succeeded  to  the  estates  and  title  of  'Count  of  Boulogne ;  another, 
younger,  named  Baldwin,  became  king  of  Jerusalem  after  Godfrey's 
death.  William  of  Tyre  assigns  to  Ida  a  fourth  son,  named  William, 
who  remains  at  home  with  his  mother,  while  his  three  brothers  are 
fighting  in  the  Holy  Land,  but  no  reliable  authority  for  the  truth  of 
this  statement  has  ever  been  found.  Ida  had  no  daughter,  although 
tradition  designates  a  sister  of  \Godfrey  of  Bouillon  as  the  unfortunate 
and  ill-used  wife  of  Henry  IV.  of  Germany. 

The  year  of  Godfrey's  birth  is  not  positively  known,  but  its  most 
probable  date  is  1060.  His  birth-place  is  equally  uncertain,  some 
authorities  stating  that  he  was  born  in  Baisy,  Brabant,  thus  making 
him  a  German  subject  both  by  birth  and  adoption.  Most  of  the 
later  historians  and  biographers  have,  however,  decided  in  favour  of 
Boulogne-sur-Mer,  in  France,  his  father's  ancestral  home.     Here  the 


XXXI 


V.    The  Life  of  Godfrey  of  Bouillon.     His  Character, 

three  boys  were  very  carefully  reared  by  their  pious  and  intelligent 
mother,  whose  teachings  seem  to  have  had  a  life-long  influence  over 

them  all.  „  . 

Godfrey,  who  at  an  early  age  was  adopted  by  his  chddless  uncle 
Godfrey  duke  of  Lower  Lorraine,  spent  much  of  his  childhood  in 
Brabant,  and  at  the  age  of  seventeen  succeeded  to  the  March  of 
Antwerp  and  all  his  uncle's  allodial  possessions.     Among  these  was 
the  family  castle  of  Bouillon,  from  which  he  took  his  title,  winch 
curiously  enough  Caxton  has  altered  into  «  Boloyne,"  confounding  it 
evidently  with  that  of  his  father  and  brother  in  France.     The  early 
manhood  of  Godfrey,  up  to  the  call  for  the  First  Crusade,  as  narrated 
by  enthusiastic  biographers,  and  repeated  to  a  certain  extent  by 
William  of  Tyre,  represents  him  already  as  a  brilliant,  irresistible 
hero      According  to  these  traditions,  Godfrey  appears  at  the  court  of 
the  Emperor  of  Germany,  surrounded  by  glittering  retainers.    Henry, 
impressed  by  the  stately  manner  and  beautiful  person  of  the  youthful 
hero  inquires  "Who  is  this  noble-looking  knight  1"  and  kisses  him 
when  he  learns  his  name,  twice   on  the   chin  and  cheek.     Then 
follows  a  series  of  knightly  deeds.     Godfrey   succours  the  poor 
orphan,  protects  the  friendless,  and  fights  a  duel  for  part  of  his 
heritage  unjustly  claimed  by  a  relative.     He  is  chosen  from  all   he 
German  nobles  to  carry  the  banner  of  his  emperor  against  Rudolph 
of  Suabia,  and  kills  this  same  Rudolph  on  the  field  of  battle.     Then 
comes  the  famous  joumey  to  Rome,  where  Henry  besieges  the  Pope, 
and  Godfrey,  after  wonderful  deeds  of  valour,  is  the  first  to  enter  the 
city.     Here,  tradition  says,  heated  by  battle,  he  drank  too  freely  o 
wine,  and  was  in  consequence  seized  with  a  fever,  which  lasted  until 
he  put  on  the  cross  for  the  First  Crusade,  when  he  immediately 
became  well.     William  of  Malmesbury,  who  relates  the  story,  states 
that  Godfrey  had  no  return  of  his  malady  during  all  the  exposures 
of  the  First  Crusade,  until  Jerusalem  was  taken,  and  a  Christian 
government  thoroughly  established  ;  then,  his  mission  on  earth  being 
fulfilled  God  permitted  his  fever  to  seize  him  again  so  violently,  that 
in  a  few  days  he  died  of  it     All  of  these  stories  except  the  last  are 
plausible,  and  probable  enough,  but  we  do  not  find  authorities  to 
confirm  them.     Godfrey's  life  up  to  the  time  of  the  First  Crusade- 
as  nearly  as  can  be  gathered  from  documents  and  authentic  records- 
was  that  of  an  ordinary  young  knight  of  good  family.     He  was 
courageous  and  upright,  and  occupied  himself  chiefly  in  protecting 
his  possessions  from  powerful  and  greedy  neighbours,  and  in  attend- 


GODFREY. 


xxxii     V.    The  Life  of  Godfrey  of  Bouillon.     First  Crusade. 

ing  to  his  own  affairs.  His  chief  care  seems  to  have  heen  to  advance 
to  the  best  of  his  ability  his  own  worldly  interests ;  and  there  seems 
to  have  been  very  little  manifestation  of  religious  enthusiasm,  or 
indeed  of  those  heroic  qualities  which  were  soon  to  develop  him  into 
a  world-renowned  hero,  and  obtain  for  him  honours  which  the  world 
esteemed  ?.s  among  the  greatest  that  could  be  conferred  upon  mortal 
man.  This  much  is  really  known  of  him.  He  had  a  quarrel  with 
Count  Theodore  of  Flammes,  whom  he  took  prisoner,  and  kept  in 
durance  vile  for  the  rest  of  his  life.  When  only  seventeen,  he  was 
besieged  in  the  Castle  of  Bouillon,  just  after  his  uncle's  death,  by 
Albeit  count  of  Namur,  and  by  the  Bishop  of  Verdun.  Against 
this  combined  attack  Godfrey  defended  his  fortress  with  skill  and 
energy.  The  lords  of  Bouillon  up  to  1076  were  also  counts  of 
Verdun,  but  after  this  time,  Bishop  Theoderic  wished  to  have  the 
title  and  the  property  bestowed  upon  Albert  of  Namur.  Godfrey 
naturally  opposed  this  intention,  and  not  only  protected  himself  and 
thwarted  their  purpose,  but  laid  waste  the  diocese  of  the  Bishop,  and 
harassed  him  and  his  ally  in  every  possible  way.  That  Godfrey  did 
go  to  Eome,  to  aid  the  Emperor  against  the  Pope,  seems  definitely 
established,  and  as  a  reward  for  his  services,  in  1089,  Henry 
bestowed  upon  him  the  duchy  of  Lower  Lorraine,  which  had  been 
refused  him  after  the  death  of  his  uncle. 

When  the  call  for  the  First  Crusade  came  in  1095,  from  Urban 
II,  at  the  council  of  Clermont,  Godfrey  decided  at  once  to  go,  and 
set  about  his  preparations  with  sucli  energy  that  he  was  the  first  of 
the  great  princes  ready  to  start,  although  his  retinue  was  one  of  the 
largest,  for  under  his  standard  were  ranged  10,000  horsemen  and 
80,000  infantry.  At  this  time,  it  is  certain  that  he  had  no  idea  of 
devoting  his  life  to  the  conquest  of  Jerusalem,  and  no  intention  of 
expatriating  himself  for  ever.  He  sold  his  castles  of  Stenay  and 
Monzon  to  the  Bishop  of  Verdun,  with  whom  he  seems  to  have  been 
on  good  terms  again ;  he  also  mortgaged  the  Seignory  of  Bouillon  to 
the  Bishop  of  Liege,  but  on  the  express  condition  that  he  himself,  or 
three  of  his  nearest  heirs  especially  named,  might  buy  the  property 
back  within  fourteen  years.  The  price  fixed  was  1300  silver  marks, 
and  three  gold  marks.  This  price  is  given  by  Gilles  dArval. 
Ordericus  Vitalis  says  that  he  received  7000  marks  of  silver  for 
them,  while  Albert  dAix  makes  it  only  1500.  The  bishop  had  a 
great  deal  of  difficulty  in  raising  this  large  sum  of  money,  and  even 
went  so  far  a8  to  despoil  the  shrine  of  St.  Lambert,  the  altar,  the 


V.  The  Life  of  G.  of  Bouillon.    Start  for  the  Holy  Land,    xxxiii 

pulpit,  and  the  sacerdotal  vestments,  of  their  gold  and  precious 
stones,  besides  taking  everything  valuable  that  he  could  lay  hia 
hands  on  in  the  convents  and  monasteries  of  his  diocese. 

The  fact  that  Godfrey  made  a  series  of  unusuaUy  rich  donations 
to  different  churches  and  religious  houses  between  the  years  1090 
and  1096  is  well  authenticated.  In  1090  the  records  show  that  he 
restored  to  the  Abbey  of  Gorze,  in  the  diocese  of  Metz,  the  church  of 
St.  Dagobert  at  Stenay.  In  1096  he  gave  many  large  gifts  to  this 
same  church  in  concert  with  his  brother  Baldwin.  In  1094,  in 
concert  with  his  mother  and  brothers,  he  presented  the  church  of 
Baisy  to  the  monastery  of  St.  Pierre  at  Bouillon.  He  also  founded 
at  Antwerp  the  chapter  of  St.  Michel,  transferred  later  to  the  church 
of  Notre  Dame.  In  1096  he  assigned  five  manors  to  the  monastery 
of  Afflighem,  situated  near  Genappe ;  and  the  same  year  the  family, 
as  a  whole,  gave  tlio  church  of  Genappe,  with  all  its  revenues,  to  the 
same  monastery.  Godfrey  also  gave  the  castle  of  Falkenstein  to  the 
church  of  Notre  Dame  at  Verdun,  and  presented  the  chapter  of  St. 
Jervais,  at   Maestricht,  with  an   estate  that  he   possessed   on   the 

Meuse. 

Godfrey's  worldly  and  religious  affairs  thus  being  all  put  in 
order,  as  we  see,  he  finished  his  preparations  and  started  for  the 
Holy  Land  in  August  1096,  with  his  brothers  Eustache  and  Bald- 
win. As  for  the  oft-repeated  statement  that  Godfrey  was  the  officially 
appointed  leader  of  the  First  Crusade,  there  is  no  truth  in  it.  The 
Papal  Legate,  Bishop  Adhemar  of  Puy,  was  the  only  person  to  whom 
any  authority  had  in  any  sense  been  officially  delegated ;  but  there 
was  no  one  particular  leader  of  this  great  movement  in  the  strict 
sense  of  the  word ;  each  great  prince  prepared  his  own  outfit,  and 
gathered  his  army,  and  set  out,  when  and  how  it  best  pleased  him. 
If  Godfrey  has  always  been  considered  the  central  figure  of  the  First 
Crusade,  it  is  owing  not  to  his  political  position,  but  to  his  moral 
influence  and  personal  character,  probably  because  it  was  instinctively 
felt  that  he,  more  than  any  other  of  the  great  princes,  was  in  sym- 
pathy with  the  tendencies  and  motives  that  called  it  into  being. 

Godfrey's  journey  to  Constantinople,  which  city  Adhemar  had 
chosen  as  the  rendezvous  of  all  the  prinees,  was  not  an  easy  one.  He 
found  all  the  countries  through  which  he  had  to  pass  excited  and 
unfriendly,  owing  to  the  outrages  which  had  been  perpetrated  upon 
their  inhabitants  by  the  undisciplined  bands  of  common  people  that 
had  preceded  him.     Following  the  Danube,  he  arrived  peacefully 


c  2 


xxxiv     V.  The  Life  of  Godfrey  of  Bouillon.     At  Constantinople. 

enough  at  the  boundaries  of  Hungary.  Here  however  he  encoun- 
tered great  difficulties,  so  that  it  took  him  the  whole  month  of 
September  to  traverse  that  country.  The  first  part  of  November  he 
crossed  Bulgaria,  and  finally  reached  Nissa,  where  he  received  friendly 
messages  from  the  Greek  emperor  Alexis,  which  he  accepted  in  good 
faith.  "When  he  came  to  Phillipopolis,  however,  he  learned  that 
Hugh  of  Vermandois,  brother  of  the  king  of  France,  who  had  pre- 
ceded him  to  Constantinople  by  another  route,  instead  of  being 
treated  by  the  Greeks  with  the  consideration  due  to  his  lofty  rank, 
was  held  a  prisoner  by  the  Emperor.  Indignant  at  this  treatment, 
Godfrey — who  had  scrupulously  refrained  from  molesting  the  inhabit- 
ants of  the  countries  through  which  he  passed — immediately  gave 
his  men  licence  to  pillage  the  land.  This  summary  proceeding  soon 
brought  the  Emperor  to  his  senses,  and  he  begged  Hugh's  pardon  for 
his  imprisonment,  and  agreed  to  set  him  free  as  soon  as  the  French 
army  should  arrive  in  front  of  Constantinople.  Not  being  able  to 
obtain  his  ends  by  force,  the  crafty  Alexis  then  changed  his  tactics, 
and  by  flattery  and  gifts  soon  persuaded  Hugh,  who  was  a  vain 
young  prince,  to  take  the  oath  of  allegiance  to  him — hoping  to  induce 
all  the  other  barons  and  princes  to  follow  this  example.  Godfrey 
was  the  next  to  arrive ;  but  on  being  summoned  to  swear  fealty  and 
obedience  to  the  Emperor,  he  utterly  refused  to  do  so,  exclaiming 
reproachfully  to  Hugh,  who  came  to  him  a  second  time  to  persuade 
him  to  take  this  step,  "What!  you,  a  king's  son,  have  become 
a  slave  also  ! "  But  as  the  winter  wore  on,  and  Alexis  showed  him- 
self so  unfriendly,  Godfrey  began  to  fear  that,  unless  this  concession 
were  made,  they  might  be  long  delayed  in  their  undertaking,  or 
indeed  be  hindered  altogether  from  going  on  to  Jerusalem.  Albert 
of  Aix,  who  gives  a  fuller  report  of  these  negotiations  than  William 
of  Tyre,  states  that  finally  Godfrey  consented  to  become  Alexis'  liege 
man,  rather  than  bring  about  an  open  rupture  with  him,  saying  that 
he  had  not  left  home  to  overturn  Christian  kingdoms,  but  to  get  the 
Emperor's  help  in  carrying  Christian  weapons  against  Jerusalem. 
This  matter  being  settled  the  barons  and  princes  decided  to  leave 
Constantinople,  and  to  continue  on  their  holy  journey.  The  first 
city  of  importance  beyond  Constantinople  on  Mussulman  territory 
was  Nicaea,  the  capital  of  Bithynia,  then  under  the  rule  of  Solyman's 
son  David,  surnamed  Kilidge-Arslan,  or  the  Sword  of  the  Spirit. 
This  town,  although  strongly  fortified,  the  Crusaders  resolved  to 
besiege.     Godfrey  fought  valiantly,  and  performed  wonderful  deeds 


V.  TJie  Life  of  Godfrey  of  Bouillon.     Conquers  Saracens,     xxxv 

of  valour,  but  he  was  not  successful  as  the  director  of  this  siege. 
Nothing  was  really  accomplished  before  Nicaea  until  Boheraond, 
Prince  of  Tarentum,  arrived.  He  infused  new  life  and  energy  into 
everything,  and  soon  forced  Kilidge-Arslau  to  surrender. 

In  accordance  with  the  oath  that  they  had  sworn  at  Constanti- 
nople, the  Crusaders  handed  the  city  over  to  Alexis,  on  the  27th  of 
June,  1097.  Having  rested  themselves  thoroughly,  they  set  off  again 
for  Syria  by  way  of  Phrygia,  Cilicia,  and  the  passes  of  the  Taurus. 
Very  unwisely  the  army  divided,  the  main  body,  under  Godfrey, 
Raymond  of  Toulouse,  Adhemar,  and  Hugh  of  Vermandois,  crossing 
the  plaiu  of  Dorylaeum,  while  a  smaller  force,  commanded  by  the 
Duke  of  Normandy,  Bohemond,  and  Tancrcd,  turned  off  to  the  left. 
Kilidge-Arslan,  after  his  flight  from  Nicaea,  nothing  daunted  by 
his  defeat,  had  collected  an  army  of  about  200,000  men,  and  had 
returned,  hoping  to  retrieve  his  misfortunes.  As  soon  as  he  learned 
of  the  division  of  the  army  of  his  opponents,  he  determined  to 
attack  the  smaller  body.  A  terrible  slaughter  ensued.  The  Sara- 
cens were  on  the  point  of  gaining  a  complete  victory,  when  the 
main  army  came  up  to  the  rescue,  preceded  by  Godfrey  and  fifty 
knights,  who  had  been  too  impatient  to  wait  for  their  s^wer-moving 
companions.  In  a  moment  the  situation  was  changed.  The  Saracens 
were  thoroughly  routed,  and  fled  in  every  direction,  leaving  their 
tents  and  a  rich  booty  to  the  victors. 

The  Crusaders  continued  their  route  after  their  victory,  through 
an  arid  and  desolate  country,  suffering  incredible  tortures  from 
hunger,  thirst,  and  heat ;  and  it  was  not  until  they  arrived  in 
Armenia  that  relief  was  obtained.  Here  Baldwin  left  tho  main  body 
of  the  army  in  order  to  besiege  Edessa,  which  seemed  to  him  too 
tempting  a  piece  of  booty  to  be  left  behind,  while  Godfrey  and  the 
other  princes  marched  towards  Antioch  in  Syria,  which  great  and 
powerful  city  they  realized  must  be  taken  before  they  could  go  on  to 
Jerusalem. 

Bagi  Sijan,  a  Seljoucide  prince,  was  at  this  time  Emir  of  Antioch. 
For  several  years  the  whole  Mahommedan  world  had  been  convulsed 
by  internal  religious  dissensions.  The  two  parties,  whoso  heads 
resided  respectively  in  Egypt  and  Bagdad,  were  struggling  for  the 
mastery  in  Palestine.  Bagi  Sijan, — or  Baghistan,  as  he  is  called  in 
French  and  English  Chronicles, — who  sympathized  with  the  Fati- 
mides  or  Egyptian  faction,  was  absent  from  Antioch  as  the  Crusaders 
approached,  having  gone  with  the  princes  of  Aleppo  and  Jerusalem 

c  * 
3* 


xxxvi     V.  The  Life  of  Godfrey  of  Bouillon.     Siege  of  Antioch. 

against  Einessa,  which  was  occupied  by  the  opposite  faction.  On 
hearing  the  news  of  the  Christians'  arrival,  he  speedily  returned  to 
Antioch,  and  realizing  his  danger,  sent  for  aid  in  all  directions, 
including  even  those  foes  against  whom  but  the  day  before  he  had 
been  arrayed  in  arms. 

The  Crusaders,  after  some  debate,  decided  to  attempt  the  siege  of 
Antioch  immediately,  and  took  up  their  position  around  its  walls, 
notwithstanding  the  fact  that  they  had  not  enough  men  to  invest 
them  entirely.  This  was  a  siege  in  which,  strange  to  say,  the 
besiegers  suffered  infinitely  more  than  the  besieged.  Antioch  was 
well  provisioned,  while  the  country  round  about  had  been  so 
thoroughly  pillaged  and  laid  waste,  that  it  was  with  extreme  diffi- 
culty that  the  Christians  could  obtain  the  necessities  of  life.  Added 
to  this  was  the  discomfort  of  a  rainy  season,  so  long  continued  that 
their  very  tents  rotted  over  their  heads.  As  a  natural  consequence  of 
this  state  of  things,  a  frightful  epidemic  broke  out,  which  reduced 
their  numbers  with  startling  rapidity,  and  enfeebled  and  discouraged 
those  Avho  were  left  alive.  It  was  not  until  spring  returned,  and 
better  weather  came,  that  anything  like  energy  showed  itself  among 
the  besiegers. 

In  all  this  trouble  Godfrey  bore  himself  like  a  Christian  hero, 
suffering  patiently  with  the  others,  and  signalizing  himself  by  deeds 
of  valour  and  courage.  One  of  his  exhibitions  of  strength  and 
bravery  is  reported  in  more  than  one  of  the  old  chronicles.  A  fleet 
of  Genoese  and  Pisans  having  anchored  in  the  port  of  St.  Simon,  the 
Crusaders,  in  all  haste  and  joy,  sent  a  body  of  men  to  receive  the 
provisions  and  news  that  they  brought,  and  to  escort  back  to  Antioch 
the  sailors  and  carpenters  who  were  to  assist  them  in  constructing 
besieging  engines.  As  the  little  body  of  men  returned,  it  was  attacked 
and  routed  by  a  party  of  Saracens,  who  were  lying  in  wait  for  them. 
Godfrey,  hearing  of  the  engagement,  hastened  to  the  spot  with  a  large 
detachment  of  men.  Bagi  Sijan,  who  was  standing  on  one  of  the 
towers  of  Antioch,  rejoicing  over  the  defeat  of  the  Christians,  seeing 
his  own  men,  in  turn,  in  danger,  sent  a  party  out  from  the  town 
to  their  assistance.  The  melee  became  general,  and  the  fighting 
desperate  on  both  sides.  The  Christian  princes  smote  prodigious 
blows,  and  performed  wonderful  deeds  of  valour.  Eobert  of  Nor- 
mandy split  the  head  of  one  of  his  opponents  to  the  shoulder  with 
a  single  stroke,  but  Godfrey  surpassed  even  that.  A  huge  Saracen 
engaged  with   him,  and   shivered   his   shield  with   the  first   blow. 


V.    Tlie  Life  of  Godfrey  of  Bouillon.     Antioch  taken,     xxxvii 

Godfrey,  rising  in  his  stirrups,  calmly  cut  his  adversary  in  two 
across  the  middle  with  one  stroke,  so  that  the  upper  half  of  the 
man  fell  to  the  ground,  leaving  the  lower  half  still  sitting  on  the 
horse. 

Thus  for  months  the  Crusaders  invested  Antioch,  and  at  the  end 
of  this  time  would  have  been  no  nearer  accomplishing  their  purpose 
than  at  the  beginning,  had  not  one  Emir  Feirus,  as  William  of  Tyre 
calls  him,  a  renegade  Armenian  of  wealth  and  influence  in  Antioch, 
turned  traitor,  and  delivered  the  city  into  their  hands,  on  condition 
that  Bohemond  of  Tarentum  should  be  its  prince  and  ruler.     Once 
inside  the  walls,  the  Christians,  infuriated  by  the  long  resistance, 
and  exasperated  by  their  own  sufferings,  slaughtered  the  greater  part 
of  the  inhabitants,  young  and  old  indiscriminately,  as  many  as  six 
thousand  perishing  in  a  single  night     But  Godfrey  and  the  other 
princes  had  but  a  short  time  to  exult  over  their  success.     It  will  be 
remembered  that  Bagi-Sijan  at  the  commencement  of  the  siege  sent 
to  all  the  great  Mahommedan  princes  for  aid.     To  his  appeal  they 
did  not  turn  a  deaf  ear;  and  only  three  days  after  the  Christians 
entered  Antioch,  on  the  6th  of  June,  Kerboga,  prince  of  Mosul, 
presented  himself  before  its  gates,  with  an  army  estimated  variously 
at  from  300,000  to  600,000  men,  and  the  besiegers  became  in  turn 
the  besieged.     On  the  horrors  of  that  siege  it  is  difficult  to  dwell. 
It  is  enough  to  say,  that  after  being  shut  up  three  weeks  in  a  city 
stripped   of  provisions  and   stores   of   every  kind,  the   Crusaders, 
rendered   desperate   by   famine   and  misery,    marched   out  against 
Kerboga  and  his  army— headed  by  Godfrey  and  Tancred,  aud  their 
fellow  peers — decided  to  die  by  the  sword  rather  than  by  disease 
and  hunger.     Inspired  by  their  necessities,  and  uplifted  by  their 
religious  faith,  the  weak  and  enfeebled  men  fought  as  only  desperate 
men   can   fight,  and   were   rewarded   by   complete   victory.     They 
remained  masters  of  the  field,  while  the  vast  army  of  Kerboga  was 
scattered  to  the  four  winds  of  heaven.     This  battle  was  the  end  of 
any  effective  opposition  to  the  onward  march  of  the  Crusaders ;  but 
the  hardships  that  they  had  endured  seemed  for  the  time  to.  have 
quenched  the  ardour  of  the  leaders  of  the  army,  for  it  was  not  until 
late  in  the  following  winter,  after  the  repeated  solicitations  of  the 
common  people,  that  the  princes  and  great  barons  could  be  persuaded 
to  leave  their  private  expeditions  against  adjacent  cities,  and  start  on 
their   way  towards  Jerusalem.     Godfrey,  Eustache,  and  Robert  of 
Flanders  did  not  get  under  way  until  spring. 


xxxviii    V.  The  Life  of  Godfrey  of  Bouillon.    Siege  of  Jerusalem. 

Their  route  lay  along  the  sea  now,  through  such  a  beautiful  and 
fertile  country,  that  notwithstanding  the  murmurs  of  the  common 
people,  who  were  impatient  to  reach  their  journey's  end,  the  leaders 
could  not  resist  the  temptation  to  stop  and  lay  siege  to  some  of  the 
wealthy  towns  near  by.  Godfrey  besieged  Gibel,  while  Raymond  of 
Toulouse  attacked  Archas.  In  this  way  some  time  was  consumed,  so 
that  it  was  not  until  the  end  of  May  that  the  forces  were  all  united 
again,  this  time,  however,  with  a  firm  determination  to  let  nothing 
hinder  them  from  proceeding  directly  to  Jerusalem. 

Sickness  and  war  had  made  terrible  havoc  among  their  number, 
so  that  of  the  hundreds  of  thousands  who  had  started  on  this  under- 
taking, scarce  fifty  thousand  were  now  left.  The  excitement  was 
tremendous  as  they  approached  the  Holy  City.  The  last  night, 
many  of  the  men,  unable  to  restrain  their  impatience,  marched  the 
whole  night  through,  and  at  daybreak,  June  10th,  1099,  saw  the 
walls  and  towers  of  Jerusalem  rise  up  before  them.  Never  before  or 
since,  in  the  history  of  the  world,  probably,  has  a  scene  of  such 
intense  emotion,  on  so  large  a  scale,  been  seen,  or  have  such  transports 
of  joy  and  reverence  been  witnessed.  Strong,  stalwart  men,  who 
had  endured  untold  suffering  and  privations  to  behold  this  sight, 
sobbed  aloud ;  some  cast  themselves  upon  their  knees  in  prayer ; 
others  kissed  the  earth  on  which  they  stood,  in  an  ecstasy  of 
rejoicing. 

The  very  next  day  energetic  preparations  were  made  for  the 
assault  of  the  city.  To  each  of  the  princes  was  assigned  a  portion  of 
the  walls,  to  invest.  Godfrey,  with  his  brother  Eustache  and  his 
cousin  Baldwin  du  Bourg,  occupied  the  north-west  side,  between  the 
gate  of  Damascus  and  the  gate  of  Jaffa,  which  included  the  spot 
most  precious  to  them  all,  the  inclosure  of  Mount  Calvary.  The 
Saracens — well  provisioned,  and  thoroughly  prepared  for  a  long  siege 
— had  not  only  stripped  the  country  around  of  everything  eatable*, 
but  had  filled  up  all  the  wells  and  cisterns  for  a  long  distance,  so  that 
in  a  few  days  the  besiegers  suffered  both  from  hunger  and  thirst. 
Nothing  daunted,  they  continued  their  siege  with  all  the  fire  of 
religious  enthusiasts ;  and  recognizing  the  fact  that  their  unaided 
strength  could  not  accomplish  their  purpose,  they  set  themselves 
systematically  and  patiently  about  building  the  necessary  engines  for 
making  a  decisive  attack.  For  weeks  they  laboured  untiringly,  until 
at  length  everything  that  the  military  science  of  the  time  could 
devise,  with  the  limited  means  and  material  at  their  disposal,  was 


V.  The  Life  of  Godfrey  of  Bouillon.   King  of  Jerusalem,    xxxix 

ready.  On  Thursday,  July  the  14th,  the  assault  was  commenced. 
For  two  days  the  conflict  was  terrible ;  both  sides  fought  with  the 
energy  of  desperation,  until  late  on  Friday  afternoon,  when  the  two 
brothers  Lethold  and  Engelbert  of  Tournai,  followed  by  Godfrey  of 
Bouillon,  set  foot  upon  the  walls  of  Jerusalem.  In  an  incredibly 
short  space  of  time  Godfrey  and  his  men  were  down  in  the  city,  and 
the  gates  were  thrown  open.  The  Crusaders  massacred  their  enemies 
without  mercy,  and  blood  ran  in  torrents  to  their  knees  in  the 
street. 

But  Godfrey,  with  his  deep  religious  sentiment,  felt  that  prayer 
rather  than  bloodshed  befitted  their  first  hours  in  Jerusalem,  and  set 
the  example  to  the  others  by  withdrawing  from  the  carnage,  and 
going  barefooted,  clad  simply  in  a  clean  linen  garment,  to  the 
sepulchre  of  our  Lord,  to  return  thanks  that  He  had  thus  allowed 
them  to  accomplish  their  pilgrimage  and  fulfil  their  vows.  Godfrey 
was  followed  by  all ;  weapons  and  bloody  garments  were  laid  aside, 
and  barefooted,  with  heads  reverently  uncovered,  all  marched  to  the 
Church  of  the  Resurrection,  weeping  tears  of  joy,  praying  and  singing 
tongs  of  penitence  and  rejoicing. 

The  victory  now  obtained  was  complete,  but  there  was  no  time 
to  sit  idly,  or  even  to  rest  after  their  long  labours.  The  city  was 
cleared  of  its  dead  ;  and  after  that,  the  first  care  of  the  Crusaders  was 
to  organize  a  Christian  government,  and  above  all  to  choose  a  fitting 
ruler,  a  man  capable  of  leading  them  in  war,  and  of  controlling  and 
guiding  them  in  peace.  After  due  deliberation  and  careful  inquiry 
into  the  character  and  ability  of  each  of  the  great  barons,  on  July 
23rd  they  elected  Godfrey  of  Bouillon  king  of  Jerusalem,  and  would 
have  proceeded  immediately  to  crown  him,  had  not  that  pious  and 
reverential  prince  unconditionally  refused  the  honour.  Their  leader 
and  duke  he  was  willing  to  be,  "  but  God  forbid,"  said  he,  "  that  I 
should  be  crowned  with  a  crown  of  gold,  where  my  Saviour  bore  a 
crown  of  thorns."  At  least,  this  is  the  report  of  the  deliberations 
and  their  result,  as  given  by  William  of  Tyre,  who  followed  Albert 
of  Aix.  According  to  Raymond  of  Agiles,  the  crown  was  first  offered 
to  Raymond  of  Toulouse,  who  refused  it  in  the  words  here  attributed 
to  Godfrey.  Other  authorities  state  that  the  crown  was  also  ottered 
to  Robert  of  Normandy,  who  in  turn  refused  it,  and  that  theu  the 
choice  fell  upon  Godfrey  of  Bouillon.  Whether  this  be  true  or  not, 
it  is  certain  that  the  choice  once  made,  all  were  unanimously  pleased 
and  contented  with  it ;  the  common  people,  especially,  regarded  it  as 


xl      V.  The  Life  of  Godfrey  of  Bouillon.     Death,  July  18,  1100. 

the  result  of  an  inspiration  from  heaven.  Little  opportunity  was 
olfered  for  festivities  in  honour  of  the  new  king,  as  an  Egyptian 
army,  300,000  strong,  under  the  Emir  Afdal,  was  advancing  against 
them.  So  confident  of  victory  were  the  Moslems,  that  they  were 
even  bringing  with  them,  it  was  reported,  ropes  or  chains  with 
which  to  bind  their  prisoners.  At  the  moment  that  Godfrey  took 
command  of  the  little  army  of  the  Crusaders,  the  enemy  were  already 
traversing  Gaza,  the  ancient  land  of  the  Philistines.  He  sent  im- 
mediately for  Tancred  and  Eustache,  who  were  away  in  Naplouse, 
and  prepared  to  go  out  against  the  foe,  as  he  saw  that  to  allow  them- 
selves to  be  besieged  in  Jerusalem  would  only  repeat  the  horrors  of 
Antioch.  At  first,  Eobert  of  Normandy  and  Raymond  of  Toulouse 
refused  to  join  the  outgoing  troops,  but  soon,  seeing  the  imminent 
danger  that  threatened  them,  yielded,  and  united  with  the  others. 
The  two  armies  met  near  Askalon,  Godfrey  at  the  head  of  scarce 
20,000  men.  But  such  was  their  enthusiasm  and  bravery  that 
nothing  could  withstand  them,  and  the  vast  army  of  Afdal  was 
gloriously  routed.  This  battle  firmly  established  the  Latins  in 
Palestine ;  and  the  great  princes,  feeling  that  they  had  fulfilled  their 
vows,  started  one  after  another  for  home,  leaving  Godfrey  with  a  few 
thousand  men  to  solve  the  difficult  problem  of  governing,  protecting, 
and  increasing  his  newly-founded  domain. 

Of  the  events  of  Godfrey's  reign  there  is  but  little  to  say.  He 
ruled  wisely,  strengthening  himself  in  every  possible  way,  and 
making  good  laws  both  for  the  governing  and  the  governed.  He 
died  after  one  short  year  of  kingship  on  July  18,  1100,  and  was 
buried  on  Mount  Calvary,  near  the  Saviour  whom,  in  life,  he  had 
striven  with  reverence  and  single-heartedness  to  serve.  Tradition 
gives  us  more  than  one  version  of  the  cause  of  his  death.  One 
authority  tells  us  that  he  died  from  eating  some  poisoned  fruit, 
presented  by  the  neighbouring  Emir  of  Ctesarea ;  another  states  that 
he  was  poisoned  by  Dagobert,  the  new  bishop  of  Jerusalem ;  but 
neither  of  these  two  stories  seems  to  be  any  more  reliable  than  the 
quartan-fever  legend  already  mentioned. 

Thus  perished,  in  the  flower  of  his  age,  the  man  who  above  all 
others  was  the  leading  figure  in  the  great  religious  movements  of  the 
11th  and  12th  centuries. 

Caxton's  reasons  for  presenting  the  English-speaking  and  reading 
world  with  a  translation  of  William  of  Tyre's  history,  he  gives  us 
in  his  simple  preface.     He  wishes  to  arouse  his  countrymen  to  a 


V.    The  Life  of  Godfrey  of  Bouillan.     Caxton.  xli 

renewed  interest  in  the  Holy  Land,  and  above  all  to  make  them 
familiar  with  the  noble  deeds  and  "bye  courageous  faytes"  of 
Godfrey  of  Bouillon.  As  Godfrey  disappears  from  the  pages  of 
William's  history  at  this  point,  so  Caxton  abruptly  ends  his  transla- 
tion, without  other  comment  than  the  date  when  the  work  was 
finished.  It  may  be  wondered  that  Caxton  makes  no  mention  of 
William  of  Tyre,  either  in  his  preface,  or  at  the  close  of  the  book ; 
but  there  is  no  reason  to  believe  that  he,  any  more  than  the  other 
editors  and  translators,  knew  who  the  real  author  of  the  work  was, 
the  identity  of  these  editions  and  translations  with  the  Latin  text  of 
William  of  Tyre,  being  a  discovery  which  it  was  reserved  for  modern 
scholars  to  make. 


GODFREY  OF  BULLOGNE, 

OB 

THE   SIEGE  AND   CONQUESTE  OF  JHERUSALEM. 

CAXTON,  1481.     THE    PROLOGUE. 

He  hye  couragyous  faytes  /  And?  valyaunt  actes  of  noble,  Illus-  Noi.ie  deeds 
t        trous  and  vertuous  personnes,  ben  digne  to  be  recounted  /  put  held  in 

-1  memory, 

in  memorye  /  and  wreton,  to  tliende  that  ther  may  be  gyuen  to  influence 

4  to   them  name  Inmortal,  by  souerayn  laude  and  preysyng,  «vnid  evil 

And  also  for  to  moeue   and  tenflawme  the  hertes  of  the  Redars 

and1  hierers,  for  teschewe  and!  flee  werkes  vycious,  dishonnest  and* 

vytuperable  /   And!   for   tempryse  and    accomplysshe    enterpryses 

8  honnestes,  and  werkes  of  gloryous  meryte,  to  lyue  in  remembraunce 

perpetuel  /  tfor  as  it  is  so,  that  thystoryagraphes  haue  wreton  many 

a  noble  hystorye,  as  wel  in  metre  as  in  prose,  By  whiche  thactes 

&  noble  fayttes   of  thauncyent   conquerours  ben  had  in  remem- 

12  braunce,  and  remayne  in  grete,  large  /  and  aourned  volumes  /  and 

so  shal  abyde  in  perpetuel  memorye,  to  thentente  that  gloryous 

Prynces  and  hye  men  of  noble  and  vertuouse  courage,  shold  take  Princes  and 

ensample  tempryse  werkys  leeful  and  honneste  /  Fyrst,  fur  goddes  simuid  pat- 
tern after 
]  6  quarell/in  mayntenyng  oure1  fayth  and  the  libertees  of  holy  chirche,  tiiem, 

For  the  recuperacion  of  the  holy  land1,  whiche  our  ble?syd  lord  to  recover  the 

Ihesu  Criste  hath  halowed  by  his  blessyd  presence  humayno  /  and 

by  shedyng  therin  for  oure  redempcion  his  precious  blood  ;  ffor  the 

20  releef  of  suche  cristen  men  as  there  dwelle  in  grete  myserye  and 

thraldomm,  And  also  for  the  defence  of  theyr  Royammes,  Loudes,  to  defend 
Enherytages  /  and!  subgettes.     And!   for  thyse  causes  tendeuoyre  doms. 
theym  in  theyr  noble  persones  /  with  alle  theyr  puyssamzces  and 

24  power,  tadresse  and  remyse  theyra  in  theyr  auncyent  Fraunchyses 

and  lyberte  /  Acordyng1  to  that  we  fynde  wreton  in  holy  scripture  Many  noble 
of  many  noble  historyes,  which  were  here  ouer  long  to  rt'liercc.  written  in 
But  in  especial  of  thre  noble  and  mooste  worthy  of  alle  other,  that  nana. 

28  is  to  wytte,  fyrst  of  due  Iosue,  that  noble  prynce  /  whiche  ladde  ami!  ouosima, 

1   Or'uj.  on  re. 
GODFREY.  li 


2  Of  three  nun  of  prowess  in  olden  time.  [Pro]. 

conduyted  the  Clrilderen  of  Israhel,  the  chosen  people  of  God',  oute 
of  deserte  in  to  the  londe  of  promyssyon,  the  Londe  flowynge  Mylke 

nf  David  Uie    and  hony.      Socondly,  of  Dauyd  the  Kynge  and  holy  Prophete  / 
Whome  God1   chaas  after  Ids    herte,   And1  achyeuyd   many   grete  4 
Bataylles,  gouernyng  the  sayd  chosen  people  of  God  by  the  space  of 

of  the  nohie    fourty  yeris  /  And  the  thyrde  of  the  Noble  Iudas  Machabeus ;  how 

catena,  he  deffended  the  sayd'  people  in  fyghtyng*  many  and  merueyllous 

bataylles,  for  veray  zeele  and  loue  of  his  lawe,  and  mayntenyng  of  8 
the  same  vnto  the  deth,  ffor  which  causes  a-forsayd,  the  names  of 
thyes  thre  abyde  perpetuel,  for  thre  of  the  moste  beste  and1  Nobleste 
of  the  Iewys  /  And*  in  the  nombre  of  xthe  moost  digne  and  moost 
worthy  /  12 

a       Nd  by  cause  valyaunce  and  prowesse  is  remembryd  emong  the 

in  profane  gentyles  &  payn[elmes,  as  emong  thebrewes,  I  fvnde  wreton  of 

history  is  ,-,.,,, 

foiinii  re-       the  incredible,  cheualrous  prowesse  of  the  noble  and  valvaunt  Hector 

corded  the  *  J 

prowess  of     of  troye,  whos  excellent  actes  wry  ten  /  Ouyde,  Homer,  Virgyle,  1G 
Troy,  Dares,  Dyctes  and  other  dyueree,  and  eche  better  than  other,  re- 

herchyng  his  noble  vertues  /  strengthe  and  humanyte  /  Secondly,  of 
of  Alexander,  Alysaundre  the  grete  kynge  of  Macedone,  which  domyned  and  had 

to  hym  obeyssaunt  the  vnyuersal  world  ;  And  the  thyrde,  the  noble  20 
of.Tuii.isCse-  Julyus  Cezar,  Emperour  of  Rome,  whos  noble  actes  ben  wreton  by 

Bar,  Emperor 

of  Rome.       poetes,  as  lucan  /  stace  and  other  /  And!  dayly  remembryd'  as  newe 

and  ffresshe  as  he  yet  lyuyd  /  which e  thre  ben  sette  as  for  the  moost 

worthy  emong  the  gentyles  and  pay n ems.  ,     24 

0\v  lete  vs  thenne  remembre  what  hystoryes  ben  wreton  of 

Cristen  men,  of  whom  ther  be  many  wreton.     But  in  especial, 

or  christian    as  for  the  best  and  worth yest,  I  fynde  fyrst  the  gloryous  /  most 

ti.«  first  and    excellent  in  his  tyme  /  and  fyrst  founder  of  the  round  table  /  Kyng  2S 

Anhur,  King  Arthur,  kyng  of  the  brytons,  that  tyme  regnyng  in  this  Royanime  / 

ofthe  lirilons.  »       .'     o  J  >  J  OJO  J 

of  whos  retenue  were  many  noble  Kynges,  Prynces  /  lordes  and 
knyghtes,  of  which  the  noblest  were  knyghtes  of  the  round  table, 
of  whos  actes  and1  historyes  there  be  large  volumes,  and!  bookes  grele  32 
plente  and  many  /  O  blessyd  lord,  whan  I  remembre  the  grete  and 
many  volumes  of  seynt  graal  /  ghalehot,  &  launcelotte  de  lake  / 
Gawayn,  perceual  /  Lyonel  /  and  tristram,  and!  many  other,  of  whom 
were  oucr  longe  to  reherce  /  and  also  to  me  vnknowen  !  Rut  3G 
He  is  stalled   thystorye  of  the  sayd  Arthur  is  so  gloryous  and  shynyng,  that  he  is 

in  the  first  __         .        .        _  ci  ii/i  i  ai^ 

place.  stalled1  in  the  fyrst  place  of  the  mooste  noble  /  beste  anil  worthyest 

charier  of  the  cristen  men.     Secondlv,  of  Gharlemayn,  the  grete  Emperour2 

luagne,  the 

1  leaf  1,  back.  2  Or'uj.  Epoinrour. 


Prol.]  Charlemagne  and  Godfrey  of  Bologne.  3 

of  Allemavne,  and  kyng  of  ffraunce  /  whos  noble  actes  and  con-  creat  Em- 

•        '  J     °  '  |ieror  or  Alle- 

questes  ben  wreton  in  large  volumes  with  the  noble  faytes  and  actes  jwiwrnd 
of  his  douje  pieres,  that  is  to  save,  Rowlond  and  olyuer  /  with  the  *""2JJ  is 
4  other  /  whos  name  and  renommee  abydeth  also  perpetuel,  and  is 
stalled  iu  the  second  place  emonge  the  most  worthy  of  Cristen  men. 
Of  alle  thyse  historyes  afor  reherced,  the  bookes  and  volumes  ben  ah  ti.ese  |.is- 

w  w  '  tones  ate  to 

had  in  latyn,  ffrenssh  and  Euglysshe,  and  other  langage.  'i'Ii'I,','1 '" 

8  t        Henne  as  for  the  thyrd  of  the  Cristen  prynces,  taken,  reputed  ^e'r°|;;l;V'd 
and  renommed  for  to  be  egal  emong  thyse  worthy  &  best  that  b^b**- 
euer  were,  I  mene  the  noble  Godefrov  of  Boloyne  /  whiche  'now  The  third  » 

'  *  .      Godfreji  ol 

but  late,  not  yet  four  C.  yere  syth  he  flowred,  and  was  stalled  in  iwogne, 
12  the  thvrde  stalle  of  the  moost  worthy  of  Cristen  men,  whos  hystorve  Hi«hirtn»yta 

J  -  in  Latin  and 

is   made  and  wreton  in  Latyn  and  ffrensshe  in  large   and  grete  Fremii.  hot 

J  o  o  not  yet  known 

volumes/  And  as  not  knowen  emonge  vs  here  /  whiche  ben  adiacent '"  t-»g»sii. 
and  neyghbours  to  the  place  of  his  natyuyte  /  whos  noble  hystorye  I 

lf>  late  fonde  in  a  booke  of  ffrenssh,  al  alonge  of  his  noble  actes, 
valyaunces,  prowesses  /  and  accomplysshement  of  his  hye  empryses  / 
Iu  whiche  I  fynde  very  causes,  as  me  semeth,  moche  semblable  and 
lyke  vnto  suche  as  we  haue  nowe  dayly  tofore  vs,  By  the   mes- 

20  creauntes  and    turkes   emprysed  /  ayenst  Cristendom.     And  yet 

moche  more  nowe  than  were  in  his  dayes  /  ffor  in  his  dayes  the  Ti.e  Turks 

"  '  to-day  have 

turkes  had  conquerd  vpon  Cristendom  but  vnto  the  braas  of  seynt  "^de  greater 

a  J-  w  encroach- 

George  by  Coustantynople,  And  had  no  foote  on  this  syde  the  sayd  gjgjjgj, 
24  Braas.     But  at  this  daye  it  is  so  that  they  haue  comen  ouer  and  J!'™  j;;. u,e 
goten  that  Imperial  Cyte,  Constautynople  aforsayd  /  and   many  Godft*y- 
Royamme  and  countre  /  to  the  grete  dommage  and  hurte  of'  alle 
Cristendom;  To  the  resistence  of  whom,  as  yet,  fewe  Cristen  prynces 
28  haue   put  theym  in  deuoyr.     Thenne  I  retorne   agayn  vnto   the 
conqueste  at  suche  tyme  as  they  were  come  to  the  sayd  Braas,  that 
bv  the  dvlvaent  solicitude  of  a  pour  heremyte  /  the  sayd  Godeffroy  Tiie  First 

J  J    J  o  i  i        i  »  "    Crusade  un- 

of  Boloyne,  and  other  dynerse  prynces  /  hordes  and  comyn  peple,  ^J^^ 
32  auowed  the  croysyng  and  empryse  to  warre  agayn  the  mescreauntes,  jion^of  a  poor 
And1  to  recouere  the  holy  Cyte  of  Iherusalem  ;  whiche  afterward! 
they  achyeuyd,  and  conquerd  fro  the  sayd  braas  vnto  the  holy  lande, 
and  recouerd  the  holy  cyte  of  Iherusalem  /  as  in  this  sayd  book,'-  al 
36  alonge  and  playnly  shal  appere.  In  whiche  cyte  the  sayd  Godeffroy 
was  elect  and?  chosen  for  his  vertue  /  prowesse  /  and  blessyd 
disposicion,   to  be   kyng   of  the   sayd!  Iherusalem,  and  the  londe 


therabnut. 


1  leaf  2.  -   Orig.  boook. 


4       Caojton  wishes  to  incite  Christians  to  reconquer  Jerusalem.     [Prol. 
n.u  instory   t        Henne  I,  thus  vysytyng1  this  noble  hystorye  /  whiche  is  no 

is  no  fable,  *  *      ' 

fable  ne  fayned?  tbynge,  But  alle  that  is  therin  trewe  /  Con- 
rnnsi.iering    siderynge  also  the  grete  puyssaunce  of  the  Turke,  grete  enemye  of 
c,™cl,,me"t9   oure  Cristen   fayth,  destroyar  of  Cristen  blood,  and!  vsurpar  of  4 
certayn  Em  pyres,  and!  many  Cristen  Royammes  and!  countrees,  And! 
now  late  this  sayd  yere  hath  as3aylled  the  Cyte  and!  castel  in  the 
Isle  of  rhodes,  where  valyantly  he  hath  be  resisted ;  but  yet  not 
withstondyng  he  hath  approchod  more  ner,  &  hath  take?*  the  Cyte  8 
of  Ydronte  in  puylle,  By  whiche  he  hath  goten  an  entre  to  entre 
in  to  the  Royamrae  of  Naples ;  And!  fro  thens,  withoute  he  be  re- 
sisted, vnto  Rome  &  ytalye  /  to  whos  resistence  I  beseche  1almyghty 
God!  to  piouyde,  yf  it  be  his  wylle  :  Then?*e  me  semeth  it  necessary  12 
An  christians  and!  expedyent  for  alle  cristen  prynces  to  make  peas  /  amy  te  and 
against  tiiem,  allyaunce  eche  with  other,  and  prouyde  by  theyr  wysedo??imes  the 
resistence  agayn  hym  for  the  defense  of  our  fayth  and  moder  /  holy 
chirch  /  &  also  for  the  recuperacion  of  the  holy  londe  &  holy  Cyte  1 6 
of  Iherusalem  /  In  whiche  our  blessyd!  sauyour,  Ihesu  Crist,  redemed 
and  follow      vs  with  his    precious   blood,  And  to  doo   as   this   noble   prynce 
oroodfrey  of  Godeffroy  of  boloyne  dyde,  with  other  noble  and?  hye  prynces  in  his 

companye.      Thenne  for  thexhortacion 2  of  alle  Cristen   prynces  /  20 
Lordes  /  Barons  /  Knyghtes  /  Gentilmen  /  Marchanntes  /  and  all  the 
i  translate      comyn  peple  of   this   noble  Royamme,  walys  &  yiiond,  I  huue 
from  the        emprysed  to  translate  this  book  of  the  conquest  of  Iherusalem  out 

French, toen-      „    ,,  .     .  '  .  . 

eonrutje  men  oi  nrenssh  in  to  our  maternal  tongue,  to  thentente  tencourage  them  24 

to  undertake  . 

the  recovery    by  the   reuyng  and   heeiyng  of  the  merueyllous  historyes  heriu 
comprysed,  and  of  the  holy  myracles  shewyd  that  euery  man  in 
his  partye  endeuoyre  theym  vnto  the  resistence  afore  sayd,  And 
recuperacion  of  the  sayd  holy  londe.     &  for  as  moche  as  I  knowe  28 
no  Cristen  kynge  better  prouyd!  in  Armes,  and!  for  whom  god!  hath 
shewed  more  grace  /  And  in  alle  his   empryses  gloryous,  vayn- 
quysshour,  happy  and  enrous  /  than  is  our  naturel  /  lawful  /  and 
souerayn  lord  and  moost  cristen  kynge  /  (1)  Edward,  by  the  grace  of  32 
god,  kynge  of  englond  and  of  ffraunce,  and!  lord  of  Yrlond  /  vnder 
the  shadowe  of  whos  noble  protection  /  I  haue  achyeued  this  symple 
i  hope  espe-    translacion  /  that  he  of  his  moost  noble  grace  wold?  adresse,  styre,  or 
duce  King      conimaunde  somme  noble  Capytayn  of  his  subgettes  to  empryse  this  36 
interest  him-  warre   a<myn  the    sayd  turke  &  hethen   peple,  to  whiche   I   can 

«elfin  the  °   J  J  ,  .        ,  . 

m»tter.  thynke  that  euery  man  wyll  put  hand!  to  in  theyr  prop  re  persones  / 

1  leaf  2,  back.  *   Orig.  thexortaciou. 

(1)  The  Clarendon  figures  iu  brackets  refer  to  the  Notes  at  the  end  of  the  text. 


Prol  ]     Admirer*  of  biuvc  deeds  arc  cxlwrtcd  to  read  tliis  book.  5 

and   in  thevr  meuable   "oodes  /  Thenne  to  hym,  my  inoost  drcd  i  addre««  tins 

J  °  J  simple  and 

naturel  and1  sonerayn  lord,  I  adresse  this  symple  andf  rude  booke,  J^^™*'", 
besechyng  his  moost  bounteuous  and  haboundaunt  grace  to  receyue  lord. 
4  it  of  me,  his  indigne  and  humble  subgette,  William  Caxton,  And 
to  pardonne  me  so  presumynge ;  besechyng  almyghty  god  that  this  j*^"^ 
sayd  book  may  encourage,  moeue,   and  enflamme   the   hertes   of  ma^infiuence 
somme  noble  men,  that  by  the  same  the  mescreauntes  maye  be  read  it. 
8  resisted*  andf  putte  to  rebuke,  Cristen  fayth  encreaced  and*  enhaunced, 
and  the  holy  lande,  with  the  blessyd  cyte  of  Ifcerusalem,  recouerd1, 
andf  may  come  agayn  in  to  cristen  mens  hondes.     Thenne  I  exhorte  i  e*hort  ^ 
alle  noble  men  of  bye  courage  to  see  this  booke,  and  here  it  redde ;  V''*  *£k^ 

12  by  which  ye  shal  see  what  wayes  were  taken,  what  noble  prowesses  J^£jffl 
and  valyaunces  were  achyeuydf  by  the  noble  compares,  &  especial  $  £$S 
by  the  said  noble  prynce  godeffroy  of  boloyne,  due  of  Loreyne  /  by  p^l00"1" 
whiche  he  deseruydf  the  name  of  one  of  the  moost  worthy  that  euer 

1G  were,  and?  ys  stalled  in  the  thyrd*  stalle  of  the  Cristen  conquerours  / 
Andf  in  the  nyntbe  of  the  mooste  worthy  /  where  his  name  and 
renomme  shal  remayne  and  abyde  perpetuel  /  And  for  to  deserue 
the  tenthe  place,  I  beseche  almyghty  Godf  to  graunte  and  ottroye  to 


20  our  savd  souerayn  lord,  or  to  one  of  his  noble  progeuye  /  I  meane  my  i  beseeci.  my 

«/  w  *  lord  Prince, 

lord*  Prvnce  /  and  my  lord  Rychardf,  due2  of  yorke  and  norfolke,(2)  rod  my  loni 

J  l  J  a  Richard,  tlie 

to  whom  I  humbly  beseche  /  at  theyr  leyzer  and  playsyr,  to  see  &  j**^ 


here  redde  this  symple  book,  by  which  they  may  be  encoraged  to  *ej£Ju,_ 
24  deserue  lawde  and  honour,  and  that  their  name  and*  renomme  may  silI,Ple  bo"k- 
encreace  and1  remayne  perpetuel  /  Andf  after  this  lyf  short  and  tran- 
sytorye  /  All  we  may  atteyne  to  come  to  the  euerlastyng  lyf  in 
heuen,  where  is  ioye  and1  reste  withoute  eude.     Amen. 

28  t        Henne  for  to  knowe  the  content  of  this  book,  ye  shal  playnly  see  by 

the  table  folowynge  /  wherof  euery  chapytre3  treateth  al  alonge. 

The  fyrst  chapytre  treateth  how  Eracles  conquerd  Perse,  And  slewe  Cosdroe] 

andf  brought  in  to  Iherasalem  the  veray  Crosse  /  Capitulo  primo.     [p.  18, 

32  How  the  puyssaunt  Cosdroe  wasted  thempyu  of  rome,  for  tauenge  the  deth  of 

themperour  Mauryce,  fader  to  his  wyt'  /  ca°.  ij.     [p.  20} 

How  this  puyssaunt  kyng  entred  in  to  Iherusalem  /  and  demaunded  dyly- 

gently  of  the  temple  /  and  reedefyed  it,  and  assigned*  grete  reuenues  to 

36  entretiene  it  /  capitulo  iij°.     [p.  21] 

How  Charlemayne  by  his  lyberalyte  gate,  for  the  prouffyt  of  cristen  peple  in 

hethenesse,  thamyte  of  hethen  prynces.  capitulo  iiij.     [p.  22] 

1  leaf  3.  -   Or'uj.  dnc.  3   Orlg.  chapytpe. 


6  Table  of  Contents.     Cliapters  5 — 21. 

Of  the  noyse  that  sourded  emonge  the  hethen  peple  discordynge   in  theyr 

lawe  /  And  how  they  of  egypte  yssued!  oute  of  theyr  londe,  and  of  the 

euylles  and  harmes  that  they  dyde..  capitulo  v.     [p.  23] 

How  thafflyction  /   Iniuryes,  and  tormentes  of  cristen  men,  grewe  in  the  4 

tyme  of  Calyphe  hetham.  capitulo  vi.     [p.  24] 

How  at   the   requeste   of   themperour   of   constantynople    the   cristen   men 

obteyned  licence  to  bylde  agayn  the  chirche  of  the  holy  sepulcre. 

Capitulo  vij.     [p.  26]  8 
Of  the  turkes,  fro  whens  they  cam,  And?   how  they  grewe  in  to  ^rete 

puyssauwce,  &  dyde  chose  theym  a  kyng  for  to  mayntene  their  warrys. 

Capitulo  viij.     [p.  28] 
Of  thorryble  synnes  regnyng  thewne  in  Cristiente  /  as  wel  in  thyse  partyes  as  12 

in  tho  partyes  /  capitulo  ix.     [p.  31] 

Of  a  bataylle  that   themperour  Romayn  of  Constantynople  had  ayenst  a 

prynce  of  thoryent  named  belphet  /  capitulo  x.     [p.  32] 

Of  many  maner  tormentes  /  that  the  Cristen  peple  suffred  for  their  synnes  in  16 

that  tyme.  capitulo  xi.     [p.  35] 

How  after  they  had  ben  .iiij  C  /  lxxxx  yere  in  the  seruage  of  the  hethen 

men,  our  lord  pourueyed  remedye  for  his  cristen  peple.     ca.  xii.     [p.  36] 
How  Peter  theremyte  enterprysed  the  more  hardly  his  viage,  by  the  reue-  20 

lacion  or  vysyon  that  he  sawe  in  his  sleep  /  ca°.  xiij0.     [p.  39] 

Of  the  persecucions  of  the  chirche  in  that  tyme  /  And  how  the  pope  Vrban 

was  put  out  of  the  see  of  Rome  by  the  Bysshop  of  Rauenne. 

Capitulo  xiiij.     [p.  40]  24 
Of  a  general  counseyl  that  the  pope  Vrban  ordeyned1,  for  the  reformacion  of 

holy  chirche  and  thamendement  of  the  people.  ca  /  xv.      [p.  42] 

How  many  noble  and  bye  men  /  and  other  moyen  peple  of  the  royamme  of 

ffraunce  crossyd  theym  for  to  goo  ouer  see  /  ca°.  xvj.     [p.  43]  28 

The  names  of  noble  men  that  enterprysed!  this  pylgremage  /  as  wel  on  this 

syde  the  see  as  beyonde  the  montaynes  /2  ca°.  xvij.     [p.  45] 

Of  thauentures  that  a  Rowte  of  Cristen  men  in  this  vyage,  of  whom  one 

gaultier  without  knowleche  was  capitayn  /  ca°.  xviij.     [p.  47]  32 

How  Peter  theremyte  was  chyef  and  Capitayn  of  a  grete  hooste,  in  this  vyage 

toward  the  holy  londe.  capitulo  xix.     [p.  49] 

How  somme  of  thoost  of  Peter  theremyte  vnwytyng  hym  /  sette  fyre  in  the 

subarbys  of  Nyz  at  theyr  departyng  /  capitulo  xx.     [p.  50]  36 

How  Peter  theremyte  was  aduertysed  of  al  this,   and  of  the  harme  that 

ensiewed  /  Capitulo  xxi.     [p.  51] 

1  leaf  3,  back.  *   Orbj.  moutaxnes. 


Table  of  Contents.     Chapters  22—37.  7 

How  themperour  of  constantynople,  beyng*  aduertysed  of  thies  oultrages,  sentc 

his  messagers  to  Peter  theremyte  /  capitulo  xxij.     [p.  54] 

Of  the  niayntenyng  of  thoost  of  Peter  theremyte,  Ami  how  thre  M  /  duche- 

4  men  toke  a  castel  by  assault  /  and  slewe  alle  theym  that  were  therin 

with  the  swerd.  capitulo  xxiij0.     [p.  55] 

How  Solyman,  lord  of  that  countre,  reprised  and  toke  agayu  the  castel,  and 

slewe  alle  the  duche  men  that  were  therin  /  ca°.  xxiiij.     [p.  50] 

8  How  our  men  armed  theym  for  tauenge  the  duche  men,  And!  of  a  recountiv 

that  they  had  agaynst  Solyman.  ca°.  xxv.     [p.  57] 

How  Peter  theremyte,  beyng  in  Constantynople,  was  aduertysed  of  this  dis- 

confyture  /  And?  saued  thre  thousand  cristen  men  beyng  *in  grete  daunger. 

12  capitulo  xxvj.     [p.  58] 

How  a  preest  named  Godechan  made  hymself  Capytayn  of  /  xv  thousand 

duche  men  in  this  vyage,  And1  of  theyr  oultrayes. 

Capitulo  xxvij.     [p.  59] 

16  How  two  C   thousand   Cristen  men  afoote,   &  thre  thousand  on  horsbak, 

withoute    Capitayn,    assembled1    in    this    pylgremage,    And?    of    theyr 

ma}'ntene  /  capitulo  xxviij.     [p.  61] 

How  this  peple  began   to  destroye   the   londe  of  the  kyng  of  hongrye  by 

20  cause  he  wold  not  graxinte  them  leue  to  passe  /     capitulo  xxix.     [p.  63] 

How  the  due   godeffroy  of   Eoloyne   beyng  Avith  a  grete  hoost  cam   vnto 

hongrye,  and  sente  his  messagers  to  the  kyng  to  demande  passage. 

capitulo  xxx.     [p.  64] 
24  How  the  messagers  of  due  godeffroy  declared  theyr  message  vnto  the  kynge 
of  hongrye  /  and  therupon  his  answere.  ca°.  xxxj.     [p.  65] 

How  the  sayd  kynge  sente  for  to  fetche  the  due  Godeffroye,  And?  how  he 
wente,  &  of  the  deuyses  that  they  had?  to  gydre  /        ca°.  xxxij.     [p.  68] 
28  How  the  due   Godefroy  sente  his   messagers   to  themperour  of  constanty- 
nople,2 to  thende  that  he  shold  delyuer  to  hym  huon  le  mayne  and  other 
that  he  helde  in  pryson.  capitulo  xxxiij.     [p.  69] 

How  due  Godeffroy  constrayned  themperour  by  force  to  rendre  &  delyuer 
32  his  prysoners.  capitulo  xxxiiij.     [p.  71] 

The  grete  despyte  that  themperour  toke  that  due  godeffroy  refused  to  goo 
in  to  Constantynople  vnto  hym  /  capitulo  xxxv.     [p.  72] 

Of  the  descripcion  of  the  Cyte  of  Constantynople,  Am?  of  many  conntrees 
36  and  londes  therabout.  capitulo  xxxvi.     [p.  73] 

How  our  peple  brente  theyr  lodgys,  and  toke  theyr  harnoys  /  and?  of  an 
assault  that  the  grekes  made  on  them.  capitulo  xxxvij.     [p.  74] 

1  leaf  i.  ~  Oriff.  Constantinople. 


8  Table  of  Contents.     Chapters  38 — 53. 

How  after  our  peple  began  to  destroye  the  eontre  /  And  of  a  message  fro 

Buymont  vnto  due  godeffroy.  And1  the  answere  of  the  due  vpon  the 

same  agayn.  capitulo  xxxviij.     [p.  76] 

How  themperour  appeased  the  due  Godeffroy  /  and  seute  for  hyrn  /  and  of  4 

thonour  that  lie  dyde  to  hym  /  capitulo  xxxix.     [p.  77] 

Of  the  yefles  that  themperour  made  to  due  Godeffroye,  to  the  barons,  and  to 

the  gentiliuen  of  his  hooste.  capitulo  xL     [p.  78] 

How  buymont  was  made  Capitayn  of  a  greet  hooste,   And1  the  names  of  8 

many  nobles  of  thooste,  &  of  theyr  maytene.  ca°.  xlj.     [p.  79] 

Messagers  and  lettres  fro  themperour  to  buymont,  And  the  contenue  of  the 

same,  as  foloweth  /  capitulo  xlij.     [p.  81] 

How  Buymont  approched!  constantynople,  and  was  seute  for  to  come  to  the  12 

einperour,  And  how  by  the  prayer  of  due  Godeffroye  xhe  wente  toward 

hym  /  capitulo  xliij.     [p.  82] 

How  tlierle  Robert  of  fflaundres  with  his  boost  approchyd  Constantinople, 

And  how  themperour  sente  for  hym  /  And  of  theyr  deuyses  to  gydre.        16 

capitulo  xliiij.     [p.  83] 
Of  the  mayntyene  of  thoost  whiche  therle  of  tholouse  and  t;ie  bisshop  of 

Buy  brought  ouer  see.  capitulo  xlv.     [p.  84] 

Ambassadours  of   themperour  to  the  sayd  erle  and  Bysshop,   and   of  the  20 

contenue  of  his  lettres  /  and  of  the  daunger  wherin  the  sayd  bisshop 

was.  ca°.  xlvj.     [p.  86] 

How  therle  of  tholouse,  beyng  with  themperour,  wold  not  doo  ho??image 

to  hym,  And  of  the  despyte  that  themperour  dyde  /  24 

ca°.  /  xlvij.     [p.  87] 
How  themperour,  for  tauenge  hym  and  therle,  made  his  conestables  tenbusshe 

them,  and  assaylle  thoost  of  therle.  capitulo  xlviij.      [p.  88] 

How  at  thynstaunte  prayer  of  the  barons  of  thooste,  therle  made  homage  to  28 

themperour,  which  thenne  gaf  grete  yeftes  to  hym  and  his  / 

capitulo  xlix.     [p.  90] 
How  due  Robert  of  Normandye  /  and  other  here  named,  approuched  Con- 
stantynople, and  made  hommage  to  themperour  /  ca°.  L.     [p.  91]  32 
How  themperour  sente,  for  to  destroye  our  cristen  men,  one  his  seruaunt, 

faynyng  to  be  a  trewe  conduytour  and  guyde.  ca°.  Lj.     [p.  92] 

Of  the  situacion  of  Nycene  /  And  how  our  peple  approuched  therto,  merueyl- 

lyng  of  the  place,  and  of  the  strengthe  /  capitulo  /  Lij.     [p.  93]  36 

How  the  puyssaunt  turke  Solyman  with  a  grete  hooste  aduysed  tyme  and 

houre  to  assaylle  and  smyte  on  our  peple,  for  to  reyse  the  siege  / 

capitulo  Liij.     [p.  94] 
1  leaf  4.  back. 


Tabic  of  Contents.     Chapters  54—68.  9 

How  Solyman,  beyng1  in  the  montaynes,1  aente  his  messagers  to  them  of 

the  toun,2  And!  of  the  comforte  that  he  gaf  to  theyiu. 

Capitulo  Liiij.     [p.  95] 

4  How  the  messagers  of  Solyman  were  taken  by  our  men  /  And!  by  them  was 

knowen  the  couyne  of  the  sayd  Solyman.  ca°.  Lv.     [p.  96] 

How  a  grete  batayll  of  Solyman  cam  and!  smote  on  our  peple  /  And  of  thende 

of  the  sckarmuche  /  capitulo  Lvj.     [p.  97] 

8  How  our  barons  were  lodged  in  the  sayd  siege  /  of  their  mayntene,  &  how 

euery  day  they  enforced  them  thassaylle  the  toun  /      ca°.  Lvij.     [p.  98] 

How  our  barons  made  castellys  of  tree  and  approuched  the  toun,  And  how 

they  within  brake  one  of  theym  /  and1  slewe  them  that  were  therin  / 

jo  capitulo  Lviij.     [p.  99] 

Of  the  counseyl  that  our  men  toke  for  tassiege  the  toun  by  water,  for  to  con- 

strayne  them  not  for  to  entre  ne  yssue  /  capitulo  Lix.     [p.  100] 

How,  after  the  cyte  was  assieged  by  water  and  by  londe,  our  men3  assaylle 

16  it ;  And  of  a  shotte  that  due  godeffroy  dyde  shote.       ca°.  Lx.     [p.  101] 

How,  after  many  assaultes,  oure  men  beyng  in  counseyl  /  A  lombard  cam  to 

them  /  whiche  offred  to  make  an  engyne  that  shold  destroye  the  toun  / 

capitulo  Lxi.     [p.  103] 

20  How  after  /  that  this  engyne  was  so  wel  wrought,  the  wyf  of  Solyman,  with 

tweyne  of  her  childeren,  wente  out  of  the  toun,  &  were  taken  by  our 

men.  capitulo  Lxij.     [p.  104] 

How  themperour4  sente  grete  barons  for  to  receyue  the  toun  /  after  that  our 

24  peple  had  acerteyned  hym  that  they  wold  yelde  it  / 

Capitulo  Lxiij.      [p.  106] 

How  our  boost5  departed  on  theyr  iourneye.     And?  how  somme  departed  fro 

theyr  felawship  /  And  how  solyman  determyned  tassaille  them  / 

28  capitulo  Lxiiij.     [p.  107] 

Of  the  bataylle  that  Solyman  had1  ayenst  somme  of  oure  peple  that  were 

departed  fro  theyr  felawship  folyly  /  capitulo  Lxv.     [p.  108] 

Of  the  dylygeuce  that  due  godeffroy  made  whan  he  was  aduertysed  herof  / 

32  and  how  Solyman  was  disconfyted,  and?  his  lygnage  taken. 

capitulo  Lxvj.     [p.  109] 

How  the  fourth  day  after  this  vyctorye,  our  peple  went  forth  on  theyr  waye, 

And?  of  the  grete  mesease  of  the  hooste  the  same  daye. 

36  Capitulo  Lxvij.     [p.  Ill] 

How  somme  of  the  grete  barons  of  thoste  /  after  to  haue  approuched  Anthyoche 

the  lasse  /  departed1  for  to  goo  vytaylle  them  /    Capitulo  Lxviij.  [p.  112] 

1  Oi'ig.  inontayuea.  a   Orig.  tonii.  3  leaf  5. 

*   Oriff.  theuiperonr.  6   Orig.  hooost. 

4* 


10  Table  of  Contents.     Chapters  GO — 85. 

Here  recounted  thystorye  of  somine  aduentures  /  that  tlienne  fylle  in  thoost 

of  Cristen  men  /  capitulo  Lxix.     [p.  114] 

How  Tancre,  that  was  departed  fro  thoost  /  assieged  Tarse  /  and  toke  it  by 

certayn  couenaunt.  ca°.  Lxx.     [p.  115]  4 

How  bawdwyn,  broder1  of  Godeffroy,  sechyng  his  aduentures,  sawe  Tancre 

and  his  peple  tofore  Tarse,  and  adressyd  hym  to  theym. 

Capitulo  Lxxj.     [p.  116] 
Of  thenuye  that  Bawdwyn  and  his  peple  had,  to  see  the  baner  of  Tancre  on  8 

the  walle  of  the  toun.     And'  how  Tancre  departed. 

Capitulo  Lxxij.     [p.  116] 
How  a  lytil  after,  Tancre  cam  to  the  Cyte  of  anamystre  /  whiche  the  turkes 

helde,  and  toke  it  by  assault.  capitulo  Lxxiij.      [p.  118]  12 

How  Bawdwyn  entred  in  to  Tharse  /  And  how  thre  honderd  pylgryms  were 

slayn  of  the  turkes  afore  the  same  toun  /        Capitulo  Lxxiiij.     [p.  118] 
How  the  peple  of  bawdwyn  knewe  the  departyng  of  the  turkes,  3And  of 

the  slaughter  of  the  cristen  men.  capitulo  Lxxv.     [p.  120]  16 

How  the  sayd  Bawdwyn  retorned   to    the   grete  boost  /  And  how  Tancre 

mayntened  hym  moche  wel  in  conqueryng4  countrees. 

Capitulo  Lxxvj.     [p.  122] 
How  bawdwyn  conquerd  a  grete  contre  vpon  the  turkes,  by  the  counseyl  of  a  20 

knyght  Ermyne,  named  Pancrace  /  ca°.  Lxxvij.      [p.  123] 

How  they  of  Bages  sente  their  messagers  to  bawdwyn,  prayeng  hym  that  he 

wold  come  to  theym.  capitulo  Lxxviij.     [p.  124] 

How  this  due  that  was   at  Bages  varyed  for  to  holde  this  /  that  he  had  24 

promysed  to  bawdwyn  /  capitulo  Lxxix.      [p.  126] 

How  bawdwyn  wente  tassaylle  famosette,  a  Cyte  nygh  to  rages. 

Capitulo  Lxxx.      [p.  127] 
How  they  of  the  toun  of  rages  slewe  theyr  due,  And  chaas  bawdwyn  for  to  28 

be  theyr  lord.  capitulo  lxxxj.      [p.  128] 

How  bawdwyn  wente  and  assieged  the  toun  of  Sororge,  nygh  to  L'.nges,  and 

toke  it  /  and  of  his  ordenaunces.  capitulo  lxxxij.     [p.  129] 

How  the  grete  boost  cam  to  fore  Marese,  and  how  the  turkes  that  were  within  32 

liedde  /  And  how  our  peple  payned  them  to  conquere  countrees  / 

capitulo  lxxxiij.     [p.  130] 
How  it  was  commaunded  vnto  alio  the  barons  to  come  to  thoost,  for  to  goo 

vnto  Anthyoche,  And  of  somine  recountrees  that  they  had  in  the  waye  /   36 

capitulo  Lxxxi  ij.      [p.  132] 
How  Anthyoche  by  sucussion  of  tyme  /  had  dyuerse  names.     And  of  the 

noblesse  of  auncyente.  capitulo  Lxxxv.     [p.  134] 

1    Oriff.  krociur.  -  loaf  5.  b:ick. 


Talk  of  Contents.     Chapters  86— 104.  11 

Of  the  situacion  of  Anthyoche.  Lxxxvj.     [p.  135] 

Who  was  thenne  lord  of  anthyoche  /  and'  hy  what  moner  he  was  comen  vnto 

this  seygnorye.  capitulo  Lxxxvij.     [p.  136] 

4  Diuerse  oppiynons  of  our  men  tofore  they  had  assieged   anthyoche.     And 

how  they  acorded  alle  for  tassiege  it.  capitulo  Lxxxviij.     [p.  137] 

How,  after  the  situacion  of  the  toun,  eche  of  the  hye  barons  of  thoost  were 

lodged  at  the  sayd  siege  /  capitulo  Lxxxix.     [p.  139] 

8  How  our  peple  assembled  in  counseyl  for  to  fynde  the  nioyen  for  to  sende  for 

vytaylle,  and  of  a  hrydge  that  they  made.  ca°.  Lxxxx.     [p.  140] 

How  our  peple  stopped  a  yate  without  forth  /  And  of  a  castel  of  tree  that 

they  made.  capitulo  Lxxxxj.     [p.  141] 

12  How  oure  peple  were  in  grete  meschyef,  for  as  moche  as  they  of  the  toun 

yssued  /  &  entred  in  &  out  with  grete  rowtes.1      ca°.  Lxxxxij.     [p.  142] 

Of  the  faiuyne  and  mortalyte  of  thost,  after  that  they  had  be  at  the  sayd 

siege  the  space  of  two  monethis  /  capitulo  Lxxxxiij.     [p.  144] 

16  How  our  peple  ordeyned  grete  Eowtes  for  to  goo  for  vytalle,2  &  to  reteyne  the 

peple  whiche  fledde  for  hongre.  capitulo  lxxxxiiij.     [p.  145] 

How  buymont  and  therle  of  fflauralres  mayntened  theym,  beyng  in  fourage 

of  theyr  recountrees  /  and  of  the  gayn  that  they  made. 

20  capitulo  Lxxxxv.     [p.  14G] 

How  a  grete  Rowte  of  Cristen  men  were  in  this  tyme  slayn  by  the  turkes 

bytwene3  Fynemye  and  terme  /  capitulo  Lxxxxvj.     [p.  147] 

How  the  vntrewe  greke  latyus  departed  fraudelously  fro  thoost,  And  other 

24  moo  by  the  ensample  of  hym  /  capitulo  Lxxxx vij.     [p.  148] 

How  the  prelates  of  thoost  couwseylled  to  doo  penaunce  for  tappese  god,  &  of 

thordenaimces  that  were  made  teschewe  synne.4       Lxxxxviij.     [p.  149] 

How  buymont  fonde  a  subtil  remedye,  for  to  delyuer  and  purge  thoost  of 

28  tespyes  of  the  turkes  /  capitulo  Lxxxxix.     [p.  150] 

How  the  Calyphe  of  Egypte  sente  his  messagers  with  grete  yeftes  vnto  our 

boost.  capitulo  C.      [p.  15  2 J 

How  Ancean,  lord  of  Anthyoche  /  and!  the  barons,  sente  vnto  the  turkes  theyr 

32  neyghbours  for  to  demaunde  socours.  ca°  Cj.      [p.  153] 

How  oure  peple  knewe  the  couyne  of  the  turkes.     Of  thembusshe  that  they 

made,  &  of  theyr  vyctorye  &  gayn  that  they  had  /       ca°.  Cij.      [p.  154] 

How  the  turkes  of  Anthyoche  sprang  out,  and  assaylled  the  lodgyses  of  our 

36  peple  /  capitulo  Ciij.     [p.  155] 

Of  a  castel  that  oure  men  made  /  Of  somme  pylgryms  that  arryued  atte  porte  / 

And  how  they  were  disconfyted  by  a  busshement  of  turkis. 

capitulo  Ciiij.      [p.  156] 
1   Orig.  rewtcs.  2  leaf  6.  3  Or'uj.  hytwuuu.  4   Oriff.  symui. 


12  Table  of  Contents.     Chapters  105—122. 

Of  a  butaylle  where  our  men  auenged  them  of  the  turkes  /  And  of  a  stroke 

that  due  godeffroy  gaf  in  this  bataylle.  ca°.  CV.     [p.  159] 

How  the  cristen  men  thanked  our  lord  of  this  vyctoryc,  And  made  a  castel  iu 

their  mahommerye  /  where  they  founde  grete  gayne.        •■  4 

Capitulo  Cvj.     [p.  162] 
Of  a  fortresse  that  Tancre  made  ouer  the  ryuer,  And  how  he  deffercded  it 

valyauntly.  capitulo  Cvij.     [p.  163] 

How  thenne  the  turkes  of  the  toun1  began  to  haue  mesease  and  sorowe,  and  8 

our  peple  ease.  capitulo  Cviij.     [p.  165] 

How  therle  estieuen  of  chartiys  and  of  bloys  ftedde  fro  thooste  shamefully. 

capitulo  Cix.     [p.  166] 
How  a  Cristen  man,  Emyrferyus,  whiche  was  in  Anthyoche,  acqueynted  hym  12 

with  buymont.  capitulo  Cx.     [p.  167] 

Of  som  deuises  that  the  said  emirferius  sent  to  buymorct,2  &  in  what  maner 

he  acorded  to  delyuer  hym  the.  toun  /  capitulo  Cxj.     [p.  169] 

How  buymont  discouerid  this  thyng  to  due  godeffroy,  to  huon  le  mayne,  to  16 

the  due  of  normandye,  &  to  therle  of  flamidres.  ca°.  Cxij.     [p.  170] 

3  Of  the  grete  socours  that  the  soudan4  of  Perse  had  sente  to  them  of  An- 
thyoche, And  corbagat  assieged  Rages  /  capitulo  Cxiij.     [p.  171] 
How  oure  men  aduertysed  of  the  grete  hooste  of  corbagat,  sente  somme  of  20 

theyr  knyghtes  for  to  esteme  them.     And  what  they  reported  of  that 

they  had  seen.  capitulo  Cxiiij.     [p.  172] 

Of  the  counseyl  that  oure  peple  toke  for  to  ordeyne  theyr  nedes,  whan  they 

sawe  the  comyng  of  this  right  grete  boost.  cap0.  Cxv.     [p.  173]  24 

How  after  that  buymont  had  declared  his  fayt  to  alle  thoost  /  they  acorded 

that  the  toun  shold  be  his,  sauf  therle  of  tholouse  /     ca°.  Cxvj.     [p.  174] 
How  they  of  Anthyoche  had  fere  of  treson,  And  how  they  assembled  in  coun- 

seil,  &  of  that  which  emirferiws  deposed  therat.         ca°.  Cxvij.     [p.  176]  28 
Of  the  meschyef  that  the  turkes  made  euery  day  to  the  cristen  men  that  were 

in  Anthyoche  enhabytyng  with  them  /  ca°.  Cxviij.     [p.  177] 

Of  the  dylygence  that  buymont5  made  in  this  werke.     And  emyrferius  slewe 

his  broder,  &  delyuerd  the  toun  to  the  cristere  men.      ca°.  Cxix.     [p.  179]  32 
Of  the  mayntene  of  the  cristen  men  in  this  pryse,  And  of  thaffraye  of  the 

turkes  of  the  toun.  capitulo  Cxx.     [p.  181] 

How  Ancean,  lord  of  Anthyoche,  fledde  by  a  posterne  oute  of  the  toun  /  and 

he  was  recountred  and  put  to  deth.  capitulo  Cxxj.     [p.  183]  36 

How,  after  that  our  men  had  made  grete  slaughter  of  theyr  enemyes,  our  men 

helde  coimseyl  for  to  take  the  dongeon  /  thenne  beyng  seased  of  the 

turkes.  capitulo  Cxxij.     [p.  184] 

1  Or'ig.  tonn.     2  Or'tg.  buymont.     3  tejif  6.  back.     *  Oi'ig,  soudanf.     5  Orig.  buymout. 


Table  of  Contents.     Chapters  123—140.  13 

How,  wliyles  that  thoost  garaysshyd  the  toun,  Somme  of  thoost  corbagat  cam 

rennyng  to  fore  it.  capitulo  Cxxiij.     [p.  185] 

How,  the  thyrd  day  after  the  getynge  audi  pryso  of  Anthyoche,  corbagat  with 

4  his  boost  arryued  to  fore  it.  capitulo  Cxxiiij.     [p.  186] 

How  after  that  /  the  due  was  within  the  barres  of  the  toun  /  many  of  his. 

men  slayn,  the  turkes  entred  in  to  the  toun.  ca°.  Cxxv.     [p.  188] 

How  oure  cristen  men,  that  a  lytil  tofore  had!  assiegedl  the  toun  /  were  now 

8  assieged  in  the  same.  capitulo  Cxxvj.     [p.  189] 

How  corbagat  dyde  do  assaylle  a  fortresse  which  therle  of  fflauwdres  kepte 

without  the  gate,  &  of  that  ensiewed*.  capitulo  Cxxvij.     [p.  101] 

Of  the  grete  famyne  and  mesease  that  our  men  suffred  in  the  cyte  of  Anthy- 

12  oche,  beyng  assieged  on  alle  sydes  by  the  said  corbagat. 

capitulo  Cxxviij.     [p.  192] 

How  the  turkes,  felyng  that  oure  men  were  in  suche  meschyef  of  hongre, 

enforced  them  for  tassaylle  the  cyte  /  capitulo  Cxxix.     [p.  193] 

16  How  corbagat  sente  his  men  of  armes,  for  to  slee  the  marcmners  that  Avere  at 

the  parte  ;  wherof  our  me«  had  a  grete  losse.     capitulo  Cxxx.     [p.  194] 

How  guyllem  de  grateuylle  and?  his  felaws  fugytyfs  cam  in  to  1Allexandryee 

the  lasse.  Capitulo  Cxxxj.     [p.  195] 

20  How  therle  of  chartres  /  discouraged  themperour  of  constantynople,  that  he 

shold  not  goo  &  socoure  our  peple  in  anthioche.       ca°.  Cxxxij.     [p.  196] 

How,  by  the  warnynges  of  the  sayil?  Erie  /  themperour,  whiche  wold  haue  goon 

&  socoured  our  men,  retorned  shortly.  ca°.  Cxxxiij.     [p.  198] 

24  How  our  peple  in  Anthyoche,  beyng  aduertysed?  herof ,  were  alle  discouraged  / 

And  Corbagat  enhaunced?  in  pryde.  ca°.  Cxxxiiij.     [p.  199] 

How  the  spere  was  founden  that  Ih&sus  was  prechyd2  on  the  crosse  with  /  & 

of  the  co»ifort  that  our  pilgrims  toke  therby.  ca°.  Cxxxv.     [p.  200] 

28  How  peter  theremyte  was  sent  by  our  men  vnto  Corbagat,  the  wordes  that  he 

sayde  /  and  an  s  were  of  the  sayd  corbagat.  ca°.  Cxxxyj.     [p.  202] 

How  the  sayd  Peter  retorned  in  to  the  toun  /  and  wold  openly  haue3  sayd 

his  message  /  and  of  the  subtyl  counseyl  of  the  due  /  whiche  Avoid  not 

32  suffre  it  /  capitulo  Cxxxvij.     [p.  204] 

How  tofore,  er  our  men  departed,  they  made  redy  theyr  bataylles  right  wel  in 

poynt  /  And  of  the  nombre  of  them  /  ca°.  Cxxxviij.     [p.  205] 

How  Corbagat  was  aduertysed  of  thyssuyng  of  our  peple  /  and  sente  archers 

36  for  to  deffende  the  brydge  /  And?  how  they  were  disconfyted  / 

capitulo  Cxxxix.     [p.  207] 
How  oure  men   reioysed   them  of  a  dewe   descendyng*  fro  heuen  /.&  of 
theyr  mayntene  in  approuchyng  the  turkes  /         capitulo  Cxi.     fp.  208] 
1  leaf  7.  *  sic  :  =  pricked.  3   Orig.  hane. 


14  Table  of  Contents.     Chapters  141 — 157. 

How  Corbagat  ordeynecl  his  bataylles  /  and  liow  the  two  hoostcs  marched  to 

gydre  in  bataylle.  capitulo  Cxlj.      [p.  209] 

Of  the  fleyng  of  corbagat,  and1  of  somnie  turkes  gadred  to  gydre  and  agayn 

discomfyted  by  our  men  /  capitulo  Cxlij.      [p.  211]  4 

How  our  peple  retorned  fro  the  chaas  /  and  wente  to  the  pyllage.     And  of 

the  grete  rychesses  that  they  fonde  /  capitulo  Cxliij.     [p.  213] 

Of  the  fayr  ordenaunces  that  oure  people  made  in  the  chirches  of  anthyoche  / 

&  in  other  townes  by  /  after  this  victorye  /  ca°.  Cxliiij.     [p.  215]  8 

How  our  peple  se«te  ambassadours  to  themperour  of  Constantinople,  for  to 

somone  hym  for  to  come  socoure  them  as  he  had  promised!  / 

capitulo  Cxlv.     [p.  216] 
How  the  pylgryms  of  thoost  desired  to  goo  vnto  Iherusalem,  for  teschewe  the  12 

mortalyte  and  tacomplysshe  theyr  vowe  /  ca°.  Cxlvj.     [p.  218] 

The  dylygence  that  due  Godeffroye  made  for  to  socoure  a  turke,  to  whom  he 

had  promised  to  helpe  hym.    And  how  he  reysed  the  siege,  beyng  tofore 

his  castel.  capitulo  Cxlvij.     [p.  219]  16 

Of  somme  pylgryms  goyng  fro  Anthyoche  toward  the  due  godeffroye,  that 

were  distressyd  by  the  turkes  /  And  rescowed  by  the  due  / 

Capitulo  Cxlviij.     [p.  220] 
2 How  the  due  alway  enforced  hym  to  augmente  cristiente,  and  of  somme  20 

fortresses  by  hym  beten  and  destroyed.  ca°.  Cxlix.     [p.  221] 

How  the  knyghtes  of  Eages  wold  haue  bytrayed  Bawdwyn  theyr  lord,  And 

how  he  was  therof  aduertysed  /  ca°.  CL.     [p.  222] 

How  the rle  bawdwyn  was  in  daunger  of  deth,  by  the  treson  of  a  turk  named  24 

balac.  ca°.  CLj.     [p.  223] 

How  therle  of  tholouse3  toke  the  cyte  of  albane  /  and  theriu  constituted  a 

bisshop/  ca°.  CLij.     [p.  225] 

How  oure  peple  retorned?  in  to  Anthyoche  /  and  toke  counseyl  for  to  goo  to  28 

Iherusalem  /  and  of  this  that  foloweth.  ca°.  CLiij.      [p.  226] 

How  the  due  godeffroy  wold  goo  to  Rages  to  vysyte  his  brother,  er  he  began 

his  way  to  Iherusalem,  And'  of  soinine  of  his  adueu[tu]res. 

capitulo  CLiiij.     [p.  228]  32 
How,  after  the  cyte  of  albane4  was  conquerd,  a  grete  debate  aroos  bytwene 

therle  of  tholouse  and  buymont  /  ca°.  CLv.     [p.  228] 

How,  at  the  request  of  the  comyn  peple,  therle,  of  tholouse  ordeyned  day  for 

to  condnyte  them.  Ca°.  CLvj.     [p.  230J  36 

How  therle  of   tholouse  auengyd  hym  of   somme  turkes  Robbours   which 

rubbed  his  hoost.  Capitulo  CLvij.     [p.  231] 

1    Or\g.  aud.  -  leaf  7.  back.  3   Oriff.  tholiouse. 

i  Oriff.  ulbare. 


Tulle  of  Contents.     Chapters  158 — 174.  15 

How  tliorle  of  tliolouse  approchyd  with  his  boost  vnto  Arcliys  /  And  of  tlio 

situacion  of  the  same.  Ca°.  CLviij.     [p.  233] 

Of  a  toun  named  tortuose,  whiche  Raymoni  toke  with  a  Rowte  of  pylgryms  / 

4  And  of  the  departyng  of  the  other  Barons.         Capitulo  Cl.ix.      [p.  234] 

How  the  due  assieged  Gibelet  /  and  of  a  trayson  by  whiche  he  left  his  sie^e. 

Capitulo  CLx.     [p.  235] 
How  thoost  murmured  of  the  spere  founden  in  Anthyoche,  And  of  the  grete 
8  myracle  that  happed  in  the  presence  of  alio  thooste. 

Capitulo  CLxj.     [p.  237] 

Of  thambassade  of  Egypte  comen  with  oure  -men  in  to  thooste  of  pylgryms  / 

and  of  the  reuerence  that  was  don  to  them.  ca°.  CLxij.     [p.  230] 

12  Of  an  embassade  fro  the?»perour  of  constat  tynople  comen  to  our  pylgryms,  & 

of  thanswer  to  the  sayd  Ambassiate  /  capitulo  CLxiij.     [p.  240] 

How  the  comyn  peple  complayned  them  of  this,  that  they  wente  not  hastely 

to  Iherusalem  /  capitulo  CLxiiij.     [p.  242] 

1G  Of  the  grete  dylygence  that  our  men  made  for  tapproche  to  Iherusalem,  And 

of  thalyannces  of  somme  Turkes  made  vnto  them. 

Capitulo  CLxv.     [p.  243] 

How  the  Cristen  men  of  Bethlehem  receyued  moche  wel  Tancre  &  his  rowte  / 

20  &  sette  his1  baner  in  the  chirche  of  our  lady  /  ca  Clxyj.     [p.  245] 

2  Of  thardaunt  desire  that  the  peple  had  to  see  Iherusalem,  and  how  thoost 

approched,  and  was  lodged  by  ordenaunce.        capitulo  Cixvij.     [p.  246] 

Of  the  situacion  of  Iherusalem,  and  of  the  descripcion,  and  also  of  many  other 

24  cytees,  townes,  and  countrees  theraboute.     Capitulo  /  CLxviij.     [p.  248] 

How  Iherusalem  hath  had  many  names,  after  dyuerse  lordes  theiin  regnyng  / 

And  yet  of  the  situacion  wel  at  longe  /  Capitulo  CLxix.     [p.  250] 

Here  thy  story  e  deuyseth  of  many  merueyllous  edefyces  conteyned  in  the  same 

28  cyte  of  Iherusalem /&  who  made  them.  capitulo  /  Clxx.     [p.  251] 

How  the  turkes  of  Iherusalem,  whan  they  knewe  the  comyng  of  oure  hooste, 

stopped  the  pyttes  and  fontaynes  of  the  toun  / 

Capitulo  CLxx.j.     [p.  253] 

32  Of  the,  nombre  of  them  of  thoost  /  of  them  of  Iherusalem,  and  how  our  men 

lodged  them  in  the  siege  to  fore  Iherusalem.     capitulo  CLxxij.     [p.  254  ] 

How  our  men  began  tassaylle  Iherusalem,  And  of  the  grete  dylige/?ce  that 

they  dyde  to  make  engyns  for  to  take  it  /  ca°  /  CLxxiij.      [p.  25G] 

3G  How  our  peple  were  in  grete  meschyef  atte  sayd  siege  /  And  how  the  turkes 

deserted  them  /  by  cause  they  myght  yssue  and1  entre  in  and  out  of  the 

toun.  capitulo  CLxxiiij.     [p.  257] 

'    Orm   hit.  -  leaf  6. 


¥ 


16  Tabic  of  Contents.     Chapters  175 — 189. 

How  the  turkes  enforced!  them  to  make  merueyllous  engyns  ayenst  oures,  and 
of  the  meschyef  don  to  the  cristen  men  dwellyng  in  the  toun. 

capitulo  CLxxv.     [p.  258] 
In  this  tyme  arryued1  a  ship  of  genewys  atte  porte  of  halappe,  And  how  4 
theyr  messagers  cam  in  to  thoost,  and*  of  theyr  request  / 

Capitulo  CLxxvj.     [p.  259] 
How  alle   the  pylgryms,  euerich  after  his  estate  /  payned  them  to  make 

thengyns  for  thassault.  capitulo  CLxxvij.     [p.  261]  8 

Of  the  fayr  processions  that  oure  pylgryms  made  /  to  thende  that  god  shold 
gyue  to  theym  vyctorye  /  And  how  they  pardonned  eche  other  theyr 
male  talentes  and  euyll  wylles  /  capitulo  /  CLxxviij.     [p.  262] 

How  oure  men  sodenly  transported1  in  the  nyght   theyr  engyns  vnto  that  12 
other  parte  of  the  toun  for  tassaylle  on  that  syde. 

Capitulo  CLxxix.     [p.  263] 
How,  the  daye  folowyng,  oure  peple  made  a  merueyllous  assault,  &  how  the 

turkes  defended  them  suhtylly  &  wel.  capitulo  CLxxx.     [p.  265]  16 

The  nyght  departed  the  sayd  assault,  our  peple  withdrewe  them  /  And  how 
they  watched  theyr  engynes  /  and*  the  turkes  the  toun  / 

Capitulo  CIxxxj.     [p.  266] 
How  oure  peple  retorned*  agayn  on  the  morn  to  thassault2  /  And*  3of  the  20 
sorceryes  that  they  wold  haue  charmed  one  of  our  engyns. 

capitulo  CLxxxij.     [p.  267] 
Of  the  dispar  Of  our  peple  at  the  sayd  assault,  And  how  they  were  recom- 
forted  by  a  knyght  vnknowen4  and  euydent  myracles.  24 

capitulo  CLxxxiij.     [p.  268] 
How   therle  of   tholouse   assaylled  vy^orously  toward!   the  south,  And!  of 
thardaunt  desire  that  eche  man  had!  to  doo  wel  / 

capitulo  CLxxxiiij.     [p.  270]  28 
Of  the  pryse  and1  takyng  of  Iherusaleru  /  and  how  due  godeffroy  entred  fyrst 
on  the  walles  /  and  who  folowed.  capitulo  CLxxxv.     [p.  271] 

Of  the  mayntenyng  of  our  peple  entred  in  to  the  toun  toward  the  northeest, 
and  therle  of  tholouse,  herof  al  ignoraunt,  assaylled1  alwey.  32 

capitulo  CLxxx vi.     [p.  272] 
How  xM  turkes  were  slayn  in  the  temple,  and  of  the  grete  tresour  that 
Tancre  fonde  in  the  temple  /  capitulo  CLxxxvij.     [p.  274] 

Of  the  ordenauwees  that  the  cristen  men  made  tofore  they  vnarmed!  them  36 

after  that  the  toun  was  taken.  capitulo  CLxxxviij.     [p.  275] 

How  the  cristen  men,  that  had!  charged1  theyr  message  for  theyr  delyueraunce 
to  peter  theremyte,  knewe  hym.  ca°.  CLxxxix.     [p.  277] 

1   Oriff.  arryued.  2  thassanlt.  3  leaf  8,  back.  4   Orig.  vuknowen. 


Table  of  Contents,     diopters  190—206.  17 

How  they  clensyd  the  touu  of  the  dede  bodyes.     Of  many  other  ordenaunces  / 
And!  how  the  dongeon  was  yolden  to  therle  of  tliolouse. 

capitulo  CLxxxx.     [p.  278] 
4  How  the  hye  barons  of  thoost  assembled  for  to  chose  a  kynge  of  Iherusalem, 
And  thoppynyon  of  the  clergye  vpon  the  same. 

Capitulo  CLxxxxj.     [p.  279] 
How  the  due  godeffroy  was  chosen  kynge  of  Iherusalem,  And?  how  he  was 
8  presented  to  our  lord  in  his  chirche  of  the  holy  sepulcre  / 

capitulo  CLxxxxij.     [p.  281] 

How  due  godeffroy  after  his  election  requyred  therle  of  tholouse  that  he  shold 

delyuer  to  hym  the  tour  dauyd.  ca°.  CLxxxxiij.     [p.  282] 

12  Of  a  patriarke  electe  and  chosen  in  Iherusalem.     And  how  there  was  founden 

a  part  of  the  veray  crosse.  capitulo  CLxxxxiiij.     [p.  283] 

How  due  godeffroy  payned  hym  to  amende  the  Royamme :  of  his  good  con- 

dicions  and  statutes.  capitulo  GLxxxxv.     [p.  284] 

1G  Of  the  sayeng  of  the  countesse  of  boloyne,  moder  of  the  sayd  due,  that  she 

sayd.of  her  iij  oldest  sones  was  verefyed  /         ca°.  CLxxxxvj.      [p.  286] 

Of  the  wagyng  of  a  bataylle  which  was  bytwene  due  godefroy  and  an  hye 

baron  of  almayne  /  capitulo  C  :  Lxxxxvij.     [p.  287] 

20  Of  a  fayr  fayte  of  armes,  which  that  the  due1  dide  in  a  bataill  that  the?/iperour 

of  Almayne  had  aye/zst  them  of  saxone.  ca°.  Clxxxxviij.2     [p.  288] 

3  How  the  valyaunt  due  godeffroy  augmented  holy  chirche  /  and1  he  wold 

neuer  bere  crowne  /  capitulo  CLxxxxix.     [p.  290] 

24  How  the  turkes  of  Arabe  and  of  Egypte  made  their  sonimance  for  to  come  in 

to  Sury  tassaylle  our  eristen  men.  capitulo  CC.     [p.  291] 

How  the  crysten  men,  whan  they  knewe  thyse  tydynges,  cryed  to  god  for 

mercy  &  for  to  haue  vyctorye.  capitulo  CCj.     [p.  293] 

28  How  oure  men  assembled  and1  ordeyned  theyr  bataylles  for  to  fyghte  ayenst 

the  turkes.     And  how  the  turkes  were  disconfyted. 

capitulo  CCij.     [p.  294] 

How  somme  of  oure  barons  wolde  retorne  home  /  after  that  they  had  don 

32  theyr  pylgremage  f-  capitulo  CCiij.     [p.  29G] 

How  buymont  and  bawdwyn  acerteyned  of  the  conquest  of  Iherusalem  wold 

accomplysshe  theyr  pylgremage  /  ca°.  CCiiij.     [p.  298] 

How  our  eristen  men  chosen  a  very  patriark  in  Iherusalem  /  And  assigned  to 

36  hym  rentes  /  capitulo  CO.     [p.  300] 

How  by  thatysement  of  somme  men  a  gretc  debate  sourded  bytwene  the  due 

&  the  patriark  of  Iherusalem.  ca°.  CCvj.     [p.  301] 

1   Or'ig.  due.  2   Onrj.  clxxxxvij.  s  leaf  9. 

GODFREY.      .  C 


18  Of  the  Roman  Emperor  Eracles.  [Cli.  I. 

Here  recounteth  thistorye,  how  tlie  fourth  part  of  Iherusalem  cam  vnto  the 
patriarke  of  the  same  /  capitulo  CCvij.     [p.  302] 

Of  the  same  mater.  ca°.  CCviij.     [p.  304] 

How  due  godeffroy,  for  taugmente  cristiente  assyeged?  one  of  the  tounes  of  the  4 
turkes  /  capitulo  CCix.     [p.  305] 

How  the  turkes  Drought  presentes  to  the  due  Godeffroye  at  the  sayd  siege  / 
and  of  theyr  deuyses  to  gydre  /  capitulo  CCx.     [p.  307] 

How  huymont  was  taken  in  goyng  to  meletene,  whiche  cyte  the  lord  of  the  8 
toun  wold!  haue  yolden  to  hym.  capitulo  CCxj.     [p.  308] 

How  the  due  godeffroy  assemhled  his  peple  and!  entred  in  to  Arahye.  And 
of  the  gayn  that  he  made  of  two  grete  strokes,  that  he  smote  on  two 
camellis,  And  of  his  deth.  capitulo  CCxij.     [p.  309]  12 

Here  endeth  the  table  of   the  content  and  chapytres  nombred?  of   this 

present  book,  entitled  the  siege  and1  conqueste  of  Iherusalem  by  eristen  men. 

i  leaf  id.  1Here  begynneth  the  boke  Intituled?  Eracles  /  and  also  Godefrey 

ouhe'book  °f  Boloyne  /  the  whiche  speketh  of  the  Conquest  of  the  holy  londe  16 

aisocaiied  °f  Iherusalem  /  conteynyng  diuerse  warres   and  noble  faytes  of 

i{oiogne,°f  Armes  made  in  the  same  Royarame  /  and  in  the  contrees  adiacent, 

ti.e'd.'iiquest  And  also  many  meruayllous  werkes  happed?  and  fallen,  as  wel  on 

Land    °y  this  syde  /  as  in  tho  partyes  this  tyme  duryng*  /  And  how  the  20 

Boi.>gne.ey  valyant  due  Godefrey  of  Boloyue  conquerdf  with  swerd  the  sayd 
Royanime  /  And  was  kynge  there  / 

The   ffirst   chapitre   treateth   how   Eracles    couquerd 
Perse  and  slevve  Cosdroe  /  and    brought   in  to  24 
Iherusalem  the  very  crosse  /       capitulo  primo  / 

Eracles  was  He  Auncyent  hystoryes  saye  that  Eracles  was  a  good?  crysten 

Rome.  man,  and  gouernour  of  them  pyre  of  Rome  /  But  in  his  tyme 

Machomet  had  ben,  whiche  was  messager  of  the  deuil,  And?  28 
t        made  the  peple  to  vnderstonde  /  that  he  was  a  prophete  sente 
Mahommed-  from  our  lorde  /  In  the  tyme  of  Eracles  was  the  fals  lawe  of 

anism  was  . 

widely  spread  machomet  sowen  and  sprad  abrode  in  many  partyes  of  thoryent  / 

in  hia  time.  x  » 

and  namely  in  Arabye  /  in  so  nioche  2that  the  prynces  of  the  32 
londes  yet  wold  not  gyue  faith  to  his  secte  that  he  prechid  and 
taught,  whiche  is  cursed  and  euyl  /  but  he  constrayned  them  by 
force  and  by  swerd  to,  &  alle  their  subgets  to  obeye  to  his  com- 
mandemens,  and  to    byleue   in    his   lawe2  /   Whan  Eracles   had  36 

2— 2  Caxton  seems  to  have  misunderstood  his  French  here  entirety.     It 
was  the  princes  themselves  who  "constrayned  their  subjets  by  force  and  by 


Ch.  I.]  Of  the  Hainan  Emperor  Eracles.  19 

conquerd  Perse,  and  slayn  cosdroe,  which  was  a  puissaunt  kynge,  he  Eracie« 
brought  agayn  to  Iherusaleni  the  very  Crosse  (3)  /  whiche  they  had  uwlroe,  king 
ladde  in  to  perse  /  And  abode  and  dwellyd  in  the  londe  of  Surrye  /  »»* t,*gU^I!,tM 

4  And  dide  do  ordeyne  and  chose  a  patriarke,  a  moche  wise  man  ^3^em- 
named  Modeste  /  By  whos  counseil  he  dyde  do  make  agayn  the 
chirches  /  and  habylled  the  holy  places  /  and  clensed  them  that 
the  tyraunt  Cosdrue(4)  of  Perse  had  smeton  doun  and  destroyed1, 

8  Eracles  sette  grete  entente  &  made  grete  costes  for  to  repayre  them  / 
And  whiles  he  entended  ther  aboute  /  homar,  the  sone  of  captap,  Homar,  son 

,  ofCaptap. 

whiche  was  a  prynce  of  Arabe,  the  thirde  after  machomet  /  cam  in  prince  or 
to  this  contree  named  palestyne,  with  so  grete  noinbre  of  peple  that  towwta 

12  alle  the  londe  was  couerd  with  them  /  and  had?  thenne  taken  by 
force  a  moche  stronge  Cyte  of  that  londe  named!  Iadre  /  ffrom  thens 
he  drewe  hym  toward?  damaske  /  and  assieged  Hhe  cyte,  and  by 
strengthe  toke  hyt  /  ffor  he  had  so  grete  a  nombre  of  peple  that 

16  nothyng   myght   resiste   hym   /   themperour   heracles,   which   yet 

dwellyd  in  a  parte  of  this  londe  named  Cylyce,  herde  tydynges  of 

this  peple  /  And  sente  good  espyes  &  trewe,  in  whiche  he  trusted,  Eracles  sends 
*r  r     i  o  u  »  his  spie9  to 

for  to  see  and  serche  their  couine  /  2ffor  he  desyred  moche  to  bane  ascertain  the 

'  "  character  of 

20  a  doo  with  thise  peple  on  the  felde,  and  fyghte  and  chase  them  out  t»>e  invaders, 
of  the  londes  and  cytees2  whiche  obeyed  to  Cristente  &  to  thempyre 
of  Rome.    But  whan  his  messagers  cam,  he  had  by  them  knowleche 
certaynly  that  he  had  not  peple  ynowhe  to  fyhte  ayenst  them  /  ffor 

24  they  were  so  fyers  &  so  orguyllo?w  of  the  grete  nombre  of  peple 
that  they  had  /  that  they  thought  /  nothyng  myght  resiste  them  / 
And  ther  vpon  heracles  had  deliberaet'on,  and  counseilled  with  his  Eracles  de- 

r  cides  not  to 

peple  /  that  it  shold  be  lest  dishonour  to  departe  and  retorne  in  to  jteiitwitii 
28  his  contre  /  than  suffre  his  peple  to  be  destroyed,  &  myght  not  Jg**"*^ 
amende  it  /  Thus  therane,  he  departed  out  of  Surye,  by  cause  the  sy,ia- 
kynge  of  Arabe  &  his  peple  were  of  so  grete  power  &  so  proudo  /  as 
they  that  fonde  alle  the  contre  habandonned3  to  them  /  ffor  in  a 
32  short  tyme   they   had    conquered  alle   the    contre    of    Surye   vnto  The  Arabs 

•>  •'  *■  conquer  all 

Egypte  /  One  thyng1  that  was  to  fore  happenned  in  this  contree,  Syria. 

swerd  to  obey."  Fr.  que  U  princes  des  terres  ne  sc  tenoient  mie  a  ce  que 
fen  enseignast  et  amonestast  a  entire  celle  male  aventure,  eneois  contreig- 
uoieitt  par  force  et  par  enpee  touz  leur  songiez  a  obcir  au  commandemant 
Mahomet,  viz.  as  the  princes  of  the  land  were  not  satisfied  with  teaching  and 
admonishing,  etc.  1  leaf  10.  back. 

2~2  Caxton  has  translated  very  freely  Fr.  Car  il  desirois  moult  a  teavoir 
s"d  peiist  cele  ijeitt  attendre  en  chump  oh  niter  cur  et  chacier  des  terres  it 
des  citiis.  3  Urig.  habandon/Mied. 

C  'J 


20  How  Cosdroe  wasted  the  Roman  Empire.     [Ch.  II. 

Tiiey  did       whiche   heelp   moche  them  of   Arabe   tencrece   their   power,  ffor 

this  the  more  . 

e;isiiy,  be-  cosdroe  the  puissanftt  kynge  of  perse,  of  "whom  1  haue  spoken  to 
damage  done  fore  /  had  ben  with  grete  puissannce  in  Surye  /  and  had  destroyed 
cosdroe.  the  Cytees  and  castels  /  brent  townes  &  chirches,  and  slayn  grete  4 
partye  of  the  peplc  /  and  the  remeunnt  had1  brought  in  to  Captyuyte  / 
And  toke  the  cyte  of  Iherusalem  with  force,  and1  slewe  within  the 
toun?*  xxxvj.  M.  men  /  And1  bare  away  with  hym  the  veray  crosse 
that  our  lord  Ihesu  Cryste  suffred  deth  on  for  vs,  And  ladde  with  8 
hym  the  patriarke  of  Iherusalem  named  (5)Acharye,1  and  brought 
hym  with  hym  with  the  other  Caytyfs  / 

Here    recounteth  thistorye    how  that  the   puissaimt 
kynge  Cosdroe  wastyd  the  Empyre  of  Rome,  for  12 
tauenge  the  deth  of  themperour  Maurice  /  fader 
of  his  wyf  /  capitulo  ij° 

Ow  I  shal  telle  yow  why  he  had  so  doon  /  lyke  as  I  sayde  / 
MRnricewas  n       he  was  a  ryght  myghty  kynge  /  now  had  ther  be  an  emperour  16 
of  Rome,  at  Rome,  named?  Maury ce,  whiche  as  we  fynde  was  moche 

acqueynted  with  seint  gregorie,  And  was  his  gossib,  ffor  2the  payd? 
seynt  Gregorys  had  cristmyd!  to  hym  a  daughter  named*  Marie  / 
who  gave       This  Maurice  gaf  her  in  Maryage  to  this  Cosdroe  /  And  ther  by  was  20 
Marie  m ' er  a  grete  frenship  bytwene  them  /  &  grete  alyau??ce  bytwene  them  of 
cosdroe, king  perse  and  the  Romayns  as  longe  as  themperour  lyned  /  in  suche 
wise  /  that  for  the  loue  of  his  wyf  &  the  Romayns,  whiche  were 
Cristen  /  This  Emperour  made  Cosdroe  to  be  baptised.     But  after  24 
wi.en  Mau-    it  befylle  that  foca  slewe  in  treson  this  Emperour  Maurice  /  And 
byFoca,        was  Emperour  in  his  place,  and  was  called  ffoca  cezar  /  whan 
cosdroe  was   cosdroe  herd  herof  he  had  merveyllous  grete  sorow,  grete  desdayne  / 
with  the        grete  orguyel,  &  grete  hate  ayenst  the  peple  of  the  Romayns,  by  28 
cause  that  he  whiche  had?  slayn  theyr  lorde  vntrewly  /  and  was  yet 
blody  of  the  blood?  of  the  emperour,  they  had1  chosen  to  be  their 
lord,  and  had  gyuen  to  hym  thempire  /  ffor  this  cause  he  entended? 
to  his  power  to  lmrte  and  destroye  al  thempire  of  Rome  /  And  for  32 
To  avenge      this  cause,  for  tauengo  the  deth  of  the  fader  of  his  wyf  /  whiche 

his  wife's  . 

father  he       ofte  enticed  hym  therto  /  he  entred?  in  to  the  londe  of  Surye,  whiche 

wasted  and  "  ' 

destroyed       thenne  was  subget  to  thempyre  of  Rome,  and  wasted?  &  destroyed 

Syria,  winch  °  r ' 

was  a  Roman  it  /  lyke  as  I  haue  said?  to  tore  /  and  voyded?  almost  alle  the  peple  3G 

province.  '      J  i  j  x     * 

that  was  therih  /  ffor  whiche  cause  This  kynge  homar  aforsaid,  & 
1  Lat.  Zachariai.  2  leaf  11. 


Ch.  III.]     How  Cosdroe  rebuilt  the  Temple  of  Jerusalem.  21 

bis  peple  of  Arabe,  that  fonde  this  londe  so  voyde,  myght  the  better  Jfanwftjmd 
doo  theyr  wylles  with  alle  /  %££?* 

How  this  puissaunt  kynge  entred  in  to  Iherusalem  / 

4  and  demaunded  dylygently  of  the  Temple,  and 

reedyfied  it,  and  assigned  grete  reuenues  tberto 

for  tentretene1  it.  capitulo  iij° 

Han  they  cam  in  the  holy  cyte  of  Iherusalem,  they  fonde  it 

8  w      destroyed1  and'  deserte  /  sauf  a  fewe  cristen  men  whiche  dwellyd 

there,  and  were  suffred  that  they  shold  lyue  as  Cristen  men,  and 

make  agayn  their  chirches,  and1  that  they  shold  haue  a  patriarke. 

In  the  while  that  this  myghty  prynce  duellid1  in  Iherusalem,  he 

12  be°an  tenquyre  moche   ententifly2  of  the  peple  of  the  tounn,  &  Hnmarin- 

°  ^    J  -  quired  where 

pryncipally  of  the  patriarke  whiche  was  named1  Sophonye  /  &  had  the  temple 
ben  chosen  after  modeste,  whiche  was  deed,  of  whom  I  haue  spoken 
to  fore,  In  what  place  the  temple  of  our  lord1  had  3be  whan  Titus 

16  the  prynce  deffeted1  and  destroyed  al  the  cyte  /  he  shewid  to  hym 
the  very  certayn  place,  &  the  fondamentes,  &  a  parte  of  the 
muraylles  whiche  were  thenrce  yet  apperyng  /  he  made  anon  to  be 
sought  &  to  be  brouht  to  hym,  without  longe  taryeng,  grete  nombre 

20  of  masons  &  of  carpenters  /  &  dide  do  be  sette  stones  of  marble  &  He  assembled 

r  '  ,  material, 

of   other   manere,   &  alle  thynges   necessarye  therto  he   dide  do  andj»ms«ut 
assemble  as  moche  as  shold  nede  /  And  deuised  the  maner  and 
ordynance  of  the  mesure4  /  and  of  the  dyspences  for  to  make  the 

24  temple  /  And",  as  he  was  a  noble  prynce  of  hye  affaire  &  noble  /  he 
brought  anon  to  ende  this  that  he  had  emprised1,  in  suche  wise  that 
the  temple  was  reedefyed  in  suche  forme  and  estate  as  it  yet 
apeereth  /  this  saide  prynce  hym.  self   assygned  grete  rentes  8c  He  assigned 

28  reuenues  ffor  euer  more,  for  to  sustene  and  repayre  alle  that  shold!  sustain  it  for 

x  ever. 

be  nedeful  to  thedyfices  and  other  necessites  of  the  temple  /  and  for 

the  seruyng1  of  the  lyght  /  day  and  nyght,  by  the  handes  of  them 

that  he  commysed1  to  kepe  the  temple  /  Ther  is  in  the  same  temple, 

32  Avithin  and  without,  5letters  of  golde5  in  the  langage  of  Arabe, 

1  Fr.  entretenir,  i.  e.  support         2  Orig.  eutentifly.         3  leaf  11,  back. 

*  Fr.  merrain,  building  material,  not  measure. 

*-*  Tbe  French  has  leftre*  faites  d!or  mitsique,  i.  e.  letters  made  of  gold 
mosaic-work.  Caxton  probably  misunderstood  the  word  musique.  and  simply 
left  it  out.  The  Latin  gives,  Exttant  porro  in  eadem  templi  aedijiclo  ifttv* 
et  extra  ex  opere  musaxco  Arabice  idiomatis  litterarum  retustissima  monu- 
mrnta  quae  illins  temporis  esse  credmitttr. 


22  Of  Charlemagne  and  Prince  Aaron.        [Ch.  IV. 

whiche  deuyse  as  we  suppose  /  who  was  lie  that  reedefyed  the 
temple  /  and  what  tyme  /  And  how  moche  it  costeto  rehylde  it  / 

How    Charlemayne   by    his    lyberalite    gate    for    the 
prouffyt  of  cristen  peple  in  hethenes  /  thamytye  4 
of  hethen  prynces  /  capitulo  iiij. 

Jerusalem  Hus   it  happed'  that  this  holy  cyte  of  Iherusalem,  for  the 

the  power  of  t        svnnes  of  the  peple,  was  in  seruage  and  1in  daunger1  of  hethen 

heathen  J  i    m  '.  ••••  o 

nations  four  peple  longe  tyme  /  That   is    to  wete    eccexxxmj   yere   con-  o 

hundred  and  l     r  °         J  ' 

thirty-four     tynuelly  /  hut  not  allway  in  one  maneve  /  They  were  one  tyme 

hetter,  &  another  tyme  werse  /  lyke  as  the  lordes  chaunged,  whiche 

were  of  dyuerse  maners  &  condicions  /  hut  neuertheles  thise  peple 

were  alway  in  suhiection  /  It  happed?  that  one  grete  lorde  of  this  12 

saide  lawe  had  nyghe  in  his  seignorye  alle  the  londe  of  thoryent, 

Tiierrinoe     sauf  only  ynde  /  This  prynce2  was  named  Aaron,(6)  &  his  surname- 

rule™ ail  the    ressit  /  This  man  Avas  of  so  grete  cortosye  /  of  so  grete  largesse  /  of 

nations  ex-     so  hye  vygour  /  and  of  so  grete  affaires  in  alle  good  maners,  that  yet  1G 

the  paynems    speke   of   hym  /  lyke   as  they  doo  in  ffraimce  of 
This  Aaron     Charlemayn  /  they  were  hothe   in  one  tyme,  this   aaron  &  this 
same  time6     charlcmain.     3And  therfore,  in  their  tyme,  the   cristen  peple  in 
mague.  e       Iherusalem  were  in  hetter  poynt  /  than  thei  had  euer  he  to  fore  20 
tians  of  Jem-  vnder  ony  of  the  hethen  pei  >le  /  ffor  Charlemayn  the  good'  Emperour,4 

salem  were  J  «•  ,  , 

well  treated    whiche  so  moche  trauailled  and  suff  ryd  for  our  lorde  /  and  so  moche 

by  him.  . 

enhaunced'  the  fayth  of  Ihesu  Criste,  to  thende  that  the  Oistiente 
in  Surye  myght  be  the  hetter  and  more  debonairly  cherysshed  and  24 
entreated,  Pourchassed  so  longe  that  he  had'  the  lone  and  acqueynt- 
au»ce5  of   the   said  Aaron,  by  messages  that   wente  and'  cam  / 
Aaron  loved    Wherof  this  Aaron  had  moche  grete  Ioye  /  And  aboue  alle  the 
Chariem^ue  prynces  of  the  world  he  louid'  and'  honoured  themperour  Charle-  28 
ou'e.e princes,  niayne,  and  the  Cristen  peple  that  were  vnder  hym  /  And  alle  the 
holy  places  that  were  vnder  his  power  /  he  wolde  that  they  shold 
be  entvetiened,  mayntened'  and  wel  aourned',  lyke  as  Charlemayne 
had  desyred  and  sente  to  hym  worde  /  Wherof  it  semed  that  our  32 
peple  beynge  there  /  Were  mure  vnder  the  power  of  Charlemayne 
than  vnder  the  power  of  the  hethen  men  /  Whan  he  myght  fynde 
He  rewarded  the  messagers  of  Charlemayn  /  he  charged'  and'0  laded'  them  alle 
!,i^':"lc"  with  richesses  of  thoryent  /  With  clothes  of  sylke,  with  spyces  /  36 

ambassadors. 

i-1  Fr.  en  Tangier,  in  the  power  of.         2  Orig.  pryuce.         3  leaf  12. 
4  Orig.  Emperour.         5  Orig.  acqueyutaunce.         G  Orig.  aud. 


Ch.  V.]     Of  Charlemagne.     Of  the  Eastern  Heathen.  2.°> 

Ieweles  of  golde  of  dyuerse  facions  /  And'  with  ryche  precious 
st  ones,  whiche  he  sente  to  his  frende  Charlemayn  /  And?  largely  he 
gaf  and?  rewarded'  the  messagers  /  And  emonge  al  other  thinges,  He 
4  sente  into  tt'raunce  an  Olyphant ;  This  dehonayrte  pourchased  the  He  even  sent 

"  r  *  *  an  e|ppli:ml 

good  Charlemayn  for  tlie  Crysten  men  that  were  in  captinyte  vnder  to  France, 
the  said  Aaron  /  And  in  lyke  wyse  the  said  Aaron,  for  the  loue  ti.u  Aaron 

J  d  also  procured 

that  he  hare  to  Carlemayn,  pourchassed  for  other  Cristen  men  that  J^Jj*^Jf^ 
8  were  in  al  hethenes  vnder  dyuerse  lordes,  as  in  egypte,  And  in  2ShS5i«i 
Aufrique  /  That  is  to  seye  in  Alexandrye  /  And  in  Cartage  /  ffor  he  countries, 
sente  ^rete  yeftes  and1  moche  good  2to  sustene  the  power  of  Cristen 
men,2  &  sente  grete  presentcs  vnto  theyr  lordes  &  maistres  mys- 

12  creauntes,  &  amyahle  letters  /  In  suehe  wise,  that  he  pourchassed 
their  loue  and  acqueyntaunce  /  by  whiche  they  conteyned  them 
more  debonairly  vn  to  cristiens  that  were  in  theyr  subiection  ;  thus 
dyde  the  hye  prynce  charlemayn  vnto  the  hethen  lordes,  that  were 

16  fer  fro  hvm  /  ffor  it  is  to  be  bileuid  /  that  yf  he  had  ben  nyghe  to  ifcharie- 

J         I  i  <i  "  "  mnene  had 

them,  that  he  wold  haue  essayed  for  to  haue  delyuerd  in  another  ^ed  nearer 
manor  the  peple  of  our  lord,  lyke  as  he  dyde  ryght  gloriously  in  £S8dta« 

i  /  succoured 

many  places/  thecims- 

tians  more 
effectually. 

203Of  the  noyse  that  sourded  emonge  the  hethen  men 
discordyng  in  theyr  lawe  /  and  how  they  of 
egypte  yssued  out  of  theyr  londe,  and  of  the 
euyllis  that  they  dyde.  capitulo  v° 

24  N"  this  season,  it  happed  that  a  grete  debate  sourded  bytwene  Great  reiitf- 

t-<  c  t»  /  ous  disputes 

i        the  mescreauntes  of  Egypte  /  and'  the  mescreauntes  ot  .rerse  /  arose  among 

ojr        ■  .  '    theunbe- 

ffor  eueryche  partye  of  this  peple  wold  haue  the  seignourye  lievers, 
vpon  the  other  /  The  Rote  of  this  grete  hate  and  enuye  sourded!  and 

28  aroos  of  that  whyche  discorded  /  and  yet  dyscorde  of  certayn  poyntes 
of  theyr  lawe  /  in  suche  wise  that  they  haue  dyuerse  names  /  ffor 
they  that  holde  the  lawe  of  perse  haue  the  name  in  theyr  langage 
soun4  /  And  they  of  the  lawe  of  Egypte  be  named  siha.     And  they 

32  be  not  so  forre  fro  the  very  crysten  lawe  /  as  ben  the  other  /  It 

happed  that  they  of  Egypte  yssued  out  of  theyr  londe,  and  conquered  so  that  tiic 
alle  the  londes  vnto  Antyoche  /  And  emonge  the  other  cytees  that  issued  out  of 

•II  °  ->  their  country 

were  taken  /  The  holy  cyte  of  Iherusalem  cam  vnder  theyr  power  and  enn- 

i  Ortg.  aud.  8illem- 

2—2  pr>  a  soit&tcnir  lot  ponres  chrestlens.     Caxton  has  here  mistaken 
"jjonres"  poor,  for  "poio'tr,"  power.  3  leaf  12,  back. 

1  Pr.  Sunn,  Lat.  Sonni. 


24     Christ's  Sepulchre  cast  down.     Christians'  Sufferings.    [Ch.  V,  VI. 

and  seignourye  /.  The  peple  that  were  there  in   captiuyte1  were 
resonably  wel  entreated  /  tyl  it  happed  by  the  suH'raunce  of  god 
that  his  peple  shold  be  chastised  /  and  that  was  by  a  desloyal  and 
Heream,        cruel  lord  and  calyphe  of  Egypte,  whiche  was  named  hecam  /  he  4 
K»rypt.«ir-    passed  in  malyce  and  cruelte  alle  his  predecessours  in  suche  wyse 
mieity'iui      2that  the  peple  of  his  lawe  helde  them  as  wode  men  of  pryde  /  of 
decessors.      rage  /  and  of  falsehed2  /  Emonge  the  other  tyrannyes,  he  commanded 
He  cast  down  to  caste  doun  to  the  ground  the  chyrche  of  the  sepulcre  of  our  8 
of  the  Holy    lorde  Ihesu  Cryste  /  whiche  had  ben  3made*  first  of  Constantyne 
themperour  /  by  a  noble  Patryarke  of  .Iherusalem  named  Maxyme  / 
and?  alter  reedefyed  by  modest  that  other  patriarke  /  In  the  tyme  of 
heraclep,  of  whom  we  haue  spoken  to  fore,  he  sente  to  them  a  fals  1 2 
caliphe,  one  his   bayly,  whiche  was  lord  of  Eames,   and  named 
hyart.5(7)     This  dyde  the  commandement  of  his  lord,  and  caste  it 
Orestes  was    doun  to  grounde  /  In  this  tyme  was  patriarke  of  this  chyrche  a 
oietnu"al "    right  valyaunt  man  named  Oreste  /  and  was  vncle  vnto  this  vntrew  16 
kynge  of  Egypte,  broder  of  his  moder  /  And  this  was  the  reson  why 
he  was  so  cruel  ayenste  Crystiente  /  ffor  the  heethen  men  sayde  that 
he  shold  neuer  be  ferme  in  theyr  lawe  /  by  cause  he  had  a  crysten 
moder  /  And  for  to  take  away  this  suspecion  lie  destroyed  this  20 
holy  chirche  of  the  holy  sepulcre  /  whiche  was  the  fontayne  and 
begynnyng  of  oar  very  creaunce  / 

How  thaffliccyon,  iniuries  and  tormentes  of  crysten 
men  grewe  in  the  tyme  of  Calyphe  hetam.  24 

capitulo  vj° 

Eo  thenne  forth  on  began  th  estate  of  our  peple  at  Iherusalem 
f        to  be  more  greuous  and  more  sorowful  than  it  was  wonte  to 

be  /  ffor  they  toke  grete  displaysir  at  theyr  herte  for  the  28 
chirche  of   the   resurrexion   of   our   lorde,   whiche  they  sawe    so 
Heceamim-    destroyed  emonge   them  /    And   on   that   other   syde   they  were 
tributes  upon  charged  ouer  sorowfully  wyth  tribute?,  taskes  and  tayllages,  ayenst 
tilu.s  of         the  custome  and  preuyleges  graunted  to  them  of  hethen  prynces  /  32 

Jerusalem.  .  .         .  e 

And  also,  they  were  deffended  to  make  ony  festes  on  the  dayes  ot 
Thovwere      theyr  hye  festes  /  but  thenne  they  were  compellyd  to  trauaylle  by 

obliged  to  *        * 

work  on  their         l   Oriy.  captinyte. 

last  days.  ^_2  Fr  ^  ^  ^)ig  ^  ^  ^.  ^  fen0)ent  av**i  comme  forsrni  cPorgmil 

et  de  raige,  i.  e.  even  the  people  of  his  own  religion  considered  him  crazy 
with  pride  and  anger.  3  leaf  13. 

4  Fr.  "re/ait,  premier  em  ent.y     Constantine  did  not  make,  but  remade 
the  church.  5  The  ed.  of  P.  Paris,  Paris  1879,  gives  Hiarot. 


Ch  VI  ]     The  Sufferings  of  tlie  Christians  in,  Jerusalem.  25 

force  and  angre  /  or  they  were  commanded  not  to  yssue  out  of 
theyr  howses  ne  dores  /  but  holde  them  cloos  wythin  /  to  thende 
that  they  shold1  make  no  semblaunce  of  feste  wythin  them  /  And? 
4  yet  also  they  myght  not  be  therin  in  pees  ne  assured!  /  but  they  They  could 
caste  at  them  by  the  wyndows  crrete  stones,  donge,  dyrte,  and  foul  remain  in 

•>  •>  "  peace  in 

ordure  /  And  yf  it  happed1  somtyme  a  Crysten  man  to  saye  a  light  tiieir  homes, 
worde  that  dyspleased  ony  of  the  hethen  men  /  Anon  he  shold  be  H^jyjeR 
8  taken  like   a   murderer,  and   brought  to  pryson,  and  shold  lose  f0*71^"flic,e'1 
therfore  his  fyste  or  fote  /  or  he  was  brought  to  the  gybet  /  And1  0j^11'^*t 
alle  the  good  that  he  had  /  was  brought  in  to  the  handes  of  the 
Calyphe  /  Somtyme  they  wold  take  the  chyldren  of  the  crysten 
12  peple  /  bothe  sones  and  doughtres,  in  to  theyr  owne  howses  /  and 

made  them  mescreauntes  ayenst  theyr  wylle  /  And  somtyme  by  Tiieir  chii- 
betynge  /  and  another  wyth  lyes  and  flaterye  made  many  yong^  toned  to 

I  i  ii  i  11       renounce  the 

folke  to  renye  our  fayth  /  And  thus  they  dyde  to  our1  peple  moche  christian 
16  shame  and  grief  /  But  notwythstondyng*  /  good  crysten  men  lefte  But,notwifl»- 
not  /  but  admonested  and  conforted  the  peple  to  suffre  al  this  with  g.ood  Cl,r'8- 

'  *    *  tians  en- 

2a  good  herte  and  veri  penitence  for  the  faith  of  Ihesu  Criste,  and  ^J,™*^ 
promysed  them  for  thise  shames  /  the  Ioye  /  thonour  and  the  u,^"^"" 

20  glorye  of  heuen,  whiche  euer  shal  endure  /  The  good  Cristen  peple 
spack  so  to  gydre  /  that  they  enforced  them  to  holde,  And  kepe 
their  cristen  fayth  the  more  surely  /  By  cause  they  dyde  them  so 
moche  harm  And  repreef.     It  sholde  be  ouer  longe   a  thinge  to 

24  recounte  to  you  /  Alle  the  meseases  &  the  myschiefs  that  the  peple 
of  our  lord  endured  that  tyme.  But  I  shal  shew  yow  one  exampel, 
to  thende  that  by  the  same  ye  vnderstohde  the3  more  of  other  / 
One  of  the  hethen  men,  ouermoche  malicious  and  vntrewe,  whiche  a  malicious 

28  hated  of  ouermoche  cruel  hate  the  cristen  men,  he  aduised  and  devised  a 
thoughte  an  a  day  how  he  myght  brynge  them  to  deth.     He  sawe  destroy  nil 

°  J  J°  i      .  theOhris- 

wel  that  alle  the  cyte  helde  the  temple  in  moche  grete  honour  &  t'»ns. 

*  r  o  Tne  temple 

reuerence,  whiche  was  reedefyed,  &  the  laye  peple  named  it  /  the  was  regarded 
32  temple  dominus  /  &  that  they  whiche  had  the  charge  to  kepe  it  dide  £*Xchr<Js-'y 
al  their  peyne  to  kepe  it  cleen  &  nette  /  now  ther  was  a  place  to  tin 
fore  the  temple,  whiche  was  named  thaitre4  of  the  temple  /  Whiche 
they  wolde  kepe  as  clene  /  as  cristen  men  kepe  their  chirches  and 
36  aultres  /  And  this  vntreu  man,  that  I  haue  said  yow  of  to  fore, 

1  Orig.  onr.  2  leaf  13,  back.  3  Fr.  "  Pluxi-evrt  des  autres." 

4  Fr.  aitre,  i.  e.  the  Cathedral  yard,  or  the  square  before  the  Cathedral. 

The  word  evidently  puzzled  Caxton,  so  that  he  transferred  it  bodily,  instead 

of  trying  to  find  its  English  equivalent. 

5* 


both  Chris- 
tians and  Mi 
hainmeduiis. 


26  The  Dead  Dog  in  the  Heathen  Temple.     [Ch.  VI,  VII. 

Thin  ma-       Toke  by  nyght,  in  suche  wise  that  no  man  sawe  it  /  a  dede  hounde 

licidua  man  J       J  °      '  ' 

aforesaid        al  roten  and'  stynkyng,  and?  brought  it  in  to  the  same  aitre  to  lore 

placed  a  dead  J       J    °'  ° 

dog  in  the      the  temple  /   On  the  morn,   whan  they  of  the  toun1  cam  to  the 

open  place  c         i  >  j 

tem'ie"'6      temple,  they  fonde  this  dogge  /  Thenne  sourded'  and?  aroos  /  a  crye  /  4 

a  noyse,  and  a  clamour  so  grete  thurgh  alle  the  toun  /  That  ther 

was  nothinge  spoken  of  but  of  this  hounde.     They  assembled'  /  and 

put  out  of  doubte  /  that  this  was  not  doon  ne  caste  there  but  by  the 

Theheatiien   Cristyens  /  Alle  the  hethen  men  Accorded!  to  this  poynt  that  alle  8 

KdbUIr'  tne  cristen  peple  shold  be  put  to  deth  with  the  swerd<  /  2Andf  there 

chrfsHan1""9  were  theyr  swerdes  drawen  redy  out  /  And  they  also  that  sholde 

foi-dtiieir"ored  smyte  of  their  heedes.2     Emonge  the  crysten  men  was  a  yonge  man 

of  a  moche  grete  herte  ami!  of  grete  pyte  /  And'  spak  to  the  peple,  12 
a  youn?  man  and  said  to  them  /  "ffair  lordes,  trouthe  it  is  /  That  I  am  not 

devised  the  .  .  . 

deliverance     culpable  in  this  thinge,  ne  none  of  yow,  as  I  byleue  certaynly  /  But 
tians,  by        it  shold'  be  ouermoche  grete  do?/image  yf  we  alle  shold'  deye  thus, 

taking  the  °  o      J  J  ' 

hfrnseit0'1      ^or  ^  ^*s  s*10^  a^e  tne  Cristendomnie  be  quenchid!  in  this  londe  /  16 
Wherfore  I  haue  thought  in  my  self  /  how  I  shul  delyuer  yow  alle, 
by  thayde  of  our  lord'  /  Two  thynges  I  3desyre  of  you,  for  the  loue 
of  god!  /  That  one  is  that  ye  praye  for  my  sowle  in  your  orisons  / 
That  other  is  that  ye  deporte4  and  honoure  my  pome  lyguage  /  ffor  20 
I  will  take  this  thinge  on  me  /  and'  saye  that  I  allone  haue  doon 
this  fayt,  whiche  they  put  on  a7s  alle  "  /  they  that  doubted  the  deth 
had  grete  Ioye  whan  they  herd!  this  /  and  promysed  to  hym  their 
orisons,  and  thonoure  of  his  lygnage  /  In  this  maner  that  they  of  24 
his  lygnage  euermore   on   palmsonday  shal  here  tholyue,  whiche 
signyfyeth  Ihe«u  Criste  whan  he  cam  in  to  Iherusalem  /  Tims  this 
man  cam  to  fore  the  Iustice  /  And'  said'  to  them  that  the  other 
Cristen  men  were  nothyng*  culpable  in  this  fayt  /  and  sayde  that  he  28 
hym  self  had  doon  the  dede  /  whan  they  herde  this  /  they  delyuerd 

He  had  his     alle  the  other  /  And'  he  only  had  his  heed  smeton  of  / 

head  smitten  ' 

oil. 

How  at  the  requeste  of  Themperour  of  Constanty- 
noble  the  cristen  men  obteyned  lycence  to  bylde  32 
agayn  the  chirche  of  the  holy  sepulcre. 

capitulo  .vij° 

1   Oriff.  tonn. 

2—2  Caxton  is  so  hampered  here,  by  his  corrupt  French  text,  that  he  does 
not  make  a  very  intelligible  translation.  The  text  of  A.  shows  us  the  sense 
of  the  passage — "  Et  ja  estoient  pres  les  espies  trades  de  eel  qui  lenr 
devoient  a  touz  les  testes  trancMer." 

3  leaf  14.  4  Fr.  deporte:,  protect,  take  care  of. 


Ch.  VII.]     The  Christian  Embassy  to  Constantinople.  27 

s  Uche  diseases1  suffred  the  peple  of  our  lord  in  this  tyme ;  but 
Ihesu  eryste,  that  wel  can  sette  lemedyes  in  thinges  merueillous 
&  out   of   ordre  /  recomforte  them  after,  ffor  this  vntrewe  Heoenm, 

'  Prince  of 

4  prynce  of  egipte,  hetam,  deyde  /  and  his  sone,  named  daher,  regned  g^Pj-^- 
after  hym  /  This  daher  renewed  the  alyaurcces  with  themperour  of  ^reUnied 
constantynoble,  2  whiche  was  a  Romayn,  and  named  Eliopolitans2  / 
lie  prayde  3the  said?  daher,  whom  he  moche  louyd,3  that  he  wold 
8  suffre  that  the  Cristen  men  myght  reedefye  the  chirche  of  the  holy 
sepulcre,  whiche  his  fader  had  do  heten  douim  /  he  graunted  it  for 
the  loue  of  themperour  /  It  was  not  longe  after  that  this  emperour 
deyde  /  and?  after  hym  regned?  Constantyn,  whiche  had  to  surname 

12  Monomaques  /  whiche  is  to  saye  in  grece  as  a  man  fyghtyng  allone  / 

The  poure  cristen  that  were  in  Iherusalem  had  lycence  for  to  make  ™*®*** 
agayn  their  chirches  /  hut  they  had1  not  the  power,  for  their  ^^n 
pouerte  /  And?  herupon  they  had'  a  counseyl  that  they  wold'  sende  |^1(<;lmrch' 

16  to  themperour  /  andi  requyre  hym  for  goddes  sake  that  he  wold?  U101,ey- 
helpe  and'  socour  of  his  Almesse,  for  the  reedefyeng  of  this  holy 
werke  /  Ther  was  in  the  toun?«  of  Iherusalem  a  good?  man  named 
Iohan  4  Cariaintes,   horn   in   Constantynople,  &  had  bon   a   grete 

20  gentilman  of  the  contre  as  of  his  lignage  /  But  yet  was  he  more 
gentil  of  herte  &  good'  maners  /  This  man  was  comen  on  pylgremage 
to  the  holy  sepulcre,  and'  had?  lefte  alle  the  bobaurcce  and?  thonour 
of  the  world  /  &  had?  taken  thahyte  of  relygion  /  ffor  to  folowe  cur 

24  lord?  Ihesu  Criste  in  pouerte5  in  the  place  /  where  he  suffred  pouerte 

&  messease  for  vs  /  This  said?  Iohan  was  prayd'  of  alle  the  cristen  TJ'^;;}  *jja 
peple  there,  that  he  wolde   entrepryse  this  message  for  to  go  to  gg;™^ 
themperour,  for  the  loue  of  god  and  of  them  /  he  dyde  it  with  a  »»pie- 

28  good  wylle,  and?  departed,  and6  cam  in  to  Constantynoble,  and?  spak 

to  themnerour  /  and?  dide  alle  that  he  was  requyred  /  ffor  themperour  The  Emperor 

r  I  agree*!  to 

graunted  that  he  wolde  make  alle  the  dispences7  that  shold'  be  ^  »» !();.e 
nedeful  to  the  byldyng  of  this  holy  chirche  /  and  wolde  reedefye  it  £™^# 
32  at  his  owen  coste  /  This  lohcm  was  moche  Ioyous  whan  he  had'  so 
wel  accomplissyd  his  message  /  and  toke  leue  of  themperour,  and! 
cam  agayn  in  to  Iherusalem  /  Whan  he  had1  said'  to  the  peple  the 
good  tydinges  that  he  brought  /  they  made  grete  Ioye,  And  many 

1  Fr.  "mesaises"  should  not,  in  this  case,  he  translated  "diseases,"  but 
calamities,  miseries. 

2~2  Caxton  has  here  misunderstood  his  text.  Tlie  French  has,  "qui 
avoit  nam  Remain,  et  estoit  nomme  en  soumoin  Elyopolitanes." 

3-3  Fr.  cebii  Daher  qui  moult  Vaimoit.  4   leaf  14,  hack. 

5  Orig.  pouerty.  c  Orig.  aud.  '  Oriff.  dispeuces. 


28        The  Sepulchre  rebuilt.     Sorrows  of  Christians.     [Ch.  VII,  VIII. 

riie  ci.ns-      wepte  grete  terees  for  pyte  /  by  cause  they  thoughte  that  our  lord 
for j«y  at       wolde  not  al  way  forgete  them  /  whan  he  had?  doo  to  them  suche 

this  news.  J  o  i 

comforte  /  In  this  tyine  was  patriarke  in  Iherusalem  an  holy  man 

named1  nycesores1  /  Theraperour  held!  ryght  wel  his  promesse,  ffor  4 

he  sente  without  taiyeng  grete  partyr  of  his  tresour  /  and'  dide  do 

make  the  chyrche  of  the  holy  sepulcre  moche  hye  in  thestate  and! 

The  church     nianere  that  it  is  yet  /  And  was  ful  made  the  yere  of  thincarnacion 

pieted  in  the  of  our  lord  a  M  xlviij,  And  had1  hen  xxxvij  yere  destroyed.     This  8 

was  ryght  the  yere  to  fore  that  our  peple  recouerd  the  cyte  /  Whan 

the  C listen  men  there  had  made  agayn  the  chirche  /  they  were 

Ti.e  Chris-     moche  Ioyous,  and  were  also  therm  well  comforted  of  all  theyr 

tiaw>  now  feel  _  .      , 

repaid  tor  all  meseases  and  repreues  that  they  sunred,  wherof  they  had  grete  12 

thev  have 

suffered.        plente  /  not  only  in  Iherusalem  /  But  also  in  alle  the  cytees  ahoute  / 

as  in  bethleem  /  And  in  the  cyte  where  Amos  the  prophete  was 

born,  named  Tecua  /  As  ofte  as  the  Caliphe  sente  in  to  the  lande  a 

newe  bayly  /  so  ofte  were  sette  on  them  new  tributes  &  taillages,  16 

whiche  they  myght  not  well  paye  /  &  yf  they  payed  not,  anon  they 

menaced  them  for  to  caste  doun  their  chirches  to  the  ground,  & 

saide  they  had  of  their  lord  commandement  so  to  doo :  thus  in  this 

They  had       sorow  were  the  cristen  peple  /  one  while  vnder  them  of  egipte  /  20 

greatly  under  another  tyme  vnder  them  of  Perse  /  but  this  was  not  but  yet  a 

thins  and  the  begynning  to  them,  as  whan  they  cam  vnder  the  power  of  the 

2  turques  /  llbr  the  turques  conquerd  the  lioyame  of  perse  /  and  also 

of  Egypte.     Thus  the  holy  cyte  fylle  in  to  their  demayne  /  whiche  24 

demened  it  so  cruelly  &  tormented  it  so  cruely  /  that  it  semed  to 

but  that  was  the  peple  of  our  lord  that  they  had  be  in  fraunchise  and  in  grete 

compare.!  to  reste  vnder  them  of  Egypte  and  of  perse.     Thus  helde  the  turkes 

their  neat-  OJ  r  oa 

ment  by  the    them  there  vuj  yere  /  ^° 

lurks.  °   "  ' 

Of  the  turkes ;  fro  wens  they  cam  /  and  how  they 
grewe  in  to  grete  puisaunce,  and  dide  chese  them 
a  kynge  for  to  mayntene  their  warres. 

capitulo  viij0  32 

or  as  moche  as  we  haue  spoken  of  the  turkes  /  &  shal  ofte 
it  seams  i.est  f  speke  of  them  in  this  book  /  me  semeth  good  that  I  saye  to 
SJSmtT'  yow  fro  whens  this  peple  cam  first  /  &  wherby  they  had  so 

"rete  power  /  The  turke  &  turkemans  cam  out  of  a  lynage,  Eote,  &  38 

1  Fr.  Nycefores,  Lat.  Nyccphorus.  2  leaf  15. 


Ch.  VIII.]        Of  the  Character  of  the  Turks.  29 

of  a  contre  l  toward  the  Eest  whiche  is  in  surye,1  And  were  a  peple  They  came 
moche  rude  &  without  ordynauracc  /  ne  hadf  no  contreye,  ne  no  J*»l^ere 
certayn  dwellyng*  place  /  But  went  all  aboute  fro  londe  to  londe  /  J^,,""^ 
4  &  sought  pastures  for  their  beestis  /  ne  neuer  duellid  in  castel  ne  i*0Ple- 
tounn  /  And!  whan   they  wolde  meue  from  one  place  to  another  / 
thenne  wente  euerv  lynage  bv  hyin  self  /  And  thev  made  in  euery  Every  tribe 

J     J       °         -        J  '  -  ^    lived  by  itself, 

kvnred  or  lvanage  a  prince  whiche  was  tlieyr  Iusticer :    by  thise  »nd  <**<**  ••»<■ 

j  «,'  o      o  r  -i  •/  0i  it*  number 

8  prynces,  all  their   mesfeates    and    trespeaces   were   redressyd   and  JUJJ^,^ 
ainendid  /  And!  they  obeyed,  and  dide  that  he  or  they  commanded  / jU8tice- 
They  caryed  with  them  alle    theyr  thynges,  seruauntes,  menages, 
houshold,  thier   Oxen,  kyen,  sheep,  and  other   beestis.     In   this  ah  their 

'  '       J  '  wealth  was 

12  thynge  was  alle  theyr  ryehesse  /  They  laboured  no  londe  by  eeryng  >»  herds. 
ne  sowyng  /  ne  they  coude  neyther  bye  ne  selle  /  ffor  they  had  no  They  had  no 
rnoneye;  but  their  beestes,  their  chese  and  Mylke,  changed  thei,  for  exchanged 
to  haue  other  thinges  that  they  neded.     Whan  they  had  ben  in  '^f™ 

16  one  place,  and!  had!  nede  to  goo  in  to  another,  they  sente  the  wisest  "eeded- 
of  their  peple  vnto   the  princes  of  the  cowtre  /  And  they  made 
couenauntes  for  them  for  to  dwelle  in  theyr  wodes  &  pastures  for 
the  tribute  that  they  shold  paye  lyke  as  they  shold  accorde  /  Now  it 

20  happed  that  a  grete  partye  of  this  peple  departed!  fro  the  ether  /  and  A^iarge  body 
entred  in  to  the  londe  of  perse  /  &  fonde  this  londe  moche  plenty-  £iHJJd™£ia 
vous  of  pastures  /  and  ryght  good'  of  suche  as  they  neded  /  And  gaf 
to  the  kynge  the  trybute  that  thev  were  accorded!  fore  /  And!  dwellvd*  and  lived 

*     **  *  "  there  a  lung 

24  there  I  can  not  telle  how  longe  /  This  peple  began  to  growe  and  time, 
multeplye2  in  suche  wise  that  3  there  were  of  them  a  meruayllous 
grete  nombre  /  in  so  moche  that  the  kynge,  and  they  of  the  contre  until  they 

°  '  °  increased  so 

self  began  to  haue  grete  doubte  of  them  and  fere  /  leste  they  myght  that  the 

©  o  '  "         " '-'        Persians  bc- 

28  doo  harme  by  the  power  that  ouermoche  grewe  and  encreced ;  here  b»^°  ''*"• 
vpon  they  had  a  counseyl  emonge  them  /  that  they  wold  dryue  and 
chasse  them  by  force  out  of  theyr  londe  /  But  after,  they  chaunged 
theyr  counseyl  /  and  semed  better  /  that  they  shold  charge  them  tIJ.ebaivyg  were 

32  with  suche  tributes  that  they  myght  not  suffre  /  And  thenne  they  jmP£8eduP<m 
shold  departe  4by  their  owne  agrement4  lyke  as  they  were  come  / 
Thus  they  dyde  /   But  they  suffred  longe  thise  greues  /  til  atte 
laste,  whan  they  myght  nomore  suffre  /  thei  cou/jseylled  emong 

36  them  self  that  they  wold  nomore  paye  to  the  kynge.    whan  the 
kynge  herde  this  /  he  dide  do  crye  thurgh  alle  his  Royamme  /  that 

l— x  Fr.  "  rcrx  bisse  qnand  Ven  est  en  Snrie"  i.  e.  north  of  Syria. 

*   Oriff.  multeplye.  3  leaf  15,  back. 

4_4  j.-,._  k jJ(l).  rinn,;;  (t  (jr  lour  grL" 


30  How  the  Turks  chose  them  a  King,  Selduc.     [Ch.  VIII. 

At  last  they  they  shold  yssue  out  of  it  by  a  certayn  day  that  was  named  to 
to  leave' the  them  /  And  that  the3r  shold  passe  the  flood  named  cofcar,  whiche 
is  vtterist  part  of  the  Eoya?urue  of  perse  on  that  other  syde  /  And 
As  the  Turks  whan  they  were  departed1,  and?  on  the  playn,  they  sawe  them  self  4 
^ther  to  ouer,  &  apperceyued  that  they  were  so  grete  plente  of  peple  that  no 
first re'.iize.i    londe  myght  suffyse1  them/  ne  withstonde  them  yf  they  helde  hem 

their  number  , 

and  power,  to  gydre  ;  ffor  to  fore,  whan  they  dwellid  in  perse  /  they  dwelhd  fer 
a  sondre,  in  suehe  wise  that  they  knewe  not  their  power  /  But  now  8 
whan  they  sawe  that  they  were  so  many,  they  had  meruaillous  grete 
desdayne  of  that  they  had  suffred,  and  the  pryde  &  grieuousnes  of 
one  prince.  They  take  counseyl  emonge  them,  and1  sawe  that  no 
peple  myght  resiste  them  /  but  myght  conquere  alle  londes  ther  12 
aboute  /  But  one  thynge  destrobled  them  /  and  that  was  /  they 
rhey  decided  had  no  kynge  on  them  /  And  thenne  they  dyde  in  this  manere  / 
kingtoruie    They  fonde  emonge  them  an  hondred  lignages  /  of  whiche  euerich 

had  his  meyne  /  And  euery  lignage  brought  forth  an  Arowe  marked  16 
in  suche  wise  that  the  Arowe  of  eche  lignage  myght  be  knowen  / 
and  whan  alle  thise  Arowes  were  brought  to  gydre  /  They  called  a 
lytil  chylde  /  and  commanded  hym  to  take  vp  suche  one  as  he 
Avolde  /  ffor  they  had  acorded  emonge  them  /  that  of  the  lignage,  20 
that  the  Arowe  shold  be  taken  vp  by  the  chylde  /  they  shold  chese 
them  a  kynge  /  The  chylde  toke  vp  one  of  a  lignage  that  after  was 
called  Selduces  /  Now  they  knewe  that  of  this  lignage  they  muste 
chese  a  kynge  /  And  they  toke  an  hondred  of  the  most  prudent  &  24 
wise  men  that  they  coude  fynde  in  al   the   lignage  /  And  com- 
manded that  eche  of  them  shold  brynge  an  arowe  /  wheron  his  name 
shold  be  wreton  /  And  after  they  called  the  chylde  /  and  bad  hym 
take  vp  one  of  the  Arowes  /  And  concluded  emonge  them  /  that  he  28 
shold  be  kynge  /  of  whom  he  2toke  vp  the  arowe  /  he  toke  vp  one  / 
One  selduc     on  whiche  was  wreton  Selduc  /  This  Selduc  was  a  moche  goodly 
JJia"     man  /  and  gretely  honoured  in  his  lignage  /  he  was  grete  and 

stronge,  a  good  knyght  and  wel  proued  /  and  semed  wel  to  be  a  32 

good  man  and  of  hye  werkes  /  They  chees  alle  this  man  for  to  be 

theyr  kynge,  as  they  had  promysed  /  And  dyde  to  hym  homage 

and  feaulte  by  oth,  and  obeyed  hym,  and  honoured  hym,  lyke  as  is 

His  first  com-  don  to  a  new  kynge  /  This  kynge,  for  the  first  of  his  commande-  36 

waTu.'it'aii    mentis,  commanded  and  made  do  crye  ouer  all,  on  payne  of  lesyng 

iuto'peS™  of  theyr  lyues,  they  shold  repasse  &  goo  ouer  agayn  the  flood  of 

1  The  French  gives  "souffrir,"  endure,  which  Caxton  has  evidently  mis- 
taken for  " svffire"  to  suffice.  ?  leaf  16. 


Ch.  IX  ]  Of  the  Condition  of  Christianity.  31 

Cobar,  and  retorne  agayn  in  to  perse,  ffor  they  wold  no  lcngre  be 
in  danger  for  to  seche  place  and  stede  where  they  myght  dwelle  / 
but  wolde  that   they  shold  conqnere  this  londe  and'  other  /  and  to  conquer 
4  reteyne  them  in  theyr  seignourye  /  lyke  as  he  sayd  and  commanded, 
it  was  don  /  ffor  the  peple  couquerd  in  a  short  space  by  force  of  Ti.ey  con- 
armes,  not  only  the  Itoyame  of  Perse  /  but  alle  Arabe  and  other  only  Penda, 

J  J  '  but  Arabia 

contrees  of  thoryent  /  and  toke  them  by  strengthe,  and  reteyned  gjjj^p?, 
8  them  vnder  theyr  power  /  And  thus  it  happed  that  this  peple  that  East- 
tofore  had  be  so  rude  /  and  lyued  so  out  of  rule  as  beestis  /  after 
gate  in  lasse  than  fourty  yere  so  grete  seignouryes,  as  ye  now  here  / 
And  mounted  in  so  grete  pryde  /  that  they  wolde  no  more  haue  the  They  would 

i  no  lol,Ker 

12  name  lyke  as  the  other  had  /  1wherfore  they  were  called  turkes  /  hec.iied 

""  iv  Turcomans, 

The  other  that  wold  not  leue  theyr  maner  of  lyuynge  were  alleway  but  took 

J  "*     J     °  tin*  luune  of 

named,  and  yet  ben,  Turquemans  /  Thise  peple,  whan  they  had  Turk- 

couquerd   this  contre  of   thoryent  /   they  wold    entre   in   to  the 

16  lioyamme  of  Egypte  /  ffor  they  were  of  moche  grete  puissaunce  / 

And  descended  in  to  JSurrye  /  and  conquered'  the  contre  /  And  They  de- 
scended into 
emonge  the  other  cytees,  they  toke  the  holy  cyte  of  Iherusalem,  And'  Syria,  ,   , 

suche  peple  as  they  fonde  there  they  demened   right   enyl,  and!  ij°'y  cjty  of 

20  tormentid  and  greued'  them  more  than  they  had  ben  tofore  /  lyke 

as  I  haue  sayd  to  you  to  fore  / 

Of  thorryble  synnes  regnyng  thenne  in  crystiante,  as 

wel  in  thyse  partyes  /  as  in  tho  partyes. 
24  capitulo  ix° 

E  haue  herd  how  this  peple  that  were  crysten  were  demened, 

y    in    this    contre  of    thoryent  /    Now    ye  may   here    how    the 

crystiente   2is   contened  and  ruled  in  other   partyes  of   the 

28  world  /  knowe  ye  for  certayn,  that  this  tyme  were  foumlen  but3  Hut  few 

'J  •>    >  J  _  people  iii  the 

fewe  /  that  had  the  drede  of  our  lord  in  theyr  herte  /  Alle  right  world  at  this 

'  "  '  °         time  bad  tin- 

wvsnesse  /  alle  trouthe  /  alle    pyte  were  fay  lied  /   The  fayth  of  fearoftiie 

'  l  •>  j  i  j  I,,,,.,!  ,|,  (|ltM1. 

Ihesu  cryste  was  4as  it  had  be  quench  id  /  and  of  charyte  men  spack  l,c;"'ts- 
32  not  /  debates  /  discordes  /  and  warres  were  nyhe  oueral  /  in  suche 

wyse,  that  it  semed'  /  that  thende  of  the  world  was  nyghe  /  by  the  The  end  or 

»      '  '  J  °        '      J  the  world 

signes  that  our  lord  sayth  in  the    gospell  /  ffor  pestylences  and  seemednigh. 
famynes  were  grete  on  therthe  /  ferdfulnes  of  heuen,  tremblyng  of 
3G  therthe  in  many  places,  and  many  other  thinges  there  were  that 

1  Caxton  omits  here  " d-ont  ilz  vindrent" 
2  Fr.  se  contcnoit,  i.  e.  conducted  itself.         3   Or'nj.  but.         4  leaf  10,  back. 


32  The  sad  state  of  Christendom.    No  true  faith.     [Ch.  X. 

ought  to  fere  the  hertes  of  men,  to  drawe  them  fro  euyl  /  &  to 
brynge  to  them  the  remembraunce  of  our  lord  /  But  they  were  as 
deef  and  blynde  of  heeiyng  and  of  seeyng1  /  this  that  was  nedeful  to 
them  for  to  saue  theyr  sowles  /  The  prynces  and  the  barons  brente  4 
and  destroyed*  the  contrees  of  theyr  neygbbours  /  yf  ony  man  had 
The  princes    saued  ony  thynge  in  theyr  kepyng  /  theyr  owne  lordes  toke  them, 
their  own      and  put  them  in  prison  and  in  greuous  tormentis,  for  to  take  fro 
them  suche  as  they  had?  /  in  suche  wyse  that  the  chyldren  of  them  8 
that  had  ben  riehe  men  /  men  myght  see  them  goo  fro  dore  to 
dore,  for  to  begge'  and  gete  theyr  brede  /  and  somme  deye  for 
and  even       hungre  and  mesease  /  xAs  to  the  chirches  ne  Religyouses,  they  kept 
churches.  '"  not  theyr  priuy leges  ne  none  other  fraunchyses  /  but  were  taken  fro  12 
them  alle1  that  mocht  be  founden,  as  wel  meobles,  rentes,  and 
other  thynges  /  ye  the  crosses,  chalyces,  &  the  sensours,  they  toke 
fro  the  chirches  /  and  molte  them  for  to  selle  /  yf  ony  fiedde  to  the 
chirche  for  to  warante  and  saue  hym  /  he  was  taken  &  drawen  out  16 
Monks  and     vylaynously,  as  out  of  a  tauerne  or  an  other  place  /  To  Monkes  and 
maltreated.6    clerkes  were  doon  wronges,  and  all  the  shames  they  myght  /  Ther 
was  no  iustyce  /  but  on  them   that  trespacedf   not  ne  forfayted 
nothyng  /  The  contrees  were  ful  of  theues  &  of  murdriers  /  In  20 
sin  and  vice   cytees  ne  in  good  townes  w;is  noman  sure  /  There  regned  custom- 
Snrebuked.     ably  dronkenship  /  lecherye  /  playeng  at  dyse  &  roberyes  /  ther 
was  no  manage  kepte  /  ne  lignage  /  And!  also  as  of  euyl  lyf  were 
the  clerkes  or  werse  /  as  the  other  /  The  bysshops  ne  the  other  24 
prelates   durst   not  reprehende   ne    chastyse  none  for   theyr  euyl 
werkes  /  The  Rentes  of  holy  chirche  they  gaf  ne  payd  none  /  but2 
solde  the  benefices  /  And  fynably  I  saye  yow,  that  alle  euyl  werkes 
Everyone      had  surprysed!  alle  crystiente  /  in  suche  wyse,  that  it  semedf  that  28 
exert  himself  eueryche  dyde  payne  for  to  serue  the  deuyll  / 

to  serve  the 
devil. 

Of  a  bataylle  that  themperour  Eomayne  of  Constanty- 
nople  had  ayenst  a  puissaunt  prynce  of  thoryent 
named  Belphet.  ca°  x°  32 

o       Wr  lorde,  that  by  his  pyte  chastyseth  in  this  world  for  to  spare 
in  that  other  /  and1  can  wel  bete  his  children  that  he  loueth , 

i—i  Fr.  "As  yglises  n'as  religyous  ne  gardoient  nul  previlege,  ne  nul 
franchise  einz  leur  tollient,"  etc.  Caxton  seems  here  to  have  translated  the 
French  as  (a  les)  by  the  English  as.  It  should  read — They  protected  none 
of  the  privileges  or  franchises  of  the  church,  or  of  the  religious  orders,  but 
took  away,  etc.  2  Orig.  bnt. 


Ch.  X.]  Of  the  heathen  prince  Belphet.  33 

2for  to  saue  them,  suffred!  a  grete  flawe2  to  come  in  to  the  contre, 
for  to  chastyse  the  peple  /  ffor  ia    this  tyme,  whan  themperour  Auhu  time 
Koniayn  was  lord  in  constantynoble  /  yssued  out  of  the  partyes  of  ^n^Ja*ued 
4  thoryent  a  puissant  hethen  prynce  named!  Belphet,  whiche  brought  Belphet. 
with  hym  so  grete  plewte  of  peple  out  of  perse  &  surye,  that  they 
couerd  alle  the  contre  /  &  the  multitude  was  60  grete  that  it  myght 
not  wel  be  nombred  /  they  brought  with  them  cartes  /  Charyottes  / 
8  horses,  camels  /  beuffes  /  kyen  /  &  other  smale  beestys,  so  grete 
plente  /  that  vnnethe  it  myght  be  byleuyd1  /  &  with  this  grete 
apparayl  /  This  grete  force  &  strengthe  he  brought  in  to  thempire  "«]£»■"  *£e 
of  constantinoble  /  &  began  to  take  &  waste  alle  that  he  fo»de  /  &  £3^°/. 

12  where  as  they  fnnde  fortresses  /  cytees  or  castellis,  they  toke  it  al  n°Ple- 
with  assault  /  ffor  nothyng  myght  resiste  them,  but  that  they  smote 
alle  doun  to  therthe  /  alle  the  peple  hool3  fledde  to  fore  hym  /  this 
tydynges  cam  to  themperour  that  this  grete  lord  had  supprised  & 

16  taken  alle  his  contre  /  anon  without  taryeng,  he  sente  alle  about  in 
thempire,. &  dyde  then/ie  somone  alle  his  hoost,  &  assembled  as 
moche  peple  as  he  coude  gete  /  &  as  moche  good1  as  he  myght  fine 
for  this  werke  that  was  so  grete  /  whan  his  peple  were  comen,  he 

20  yssued*  with  as  many  men  of  armes  and  of  warre  as  he  myght  haue  /  The  Emperor 

J  J  marched  nut 

&  drewe  to  that  parte  where  this  belphet  cam  /  he  fonde  hym  to  against  him. 
sone.  as  he  that  was  ferre  entred  in  to  the  londe  /  whan  they  knewe 
that  eche  of  them  was  so  nygh  other  /  they  ordeynedf  theyr  bataylles 

24  for  to  fyghte  /  &  assembled  so  cruelly  &  of  so  grete  angre  /  as  peple 
that  had*  eche  to  other  grete  hate.  The  hethen  foughte  for  tenhauuee 
theyr  lawe,  &  for  tencrece  theyr  power  /  &  the  cristen  men  defended 
theyr  fayth  &  the  lawe  of  Ihesu  criste,  &  to  saue  and?  kepe  theyr 

28  Hues  &  franchyses,  &  theyr  wyues  /  childeren,  &  theyr  contree  / 

The  bataylle  was  moche  grete  &  cruelle,  moche  peple  slayn,  &  blode  The  battle 

whs  fierce, 

shadde  here  &  there.     Atte  laste  the  grekes  myght  not  suffre  the  and  many 

•  _       were  »Uill. 

favtes4  ne  the  grete  plente  of  the  mescreauns  /  and  fledde  as  dis-  Finally  the 

J  ox-  1  Greeks  fled. 

32  comfyted  so  fowlethat  none  retornecJ  agayn,  but0  ranne  away  wi th- 
ou te  ordenaunce,  eueryche  where  he  myght  best  sane  hym ;  they 
that  Mowed  them  6dyde  alle  that  they  wolde.6  They  slewe  many, 
&  tokf.  grete  plente  a  lyue,  Audf  emonge  alle  other,  Themperour  was  Their  Em- 

1  leaf  17.  2  Yr.Jleau.  scourge.  SKU. 

3  Fr.  entierement,  entirely,  i.  c.  to  a  man. 

4  Fr.  fais.     Caxton  has  evidently  confounded  this  word,  which  means 
burden,  weight,  force,  with  fait,  feat.  5  Orig.  bnt. 

6— 6  Fr.  "en  faisoit  presqite  leurs  x-olontes,"  i.  e.  had  pretty  nearly  their 
own  way  with  them. 

GODFREY.  D 


34  Prince  Belphet  conquers  the  Christians.        [Ch.  X. 

taken  hym  self  /  whan  tydinges  cam  in  to  the  contre  that  the  batayl 
was  loste,  and1  themperour  taken  /  ther  was  grete  sorowe  of  alle 
tholde  men,  wyues  /  &  childeren  that  had  not  ben  there  /  belphet, 
this    prynce    of   myscreauntes,    seeyng1   that   he   had    thus    playn  4 
victorye  of  the  cristen  men,  mounted  &  aroos  in  to  grete  pryde  / 
ft'or  he  thought  wel  that  he  shold  fynde  no  barre  that  shold  lette 
hym  to  doo  his  wille  in  Hhempyre.  whan  he  was  lodged,  &  his  hoost 
aboute  hym  /  he  co?ramanded  themperour  to  be  brought  to  fore  hym,  8 
iwpiiet         which  had  be  taken  in  the  bataylle  /  &  he  sette  his  foote  vpon  the 
shamefully,    necke  of  themperour  /  &  this  dyde  he   ofte,  &  whan    he  shold? 
mounte  vpon  horsbak  or  descende  /  in  shame  and  despite  of  the 
fayth  of  our  lord  and?  of  the  cristen  peple.     Whan  he  had  thus  a  1 2 
After  a  time   whyle  shamed,  reuyled,  &  despyted  themperour,  He  lete  hym  goo, 
tree.  &  delyuerd  hym  &  som  of  his  barons  /  that  had  be  prisoners  /  & 

whan  themperour  was  come  agayn  in  to  constantynoble  /  2the 
barons  of  the  londe  reputed?  hym  as  ouermoche  dishonoured?  /  as  he  1G 
that  had  shamefully  conduyted?  the  bataille,2  &  toke  hym  &  raced 
out  his  eyen,  &  lete  hym  vse  his  lif  in  sorowe  &  shame.  This 
neiphet  con-  prynce  belphet  began  to  take  alle  the  londe,  in  suche  wyse,  that  in 
the  land  as     a  Ivtil  whyle  he  cojzquerd  fro  the3  lystes  of   surye,  vnto  the  see  20 

far  as  Con-  *  .  .  . 

stantinopie,  called  the  braas  of  seynt  george  /  which  is  wel  xxx  lourneyes  of 
lengthe  /  &  x  of  brede  /  &  in  som  place  xv,  &  whan  he  cam  to  the 
braas  /  he  wold  haue  passed?  in  to  constantinoble  /  whiche  is  on 
that  other  side  of  that  litil  see  /  but  he  myght  not  finde  shippis  24 
ynowgh  /  Thus  the  cristen  peple  of  that  londe,  for  theyr  synnes4 
were  vnder  this  cruell  peple  /  ernong  the  other,  the  noble  and  hye 
cyte  where  saynt  peter  was,5  &  made  fyrst  as  chyef  of  cristente  / 

including       that  is,  antioche,  was  taken  in  the  ende,  and  subgette  vnto  the  28 
turkes  /  thus  had  this  belphet  in  his  seygnorye  &  demayne  the 
londes   named   celessurye  /   the   two    cilices  /  pamphylee  /  lyce, 
lycaone  /  cappadoce,  galace  /  Bethyne,  &  a  parte  of  the  lasse  asye  / 

The  Turks     alle  thise  courctrees  ar  moch  fertile  &  ful  of  peple  /  this  hethen  32 

inaitieat  the  peple  began  to  bete  doun  the  chirches  &  crreue  the  cristen  peple,  as 

Christians,      r  r  o  o  r   r 

1  leaf  17,  back. 

2—2  Caxton's  translation  is  here  incorrect.  "  Les  barons  de  la  terre  tinrent 
a  trop  grant  deshonneur  se  celui  qui  ainsi  honteusement  les  avoit  conduitz 
(var.  avoit  este  menez),  denioroit  plus  seur  dedans  le  povoir  et  la  haultesce 
de  Pempire."       3  Fr.  Laliclu:,  i.  e.  the  town  of  Laodicea.       4  Orig.  syunes. 

6  It  is  hard  to  understand  whether  Caxton  means  here  that  Saint  Peter 
was  "made  chyef  of  Cristente"  or  the  city  of  Antioch.  The  Latin  original 
has — " Infer  qnos  nobilis  et  eximia  prorinciarum  multarum  modcratrix  et 
princcps  civitas  principis  apostoloi'Um  sedes  prima  capta  est." 


CI).  XL]         Of  the  Sufferings  of  the  Christians.  35 

it  plesyd  them  /  ffor  so  grete  atfraye  &  drede  was  in  the  hertes  of 
the  cristen  peple  /  that  they  alle  fledde  vj  iourneyes  fro  the  said 
helphet  /  this  was  a  thynge  that  greuyd  merueylously  the  holy  cyte  Jerusalem 
4  of  Iherusalem  &  the  peple  of  the  covmtre  /  ffor  whyles  themperour  suffered  by 

"  r    x  "  •*  tins  rliimue 

of  constantynoble  was  in  good  pees  &  in  his  grete  power  /  many  of  masters, 
grete  socours,  grete  comfort  of  ryche  yeftes  &  of  large  almesses  cam 
vnto  the  peple  of  surye,  and  also  fro  the  londe  of  antioche.  But 
8  thenne  they  had  loste  alle,  &  had  none  hope  that  euer  ony  ayde  ne 
socours  shold  come  to  them  /  wherfor  they  supposed  euer  to  be  in 
seruage  &  captyuite  without  ony  rauHsom. 


ffered 

all  these 
torments  on 
account  of 


Of  many  maners  of  tormens  that  the  cristen  peple  The  cim 
12  suffred  for  theyr  synnes  /  in  that  time  / 

.        *  .„  account  ol 

CapitlllO    XI.  their  sins. 

w      Hyles  that  this  tyme  was  so  peryllous  for  the  seygnorye  of 

thyse  hethen  men  /  cam  oftymes  in  pylgremages  the  grekes  The  Greek? 
1G  aand  the  latyns  in  to  Iherusalem  /  ffor  to  praye  oure  lore?  and?  crye  madepii- 

"  i  *     *  ./      gnmagea 

hym  mercy  /  that  he  wold  not  for^ete  thus  his  peple.     yet  many  °ften  t0 

*  •>    i  °  *    *  •»  •>    Jerusalem. 

cam  theder  in  grete  perylle,  ffor  alle  the  countrees  by  whiche  they 

shold  passe  were  ful2  of  theyr  enemyes  /  and  ofte  they  were  robbec? 

20  and  slayn  /  And  whan  they  myght  escape  and  come  to  the  holy 

cyte  /  they  myght  not  entre  therin.     But  eche  persone  muste  paye  Each  pilgrim 
a  besaunt  for  trybute,  wherof   happed  ofte  that  they  that   were  besant  to 

J  lr  J  enter  the 

despoylled,  had   not  wherof   they  myght   paye    this   tribute  /  &  Holy  city. 

24  myght  not  entre  in  to  the  town  /  And  for  this  they  suffred  Colde  / 
hungre  /  and  grete  mesease  /  And  many  deyde.  And  herof  the 
Cristen  men  of  the  toun  were  moche  greued  /  For  they  susteyned 
them  that  lyuad  /  And  muste  burye  them  that  were  dede  /  and 

28  seche  such  thyng  as  was  nedeful  to  them  self  &  other  /  3They  that 
myght  entre  in  the  town  were  yet  more  greued3  /  ffor  som  were 
murdred  in  the  holy  places  of  the  cyte  secretely  /  &  was  doon  to  The  pilgrims 
them  moche  shame  &  repreef  openly.     Ther  was  fylthe  caste  in  sorts  of ' 

...  /oi  .,  -itoi  ;<i  shame  from 

32  their  visage  /  &  other  spytte  in  the  myddes  of  theyr  visage  /  &  som  the  heathen, 
men  bette  them  /  wherfore  the  cristen  men  of  the  town,  that  had 
som  acqueyntaiiHces  with  the  hethen  men,  conduyted  and  ladde 
them4  to  theyr  pylgremages,  for  to  kepe   them   to   theyr  power. 

1  leaf  18.  2  Oritj.  ful. 

3-3  Caxton  has  misunderstood  his  French,  which  reads  "  Ceulx  qui 
pmoient  entrer  dans  la  title  les  greeoient  encore  j>his,"  that  is,  gave  them 
(the  Christians  of  Jerusalem)  even  more  trouble.         4  i.e.  the  pilgrims. 

1>    2 


36    Indignities  suffered  by  the  Christians.    Peter  the  Hermit.    [Ch.  XII. 

There  were  in  the  cyte  of  them  of  Malfe,  which  is  a  cyte  of  puyell, 
which  had  a  chirche  in  Iherusalem  named?  saynte  marye   de  la 
There  was  a   latyne,(8)  whereby  was  an  hospital  of  poure  peple,  where  as  was  a 
them  near      chappel  that  was  named?  saynt  Iohan  Eleymont  /  This  saynt  Iohan  4 
la  Latyne.      was  a  patriarke  of  Allexandrye  /  Thabbot  of  the  chirche  of  our  lady 
had  in  his  cure  &  in  his  pourueyaurace  this  hospital,  &  pourchassed 
alle  that  was  nedeful  for  them.     There  were  receyuyd  alle  the  pour 
pylgryms  whiche  had  not  wherof  to  lyue  /  And  this  hows  was  of  8 
moche  grete  chary te  /  Thus  were  the  cristen  peple  in  grete  disease1 
in  the  toun  /  But  there  was  nothyng  that  displesyd  them,  as  whan 
they  had  made  theyr  deuocions  atte  holy  places  in  the  toun,  with 
grete  traueylles  &  grete  costes,  And?  whan  they  were  in  the  seruyse  12 
They  were     of  our  lord  /  the  hethen  mescreauntes  cam  in  with  grete  noyse  & 

insulted  even  .     ,  ,  111  /  i       1 

in  the  holy     crye,  and  satte  vpon  the  aulters  /  threwe  doun  the  chalyces  /  brake 

places.  J  r  iom  i  • 

the  lampes  /  &  the  tapres  /  &  yet  for  more  to  angre  the  cristen 
peple  /  they  toke  ofte  the  patriarke,  which  was  thewne,  by  the  1G 
berde,  and1  by  the  heer  /  And!  threwe  hym  doun  to  the  grounde,  & 
defowled  hym  vnder  theyr  feet,  of  whiche  alle  cristente  had  grete 
The  elms-  sorowe  &  moche  pyte  /  In  thyse  sorowes  and  meseases  were  the 
endured  this  cristen  men  in  the  londe  of  Surye,  as  I  haue  sayd  you  to  fore,  20 

slavery  for  ,    .  ,  i       i    /• 

490  years.       CCCC  four  score  &  ten  yere  /  and!  alwey  cryed  vnto  our  lord  for 

2 mercy  with  syghes  &  teeres  /  &  prayde  hym  deuoutly  that  he  wold? 

not  alle  forgete  them  /  But  the  good  lord,  that  after  the  tempeste  & 

TiieLordat  derke  weder  can  wel  brynge  clerenes  and  fayr  season,  behelde  this  24 

their  prayers,  peple  in  pvte  /  And  sente  to  them  comforte  and"  delyuerance  of  the 

and  delivered  r   r  fJ        I  J 

them.  tormentes  in  whiche  they  had  longe  ben. 

How  aftir  they3  had  ben  four  CCCC  lxxxx  yere  in 
seruage  of  the  hethen  peple  /  our  lord  pourueyed  28 
remedye  for  his  cristen  peple  /  capitulo  xij. 

i     Haue  wel  said  to  you  byfore  /  that  out  of  many  londes  cam 
Peter  the  pilgryms  in  to  Iherasalem  /  emong  alle  other  ther  was  one 

toejwuS;dem!  which  was  of  the  royame  of  ffraunce,  born  in  the  bisshopprych  of  32 
Amyens,  That  is  to  wete  /  one  named  peter,  whiche  had  ben  an 
heremyte  in  a  wode  /  And  therfor  he  was  called  peter  theremyte  / 
He  was  small  this  was  a  litil  man  of  body,  &  as  a  persone  had?  in  despite,  &  lytil 
b»t  great  of    preysed  by  semblaunt  /  But  he  was  of  a  merueyllous  grete  herte  /  36 

heart.  r     J  J  I 

1  Fr.  "mesaise,"  here  means  discomfort,  viisery.  2  leaf  18,  back. 

3   Or  ig.  the. 


Oh.  XII.]  Peter  the  Hermit.  37 

of  moche  clere  engyne  /  and  good  vnxlerstondyng  /  and  spalc  right 
-vvel  /  whan  he  cam  to  the  gate  of  Iherusalem  /  he  payd  the  trybnte 
of  a  besaurat  &  entred  in  to  the  cyte  /  and  was  lodged  in  a  good 
4  cristen  mans  hows  /  This  petre1  ahvey  enquyred2  &  demaurcded  He  made 

a  many 

moche  of  his  hoost  /  of  the  gouernaunce  &  estate  of  the  cyte  /  And  inquiries. 

how  the  cristen  men  conteyned  them  vnder  the  hethen  men  /  And 

how  theyr  lord  demened  &  gouerned  them  /  his  hoost,  whiche  had  His  host  told 

J  °  him  i  In- 

8  lonse3  ben  in  the  towno  /  tolde  to  hym  alle  the  maner  playnly  of  story  of  their 

o  I  •»  *  sufferings. 

the  tymes  passyd1,  And  how  the  cristente  bad  be  defowled  /  And1 
the  holy  places  dishonoured  /  whiche  was  sorouful  to  here  /  And  lie 
hym  self,  which  a  good  while  had!  be  in  the  toun  for  to  doo  his 

12  pylgremage  /  sawe  wel  &  perceyued  a  grete  partye  of  the  caityfnes  / 
in  which  the  cristen  men  were  /  he  herd  saye  that  the  patriarke  was 
a  good!  wyse  man,  deuote  &  religyo?^-,  which  was  named  symeon  /  (9) 
Peter  thought  that  he  wold!  goo  &  speke  with  hym  /  &  demande  of  Peter  took 

16  hym  the  estate  of  the  chirches,  of  the  clergye,  &  of  the  peple  /  he  the  Patriarch 

J  '  a"  »    »        i  as  to  what 

cam  to  hym,  &  dyde  so  as  he  thought,  And  asked  of  hym  alle  thise  should  be 

thynges  /  The  patriarke  apperceyued  wel  by  his  wordes  and  his 

couwtinaunce  /  that  he  was  a  man  that  dredde  god  /  &  right  wyse 

20  and  vnderstondyng  /  And!  began  to  telle  to  hym  by  layser  /  alle  the 

meseases  of  the  cristen  peple.     whan  peter  herde  thise  sorowes 

of  the  mouthe  of  this  good  man,  whom  he  byleuyd  welr  coude4 

not  absteyne  hym  fro  grete  syghes  /  &  wepyng  many  teeres  for 

24  pyte  /  &  ofte  demanded  of  tho  patriarke  yf  ther  were  ony  cottseil  & 

remedye  for  this  werke  /  &  the  holy  &  deuote  patriarke  5answerd 

hym  :  (10)  "  we  haue  made  many  orysons  &  prayers  vnto  oure  lord 

god  for  to  receyue  vs  in  to  his  mercy  and  grace.    But  we  apperceyue 

28  wel  /  that  our  synnes  be  not  yet  purged  /  ffor  we  ben  certaynly  in 

the   culpe   and   blame,   whan   oure  lord,,  whiche   is   so  rightwys, 

holdeth  vs  yet  in  the  payne.     But  the  renowwne  of  the  contrees  by  The  euris- 

yonde  the  montaynes  is  moche  grete  here,  that  the  peple  there,  and  l™™*?£* 

32  specially  of  them  of  ffraunce,  ben  good  cristen  peple,  and  moche  them, 

stedfaste  in  the  fayth.     And  therfor  oure  lord  holdeth  them  at  this 

day  in  moche  grete  peas  and  in  hye  puissaurace6  /  yf  they  Avoid 

praye  our  lord  that  he  wolde  haue  pyte  on  vs  /  or  7that  they  toke 

36  counseyl7  for  to  socoure  vs  /  we  haue  certaynly  hope  that  our  lord 

1  After  "Peter"  Caxton  has  omitted  Comme  il  estoit  xaige  et  enquerant, 
"as  he  was  a  sensible  and  inquiring  man."  2  Orig.  enqnyred. 

3  Orlg.  louge.  4  Coude  =  our,  "  he  could." 

6  leaf  19.  6   Orig.  puissauce. 

7~7  Fr.  on  qn'ilz prinssent  censcU,  "or  if  they  would  take  counsel." 

6 


33 


Peter  undertakes  the  Crusade. 


[Ch.  XII. 


fortheQreekg 
have  not 
power 
enough. 


Peter  is  of 
the  same 
opinion, 


and  advises 
him  to  send 
letters  to  the 
Pope. 


He  offers  to 
carry  the 
messages 
himself. 


The  Patri- 
arch accepts 
this  offer  with 
joy. 


shold  helpe  vs  by  them  for  taccomplysshe  oure  werke.     ffor  ye  see 
wel  that  the  grekes  and  themperour  of  Constantinoble,  whiche  ben 
our  neyghbours  and  as  kynnesmen,  maye  not  helpe  ne  counseyle  vs  / 
ffor  they  them  self  ben  as  who  sayth  destroyed  /  And  haue  no  i 
power  to  defende  theyr  owne  lande  "  /  Whan  peter  herd  this  /  he 
answerd  in  this  maner  /  "  f ayr  fader,  Hrouthe  it  is  that  ye  haue 
sayd  /  ffor  of  that  londe  am  I.1    And  god  be  thanked  /  the  fayth  of 
oure  lord  is  moche  better  holden  there  and  kepte  /  than  it  is  in  ony  8 
other  londes  that  I  haue  ben  in,  syth  that  I  departed  on  my  Iourneye 
fro  my  contre  /  2An<J  I  byleue  certaynly  that  [if  they  knew]  of  the 
mesease  and  seruage  in  whiche  thise  hethen  mysbyleuydf  peple 
holde  you  Inne,2  /  that,  by  the  playsyre  of  almyghty  god,  by  theyr  12 
good  wylles,  they  shold  fynde  counseyl  and  ayde  in  this  your  grete 
nede  &  werke  /  wherfor  I  counseyl  you  one  thyng,  yf  it  be  aggre- 
able  to  you  &  seme  good  /  that  is,  that  ye  sende  your  lettres  vnto 
oure  holy  fader  the  pope,  and  to  the  chirche  of  rome,  vnto  the  16 
kynges,  prynces  &  barons  of  the  Occident  &  weste  parte  /  In  which 
late  them  wete  playnly3  how  it  is  with  you  /  &  that  ye  crye  to 
them  for  mercy  /  that  they  wolde  socoure  you  for  the  loue  of  god 
&  for  his  fayth  in  suche  maner,  that  they  myght  haue  honoure  in  20 
this  world  &  sauacz'on  of  their  soules  in  that  other  /  &  for  that  ye 
be  pour  peple  /  ye  haue  no  nede  to  make  grete  dispencis  /  yf  ye 
thynke  I  be  sufficiaunt  for  so  grete  a  message  /  ffor  the  loue  of 
Ihesu  Criste  &  remyssyon  of  my  synnes,4  I  shal  entreprise5  this  24 
vyage,  and!  offre  my  self  to  take  so  moche  traueyl  for  you  /  And1 1 
promyse  truly  to  you  that  I  shal  late  them  haue  knowleche  /  how  it 
is  with  you  /  yf  god  sende  me  grace  to  come  thydre  "  /  whan  the 
patriarke  herd  this  /  he  had  moche  grete  ioye  /  he  sente  anon  for  28 
the  moost  saddest  &  wysest  men  of  the  cristen  peple,  &  for  the 
clerk  es  &  laye  men  /  &  sayde  &  shewde  to  them  the  bounte  and  the 
seruyse  that  this  good  man  offryd  to  6them  /  They  were  right  glad  / 
And!  thanked  hym  moche  /  Thenne  anon,  withoute  taryenge  /  they  32 
made  theyr  wrytynges  and!  sealed!  them  with  theyr  seales  /  and 
delyuerd  them  to  peter  theremyte  / 

1-1  Fr.  vray  est,  ce  que  vous  avez  dit  de  la  terre  dont  je  sug,  "  that  is 
true,  what  you  have  said  of  the  laud  from  which  I  come." 

2-2  Caxton's  obscurity  is  here  due  to  his  bad  French  text,  which  omits 
one  of  the  important  verbs  in  the  sentence.  A.  gives  the  correct  reading,  '*  Je 
croit  certainement  que  s"il  saroient  la  mesaise  et  11  sewage  qu  que  cist 
tuescreant  voz  tienneiit^  etc.  3  Ovlg.  playuly. 

4  (/rig.  synues.  5  Orig.  euterprise.  e  leaf  19,  back. 


Ch.  XIII.]        The   Vision  of  Peter  tlie  Hermit.  39 

How  the  said  peter  theremyte  entreprised  the  more 

hardyly   his   vyage,  by   thapparic/on    or   vision 

that  he  sawe  in  his  sleep  /  ca  xiii0 

4  t       Ruly  our  lord  god  is  swete  /  pyteous  /  and  mercyful  /  ffor  he 

wylle  not  suffre  to  perysshe  /  ne  to  be  loste  /  them  that  haue  ™*  J;°ar?d  to 
in  hym  ferme  and  stedfast  hope  /  And  whan  the  men  lacke  helpe  /  thow  wi.o^ 
god?  sendeth  to  them  his  ayde  /  And  this  may  clerely  be  seen  in 
8  this  werke  /  for  fro  whens  cometh  that  this  pour  man  /  whiche  was 
lytil  &  despysed  persone,  wery  and  brused  of  so  grete  Iourneye  and 
waye  /  that  durste  enterprise  so  grete  a  dede  and  werkc  /  how 
myght  he  wene  that  our  lord1  wolde  accomplysshe  so  grete  a  werke 

12  by  hym  /  as  for  to  dylyure  his  peple  fro  the  myserye  and?  caytyfnes 

that  they  had  ben  in,  nygh  fyue  C  yere  /  But  this  hardynesse  cam  ££jjtt?# 
to  hym  of  the  grete  charyte  that  he  had!  in  hym  /  And  the  fayth  g^<*^ 
wrought  in  hym  for  the  loue  that  he  had  to  his  bretheren  /  In  thise 

16  dayes  happed  a  thynge  /  that  moche  lyft  vp  his  herte  to  poursue 
his  enterprise  /  ffor  this  good  man,  whan  he  had  taken  this  message 
and?  charge  therof  /  he  wente  moche  ofter  than  he  was  woonte  to 
doo  to  the  holy  places  in  the  cyte,  and?  cam  on  an  euentide  to  the 

20  chirche  of  the  holy  sepulchre,  and  made  there  his  prayers  deuoutly, 
with  grete  plente  of  teeris  /  Aftir  this  he  sleepte  vpon  the  pamente, 
&  hym  semed  that  our  saueour  Ihesu  Criste  cam  to  fore  hym  /  Jj£j£f  to 
*and  charged  hym  self  to  doo  this  message1  /  And  said  to  hym,  ^J^* 

24  "  petre,  aryse  vp  hastely  /  and  goo  surely  thedyr  as  thou  hast  $*<*»*? 
entreprysed  /  ffor  I  shal  be  with  the  /  It  is  now  tyme  from  hens  ^^hn 
forth  /  that  my  holy  Cyte  be  clensed  /  and  that  my  peple  be{^under- 
socoured  "  /  Petre  awoke  in  this  poynt,  And  was  fro  than  forthon 

28  more  abandouned  vnto  the  waye,  and?  also  sure,  as  his  Iourneye  and 
message  had  be  doon  /  he  entermed2  and  appoynted  his  departyng 
for  to  doo  his  erande  /  And  had  leue  and  benediction  of  the 
patriarke  /  he  descended  doun  to  the  see3  /  and  fonde  there  a  shyp 

32  of  marchauntes  that  wolde  passe  in  to  puylle  /  he  entred  in  to  the  J'^jf;1* 
ship  /  the  which  had  good  wynde,  &  in  shorte  tyme  arryued  at  bar  /  immediately. 

1~1  Fr.  et  lui.  encliargoit  ce  message  m-csmes.  Caxton  translates  mesmes 
as  belonging  to  lui,  instead  of  to  message.  It  should  read,  "  and  charged 
him  with  this  same  message."     Lat.    '  Bt  eandem  injuwxisse  legationem." 

2  Caxton'a  original  gives  "  enterina  son  departement  pour  /aire  son, 
cltemin,"  i.  e.  "  prepared  to  depart  on  his  journey."  Another  version  gives 
"  atorna  son  oirre."  Caxton  read  "  enterina  "  as  enterma,  an  easy,  paleo- 
graphic  mistake,  and  then  made  •'  entermed  "  of  it  in  English.  Lat.  "  ad 
redeuudum  accinctus."  3   Orig.  see. 


40     Urban  curses  the  Emperor,  and  is  turned  out  of  Borne.     [Ch.  XIV. 

peter  yssued  out,  &  wente  by  londe  to  rome.  he  fonde  in  the 
contre  the  pope  vrban  /  and  salewed  hyin  in  the  name  of  the 
He  delivers  *Patriarke  and  of  the  cristen  peple  of  Surye,  and  delyuerd  to  hym 
Pope3  urban,  theyr  lettres  /  &  sayde  to  hym  by  mouthe,  moche  truli  &  wysely,  4 
the  grete  sorowes,  the  miseryes  and  vyletees  that  the  cristen  suffred 
thenne  in  the  holy  londe  /  as  he  that  was  expert  therof  /  and8  coude 
wel  saye  to  hym  the  trouthe. 

Of  the  persecutions  of  the  chirche  in  that  tyme,  and  8 
how  the  pope  Urban  was  putte  oute  of  the  see  of 
Home  by  the  bysshop  of  Rauenne  /  ca°  xiiij. 

Harry,         i        N  this  tyme,  Harry  themperour  of  Allemayne,  had!  a  grete 
Germany,0'  debate  ayenst  the   pope  Gregory  the  senenth,  to  fore  this  12 

wuifpop™1  Urban  /  and  the  discorde  aroos  for  the  rynges  and  the  croses2  of 
'  the  bisshoppes  that  were  dede  in  thempyre  /  For  suche  a  customme 
had?  ronne  a  grete  whyle  there,  that  whan  the  prelates  were  deed1  / 
the  rynges  and1  croses  of  them  were  brought  to  themperour  /  And*  16 
he  gaf  them  to  his  clerkes  and  his  chapylayns,  or  whom  he  wolde  / 
The  Emperor  and  sente  to  the  chyrches,  and!  bad?  them  that  they  shoolde  holde 
on°trh°eap.e4     them  for  theyr  bisshops  and  archebisshops  without  other  election  & 
tuf  church!   other  proef,  by  whiche  holy  chirche  was  adommaged?  sore  /  For  he  20 
sente  ofte  persoraies  /  that  were  not  propice  therto  /  The  pope 
gregorie  sawe  that  this  customme  was  ayenst  the  right  and?  lawe 
The  Pope      wreton,  and  also  ayenst  reason  /  and?  prayd  hym  amyably  to  leue 
Setlto  the™10  this  for  the  lone  of  god,  of  holy  chirche,  and  for  sauacion  of  his  24 
matter  peace-  ^^  ^  ^  ^  apperteyned,  nothyng  to  hym  /  Themperour  wold?  not 
leue  this  for  the  pope  /  wherfor  the  pope  cursed  hym  /  herof  them- 
perour had  so  grete  despite  &  so  grete3  desdayne  /  that  incontinent4 
The  Emperor  he  began  to  warre  ayenst  the  chyrche  of  rome  /  &  ayenst  the  pope  28 
deciare3  war.  ^  made  tQ  rige  an  a(jUersarye  /  Tharchiebisshop  of  rauenne,  whiche 
was  named  Gilbert,(ll)  &  was  wel  lettred  &  moche  riche  /  This  bis- 
shop  trusted1  ouermoche  in  thayde  of  themperour  /  And*  in  the  plente 
He  deposes     of  his  rychesse  /  And?  he  cam  to  rome  /  and  deposed  and  put  out  the  32 
pnuGiiberf  pope  of  his  see  by  fauour  &  force  /  And  becam  so  fel,  and  of  so 
huHpT£e?ain  grete  pryde  that  he  had,  that  he  forgate  his  wytte  &  reson  that  he 
ought  to  haue  by  his  clergye  /  And  sette  hym  self  in  the  see  /  And 
made  hym  to  be  holden  for  pope,  as  he  that  wel  wende  to  haue  ben  36 

1  leaf  20.  2  Fr,  croces,  crosier,  or  bishop's  staff. 

3   Orig.  gtete.  *   Ov\g.  iucouteuertt. 


Cli.  XIV.]  Urban  is  chosen  Pope.  41 

it  /  I  haue  saitl  you  to  fore,  that  at  that  tyme  /  Cristen  pcple  were  The  state  of 

/  J  *         '  «  ChrUUanity 

ill  met  paryll  thurghout  alle  the  world  /  &  that  the  comandeinens  "tthljUnw 

0  l       J  o  '  very  deplor- 

of  the  gospel  were  moche  forgoten  /  and*  of  holy  chyrche  /  And!  men  »Ma. 
4  ranne  faste  and  habourcdantly  to  the  werkes  of  the  deuyl  &  to  all« 
synnes  /  &  whan  this  discorde  and*  Scysme  was  so  grete  /  Thenne 
alle  trouthe  was  Jgoon  &  the  fayth  of  our  saueour  was  lyke  as  it 
had  ben  alle  perysshed!  /  The  bysshoppes,  the  abbottes,  and  the  The  aigni. 

r      J  '  ,  taries  ol  t lie 

8  prouostes2  were  beten  &  sette  in  prison  /  3And  alle  theyr  thyngea  j^"*"? 
were  taken  awey  fro  them,  namely  by  them  that  helde  of  them-  *»a insulted. 
perour.4  3  /  In  this  debate  was  done  alle  the  shames  and  repreues  to 
the  pope  /  Thenne  the  holy  fader  sawe  that  he  was  not  obeyed  as 

12  he  shold  be  /  and  that  he  was  in  paryl  of  his  lvf  /  And  he  went  in  The  Pope 
to  puylle  /  by  the  helpe  and  counseyl  of  Robert  guichart  /  whiehe  |j|Sjrtf 
thewne  was  lord  of  the  contre  /  This  Eobert  dyde  vnto  our  holy  protection. 
fader  /  and  to  his  peple,  as  moche  of  honour,  of  servyse,  and!  bounte 

1 6  as  they  wold!  take,  and!  yet  more  /  at  laste  our5  holy  fader  wente 

hym  in  to  salerne  /  &  becam  seke,  and0  laye  doun  &  there  deyde  /  Here  he  dies. 
&  was  there  buryed?  /  The  Cardynals  that  were  there  Chose  another,  a  Pop* 
whiehe  was  named*  viator "  /  whiehe  endured  but  one  moneth  or  cuoeen. 

20  there  aboutes  :  After  hym,  they  choos  this  vrban  that  I  spack  of  to  After  him 

...  .     Prbania 

fore  /  This  vrban  sawe  that  themperour  was  yet  in  his  malice  &  his  elected, 
angre  /  &  durst  not  sabandone  to  hym,  ne  put  hym  in  his  power,8 
but  helde  hym  in  the  forteresses  of  some  barons,  that  for  goddes 

24  sake  reteyned  hym  in  grete  doubte  /  whiles  he  was  in  this  poynt9  / 
■peter  theremyte  cam  to  hym  /  and!  brought  to  hym  the  message  fro 
the  Crysten  men  in  the  holy  londe  /  our  holy  fader  the  pope 
knewe  moche  wel  /  the  bounte  /  the  wytte  /  and  the  religion  that 

28  was  in  this  peter  /  And  /  ansuerd  to  hym  moche  swetly,  and1  sayde  He  receive* 

til  J  ■/  >>         peter  favour- 

that  he  shold!  coo  hasty] y  speke  to  the  princes  and!  barons  of  the  »Wy,  «•<• 

n  j   j      r  i  advise*  him 

royame  of  ffrannce  of  this  werke  /  for  yf  lie  myght  escape  sauely  fro  [PP"^1,' the 
the  handes  of  themperour,  he  hym  self  had1  Intencion  to  passe  the  France. 
32  montaygnes,  and"  drawe  hym  toward!  tho  parties  for  to  helpe  the 
better  to  this  wherke  /  yf  it  were  possible  /  Thenne  peter  was  right 

1  leaf  20,  back.  2  Fr.  promircs.  priests,  not  provosts. 

3 — 3  Fr.  "Ten  mettoient  ant  res  evisques  et  autres  abes  en  lews  lens  no- 
miemeat  a  cents  qui  se  tenoient  Severs  Vemperenr.u  Lat.  "  Quicumque 
voiveratori  in  Jute  svu  perversitate  nan  erant  consentientes." 

4  Orig.  themperonr.  5   Orig.  onr.  e  Orig.  aud. 

7  Caxton  here  follows  his  French  original,  which  is  corrupt.  The  Latin 
and  the  better  French  translations  give  Victor. 

8-8  Fr.  s'abandonncr,  a  son  j>ooir,    'trust  himself  iu  his  hands." 

u   Orig.  poyut. 

6  * 


42  Pope,  Urban  calls  a  General  Council.      [Ch.  XV. 

glad  of  this  good?  answere  of  our  holy  fader  /  and!  passed?  lombardye 
and?  the  montaygnes,1  and?  cam  in  to  {France  /  And*  began  diligently 
to  gete2  the  barons,  like  as  he  was  sent  expresly  to  them,  and?  tolde 
to  eche  of  them  the  shames  and?  disconvenyenees3  that  the  hethen  4 
peple  dyde  to  the  Oysten  folke  in  the  holy  londe  /  And  the  same 
Peter  he  said*  to  the  mene  peple  /  for  he  assembled1  them  oftvmes,  and* 

preaches  the  *  '  ■  V  ' 

crusade  with  tolde  to  them  the  sorout'ul  state  of  the  londe  &  Cyte  of  Iherusalem  I 

sucli  power  J  I 

thatle  wee     *n  sucUe  Avyse  that  he  made  them  to  wepe  many  a  teere  /  And  at  8 
tears-ofpity.  euery  tyme  he  made  some  fruyt  by  his  sayeng  and  exhortyng  the 
Like  John      peple  to  gyue  socours  to  the  holy  lande  /  And  like  wise,  as  saynt 

the  liaptist       t    1  1 

before  Christ,  tohan   baptyste   preched  to  fore,  to  make  the  way  to  fore-  Ihesu 

so  Peter  pre-  .  . 

pares  tor  the  cryste  /  so  in  the  same  wyse  this  Peter  brought  tydynsres  to  lore  1 2 

coming  of  i 

Pope  urban,   the  comyng  of  our  holy  fader  /  wherfore  he  hym  self,  whan  he  4cam, 
was  the  batter  herd?  and  byleuid?  /  and?  the  more  dyde  in  this  werke  / 

Of  a  general  counseyl  that  the  pope  vrban  ordeyned 
for  the  reformacion  of  holy  chirche  &  thamende-  16 
merit  of  the  peple  /  cap"  xv" 

in  loos,         i        N  the  yere  of  thyncarnacion  of  our  lord  M.  lxxxxv.  regned  the 

Henry 

reigned  in  fourth  harry,  kynge  of  almayn  and?  emperour  of  Rome  /  the 

and  Philip  in  xviii  yere  of  his  regne  /  and?  the  xii  of  his  Empire,  and  In  frannce  20 
regned?  thenne  philipe,  the  sone  of  harry  /  Thenne  sawe  our  holy 
fader  the  pope  vrban,  that  the  world  was  moche  empeyred?  and 
torned?  to  evyl  /  and  helde  a  counseyl  ther  vpon  of  the  prelates  of 
ytalye  at  playsance  /  where  he  made  establysshemens  by  theyr  coun-  24 
seyl,  for  tamende  the  maners  of  the  "Clergy  e  and?  of  the  laye  peple  / 
After  he  knewe  wel  that  he  was  not  sure  in  the  power  of  thern- 
Ti.e  Pope       perour,  and?  passed?  the  montaygnes  and  cam  in  to  the  royame  of 
France.         frannce  /  he  fonde  the  peple  euyl  endoctryned?  and  ouermoclie  en-  28 
clyned?  to  synne  //  Charite  faylled?  /  and?  warres  and?  discordes  were 
emonge  the  riche  men  /  And  thought  that  it  was  nede  to  doo  his 
He  orders  a    power  &  myght  for  tamende  Cristiente  /  he  ordeyned  a-  generall 
ciuny;  '        counseyl  of  alle  the  prelates  that  were  bytwene  the  montaynes5  ami?  32 

the  see  of  Englande  /  this  counseyl  was  sette  fyrst  at  6Clony  / 
u  seeona        Another  tyme  at  puy  nostre7  dame6  /  And'  the  thirde  tyme  at  Clere- 


1'uy  Nostre 

D.iiiie  ; 


1   Oriff.  montaygnee.  2  Fr.  qverir,  search  out. 

3  Fr.  disco ncemincex,  insults,  not  discoiivetiiences,  as  Caxtou  evidently 
read  it.  4  leaf  21.  °  Oriff.  montayues. 

°— s  Otlier  editions  give  Ycrzelai,  Lat.  et  nnicersis  tranmljiinaruiu  j>ar- 
tihim  apuil   VigiliavuM.  7   Fr.  Put  Xostre  Dame. 


Ch.  XV,  XVI.]     Urban  adopts  Peters  Crusade  before  the  Council.    43 
niont,  ia  aauergne  /  This  was  in  the  moneth  of  Nouembre  /  There  a  third  at 

•  Clereuiunt. 

were  many  Archebisshops  /  bisshops  /  ahbotos  /  and  grete  prelates 
and  persones  of  holi  chirche  of  thise  parties.  Ther  were  by  the 
4  general  counseyl  many  commandemenfcs1  gyuen  for  tamende  clerk  es 
&  layotee2  /  for  teshewe  synnes  /  and!  reeouere  good  maners  /  There 
was  holy  chirche  al  reformed',  of  whiche  it  had*  grete  nede  / 
Emonge  alle  other,  Peter  theremyte  was  there,  whiche  formate  not  Peter  ad- 

°  J  °  dresi-e*  (his 

8  the  werke  that  he  was  charged!  with  /  but  admonested?  the  prelates  >"st  council. 
eche  pryuatly  by  hym   self,  &  prayde  the  conmne   peple  openly 
nioche  wel  and  wysely  /  Thewne  tuke  our  holy  fader  the  wordes,  The  Pope 

,     ,  .  .      ,  hi.nselt  then 

and  shewed!  generally  to  alle  the  counseyl  /  what  e;rete  shame  it  was  preached 

.  '  witli  frreat 

12  to  alle  the  cristen  men,  of  our  faith  /  that  was  so  nyghe  destroyed?  vigour, 
&  faylled  in  the  place  where  it  began  /  and  it  myght  be  grete  fere 
and  drede  whan  it  faylled!  at  the  heed  &  welle  /  that  the  ryvers  shold? 
not  endure  /  that  were  rennyng   thurgh  the  world  /  And!  saide 

16  moche  wel,  that  alle  the  very  Crysten  peple  shold1  take  herof  grete 
despite  of  thus  desheryted!  by  their  defaulte  /  and?  his  contre 
delyuered?  to  his  enemyes  /  And'  promysed'  that  yf  they  wolde  take  promising 

„  i-i  i  tit  -i  remittance  of 

dvpon  this  pylgremage,  he  wolde  chauwge  theyr  penaunce  in  to  this  siiwtoaii 
20  werke.     And  yf  they  deyde  in  this  waye,  confessid  and  repentaunt,4  tlie  Cl0S8- 
he  wolde  take  it  on  his  fayth,  that  they  incontinent  shold  goo  in 
to  the  Ioye  of  heuen.     On  that  other  syde,  as  long1  as  they  were  in 
the  seruyse  of  our  lord',  they  were  in  the  warde  and  kepyng1  of  holy 
24  chirche,  bothe  they  and  theyr  thynges,  in  suche  wyse,  that  they  that 
dyde  to   them  ony  domage,  shold   be   acursed,  &   alle   this  com- 
manded he  to  be  kept  of  alle  the  prelates  that  were  atte  counseyl. 
This  doon,  he  gaf  euery  man  leue,  and  commanded'  [that  he]  shold  Hecom- 
28  preche  this  pylgremage  and  pardon.     And  tolde  to  them  that  alle  priests  and 
men  shold  trauaylle  to  gyue  and  make  lon^e  trewes  and  pees  of  the  preach  the 

Crusaile. 

warres,    for   taccomplysshe    the    better    this    pylgremage,   and    to 
performe  it. 

32  How  many  noble  and  hye  men,  and  other  of  the 
Eoyame  of  fraunse,  crossed  them  for  to  goo 
ouer  see.  ca°  xvj° 

o       Wr  lord  gaf  his  grace  vnto  our  holy  fader  the  pope  in  vtteryng 
36  of  the  word  of  god,  which  was  said  in  suche  wyse,  that  it  was 

1   Or'\g.  contnandements.  2  Orifj.  layefee.  3  leaf  21,  back. 

4  Orig.  repeutauut. 


44    The  French  Folk  flock  to  Peters  Crusade  against  the  Turk.  [Ch.  XVI. 
The  preach-    fyxed  and  roted  in  the  hertes  of  them  that  herde  hyiri,  and  not  only 

mg  oi  the  w     -  *  ,/ 

jvpe  success-  of  them  that  were  present,  hut  of  alle  other  that  it  was  recorded? 

and'  told  vnto,  ffor  the  bisshops  wente  in  to  theyr  countrees  and 

preched  to  theyr  peple  like  as  it  was  to  them  commanded.     1How  4 

tiinw  fo?rU  be  ifc  that  {t  was  a  stranSe  thyng,1  and  right  greuo?^  for  a  man  to  leue 

i"s"vife'aude  his  contree>  llis  wyf»  hi*  childeren  /  and  lygnage,  And  leue  them 

children;       that  he  loueth  by  nature.     But  whan  one  thynketh  what  reward 

he  shal  haue  of  our  lord  so  to  doo,  thenne  he  geteth  a  feruent  loue  8 

doi„gyhe0       in  hym  self  for  the  cliaryte  of  our  lord>  an,i2  leueth  the  naturel  loue 

saves  his       0f  his  fiessh,  for  to  saue  his  sowle  /  and  this  myght  wel  he  perceyued 

and  seen,  ffor  the  peple  of  the  Royame  of  ffraunce,  and  the  grete 

barons,  and  other  lasse  that  were  enclyned  to  synnes  and  acustomed  12 

ah  the  great  to  doo  ylle,  as  I  haue  said'  to  fore,  aftir  they  herde  this  prechvn** 

barons  of  J  i  j     o  > 

SS"rtok        entreprysed  so  vygorously  the  werke  of  our  lord,  and  auowed  them 

vi-orou^v      t0  Ward  tbis  Py^1'6111^'  as  y°  sllal  nere>  ff°r  ifc  semed  that  euery 

man  ought  to  eutreprise  tauenge  the  wronge  and  shame  that  the  16 
hethen  dyde  to  our  lord,  and  to  his  peple,  in  the  londe  of  Iheru- 
salem.     Ye  shold  haue  seen  the  husbonde  departe  fro  his  wyf,  And 
the  faders  fro  the  childeren,  and  the  childeren  fro  the  fadres.     And 

stany  join  to  it  semed  that  euery  man  wolde  departe  fro  that  he  louyd  best  in  °0 

save  their  » 

souls.  this  world,3  for  to  wynne  the  Ioye  of  that  other  /  Ther  was  so  grete 

affraye,  and  so  grete  a  meuyng  thurgh  alle  the  londe,  that  vnneth 
ye  shold  haue  foimde  an  hows  /  but  that  som  had  enterpiised 
this  4viage  /  I  saye  not  that  alle  that  wente  were  wyse  and  of  pure  24 
entencion  toward  our  lord  /  ffor  som  monkes  wente  out  of  theyr 
cloystres  without  leue  of  theyr  abbotes  or  pryours  /  and  the  recluses 
wente  out  of  the  places  where  they  had  ben  closed  in  /  and  wente 

Many  go  for   forth  with  the  other  /  Som  wente  forth  for  loue  of  theyr  frendes,  to  28 

iimrc  worldly  ■»  ' 

ie..Su„s.         bere  them  felawship  /  Other  wente  forth  for  bobaunce,  lest  they 
shold  be  reputed  for  euyl  and  not  good  /  And  som  there  were  that 
wolde  withdrawe  them  for  theyr  creancers,  and  haue  respite  of  theyr 
dettes  /  But  how  that  it  was  theyr  entencions  within  theyr  hertes,  32 
it  semyd  good  for  the  grete  enterpryse  that  they  shewed  outward  / 

Men  need       And  it  was  of  grete  nede  that  this  pyl^rema^e  was  chosen  at  that 

this  hard  .  °  .  rj   °  ° 

penance.        tyme  /  nor  there  were  in  the  world  so  many  synnes  that  they  with- 

drewe  the  peple  /  fro  our5  lord  /  And  it  was  well  behoueful  that  36 
god  shold  sende  to  them  som  addressement,6  by  whiche  they  myght 

1-1   Fr.  Bivn.  sure:,  que  forte  chose,   ';Be  assured  that  it  is  a  hard  thing,"  etc. 
2    Or'iij.  aud.  3    Ol'iff.  wrold.  4  leaf  22.  5   Oritj.  onr. 

a  Fr.  adrieemctit,  according'  to  Cotgrave,  a  directing  or  setting  in  the  nearest  course. 


Cli.  XVII.]     Many  distinguished  Men  undertake  the  Ci-usade.  43 

come  to  heuen  /  and'  that  he  gaf  them  som  traueylle,  as  it  were  a 
purgatoryo  to  fore  theyr  dcth  /  At  this  couiiseyl  auowed  presently  Ajnon*  the 
this  pylgremage,  the  good?  bisshop  of  Puy  named1  Aymart  /  whiche  JJjJj^L 

4  aftirward'  was  legate  in  the  same  hoost  /  and'  conteyned'  hym  moche  ^g^™*, 
wysely  and  truly  /  Also,  the  bisshop  of  Orenge,  whiche1  was  an  holy  0ra»Ke- 
man  and  relygyous,  auowed  there  the  same  viage  /  And!  ynowhe  of 
other  whiche  were  not  at  that  couiiseyl  that  enterprised  the  same 
8  vowe  /  Our  holy  fader  had?  commanded  /  and  made  the  bisshops  to 
holde  it  /  that  alle  they  that  wohle  auowe  this  pylgremage  shold  ££;  Ani- 
sette the  sigue  of  the  crosse  on  their  right  sholdre  /  nor  thonoure  of  ™e0arsarea 
hym  that  bare  the  torment  of  the  crosse  vpon  his  sholders  for  to 

1 2  saue  vs  /  and?  taccomplysshe  this  that  oure  lord'  sayth  in  the  gospell  / 
"Who  that  wil  lyue  aftir  me  /  renye2  hym  self  and  take  the  crosse 
and  folowe  me  "  /  wel  forsaketh  he  hym  self,  that  leueth  /  that  the 
flessh  loueth  /  for  sauyng  of  his  sowle  /  whan  one  of  the  grete  barons 

16  was  croysed?  so  on  his  sholdre  in  a  centre,  alio  the  peple  of  the 
contre  that  were  also  crossyd  cam  to  hym,  and  chees  hym  for 
theyr  captayne,  and  made  to  hym  feaulte  for  to  haue  his  ayde 
and  warantise  in  the  waye  of  the  sayd  pylgremage  / 

20  The  names  of  noble  men  that  enterprised  this  pyl- 
gremage, as  wel  on  this  side  as  beyonde  the 
montaynes  /  capitulo  xvij0 

i        N   the   royame    of  fraurcce   and   of   Allemayne,   3hughe,  the  ^Franco.  _ 
24  yonger  brother  of  the  kyng  of  frounce43  /  Eobert,  therle  of  gj^*™"1 

flaundres5  /  Robert,  Due6  of  Normandye,  Sone  to  kynge  William  ^^bert 
of  7Englond  /  Stephen,  therle  of  chartres  and  of  bloys,  which  was  ££"*?"• 
fader  to  erle  thybauld  the  olde,  whiche  lyeth  at  laigny  /  Raymond,  ggJJJSJk 
28  therle  of  tholouse  /  and  many  knyghtes  of  that  londe  /  The  valyant  »»*»■■* 
man  Godefroy  of  buyllon,  Due  of  lorayne,  with  his  two  bretheren,  %*£** 
Bawdwyn  and  eustace  /  And  one  theyr  cosyn,  Bawdwyn,  sone  to  j^,1;^"'0 
the  counte  huon  de  Retel  /  Therle  garnyer  de  gres  /  Bawdwyn,  the 
32  erle  of   henawde  /  Ysoart,  the   erle  of   ye  /    Rembout,  therle  of 
Orenge  /  William,  therle  of  forests  /  Steuen,  therle  of  Aubmalle  / 
Rotrout,  the  erle  of  Perche  /  Hughe,  the  erle  of  saynt  pol  /  &  many 

1   Orig.  whi  he.  2  Fr.  rente,  "let  him  deny  himself." 

3— 3  Fr.  "Hue  le  maine,  frlre  an   roy   France;"  Hugh    th>>   great,  not 
"Hugh  the  younger  brother."'    Lat.  Hugo  Magnus.  *  Orig.  frauuee, 

■'  Orig.  rlauudres.  G  Orig.  Hue.  7  leaf  22,  back. 


4f>  The  Equipment  of  Peter  the  Hermit's  Crusaders.     [Ch.  XVII. 

barons  and  knyghtes  that  were  not  counted1  /  As  raoul  de  baugenel  / 
Euerard   du   puisat   /  Guy   de   gaiiande,    which    was   steward   of 
ixaunce  /  Thomas  de  fferre,  Guy  de  possesse,  Giles  de  chaumouttt  / 
Girard  cherisy  /  Rogier  de  baruyle  /  Henry  da»sique2  /  Centon  of  4 
win.  of         heart  /   Guiilem   amanaix,  Gaste   the  bediers,  Guillem  de   mont- 

Mi>nt|ielier, 

rjirani  of  '     pellyer  /  and  Gyrard  de  Roussilon  /  ye  may  wel  knowe  that  with 

Rnugailou. 

this  peple  were  croyssed  moche  gretc  plente  of  knyghtes  and  other, 

with  grete  nombre  of  comune  peple  /  whiche  peter  theremyte  gadrecf  8 

in  the  Royamme  of  fraurace  and  in  thempyre  of  Allemaygne.  And  by 

in  Italy         yonde  the  montayns  men  croyssed  them  also  /  Euymount  the  prynce 

Prim-c  of  '     of  Tarente,  whiche  was  soon  to  Robart  guychart,  that  was  Due  of 

Tarentum, 

ami  iiia         puylle,  and  Tancre  his  neuew,  his  sustres  sone,  and  many  other  grete  12 
Tancied.        barons  of  this  londe  that  were  not  so  renommed  ne  knowen  as  thise 
were.     There  was  grete  Appareyllemens,  and3  araye  that  was  made 
for  this  pylgremage.     The  grete  men  had  enterprised,  that  assone  as 
the  wy nter  was  passed'  they  wold  putte  them  on  this  pylgremage.  10 
The  niene  peple,  the  knyghtes,  the  barons,  and  other,  aftir  they 
were  acqueynted  that  one  with  that  other  /  sente  to  eche  other 
lettres  and  messages  for  taccorde  to  goo  to  gydre  /  and  apoynted? 
the  tyme  of  departyng*,  and  of  the  waye  that  they  sholde  holde  /  20 
And  whan  Marche  was  come,  ye  sholde  haue  seen  horses  arrayed, 
with  sommyers,  palfroyes,  and  stedes  /  tentes  and  pauyllons,  and 
to  make  armures.4     5ye  maye  wel  knowe6  that  there  was  moche  to 
The  barons     doo  of  many  thynges,5  nor  the  barons  were  acorded  that  they  shold  24 
to  so  nil        not  goo  alle  to  gydre,  ffor  no  contre  myght  suffyse  ne  fynde  that 

together. 

which  shold  be  nedeful  for  them  /  ffor  whiche  cause  alle  the  hoostes 
neuyr  assembled  (as  ye  shal  here)  tyl  they  cam  vnto7  the  cyte  of 
Nycene.     The  niene  peple  charged  them  self  not  moche  with  tentes  28 
Every  man     ne  Armures,  ffor  they  myght  not  here  it.     And  therfor  euery  man 
garnysshid  hym  aftir  that   he  was,  with  nioneye   and  goodes,  as 


own  arm 

inovisioi 


departure 

wa>  a  sad 
one. 


moche  as  he  supposed  shold  be  nedeful  for  hym.     Whan  the  daye 

of  departyng1  8cam,  ther  were  grete  sorowes,  grete  Avepynges,  and  32 

grete  cryes  at  departyng1  of  the  pylgryms  /  ffor  there  were  but  fewe 

bowses  but  of   them   som  wente  /  And  suche   howsholders   ther 

were  /  that  they  wente  alle,  and  caryed  theyr  wyues,  and9  bare 

theyr  childeren  with  them  /  It  was  a  merueyllous  thynge  to  see  this  36 

1    Oriff.  couuted.      2  Fr.  Henry  d'Asqite.    Lat.  de  Ascka.      3   Orig.  aud. 
4  Fr.  "faire-armeures  cluirgier,"  Caxton  neglected  to  translate  "ckargier." 
:>— i  p,.  "  Bien  y  porez  savoir  qii'il  gembloit  commencement  de  tres  grant 
chose."     Caxton  has  certainly  translated  very  freely  here. 

0   Or};/,  kuowe.  7    Oriff.  vuto.  8  leaf  23.  9   Oriff.  aud. 


Ch.  XVI 1 1.]    The  Christian  Knight  Gaultier,  without  Knovjledgc.    47 

meuynges  /  ifor  it  had  not  byfore  be  acustonied  to  soe  suche 
thynges  in  fraunce  /  ne  neuer  Lyfore  was  crosse  born  ne  taken  for 
pylgreniage. 

4  Of  thauentures  that  a  Rowte  of  Cristen  men  had  in 
this  viage  /  Of  whome  one  Ganltyer  withoute 
knowleche  /  was  Captayue  /  capitulo  xviij" 

t        lie  yere  of  thyncarnacion  of  our  lord  .M.  foure  score  xvj  /Thestiiof 

J  J  '    March,  liHMJ, 

8  the  edit  daye  of  Marche  cam  a  gentilman,  a  knyght  right  noble,  Waiter  the 

o     -       »  C1  ■      .  PeiinylMH 

named   Gaultier,(12)   without   knowleche1   to   his   surname,    with  ]»»■*»  i»'o 

»\       /  uermniiy. 

hym  cam  a  inerueyllous2  grete  plente  of  folke  a  foot,  ffor  ther  were 
]>ut  fewe  men  a  hors  bak  in  this  rowte  /  they  passed  in  allemayne, 

12  and'  drewe  hem  toward?  hongrye  /  The  Eoyamme  of  hongrye  was  Hungry  t« 
alle  enuyronned  with   grete  waters,  and  large  mershes,  and   depe  coimtrj  w 
lakes,  in  suche  wyse  that   none   myght  entre   ne    yssue    but    by 
certayne  places  and  strayt  entrees  that  ben  as  yates  of  the  londe. 

10  In  hongerye  was  thenne  a  kynge,  a  moche  valyauut  man  named' 
Colemant  /  And  was  a  very  good  cristen  man  /  He  knewe  that 
Gaultier  cam  by  londe  with  grete  peple  /  and  had'  therof  moche 
grete  Ioye  /  and!  helde  wel  with  the  pylgremage  that  he  had  enter- 

20  prised  /  he  receyued  them  debonayily  in  his  londe,  and  commanded  KmgCdie- 

1  '  J  hi  ma"'  receives 

tliurgh  his  royame  that  they  shold  haue  alle  maner  vytaylle,  good  Water 

sheep,3  and  alle  that  they  neded  /  The  pylgryms  passed  alle  hongrye 

in  crood  peas,  tyl  they  cam  to  the  ende,  where  they  fou^de  a  water  They  rwche.1 

r~  i         ■>     j  j  »  x\h>  confines 

24  whiche  was  named  Marce  /  This  was  the  bouw.de  of  hongerye  toward  of  Hungary. 
thoryent.    they  passed  this  water  hi  good  peas,  and?  entred  in  to 
hongrye.4     And  withoute  knovvyng  of  this  Gaulteer,  some  of  his 
peple  abode  oner  the  water  /  And  cam  to  a  castel  named  Malleuylle, 

28  for  to  by  vitaylles,  of  the  whiche  they  had  nede  /  The  hongres5  by 
cause6  that  alle  the  boost  was  passed,  sauf  they  which  were  but  a 
fewe,  ranne  vpon  them  /  Andf  bette  them  /  And  dyde  to  them  ouer-  a  r, w  «££ 
moche  shame.     They  passed  the  water,  and  cam  to  gaultier  /  and  ;;;';, .' ,',;/,  ,e 

32  shewde  to  hym  playnly  how  they  had  ben  demened  without  for-  Huuu.u  >. 

1  Some  of  the  French  texts  give  "  Gautier  sans  Savoir,"  which  Caxton 
follows ;  others  have  the  more  correct,  "  Gavtier  sans  Avoir"  i.  e.  Walter 
the  Pennyless.     Lat.  Gaiter  its  eoynomento  "Sans  Aveir." 

-   Orig.  meruey lions. 

3  Fr.  a  ban  marcTiie,  i.e.  at  low  prices:  "good  cheap"  seems  to  have 
heen  the  ordinary  translation.  Bee  p.  48  ;  Uht  cheap  is  another  form  for  the 
same  expression.     See  Ancrvii  ll'nrle,  1.  398,  and  Toirnley  Mysteries,  102. 

1    Rougrj'e,  Bulgaria.  6  Bougies,  Bulgarians.  u    Oi'ig.  cause. 


48  Disasters  to  the  Christicais  in  Bulgaria.     [Ch.  XVIII. 

Tiiey  com-     faytte  :  They  hatH  moche   grete  despite,  and  nioche  sorowe  herof. 

Waiter.         And1  had*  passed  the  1  water  agayn,  yf  they  had  not  so  grete  peryl 
and  so  grete  distourblyng1,  And!  thought  they  wold  goo  theyr  waye, 
and?  leue  for  tauenge  this  thynge  /  So  long  they  wente  tyl  they  cam  4 
to  belle  graue,  whiche  is  the  first  Cyte  of  bougrye2  on  this  syde. 
Gaultier  sente  to  the  due  of  the  town,  and  requyred  hym  that  he 

The  Duke  of  wolde  late  them  ther  by  vytaylles  /  he  wold  not  suffre  ony  to  be 

Bellegrave 

will  not  sen    Sold  to  them.     Thoost  had  grete  disease3  for  lak  of  vytaylle  /  and  8 

1  hem  pro-  °  J       J  I 

visions.         myght  not  lenger  kepe  them,  but  that  a  grete  parte  of  them  wente 

a  fowragyng  for  to  gete  vytaylles  for  them,  and  for  theyr  beestys  / 

They  founde  grete  plente  of  beestes  in  the  contre  /  whiche  they  toke 

and  brought  to  theyr  lodgynges  /  whan  they  of  the  contre  herd  this,  12 

a  conflict       they  armed  them,  and  assembled  grete  peple  of  the  couratree,  and  ran 

vpon  them  where  they  droef  their  proyes,  and  fought  with  them  /  and 

toke  the  beestes  fro  them  /  and  many  of  them  they  slewe,  and  bam  ted 

the  other  away,  the  no?>tbre  wel  of  Cxi  of  oure4  men,  shytte  them  16 

in  a  monasterye  for  to  kepe  them  there  sauf  /  but  the  borcgres  cam 

Waiter  sees    there  aboute  /  and  sette  fyer  on  the  chirche,  and  brente  alle  /  Gaultier 

are  to  blame,  sawe  that  he  ledde  with  hym  many  folyssh  peple,  whiche  he  coude 

not  rule  ne  sette  alle  in  ordenau«ce,  And  withdrewe  hym  fro  them,  20 
and  toke  them  that  wold  be  ruled  and  obeye  hym,  and  wente  in  to 
forestes  of  bougrye,5  which  ben  large  and  long,  and  began  to  passe 
He  sets  out     the  moost  wysely  and  stylle  that  he  myght  /  tyl  he  cam  to  a  cyte 
willed  named  stralyce  /  and  is  a  contre  named  danemarche6  the  moyen  /  24 

There  fonde  he  a  good  man  that  was  duke  of  the  londe  /  whan  this 

They  are  well  duke  knewe  what  they  were  and  whyther  they  wente  /  he  receyued 

'  them  moche  debonayrly,  and   made   them  to  haue  vytaylles  and 

other  thynges  good  cheep.    And  dyde  to  them  bountes  and  seruyses  28 

ynowgh  for  the  oultrage  that  was  doon  to  them  at  belgraue.     And 

dyde  redresse  and  yelde  agayne  to  them  as  moche  as  he  myght 

and  Riven  a    recouere  /  and  aboue  alle  this  /  he  delyuerd  to  them  good  conduyte 

toConstMiti-  and  sewr  tyl  they  cam  to  constantynoble  /  whan  they  were  come  to  32 

constantinoble,  themperour  sente  for  gaultier.  he  cam  vnto  hym,  and 
Mere  the  sayde  to  hym  thoccasion  of  his  viage,  and  that  he  wolde  abyde  there, 
receives  peter  theremyte,  by  the  commandemt  of  whom  he  had  brought 
ldmiiy.  thyse  pylgryms  /  whan  themperour  herde  this  /  he  receyued  hym  36 

1  leaf  23,  back. 

2  Lat.   "  Bulgarorum   et  fines  alligat  ad    locum   deveniens  qui  dicatur 
Belgravia."  3  Vr.  Bovffrete,  lack,  scarcity.  4   Or'ig.  onre. 

ft  Bougrye.  Bulgaria. 

6  !•>.  Danemarche  la  Maienne.     Lat.  Dacia  Mediterranean 


Ch.  XIX.]     Peter  the  Hcmiit  starts  with  his  Army.  49 

moche  wel  and  swetly  /  and  assygned  to  hym  a  fayr  place  without 
the  town  /  where  as  he  lodged  hym  with  his  felawship,  and  com- 
manded that  they  shold  haue  vytaylle  and  alle  other  necessaryes 
4  good  chepe  /  and  ther  soiourned  they  a  whyle. 

How  Pieter  the  heremyte  was  chyef  of  a  grete  hoost  in 

this  *  viage  toward  the  holy  londe.     capitulo  xix°.        pieam] 
i        t  was  not  longe  af  tir  that  peter  theremite  cam  fro  his  contre  /  Peter  the 

" '»   '  i    I  ■»«■  1 1.  Hermit  Bets 

8  with  grete  plente  of  peple,  vnto  the  nombre  of  xl  /  M  /  he  cam  out  with 

or  r    r      >  <  •  iO,OU0  men. 

in  to  lorayne,  and  passed  francone  /  bauyere,  osterych2  /  and  drewe 
hym  toward  hungrye.  Peter  sente  his  messagers  to  the  kyng  of 
hongrye,  to  thende  that  he  niyght  passe  his  Royamme,  he  sente 

12  hym  worde  that  he  shold  haue  good  leue  yf  they  wold  goo  in  peas 
without  medlynges3  and  oultrages  /  They  answerd  that  they  were 
pylgryms  of  our  lord  /  and  had  no  talente  for  to  trouble  the  pees  / 
Thus  entred  they  the  royamme  of  hongrye  /  and  passed  by  the 

16  lande  without  ony  debate,  vytaylles  and  other  thynges  had  they 

ynough  good  cheepe  /  At  thende  they  cam  to  the  castel  of  whiche  I  They  arrive 
spak  to  fore  /  named  maleuylle :  There  herd  they  saye  /  what  was  Here  they 
doon  to  them  of  the  retenue  of  Gaultier,  and  the  grete  oultrage  doon  injustice  done 

20  to  them  without  cause  /  and  sawe  yet  the  armes  and  despoyllis  of  men. 
theyr  felawes  that  had  be  robbed  there  hange  yet  on  the  walles  / 

Oure  pylgryms  that  sawe  this  were  alle  as  they  had  ben  out  of 
theyr  wytte,  and  ran  to  armes  /  and  4began  euery  man  to  do  wel.4 

24  they  toke  the  toun  by  force,  and  smote  oi  the  heedes  of  alle  them 
that  were  within,  sauf  a  fewe  which  ran  in  to  the  water  and  were 
drowned,  ther  were  fouwde  of  them  that  were  deed  wel  a  four  M  /  TheykM 

4000  men  to 

and  of  peters  meyne  were  slayn  an  C  /  whan  this  was  don  the  hoost  avenge  their 
28  forade  there  grete  plente  of  vytaylles  /  and  abode  wel  v  dayes  in  that  pilgrims, 
place  /  The  due  of  "  Bougrie,"  which  was  named  Incita,5  vnderstode 
how  thise  pilgryms  had  venged  their  felaws  ayenst  them  of  male- 
uylle /  and  doubted  for  as  moche  as  he  had  defended  the  vytaylles  to  The  Duke  of 

J         I  .  Hungary  has 

32  our  peple  /  and  that  he  had  slayn  many  of  them.    And  hym  semed  great  tear  of 
that  bellegraue  was  not  strong  ynough  /  therfor  he  lefte  the  town  / 
and  wente  in  to  a  strenger  castel  /  Thus  alle  they  of  the  cyte  yssued 
with  their  goodes  /  and  drewe  them  to  the  depe  fores tes  /  Peter 

2  1  orig.  ofterych.  3  Fr.  MesUet. 

<—*  Fr.  " ientre  commencerent  a  semondre  et  a  ammester  a  bien  faire" 
Oaxton,  misled  by  the  recurrence  of  the  preposition  a,  skipped  a  line  in  his 
translation.  6  Fr.  B.  Vicetel.     A.  Vitirn.     Lat.  Nichita. 

GODFREY.  E 


50  Peters  Army  arrives  at  Nyze.    [Cli.  XIX,  XX. 

whyles  he   laye   yet   at   raaleuylle,  herd  saye  that   the  kyng  of 
hongrye  had  herd  of  the  deth  of  his  peple  /  wherof  he  was  moche 
angry  /  and  that  he  8omcned  and  assembled  alle  his  power  for 
Peter  is  in     tauenge  his  men  that  had  he  slayn  /  And  doubted  herof  /  And  was  4 
the  duke,       no  merueylle  /  wherfore  he  made  tassemble  alle  the  shippes  that 
Hungary.      myght  be  founden  atte  ryue  of  the  see  to  hym  /  and  made  his  peple 
to  departe  moche  hastely  his  cartes  and  charyottes  /  and  the  beestes 
they  had  merueyllous  grete  praye,  and  lad  away  grete  ry chesses  fro  8 
the  castel  of  maleyulle,  that  they  had  there  taken  whan  they  were 
[» if.s4.bk.]  passed  ouer  in  to  bongrye.  athey  cam  to  fore  bellegraue  /  and  fonde 
the  cyte  alle  voyde,  ffor  they  were  alle  fled  /  Aftir  they  wente  eght 
They  arrive    grete  iourneyes  by  many  grete  forestes  tyl  they  cam  to  fore  a  cyte  12 
Nyze.  named  Nyze  /  This  town  fonde  they  moche  stronge,  and  wel  wallyd 

with  grete  towres  and  stronge  /  And  within  was  grete  garnyson, 
and  the  beste  men  of  warre  of  alle  the  londe,  and  grete  plente  of 
armours  aud  vytaylle  /  Peter  the  heremyte  and  his  boost  fonde  a  16 
hrygge  of  stone  by  whiche  they  passed  a  water  rennyng2  nyghe  to 
the  cyte  /  they  passed  the  brygge  and  lodged  them  bytwene  the 
water  and  the  towne,  And  by  cause  they  had  not  mete3  ynough  / 
Peter  asks  Peter  sente  his  messages  vnto  the  lord  of  the  toun  /  and  prayd  hym  20 
sions  be  sold  fayr  for  hym  and  for  his  peple  that  were  cristen  /  and  pylgryms 

to  them  at  a        J  J    .  r   r  '  rJ  °  "     ■ 

reasonable  that  wente  in  the  seruyse  of  our  lord  /  that  they  myght  bye 
vytaylles  of  the  toun  at  resonable  prys  /  Thenrae  the  lord  sende 
worde  to  peter  that  he  wold  not  suffre  /  that  they  shold  entre  in  to  24 

They  have  to  the  toun  /  But,  and  yf  he  wold  gyue  hym  good  ostages  /  that  his 

(rive  hostages  '  ,  1  j  i_ 

to  keep  the  peple  shold  doo  no  harme  ne  oultrage  to  the  peple  and  marcheauntes 
of  the  toun  that  shold  come  for  to  selle  them  vytaylle  /  he  shold 
sende  to  them  ynough  at  resonable  prys.  whan  Peter  and  his  peple  28 
herd  this  they  were  glad  ynough.  They  delyuered  good  ostages  / 
and  anon  they  of  the  toun  cam  out  with  grete  plente  of  vytayl  and 
other  thynges  necessarye  in  the  boost  / 

How  some  of  the  oost  of  peter  thermyte  vnwetyng  32 
hym  sette  fyre  in  the  subarbes  of  Nyz  at  theyr 
departyng  /  cap"  xx? 

m      oche  was  this  nyght,  the  hoost  of  the  pylgryms,  refresshyd  of 

alle  thynges  that  they  had  nede  /  ffor  they  had  ben  long  fro  3(5 
ony  good  toun.    And  they  of  the  cyte  were  to  them  moche  debonair 

2  Or  iff.  rennyug.  3  Fr.  viandes,  food,  victuals. 


peace. 


Ch.  XX,  XXI.}     Of  the  Behaviour  of  Peter'9  Army.  51 

and  resonable!     On  the  morne  they  demanded  theyr  ostaces  /  And  in  the  mom. 

,  Ingtheygo 

they  were  delyuerd  gladly  /  And  forth  they  wente  in  peas.     But  H'eir  way 
now  ye  shal  here  how  the  deuyl  doth  grete  peyne  for  to  empresshe 
4  and  lotte  good  werkes  /  In  thia  companye  had  ben  the  euen  a  fore  a 
stryf  to  one  of  the  marcchauntcs  of  the  town  /  and  som  of  the  oost  / 
whan  the  hoost  was  departed,  the  duchemen  assembled   to  the  except* 

hundred 

nombre  of  an  hunderd,1  and   for  vengeaunee  of  the  stryf  /  they  Dutchmen, 
8  sawe  yij  myllenes,  whiche  stode  at  brygge  nyghe  the  town  /  and2  toaiittie 
sette  them  a  fyre,  and  brcnte  them  anone  /  this  was  not  ynough, 
but  there  was  a  titil  borough  without  the  eyte  /  and  they  sette  that 
a  fyre  also,  and  brende  hit  to  asshes  /  and  syth  wente  theyr  waye 

12  aftir  theyr  3felawahip,  whiche  knewe   nothyng   herof  /  Of  this    Ptaf»] 
thynge  the  lord  of:  the 'town,  whiche  had  the  euen  to  fore  shewde 
to  them  grete  debonayrte  was  gretely  meuyd,  for  he  sawe  that  they 
rendrid  euyl  for  god  /  and  was  half  out  of  his  wytte  for  angre  / 

16  4This  felonnye  that   this  fewe  dydo  was  xcyted  alle  the  hoost,4 
whiche  was  euyl  and  pyte.  he  made  anon  arme  alle  the  town,  and 
yssued  on  horsbak  and  on  fote  /  hym  self  cam  to  fore  /  and  prayde,  The  duke 
and  moche  desyred  his  peple  for  to  venge  vpon  thyse  false  rowters,  pilgrims. 

20  and  theuys  the  oultrage  that  they  had  don.  whan  they  approched 

the  hoost  /  they  fonde  fyrst  thise5  thre  malefactours  whiche  had  He  overtakes 

'  *  *  theDntch- 

not  yet  ouertaken  theyr  felaws  /  And  Tonne  on  them,  and  smote  of  men,  and 

.  ■  '  smite*  off 

their  heede's  /  it  had  thenne  be  ynowgh,  but6  they  were  not  con-  their  head*. 
24  tent,7  but  smote   in  4he  aftirst  parte  of  thoost  whiche  doubted  He  also 

.  attacks  the 

nothyng  /  they  fonde  charyottes  /  sommyers  /  males,  seruauntes,  rear  of  **■• 
wyramen,  and2  children  /  whiche  myght  not  goo  so  faste  as  the  pilgrims, 
other  /  They  slewe  many,  and  somme  they  ouerthrewe,  and  ladde 
28  away  the  cariage.     And  thus  retorned  in  to  theyr  cyte  without  hurte, 
and  alle  blody  of  the  bloode  of  the  pylgryms. 

How  Peter  theremyte  was  aduertysed  of  alle  this. 
And  of  the  harme  that  ensiewed.     capitulo  xxj° 

32  p       Eter  was  goyng  with  the  grete  co?wpanye8  whan  a  messager  Peter  is 

~  informed  cl 

cam  to  hym  rydyng,  &  told  to  hym  of  this  aduenture  that  was  t<>»- 

1    Orig.  huuderd.  2   Orig.  aud. 

1—4  Fr.  "et  la  felonie  que  pen  des  geiis  lui  aroient  faicte,  mist  sus  a 
tout  I  Oft." 

6  Fr.  Tioit :  these  Dutchmen ;  Caxton  probably  mistook  Tirnt  for  trots, 
and  translated  accordingly.  fl  Orig.  bnt.  7   Orig.  coutent. 

8  Fr.  companye  de  Post,  with  the  main  body  of  the  army.     After  "  Tost " 
is  omitted  "qui  mot  ne  sgaroit  de  cecy." 

E  2 


52  Peter  orders  Peace  to  be  made.         [Ch.  XXL 

fallen  in  the  taylle  of  thoost.  Peter  sente  anon  to  them  that  were 
to  fore,  that  they  shold  retourne  agayn  the  way  that  they  were 
comyn  vnto  the  cyte  of  nyz  /  In  this  retorne  they  fonde  thynges 
ynowgh  that  displesyd  them,  ffor  they  fonde  their  felawes  byheded,  4 
lyeng  by  the  waye  /  they  bad  grete  sorowe  herof  /  One  fonde  his 
fader  deed  /  Another  his  brother  or  his  sone,  and  another  his  wyf 
or  his  doughter  /  there  were  many  disconuenyentes.1  Peter,  whiche 
had  his  entencion  pure  vnto  oure2  lord  /  entented  not,  but  tappese  8 
the  malyce,  and  leye  doun  the  discorde  whiche  was  sourded  emong 
He  «end»  to    the  peple  /  he  sente  som  wyse  and  prudent  men  to  the  lord  and  to 

tbe  Duke  for      ,  ,  -     .  , 

«n  expiana-    the  moost  hye  men  of  the  cyte,  for  to  demaunde  by  what  occasion 

they  had  don  this  euil  and  crueltees  ayenst  the  peple  of  our  lord  /  12 
They  answerd  that  this  was  by  the  defaulte  of  the  pylgryms  /  and 
that  they  had  fyrst  doon  grete  oultrage  to  brenne  theyr  mylnes  and3 
when  Peter   burghe.     whan  Peter  and  the  wyse  men  that  were  with  hym  herd 
reason,  he      this  /  They  thought  wel  that  it  was  no  place  ne  tyme  to  venge  16 
[♦  if.  as,  bk.]  4  theyr  shames,  And  therfor  torned  the  mater  vnto  peas  and  acorde  / 
w"re  to'"       f°r  to  recouvre  the  praye,  the  prysonners  and  caryage  whiche  they 
had  ledde  away  fro  thoost  /  ffor  there  were  of  the  mene  peple 
His  followers  whiche  wold  not  be  ruled,  and  wold  not  suffre  them  of  the  towne  to  20 

will  not  go 
on  without 
revenge. 


haue  pees  with  vs  /  but  wolde  auenge8  by  force  the  oultrage  that 
they  had  doon  /  Peter  felte  this  thynge,  And  apperceyued  anone 
the  euylle  that  sourded  /  And  sente  of  the  wysest  and  grettest  of 
his  companye6  to  make  the  pees  /  his  peple  wold  not  haue  pees.  24 
He  made  a  crye  on  payne  of  deth,  in  his  name  and  the  name  of  the 
barons  /  that  noman  be  so  hardy  to  breke  the  pees  that  was  made. 
And  this  he  charged  vpon  their  pylgremages,  theyr  feaulte,  and  on 
thobedyence  that  they  had  promysed  hym  /  And  whan  they  of  the  28 
hoost  herd  this  /  they7  remeuyd  not  /  But  folyssh  peple  wente 
forth  and  made  grete  noyse,  and  wold  not  obeye.  The  messagers 
that  were  in  the  toun  for  taccorde  this  that  was  don,  sawe  that  the 
They  break    noyse  grewe  more  and  more,  and  retourned  to  theyr  felawshhip  32 

offthenego-  ,.  .  niii  • 

ciations.  withoute  ony  conclusion  or  doyng  that  they  had  enterprised  /  and 
dyde  theyr  best  to  seece  the  debate  /  but8  they  had  no  power,  ffor 
there  were  moo  than  a  thousend  pylgryms,  whiche  noman  myght 

1  Fr.  ditconvenves,  2  Orig.  onre.  8  Orig.  aud. 

6  Orig.  aneuge.  8  Orig.  compauye. 

*  Caxton'8  original  is  here  corrupt  A.  gives  the  correct  reading,  "  si  ne 
le  crurent  pas"  they  did  not  believe  it,  instead  of  "tlisy  remevyd  not," 
which  is>in  direct  contradiction  with  the  next  sentence. 

8  Orig.  but 


Ch.  XXI.]  The  Battle  near  Nyze.  53 

holde  ne  reteyne  /  But  that  they  wold  goo  armed  to  the  toun.     Out 

of  the  toun  yssued  as  many  or  moo  ayenst  them,  ther  began  the  a  great  hai  tie 

bataylle  and  the  medle  grete  and  thyk,  and  began  to  slee  eche  other 

4  largely  /  Peter  ne  his  route  meuyd  not  /  but1  byhelde  the  bataylle. 
They  of  the  toun  that  were  on  the  walles  and  at  wyndowes  sawe 
that  theyr  peple  had  the  werse,  and  apperceyued  that  the  grete 
power  of  thoost  2enternieted  not  of  this  warre,  and2  thought  that 

8  they  wold  not  helpe  them  /  And3  opened  theyr  yates  and  yssued 
oute  by  grete  rowtes  alle  armed,  and  smote  in  the  bataylle  /  And 
founde  of  our  peple  aboute  a  /  V  /  C.  vpon  the  brygge  /  4And 
addressyd  to  them  and  slewe  them  alle,  sauf  somme  that  were  caste  The  pilgrim* 

get  the  wor»t 

12  in  the  water  /  And  alle  were  perysshed.     whan  the  grete  hoost  ofit« 

apperceyued  theyr  peple  thus  euyl  demened,  they  myght  suffre  it  Those  who 

no  lender,  but  wente  to  Armes  /  and  smote  in  to  the  bataylle  /  one  !°°ke<i  °" 

°    1  i  j       i         j,ave  t0  come 

af  tir  another,  lyke  as  they  myght  be  armed,     the  peple  that  had  *»  the  aid  of 
16  bygonne  this  debate  were  discomfyted  fyrst  /  And  began  to  flee  so 
fast  that  nothyng  myght  tarye  them  /  They  began  to  bete  them  on 
horsbak,  that  cam  for  to  helpe  them  /  by  whiche  the  good  men  were 
discomfyted  /  And  they  of  the  Cyte  that  were  nygh  to  theyr 
20  retrayt,  began  to  chase  them  moche  straytly,  and  to  slee  them  /  At 
last,  whan  oure  peple  were  withdrawen  /  they  retorned5  by  the 
6caryage  and  harnoys  /  And  caryed  alle,  and  ledde  it  with  them.    [« leaf  26] 
And  toke  wymmen  and  childeren  that  myght  riot  flee,  and  putte 
24  them  in  prison.     There  were  wel  slayn  and  lost  of  the  peple  of  the  io,ooopii- 
hoost  /  X  /  M  /  and  the  bongres7  wan  alle  the  harnoys  of  thoost  /  slain,  and 

'    many  women 

There  was  a  cart  loste  that  longed  to  peter  theremyte,  aUe  f ul  of  and  children 
Rychesse,  whiche  had  ben  youen  to  hym  in  ffrauwee  for  to  socoure8  p™«ne™« 

28  and  sustene  the  necessytees  of  the  hoost  /  they  that  myght  escape 
fro  this  discomfiture,  drewe  them  in  to  the  forestes  /  and  hydde  them 
in  the  depe  valeyes  in  the  nyght  /  And  on  the  morn  they  began  to 
calle  eche  other  /  and  to  whystle,9  and  sowne  trumpes  and  busynes 

32  in  the  woodes.     And  thus  began  to  reassemble,  and  gadred  them  Those  wi.o 

,  °  are  left  hei;in 

to  gydre  on  a  temtorie.10  to  assemble. 

1  Orig.  brat. 

2— 2  pr#  "  jy,  s'entrevietoit  de  cele  guerre.'"' 
3  Orig.  Aud. 

*  Fr.  uet  s'adrecicrent  d  eulx." 

6  Orig.  retorued.         7  Bougres,  Bulgarians.         8  Orig.  soconre. 
9  Fr.  huchier,  to  call  in  a  loud  voice,  not  "  to  n-Juatle." 
10  Fr.  tertre,   a   small   hill.     The  word  territoire,  with  which   Caxton 
translates  tertre,  seems  to  be  peculiar  to  him. 


54       The  Emperor  orders  Peter  to  go  to  Constantinople.     [Ch.  XXII. 

How  Themperour  of  Constantynoble,  beyng  aduer- 
tised  of  thise  oultrages,  sente  his  messagers  to 
peter  theremyte1  /  ca°  xxij° 

After  four      a       T  the  fourth  daye  were  nyghe  alle  assembled  aboute  peter,  4 
are  collected,  And  they  were  about  a  four  thousand,     they  were  in  mocho 

their  way.     grete  meschyef,  as  they  that  had  lost  theyr  frendes  and  theyr  peple, 
and  almost  alle  theyr  harnoys  /  not  withstondyng  2they  lefte  not, 
but  wente  forth  on  the  waye2  that  they  had  enterprised,  with  grete  8 
mesease  and  payne  for  lak  of  vytaylle.     And  as  they  were  in  this 
They  meet     poynt,  They  sawe  come  ayenst  them  the  messagers  of  themperour  of 
gerg  of  the     constantynoble,3  whiche  spak  to  peter  /  And  anon  he  dyde  assemble 
Kmperor;      the  heye  men  and  Capytaynes  of  the  hoost  for  to  here  the  message  12 

that  they  brought.     And  aftir  they  sayd  in  this  nianere  /  "  ffayr 

who  inform    syrs,  moche  euyl  tydjnges  and  renomme  is  comen  of  you  to  our 

evfue^orts    lord  themperour  /  ffor  it  is  tolde  to  hym  that  ye  goo  by  the  countree 

hear  of  their  of  his  empyre  with  force,  and  robbe  the  peple  of  suche  as  they  16 

haue,  breke  his  townes,  and  slee  his  peple  /  and  doo   alle  the 

oultrages  and  wronges  that  ye  may  /  the  good  chere  /  bounte,  and 

alle  the  seruyse  that  is  doon  to  you  auaylleth  nothyng.  ne  may 

adoulce  ne  aswage  your  hertes  /  Therfore  he  commandeth  you  that  20 

The  Emperor  ye  abyde  in  none  of  his  cytees  more  than  thre  dayes  /  But  goo 

t.nr.arch'6"1    your  waye  stray t  forth  to  constantynoble  /  ffor  he  hath  commanded 

coniwntin-    vs  to  goo  with  you  /  and  that  we  do  brynge  to  you  on  the  waye 

vytayll  good  cheep  ynowe."(13)     whan  thise  good  men  herd  this,  24 
that  themperour  had  don  to  them  this  bounte  /  they  had  grete  ioye  / 
and  excused  them  of   thise  bataylles   and  fyghtyng,  and  shewd 
openly  what  the  bongres  had  doon  withoute  theyr  offence  or  culpe 
[«  if.  26,  bk.]  by  force  and  grete  oultrage.     4The  messagers  dyrected  them  on  the  28 
There  they     way  tyl  they  cam  to  constantynoble  /  They  fonde  there  gaultyer 
Lnd  hitmen,  sans  sauoyr  /  and  his  peple,  that  taryed  for  them  /  And  thewne  they 
wente  alle  to  gydre5  /  And  lodged  them   in  the  place  that  was 
assygned  to  them  /  And  there  eche  tolde  to  other  of  theyr  mys-  32 
auentures  :6  Themperour  sente  for  peter.     And  he  wente  to  hym  / 
He  sawe  in  the  towne  many  thynges  /  7  palaysses,  many  rychesses  / 

1   Orig.  therempte. 

2—2  pn  mais  ne  laissierent  mie  pour  ce  qvilz  ne  se  meissent  en  la  roye, 
but  this  did  not  hinder  them  from  starting  on  the  journey,  etc. 
3  Orig.  constantyuoble.  6  Orig.  ggdre. 

6  Fr.  mesauentures,  misfortunes. 
7~T  (next  p.)  Fr.  et  en  ce  palais  mainles  ricltetses  et  maintcs  merveillei. 


Ch.  XXIII.]     Peters  Arrival  in  Constantinople.  55 

and  marueylles7  /  But  he  was  a  man  of  grete  herte  and  courage,  and 
abasshyd  of  nothyng  /  Themperour  demanded  of  hym  of  thestate  The  Emperor 
of  his  pcple,  and  of  other  barons  of  thoccyent  /  that  were  thus  que«tioii»  or 
4  meuyd  to  this  pylgremage.  Peter  answerd  hym  moche  wel  of  alle 
thynges  /  And  said  that  they  were  pour  peple,  and  were  come  to 
fore  /  But  the  prynces  and  hye  men  cam  aftir  with  moch  grete 
peple  /  which  wold  not  long  tarye  /  themperour  and  his  barous  of 
8  the  palays  sawe  alle  that  peter  was  so  lytiL  And  so  wel  /  so  wysely  / 
so  fayr  and  so  wel  appoynt  of  alle  thynges,  answerd  that  they 
merueylled  ouer1  moche  /  and  alowed  and  preysed  hym  moche. 
Themperour  gaf  to  hym  grete  yeftes  /  And  receyued  hym  in  his  He  givee 

12  grace  /  And  syth  he  lete  hym  retorne  to  his  peple.     There  rested  *>et*r- 
the  oost  of  the  pyjgryms  wel  at  ease  and  in  peas  /  And  a  whyle 
aftir  shippes  were  made  redy  by  the  commau»dement  of  themperour, 
And  they  passed  the  see  named  the  braas  of  seynt  george,  And  The  cm»ad- 

16  cam  in  to  the  lond  named  bythyne  /  This  is  the  fyrst  partye  of  Brae  of  st. 
Asye  /  vpon  the  see  /  And  they  lodged  them  in  a  place  called 
Cinintot.2 

Of  the  mayntenyng  of  the  hoost  of  peter  theremyte  / 

20  And  how  thre  thousand  duchemen  toke  a  castel 

by  assault  /  and  slewe  alle  that  were  therin  with 

the  swerde  /  capitulo  xxiij° 

t  His  was  in  the  marches  of  theyr  enemyes  /  there  was  the 
24  hoost  about  two  monethes,  And  euery  day  they  fonde  fresshe  They  are  well 

vytaylles  to  selle  good  cheep,  wherof  they  were  wel  at  ease,  3so  provisions. 

moch  that  it  coude  not  wel  be  suffred  longe  /  They  began  to  meue,3 

and  made  routes  for  to  goo  en  fourage  in  the  contrey  /  Ther  wente 
28  wel  somtyme  .X.   LI  /  or  move,  maulgre    the   barons,   that  were 

capytayns  in  the  hoost.     Neuerthelesse4   Peter   commanded   and  Peter  forbid* 

rj      J  them  to 

sente  lettres  to  them,  that  they  shold  abyde,  and  not  remeue  fro  the  forage  and 

oost  /  to  pylle  tyl  the  grete  Prynces  were  comen.     On  a  daye  it 

,'52  happed  that  Pieter  passed  the  braas  /  And  cam  in  to  Constanty- 

noble5  for  to  speke  for  vytaylles  /  that  began  to  wexe  dere  /  6The    [•  leaf  27] 

mene  peple   sawe  that  Peter  was  not  there,  And  were  the  more 

hardy,     they  assembled,  and  were  of  a  companye  wel  eght  thousand 

1  Orig.  oner.  2  Fr.  Civitot. 

3-3  "Tant  que  li  peuple  qui  a  peine  petit  souffrir  grant  aise  longitement 
te  comvien$a  a  es  nwnvoir"  etc. 

4  Orig.  neuetthelesse.  °  Orig.  Coustantyuoble. 


5G    Solyman  retakes  the  Castle  and  beheads  the  Ihdchmen.    [Ch.  XXIV. 

Notwith-       a  fote,  and  thre  honderd  a  horshack.     they  made  theyr  bataylles, 
they  c'oSon  a  and  wente  alle  in  ordenaurcce  toward  the  cyte  of  nycene,  ayenst  the 
potion  near  wille  and  deffence  of  alle  the  grete  men  of  thoost  /  whan  they  cam 
nyghe  to  this  grete  cyte,  They  smote  in  to  the  townes  about  it,  and  4 
toke   merueyllows  many  beestes,  grete  and  smale,  And  brought 
moche  grete  gayne  /  And  retorned  saufiy  withoute  hurte  home  agayn 
in  to  the  oost  with  grete  ioye  and  feste.     The  duchemen,  whiche 
ben  a  peple  rude  and  hardy,  sawe  this  glorye  and  this  gayne  that  8 
they  had  wonne  /  aud  had  grete  enuye  therat  /  and  were  meuid 
with  couetyse  of  good,  and  to  haue  worship  /  relyed  them  to  gydre 
alle  of  that  tongue  vnto  the  nombre  of  thre  thousand  a  foote  /  and 
wente  strayte  toward  Nycene  /  There  was  a  /  Castel  at  foote  of  an  1 2 
snoo  Dutch-    hylle,  nygh  vnto  Nycene,  at  leste  Foure  myle  of.    These  Duchemen 
^e8tiel.ake  a     cam  theder  and  began  tassaylle  the  castel  moche  strongly  /  they 
within  defended  them  to  theyr  power  as  long  as  they  myght,  but  it 
auaylled  not  /  ffor  the  castel  was  taken  by  force  /  And  the  duchemen  16 
entred  therin  /  And  alle  them  that  they  fonde  within,  men,  wymmen, 
and  chylderen,  they  slewe  without  mercy  /   They  fonde  ther  in 
vytaylle  ynowgh,  and  other  thynges  /  and  sawe  that  the  place  was 
moche  fayr  and  delectable  /  and  garnysshed  it,  and  6ayde  that  they  20 
wolde  it  holde  tyl  the  grete  prynces,  whome  they  abode  and  taryed 
for,  were  comen  / 

How  Solyman,  lord  of  that  contre,  reprysed  and  toke 
agayn  the  castel,  and  slewe  alle  the  duchemen  21 
that  where  therin.  ca°  xxiiij° 

s       01yman,(14)  whiche  was  lord  of  this  contre  and  gouernoure,1 
had  herd  longe  to  fore  /  that  the  cristen  peple  were  meuyd  of 
the  Royamme  of  ffraunce  for  to  goo  in  to  the  londe  of  surye  /  And  28 
solyman  pre-  that  they  addressed  them  for  to  passe  by  his  londe  /  Therfore  he  had 
iena\u?aend.  ben  in  thoryent,  fro  whens  he  was  come  /  and  had  brought  grete 
plente  of  knyghtes  and  other  peple  /  by  whom  he  entended  to  kepe 
his  londe  /  And  greue  his  enemyes  /  that  shold  passe  there  by  /  he  32 
was  thenne  drawen  toward  our  peple,  and  with  his  folkes  was  in 
the  montaynes  and  woodes  /  He  herde  how  thys  duchemen  had 
"aSSue?     taken  his  castel  and  slayn  his  men  /  and  cam  the  moost  hasty  wyse 
SttaMtal  he  myghte  and  assyeged  the  castel  /  and  toke  it  without  taryeng2  /  36 
Fir.  27,  bk.]  and  he  smote  of  the  3heedes  of  alle  them  that  he  fonde  /  The 
1  Orig.  goneruoure.  2  Orig.  taryeug. 


Ch.  XXV.]      How  the  IhUchmen  were  avenged.  57 

tydynge  cam  in  to  the   hoost  that  Solyman  had   slayn  alle  the 
duchemen  and  theyr  felaws  /  They  had  moche  sorow  /  and  ther  J^&l*™? 
arroos  a  grete  crye  and  grete  wepyng  in  the  lodgys  /  The  peple  {^™dare 

i  afote  toke  herof  grete  despite  emonge  them  /  And  began  to  speke  revenue, 
hrewdly  /  And  said  that  the  barons  of  the  oost  ought  not  to  suffre 
his.     But  that  they  shold  renne  a  horsbak  and  auenge  blood  of 
theyr  bretheren, 1  that  so  nygh  was  shed l  /  The  grete  men  of  thoost, 

8  that  knewe  more  of  warre  and  of  other  thynges  /  than  the  mene 
peple,  wold  haue  holden  them  in  peas  /  And  sayde  this  may  wel  be 
vet  amended  /   And  also  themperour  counceylled  /  And  it  was  The  wiser 

J  i  r  hi  oneg  wlg|,  {<, 

trouthe  /  that  they  shold  abyde  the  corny ng  of  the  grete  barons,  await  tha 
12  whiche  shold  not  longe  tarye  /  The  peple  and  the  folyssh  folke  were  great  baro™. 
not  content  with  thyse  wordes  /  But  they  had  a  Capytayne  named 
godefrey   bureau,  whiche   brought   them   in   suche   reuerye2   and 
murmur  that  they  spake  largely  and  rudely  ayenst  the  knyghtes  /  But  the 
16  And  sayde  alle  clerly  that  they  were  vntrewe  and  euyl,  and  that  obstinate, 
they  lete  not  to  auenge  this  by  wysedom  /  but  for  grete  cowardyse  / 

How  oure  men  armed  them  for  tauenge  the  duche- 
men, and  of  a  recountour  that  they  had  ayenst 
20  Solyman  /  ca°  xxv°. 

i        T  happeth  oftyme  that   the  werse  counseyl  ouercometh  the  often  bad 

rr  "  Aii  counsel  pre- 

uetter  /  And  it  is  no  meruaylle,  ffor  there  ben  more  fooles  than  vaiis  over 

'  °  good. 

wysemen.     Thyse  mene  peple,  and  without  reson,  meuyd  them  so 
24  moche  and  cryed  that  the  barons  and  other  men  that  were  with 
hem  ran  to  armes,  an  horsbak3  and  on  foote.     There  were  wel  / 
XXV  /  M.  on  foote  '  and  /  V  /  C  /  a  horsbak,  alle  wel  arrayed  /  25,000  foot- 

'  e  1       •  J     men  alld  5°° 

They  made  theyr  bataylles  /  and  wente  forth  in  ordenaunce  toward  hom  start 
28  the  montaygnes  by  the  woodes  strayt  toward  Nycene  /  They  were 
not  departed  thre  myle  whan  Solyman,  whiche  had  moche  peple 
with  hym,  apperceyued4  them  :  ffor  he  cam  alle  couerd  and  secretely 
in  the  wode  /  ffor  to  make  an  assaylle  /  in  the  oost  of  the  pylgryms  / 
32  But  whan  he  herd  the  noyse  and  thaffraye  in  the  foreste,  he  wyst 
wel  that  thei  were  the  cristere  men  that  cam  ayenst  hym,  and 
suffred  them  to  passe,  he  hym  self  with  alle  his  peple  drewe  hym 
incontinent  oute  of  the  wode  in  to  the  playn  where  as  they  shold 

l—i  Fr.  "qui  ainsi  pres  aVeulx  estoit  espandu,"  viz.  "which  was  thus 
sited  so  near  them.'"  2  Fr.  enreder'u;,  rage,  fury,  obstinacy. 

3  Orig.  borsbak.  4  Orig.  apperceyned. 


58 


Defeat  of  the  Christians.     3000  saved  by  Peter.     [Ch.  XXVI. 


passe  /  whan  oure  peple  were  yssued,  they  sewed  them  sodenly  / 
they  toke  none  hede  of  hym,  and  anon  with  their  felawship  ran 
p  leaf  28]  vpon  our  men  with  their  speres  xand  swerdes  for  tauenge  theyr 
bretheren.  The  hethen  men  sawe  on  that  other  syde  that  certaynly  4 
they  wold  fyghte  /  and  that  euery  man  dyd  his  beste  /  receyued 
them  moch  fiersly  /  the  bataylle  began  moche  crueUe  /  and  many 
were  dede  on  bothe  sydes :  and  the  bataylle  dured  longe  /  But 
solyman  had  moche  more  peple  on  horsbacke,  whom  the  pylgryms  8 
a  fote  myght  not  lenger  suffre  /  But  began  to  flee  without 
ordenaunce  /  and  were  discomfyted  /  The  turkes  folowed  them 
aftir,  sleeyng  alle  them  that  they  myght  atteyne,  tyl  they  cam  to 
theyr  lodgyng  /  There  were  slayn  Gaultier  sans  sauoyr  /  Reygnald  12 
de  broyes  and  ffoucher  dorleans,  whiche  were  good  and  valyaurct 
knyghtes  /  and  almost  alle  were  slayn  and  brought  in  to  prison  / 
ffor  of  /  XXV  /  M  men  /  and  fyue  honderd  men  on  horsbak,  coude 
not  be  founden  thre  to  gydre  /  But  that  they  were  taken  or  slayn  /  16 


A  fierce  con 

test  ensues. 


The  Turks 
ave  vietoii- 
cas. 


Soljman 
attacks  the 
Christian 
camp.    . 


SIMM)  of  the 
Crusaders 
llee  to  an  old 
fortress. 


The  Turks 
assail  them. 


Word  is  sent 
t«.  Peter  in 
Constantin- 
ople of  these 
riverses. 


How  peter  theremyte  beyng  in  constantynoble  was 
aduertysed  of  this  disconfyture  /  and  saued  thre 
thousand  cristen  men,  beyng  in  grete  daunger. 

capitulo  xxyj?  20 

t       His  vyctorye  brought  Solyman  in  in  grete  pryde,  and  in  grete 
sewrte  he  smote  in  to  the  lodgis  of  the  Cristen  men  /  where  as 
wer  lefte  thamicyent  peple,  men,  wymmen,  clerkes,  and  monkes, 
whom  he  put  alle  to  deth  /  he  fonde  maydens  and  smale  childeren,  24 
whiche  he  ledde  with  hym,  for  to  be  euer  aftir  in  seruage.     On  that 
one  side  of  the  tentes  nyghe  vnto  the  see  /  was  an  old  fortresse  for- 
leten  and  beten  doun,  in  whiche  no  man  dwelled,  nether  was  fonde 
therin  dore  ne  wyndowe  /  Theder  fiedde  of  the  pylgryms  aboute  a  28 
thre  thousand,  one  aftir  another  for  to  kepe  theyr  lyuess  /  They 
stopped  thentrees  the  best  wyse  they  myght  with  grete  tymbre  and 
trees,  and  with  grete  stones  /  The  turkes  knewe  therof  /  and  cam 
and  began  tassaylle  it  on  alle  sides  moche  anguysshously  /  They  32 
defended  them  the  best  wey  they  myghte,  ffor  they  had  grete  nede. 
whyles  they  were  thus  assaylled  /  a  messager  wente  hastely  to  peter 
theremyte,  which  was  in  constantynoble,  as  is  said  to  you  to  fore. 
This  message  said  to  hym  that  alle  his  men  were  perysshyd  /  sauf  36 
a  lytil  remenaunt,  whiche  were  at  grete  meschief  in  an  old  hows 
asyeged,  whiche  were  in  moche  grete  daunger  /  yf  they  had  not 


Ch.  XXVII.]     The  Emperor  revues  Peters  Army.  59 

hasty  socoure.     Peter  was  moche  abasshed  /  And  had  meruayl- 
lously  grete  sorowe  /  Neuerthelesse,  anon  he  ranne  to  theniperour, 
and  fyld  doun  at  his  feet,  and  prayd  hym  for  goddes  sake  and  xfor  [»  if.  28,  bk.] 
4  the  sauacion  of  his  sowle,  that  he  wold  sende  socoure  to  this  poure  t^eE.tJt^or 
peple  that  were  in  so  grete  peryll  /  that  yf  he  hasted  not  /  they  or  ie ''" 
6hold  be  alle  deed  /  Theniperour  that  moche  louyd  peter  sente  anon 
his  meesajrers  theder  /  and  commaunded  the  turkes  that  essaylled  The  Emperor 

°  '  orders  tlie 

8  them  /  shold  leue  thassault  /  and  departe  thens  /  They  wente  aweye  '^J^ 
anon  whan  they  had  herde  the  commandement  of  themperour,  But2 
they  ledde  with  them  prisonnere  ynowe  /  horses,  mules  /  and  other 
beestes  /    tentes    /    pauyllons,  and   gonnes.    and  wyth  alle   they 

12  retourned  in  to  nycene  /  here  ye  maye  here  how  so  moche  peple  ah  these  di»- 
was  loste  /  by  the  folye  of  the  moyen  peple  /  whiche  wold  not  ^^fbt{ietl,e 
haue  ne  endure  the  gouernaunce  of   the  wyse  men  aboue  them.  ~m^e°" 
Here  may  men  wel  see  that  it  is  grete  peryl  to  truste  to  the  bataylle 

16  or  warre  of  them  /  that  knowe  not  of  it  / 

How  a  preest  named  godechan  made  hym  self  cap- 
tayn  of  /  xl  /  M  /  duchemen  in  this  viage,  and 
of  theyr  oultrages  /  ca°  xxvij* 

20  8        Yth  that  Pieter  was  passed  in  to  bythme  as  I  haue  said  /  it 

was  not  longe  aftir  that  a  priest  named  Godechan3  had  prechyd  Godechan. 
in  duchelonde  /  lyke  as  peter  theremyte  had  doon  in  ffrauwee.     And  ^J^'™"',, 
cam  with  his  peple  for  to  goo  in  this  pylgremage,  ffor  he  had  wel  Ho|y  u,,d- 

24  assembled4  /  xl  /  M  /  of  duchemen.  They  entred  alle  in  to  the 
londe  of  hongrye  /  ffor  the  kyng  had  comaunded  that  they  shold  be 
receyued  debonayrly,  by  cause  it  were  his  neyghbours,  and  that5 
they  shold  vytaylle  and  other  necessytees0  at  prys  resonable.    7They  They  remain 

28  that   fonde  the  londe  right  good  began   to  abyde  there  alle  the  a"  winter. 
wynter7  /  and  for  the  ease  that  they  had  they  began  to  wexe  prowd 
In  suche  wyse  that  they  toke  away  the  vytaylles  and  other  thynges,  They  rob  and 
and  ledde  awey  the  beestes  oute  of  the.  feeldes  /  they  toke  wyues  /  ^J*"11^,,, 

32  bete  theyr  husbondes  and  slewe  them  /  and  for  noman  wold  they 

2   Oi  iff.  Bot.  s  Lat.  Qodescalcm. 

4  Fr.  et  Lat.  XV  m,  instead  of  XL  M. 

6  Caxton  has  omitted  the  verb  in  this  clause.  Fr.  "ten  leur  vendoit 
riandes,"  etc.  8  Orig.  uecessytus. 

7— 7  Caxton  here  translates  s'enycrer,  i.  e.  to  become  intoxicated,  by 
"to  pats  tlie  winter,"  evidently  mistaking  it  for  a  derivation  of  yrer, 
winter.  Fr.  "ceux  que  trouvuicnt  la  terre  moult  bonne,  ie  commencerent 
a  enycrer"  «tc. 


CO    The  King  of  Hungary  sends  Messengers  to  Godcchan.    [Ch.  XXVII. 
The  Kin*  of  leue  thise  oultrages  /  The  kynge  of  the  londe  herde  the  tydynses  of 

Hungary  _  °        '  J     °  J     J     o 

loses  kiia        this  peple,  and  was  moche  displaysyd,  and  was  moche  sory  ther- 
fore  /  And  myght  not  wyth  his  honour  no  longer  suffre  it,  lest  it 
shold  tome  to  ouermoche  hurte  of  his  londe  and  of  his  subgettes.  4 
And  dyde  do  assemble  moche  peple  on  horsbak,  and  on  fote  for 

and  proceeds  tauenge  on  thise  duchemen.  he  began  to  poursyewe  them  so  ferre, 

against  the  " 

Dutchmen,     that  he  fonde  them  right  in  the  mydle  of  his  royame  by  a  castel 

named  bellgraue  /  the  kyng  had  seen  and  also  herd  of  thoultrages  8 

that  they  had  doon  in  his  londe  whyles  he  siewed  aftir  them  /  The 

duchmen  knewe  that  the  kynge  cam  vpon  them  and  was  nyghe. 

['  leaf  29]    *and  they  knewe  wel  that  they  had  not  ben  wel  gouerned  toward 

hym  /  But  had  doon  many  ylle  tornes  and  wronges  in  his  londe,  12 
wherfor  they  had  not  deseruyd  his  grace  and  his  loue2  :  Neuirtheles 

They  are  de-  they  ran  to  armes,  and  sayde  that  they  wolde  defende  them  fro  the 

termined  to 

defend  i i.em-  hongers  /  and  wold  neuer  deye  for  nought  /  but  erst  wold  they  selle 

selves  unto  °  '  J  o        I  J 

death.  theyr  lyf  moche  dere  /whan  the  kyng  and  the  hongers  sawe  this,  16 

they  thought  that  this  peple  were  moche  stronge  and3  hardy  /  and 
there  as  alle  dispayred  /  And  sawe  that  he  myght  not  ouercome 

The  king  lias  them  without  grete  losse  of  his  peple  in  that  maner  /  and  lef  te  the 

recourse  to 

stratagem,     force  of  bataylle  /  and  toke  hym  to  subtilite  and  falshed  /  as  peple  20 

that  is  ful  of  barate  deceyte  and  trycherye.     The  kynge  and  the 
He  sends       hongers4  sente  message  to  godechan  and  to  the  grete  men  of  the 

false  messen- 

tiers  t<>         companye  for  to  deceyue  them  by  fayre  wordes  of  peas  /  and  sayd 

to  them  in  this  manere  :  24 

"  Ouer  grete  complaynte  and  moche  fowle  renomme  is  comen  to 
the  kyng  of  you,  fayr  syres  /  whiche  hath  sente  vs  hether  /  ffor  as 
he  hath  herd  saye  /  ye  haue  not  had  to  none  of  youre  hoostes  no 
fayth  ne  trouthe,  But  haue  taken  fro  them  that  they  hadde,  and  28 
haue  beten  And  slayn  them  /  ye  have  taken  their  doughters  and 
wyues,  and  doo  snche  oultrages  to  them  as  it  ought  not  to  be  sayd. 
The  marcheauntes  and  other  peple  that  ye  fynde  by  the  wayes,  be 
not  sure,  and  goo  not  quyt  fro  you,  but  be  robbed  and  pyled  /  Of  32 
whiche  thynges  the  kyng  hath  grete  clamours  aftir  him  /  Neuir- 

who  teii  him  theles  the  kyng  knoweth  wel  /  that  ye  be  not  alle  in  this  defaulte. 

doemot  mg  but  ther  ben  emong  you  many5  good  men  and  wyse  to  whom  this 

an  guilty,      folye  moche   displaysyth  /  And  the  oultrage  of  the  malefactours  36 
whiche  haue  so  angred  the  kyng  and  his  peple  /  Therfor  the  kyng 
wil  not  put  the  defaulte  of  one  partye  vpon  alle  /  ne  it  is  not  right 

2  Oriff.  lone.  3   Or'tg.  aud.  4   Orig.  hougers. 

5  Orig.  mauy. 


Ch.  XXVII.]     Godechans  Men  massacred  by  the  Hungarians.  61 

that  the  ferewe  pylgryms  shold  bye1  the  trespaa  of  the  bad  /  and  and  that  ti.e 
he  doubteth  to  take  vengeance  on  you  alle  /  wherfore  we  couwseyle  '">' |o  •»«»* 

6  J  '  J        with  the  bed; 

you  that  ye  appese  the  kynge  in  this  nianer  /  And  we  promyse 
4  you  in  good  fayth  that  ye  shal  neuer  haue  damage  /  Offre,  and 
putte2  your  bodyes  /  your  armes,  and  alle  your  thynges  in   his  that  they 
wylle  and  in  his  mercy,  without   makyng  of  ony  appoyntement tlirow  th""- 
with  hym  /  for  yf  ye  wil  not  so  doo  ye  see  wel,  ye  haue  not  the  mercy  of  the 
8  puysau/jce  ayenst  hym  /  for  ye  be  in  the  myddle  of  his  royamme, 
And  may  not  escape  hym."    Godechan  and  the  grete  men  of  his  if  not,  they 

will  all  l>e 

hoost  to  whom  this  oultrages  moche  displesyd.    and  the  l'olyes  of  destroyed. 
the  mene  peple  trusted  wel  in  the  wordes  that  they  had  brought  to 

12  them,  And  had  grete  hope  in  the  hyenes  and  mercy  of  the  kyng. 

They  called  the  peple  /  counseyled  3and  prayde  them  that  they  pif-29,  bk.j 
wolde  rendre  theyr  harnoys  /  and  put  them  in  the  mercy  of  the 
kyng  /  they  wold  not  doo  it,  and  sayde  ther  shold  neuer  come  good 

16  to  them  to  put  them  under  so  vntrew  peple.     Neuertheles,  atte 

laste  they  dyde  by  the  counseyl  and  wylle  of  the  wyse  men.    Theyr  The  pilgrims 

agree  to  give 

harnoys,  and  alle   that  they  hadde  they  delyuerd  atte  commande-  themseUes 
ment  of  the  kynge,  whan  they  supposed  thereby  to  haue  goten  king,  expect- 

«     °    '  j  rr  j  o  1Mg  mercy ; 

20  theyr  lyf  /  They  ran  to  the  deth  /  4ffor  the  hongers  assaylled  them 
anon  in  the  mydle  of  them  alle  armed  /  And  of  this  poynt  toke 
none  hede  /  they  began  to  slee4  and  smyte  of  heedes  without  de-  but  the 

,  i  ,  -i  ,         rrr,  ,  Hungarians 

mandyng  who  was  good  ne  who  was  euyL      They  slewe  so  many  slaughter 

them  all,  un- 

24  that  they  waded  in  the  blood  vnto  the  half  legge  /  it  was  sorowe  armed.  wUh- 

J  oe>     /  out  pity. 

and  pyte  to  see  theyr  bodyes  of  so  fayr  peple  slayne  in  the  stretes, 
wayes  and  feeldes  /  som  happed  tescape  that  wente  emong  the 
other,  and  retomed  in  to  theyr  contre,  and  tolde  this  meschyef  and 
28  trayson  /  by  whiche  they  taught  alle  the  pylgryms  that  they  fonde 
that  they  shold  not  truste  to  the  peple  of  hongrye  / 

How  /  C.C  /  M.  cristen  men  a  foote  and  thre.  M.  a 
horsbak   withoute5   captayn    assembled    in    this 
32  pylgremage  /  and  of  theyr  mayntene  / 

capitulo  xxviij" 

1  Fr.  comparent,  pay  for,  i.  e.  to  be  punished  for.  2   Orig.  pntte. 

4-4  Fr.  "guar  li  Hong  re  xaillirent  el  Milieu  de  eels  qui  de  ce  ne  *e 
gardoient  et  lex  commencierent  a  ocir."1  Caxton's  translation  is  very  obscure 
here  :  as  can  be  seen  from  the  Freuch,  it  was  the  Crusaders  who  were  off 
their  guard. 

6   Orig.  withonte. 


62     Christian  Pilgrims  slay  Jews,  and  go  to  Hungary.    [Ch.  XXVIII. 
Another        i        Na  litil  tyme  aftir  this  grete  occisyon  that  I  haue  said  to  fore 

company  of  . 

pilgrims  assembled  moche  grete  peple  a  foote  without  capytayne.    Neuer- 

►tarts  with-  off  fj      J 

out  a  captain,  theles  ther  were  emong  them  hye  men  and  good  knyghtes,  But1  the 
comune  peple  obeyed  them  not  /  ne  byleuyd  them  of  nothynge  /  4 
There  was  emonge  them  Thomas  de  fere,  clerembault  of  vendueyl  / 
Guillem  Carpenter.     And  the  counte  herman  /  These  peple  that 
Avere  a  foote  dyde  many  ylles  and  oultragos  by  the  waye  /  And  ther 
who  slay  all    arrose  emong  them  a  madnesse  and  a  rage  of  whiche  they  coude  not  8 
they  meet,      kepe  them  fro  sleyng  of  alle  the  Iewes  in  alle  the  wayes  and  townes 
by  whiche  they  passed  /  They  slewe  merueyllows  grete  nombre  at 
especially  in   Coleyne,  at  Magonce  /  and  in  other  places  (15)  /  In  thise  partyes  as 
Mayence.       they  wente  was  an  erle,  a  right  noble  lord  named  Emycon  /  whan  1 2 
he  sawe  this  peple  /  he  put  hym  self  in  theyr  companye  for  to  goo 
with  them  in  this  pylgremage  /  he  chastysed  not  ne  blamed  the 
mysruled  peple  /  but  entysed  them  to  doo  euyl  tornes  /  They  passed 
by  francone  and  by  baupere  so  ferre  that  they  drewe  in  te  hongrye,  16 
and  cam   in  to  a  toun  named  meeszebors.    wel  supposed  they  to 
haue  passed  in  to  hongrye  withoute  ony  gaynsayeng  /  but  whan 
p  leaf  so]    they  cam  to  the  brygge  /  it  was  deffended  them  and  2closed.    There 
fallowed:    was  a  fortresse  whiche  was  closed  on  that  one  syde  with  the  ryuer  20 
Mimgary,       °f  tne  dunoe  /  and  on  that  other  syde  with  the  ryuer  named  lintans  / 
fetafedfef    Tne  remenaunt  was  enuyronned  with  a  depe  mareys  /  within  the 
fortreslfon     fortresse  was  grete  plente  of  peple  wel  armed,  wherfore  it  was  not 

lyght  for  to  passe  that  toun  by  force  /  ffor  the  kynge  of  hongrye  24 
had  wel  vnderstande  of  the  comyng  of  this  peeple  /  whiche  were 
There  were     withoute  faylle  wel  /  CC  /  M  /  on  fote.     And  on  horsbak  were 
men  and  8000  nomoo  but  thre  thousand  /  And  doubted  moche  that  they  whan 

horsemen  in  ..  .   .        „     i  cto 

this  com-       they  were  entred  in  to  his  londe,  wolde  auenge  thoccision3  that  was  Uo 

pany. 

doon  by  falsehed  and  trayson  vpon  the  peple  of  godechan,  ffor  the 

rumoure  and  speche  was  moche  yet  of  that  fowle  and  vylanous 

fayte  thurgh  out  al  the  londe  /  They  that  sawe  that  they  myght  not 

They  begged  passe  in  to  the  londe,  prayd  them  of  the  fortresse  that  they  wold  32 

to  send  meg-   suffre  them  to  sende  messagers  to  the  kyng  of  hongrye,  for  to  requyre 

sengers  to  .  - 

the  KinB  of  his  grace  that  they  myght  passe  in  good  peas  /  and  they  wold  lodge 
them  ther  whylest  in  tho  places  that  were  ful  of  pastures  to  fore  the 
paas. 

1   Orig.  Bnt.  3  Fr.  occision,  slaughter. 


Ch.  XXIX.]     How  the  Crusaders  passed  thrmigh  Hungary.  63 

How  this  peple  began  to  destroye  the  londe  of  the 
kyng,  by  cause  he  wold  not  graunte  to  them  leue 
for  to  passe  /  ca°  xxix" 

4  a       Lytil  whyle  taryed  they  that  wente  to  the  kyng  /  but  retorned 
anon  /  ffor  they  myght  not  spede  of  such  thynges  as  they 
demanded.     The  kyn"  answerd  that  for  yefte  ne  for  prayer  shold  The  Vine 

J     °  J  r      j  would  not 

they  entre  in  to  his  londe  /  whan  they  of  the  oost,  grete  and  smale,  aiiowthemto 
8  lierd  this  /  they  were  moche  angry  /  ffor  they  had  trauaylled  and 
despended  moche  good  to  come  thedyr  /  :And  now  they  had  loost 
their  waye1  /  They  concluded  emong  them  that  they  shold  brenne 
and  destroye  the  contreye  of  the  kynge  /  as  moche  as  was  on  this 
12  syde  the  mareys  /  They  sette  fyer  on  townes,  and  toke  the  men,  TheCrawui- 

iiiiii;i  ii<  ers  desolated 

and  destroyed  alle  the  contrey  whyles  they  dyde  thus  /  the  peple  of  the  whole 
the  fortresse  cam  out,2  and  with  other  peple  of  the  kynges  to  the  revenge, 
nombre  of  /  vii  /  C  /  what3  of    knyghtes   and  other   peple  wel 
1G  armed,  and  passed  by  shippis  er  euer  the  pilgrims4  knewe  of  it  ony 
word,  and  they  sette  them  for  to  deffende  the  pylgryms  at  a  paas 
that  they  shold  not  entre.  whan  the  pylgryms  sawe  this  /  they  ran  They  conqw* 

the  Huiik>- 

vygorously  vpon  them  in  suche  wyse,  that  er  they  myght  saue  them  rians. 

20  self  they  were  slayn  alle  /  sauf  a  fewe  of  them  that  withdrewe  them 
in  to  the  mareys  /  and  hydde  them  in  the  reed  /  whan  thyse  pyl- 
gryms thus  had  the  victorye  /  they  mounted  in  moche  grete 
hardynes  /  and  said  that  by  force  they  wold  Hake  the  fortresse  of  p  if. so,  bk.i 

24  hongrye  /  and  withoute  leue  they  wold  passe  thurgh    the   londe. 
Thenne  they  began  to  somonne  and  recomforte6  euery  man  to'doo 
wel  /  "They  toke  poles  and  made  scaffholdes  moche  grete  plente7  /  TheCnmmd- 
whiche  they  sette  to  the  walles  /  And  monnted  vp  couerd  with  assail  the 

iiii  fortress, 

28  theyr  sheldes  and  targes,  and  assaylled  it  moche  h^rdely  many 
pyked  with  pykoys,  and  myned  the  walles  with  gret^e  force  that 
8thentre  semed  al  redy  for  to  entree,8  they  that  were  within  were 
nyghe  deed  for  despayer,  ffor  they  defended  slowly  as  men  affrayed 

32  in  their  hertes,  ffor  they  supposed  anon  to  be  slayn  /  and  sodenly  but  are  m* 
cam  a  fere  and  a  drede  vpon  the  hertes  of  the  pylgryms  that  wened 

1—1  Fr.  or  avoient  lew  voye  perdu,  A  {rood  example  of  Caxton's  literal 
translations,  the  meaning  being,  "  now  they  had  had  their  journey  for 
nothing."  2  Orig.  ont.  3  Fr.  "tant  chevalier  que  lergetu." 

4   Orig.  pligrims.  8  Fr.  entrerenforter. 

7—7  Fr.  Ponz  et  eschieles  Jirent  d  moult  grant  plente.     They  made  a 
great  number  of  scaffolds  and  ladders.     Lat.  pontibim  fabricati*. 
8-8  entre  should  read  entrie  and  vice  versa. 


64        Panic  among  the  French  Pilgrims,  who  are  slain.     [Ch.  XXX. 


Tlie  Hunga- 
rians are 
mucli  aston- 
ished at  the 
unexpected 
flight  of  the 
Crusaders. 


The  great 
sins  of  the 
CruRaders 
make  them 
cowardly. 


They  were 
obliged  to 
tike  a  round- 
about way. 


This  was  a 
lesson  to 
those  who 
came  after,  to 
go  more 
peaceably. 


Godfrey  of 
Boulogne 
started  the 
15th  of  Au- 
gust, 1096. 

[*  leaf  31] 


anon  to  be  slayn  /  And  neuer  was  k  no  wen  wherfore  it  was,  and 
anon  fyl  donn  fro    the   scaffoldes  /  and   taryed  not  /  but  fledde 
sodeynly  /  and  none  wyste  why  they  fledde.     The  hongers  whan 
they  sawe  this  /  myght  wyth  grete  peyne  byleue  it,  that  this  was  4 
trouthe  /  ffor  they  sawe  no  rayson  why.     Neuertheles,  whan  they 
apperceyuyd  they  descended  doun  /  and  began  to.folowe  the  chaas 
in  1suche  wyse  that  them  next  to  fore  them  were  almost  alle  taken 
and  slayn.1     In  this  auenture  was  fonden  none  other  reson  /  sauf  8 
that  the  peple  was  so  fill  of  synne  /  that  they  had  not  desernyd  the 
loue  of  our  lord  /  ne  thonoure  of  the  world  /  And  therfor  theyre 
synnes2  acowarded  them  in  suche  wyse  that  they  myght  not  doo  ne 
accomplysshe  this  grete  werke  /  whiche  they  had  nyghe  achyeued.  12 
The  erle  Emycon  cam  agayn  in  to  his  contre  with  grete  nombre  of 
peple  disconfyted  /  The  other  barons  of  ffraunce  that  I  fore  haue 
named  wente  in  to  lombardye,  and  so  in  to  puylle  /  There  had  they 
knowleche  that  somme  of  the  grete  barons  were  passed  in  to  duras,  16 
and  fro  thens  in  to  grece  /  They  wente  aftir  and  folowyd  them.     In 
this  manere  were  the  peple  of  ffraunce  disperpled  and  of  the  con- 
trees  ther  by  /  The  waye  of  hongrye  was  moche  more  strayte  and 
ner  yf  they  myght  haue  goon  it  /  3And  had  not  be  destrowbled  by  20 
theyf  folye3  /  But  the  other  that  cam  aftir  peyned  them  moche  for 
to  goo  more  wysely  and  more  in  peas. 

How  the  due  godefroy  of  boloyne  beyng  with  a  grete 

hoost  cam  vnto  hongrye,  sente  his  messagers  to  24 

the  kyng  for  to  demande  passage  / 

capitulo  xxx° 

c       Omen  was  the  moneth  of  anguste,  in  the  yere  of  thyncarnacion 

of  our  lord  /  M  /  lxxxxvj  /  the  xv  /  day  of  the  same  moneth,  28 
The  valyauwt  godefroy  of  buyllon,  due  of  loraygne,  assembled  them 
4  that  shold  be  his  felawes  in    this  iourneye  /  And  cam  fro  his 
contrey  with  so  grete  apparayllement   as   it   apperteyned   to   his 
estate  /  with  hym  Bawdwyn  his  brother  /  Bawdwyn,  the  Erie  of  32 

l— *  Fr.  "  telement  que  cenx  qui  vng  port  decant  estoient  presqne  mors 
on  print  Occident  ores  les  autre*."  Cnxton  has  not  at  all  understood  his 
French  here.  He  seems  to  have  mistaken  decant  for  a  preposition,  and  to 
have  translated  the  rest  of  the  sentence  accordingly. 

2   Orig.  synues. 

3-3  Fr.  usi  cevx  qui  avant  estoient  alles  ne  Venssent  si  destot/ibe  par 
leur/olie,"  if  those  who  had  gone  in  advance  had  not  by  their  folly  closed  it. 


Ch.  XXXI.]     Godfrey  sends  Messengers"  to  the  King  of  Hungary.    65 

henawde  /  Huge,  the  Erie  of  seynt  pol  /  Euerard  his  sone,  which 
was  a  moche  valyaunt1  yonge  man.  Garnyer  the  Erie,  suraamed  of 
grees  /  Bernard,  the  Erie  of  Toul  /  Pieter  his  brother  /  Bauwdwyn 
4  de  hors,  cosyn  to  the  due  /  Henry  dasque  /  godefroy  his  brothor, 
And  many  other  good1  knyghtes  with  them  /  Thise  men  were  so 
good  frendes  emonge2  them,  and  so  wyse  men,  that  in  no  wyse  they 
wold  departe  that  one  fro  that  other  /  they  cam  alio  hool  with  their  The v  arrive 

r  in  Austria 

8  thynges  in  to  Osteryche  the  /  xx.  daye  of  scpteinhre  vnto  a  town  themiiof 
which  is  named  tayllenborch,  there  renneth  a  ryuer  named  lyntans, 
and  departed  thempyre  of  allemaygne  fro  the  royamme  of  hongrye  / 
whan  they  were  comen  theder,  they  had  herd!  by  the  waye  ctiyl 
12  tydynges  of  the  grete  mesauentures,  that  Godechan  and!  his  peple 
had  in  hongrye  /  They  assembled?  and  toke  counseyl  emonge  them  / 
how  they  myght  passe  this  contre  in  peas  /  They  alle  acorded"  that  They  sent 

J        J  °        r  xiv  messengers 

they  shold  sende  messagers  &  lettres  vnto  the   kyng  of  hongrye  io  the  King 

J  °  "     °  ol  Hungary. 

16  for  to  demande  first  /  by  what  reason  theyr  felaws,  the  pylgryms 
whiche  were  theyr  bretheren  were  thus  perysshedf  in  his  power  and 
his  londe'/  Aftir  this  they  encharged  the  messagers  that  they  shold 
entre  with  hym  in  to  co?/mwicacion,3  that  they  myght  passe  his 

20  Royamme  seurly  and  in  peas  /  And'  that  herin  they  put  them  in 
deuoyr  and  payne  /  ffor  this  waye  was  for  them  moche  shorte  /  and 
more  couenable  yf  they  myght  haue  it  /  than  for  to  passe  by  see  / 
In  this  message  wente  godefroy  dasque,  brother  of  henry,  by  cause  Godfrey 

iii  ;  d'Asquelml 

24  he  had  long  to  fore  ben  acqueyntetr  with  the  kynge  of  hongrye  /  charge  or  the 

°  *      "  embassy. 

with  hym  they  sente  other  wyse  men  /  They  wente  so4  fer  that 

they  fonde  the  kyng,  And  salewed  hym  in  the  name  of  hem  that  They  salute j 

J  JO'  J  the  king  and. 

sente  them,  And  delyuerd  their  lettres  of  credence  /  And  aftir  sayd  delivered 

>  J  i  i       their  nies- 

28  to  hym  thyse  wordes.  Bage- 


How  the  messagers  of  the  due  godefroy  declared  their 
message  vnto  the  kyng  of  hongrye  /  And  ther 
vpon  his  answere  /  ca"  xxxj? 

32  "t     He  wyse  man  &  noble  Godefroy,  Due  of  lorayne,  And  the 
other  prynces  that  with  hym  come  in  pylgremage  /  haue  sente 
vs  now  vnto  you,  And  by  you  wolde  knowe  by  what  occasion  the  Ther  asked 

J         '  J    J  i/i  the  king  why 

other  pylgryms,  whom  they  helde  for  felaws  andf  bretheren  /  haue  he  had  siaiu 

*J    °   J  '  J  '  their  telhiw- 

36  so  cruelly  be  slayn  and  smeton  in  pieces  in  your  power  /  Wei  they  pilgrims. 
i . 
1   Orlg.  valvnuut.         -   Or'ig.  emonge.         3  Oi'ig.  coicacion. 
4    Orig.   fo. 
CODFREY.  F 


qq  The  King  replies.  [Ch.  XXXI. 

knowe  and  sende  you1  worde  that  they  haue  ben  so  slayn,  ffor 
[Mf.si.bk.]  2  they  haue  fonden  many  of  them  that  ben  escaped  /  Moche  they 
™7gwdrvel  meruaylle  how  ye  and  your  peple,  which  ben  cristen  as  ye  saye  / 
co^d'iode-  haue  thus  destroyed  the  good  companye,  whiche  for  to  enhau/tse  the  4 
wi,oyi^°ieft  fayth  of  Ihesu  Crist  ben  departed  out  of  theyr  contre  /  in  suche 
toenilXT  wyse  that  the  most  mortal  enemyos  that  they  haue,  had  not  don 
ci?rut.tU  °f  werse  /  They  desire  moche  to  knowe  yf  it  were  by  the  defaulte  of 
They  wish  to  the  pyigryma ;  ffor  yf  ye  haue  doon  it  by  Iustyce,  or  in  deffendyng  8 
«*» thefaHit  u  an(j  y0Ure  londes  /  or  other  wyse  that  they  wold  enforce  and 
?rimB-  take  ony  thyng*  away  yf  it  were  so  /  The  due  and?  his  felaws  wold? 

take  it  more  lightly  /  But  yf  it  be  doo  without  their  trespaas,  or  for 
hate  that  ye  had  to  them  /  and  thus  murdred  them,  they  that  seute  12 
vs  hether,  lete  you  wete  by  vs  that  they  haue  lefte  theyr  owne 
countreyes  for  tauenge  the  wronges  and  the  oultrages  that  haue  ben 
don  to  the  peple  of  oure  lord1  /  And?  yf  they  tinde  that  ye  haue  so 
doo  /  they  be  not  in  wylle  to  passe  ferther,  tyl  they  haue  to  theyr  16 
power  auenged?  the  deth  of  the  pylgryms  of  our  lord!."   And?  herwith 
godefroy,  that  acounted  to  the  kyng,  made  an  ende  of  his  wordes. 
ThekinR,  The  kyng  was  in  his  palays,  where  he  had  grete  plente  of 

by^ubaron..,  barons  of  his  Royamme  ami  of  other  peple,  thenne  answerd?  and  20 
"Tplelieth   sayde  :  "  Godefroy,  it  plesyth  me  moche  that  ye  be  come  in  to  this 
thauito'^lrt  contrey  for  to  speke  to  me  /  It  is  a  moche  good  thyng  for  me  for 
STgiadnto     two  causes  /  that  one  is  that  ye  be  of  myn  acqueyntaimce  and  my 
ofy  exaue.     frende  lonce  syth  /  And  we  shal  afferme  and?  renewe  our  loues  and  24 
our  acqueyntaunces  in  this  youre  comyng.    That  other  cause  is  that 
I  knowe  you  to  be  a  man  wyse,  resonable,  &  of  good  wille  /  and 
am  moche  ioyous  of  this  that  ye  shal  here  my  excusacion  /  trouthe 
it  is  that  we  haue  the  name  of  the  cristiente  /  it  were  &  shold?  be  28 
moche  fayr  to  vs  yf  we  had?  the  werkes  /  But3  they  that  ben  passed? 
tofore  with  peter   theremyte   and  with   godechan,  haue  not  the 
we  received   werkes  of  pylgryms  ne  of  cristen  men  /  ffor  we  receyuyd?  peter 
menk?udiy.i9  theremyte  &  his  peple  in  oure  londes  and  in  our*  townes  with  32 
grete  debonayrte,  And  departed  with  them  oure  vytaylles :  and* 
other  thynges  we  gaf  to  them  /  But  they,  lyke  as  the  serpent  that 
prycketh  or  styngeth  hym  that  kepeth  hym  warme  in  his  hosomme  / 
Thdy  repaid    hath   guerdonned   &  rewarded  vs   for   our   good   dedes  /  for   in  36 
g«Titude""     thende  of  the  royamme  of  hongrye  /  whan  they  ought  to  thanke  vs 
and?  rendre  graces  to   god?  &  to  theyr  frendes  /  They  toke  by  force 
one  of  oure  best  castellis  /  And  put  to  deth  alle  that  were  therin, 
i   Orig.  yon.  3  Orig.  Bnt.  4  Orig.  onr. 


Ch.  XXXI.]     The  King  sends  Messengers  to  Godfrey.  67 

and  caryed  the  beestys  with  them  /  they  toke  alle  the  maydens  of 
the  town  lyke  rowters  &  theues.  The  company  of  godechan  cam 
after  them  /  they  abode   not  lio  forfaytte  til  the  ende  of  our    ptaraq 

4  Royamme  /  but  assone  as  they  were  entred  and  passed  the  yates  of  Jfh(*^™,^T 
liongrye,  they  began  to  make  alle  thoultrages  they  myghte  /  They  fo^e?" 
brente  the  townes,  slewe  the  men  /  enforced  the  wymmen  /  ami 
bare   away  alle   thynges  /  they  dyde   so   moche,  that  for   theyr 

8  trespaces  were  wel  worthy  to  haue  hate  of  god  &  of  the  world  / 
we  that  be  here  in  the  place  &  in  the  dygnyte  /  by  whiche  we 
ought  to  kepe  the  peple  /  as  long1  as  it  shal  please  god  /  and1  our 
barons  that  haue  sworn  the  feaulte  of  the  Royalme,  myght  not  wel 
12  endure2  thus  to  destroye  our  peple  and  our  contrey,  but  haue  put 
to  the  hand  by  force  in  vs  defendyng  /  The  thyrde  companye  cam 
also  with  folke  a  foote  /  we  doubted?  the  noyse  and  debate  in  suche  Tneti.ird 

company  we 

wyse  /  that  we  wold  not  suffre  them  entre  in  to  our  londe  ne  come  w..ui.t  not 

J        i  allow  to  enter 

16  emonge  vs  /  Our  lord,  that  Iugeth  alle  the  wordes  &  knoweth  alle  ourUnd." 
thyng,  wote  wel  that  it  is  thus,  and  that  I  haue  lyed  to  you  no 
worde.    Now  we  praye  you  that  ye  excuse  vs  oueraal  where  ye  shal 
here  speke  of  it "  /     whan  he  had*  saidf  this,  he  sente  the  messagers 

20  in  to  theyr  Innes  /  where  they  had1  moche  grete  honour  and1  grete 

feste  /  The  kvng  toke  counseyl  of  his  barons  /  and  ordeyned!  his  Tiie  un*  Bent 

I  J     o  J  i  j  return  me»- 

owne  messagers,  whiche  he  sente  to  the  due  godefroy  and!3  to  the  g*WJ^*5 
prynces  that  cam.     He  had  spoken  ynowgh  to  godefroy  dasque  /  *">▼> 

24  and  made  hyra  grete  chere  /  and  gaf  to  hym  and  his  felawshippe 
yeftes  /  And4  aftir  toke  leue  of  him  and5  retornedf  al  to  gydre  with 
the  messagers  /  whan  they  were  comen  to  fore  the  due  godeffoy  / 
one  of  them  sayd  the  message  in  this  manere :  "  The  kyng  of 

28  hongrye  salewcth  you,  my  lordes  /  And1  sendeth  yow  worde  that  he 
knoweth  certaynly  by  renomme  that  ye  be  a  man  of  moche  bye 
lygnage,  puyssuuwt6  of  peple,  wyse  and  trewe  of  herte,  prudent  and 
valyaunt  of  body  /  in  suche  wyse  that  your  prouesse  is  born  in  to 

32  many  londes  /  ffor  thyse  thynges  our  lord1  the  kynge,  whiche  neuer 
sawe  yow,  preyseth  and1  loueth  yow  moche  in  his  herte  /  Andf  hath 

moche  grete  desire  to  doo  you  honoure  /  These  pylgryms  that  ben  bearing  G«d- 

iii  i_    frey  aild  ,,i9 

with  you  /  And  that  haue  enterprysed  so  hye  a  pylgremage  he  valiant  com- 

36  preyseth  moche  /  and  desyreth  moche  to  see  them,  and1  to  worshippe,  TfattMm. 

and  to  haue  theyr  acqueyntaunce  :  ffor  he  holdeth  hym  self  ewrous 

and  gracious  that  our  lord  hath  sette  hym  in  such  a  poyut,  that  he 

2    Oi'ig.  eudure.  3   Oi'ig.  aud.  *    Orig.  Aud.  6    Orig   aud. 

0    Orig.  pnyssauwt, 

y  2 


68  Godfrey  traverses  Hungary  peacefully.     [Ch.  XXXII. 

may  doo  seruyse  and?  bounte  to  one  so  valyaunt1  a  man.  Therfore 
vnto  you,  fayr  lord,  and  to  the  hye  men  of  your  companye  he 
prayeth,  requyreth  and!  demandeth  for  a  synguler2  yefte,  that  it 
He  begs  them  wold  plese  you3  to  come  see  hym  at  one  his  castel  named*  Ciperon  /  4 
i.is  castie  of  ff or  he  desireth  moche  to  speke  to  you  at  leyser  /  and  doo  that  ye 
wille  demaunde." 

♦  if.  32,  bk.] 4  How  the    said  kynge  sente  for  to  fetche  the  due 
godefroye  /   And  how  he  wente  /  and  of  the  8 
deuyses  that  they  had  to  gydre  /        cap0  xxxij 

w      Han  the  due  and  his  barons  had1  herd  the  messager  thus  speke, 

he  drewe  them  a  parte  and*  toke  counseyl  /  They  acorded?  wel 

that  the  due  shold1  goo.     he  sente  for  suche  companye  as  he  wold!  1 2 

The  duVe      haue  /  And!  wente  forth  with  thre  honderd  horse,  withoute  moo,  on 

horsemen  to   his  way  /hit  was  not  long  but  he  cam  to  aperon  /  he  passed!  the 

brygge  /  and  fonde  the  kynge,  whiche  made  to  hym  grete  ioye  and 

moche  honour.     And!  long  they  spak  to  gydre  /  And  the  kynge  16 

excused"  hym  of  the  deth  of  the  pylgryms  /  vnto  the  due  /  lyke  as 

he  had!  doon  to  the  messagers  /  At  thende  the  kyng  cam  so  to  poynt 

The  king  ac-  that  they  were  appeased  goodly  /  The  kyng  acorded  to  hym  the 

cords  them  .  ";  , 

safe  passage    passage  thurgh  his  royamme  /  yf  he  wold!  sette  hym  suche  hoostages,  20 
land-  as  he  shold  chese  for  to  kepe  the  pees  /  Alle  this  was  grounted!  / 

But  demands  And  he  demanded  in  hostage  Bawdwyn,  brother  of  the  sayd  due,   ;  . 

Baldwin  and  -  -  _      _ 

his  wire  as      his  wyf  and?  her  maygne  /  they  were  delyuerd  to  hym  gladly.     Ihus 

entred  they  with  alle  theyr  peple  in  to  the  lond  of  hongrye  /  The  24 
kynge  helde  to  them  wel  his  couenauntes  /  ffor  he  dyde  doo  crye  in 
alle  the  townes  as  they  shold!  passe  /  and  .also  thereby  that  they 
shold!  selle  to  them  vytaylles  good*  cheep  /  and!5  that  noman  shold 
meue  to  them  no  debate  /  The  due  commanded  also  and!  made  to  be  28 
cryed,  that  none  on  payne  of  his  lyf  were  so  hardy  to  take  ony 
thynge  fro  the  lond*  ne  fro  no  man  /  ne  for  to  doo  no  wronge,  but 
holde  them  for  felawes  and!  bretheren  /  Thus  it  happed!  that  they 
passed1  alle  hongrye  without  ony  maner  stryfor  noyse.     The  kynge  32 
rode  alwey  nyghe  to  thooste,  on  the  lyfte  syde  /  ledyng1  his  hostages 
Thev  arrive    with  hym,  redy  for  tappese  yf  ony  noyse  arroos  /  Atte  laste  they  jc' 
"ev?iie,aon  the  cam  to  malleuylle,  wherof  ye  haue  herd"  to  fore,  whiche  stondeth  on 

the  ryuer  of  the  dunoe  /  There- they  taryed!  tyl  alle  the  hoost  were  36 

1   Orig.  valyauut        2  Orig.  singnler  :  Fr.  sivgulier  don,  as  a  special  favor. 
3  Orig.  j'on.  6  Orig.  aud. 


Ch.  XXXIII.}  They  arrive  at  Nissa.  69 

passed!  by  sliippes  /  wherof  were  but  fewe  /  But  to  fore  he  had  don 
sette  ouer  /  a  thousand  men  wel  armed  for  to  kepe  the  arryuyng  on 
that  other  syde.     whan  the  hoost  of  the  comyn  peple  were  passed,  when  the 

J  *       *    *  .       *  pilgrims  had 

4  the  kyng  cam   to  the  due  and   to  the  barons,  and  brought  the  *li'ecr^e8reU 
hostages  Hhat  were  delyuerd!  to  hym1  /  he  made  to  them  moclie  ^rnke^llreefr 
ioye  and  honour  at  departyng,2  and1  gaf  to  euerych  grete  yeftes  and  "ostages. 
ryche.     Aftir  he  toke  leue,  and  retorned  home  ageyn  /  The  due 

8  and  the  barons  passed1  ouer  with  their  peple  /  and  cam  to  belle- 
graue,  a  cyte  of  bougrye,  of  whiche  we  haue  spoken  to  fore  /  And 
there  they  lodged1  3them  /  After  they  passed  thurgh  the  wodes  /  til    E3  leaf  ss] 
they  cam  to  the  cyte  of  nyz,  and  after  to  stralyce  / 

12  How  the  due  godeffroye  sente  his  messagers  to  them- 
perour  of  constantinoble,  to  thende  that  he  shold 
delyuer  huon  le  mayne  and  other,  that  he  helde 
in  prison.  cap?  xxxiij° 

16  h       Ere  may  be  knowen  the  euyl  disposicion  and  deceyte  of  the 
grekes  /  ffor  syth  themperours  latyns  faylled  in  constanty- 
nople  /  and  them  pyre  cam  vnto  the  grekes  /  of  whom  the  fyrst  was 
nycofores.4     Anon  the  barbaryns  that  were  aboute  them,  the  blacz  The  niacz, 

Comana  and 

20  and  the  comans,5  they  of  bougrye,  6 which e  ben  toward  the  eest,b  Bulgarians 

'  J  o  J    >  'had  con- 

supprised  and  toke  thyse  londes  that  were  so  good,  plentyuous  /  quered  aii 
and  delytable  /  And  conquerd  alle  fro  the  dunoe  vnto  constanty-  £°™^et0 
nople,  And  on  that  other  parte  vnto  the  see  Adryane  /  7 There  is  ^n,setanti" 

2-1  a  cyte  in  lombardye,  nygh  to  the  londe  of  the  marquys,8  named  There  u  a 
Adre  /  &  is  right  a  litil  cyte  /   But  by  cause  it  is  nyghe  the  see  of  bardy  called 
venyse  and!  of  Ancone,  hath  this  see  the  name  of  the  see  Adryane  Fromthi8 
in  wrytyng.7     This  see  goth  right  nygh  constantynoble  /  vnto  a  /  a'uc  La  takes" 

28  xxx  /  myle.     This  euyl  peple  of  thempyre  of  constantynoble  had18name' 
wel  wonne9  vpon  the  grekes  /  xxx.  journeyes  of  lengthe,  And  x  of 

1-1  Fr.  quit  leur  rendit.  Caxton  has  here  exactly  reversed  the  meaning' 
of  his  French  text. 

*  Orig.  departyug.  4  Lat.  Kyccphorut. 

5  These  two  nations  inserted  by  the  French  translators.  They  are  not 
in  the  Latin  original. 

6—6  Fr.  qui  leur  sont  devert  Vise, — towards  the  North  ;  Lat.  septen- 
trioiialis. 

7-7  This  whole  sentence  is  an  insertion  by  a  French  translator. 

8  Caxton  has  spoiled  the  sense  by  his  omission  here.  The  French  text 
gives  "pres  de  la  terte  le  Marquis  (PEest,  qui  a  non  Adre"  viz.  near  the 
land  of  the  Marquis  of  Este,  which  is  called  Adre.  9  Orig.  wonuc. 

8 


70  They  traverse  many  Countries.     [Ch.  XXXIII. 

brede  /  ffor  aboue  this  see  that  1  haue  spoken  of,  is  *a  countre 
The  chief  named  Epyre.1  The  chyef  cyte  is  named  duras  /  of  whiche  pyrrus 
i»li>un».p  ™8  was  somtyme  kynge.    2An  other  is  named1  Mayene2  /  that  is  in  the 

ntyddle  of  the  londe3  /  where  ben  also  noble  Cytees  /  Nyz  andf  4 
intMsiMd    stralyce  /  In  this  londe  was  Archade  /  Thessale  /  and  machedone  / 
diB.TheeJSyl  4Of  thyse  thre  landes  euerych  was  called  Trace4  /  And  alle  thise 
*?a.    "         were   conquerd   vpon  the  grekes  /   But  afterward   ther  was   an 
The  Emperor  Emperour  named  Basilie  recouerdf  thise  londes,  5And  brought  the  8 
conquered      blacz  and  the  bougres  longe  afore  this  tyme  /  in  suche  wyse  that 

these  coun-  .     .  , 

tries.  the  two  danemarches  were  comen  agayu  to  his  power0  /  but  yet 

wold  not  the  grekes  suffre  to  repayre  agayn  the  townes  /  ne  laboure 
the  lo??des,  which  shold  be  right  good,  to  thende  that  none  shold  12 
enhabyte  there,  By  cause  they  holde  it  for  a  strengthe  /  And  that 
nothyng  shold  be  fonde  therin  /  Also  in  espyre,  whiche  extendeth 
fro  duras  vnto  a  mount  named1  bagulars  /  And  endureth  foure 
The  duke       iourneyes  :  by  that  passed!  the  other  barons  /  But  the  Due  and  his  16 
fhnmjfh        companye   passed?  by  danemarche  la  Mayen  /  whiche  is  named1 
otherwyse  Mese  /  They  cam  by  a  destrayte,  whiche  is  named!  the 
Cloystre  of  seynt  Basyle  /  And1  syth  they  descended  in  to  a  playne  / 
[« if.  S3,  bk.j  Where  they  fonde  grete  flplente  of  vytaylle  and  of  pastures  /  And  20 

cam  vnto  Asine  pol,  whiche  is  a  moche  fayr  cyte  and  good  /  There 

AtAsinopie    herd  they  saye  and  trouthe  it  was  /  that  themperour  of  constanty- 

tha[thTGre.  noble  had  enprisonned  huon  le  mayne  /  broder  of  the  kynge  of 

iMdinmST"  ffraunce,  and  many  other  barons  that  cam  with  hym ;  ffor  thise  24 

the  Great,      noble  men  were  hasty,  and  cam  by  lombardye  in  to  puylle  /  ffro 

thens  they  passed  to  duras  /  And  soiourned  for  tabyde  the  other 

barons  /  whiche  ought  to  come  in  to  tho  partyes  /  ne  they  supposed 

to  haue  doubted  ony  thyng  in  the  londe  of  the  grekes,  that  were  28 

cristen  as  they  were  /  But  the  baylly  of  duras  toke  alle  the  moost 

*-*  Fr.  a  deux  terres,  de  quoi  cJiaxcune  a  non  Espire.  Lat.  gvper 
Adriaticuni  cnim  mare  erat  ntraque  Epirus,  cvjvt  altering  metropolis  est 
Durarhinm. 

2~2  Fr.  "  en  la  terre  on  ees  pelerint  pastoient  aroit  deux  Danemarcliex. 
L'vne  avoit  non  de  Ripe  (Lat.  Dacia  Ripengis)  qui  est  a  senestre  gvr  la 
rice  de  la  Dunoe  Vantre  est  nommt  la  Maienne."  Caxton  has  ruined  the 
sense  here  by  his  omissions.  3  Lat.  "Dacia  mediterranean 

*-*  Fr.  "et  troig  terreg  dont  cliegcun  aroit  non  Trace"  Caxton's 
translation  again  faulty. 

6— 5  A  "  il  cJiaca  leg  Blag  et  leg  Bougreg  bien  loin  «i  que  leg  Danemarches 
U  remestrent."  The  text  B  that  Caxton  followed  gives  acltata,  which  is 
evidently  a  corruption  of  clia^a,  and  the  "brought"  may  be  a  misreading 
for  "bought."  The  Lat.  gives  " eodem  Bulgarornm  guhjvgato  popvlo  per 
Rasili  urn." 


Cli.  XXXIV.]     Tlie  Emperor  has  imprisoned  Hugh  the  Great.         71 

grete  barons,  and  scnte  them  in  yrons  to  themperour  of  Constanty-  The  bailiff  of 
noble  to  doo  Ins  wylle  with  them  /  he  helde  them  in  prison,  and  aii  the  great 

J  >  r  '  barons,  who 

abode  tlie  comym*  of  the  other  barons  /  by  cause  yf  they  cam  with  were  with 

*     °  I       j  J  J  \um,  m  irons 

4  grete  power  he  wolde  delyuer  them  for  theyr  loue  /  and  yf  they  cam  ^0c£n*Unti" 
not  with  grete  myght  he  thought  not  lyghtly  to  lete  them  passe, 
whan  the  due  godefroye  and  the  other  barons  herd  tydynges  of  this 
prisonment  /  he  toke  good  messagers,  and  sente  them  with  theyr 

8  lettres  to  themperour.     And  they  prayde  and  warned  hym  that  he  Godfrey  sent 
shold  sende  to  them  without  delaye  this  hye  and  noble  man  huon  peror  »n<i 

•  it  warned  him 

le  mayne  and  alle  his  companye  /  ffor  they  helde  hym  for  lordes,  to  release 
bretheren  and1  felaws  of  this  pylgremage.     And  herin  he  had  don  men- 
12  more  his  wylle  and  his  force  than  right  /  whan  he  had  reteyned 
one  so  gentil  and  hye  prynce. 

How  the  due  godefroye  constreyned  themperour  by 
force  to  rendre  and  delyuere  his  prisonners  / 
16  capitulo  xxxiiij* 

i        N  this  tyme  was  Emperour  a  greke,  moche  fals  and  ful  of  Alexius  the 

■l  •  /~i  tireek  Einpe- 

tricherye,  and  was  named  alexes,  and  to  his  surname  Conius  /  ror  was  false 

J    '  '  '  and  full  of 

he  was  moche  acqueynted  and  pryue  with  that  other  Emperour  trickery. 

20  Nychofores  bothoniat, in  suche  wyse  that  he  made  hym  his  steward/ 
And  was  the  grettest  man  of  the  londe  sauf  themperour.  He  by 
his  malyce  purchaced  euyl  and  harme  ayenst  his  lorde,  by  thassent 
of  grete  peple  that  he  helde  aboute  hym,  and  toke  hym  and  helde 

24  hym  in  his  prison  vj  yere  tofore  that  our  pilgryms  cam  theder  / 
The  messagers  of  the  Due  and  the  other  barons  demanded  of  this 
Emperoure  Huon  le  Mayne,  lyke  as  they  were  commaunded,  and 
the  other  prysonners  /  in  lyke  wyse  /  Themperour  answerde  shortly  He  sent  wont 

to  Godfrey 

28  that  he  wold  not  delyuere  them  /  They  retourned2  in  to  the  hoost,  ihatiiewoui 

not  release 

and  said  to  them  thansuer  of  themperour.     3whan  the  due  &  the  the  barons. 
other  barons  herd  this,  they  were  moche  wroth,  And  concluded    p  leaf  ^ 
cmong  them  by  theyr  counseyl  /  that  they  wold  playnly  make 
32  warre  ayenst  hym  /  that  dyde  so  grete  oultrage  to  holde  so  hye  a 
prynce  in  prison,  ne  wolde  not  answere  by  mesure  ne  reason  /  They 
habandonned  to  the  hooste  to  take  in  that  contre  where  they  were  Thedukewas 
in,  Alle  that  they  coude  fynde,  And  brente  alle  the  townes  /   Thus  and  com- 

.  menced  to 

36  abode  they  in  thise  partyes,  and  destroyed  alle  the  contre  /  And  ravage  the 
dyde  moche  grete  dommage  and  harme  :  and  grete  plente  of  proyes  country. 

1  Orig.  nnd.  2  Orig.  retourued. 


72  The  Emperor  releases  Hugh.       [Ch.  XXXV. 

and  other  gaynes  cam  in  to  the  hoost  of  the  barons  /  Themperour 

sente  vnto  the  due  and  vnto  the  other  barons  /  that  they  ahold  doo 

The  Emperor  holde  theyr  peple  in  pees,  And  that  he  wold  delyuere  huon1  le2 

to  release       niayne  and  the  other  prisonners.     They  agreed  and  acordid  gladly,  4 

Great,  and      And  cam  with  alle  theyr  bataylles  rented  and  in  ordenaunce  to  fore 

the  other  J  J  ° 

prisoners.  constantynoble,  as  for  tassiege  the  toun.  Anon  yssued  oute  huon 
the  mayne,  doene  daucelle3  /  Guyllame  charpentier,  Clarembault 
de  venduel  /  And  entred  in  to  the  pauyllon  of  the  Due  /  And  8 
thanked  hym  moche  and  alle  the  other  of  theyr  delyueraunce  / 
And  the  due  and  the  hooste  receyued  them  with  moche  grete  ioye  / 
ffor  they  had  moche  grete  angre  and  grete  despite  of  that  was  don 
to  them.  If 2 

The  grete  despyte  that  themperour  toke,  that  due 
gc-deffroy  reffused  to  goo  in  to  constawtinoble4 
vnto  hym.  cap"  xxxv 

w      Hyles  they  spak  thus  to  gydre,  cam  the  messagers  fro  them-  1C 
perour  to  the  due,  And  requyred  them  in  theyr  lordes  name 

that  he  wold  entre  with  a  fewe  of  his  companye  in  to  the  toun  / 
The  Duke  re-  And  come  speke  with  themperour  /  The  due  had  counseyl  herupon, 
theeKmpe'ror.  and  answerd5  /  that  he  wold  not  yet  come  in  to  the  toune.     whan  20 

themperour  herd  this,  he  had  therof  moche  grete  despite,  And 
inconse-  deffended  oueral  that  ther  shold  nomore  vytaylle  be  sold  to  them, 
Kmperor  for-  ne  none  other  thynges.     The  noble  men  sawe  this,  and  sente  out 

bade  any  one  ,   .      ,  i  .    •  n      nj 

to  sen  vie-      on  fouragvnu  ouer  alle  the  countrey.     And  they  brought  in  vytaylle  2i 

t  nils  to  til© 

pilgrims.  „rete  plente,  in  suche  wyse  that  they  had  ynowgh,  poure  and  ryche. 
grims6 forage  Theniperour  sawe  that  this  contre  shold  be  destroyed  /  and  doubted 
selves!™1"       that  they  wold  yet  doo  werse  /  therfor  he  commanded  to  his 

marcheauntes  that  they  shold  goo  in  to  the  hooste  and  selle  to  them  28 
suche  thynge  as  they  neded.  The  daye  of  Cristemasse  or  of  the 
Natyuite  of  oure  Lord  approched  /  Therfore  the  Due  and  the 
Barons  dyde  do  crye  in  the  hooste  /  that  no  man  shold  forfaytte  ne 
[«if.34#bk.]  trespace  in  tho  foure  dayes  /  The  mene  whyle  cam  the  6 messagers  32 
JendsEinese-,or  of  themperour,  that  spak  to  the  barons  moche  fayr,  that  they  wold 
"oXl"  Passe  the  Drygge  and?  come  on  tne  BJ&G  °*  ^e  Pa^ays  whiche  was 

1  Orig.  hnon.  2  Orig.  te. 

3  Caxton's  French  text  gives  Doene  Dancelle,  which  he  follows.    This  is, 
however,  a  corruption  of  Drette  de  Neele,  Lat.  Drogo  de  Neela. 

4  Orig.  constatinoble.  6   Orig.  auswerd. 


i-engers  : 


Ch.  XXXVI.]     A  Description  of  Constantinople.  73 

named  blaquerne,  ilbr  there  in  yght  alle  the  hooste  lodge  in  grete 
howses  whiche  were  nygh  the  braas  of  seynt  george.     And  alle  this 
said*  tlxey  for  trieherye  and  deceyte.    Neuertheles1  our  peple  byleuyd 
4  them  lyghtly  /  ffor  the  wynter  was  moche  cold  and  sharpe  of  raynes  The  winter 
and  snowes,  in  suche  wyse  that  the  pauyllons  roted,  and1  ne  myght  and  rainy, 
not  hold  out  the  water  of  the  rayne  /  the  horses  and  poure  peple  army  *""• 

J  '  w  m    *        very  imvom- 

niyght  not  endure2  it.     herof  toke  themperour  his  occasion  for  to  £r£Wein 
.8  sende  in  to  the  hoost  /  and  that  they  shold  passe  toward  the  town :  sotney  ac- 

1/1,1.  •  cepted  the 

and  semed  that  he  had  grete  pyte  on  them  /  but  his  entencion  was  Emparor-Bin- 

°  rJ  '  iiii  Titatlon  and 

alle  other  wyse  /  ffor  he  dyde  this  to  thende  that  he  shold  enclose  came  into  the 

J        I  J  _  town. 

them  in  a  place  more  strayt,  that  they  shold  not  renne  in  to  the 
12  contre,  And  that  he  myght  haue  the  gretter  power  to  constrayne 
them  therin. 

Of  the  descripcion  of  constantinoble  /  And  of  many 
countrees  and  londes  ther  aboute. 
16  capitulo  xxx vj° 

f        Or  to  vndevstonde  how  the  barons  were  enclosed  by  the  des- 
loyaulte  of  themperour  /  it  is  to  wete  how  the  cyte  of  con- 
stantinoble stondeth  /  the  see  whiche  is  in  venyse  cometh  nygh  How  the  city 

20  vnto  /  xxx  myle  of  constantinoble  /  ffor  thens  departeth  an  arme  »opie  u  Bitu- 
like  a  fresshe  water,  And  estendeth  it  toward3  the  eest,  in  lengthe  / 
ij  /  C  /  xxx  /  myle  /  it  is  not  lyke4  euen  /  ffor  in  somrae  place 
it  is  but  a  myle  broode,  And  in  another  it  is  wel  xxx  /  of  brede 

24  or  more  /  after  the  places  that  it  renneth   in.     And  it  renneth  The  arm  or 

the  sea  run- 

bytwene  thyse  two  Auncyent  cytecs,  Sexton  and  Abydon,  of  whiche  neth  between 
that  one  is  in  asye  /  And  that  other  in  europe  /  5n"or  the  arme  is  Abjdos. 
deuyded  fro  thyse  two  londes  :5  Constantinoble  is  in  europe  :  That  it  also  divides 

•  •  mi  •  i  Constanti- 

28  other  parte  is  nycene,  whiche  is  in  asye  /  This  braas  or  arme,  thus  nopie  fh.m 

Nk'U-i. 

as  it  is  moost  brode  toward  the  see  /  lyke  a  roode  where  the  porte 
is  /  it  is  sayde  that  it  is  mooste  paysible  /  And  easyer  than  the  see 
is.  nyghe  therto  stondeth  constantinoble,  whiche  is  lyke  a  tryangle. 
32  The  first  syde  is  bytwene  the  porte  and  this  arme  /  Ther  standeth  a 
chirche  of  seynt  george  /  of  whiche  that  see  is  named  the  braas  of 

1  Orig.  Nenertheles.  2  Orig.  endnre.  3  Fr.  rent  nidi. 

4  Fr.  unie,  "lyke  even"  (in  breadth). 

6-6  Caxton  has  mistranslated  this  sentence  by  reading  dkite  as  a  past 
participle  instead  of  a  substantive.  Fr.  car  le  bra*  est  devise  de  res  deux 
terres,  viz.  for  this  arm  (i.  e.  the  Hellespont)  is  the  division  of  these  two 
countries. 

8* 


74  Tlie  Treacher  of  the  Emperor.     [Ch.  XXXVII. 

seynt  george  /  And  this  endurith  vnto  the  new  palays  of  blacquerne, 
Tiienecond     after  the  porte  /   That  other  pan1  of  the  walle  dureth  fro  this 

side  of  the  .  i 

wall  extends   chirche  of  seynt  george  vnto  the  porte2  aire  /  The  thyrde  pan  fro 
church  of  st.  that  yate  vnto  the  palays  of  Blacquerne  /  The  towne  is  moche  wel  4 

George  to  the  J  r       J  "l  / 

Golden  Gate,  closed!  toward  the  3champayne  of  walles,  of  dyches,  of  towres,  and! 
of  barbicans  /  Atte  porte  descendeth  a  fressh  water  rennyng  / 
wliiclie  is  lytil  in  the  somer  /  but  in  wynter  it  becometh  moche 
grete  for  the  rayne  /  This  water  hath  a  brygge,  on  whiche  oure  men  8 
passed  ouer  /  *  whiche  is  enclosid  bytwene  the  grete  see  and"  the 
braas  /  behynde  the  yate  /  where  they  lodged4  for  tabyde  that 
The  Emperor  comyng  of  other  barons.  Themperour5  sente  ofte  his  messagers  to 
the  Duke  to    the  due,  And!  sente  for  hym  to  come  and  speke  with  hym.     The  1 2 

come  and  B««    ,  .  _  /r  ..         , 

iiiin.  due  doubted  moche  his  tncherye,  and  Avoid  not  goo  /  But  to  thende 

wouidnotgo.  that  he  toke  it  not  for  euyl  /  he  sente  to  hym  thre  noble  men  /  that 
is  to  wyte,  Conon  de  montagu  /  Henry  dasque  /  and  bawdwyn0  de 
bort,  and  excused  hym  by  them  /  that  the  barons  that  were  with  16 
hym  wold  not  counseylle  hym  to  goo  and  speke  with  hym  tyl  that 
the  other  barons  were  comen.  Themperour  was  moche  /  wroth, 
and  deffended  agayn  that  no  vytaylles  sold  be  shold  to  the  hoost. 
sotheEmpe-  And  dyde  yet  werse  /  ffor  he  sente  on  a  daye  erly  in  the  mornyng  20 

ror  sent  his  *,  -ii-i-ii  ,  .,   ,, 

archers,         shippes  al  fill  of  archers,  that  cam  sodenly  by  the  braas  right  there 

who  slew  l  r  . 

many  of  the    as  the  due  was  lodged  /  they  shotte  grete  plente  of  arowes,  in  suche 

pilgrims.  or*  o» 

wyse  that  they  slewe  moche  peple  that  was  goon  on"  the  see  syde, 
And  many  they  hurted  by  the  dores  and  wyndowes  /  24 

How  our  peple  brente  theyr  lodgys  and  toke  theyr 
harnoys  /  And  of  an  assault  that  the  grekes  made 
on  them  /  ca°  xxxvij0 

w      Han  the  Due  and  the  other  barons  herd  this  /  by  comyn  coun-  28 

seyl  /  they  sente  the  brother  of  the  due8  for  to  take  the  brigge  / 
to  thende  that  they  of  the  toun  shold  not  sease  ne  take  it  /  They 

1  Fr.  pan,  piece,  strip. 

2  Fr.  at  partes  oires,  to  the  golden  gates.    Lat.  vtqve  ad  avream  port.am. 
*—*  The  French  here  misunderstood  by  Caxton,  "  Si  oneilz  furent  enclos 

entre  la,  grant  mer  et  le  brag,  selonc  le  port  on  ilz  estoient  loglez,  en  maisons 
qui  la- estoient  f aides"  they  (i.  e.  our  men)  and  not  the  bridge,  were  inclosed 
between  the  sea  and  the  arm.     They  were  not  lodged  "  behind  the  gate,"  but 
along  the  harbour.     Caxton  has  mistaken  port,  harbour,  for  port e,  gate. 
6  Orig.  Themperonr. 

6  Fr.  Baudon in  de  Bore,  or  Borgh,  Lat.  de  Borgo. 

7  Fr.  snr  mer,  8  Orig.  dnc. 


Ch.  XXXVIl.]     The  Pilgrims  burn  many  Houses.  73 

toke  /  v  /  honderd  men1  what  knyghtes  as  other  wel  armed1,  and  2S«o?Swn 
cam  fyrst  to  the  brygge  and!  kepte  it,  and!  sawe  that  alio  the  cyte  was  to^to the 
meued  and  armed  for  to  come  on  them.     Our  men  were  thenne 

4  adcerteyned  that  they  of  the  towno  were  theyr  enemyes.    And1  sette  ro^g*j*J» 
fyer  in  the  howses2  were  they  lodged!  in,  3and  in  other  by  whiche  °™'«|™J£, 
they  doubted!  and  fered!  wel  a  /  vj  /  thousand  or  seuen  in  suche  "ere  lodged, 
wys-i  that  som  of  Emperours  owne  howses  were  brente3  /  After  they 

8  dyde  do  sowne  theyr  tompettes4  /  And1  wente  them  alle  in  orden- 

aunce5  after  the  Due  toward1  the  brygge.    ffor  they  doubted!6  moche 

that  they  of  the  towne  wolde  come  theder  for  to  deffende  them  the 

paas  /  but,7  as  I  haue  sayd,  bawdwyn,  brother  of  the  due,  had  thenne 

12  goten  it  vpon  the  grekes,  whom  he  had1  ouerthrowen  and1  chased! 

ryght  ferre.     The  hoost  and1  alle  the  cariage  8  passed!  ouer  /  alle  in  [»if.s5.bk.] 
to  the  contrey.     And!  arrested!  there  alle  in  ordenaunco  in  a  fayr  (h«npE£a 
nlavn.  moche  fyers  and1  courageous,  by  the  chirche  of  seynt  cosme  bridge  into 

,,-.  •  j    it.  i  e  %.  *.    i>     a     tl,e  wmitry. 

16  and!  damyan  /  which  now  is  named  the  palays  of  buymont  &  the 
palays  of  blacquerne  /  whan  it  was  come  nygh  the  euentyd!  there 
were  many  slayn  of  them  of  the  town  /  &  of  the  other,  but  not  so 
many  /  The  grekes  myght  no  lenger  sufre,  but  the  pylgTyms  dis-  **£»£, 

20  comfy  ted!  them  &  chassed1  them,  sleyng1  and1  hewyng*  alle  them  that  ^J1**^ 
they  myght  arreche,  in  suche  wyse  that  they  droof  them  in  to  the  Greek»- 
toun  by  force.     Thenne  retourned1  they  agayne  as  they  that  had 
wonne  the  felde  /  And1  lodged!  in  the  playne  /  The  grekes  were 

24  moche  swollen  and  angry  of  that  they  had  lost  so  many  men  and 
had  ben  so  euyl  demened.  And9  began  to  ordeyne  thurgh  the 
town  how  they  myght  yssue  oute  with  moche  more  affraye  and 
strenger  than  they  had.  But  the  nyght  cam  10that  destourmed  their 

28  counseyl.10  This  was  an  euident  thynge,  that  themperour  had  don  [J^*^' 
the  barons  passe  the  brygge  by  tricherye  and  vntrouthe  for  to  haue  ^'J^1*- 
closed  them  as  Avithin  barryers.  tJw$>*r' 


1  Fr.  "Tant  cJievalier  comme  autre*."  *  Fr.  ou,  where. 

s— 3  Caxton's  obscurity  is  here  owing  to  a  corrupt  French  text.— The  text 
given  in  the  Historian*  Occidentaux  has  the  correct  reading  :  u  Et  et  autre* 
delez  qui  duroient  bien  viilles  on  sept,  si  que  aucuns  des  meson*  i  firent 
arses,  qui  estoient  Tempereor? — i.  e.  they  burned  the  houses  in  which  they 
were  lodged,  which  occupied  six  or  seven  miles  of  ground;  and  some  which 
belonged  to  the  emperor  were  burnt  also. 

4  Fr.  trompette*.  6  Orig.  ordenanuee. 

6  Orig.  donbted.  7  Orig.  bnt.  9  Orig.  Aud. 

10  Fr.  " qui  les  destourna  de  ce  conseill." 


76 


The  Pilgrims  pillage  the  Zand.     [Ch.  XXXVIII. 


How  after  this  our1  peple  began  to  destroye  the  contre. 
And  of  a  message  of  buymont  vnto  due  gode- 
froye.  And  the  answer  of  the  due  vpon  the 
same.  capitulo  xxxviij°  4 


Every  man  of  3, 
both  foot  and 
horse  was 
commanded 
to  arm  him- 
self. 


:iging,  and 
brought  back 
corn,  wine, 
and  other 
victuals. 


Bohemond 
sent  messen- 
gers to  God- 
frey. 


S  sone  as  thoost  apperceyued  on  the  morn  the  day  /  it  was 
cryed  that  euery  man  on  payne  of  deth  shold  arrae  hym  /  on 
horsbak  and  on  fote  /  The  Captayns  of  som  bataylle  were  ordeyned 
for  to  lede  the  peple  in  fonrage.  The  other  sette  them  in  ordyn-  8 
aunce  for  to  kepe  their  lodgys  /  ffor  wel  they  apperceyued  certaynly 
that  themperour  pourchassed  for  them  alle  the  euyl  that  he  myght, 
Part  of  them  They  that  wente  for  vytaylle  withdrewe  them  wel  /  lx  /  mvle  / 

went  for-  J  J      J  I  I         J        I 

They  pylled  al  aboute  them  alle  the  townes  that  they  fonde  /  And*  12 
brought  Corn,  Wyn,  Beestys,  and?  other  Eychesses  /  Wberof  the 
londe  was  full  that  vnnethe  myght  they  conduyte  alle  /  And  they 
were  oute  sex  dayes  /  And  aftir  retornned1  in  to  the  hooste  with  alle 
this  merueillous  gayne  /  whyles  as  they  conteyned  thus,  Messagers  16 
cam  fro  Buymont  to  fore  the  Due  /  And  salewed  hym  in  theyr 
Lordes  name  /  And  delyuerd  to  hym  lettres  wliiche  saide  in  this 
manere  /  He  salewed  in  his  lettres  the  due  as  he  ought  to  salewe 
[*  leaf  36]    suche  a  man  /  Aftir  2they  sayde  /  "knowe  ye,  sire,  that  ye  haue  to  20 
doo  with  a  moche  vntrewe  man  /  whiche  alwey  sette  his  herto  and 
purpoos  to  deceyue  them  that  truste  in  hym  /  Specially  he  hateth  the 
Latyns  to  the  deth.     And  doth  his  power  in  alle  maners,  that  he 
tiling  him    can  to  doo  euyl  to  our1  peple.     And  yf  ye  haue  not  yet  apper-  24 
gniird  against  ceyued  it  /  ye  shal  knowe  al  by  tyme  as  I  saye  to  you  /  ffor  I  knowe 
wel  the  malyce  of  the  grekes  /  And  also  the  trycherye  of  them- 
perour /  Therfor  I  pray  you  /  that  ye  withdrawe  you  fro  constan- 
tinoble  /  And  retorne  to  ward   the  playnes  of  andrenoble  or  of  28 
sympole  /  and  there  ye  may  wyntre  you  where  as  is  grete  plente  of 
nahemond     alle  goodes  /  And  I  myself,  yf  it  please  god,  assone  as  the  sprynge 
and  aid  God-  of  the  yere  cometh,  shal  come  and  hast  to  meue,  And  shal  assem- 
ble with  you  /  And  shal  helpe  you  /  as  my  lord  and  frende,  ayenst  32 
the  vntrew  prynce  that  entendeth  to  doo  euyll  with  alle  his  power 
vnto  cristiente"  /  whan  the  due  had  herd  thyse  lettres,  by  the  cou??.seyl 
of  his  barons  He  sente  to  hym  ageyn  other  lettres  that  after  the 
salewyng  spak  thus  /  "  we  thanke  you  gretely,  And  so  doo  the  other  36 
prynces  that  ben  with  vs,  of  the  loue  and  trouthe  that  ye  haue 


the  Greeks, 
an. I  the 
treachery  of 
the  Emperor 


1    Or'ig.  our. 


Ch.  XXXIX.]     The  Emperor  honours  Godfrey.  77 

sente  vs  /  And*  knowe  ye  certaynly  that  x  we  haue  founden  on  the  JMfrgrr* 
prynce  and<  on  the  peple  of  grekes  /  lyke  as  ye  wene  wel  to  knowe1  /  W'*^ 
we  knowe  wel  that  ye  saye  it  of  wysedome  andf  of  trouthe  /  2But  J*^** 

A  we  douhte  moche  the  amies  that  we  tok3  in  our  contrey  for  to  warre  truc- 
on  the  hethen  men  /  sholdf  retorue  and  conuerte  ayenst  them  that 
here  the  name  of  cristiante  as  we  our  self  doo2  /  we  attende  and 
desyre  moch  your  comyng  /  Thenne,  yf  god  will,  whan  ye  shal  bo 

8  comen  we  shal  doo  take  you  to  our  counseyl." 

How  themperour  appesed  the  due  godefroye  and  sente 
for  hym,  and  of  the  honour  that  he  dyde  to  hym. 

capitulo  /  xxxix. 

12  t        Hemperour  was  moche  anguyssous  emong  his  pryue  cou»seyl,  ™e  Emperor 
&  thought   how    he    might   appose   to   hym   the   due  &   his  »»*iou8  to  ' 

o  o  *  *  appease  me 

peple  by  cause  he  destroyed   his  contre  /  of   which  he  herd   the  »jj»«  and  uu 
clamours  right  grefce  an<*  oftc  /  And?  by  cause  that  he  knewe  that 

16  the  messagers  of  buymojit  were  come  /  and  had  brought  tidynges  / 
that  he  Avoid  hastely  come,  he  sente  ageyn  his  messagers  to  the 
due  /  &  prayd  hym  that  ho  wold  come  speke  to  hym,  &  yf  he 
doubted  of  ony  thyng  he  wold  sende3  Ioh«n  his  sone  in  hostage  in  "^J^",. 

20  to  the  hoost  /  This  message  plesyd  moche  to  the  barons  whan  they  ^nr;8i8  8,m 
herde  it  /  and  they  sente  conon   de  montagu"  /  &  bawdwyn  de  {^gw^w 
borgh  for  to  receyue  the  hostage  /  they  receyued  hym  andf5  delyuerd'6  \™™ll 
to  Bawdwyn  brother  of  the  Due,  7whiche  abode  /  for  to  Reule  and1  [7  lf.se.bk.] 

24  gouerne  the  hoost  andf  to  kepe  the  hostage  /  The  due  and  other  '**»™nwA 
barons  wente  in  to  Constantynople  to  fore  themperour  which  had  e°  to  con- ^  _ 
moche  desyred  them  /  The  grekes  made  to  them  grete  Ioye  mer-  vwtttie  e,„- 
ueyllously  what  someuer  they  thoughts.8     Themperour  kyssedf  them 

28  alle.     And'  demanded*  of  euerych  his  name  /  for  to  honoure  euerych 
by  hym  self  /  as  he  that  wel  coude  do  it.     they  were  wel  beholden 
of  alle  them  of  the  palays  /  At  last  themperour9  satte  in  his  mageste,  The  e rapwor 
and  the  barons  aboute  hym,  And  sayde  to  the  due  thyse  wordes  /  ™JJ££™}ie 

32  "  we  haue  herd!  saye  many  tymes  in  this  londe,  that  thou  art  of  hyghe  nuke  thus : 


i_i  Fl.   "now  avons  ja  tronvi,  et  en  prince  et  en  peuplc,  ce  que  rous 


,.  » 


en  goupeconez 

2-2  Yw  "  Nous  doubtons  mout  les  annex,  que  nos  prHtmet  en  nostre  pais 
pour  gnerroier  la  gent  mescreant,  turner  a  cent  qui  portent  le  non  de  la 
Crrittii-nt: ',  si  com  not fetons/' 

'■'■  Orig.  seinle.  *■  Ori</.  moutagu.  5   Orig.  aud. 

6  Orig.  delynerd.  8  Orig.  thonghte.  u  Orig.  themperonr. 


78  The  Emperor  gives  great  Gifts.  [Ch.  XL. 

••we know     lygnage  /  and1  of  moche  grete  power  in  thy  contre,  and?  a  good 

that  tliou  art  . 

a  good  knight  kuyglit  and  trewe,  in  suche  wyse  that  for  the  fayth  of  Ihesu  criste 
and  we  praise  tenhaunce,  hast  enterprised1  to  warre  ayenst  the  mesereauntes  and? 

thee  and  love  " 

thee  in  our     hethen  peple  /  whiehe  greue  the  cristen  peple  memeyllously  /  ffor  4 
alle  thyse  thynges  we  prayse  the  and?  loue  in  our  herte  /  And?  wylle 
honoure  the  with  grettest  honour  that  we  may  doo  /  ffor  thou  art 
■worthy  and  dygne  /  It  playseth  vs  and  therto  accorden  our  barons  / 

■*We  choose   that  we   cheese  the  &  aaowe  for   our   sone  /  And    we    put   our  8 

end  avow  thee  t  ' 

for  our  son,    Empyre  in  to  thyn  hande,  that  thou  kepe  it  as  our  sone  from  henss- 

siid  put  our  rj  J  '  l 

Empire  into    forth  in  good  estate  and  in  termes  of  loue"1  /  whan  he  had?  seyde 

thy  band.  °  '  J 

this  /  he  dyde  hym  to  be  clad  with  the  robe  of  an  Emperour  /  And1 
to  sytte  by  hym  /  And?2  thenne  the  barons  made  to  hym  right  grete  12 
feste  &  solempnyte  aftir  the  custom  of  the  londe  in  suche  thynges  / 
And?  thus  was  the  pees  arfermed  bytweue  the  prynces  /  and  abo 
bytwene  the  peple. 

Of  the  yeftes  that  themperour3  made  to  due  godefroye,  16 
to  the  barons  and  to  the  gentilmen  of  his  hoost. 

capitulo  xl° 

The  Emperor  a       None  whan  this  was  don  /  the   tresour  of  themperour  was 

then  present-  ,  .  .  t  •       /  n/\ 

e.t  tiie  Duke  opened1  &  was  presented  to  the  due  /  and  to  his  felawship  /  20 

and  his  com-  r  r  '.  n; 

pantonswitii   30  grete  yeftes  and?  so  grete  rychesses  that  it  Avas  merueylle  to  see  / 

great  gifts.  o  J  o  J  J  1 

Ther  was  grete  plente  of  gold,  of  pyluer,  and  of  precious  stones  / 
many  clothes  of  sylk  ryght  ryche :  vayssellys  of  dyuerse  facions, 
whiche  were  merueyllous4  of  facions  and  of  matere  /  Oure  peple  24 
meruellyd  moche  of  this  grete  rychesse  /  Thyse  yeftes  cessed?  not  at 
the  fyrst  tyme  /  but  fro  the  daye  of  the  Epyphanye  /  vnto  thas- 
sencion  tyde  /  themperour  gaf  to  the  Due  euery  weke  as  moche  as 
two  myghty  men  myght  susteyne  /  of  pierrye  /  of  pens  of  gold1,  of  28 
copper,  and1  of  tyn  he  gaf  to  hym  ten  muyes,  5euery  muye  is 

But  the  Duke  four  busshellys.5     But  the  due  departed  alle  thyse  thynges  vnto 
r«  leaf  37]    knygh  =  6te8  a,1(l  a^e  aboute  where  he  sawe  /  that  it  shold?  be  wel 

gifts  with       employed1.     Whan  they  had  ben  with  themperour  a  lytil  whyle,  32 

those  about        ,,,  .  ,,  /mi  i 

him.  they  toke  leue  &  cam  agayn  in  to  the  hoost  /  Ihey  sente  agayn 

Iohan  his  sone,  whom  they  hao?  holden  in  hostage  moche  honour- 
ably /  Themperour  dyde  do  crye  vpon  peyne  of  deth  /  that  noman 

1  Fr.  "  en  cntcvlne  anunir"  in  sincere  or  perfect  love.     Caxton  probably 
read  entcrine  as  two  words  (in,  ternie),  and  translated  accordingly. 

2  Orig.  Aud.  3  Oi-iff.  themperour.  *  Or'ig.  merueyllous. 
i— fi  Inserted  by  Caxton. 


Ch.  XLL]  They  lodge  near  Chalcedon.  70 

shokt  doo  harme  to  the  pylgryms  /  but  shold1  do  selle  to  them  alle 
maner  wares  at  prys  resonable  /  The  due  in  lyke  wyse  dyde  doo 
crye,  that  euery  man  as  dere  as  he  louyd  his  lyf  shold  doo  no  force 
4  ne  wrong  to  them  of  the  contree  /  Thus  forthon  lyuydf  they  in  From  this 

*  o  ■  time  on,  Im6 

moche  peas  /  whan  Marche  cam  the  due  knewe  wol  /  that  the  other  ^rr^e'J.'(;d 
barons  wold  come  /  and1  apperceyued!  wel  that  the  wille  of  them-  J^»» 
perour  was  /  that  he  wold  passe  with  his  peple  the  braas  of  seynt 
8  george  /  To  the  same  acorded!  the  barons  and1  the  other  of  the 
boost  /  And!  saide  to  themperour  that  he  wold  passe  ouer  /  And  he 
anon  dvde  do  make  redy  many  shippes  &  passed  wel  alle  and  cam  inMarci., 
in  to  bethnie,  whiche  is  the  fyrst  partye  of  Asye.     They  lodged!  g™"^ 

12  them  aboute1  the  Cyte  of  Calcedonie  /  Of  this  cyte  fynde  we  ™^[ul. 
wry  ten,  that  in  the  tyme  of.  pope  lyon  and  Marcyeu  themperour  <*don. 
assambled  there  one  of  the  iiij  grete  courcseyllis  /  where  ther  were 
.iij.C.xxxvj  /  prelates  for  to  condempne  an  heresye,  that  a  Monke 

16  named!  Eutyses(16)  had  founden.     And  that  helde  a  patriarkc  of 
Alysaundre  named  discrefcus(17)  /  but2  there  they  were  dampned  / 
This  cyte  is  so  nyghe  constantynoble3  that  there  is  but  the  braas  by-  ]™»d^]£ 
twene  them  bothe.     And!  there  was  the  hoost  lodged!  moche  easely  /  constants- 

nople  by  tno 

20  ffor  who  so  had!  to  doo  in  the  cyte  of  Constantynoble  he  myght  gjj™£f  St- 
passe  twyes  or  thryes  in  a  day  /  The  cause  why  themperour  made 
the  due  to  passe,  was  for  he  wold!  not  that  /  the  hoostes  of  tho 
barons  that  were  to  come  /  shold  not4  assemble5  to  gydre  so  nyghe 

24  hym  /  And!  in  lyke  dyde  he  to  the  other  barons  that  cam  aftir,  ffor 
he  neuer  wold!  lodge  tweyne  to  gydre  / 

How  Buymont  was  made  capitayn  of  a  grete  boost. 

And  the  names  of  many  nobles  of  thoost  &  of 

28  their  mayntene.  ca°  xlj. 

a       Ftir  this  maner  contened!  hym  themperour  and  due  godefroy. 

But  buymont  the  sone°  of  Robert  guychart,  prynce  of  Tarente,  Bohemond. 

i/iiii-    Prince  ot'  Ta* 
had  passed  the  see  adryane  /  And  was  come  vnto  duras  /  whan  alle  his  renn.m,  imd 

32  hoost  was  comen  he  toke  his  waye  thurgh  the  desertes  of  bougrye  /  Dru™^'d 

And  wente  softe  and!  fayr7  by  cause  of  them  that  folowed  hym.     In  Bulgaria. 

his  rowte  were  many  noble  men  /  of  whom  we  8shal  name  to  you  a    [« ieafS7,bk.] 

1  Orig.  abonte.  2  Orig.  bnt. 

3  Orig.  constantyuoble.  4  This  "«<rt"  is  superfluous. 

5  Orig.  aaseiubhe.  c  Orig.  soue.  7   Orig.  au  d'fajr. 


80.  Buymont  and  his  Suite  arrive.         [Ch.  XLI. 


Many  noble  part  /  that  is  to  wyte  /  Tancre  the  sone  of  graal  the  marquys.1 
panied  him.  Rychard?  the  pryncipat  sone  of  William  ffierbrace.  The  Brother  of 
Robert  guychart  /  Raymont  his  brother  /  Robert  the  hanse2  / 
Herman  of  caryn3  /  Robert  of  sourdeval  /  Robert  i'ytz  cristen,4  i 
vmfrey  fytz  raoul5  /  Rychard  sone  of  therle  Ranyol  erle  of  rousyg- 
nol,6  and  alle  his  bretheren.  Ogan  of  chartes,  Aubery  of  cannac  / 
And  vmfrey  of  montygneux  /  Alle  thyse  had  made  buymont  their 
They  spent     capytayn  /  They  cam  in  to  the  cite  of  castore  and*  made  there  the  8 

Christmas  in  .  „        . 

the  city  of      feste  of  cristemasse  and  helde  it  moche  hyely  /  But7  by  cause  they 
could  get  no    0f  the  contre  wold  selle  to  them  /  nothyn"  which  helde  them  for 

one  to  sell  '  J     ° 

tv?  pr°       enemyes  /  therfor  by  force  they  muste  sende  out  on  fouragyng  and 
They  went     brought  grete  proyes  and1  good*  gaynes  /  of  whiche  they  dyde  moche  12 
the  country,    harme  to  alle  the  cohtrey  /  Aftir  they  cam   in  to  the  londe  of 

and  got  ^i  rat 

weaitn  and  pelagoine,  whiche  is  moche  good  and  fertile,  and  lodged  them  there  / 
Aftir  they  herd*  saye  that  nygh  by  was  a  castel  right  strong,  wherin 
alle  the  pope-liquans8  of  the  lande  were  withdrawen  for  the  strenght  16 
of  the  place  /  And?  there  were  none  but  suche  mysbyleued*  peple  / 
Buymont  and!  his  peple  armed  them  and  wente  theder  anon9  /  And? 
founde  there  moche  grete  rychesse  in  the  towne  and  grete  proyes 
whiche  they  put  out  a  part  /  And  after  sette  fyer  ther  in  the  town  /  20 
And  alle  them  that  yssued  they  slewe  with  the  swerde.  And  the 
remenaunt  bothe  men  and  wymmen  they  brent  alle.     Themperour 

The  Emperor  herd1  saye  that   Buymont  cam  with   grete   peple.      And  doubted 

rowing  of      moche  /  And?  had  his  comyng  moche  suspecyonous,  ffor  he  had  24 
many  debates  ayenst  hym  and?  his,  of  whiche  he  had?  alwey  the 
Averse.     The  souldyours  of  themperour  and  alle  they  that  enter- 
meted10  of  armes  soiourned?  and?  wyntred?  in  thyse  partyes  by  whiche 
Bumont  passed?  /  Themperour  comniaunded?11  to  his  conestables  of  28 

And  sent  men  alle  his  peple,  that  they  shold?  cooste  buymont  with  as  moche  people 

to  follow  him,  '  i  i         i  /  •  i 

mid  to  do  mm  as  they  myghte  gete  vnto  the  water  named'  hardare  /  in  suche  manere 

damage  If 

possible.        that  yf  they  myght  greue,  ennoye,  and'  do?^mage  in  ony  paas  to 

them,12  that  they  shold  come  on   hym   strongly.      Thus  he  had  32 

1  There  is  a  discrepancy  here  in  the  French  texts,  some  giving  "son  of    • 
Gral,"  others  "son  of  William." — Lat.  "  Wilhelmi  marchionis  filing." 

2  Fr.  Hubert  de  Hanse.  3  Fr.  Herman  de  Garni. 

4  Fr.  Robert  le  filz  Cugten.     Some  versions  give  "  Turstan." — Lat.  Ro- 
bertns  filing  Tristan.  '"  Fr.  Onfrey  le  filz  Raoul.  6  Fr.  Raviol. 
7  OW.17.Bnt.                 8  Fr.  pojH'liqnans,  heretics.     Lat.  heretici. 

9  Oriff.  auon. 

10  Fr.  Centre  mettoicnt,  had  to  do  with.- 

11  Oriff.  commauded'. 

12  Fr.  en  auctm  pag,  at  any  place,  or,  on  any  occasion. 


Ch.  XLIL]     Messengers  and  Letters  from  the  Emperor  to  Buymont.     81 

ordeyned  cautelously  behynd  them,  but  to  fore  as  he  /  was  moche  £«  ^"rJ« 
disloyal  ami  couuert,  and  coude  wel    make  semblaunt  of   other  treacherous, 
thynge  than  he  thoughte,  he  sente  vnto  buymont  of   his  grete  "^^  he 
4  men  /  And!  by  them  lettres  moche  payssyble  and?  of  fayr  wordes  /  £[£££, 
And"  of  bouates  moche  debonayr  and"  deceyualle  whiche  were  as  ™|£™n£ 
folowen, 

Messagers  and  letres  fro  Themperour  to  Buymont,1 
8  and  the  2contenue  of  the  same  as  foloweth.  P-uan 

capitulo  xlij0 

t       He  salewyng  to  fore  was  moche  fayr  /  And?  aftir  sayde  /  "  we 
knowe  certaynly  that  thou  art  an  hye  prynce  &  moch  noble 
12  sone  of  an  noble  and!  valyaunt  man  /  3ffor  this  grete  maner  we  who  said, 

**  We  prize 

preyse  the  /  and1  haue  the  in  chierte3  /  And1  also  for  thou  hast  JJ"*."^ 
enterprised,4  with  so  good  herte  and1  so  good  wille  in  this  tyme  the  jjearta our 
seruyse  of  oure  lord  /  And  the  pylgremage  6 whiche  is  due  vnto  alle  g^JUgJ. 
16  them5  that  byleue  in  Ihesu  criste.     we  haue  ferme  wylle  &  cer- j-g"^  oC 
taynly  purpoos  to  honoure  the  /  And  shewe  by  dede  our  grace  that  our hori" 
we  haue  thought  /  Therfor  we  praye  and  requyre  the  in  good  "We pray 

°         '  •  tnee  to  do  no 

fay th  /  that  thou  comman  le6  to  thy  peple  that  they  doo  none  JJJJ™*^ 
20  oultrage  to  oure  peple,  &  haste  /  the  to  come  to  vs  all  surely,  nor  and  Return 
thou  shalt  haue  ther  by  honour  &  prouffyt  /  Our7  messagers  that  J^8J™# 
come  to  the  shal  by  our  commandement  doo  thyn  hooste  haue 
resonable  market  of  vytaylles  and  of  alle  other  thynges  "  /  The  sem- 
24  blaunt  of  thise  wordes  were  fayr  /  but  ther  was  ther  vnder  moch 

venym  and  of  felonnye.  Buymont,  whiche  was  wyse  and  knowyng  Bohemond, 
many  thynges,  had  many  tymes  preuyd  the  desloyalte  of  them-  often  expen- 
perour  /  And  receyued  thyse  wordes  by  semblaunce  moche  aworth  Emperor's 
28  and  in  thanke  /  But  he  preysed  them  lytil  in  his  courage.8  Neuer-  ^.^^ 
thelesse,  he  thanketh  hym  by  mouth  /  and  by  lettres  that  he  fc*  words, 
daygned  to  wryte  to  hym  and  sende,  co?Jsidered  that  he  was  so  smal 
a  man  avenst  hym  &  sente  hym  other  curtoys  wordes,  &c  /     Thise  but  answered 

"  "  "  him  courte- 

32  mcssagiers  that  were  thus  comen,  conduyted  the  hoost  vnto  the  ousiy. 
ryuer  of  bardre  /  whan  the  moost  partye  of  the  hoost  were  passed 

1  Orig.  Buytuont. 

3~3  Fr.  Por  ce,  de  grant  maniere,  te  prisons,  et  avons  elder."     Caxton's 
French  text  may  have  omitted  the  "  de"  *  Orig.  euterprised. 

6— 6  Fr.  "qui  ext  la  besoigne  de  tout  ceux,"  which  is  the  duty  of   all 
these,  etc.  6  Orig.  commaude.  7   Orig.  Onr. 

8  Fr.  courage,  heart. 

GODFREY.      ,  G 


82  Buymont  approaches  Constantinople.     [Ch.  XLIII. 

ouer,  &  the  other  ordeyned  them  for  to  passe  after.      The  con- 
es  tables  of  the  soldyours  which  e  had  away  ted  and  folowed  them 
The  Em-       wened  to  haue  founden  theyr  poynt.     And  launced  on  this  partye 
attacked       of  thoost  whiche  was  not  yet  passed1,  and1  were  many  moo  of  them  4 

them,  as  they  ,  _ 

were  crowing  than  of  oures  /  The  noyse  and"  the  crye  arroos  moche  grete.    lancre 

tJio  riv©r 

Bardara.  -whiche  moche  was  appert  &  hardy,  had1  tho  passed  half  the 
The  brave  ryuer  whiche  was  grete,  but2  whan  he  herd  this  he  retorned  agayn 
tuned  back  as  hastly  as  he  myght,  3and  discomfyted1  /  ij.  M  /  of  the  moost  8 
an£  to  e  noble  of  them  vigorously  and  putte4  them  to  flyght.8  And1  many 
many  of  he  toke  of  them  a  lyue  /  whom  he  brought  to  fore  buymont,  he 
prisoners,      demanded  them  in  the  presence  of  alle  /  wherfore  they  had  ronne 

so  on  the  hoost  of  the  cristen  men  /  whiche  were  also  cristen  and  1 2 
peple  of  themperour  their  lord  and  frende  /  They  answerd  that  they 
were  seruauntes  and  soldyours  of  themperour  and  muste6  doo  his 
[•if.88.bk.]  commandement,  ffor  by  hym  they  had  this  don  /  6here  by  myght 

alle  they  apperceyue  that  herde  this,  that  the  fayre  wordes  that  16 
themperour  sayde  were  but  deceyuaunce  and  tricherye  /  but  buy- 
mont, whiche  was  wyse  and  knewe  that  he  muste6  passe  by  theni- 
Bohemond     pyre,  made  semblaunt  that  he  apperceyued  not,  and  made  good 
un^ntTto*    chere  to  thise  men  for  to  couure  his  courage  /  And  that  plesyd  not  20 

perceive  the  .  .     _  . 

Emperor1*     som  of  his  barons  / 

treachery. 

How  Buymont  approuched  constantinoble,7  and  was 
sente  to  come  to  themperour,  And  how  by  the 
prayer  of  due  Godefroye  he  wente  toward  hym  /    24 

capitulo  xliij0 

b       Uymont  and  his  hoost  wente  so  ferre  by  the  countrees  that 
As  they  they  approched  Constantynoble.  whan  themperour  knewe  that, 

cKna?1    he  sente  agayn  grete  messagers  to  hym  /  and  prayde  hym  entierly  28 
E°m^robr»nt  that  he  wold  leue  his  hoost  and  come  speke  with  hym  with  a  pryue 
mronBd°^       meyne  /  Buymont  wyst  not  what  to  doo,  ffor  he  was  in  the  daunger 
BMkwitfa     of  hym  so  grete  a  man,  whom  he  doubted  to  angre  /  And  on  that 
lately?"        other  parte,  he  knewe  his  falsenesse  and  deceyuaunce,  And  had  wel  32 

1  Fr.ja,  already.  *  Orig.  Imt 

»— ■  This  sentence  seems  to  have  been  entirely  misunderstood  by  Caxton. 
Fr.  "  Et  deux  millet  des  plus  preuar  retonrnerent  avecques  lui;  llz  sc  fra- 
pe'rent  en  ceulx  qui  estoient  venvz  moult  vigoureutement,  si  que  ilz  let  discon- 
Jirent  tantost,  et  misrent  en  fnite."—\.  e.  two  thousand  of  his  own  men 
returned  with  him,  and  attacked  the  others  and  discomfited  them,  etc. 

*   Orig.  pntte.  6  Orig.  mnste.  J  Orig.  coustantinoble. 


Ch.  XLIV.]    Buymont  does  Homage  to  the  Emperor.  83 

apperceyued  that  he  louyd  hym  not  /  And1  therfore,  he  fered  to  goo  jMftwjwd 
to  hym  /  whyles  he  was  thus  entredeux1  /  The  Due  Godefroye  cam  about^obey- 
to  hym  the  thursdaye  afore  Esterdaye,  ffor  themperour  had  so  moche  •ummon.. 

4  prayd  the  Due  /  by  cause  he  doubted  that  he  wold  not  gladly  come 
to  hym  /  that  tho  Duo  wente  to  hym  for  to  make  hym  come  to 
themperour  /  whan  the  due  and  Buymont  mette  /  they  made  moche 
grete  Ioye  to  gydre,  and  spak  to  gydre  of  many  thynges.     After  <^^oan 

8  entred  the  due  for  to  praye  hym  to  come  to  his  fader  themperour  /  ^p6™^ 
Buymont  was  loth  tobeye  his  prayer  and  requeste  /  But  with  grete  £rt01°Em- 
pevne  the  due  vaynquysshyd2  hym  by  prayer  /  And  made  hym  to  And  finally 

mtm  -i  j-  j>  Prevail*  upon 

goo.     Themperour  Teceyued  hym  with  grete  honour  and  ioye  ana  Lim  to  do  no. 
12  kyssyd  hym  /  And  aftir  spak  so  moche  to  hym  and  to  the  due,  that 
Buymont  by  the  counseyl  of  the  due  made  to  themperour  hommage 
■with  his  hondes,  and  swar  to  hym  feaulte  as  to  his  lorde  /  Thenne  Bohemond 

7  *  swears  fealty 

shold  ye  haue  seen  come  out  of  the  tresour  of  themperour  many  to  ti.o  Em- 
16  grete  rychesses,  gold  /  syluer  /  vessel  /  precious  stones  /  and  clothes  ^lv^reat 
of  sylk  so  moche  that  vnneth  myght  be  preysed  /  whyles  that  &lm- 
Buymont  abode  in  the  palays,  Tancre  his  neuew,  sone  of  his  suster, 
that  was  right  wvse  and  of  grete  herte,  retched  not  for  to  see  Tanked 

o  J  o  »  would  not 

20  Themperour  ne  to  speke  to  hym  /  But  made  alle3  the  hoost  to|otothe 
passe  ouer  the  braas  seynt  george,  and  to  lodge  in  bethine,  nygh  to  huter^a 
calcedoine  /  where  thooste  of  the  other  barons  4had  ben  a  good  Chaicedon. 

\.  >   v  [*  leaf  S9] 

whyle  /  whan  themperour  knewe  that  tancre  had  eschewed  hym, 
24  he  was  moche  wrath,  but  he  made  no  seniblaunt  therof,  as  he  that 
wel  coude  couure  his  courage  /  he  made  moche  grete  f este  to  the 
barons  that  were  with  hym,  &  euery  daye  he  gaf  to  them  grete 
yeftes  and  newe  thynges  /  Aftir  they  departed  by  his  leue  /  And 
28  passed  the  braas  with  the  other  /  There  soiourned  they,  &  abode  *e™afe£e 
the  comyng  of  the  other  barons.     There  was  brought  to  them  grete  ™j|£0ur,e 
plente  of  vytaylles  /  and5  of  other  thynges  fro  the  cyte  of  con-  g£^*er 
stantynoble  and  fro  the  countree  aboute. 

32  How  the  erle  Robert  of  fflaunders  with  his  hooste 
approched  Constantynoble,  And  how  themperour 
sente  for  hym  /  And  of  their  deuyses  to  gydre  / 

cap°  xliiij" 

1  A  good  example  of  Csixtoi's  habit  of  transferring  French  words  and 
expressions  bodily  into  Engirt..  2   Orig.  vaynqnysshyd. 

3  Fr.  "  tout  lost."  6  Orig.  aud. 

G  2 


84  Robert  of  Flanders  does  Homage  to  the  Emperor.     [Ch.  XLV. 


Robert  of 
Flanders 
wintered  at 
Duras,  and 
in  spring 
hastened  to 
follow  the 
other  pil- 
grims. 


He  was 
received  in 
Constanti- 
nople with 
great  honor 
by  the  Em- 
peror. 


He  joined 
the  other 
Crusaders, 

and  they 
held  counsel 
together, 
and  were  very 
impatient, 
because  the 
rest  of  the 
great  barons 
arrived  not. 


r       Obert,  the  Erie  of  fflaundres,  whiche  was  coruen  to  fore  the 
wynter  to  bar,  a  cyte  of  puylle,  where  the  body  of  seynt 
Nicholas  lieth,  had  passed  the  see,  and  was  descended1  at  duras  / 
Ther  in.  a  moche  fayr  place  and  plentiuous1  he  had  wynterd  hym  /  4 
But  assone  as  it  began  to  wexe  fayr  tyme,  he  toke  his  Iourneye 
after  the  other  /  And!  hasted!  faste  to  folowe  them  /  but  it  happed! 
that  er  he  cam  to  the  barons  /  he  receyued!2  the  messagers  of  them- 
perour  that  sayd  to  hym  in  his  name  /  that  he  shold?  leue  his  hooste  8 
and  come  see  themperour,  and  speke  with  hym  wyth  a  fewe  of  his 
meyne  /  he  demaunded  and  knewe  wel  /  how  the  other  barons  had! 
don  to  fore  hym.     And  therfor  he  cam  in  to  constantynoble3  with 
a  fewe  of  his  companye.     Themperour4  receyued!  hym  wyth  grete  13 
Ioye  and1  honour  /  They  spak  of  many  thynges  to  gydre.     And! 
after,  lyke  as  other  barons  had!  don,  he  dyde  hommage,  and!  made 
oth  of  feaulte  /  Themperour  gaf  to  hym  grete  yeftes  /  and!  to  alle 
them  of  his  companye,  whan  he  and?  his  peple  had  abyden  and  16 
soiourned!  there,  by  the  wylle  of  themperour  he  made  his  peple 
passe  ouer.     And  he  hym  self  wente  after  vnto  the  other  barons  / 
whiche  with  grete  Ioye  receyued!  hym,  And!  spak  moche  to  gydre  of 
theyr  auentures  of  the  waye.    And1  ofte  they  were  in  counseyl,  how  20 
they  shold  doo  fro  than  forthon  /  they  were  moche  displesyd  for 
taryeng1  of  the  other  barons  whom  they  abode  /  It  was  not  longe 
after,  but  that  the  messagers  of  the  Erie  of  Tholouse  and  of  the 
bisshop  of  puy  were  come.     And!  tolde  how  theyr  lordes  cam  /  and  24 
that  they  were  nygh  /  And  shold  be  hastely  in  constantynoble.5 


t«ir.  sb,  bk.]6  Of  the  mayntiene  of  the  hooste  that  therle  of  Tho- 
louse and  the  bisshop  of  puy  brought  ouer  see. 

cap°  xlv°  28 

Hyse   tweyne   noble  men  departed  to    gydre   out   of    their 
countrees  with  grete  nombre  of  peple  with  them  /  They  were 
accompanied  accompanyed!  with  many  valyaunt  and   puyssaunt  men  of   theyr 
vaii^nt'and    COuntreves.    Ther  was  fyrst  William,  bisshop  of  Orenge  /  Eaybout,  32 

pmverful  J  ,  ,    _ .     ,       -  ,, 

men-  erle  of  the  same  cyte  /  Gaste  de  bedyers  /  Giralt  de  roussylon  / 

Guillem  de  montpeliers  /  Guillem,  erle  of  forestes  /  Raymont  peles  / 
centon  de  heart  /  Guillem  de  Amaneux  /  And1  many  other  barons 


The  Earl  of      t 
Toulouse  and 
the  Bishop  of 
Puy  were 


1  Fr.  planttirevx,  fertile 
3   Oriff.  constautynoble. 


6  Oriff.  coustantynoble. 


2  Oriff.  receyned. 
4  Oriff.  Themperonr. 


Ch.  XLV.]     Their  Privations  in  crossing  Dalmatia.  83 

moche  worshipful,  whiche  for  the  seruyse  of  oure  lord  lefte  theyr 
countrees,  theyr  lygnages  and  alle  theyr  delytes.     They  cam  alle  in  ^jy^J^'1 
to  lombardye,  and  passed  by  the  syde  of  aquylee.     And  aftir  cam 

4  in  to  the  londe  called1  Ister  /  ffro  thens  in  to  dalmace,  whiche  is  ^^f*'1 
a  grete  contrey  bytwene  hongrye  and!  the  see  adryane  /  Therin  be  matia. 
fore  Archiebisshopps  /  Iadre  /  spalete,  Antibare,  and  Raguse  /  The 
peple  of  that  contre  is  cruel  and?  moche  acustomedf  to  robbe  and1  to  The  people  of 

8  slee  /  There  be  montaynes,  and  the  londe  is  ful  of  depe  waters  aireer^uel  aml 
rennyng  /  And1  large  mareyses  in  suche  wyse  that  there  is  but  lytil 
londe  gaynable1  /  Beestes  ther  be  grete  plente  in  the  pastures  by 
whiche  they  lyue  /  Neuertheles  they  that  dwelle  nygh  the  see  /  ben 
12  of  other  maner  lyuyng  of  habyte  &  of  langage  /  ffor  they  speke 
Rommant  /  2Ahdl  the  other  speke  not  but  as  they  be  nourysshid2  / 
The  noble  men  of  whom  I  spak  /  camen  in  to  this  londe,  And  These  noWe- 

*  '  men  ana  their 

had  ther  many  grete  trauayllys  and  diseases  for  the  wynter,  which  [^^f" 
16  was  ouer  cold,  And!  for  the  contre,  whiche  was  euyl  garnysshyd  of  ^"osBing  thi8 
vytaylles  /  they  hadde  merueyllous  grete  suffraunce,  ffor  alle  the  land* 
peple  of   the  countree  for  feer  of  the  pylgryms  had  lefte  cytees, 
castellys,  and1  townes  for  to  flee  and  hyde  them  in  montaynes. 
30  They  had  born  theder  alle  theyr  thynges  /  ffrom  thens  they  pour- 
siewed  the  pylgryms  /  And  them  that  were  olde  /  seke  and  feble, 
and  taryed  after  the  hoost,  they  slewe  alle  /  The  erle  whiche  was 
wyse  toke  hede  of  the  hoost  /  The  other  barons  he  sente  to  fore  / 
24  he  kepte  alwey  the  rier  garde  with  grete  nombre  of  his  peple  wel 

armed  aboute  hym  /  the  aver  of  the  contre  was  so  ful  of  mystes  The  air  was 

'  »_  -.  1  '  so  full  of  fog 

and  so  thycke  /  that  they  byhynde  myght  vnneth  folowe  them  to  and  mist  that 
fore ;  ffor  this  londe,  as  I  said  to  fore,  is  ful  of  ryuers  and  rennyng*  scarcely  see 

28  waters  /  of  lakes  and  mareys  /  that  a  grete  nyle3  sourdeth  euery  JJJ^, 
day  /  it  semed  that  it  shold  neuer  sesse  /  On  that  other  syde  the 
sclauouns  and  the  dalmaces  4that  knowe  the  places  and  the  coun-    [*  leaf  40] 
trees  made  on  them  many  assaultes  at  certayn  paas  /  and  slewe  vdni^and 

32  many  of  them  that  were  vnarmed.     The  Erie  and  the  good  men  of  ua™  ha^"- 
the  hoost  closed  them  in,  And  slewe  many  of  them.     And  many  continually, 
moo  shold  haue  slayn  /  yf  the  wodes  &  their  retraytes  had  not 
be  so  nyghe  /  Somtyme  it  happed  that  therle  toke  of  them  a  lyue  / 

36  And  made  to  smyte  of  theyr  feet  and  handes  /  And  lefte  them  lye 

1  Fr.  gaingnables,  capable  of  being  cultivated. 

2—2  pr   11  ies  autres  ne  parlent  te  Esclavnrioit,  non," — the  others  speak 
nothing  but  the  Sclavic  tongue. 
3  Fr.  nisle,  fog,  mist. 


86  The  Emperor  sends  Ambassadors  to  the  Earl  of  Toulouse.  [Ch.  XLVI. 

in  the  waye  for  to  fere1  with  the  other  that  cam  after  /  In  this 
After  three  maner  they  were  thre  wekes  in  that  londe  in  grete  paryl  /  And  in 
d*"'  anfdrt  S™^  mysease  /  After  they  cam  in  to  a  castel  named  serdre2  /  there 
a'c^otwhere  tney  ^ounc^e  *De  kyng  of  sklauonye.  The  Erie  that  was  wel  be-  4 
th*ykin™*  spoken  /  spak  moche  fayr  to  hym  /  and1  gaf  to  hym  largely  grete 
sciavoma.      yeftes  and  Iewellys  /  ffor  he  hoped  ther  by  that  he  wold   haue 

holden  his  peple  in  peas,  And  haue  don  hem  had  couenable  market 
Neither  by     of  vytaylles  /  But3  it  auaylled  not  /  ffor  neuer  for  prayer,  ne  for  no  8 

prayers  jior  /  i  i  , 

by  present,    seruyse  /  myght  they  aswage*  his  courage  /  ne  mollyfye  the  peple 
moiiify  the     0f  the  oountre  /  But  they  founde  them  more  cruel  and1  more  vyllan- 

people  ot  this  '  "  « 

country.        0U8  than  to  fore.    Thus  were  they  foure  wekes  after  in  this  sorowe, 

ffor  they  were  fourty  dayes  in  passyng  this  contre  /  Aftir  cam  they  12 
to  duras. 

Ambassadours  of  themperour  to  the  sayd  Erie   and 
bisshop  /  And  of  the  contenue  of  his  lettres  /  And 
of   the   daunger  wherin   the   said   bisshop   was  16 
thenne  /  capitulo  xlvj° 

t       Hemperour  had  in  suspection  the  comyng  of  therle  /  by  cause 
that  he  knewe  wel  that  he  was  a  moche  wyse  man  and1  of 

grete  courage.     And  wel  herd  saye  that  he  had  with  hym  grete  20 
The  Emperor  plente  of  good  men  /  Therfore  he  sente  to  them  to  duras  noble  men 
the  Eari  of     of  his  londe  that  delyuerd  to  hym  lettres  fro  themperour,  which 

Toulouse  and  *  r 

the  Bishop  of  spak  in  this  maner  after  the  salewyng*  /  "  The  good  renomme  that 

renneth  of  the  thurgh  the  world1,  hath  made  vs  to  haue  certayn  24 

tydynges  /  that  thou  art  a  man  of  grete  wytte,  of  grete  power,  and* 

of  grete   prouesse  /  Therfore  we  moche  desyre  to   6ee   the,  and 

honoure  as  hym  that  we  loue  of  good  herte,  and  preyse  /  And  we 

praying  them  praye  the  moche  acertaynly,  and1  requyre  for  a  grete  yefte  /  that  28 

through  hi«    thou  doo  thy  peple  passe  our  contrees  without  oultrages  and  doyng* 

doing  harm,   harme.     And  haste  the  to  come  to  vs,  alle  sure  to  haue  oure  grace 

and  oure  bounte;  we  haue  commanded1  that  vytaylles  and  other 

necessytees  shal  be  sold  to  thy  peple  at  prys  resonable  "  /  whan  the  32 

[» if. 40, bk]  Erie  and  alle  the  barons  herde  thise  tydynges  by  thyse  lettres,  they 

The  Eari  and  were  glad1  6and  ioyous  /  ffor  they  had1  longe  suffred  grete  diseases  / 

giad  and       They  toke  theyr  waye  by  forestes  and  by  montaynes,  and  passed 

letters theM  tne  ^on^6  °f  Epyre.     Aftir  they  cam  in  to  pelagonne,  where  they  36 

1  Fr.  "pour  etpoenter  leg  autres,"  to  frighten  the  others. 
2  Fr.  Scodre.  3   Orig.  Bnt.  4  Fr.  "  adoucir  ton  coeur." 


Ch.  XL VII.]     The  Earl  of  Toulouse  mill  not  do  Homage.  87 

fonde  moche  grete  plente  of  alle  goodes  /  The  valyaunt  bisshop  of 
puy  lodged  hym  on  a  day  fer  fro  the  hoost  in  a  fayr  place  that  he 
founde  /  and  in  the  nyght  the  bougres  assaylled  hym  in  his  lodgys  The  Bishop 
4  and  toke  hym  /  But  by  cause  he  was  necessarye  to  cristiente  our  "J88^  b* 
lord  sauyd  hym,  that  they  slewe  hym  not  /  ffor  one  of  the  barbaryns  gariana, 
demaunded  of  hym  gold  /  therfore  he  defended  hym  fro  the  other,  rescued  from 
that  they  slewe  hym  not  /  In  the  mene  whyle  the  noyse  was  herde  his  fife'pre- 

"  served  to 

8  in  the  hoost.    Thenne  they  ranne  to  armes  /  and  syth  ran  on  them  /  Christianity. 
And  recouured  the  bisshop  with  alle  his  thynges  /  On  the  morn 
they  toke  theyr  waye  and  passed  salenyke1  /  And  alle  macedonie  / 
And  after  grete  trauayllea  and  many  iourneyes  they  cam  to  a  cyte 
1 2  named  Redost  /  Thether  cam  the  messagers  of  themperour  agayne  /  At  Redost, 

the  Em- 

And  spak  to  the  erle,  prayeng*  hym  in  theyT  lordes  name  /  that  he  peer's  mes- 
wold  come  to  fore  his  hooste  with  a  fewe  of  his  companye  in  to  to  him  , 

*        "  again,  also 

constantynoble  /  Messagers  ther  were  also  fro  the  barons  that  had  %*™$**n 
16  passed  the  braas  /  And  requyred  the  same  by  mouthe,  And  by  w^n|him 
lettres  fro  theyr  lordes.     The  erle  hym  self  had  sente  messagers  to  jtapwcJ" 
fore  to  knowe  the  beyng*  of  the  countre  /  and  of  the  barons.     And 
they  were  retorned,  whiche  acorded  moche  to  the  same,  and  coun- 
20  seylled  hym  to  doo  that  themperour  requyred. 

How  the  Erie  of  Tholouse  beyng  with  themperour 
wold  not  do  howmage  to  hym,  and  of  the  despyte 
that  themperour  dyde  /  ca  /  xlvij? 

24  b      Y  the  prayer  of  so  moche  peple  therle  muste  nedes  doo  soo  at 

theyr  instaunce  /  And  thus  lefte  his  hooste  /  And  cam  in  to  The  Bari 
constantinoble  with  a  fewe  of  his  meyne  /  many  messagers  encount-  and  was  wen 

received,  but 

red  hym,  whiche  alle  cam  for  to  fetche  hym  /  whan  he  cam  to  fore 

28  themperour  he  was  well  receyued  with  moche  grete  chere  and  ioye 

of  hym,  and2  alle  the  barons  of  the  palays.    After  themperour  dyde 

to  be  sayd  to  hym  /  and  requyred  hym  right  swetly  /  that  for  to 

haue  alwey  alyaunce  and  amytee  with  hym  /  And  also  for  the  grete 

32  prouffyt  that  he  shold  haue  therof,  he  shold  make  hommage  to  he  would  not 

themperour  /  lyke  as  alle  the  other  had  don  /  he  answerd  shortly  to  the  Em- 
peror, 
that  he  wold  none  make  ne  doo  to  hym.     Themperour  had  grete  At  thig  the 

desdayne,  and  was  moche  wroth  /  he  sente  to  fetche  the  conestables  ve'ry^rotnT"' 

36  of  his  souldyours,  and  for  them  that  had  the  charge  of  his  men  3of    [3  leaui] 

1  Orig.  saleuyke.  3   Or\g.  aud. 


88  The  Emperor  treats  them  treacherously.     [Ch.  XLVIII. 

and  com-       Arines  /  And  commaunded  them  secretely  in  counseyl,  that  they 

manded  h>s        ,     ,  ,  ,  •  i        1  t 

men  to  do  ail  shold  auyse  theyr  tyme  and  poynt,  and  smyte  in  to  the  hooste  01 

the  barm  that 

they  could  to  The  Erie  /  And1  doo  to  them  alle  the  harme  they  myehte,  And1  slee 

the  Earl.  '  1,1 

grete  plente  of  them  /    This  dyde  Thempcrour1  comaunde  them  4 
the  more  surely  /  hy  cause  that  he  wyste  wel  that  they  that  were 
on  that  othersyde  myght  not  helpe  them,  And  hy  cause  they  were 
his2  men  3 they  wold  not  sone  greue  them3  /  And  had  commaunded 
that  alle  the  shippes  to   here  ouer  vytaylle,  sbolde  Gome  hastely  8 
ageyn  in  to  the  Cyte,  So  that  they  on  that  other  syde  shold  not 
come  ouer  agayn  /  4ffor  euer  he  had  suspection  thassemble  of  oure 
peple4  /  And  therfore  he  made  them  to  passe  ouer  eche  after  other 
The  great      as  they  cam  /  The  grete  chere  that  he  made  to  them  /  And  the  grete  12 
welcome  that  yeftes  that  he  gaf,  cam  more  by  barate  and  of  drede  than  of  loue 

the  Emperor   J  °  ^  .,,,«. 

gave  the       or  of  largesse  /  But  oure  peple,  and  specially  the  frrenssmen,  myght 

Crusaders,  O.I  rr>  r  j  jo 

was  nought    not  byleue  that  this  Ioye  that  he  made  to  them  /  Ne  the  Kychesse 

but  treachery  J  J  '       ■  * 

and  decep.     that  he  gaf  myght  come  of  ony  trayson  ne  of  euyl  /  They  knewe  1 6 
not  by  experyence  so  moche  thewne  as  they  dyde  afterward. 

How  themperour,  for  tauenge5  hym  on  therle  /  made 
his  Conestables  tenbusshe  them  /  and  assaylle 
the  hoost  of  therle  /  ca  /  xlviij0  20 

He  conestables  whiche  had  commandement  of  Themperour,1 
The  Greeks  t  spak  to  gydre  to  theyr  men  /  And  made  a  busshement  nyghe 
Ambush!  and  to  the  hooste  of  the  Erie  of  Tholouse  /  In  the  nyght,  whan 

Earrs^rm'y   they  had  supposed  alle  well  to  be  assured,  themperours  peple  smote  24 
in  emong  them,  and  slewe  and  wonnded  many  or  they  were  awaked 
and  apperceyued  it  /  But  whan  the  crye  arroos  /  And  the  noble 
men  of  thooste  apperceyued  the  trayson,  they  armed  them  and 
reteyned  theyr  peple  that  began  to  flee  /  and  after  ran  vpon  them  28 
The  pilgrims  of  themperour,  And  slewe  many  /  and  chassed  the  remenaunt.     On 
aMaiiereto     the  mom  they  of  the  hooste  began  to  be  moche  esmayed  of  the 
were  much     trauaylle  that  they  /  had  suff  red  in  the  nyght  /  And  of  the  trayson 
by tlie  of  the  grekes  /  and  theyr  hertes  began  to6  cole  /  and  to  faylle  of  32 

treachery  of  o  I  J  o 

the  Greeks,     the  purpoose  of  theyr  waye  and  pylgremage.     And  not  only  the 

1  Orig.  Themperonr. 

2  Fr.  si  homes,  his  liege  men,  that  is,  they  had  sworn  fealty  to  him. 

3— 3  Fr.  "ne  li  nuiroient  mie  ti  legierenient,"  they  would  not  for  a  light 
thing  injure  him. 

4  Fr.  "  Car  toujour i  avoit  il  goutpegonnense  Vaggem  blee  de  nog  geng. " 
6  Orig.  taueuge.  •  Fr.  rcfroidier. 


Ch.  XLVIII.]     The  Emperor  tries  to  appease  them.  89 

sraal  &  comune  peple,  but  many  of  the  grete  &  noble  men  had 
forgoten  theyr  vowes  and  theyr  honours,  and  wold  haue  retorned 
home  vnto  theyr  countrey.     But  the  noble  bisshop  of  Puy  /  and  But  the  jjood 
4  Hhe  Bisshop2  of  Orenge  were  emonge  them,  and1  many  good1,  wyse,  p  u.  4i>Dk.] 
relygyous  men  and  clerkys,  that  prechyd1  to  them  the  wordes  of  our  P°y  «nd 
lord,  and  recomforted  them  moche  wel  /  And1  shewde  them  that  yf  ^ura«e(L 

'  '  J     them  to  con- 

they  retourned,  they  shold  lese  thonour  of  this  world  /  And  also  of  pnCTim!i«eir 
8  that  other.     Thus  with  grete  peyne  they  reteyned  them,     whan  the 
erle,  whiche  was  in  Constantynople,  herde  of  the  trayson  that  was  when  the 
don  to  hym  in  his  hoost,  he  was  as  a  man  out  of  his  wytte,  &  of  the 

Emperor's 

anon  sente  his  men  to  themperour  /  Ant?  sente  hym  word  that  he  treason  he 

'  was  beside 

12  had  betrayde  hym.     ffor  whyles  he  reteyned  hym  and  made  hym  himself  with 
good  chere,  he  had  doo  slee  his  peple  by  trayson  /  And  sente  worde 
herof  to  the  barons  that  were  on  that  other  syde,  prayeng  them  as 
his  bretheren  that  they  wold  come  to  hym  to  auenge  it.     wel  may 

16  ye  knowe  that  yf  therle  had  power  sufficient,  he  wold  not  haue 
departed  tyl  he  had  auengyd  hym;  And  that  it  shold  haue  ben 
dere  bought  /  ffor  he  was  a  man  of  grete  courage,  And  forgate  not 
lyghtly  shame  don  to  hym  /  Themperour  sawe  that  this  thynge  was  The  Emperor 

.  saw  that  he 

20  goon  ouer  ferre,  in  suche  wyse  that  he  repented  hym  /  that  he  had  had  gone  too 
so  commaunded  in  his  angre  and  hastynes,  and  hasted  hym  moche  begged  B<.he- 

°  *  »  j  mond  an<t 

for  to  sette  counseyl  in  this  werke  /  And  sente  /  for  Buymont  and  P^J^"',,, 
therle  of  fflaundres  to  come  and  speke  with  hym  /  by  cause  he  wold  ^1^'™,,,, 

24  sende  them  for  to  appese  therle  of  TholoUse  /  They  cam,  whiche  f0a^(Toxi' 
were  moche  angry  of  this  that  was  don  /  They  wente  to  therle  in 
the  name  of  themperour  /  But  they  sayd  to  hym  more  on  theyr 
owne  behalue  than  of  themperours  /  They  shewde  hym  wel  that  it 

28  was  not  tyme  ne  place  for  tauenge  his  shames  that  had  ben  don  to 
hym  in  the  seruyse  of  oure  lord,  ffor  it  shold  be  empesshement 
vnto  the  grete  werke  that  they  had  enterprised  for  to  saue  theyr 
sowles  /  And  on  that  other  syde,  yf  they  wolde  so  doo,  they  had 

32  not  the  power  ne  puyssaunce ;  therfor  it  were  better  to  hyde  their 
thoughtes  /  than  to  discouere  theyr  hertes,  to  theyr  domage  and 
shame  /  the  Erie,  thus  angry,  was  no  fool  /  but3  souffred  that  his  TheEari, 

who  was  no 

wytte  vaynquysshe  his  angre  /  And  said  that  he  wold  submette  to  fo°i.  listened 
36  thyse  two  noble  men  that  spak  to  hym,  and  byleue  them  /  They  pe™r'8 
cam  to  themperour  priuely,4  and  shewd  to  hym  al  the  fowle  dede 
and  werke  that  was  commysed  /  Themperour  vnderstode  the  grete 
yre  that  they  had  in  their  hertes  /  &  sente  for  therle  to  come  to 
2  Orig.  Bisslop.  Orig.  bnt.  4  Orig.  prinely. 

9  * 


90  The  Earl  of  Toulouse  does  Homage.     [Cb.  XLIX. 

hym  in  to  his  palays  /  &  excused  hym  to  fore  alle  pryue,  & 
apperte,  &  estrangers,  that  he  had  not  comanded  this  fayte  to  he 
doon  /  but  it  displesyd  hym  moche  /  And  yet  he,  beyng  without 
The  Emperor  culpe  and  blame  therof,  he  was  redy  to  restore  to  the  Due  alle  the  4 

[i  leaf  it]    dammages  that  l  were  don  to  his  hooste  after  his  power.     Thus 

make  good     euery  day  by  day  /  and  more  and1  more  myght  wel  be  perceyued  the 

done  by  Mi    grete  hate  that  the  grekes  had  to  the  latyns,  And  of  the  desloyal 

crusaders,     felonnye  that  themperour  had  in  his  herte  /  ayenst  oure  peple  /  but  8 

it  must  be  suffred  /  ffor  it  myght  not  thenne  be  amended. 

How  at  thynstaunt  prayer  of  the  barons  of  the 
hooste  /  The  Erie  made  hommage  to  themperour  / 
whiche  gaf  grete  yeftes  to  hym  and  his.  12 

Capitulo  xllx? 

a       Fter  the  counseyl  of  the  other  barons  /  the  erle  was  therto 
Finally,  the  meuyd  /  And  by  the  grete  prayers  of  themperour,  that  he  dyde 

iourse°swore"  hommage  to  hym,  and  sware  to  hym  feaulte,  lyke  as  the  other  had  16 
Kmperor,      doon  /  And  the  pees  was  affermed  emong  them.     Themperour  gaf 

as  tfie  other  '  ,,      .  .. 

great  barons  to  them  so  grete  yeftes  /  that  alle  they  were  merueyllously  esmayed  / 
The  other  barons,  that  were  come  ouer  agayn  on  the  hether  syde, 
receyued  newe  yeftes  and  presentes.     After,  they  passed  the  braas,  20 
and  retourned  in  to  bethnie.     And  they  prayd  moche  the  erle  that 
The  Eari       he  shold  not  longe  tarye  and  abyde  there,     the  Erles  hoost  cam  in 
constant?-     to  Constantynoble  /  And  he  made  them  passe  ouer  the  braas,  &  to 
his  men  en-    lodge  with  the  other:  he  hym  self  abode  in  the  toun,  for  certeyn  24 
the  others,     necessytees2  that  he  had  do  to  doo  and  to  ordeyne  /  And  he,  as  a 
The  Eari       moche  wyseman,  prayde  and  Incited  ofte  themperour  /  that  he 
t" pTrsuade    shold  enterpryse  the  seruyse  of  our  lord,  And  that  he  wold  be  lord 
to' go  to'jlru-  and  capytayn  of  alle  the  hoost  /  where  as  were  so  many  noble  men  /  28 
them.  And  he  had  hope  that  our  lord  shold  sende  to  hym  suche  honnour 

that  he  shold  delyuere  his  peple  and  londe  by  hym  /  3wel  coude  the 
Erie  make  to  hym  remonstrance  /  acordyng  to  the  barons  whiche 
had  spoken  in  this  mater3  /  Themperour  answerd  to  them  alle  in  32 
The  Emperor  one  maner  /  that  this  pylgremage4  was  a  moche  hye  thynge  /  and 
that  he  muoh  that  he  moche  desyred  the  pardon  /  And  aboue  alle  other  thyng*  the 

desired  to  go. 

2  Orig.  ueceasytees. 

3-3  Yr.  "  Bien  *$avoit  le  conte  lui  monstrer,  telonc  ce  que  lex  autre* 
baron*  hit  aroient  monttri  quit  parlast,  et  etixviesmes  en  avoient  parli." 
1  Orig.  pylgrenagr. 


Ch.  L]  They  go  to  Niccna.  91 

companye  of  so  hye  noble  men  plesyd  hym  moche.     And  about  nuti.iscnnn- 
hyni  and  his  empyre  he  sayd  he  had  moch  cruel  peple  and  moch  surrounded 
vntrew,  as  the  Bougres,  the  comans,  and  other  that  gladly  wold  doo  j^^'j  l^at 
4  harme  to  hym  and1  to  his  londe,  and  conquere  his  Empyre,  as  moche  JJjJgJjJgJf" 
as  they  myght  gete  /  And  therfore  it  were  grete  parylle  for  me  to  {^*ve 
withdrawe  fro  my  Countreye  /  well  and  fayre  he  excused  hym 
withoute  forth  /  But  that  he  sayd  to  oure  *  peple  was  but  trycherye  pir.«,bk.] 
8  and  falsehed ;  ne  he  had  neuer  talente  to  helpe  our  peple  /  But 
thought  wel  in  his  herte  how  he  myght  noye  them  to  his  power  / 
They  that  were  ouer  the  braas  /  The  Due  Godeffroy  /  Buymont  / 
therle  of  fflaundres  /  And  the  Bisshop  of  Puy,  aduysed  and  ordeyned 

1 2  theyr  affayres  for  them  /  And  eayde  they  wold  drawe  them  to  ward  The  great 
Nycene  /  ffor  to  abyde  there  the  other  Barons  that  were  comyng1  on  ^''^J^0 
the  waye  /  whan  they  approched  a  cyte  which  was  named  Nyco-  JjJ^JdmT 
mede  /  which  is  the  oldest  Cyte  of  the  Countre  of  Bythyne  /  Be  ye  of  the  otl'm- 

16  certayne  that  Pieter  theremyte,  with  a  fewe  peple  that  had  abyden  on  the  way 
there,  yssued  oute  of  the  poure2  place  /  And  had  ben  there  for  the  tered  Peter 
wynter.     And  cam  ayenst  thyse  Barons,  and  ealewed  them.     They 
made  to  them  good  chere  /  And  demaunded  them  of  theyr  waye 

20  and  Iourneyes  /  They  gaf  to  them  3grete  yefets,  of  whiche  they  had 

crete  nede.8     Pieter  tolde  to  them  theyr  grete  mesauentures  *  And  who  recounts 

°  JO  'his  misfor- 

sayde  that  it  cam  by  theyr  owne  oultrage  and  folye.     Thyse  noble  tunes, 
men  of  whome  I  haue  sayd,  had  peple  ynowgh,  and  cam  to  Nycene  / 
24  And  assieged  it  the  XV  /  day  of  maye  /  They  lefte  places  ynough  TheCru- 

sailers  cum- 

for  to  lodge  the  other  Barons  that  cam  after.     The  Erie  of  Tho-  mence  the 

siege  of 

louse,  whan  he  had  do  made  suche  thynges  as  hym  neded  hiNiceathe 
Constantynoble  /  he  toke  leue  of  Themperour  /  whiche  gaf  to  hym  May- 
28  ryche  yeftes  alle  newe  /  And  cam  after  hastely  to  the  syege  of 
Nycene. 

How   due   Robert    of    Normandye,    and   other    here 

named,    approched   Constantinoble  /  and    made 

32  hommage  to  themperour.  ca°  1° 

N   the   whyle  that   they  leyde   the  syege  /  Robert  due  of  Robert,  Dnke 

...  .  .  .        .  ,  .  ofNormand}, 

i       normandye,  and  other  noble  men  with  hym:  that  is  to  saye,  and  other 

;    '  f       '  J    '  noblemen 

Steuen  therle  of  Chartres  and  of  bloys  /  Eustace  broder  of 

2  Orig.  ponre. 

3-3  Caxton  has  translated  here  very  freely.     Fr.  "telement  quite  eurent 
grandement  leurs  necessites."  *  Ch'ig.  mesanentures. 


92  Robert  of  Normandy  arrives.  [Cli.  LT. 

Bentmes-  Due  Godeffroye,  sente  to  the  Emperour  and  to  other  Barons  theyr 
the  Emperor,  messagers  /  In  theyr  companye  were  Steven1  dauhmable,  Alayn 
fergaunt  /  And1  Conayn,  two  hye  Barons  of  Brytayne;  The  erle 
Rotheron  of  Perse,  Rogyer  de  Bameuylle  /  Thyse  and  other  ynowgh  4 
They  had  were2  in  the  Yere  to  fore,  in  thentre  of  Wynter,  comen  In3  to 
winter  in       Puylle  and1  in  to  Calabre,  whiche4  ben  good1  Countreyes  /  Whan 

Apulia,  but  iii,i  i/»i 

in  the  spring  the  newe  tyme  was  comen  /  they  assembled!  theyr  peple  /  And! 

had  crossed  J  '  J  ,  ,     .       ,    ,        o 

toDuraB,       ordeyned  theyr  passage  on  the  see,  And!  cam  to  duras  /  And  by  8 

pieafis]  cause  they  had!  taryed  so  5longe,  they  hasted*  them  moche,  and! 
foliVmarches  passed  Macedomone  and1  the  two  thaarses,  And1  by  grete  Iourneyes 
constant?-  an(*  grete  trauaylles  cam  vnto  Constantynople.  Themperour  sente 
nopie.  £0J.  tnem  to  come  to  hym  /  They  that  knewe  how  the  other  barons  1 2 

The  Emperor  had  don,  cam  in  to  his  palays  to  hym  /  He  receyued  them  with 

welcomed  '  r       J  «■•.«- 

them,  and     moche  grete  love  /  Alle  his  Barons  made  to  them  grete6  feste  /  He 

demanded  B  ■*      '  °  ' 

theoatiiof     Spak  to  eueryche  by  hym  self  ryght  swetly,  "and  acqueynted8  with 
they  gave,     hem7  /  After  dyde  do  requyre  of  them  hommage  and!  feaulte.    They  16 
dyde  as  the  other  had  don  that  were  passed1  to  fore  /  And!  sayd  it 
was  no.  shame  to  ensiewe  thensample  of  so  valyaunt  men,  ne  to  doo 
that  they  had1  don  /  They  becam  his  men,  and1  dyde  hym  hommage, 
and1  swore  to  hym  /  Themperoure  receyued  them  in  his  grace  /  And  20 
gaf  to  them  so  grete  yef tes  that  they  were  abasshed  alle  /  ffor  the 
yeftes  were  so  ryche  and  so  dyuerse  /  that  they  neuer  to  fore  had 
They  then      seen  none  such  /  And  after  toke  theyr  leue9  of  Themperour  /  And 
way  to     sir  passed  the  braas  of  Seynt  George  /  And  cam  with  grete  haste  to  24 
where 'they     Nycene  /  where  as  the  hooste  of  cristiente  abode  for  them.     The 

were  rGC€ivcd 

with  great     Ioye  was  grete  whan  they  were  comen,  whiche  were  the  laste  /  They 
lodged  them  in  the  places  that  were  kept  for  them. 

How  themperour  sente  for  to  destroye  oure  Cristen  28 
men  one  his  seruaunt,  faynyng  to  be  a  trewe 
Conduyteur  &  guyde.  ca°  lj° 

1  Fr.  Etienne  d'Aubemarle. 

2  Caxton  has  here  omitted  "  avecques  le  contc  de  Flandres,  et  avec  Hvon 
le  Maine." 

3  Misled  by  the  recurrence  of  the  words  "Apulia  and  Calabria''''  Caxton 
has  here  omitted  several  lines.  Fr.  "  en  Puille  et  en  Calabre.  Mais  qvand 
les  autres  passcrent  jutques  a  Duras,  ceulx-ci  pour  la  presse  de  Viver  y 
rassejr>iyerent  leurs  gens,  et  se  remiserent  en  Puille  et  en  Calabre  qm  tont 
moult  bonnes  terres."  *  Or\g.  whehe.  8  Orig.  grede. 

7-7  Fr.  "et  moult  Men  les  aeointa"  and  received  them  kindly. 
8  Orig.  acqneynted.  9  Orig.  lene. 


Ch.  LI  I.]  All  assemble  before  Niccca.  93 

Atyns1  was  a  Greke,  and  wel  acqueynted  with  themperour,  tatym  wn$  » 

*  *      *  *  treacherous 

1        the  moost  fals,  vntrewe  man  that  euer  was.     And"  so  he  wel  and  .leceitiui 

Greek, 

semed  /  2ffor  he  had  his  nosethrellys  remuled  and  tourned.2 
4  This  felawe,  by  the  commandenieut  of  his  lorde,  wente  with  oure  who,  by  the 

'      •'  order  of  the 

men  /  And  sayd  that  he  wold  conduyte3  them,  ffor  he  knewe  wel  Emperor 

l  •  J  '  conducted 

alle  the  Contre  and  the  paases  by  whiche  they  wold  passe  and  goo  /  our  men. 
But  Themperour  dyde  alle  this  for  euyl  /  ffor  he  trusted  in  the 
8  falsenesse  of  this  fals  greek  /  whiche  counseylled  them  allewey  to 
theyr  dammage  /  And  was  alway  as  the  serpent  emonge  the  elis. 
And  themperour  had  charged  hym  for  to  late  hym  wyte  euery  day 
how  the  boost  behaued  them,  and  of  theyr  purpose  /  And  therupon 

12  he  wold  sende  to  hym  his  wylle  and4  entente  /  At  this  siege  oure  Atthesirge 
peple  first  assembled  to  gydre,  and  the  Capyteyns  and  barons  spak  the  crusade™ 
of  theyr  comune5  werkes  and  counseyls  /  ffor  to  fore  they  had  '™  wer« "" 
neuer  ben   to   gydre,   ne   seen   eche   other  /  6ther   was   knowen  together. 

16  certaynly7  by  nombre  and  by  extymacion  to  8fore  Nycene,6  whan  [«if.  «,bic.] 
they  were  alle  assembled  /  sixe  .C  /  thousand  men  a  fote  /  And  of  There  were 

-ii  iTTi-h  600,000  foot- 

knyghtes  and  men  of  armes  on  horsbak,  an  hundred  thousand  or  soldiers  and 

J  °  '  ,      100,000 

moo  /  They  alle  had  moche  grete  wylle  for  to  employe  them  wel  in  knights  and 
20  this  warre  /  And  desyred  moche  at  this  fyrst  begynnyng1  of  theyr 
warre  to  enterprise  so  hyely  and  doo  so  wel  /  that  alle  other  peple 
shold  doubte  them. 

Of  the   situacion  of  Nycene  /  And  how  our  peple 

24  approched  therto  /  Merueyllyng  of  the  place  and 

of  the  strengthe  /  cap0  lij° 

o       F  the  cyte  of  nycene,  knowe  ye  that  it  had  be  vnder  tharche- 
bysshop  of  nychomede  /  But  themperour  constantyn  made  it  to 
28  be  taken  away  fro  the  power  of  this  archebysshop  /  and  it  was  a  Niaea  was 
place  of  honour  /  by  cause0  the  fyrst  of  the  iiij  grete  counseylles  1,onor'  be" 
had  be  sette  there  /  ffor  in  the  tyme  of  seynt  syluestre  the  pope  /  otrthtef°uunrciU 

had  been  held 
1  Fr.  Latins.     Lat.  Latinus.  ll,ere- 

2—2  Yr.  "  Car  il  avoit  unes  narines  rennilees."     Lat.    "  nares  habens 

mutilas  in  signum  mentis pervertae."     Caxton  evidently  read  remulees,  and 

then  not  understanding   the  word,  gave   it   an  English  termination,  and 

transferred  it  bodily  to  his  translation. 

3  Orig.  condnyte.  *  Orig.  aud.  6  Orig.  comnne. 

*— •  One  of  the  important  verbs  is  left  out  in  this  sentence.     Fr.  "  selonc 

ce  quilfut  certainement  seen  par  nombre  et  par  estimacion  ilx  eurent  devant 

Nicene"  etc.,  i.  e.  they  had  before  Nicene.  etc. 
7  Orig,  certayuly.  8  Orig.  cause. 


94  Description  of  Niccca.  [Ch.  LIIL 

in  the  time     ther   was    a   patriarke   of    constantinoble,   named    alexandre    /   & 

of  the  Em-  '  ,  .  ' 

peror  Con-     emperour  constantm  /  ther  was  a  mescreaimt  named  amus  /  which 

mantine, 

there  was »  mesprised  certeyn  poyntes  of  the  fayth  /  &  many  men  folowed 
Arnni.  hym.  therfor  assembled  in  the  Cyte  of  Nycene  iij.  C.  xviij.  4 
usge'mlied  at  prelates  /  And1  there  was  disputed  ajenst  this  popelican.  And  by 
condemned  wytnes  of  scripture,  and  by  thaccord  of  holy  men  that  were  there, 
bi»  heresy.  Arryus  was  condempned  and  his  myscreaunce  /  Syth  after,  in  the 
tynie  of  an  another  constantyn,  Emperour,  whiche  was  sone  vnto  8 
ayerne,1  Assembled1  another  counseyl2  in  the  same  place  /  whiche 
The  seventh    was  the  /  vij  /     Thenne  was  adryan  pope  of  Rome  :  And  Tareste3 

Councilor  the  .  . 

church  was    was  patriarke  of  Constantinople,     there  were  dampned  som  mys- 

alsoheld  r  r  r  J 

here,  when     byleuyd  peple,  that  said  /  that  alle  the  ymages  that  were  made  in  12 
Pope  of        holy  chirche  were  ayenst  the  fayth,  And  they  were  false  cristen 
men  and*  vntrewe  that  suff  red  them.    This  cyte  of  Nycene  stondeth 
in  a  playn,  but  the  montaynes  ben  nyghe  /  And  it  lacked  not  moche, 
The  country  5but  they  be  round  aboute5  /  The  countrey  is  moche  fayr  and  10 

roundabout  J  ,  ,  , 

is  fair  and      plentyuous  /  6the  grete  forestes  ben  by  a  ryuer  nyghe  the  cyte, 
toward  the  weste,  moche  longe  and  brode6  /  By  that  ryuer  the 
shyppes  brynge  vytaylle  and  other  marchandyse  in  to  the  cyte ; 
whan  it  is  a  grete  wynde,  the  grete  wawes  smyte  sore  on  the  walles.  20 
On  that  other  part  of  the  toun  ben  grete  dyches,  brode  and  depe, 

The  wails  of  And  ful  of  water,  of  a  lake  and  other  ffontaynes.     The  walles 

the  city  are 

strone,  high,  aboute  be  stronge,  hye  /  thycke  /  And  fulle  of  grete  Tourettys  / 

17  leaf  m]    The  Peple  within  7the  toun  were  fiers  and  hardy,  and  wel  aduysed  24 
and  the         0f  armes8  /  And  grete  plente  there  were  /  whan  oure  men  approched 
and  skiifJi  in  ^'  *ney  merueyUed  moche  of  the  strengthe  of  the  toun. 

arms. 

How  the   puyssaunt  Turke   Solyman,  with  a   grete 
hoost,  aduysed  tyme  and  houre  to  assayle  and  28 
smyte  on  our  peple,  for  to  reyse  the  siege  / 

Capitulo  liij0 

s        Olyman,  of  whome  I  haue  spoken  to  fore,  whiche  was  a  moche 
puyssaunt  Turke,  had  the  seygnorye  of  this  cyte  /  and  of  alle  32 

1  Fr.  Irene.     Lat.  Irenae.  2  Orig.  couuseyl. 

3  Fr.  Tarese*.  *  Orig.  aud. 

6-6  Fr.  "  queles  ne  toient  tout  entonr,"  but  that  they  surround  it  entirely. 

6—4  Fr.  "  Let  granz  forez  sont  delez  ;  vns  lait  ext  pre*  de  la  cite  moult 
lez  et  moult  Ions  derers  Occident."  Caxton's  French  text  gave  "river" 
(fleuve),  which  he  has  followed,  but  the  Latin  and  the  other  French  transla- 
tions give  "  lake"  (lais).  8  Fr.  ''arises  d'armes,"  skilled  iu  armes. 


Ch.  LIV.]  Some  Details  about  Solyman.  93 

the  countre  aboute.     he  was  moche  wyse  /  hardy  and1  manly  of  his  solyman  wo. 

'  r  wi»e,  hardy, 

body,     ff ro  the  tyme  that  he  herde  of  the  coraynge  of  our  peple  /  and  m*niy. 
he  was  garnysshecf  of  his  frendes  and  soldyours  for  to  defende  his 
4  cyte  and  his  londe.     An  vncle  of  his,  named  Belphet,(18)  moche  His  unci* 

J  r         »\       /  Belphethad 

puyssaunt  and  ryche,  had1  late  conquerd1  alle  the  londe  that  is  fro  conquered  ><n 
the  braas  of  seynt  george  vnto  surry  /  whiche  is  /  xxx  /  iourneyes  ^"■eut^ti' 
longe  /  In  that  tyme  Romanus  diogenes  was  Emperour,1  whiche2  s*Ti*- 
8  was  to  fore  alexes  /  that  was  deposed  /  This  belphet,  soudan  of  Beipiiet  gave 

'  .         ,        .  ,  ,  .     the  greater 

perse,  had  gyuen  the  gretter  parte  of  the  londe  to  solyman  his  part  or  their 
neuew  /  in  suche  wyse  that  he  had  alle  the  londe  fro  the  cyte  of  solyman. 
tarce,  that  is  in  Cylyce,  vnto  the  braas  of  seynt  george  /  Thus  this 

12  Solyman  8hadl  his  baylles  in  the  town  of  Constantinoble,3  whiche 
resseyuyd"  his  passages4  and!  custommes  of  the  marchans  of  the 
toune  and  of  other.  This  solyman  was  withdrawen  to  the  montaynes 
with  as  moche  peple  as  he  myght  haue,  ax/  myle  fro  the  hoost, 

16  And  dyde  lye  in  a  wayte  and  espye  how  he  myght  fynde  the  maner 
to  reyse  the  siege  /  yf  he  had  mocht  / 

How  Solyman,  beyng  in  the  montaynes,  sente  his 

messagers    to    them    of    the    toun,    &    of    the 

20  comfort  that  he  gaf  to  them.  ca°  liiij0 

Wre  peple  cam  to  fore  the  tonn,  and  withoute  acorde  and  The  cm- 
o       without  ony  ordenaunce  began  tassaylle,  in  suche  wyse  that  ™»ted '" 
they  within  myght  not  yssue  /  ne  they  without  entre.     But  the  idiaMt- 
24  the  grete  lake  that  toucheed1  the  town  destroubled1  moche,  ffor  they  able  to  go  ami 

come  by  the 

myghte,  maulgre  the  Hooste,  goo  and  come  by  the  see  as  ofte  as  Lake. 

they  wolde  /  Oure  Peple  had1  none  shippes,  ne  myght  not  deffende 

the  lake.    Certaynly  they  had1  besyeged1  5it  wel  by  londe  /  Solyman,  pif. fi.bk.] 

28  that  sawe  this  cyte  thus  enuyronned1  with  peple,  wherof  he  was 
wroth  &  angry  /And  doubted  moche  that  they  of  the  toun  shold 
be  abasshed  of  the  grete  multitude,     ther  for  he  sente  two  of  his  solyman  «er.t 
preuy  messagers,  And  commaundedf  them  in  his  name  that  they  *«"  to  the 

32  shokf  entre  in  to  the  toun  /  And1  saye  thyse  wordes,  "  I  holde  you 
so  valyaunt  men,  and1  of  suche  prouesse,  that  I  byleue  certaynly 

1  Oriff.  Emperonr.  2  Lat.  "qui  ante  hvnc  Alexium fuerat  tertuis.' 

3—3  Caxton's  corrupt  French  text  does  not  follow  the  Latin  very  closely 
here.  The  text  of  the  Historiens  Occidentaux  gives  a  more  correct  version  ; 
"  En  tel  maniere  nets  qnil  avoit  set  baillez,  tPavtre  part,  en  la  veue  de 
Constantinople"  i.  e.  he  ftad  his  bailiffs  just  in  sight  of,  not  within  Con- 
stantinople. *  Fr.  j'eages,  tolls  for  passage. 


96  Soly man's  Messengers  are  taken  Prisoners.     [Ch.  LV. 

telling  the  that  ye  preyse  and1  sette  lytil  by  this  peple,  that  ben  comen  fro  so 

l!rtto few  fer  contreyes,  where  the  sonne  goth  doun.     And  they  be  wery,  euyl 

saders,  who  ordeyned  and  garnysshed,  and  haue  none  horses  that  may  endure 

with  travel,  trauavll  /  we  ben  fressh,  and  our  horses  rested  in  our  contre  /  4 

and  poorly  J        I 

armed;         wherof  it  is  no  doubte  we  be  better  than  they  an  0  /  tymes.     And! 

that  ye  maye  wel  knowe,  ffor  it  is  not  longe  syth  that  we  dis- 

confyted  in  one  day  moo  than  /  1.  M  /  Therfor  conforte  you  and 

mayntene  you  as  noble  men,  fforto  morn,  to  fore  the  houre  of  none,  8 

and  to  be       ye  shal  be  without1  faylle  delyuerd  of  them  alle  /  but  be  ye  wel 

wo^&comhee  aduertysed  &  redy,  that  whan  we  smyte  in  the  hoost  /  ye  opene 

to'deieiverlay  youre2  yates  and*  yssue  vpon  them  in  suche  wyse  /  that  ye  thenne 

be  parteyners  of  the  vyctorye  of  thonour  /  &  of  the  prouffyt "  /         12 

How  the  messagers  of  Soly  man  were  taken  by  our 
men,  and  by  them  was  knowen  the  couyne  of  the 
sayd  solyman.  cap0  lv° 

t        He  messagers  of  Solyman  cam  upon  the  lake,  And  arryued  a  16 
lytil  ferre  fro  the  toun.     And1  after  began  tespye  and!  see  how 
our  people     they  myght  entre  in  to  the  cyte  /  Oure  peple  apperceyued!  them  and? 
*ne8Mn"eere,    ran  on  them,  that  one  of  them  was  slayn  atte  takynge  /  That  other 
one,  and  took  was  brought  a  lyue  to  fore  the  barons  /  they  made  hym  to  be  20 
prisoner.       drawen  and  payned  to  saye  the  trouthe.     he  confessyd  and  sayde 
that  Solyman  had!  sente  them  in  to  the  cyte  3tfor  to  garnysshe  them 
&  make  them  redy  /  ffor  theyr  lord  on  the  morn  shold  come3  and 
After  hearing  smyte  sodanly  in  the  hoost  /  the  barons  byleuyd  hym  wel.     And  24 
I"onC,0tnhfr"     commaumled  hym  to  be  kept  /  And  toke  courcseyl  emong  them  how 
took'couXi,  they  shold*  doo.     Therle  of  Tholouse  and!  the  bisshop  of  puy  were 
t?  mait  soiy-  not  yet  come  vnto  the  hoost  /  The  barons  sente  for  them  hastely 

for  this  thynge  /  They  cam  and!  rode  alle  the  nyght,  in  suche  wyse  28 
that  they  cam  in  to  the  hoost  to  fore  the  sonne  rysyng.    The  baners 
were  displayed!,  and!  the  trompes  sowned.     Ther  was  moche  peple, 
&  vnneth  myght  they  be  lodged  in  the  places  that  were  kept  for 
m  he"ad    '  them  /  Thenne  Solyman  at  the  hour  of  tierce  /  lyke  as  he  sayd!  that  32 

promised,  ,  .  mi 

the  next        was  taken  /  cam  doun  fro  the  montstyn  m  to  the  playn.      inenne 

morning.  '  *  ,      .        , 

[Meaf45]    our  peple  that  were  4wel  aduertysed  armed  them.     And  dyde  do 

i   Orig.  wthiout.  •  2  Orig.  yonre. 

3~3  Fr.  "pour  eulx  garnir  de  ce  que  leur  seignevr  vendroit  le  lende- 
main;''  to  warn  them  that  their  lord  would  come  the  next  day  ;  garnir 
seems  here  to  be  used  in  its  original  German  sense. 


Oh.  LVL]  Solyman  attacks  the  Crusaders.  97 

sowne  the  trompettes.  Euery  man  drewe  hym  in  to  his  hataylle 
as  it  was  ordeyned!  /  and1  moche  quyckely1  were  alle  sette  in 
ordenaunce. 

4  How  a  grete  bataylle  of  Solyman  cam  smyte  vpoii 
our  peple,  And  of  thende  of  the  scarmuche. 

capitulo  lvi° 
o       F  the  hooste  of  Solyman  departed  a  hataylle  fro  the  other, 

wherin  where2  .x.M  /  men  on  horsbak  /  And1  drewe  them  oneofSuiy- 

man's  batta- 

8  toward1  the  gate  ri"ht  toward1  the  south  /  Ther  was  lodged1  therle  lion*  attacked 

°  .  tlte  Earl  of 

of  tholouse.     And!  this  yate  was  delyuerd!  hym  to  kepe  /  But  Soly-  Toulouse, 
man  that  the  day  to  fore  had  espyedf  that  waye  and  had1  seen  no 
man  there  lodged  /  And1  wende  that  no  man  had!  ben  there  /  ffor  he 

12  knewe  nothynge  of  the  comynge  of  therle  ne  his  companye  /  this 
bataylle  smote  in  emonge  the  peuple  that  were  comen  /  They 
receyued  them  moche  fiersly  with  glayues  &  swerdes  /  &  sore 
adommaged  them  /  3Aml  made  them  to  resorte  agayn  bakward1.3 

16  Solyman4  that  ensiewed  made  them  to  retourne  with  hym,  and  Solyman 
assembled  to  the  peple  of  the  erle  of  fflaunders  /  The  due  godefroye,  returned  and 
buymont,  and  therle  of  thoulouse,  aduysed  and  sawe  that  ther  were  them  again, 
so  many  of  the  turkes  /  that  the  erle  of  fflaunders  myght  not  suffre 

20  alle.  And1  adressyd  theyre  bataylle  to  that  parte  /  And  smote  in 
emonge  them.  The  medle  was  moche  harde  /  and  aspre5  /  And 
many  turkes  were  slayn  /  Ther  was  so  moche  don  and  so  wel  /  that  Many  Turks 

'  ^  were  slain. 

Guy  de   gerlande,  seneshal   of   the   kynge  of   ffiaunce,6   Guy  du 
24  puysett,  Eogier  de  barneuylle  /  Thyse  bare  awey  the  prys  to  fore  all 

other.     But  this  bataylle  endured!  wel  an  houre  al  hoole  /  In  thende  After  an 

hour "s  pon- 
tile turkes  myght  suffre  nomore  our  peple  /  But  were  discornfyted!  test  they  were 
JO  f  i      i  j        forced  t0  flee_ 

1  Orig.  qti)'ckely.         2  Fr.  estoient,  "were"  not  " tcltere" 

8—3  Yy.  '•  et  Jirent  ressortir  arriere." 

4  According  to  the  Latin  original  Soliman  on  returning,  attacked,  not 
the  troops  of  the  count  of  Flanders,  hut  those  of  the  count  of  Toulouse,  and 
the  count  of  Flanders  came  to  his  rescue  with  Godfrey  of  Boulogne  and 
Bohemond.  Caxton's  translation  is  due  to  his  corrupt  French  text.  Lat. 
"pmwi  ecce  Solimaniuig,  cum  vtajvribus  subsequens  ropiis  eis,  refundens  aui- 
vios  qui  jam  erant  dwolvti,  tecum  itervm,  in  noxtros  redire  compulit.  At 
vera  dux,  dominvs  quoque  Boamnndus  et  comes  Flandrensis,  cum  suis  ej-pe- 
ditionibux,  ad  itnguem  armati,  videntes  hostium  majores  adcenisse  cuneox  et 
tnrmas  denriores,  \_et~\  gravl  multitudine  et  animox.%  inxtantia  comctis 
exercitum  supra  rires  fatigari,  irruunt  imammiter,  et  hostium  se  inferunt 
legioni-bus." 

6  Fr.  aspre.  vigorous,  sharp. 

r>  Lat  (jiiidc  de  Porscssa.     A  Guy  de  Posessc. 

GODFKEW        ,  H 


08  The  Position  of  the  Barons  at  the  Siege.     [Ch.  LVII. 

and  fledde  away  raoche  fowly  /  Our  peple  folowed  them  not  ferre, 
ffor  the  montaynes  and  the  wodes  were  ouer  nere  in  which  they 
fledde  /  But  were  of  turkes  slayn  /  iiij.  thousand,  and!  som  ther  were 
The  cm-       a  lyue  taken  /  Oure  peple  had  nioche  grete  ioye  of  this  vyctorye,  4 
greatTy"*™    and*  cam  ageyn  to  theyr  siege,  and?  besieged?  the  toun1  as  wel  as 
this  victory,    they  myghte  for  to  angre  and?  discourage  them  within  the  toun, 
whiche  awayted  after  socoure.    They  made  to  he  caste  with  engynes 
to  them  within  the  toun  grete  plente  of  heedes  of  the  turkes  that  8 
had  ben  slayn  in   the  bataylle  /  The   prisonners  a   lyue  and  a 
They  sent  a    thousand?  heedes  of  the  turkes  they  sente  to  themperour  /  He  coude 
heXtftfie    them  grete  thanke  and*  had1  therof  moche  ioye.     And  sente  to  them 
Emperor.'6    agayne  newe  yeftes  of   Iewellys,   of  clothes   of  sylk   and?   other  12 
pir.40,bk.i  thynges  right  largely  /  And?  conmiaunded  to  the  marchauntes  2that 
they  shold  lede  vytaylle  ynowe  vnto  the  hooste  /  and  other  thynges 
necessary  e. 

How  oure  barons  were  lodged  in  the  sayd  siege  /  of  16 
their  mayntene  /  And  how  euery  daye  they  en- 
forced3 them  tassaylle  the  toun  /       Capitulo  lvii" 

The  great      m      Oche  thought  our  barons  how  this  cyte  myght  be  assieged  on 
TOunsei'hotv  alle  partyes,  ffor  other  wyse  them  semed  they  myght  not  gete  it  /  20 

theasieg!fof  By  comyn  couwseyl  they  lodged  them  alle  /  They  sette  ayenst  the 
sonne  rysyng  the  due  and  his  two  bretheren  /  Toward  byse4  were 
lodged  buymont  and5  tancre  and  the  other  barons  that  were  in 
theyr  companye  /  6The  due7  of  normandye  and  the  eile  of  fflaunders  24 
lodged  by  them  to  ward  the  south  /  The  erle  of  tholouse,6  hue  le 
mayne,  the  bisshop  of  puy,  therle  of  chartres,  and  other  barons, 
many  with  alle  their  peple,  were  so  lodged  that  alle  the  cyte  was 
enclosed  sauf  the  lake  whiche  was  in  the  weste  /  And  after  sente  28 
They  sent  for  they  hastely  in  to  the  forest.  And  made  to  come  grete  plente  of 
rnTkTma-      tymbre  for  to  make  engyns  /  Alle  the  carpenters  of  the  hoo5ts  and 

chines. 

1   Orig.  tonn. 

3  Fr.  "  ilz  s'efforcoient?'  they  exerted  themselves. 

4  Fr.  "deters  bise,"  toward  the  North.     Lat.  Septentrionalis. 

5  Orig.  aud. 

°-6  Caxton  lias  altered  the  sense  here,  by  wrongly  dividing  his  sentence, 
misled  probably  by  his  original,  in  which  it  is  difficult  to  decide  which  is  the 
correct  division.  A.  gives  the  clearer  and  more  correct  reading — "  11  qvens 
tie  Flandre*  et  li  dim  de  Xormaiidle  se  loglerent  lez  avz  :  defers  viidi  fn  It 
ijueiis  de  Toulouse"  ete.  "•    Orig.  tlnk.  8   Orig.  hooost 


Ch.  LVIIL]     The  Barons  make  an  unsuccessful  Assault.  99 

sawyers  cam  forth  /  of  whom  was  grcte  nombre.     In  a  lytil  whyle  ^^,™njneg 
reysed  they  engynes  and  slynges.     And1  made  in  therthe  wayes  and  wid.ii»g» 
caues  couerd  for  to  fylle   the   dyches  and   to   myne   the  walles, 
4  Ther  was  grete  caste  of  Rrete  stones  at  the  walles  and  tourettes  /  so  They  ca»t 

-i    *  .»v-».       »»^  0  n  ,  great  atones 

that  in  many  places  the  walles  were  clefte  and  broken  in  many  ^1,*r^'.'t 
partes  /  ffor   to  doo   thyse  thynges  /  they  were  wel  .vii.  wekes.  j»a™»y 
There  were  in  this  whyle  many  assaultes  and  fyghtes  ofte  to  fore 
8  the  yates  /  On  a  day  the  barons  acorded1  that  the  toun  shold  be 
assaylled ;   but  this  assault  endamaged  lytil   the  toune  ne  them  Thgr  w»Hit- 
within.     But  ther  were  lost  two  valyaunt  men  /  that  one  was  j^^Jf/*1 
named1  Bawdwyn  handeron,1  a  ryche  man  anil  a  good  knyght  of 

12  berry  /  That  other  was  of  fflaundere  named  Bawdwyn  of  gauwt, 
noble  and  hardy  /  2  Thyse  two  wente  so  ferre  to  fore  daye,  that2  the 
one  was  slayn  with  a  stroke  of  a  stone  /  3And  that  other  with  an 
Arowe  /  Guyllem,  Erie  of  forest  /  And  Galles  de  lylle,3  thyse  two 

1 6  were  hye  noble  men  /  and  assaylled  moche  that  day.  In  this  tyme 
deyde  of  .sekenes  in  the  hoost  guy  de  possesse  a  moche  good  knyght. 
The  hooste  were  sorouful  of  the  deth  of  thvse  noble  meu  /  but  The  army 

was  very 

euery  man4  that   our   lord  wold"  gwerdone  them   perpetually  in  ^.™^the 
20  heuen   nor   the   good   seruyse   that   they  deyde   in.      They  were  death  oft™ 
honourably  buryed  /  And  after  entended  vnto  theyr  werke  / 

» 
5 How  our  barons  made  theyr  castellys  of  tree  and  ap-   c5  »■»' «J 
prouched  the  toun.     And  how  they  within  the 
24  toun  brake  one  of  them  and  slewe  them  with 

Inne.  Capitulo  lviij. 

o       X  a  day  the  capytavnes  of  the  hooste  were  acorded  that  the  They  deei.ied 

</  *  «       ■»  to  move  their 

castellys  that  they  had  made  shold  be  drawen  forth  and  aproche  **%*** t0 
28  the  walles  /  fTor  eche  of  the  greet  men  had  commaunded  to  make 

1  Fr.  Baudot  n  Chandcron.     Lat.  Calderon. 

2-2  Fr  u  ces  je„x  s'tstoient  moult  tires  avant,  ee  jour,  tant  que,"1  etc., 
these  two  had  gone  so  far  in  advance  (of  the  others)  that  day,  that,  etc. — 
Caxton  has  mistaken  "  avant "  for  a  preposition  governing  day,  instead  of 
an  adverb  modifying  "tires.'" 

3— 3  Fr.  "li  atttres  d'une  gajete,  et  remest  li  assauz,  un  autre  jour  fu 
recommenciez  li  assauz  par  acort  des  barons  et  fu  oecis  d'une  sajete,  Guil- 
laums  li  quens  de  Fores,  et  Galles  de  Lyle.  Caxton  has  ruined  the  sense 
here,  l>y  his  "  bourdon."     He  has  omitted  all  between  the  two  "  sajetes." 

4  Fr.  "tos  avoient  ferine  esperance  que  nostrr  Seigneur,  qui  en  son 
service  les  prenoit,  leur  gverredoitnoit  moult  hautemeHt  d  tousjoHc*.'  Cax- 
ton has  omitted.  "  had  a  firm  hope,"  just  before  "  that  our  Lord. 

II    1 


]  00  The  Turks  destroy  the  Engines  of  the  Crusaders.     [Ch.  LIX. 


Herman  of 
Germany  and 
Henri 
D'Asque 
ilevise  a  pow- 
erful engine. 


The  Turks 
broke  this 

engine  and 
killed  all  the 
knights 
within. 


Onr  men 

could  not 
prevent  the 
enemy  from 
entering  the 
city  by  the 
lake. 


The  barons 
decided  to 
bring  ships 
overland  on 

carts  from 
the  sea  to 
this  hike. 


[7  If.  47,  bk 


an  engyne  hastely  in  his  parte  /  The  erle  herman  of  duchelond 
and?1  henry  dasque,  that  were  good?  knyghtes  and*2  enterprisers,  had 
deuysed  a  thyng  of  a3  grete  tronke  of  an  oke,  and  had  sette  theron  / 
xx  /  knyghtes  alle  couerd  ahoue  /  And  vnder  they  had  men  ynough  4 
for  to  myne  the  walle  /  They  approuched  the  castel  that  it  ioyned 
to  the  walle  /  The  knyghtes  aboue  began  to  deffende  them,  And 
they  vnder  persed  the  walle.     The  turkes  within  had  dressed1  the 
grettest  part  of  theyr  engyns  to  this  castel,  and1  many  strokes  had  8 
smeton  so  longe  that  wyth  the  strok  of  a  grete  stone  4they  brake 
alle  and  fylle  doun  to  gydre4  in  suche  wyse  that  neuer  one5  escaped 
aboue  ne  vnder,  but  alle  were  deed,  There  was  grete  sorowe  in  the 
hoost  /  And  moche  more  shold  be,  ne  had  not  be  the  grete  com-  1 2 
forte  that  they  had  in  our  lord  /  They  lefte  not  herfore,  but  euery 
man  payned  hym  more  and  more  to  greue  them  with  Inne  /  And 
gaf  to  them  so  many  assaultes  day  and  nyght  /  that  they  lete  them 
haue  but  lytil  reste  /  but  one  thyng  ther  was  that  greued  our  peple  16 
moche  /  And  that  was  that  ther  cam  euery  day  in  to  the  toune 
fresshe  vytaylles  and  newe  men  /  Armours  and  artyllery  by  the 
lake  /  And1  they  coude  not  defende  it,  wherof  they  were  moche 
marry  d.  20 


Of  the  coutfseyl  that  our  men  toke  for  tassiege  the 
toun  by  watre  for  to  constreyne  them  not  for  to 
entre  ne  yssue  /  cap0  lix°. 

h      Erof  wold  our  barons  haue  counseyl  how  they  myght  dis-  24 

trouble  this  comyng  by  water  /  They  assembled  and  acorded 
that  they  wold1  sende  of  theyr  knyghtes  grete  plente,  wyse  men, 
and  men  a  fote  and  take  alle  the  shippes  at  the  see  syde  that  they 
coude  fynde,6  and  sette  them  vpon  charyottes  of  the  hoost  and  28 
brynge  suche  as  they  myght  brynge  hoole.  And  the  other  they 
shold  parte  in  two  pyeces  or  three.  And  also  they  wold  senile  to 
theinperour  and  praye  hym  that  he  wold  delyuer  to  them  shippes  / 
They  that  had  charge  of  this  werke  cam  to  the  see  without  taryeng1  32 
and  fonde  shippes  grete  plente,  suche  as  they  had  nede  of.  And 
.]  by  7the  comniaumlement  of  themperour,  whiche  graurcted  gladly, 

1   Orig.  amd.  2  Fr.  "  entseprenants,"  enterprising. 

3  Fr.  '•  de  gros  tret  de  clienc,"  of  large  timbers  of  oak. 
*-*  Fr.  "  11  defroim  et  cheut  tout  ensemble"  it  broke  in  pieces,  and  fell 
down  in  a-'beap. 

6  Orig.  oue.  6  Orlg.  fyude. 


Ch.  LX.]        The  Barons  assault  the  City  again.  101 

drewe  out  of  the  water  ynowgh,  Thenne  coupled  they  to  gydro 
four1  cartes  or  fyue  after  that  the  shyppes  weTe,  and?  sette  them 
theron  bv  force  of  peple  al  hole,  and1  with  many  men  drewe  them  in  one  night 

J  r  r  '  *  pt    they  drew 

4  forth  with  cordes  and  with  trayse  of  the  cartes  in  one  nyght  /  vij.  u»»hiM 
longe  myle  or  more  /  Thise  shippes  were  taken  of  and1  launcl>ed  in  overland-, 
to  the  lake  moche  haetely,  ffor  many  hondes  make  light  werke.  uuw;iwj" 
And  the  peple  wente  th«rto  with  a  good1  wylle.     They  had  emonge  lake, 

8  them  many  maronners  that  coude  wel  shippecrafte  /  And  they  were  »»d 
sette  therin.  moche  peple  otrerd  them  self  to  entre  alle  armed1  /  they  u-em  *»«* 

'  r   r  '  "    sailors. 

toke  as  many  as-  neded1,  and1  garnysshed1  wel  thyse  shippes  /  Sommo 
shippe  had1  in  an  hondeicJ  /  and  other  /  1.  or  xxx.  or  xx  /  after  theyr 

1 2  gretenes  /  in  suche  wyse  that  the  waye  that  they  had1  in  the  lake, 
Oure  men  hadde  taken  from  them,  whan  they  of  the  hooste  sawe  that 
this  waye  of  the  laken  was  take  from  them,2  they  had  grete  Ioye. 
And  hoped  that  the  siege  shold  not  endure  /  The  turkes  of  the 

16  toun  whan  they  apperceuyed1  that  oure  men  had1  don  so  grete  a 
we^'e  and  so  stronge,  They  fyll  in  despayre  and  were  abassl  )fl  and1 
inerueylled  of  the  vygour  of  our  peple  that  had  don  this  in  so  short 
tyme  /  And1  thenne  were  they  enclosed1  on  alle  sydes,  and1  had  loste 

20  the  waye  for  theyr  ahippes. 

How  after  the  Cyte  was  asseyged  by  water  and  by 
londe,  oure  men  assaylled  it  /  And  of  a  Shotte 
that  Due  Godefroye  dyde.  Capitulo  /  lx° 

24  w      Han  the  Barons  sawe  that  theyr  shippes  were   in  the  lake  in 

suche  wyse  that  no  man  myght  greue  them,  Anon  they  dyde  The  barons 

iii  i  i  iii   now  ordered 

do  crye  that  alle  men  shold1  arme  them  and  come  to  thassault,  And  a  second 

assault. 

it  was  acorded  that  eche  of  the  barons  shold  assaylle  in  that  parte 
28  where  he  was  lodged1  /  they  admonested?  and  enforced  theyr  peple 
to  doo  wel  /  Thassault  was  more3  /  than  euer  it  had1  be  /  There 
somme  threwe  out  of  thengyns  grete  nombre  of  stones  /  Euery  man 
dyde  his  part:  toward  the  south  in  the  partye  that  was  delyuerd14 
32  to  therle  of  thoulose  /  there  was  an  hye  toure  more  grete  than  ony  Ti.e  palace  la 
of  the  other  /  by  that  tour  was  the  palays,  In  whiche  Solymans  wyt'  man's  wiie 

.  .  iii-  i  li\ed  whs 

was.     Therle  had  sette  alle  his  entent  for  to  breke  this  tour  lon-;e  near  ti.e  Earl 

Of  1'OUloUaC, 

tyme  /  °ffor  he  had  doo  throwen  ther  at  grete  stones5  /  And  had 

1  Orig.  fonr.  2  i.  e.  the  towns-people. 

3  Fr.  greind-re,  greater.  4   Orig.  delynerd. 

6—6  Fr.  "  Car  11  g  acoit  fait  jeter  deux  grosses  jferriirei  tongue merit." 

1  0 


102  A  great  Shot  made  by  Godfrey.  [Cli.  LX. 

not  broken  one  stone  of  the  tour  /  And!  by  cause  he  wold  not  for 
The  Eari  of    shame  so  leue  it  without  takyng1  of  it.      And  ordeyned  gretter 

Toulouse  at-  J     °  JO 

[i  leaf  48]    1stones  alle  newe,  2  which  began  to  breke  the  creuaches  of  the  same 

tour2  /  &  with  the  strokes  of  the  stones  mocbe  powdre  cam  out  4 

of  the  clyftes  /  The  peple  of  the  hoost  apperceyued  it  /  And  sawe 

that  the  toure  began  to  falle  /  they  passed  the  dyche  /  and  brought3 

Thetroopg     engyns  vnto  the  walles.     Ther  began  they  with  grete  exploit  to 

mined  the  OJ  o  J  o  r 

waiis,  and      myne  the  walle  and  to  perse  it,  they  within  caste  grete  stones  upon  8 
urge  stones    the  engyns  /  And  with  shotte  of  handbowes  and  arbalestres  they 


tacked  this 
tower  vigor- 
ously. 


at  it, 

weakened  it.  nurte(i4  many  of  them  that  they  sawe  discouerd  /  And  by  cause 
Those  within  they  sawe  that  the5  closyng1  of  the  toure  began  to  faylle  /  they  walled 

maiie  a  new      ........  »    _»    «  *.  i  •    i  11 

waii  of  lime    it  within  forth  with  stones  and  chalk,  and  made  a  right  stronge  12 

and  stones. 

wall  good  and  thycke  /  6Our  men  that  were  atte  tour6  had  made  an 
hole  in  the  walle,  that  two  men  myght  wel  entre  attones  f  rely  / 
On  the  walle  in  the  parte  where  Due  Godeffroye  assaylled,  ther 
a  huge  Turk  was  a  turke  stronge,  grete,  &  hardy,  which  dyde  grete  dommage  1 6 

damaged  our  i    a      ••■    i  • 

men  greatly    to  oure  men  /  And  hurte  many  with  a  strong*  bowe  turquoys  that 

with  his  bow. 

he  had  /  And  with  a  lytil  of  oure  langage  that  he  coude  /  cessed  not 
to  saye  euyl  and  discourage  them  that  assaylled  and  called  them 
Cowardes.  hit  happed  that  due  godeffroye  saw  it  /  And  auysed  20 
hym  many  tymes  and  was  merueyllously  displesyd  with  hym  /  7  And 
thought  how  he  myght  chevysshe  to  be  at  his  ease,7  he  toke  in  his 
hand  a  arbaleste  good  and  myghty  /  and  helde  it  bent  til  the  turk 
cam  agayn  and  abandouned8  hym  /  The  due  toke  his  syght  and  24 
Duke  Godfrey  marke  and  shotte  at  hym,  &  smote  hym  right  thurgh  the  bely, 

shot  the  man 

through  the    that  he  fyl  doun  to  the  groured  fro  the  walle  /  The  crye  and  the 
he  feii  down   showtyng1  began  grete  in  the  hooste  and  the  ioye  /  The  due  had 
The  Saracens  grete  honour  and  many  good  prayers  therfore.     the  other  sarasyns  28 
abashed  of     that  were  on  that  other  parte  of  this  deifence  were  moche  abasshed 

this  feat. 

Caxton   mistakes  here:    "perrieret"   (machines   for  casting   stones)   for 
"pi-erret  "  (stones). 

2—2  Caxton's  translation  here  does  not  make  sense.  Fr.  "  Le  jor  de 
Tattanlt  on  commenca  a  veoir  crevacet,  en  eelle  tour,  qui  se  longuement 
t'ettoit  tenue,"  i.  e.  they  commenced  to  tee  the  crevices,  instead  of  "  break- 
ing" them. 

3  Fr.  " menerent  un  chat"  brought  a  cat,  i.  e.  a  covered  shed. 

4  Orig.  hnrted. 

6  Fr.  clotture,  barriere,  that  which  encloses. 

6-6  Fr.  " not  gent,  qui  ettoit  ou  chat"  our  people  who  were  in  the  shed. 
7— 7  Fr.  "te  pensa  comment  il  porroit  ce  venchier"  and  devised  a  plan 
for  revenging  himself. 

8  Fr.  " s'abandonna,"  exposed  himself. 


Ch.  LXL]     The  Turlcs  throw  burning  Oil  on  our  Men.  103 

and  ferd  that  they  deffended  them  the  more  cowardly.     The  other 
that  were  in  the  other  partyes  of  the  toun  caste  fro  the  tours  Btones 
vwon  oure  peple  that  were  atte  assault  and1  hurte  many  with  castyng, 
4  shotyng,  and  throwyng*  vpon  oure  engyns  pytche  /  Oyle  and  gvece  They  ftw 
alle  boyllyng*  /  And  threwe  also  brondes  and"  other  thynges  bren-  bofflnffgnwe 
nyng<  moche  thycke  in  suche  wyse,  that  somme  they  brente.     They  me.,, 
that  assaylled  on  the  partye  of  therle  of  tholouae  at  the  tour  that  I 
8  sayd  to  you  to  fore,  laboured  sore  for  to  myne  the  walle  /  But  one 
thyng  destroubled  them  sore,  what  someuer  they  brak  on  the  day  /  Thejr  rebuilt 
they  within  made  it  agayn  in  the  nyght  /  in  such  wise  that  they  ^;™y" 
were  in  wylle  to  leue  it  /  And  wrought  more  slowly  than  they  *»y. 

12  dyde  byfore,1  wherfore  a  moche  valyaunt  knyght  of  2the  hooste  of  [*if.48,bk.] 
the  Normans  cam  right  theder  and  admonested1  the  assaylles3  for  to 
goo  forth,  he  passed  the  dyche  tofore  with  his  helme  laced  /  the  a  "Hm*^ 
shelde  vpon  his  heed  and  brake  vygorously*  the  walle,  where  as  «jjed  ti.e 

16  the  turkes5  had  made  agayn  /  But  ther  was  none  that  folowed  hym.  j^wmefci- 
And  they  of  the  wallys  threwe  so  grete  stones  on  him  and  so  thycke,  j^e  *■» 
that  they  slewe  hym  in  the  presence  of  the  other  that  were  by  / 
And  after  with  hookes  and  crochettes  they  drewe  the  bodye  vp  to 

20  them  on  the  walle  /  And  there  disarmed  hym,  and  threwe  the 
bodye  to  our  peple.  Thenne  our  men  that  were  there  toke  the 
body,  and  buryed  it  worshipfully  /  he  was  moche  bewaylled  in 
thoost  of  cristen  men. 

24  How  after  many  assaultes,  oure  men  beyng  in  Coun- 
seyl,  A  lombard  cam  to  them,  whiche  offred  to 
make  an  engyne  that  shold  destroye  the  toun. 

capitulo  /  lxj° 

28  t       Henne   sawe  the  Barons   that   they  loste  moche   peple  with 

thassault  /  And  dyde    but   litil  harme   with   theyr  engyns6 

vnto7  the  toun  and  theyr  enemyes  /  Assembled  for  to  make  coun- 

sevl  how  they  myght  doo  /  There  cam  a  man  to  them,  a  lombard,  a  Lombard 

•>  J         •'  °  '  offereil  to 

32  which  had  seen  the  grete  hurte  &  losse  of   our  peple  /  &  sayd  buii.i  mum 

o  »    *         i  ■       engines  ot 

to  the  barons  that  he  was  a  good  maister  to  make  engyns,  yf  he  J^™1^1' 
myght  haue  stuff  &  maters    therto   propice  &  necessary  /  which 
with  goddes  helpe  shold  in  short  tyme  ouerthrowe  the  tour  where 
3G  to  they  had  don  so  moche  payne  /  and  wold  make  large  waye  for  to 

1   Orig.  byforee.  3  Fr.  as*n\lUur*.  4  Orig   vygoronsly. 

5  Orig.  tnrkea.  fi   Orig.  eugyoa.  »    Orig.  vuto. 


104 


Our  Men  destroy  the  Tower.  [Ch.  LXII. 


The  barons 
agreed  to  give 
liiin  material 

ami  men, 
and  to  pay 
him  well. 


He  finished 

his  engine, 
and  fastened 
it  to  the  wall. 


[3  leaf  49] 


About  mid- 
night the 
lower  fell. 


entre  in  to  the  toun  who  so  wolde  /  They  that  herde  hym  promysed 
hym  that  he  shold  haue  al]e  that  shold  he  nedeful  /  And  yet  a 
good  reward  and  ryche  for  his  lahoure  /  This  maister  toke  werkmen 
and  made  them  to  werke  as  he  commaunded,  that  in  short  tyme  lie  4 
had  made  his  engyn,  whiche  was  merueillously1  strong  and  grete  / 
And  ioyned  it  to  the  walle  alle  ful  of  men  of  armes  &  footemen  / 
they  that  were  on  the  walles  vpon  the  tour  threwe  with  grete  myght 
grete  stones  and1  fyre  brennyng1  moche  thycke  /  hut  thengyne  was  8 
so  stronge  and  rude,  that  the  strokes  dyde  it  no  harme  /  ne  the  fyer 
myght  not  fastne  on  it :  whan  they  of  the  toun  apperceyued  that 
they  coude  not  noye  this  engyn,  they  were  sore  a  ferde,  and  dis- 
couraged merueyllously,2  and  alle  in  despayre.     Our  men  traueylled  1 2 
to  theyr  power  to  take  oute  the  grete  stones  atte  fote  of  the  walle 
of  the  toure  /  And  vndersetted  it  with  strong  stanchons  and  grete  / 
whan  they  had  so  moche  myned   that   them  semed   that  it  was 
ynowgh.     They  Hoke  Hheyr  hahyllemens  and  sette  them  ferre  fro  16 
the  walle  /  and  thenne  put  fyer  on  alle  sydes  vnder  the  toure,  & 
wythdrewe  them  to  their  hahyllemens  and  to   thengynes  alle   in 
saufte,  whiche  were  a  grete  way  of.4    About  mydnyght  the  fyre  had 
soo  brente  and  wrought  that  this  tour  fylle  doun  to  therthe  with  so  20 
grete  a  noyse  and  tempeste  that  it  semed  that  alle  therthe  trembled  / 
And  ther  was  none,  but  he  had  grete  horrour  and  feer  in  his  herte  / 
Oure  peple  made  hastely  do  sowne  the  trumpettes,  and  crye  to  armes 
for  to  come  dilygently  to  thassault.  24 


Solyman's 
wife  endeav- 
ours to  escape 
with  her  two 
sous. 


How  after  that  this  engyn  had  so  wel  wrought  /  The 
wyf  of  solyman,  with  two  of  her  childeren,  wente 
out  of  the  toun  and  were  taken  by  our  men  / 

cap?  lxij0  28 
t       He  wyf  of  Solyman,  that  longe  had  be  in  mesease  of  drede  / 
had  so  grete  feere  that  almost  she  deyde  for  drede,  and  sayd 
she  myght  no  lenger  see  it  ne  suffre  /  and  made  sodanly  make  redy 
a  vessel,  and  put  it  on  the  lake  for  tescape  by  nyght  /  But  oure  32 

1  Orig.  merueillonsly.  z  Orig.  merueyllonsly. 

4-*  This  passage  seems  not  to  have  been  entirely  understood  by  Caxton. 
Fr.  "  II  mislrest  leur  airet,  boiz  et  grant  merricn,  por  le  mur  qui  iert  fortemait 
estanconez,  puis  bouterent  lefeu  de  toutesparz  et  se  trestrent  arrieres  dedanz  leur 
engins  tot  sauvement."—La.t.  "  Et  sustentoeulis  qui  murum  casurum  sustenta- 
bant  igne  supposito  et  nutriendis  ignibus  apta  subjecta  materia  machinam  rclin- 
qaunt  ad  suos  cum  ovini  cclcritatc  se  covfcrcntcs." 


Ch.  LXIL]     They  take  Salt/man's   Wife  and  Sons  captive.  105 

peple   that  were  in  the  shippes  for  to  kepe  the  water  fro   theyr 
enemves  cam  ayenste  her,  and  toke  the  lady  with  her  two  sones  They  were 

*  »  taken  prinon- 

that  she  had  with  her  thenne  in  her  companye.  They  presented  e™  b^ti.e 
4  them  in  the  mornyng  to  fore  the  barons.  They  made  them  to  be 
kept  right  surely  with  the  other  prisoners  that  they  had  /  The 
Turkes  in  the  toun1  were  thenne  in  grete  meschief,  as  wel  for 
thentre  that  was  so  grete  and  brode  /  as  for  their  lady  that  they 
8  had  loste  /  thenne  they  axed  trewes  for  to  speke  to  the  barons  to  The  Turks 

**  .    I  »  *  ask  for  a 

gyue  ouer  the  toun  and  them  self  in  to  theyr  handes.     Tacius,  the  truce, 
greek  of  whom  I  haue  spoken  to  fore,  whiche  was  moche  double 
and  malycious,  spak  to  the  noble  men  that  had  the  gouernaunce  of 

12  the  toun  in  counseyl,  And  shewd  to  them  that  thyse  pylgryms  were 
straungers2  of  ferre  countrees  and  euyl  and  cruel  men  /  And  shold 
doo  to  them  alle  the  harme  they  myght,  And  destroye  the  peple 
and  the  londe,  yf  they  yelded  the  cyte  to  them.     But  and  yf  they  Tadus  the 

16  wold  aduowe  and  take  themperour  to  thejr  -lord  /  And  yelde  them  J^^*  e 
to  hym  theyr  lyues  sauf,  and  theyr  goodes  in  to  his  hande,  he  shold  £  ™err^fr 
kepe  them  well  and  saufly3  /  and  shold  doo  to  them  grete  good  /  P«™rii;e'8tead 
ffor  he  was  theyr  neyghbour  /  So  moche  sayd  he  and  dyde,  that  cruaadera. 

20  they  of  the  toun  toke  theyr  counseyl4  &  cam  to  the  barons,  and 
sayd  to  them  that  they  wold  put  in  the  handes  of  themperour  theyr 
lyues  sauf  /  thejr  bodyes  the  cyte  and  theyr  godes  /  This  displesyd 
not  moche  to  &the  barons  /  ffor  theyr  entencion  was  for  to  passe  [5ic«>,bk.] 

24  forther  /  &  hoped  that  themperour  wolde  departe  the  gayn  /  proye 
and  goodes  of  the  toun6  generally  in  thoost,  neuertheles,  to  fore 
that  they  wold  grau?ite  them  this  thynge  /  they  sayde  that  they  ™eerc9™-ree 
shold   delyuer  entierly,  and  doo  come  in  to  the  hoost  alle   the  lr°itl;eei.M('^ 

28  prisonners  of  pieter  theremyte  that  were  in  the  castel  of  counthot7/  SF^JSJjJSE 
And  in  lyke  wyse  alle  the  other  that  they  had  taken  in  the  siege,  ^td,^eied 
and  them  to  fore  that  Solyman  helde.     And  this  don  they  acorded 
that  they  shold  yelde  them  to  themperour  /  Thenne  the  barons, 

32  prynces    and   knyghtes,  and  also  the  comyn  peple  sente  by  one  They  send 
acorde  messagers  to  themperour  for  to  sygnefye  hym  how  they  of  ^J?  JJ™;. 
the  cyte  had  yelded  them  to  hym  /  Therfore  they  sente  to  hym  /  g^l^J 
that  he  shold  sende  of  his  hye  and  noble  men  with  grete  nombre  of  yielded. 

1  Orig.  tonn.  J  Orig.  strauugera.  *  Orig.  sanfly. 

*  Orig.  connseyL  Orig.  tonn. 

7  Caxton's  French  text  gives  "  Cunthot."  In  the  different  French  MSS.  of 
our  text,  there  is  a  remarkable  row  of  variations  for  this  word.  Ocrinchot, 
Sunilolh,  Couthot,  and  Tuncho'.     Lat  Civitot. 

1  C  • 


106  The  JUmperor  received  the  surrendered  City.     [Ch.  LXIII. 

peple  for  to  resseyue  the  toun,  And  the  persones  of  whom  they 
had  many  /  ffor  they  alle  acorded  that  the  honour  shold  be  his, 
And  that  the  toun  shold  come  ill  his  demayne,  And  the  prisonners  at 
his  wylle  /  They  that  had  enterprise^?  theyr  vowe  for  taccomplysshe,  4 
had  purposed  for  to  departe  fro  this  place,  and  to  goo  forth  vnto 
the  lande  of  surye. 

How  themperour  sente  grete  barons  for  to  receyue  the 
sayd  toun  after  that  our  peple  had  acerteyned  8 
hym  that  they  wolde  yelde  it  /       Capitulo  /  Ixiij 

The  Emperor  g       Eete  ioye  had  themperour  of  thyse  tklynges  /  he  taryed  not  / 
rejoiced,  and  but  sente  of  his  moost  priue  men,  as  wel  barons  as  knyghtes, 

took  posses- 
sion ot  the      with  grete  quantite  of  men  of  amies  that  resseyued  the  cyte  in  his  12 

name  /  And   garnysshed   it  of   alle  thynge  that  was  nedeful,  & 

dyde  repayre  the  walles  and  alle  that  was  broken  of  the  torettes. 

Alle  that  euer  they  founde  in  the  toun  of  Armures  of  Rychesses 

and  of  vytaylles    the}'   seased    for   themperour  /  And   sente   the  16 

He  sent         prisonners  in  to  Constantinoble  /  Themperour  sente  to  euerych  of 

thanks  and  . 

special  gifts    the  barons  special  lettres,  presented  to  them  grete  yeftes  /  And 
barons.  thanketh  them  moche  of  thonour  /  that  they  had  don  to  hym  / 

And  of  this  that  they  so  wel  kepte  theyr  promesse  /  affor  that  toun  20 

But  the  com-  had  don  grete  gryef  and  anoyaunce2  to  thempyre1  /  The  mene  peple 

complained     that  moch  had  trauaylled  in  the  siege  and  had'  holpen  with  grete 

courage  /  compleyned  sore  /  ffor  they  had1  hoped  that  alle  the  hauoyr 

and  goodes  of  the  toun  shold  haue  ben  departed  emonge  them  /  24 

because  they   But  themperours  men  bare  it  alle  away,  And  they  that  trauaylled 

received  none  ,.         ,     .  ,  , 

of  the  spoils,   for  it  were  not  rewardic?  /  the  worde  that  was  moche  grete  cam 
pieafsn,       3vnto  the  barons  /  &  they  sayd  that  they  had  grete  wronge  /  ffor 

the  couenauutes  made  bytwene  themperour  &  them  were  suche  28 
that  yf  they  gate  in  theyr  waye,  ony  cytees  that  had  ben  to  fore 
themperours,  they  shold  deyluere  the  cyte  &  the  londe  to  them- 
perour /  but  the  proyes  &  gayne  shold  be  departed4  in  thoost. 
Ayenst  thyse  couenaurctes  dyde  themperour,  but  it  was  not  tyme  32 
thenne  ne  place  to  make  argument  ne  debate  ayenst  the  Grekes, 
therfor  the  noble  men  made  the  comyn  peple  to  tarye,5  to  thende 

-1  Caxton's  French  MS.  is  faulty  here.     A.  gives  the  correct  reading : — 
"que  grant  accroisscmcnt  avoi:nt  ja fait  a  V empire." 

-  Qrig.  anoyauuce.  4  Orvj.  drparted. 

*  Fr.  i.nirc,  to  lap  still,  not  "iotaryc." 


Cli.  LXIV.]     He  restored  Soly  maris   Wife  and  Sons,  unharmed.     107 

that  they  shold  not  enpesshe  this  pylgreniage  /  thus  was  suffred 

that  the  wyf  of  soliman  &  his  ij  sones  &  gvete  plente  of  prisoners  ^|>™';';|iil_ 

were  leddc  in  saefte  vnto  the7«perour  /  which  made  moch  grete  Jjjjjjjj* 

4  feste  to  the  lady  &  her  childeren,  &  as  longe  as  they  were  in  the  j£««  Em- 
toon  lie  helde  them  moche  honorably  /  after  in  short   tyme  he  lX\y'Ck  to 
sente  them  agayn  to  solyman,  alle  quyte  delyuerd,  without  demand-  s"'>»"»'- 
yng  of  ony  raunson.  this  dyde  he  to  thende,  to  haue  the  loue  and 

8  grace  of  the  turkes  /  in  suche  wyse  that  ther  was  bytwene  them 

a   counseyl  &    acorde  to   greue   our   peple  /  &   also  for   another 

rayson  /  that  is  to  wete  yf  they  were  in  such  poynt  of  another  cyte 

or  place,  that  the  cristiens  corastreyned  so  by  force,  that  they  shold 

12  not  be  aferd  to  yelde  them  frely  in  the  hande  of  themperour  /  thus  The  city  of 

J  ^  Niccii  wan 

was  taken  the  cyte  of  nycene,  the  yere  of  thyncarnacion  of  our  lord,  gjjjjj'j™  *• 
a  /  M  /  lxxxxvij,  the  xx  day  of  the  moneth  of  Iuyn.  Ju"e> 1097- 

How  our1  hoost2  departed  on  theyr  ioumey  /  &  how 
16  som  departed  fro  theyr  felawship  /  and  how  soly- 

man determyned  tassayle  them  / 

Capitulo  lxiiij" 

t        He  boost  of  the  pylgryms  departed  by  the  commaundement  of  The  Cru- 

20  the  barons,  the  iii  dave  to  fore  thentree  of  Iuylle,  fro  the  place  arched  forth 

""*  '  J         "  out,  ot  Nic*a, 

where  they  had  holden  siege  /  they  wente  two  dayes  to  gydre  moche 
peasybly  /  &  after  lodged  them  by  a  brygge  for  the  ease  of  the  M^meamiMd 
water  /  On  the  morn,  after  theyr  customme  atte  spryngyng  of  the  mweh  from 

21  day,  they  passed  the  brygge  duryng  the  derknesse  of  the  nyght,  ffor 

it  was  not  wel  day  /  Or,  perauenture,3  they  departed  wetyngly  the  Here  they 
one  fro  the  other,  ffor  buymont,  the  due  of  normandye  /  Therle  into  two 
steuen  of  chartres  /  Tancre  and*  therle  of  seynt  pol  torned  away  on 

28  the  lyft  syde  /  And!  descended*  in  to  a  valeye  named1  Gurgom  /  And* 
lodged!  them  there  aboute  none  by  a  ryuer,  where  as  was  grete 
plente  of  water  /  There  rested  they  al  that  nyght  in  peas.  But, 
neuertheles,  they  made  theyr  hoost  chaimge4  theyr  watche  diligently  / 

32  alle  the  other  torned  on  the  right   honde  alle  the  day  /  &  went 
thurgh  a  fayre  Countre  /  &  lodged*  them  in  fayre  grete  medowes 
5vpon  the  water  syde.     And1  that  one  hoost  was  fro  that  other  more  [»if.50,  bk.j 
than  two  myle  /  Soliman  had  his  herte  swollen,  and  was  felly  an 

36  angred  that  he  had  thus  loste  his  wyf  with  his  children  and  his 

1  Ori'j.  onr.  a  <>ri<t.  lmoost.  3  Oriij.  peroucuture. 

4  Yw  'Mhuii'juailui: 


108  Soly man  attacks  one  Division  of  the  Ci-usaders.     [Ch.  LXV. 

Boiyman  foi-  noble  cyte  /  he  comniaunded4  to  folowe  oure  peple  on  the   lvl'te 

lowed  the  left  "  i    r  j 

reehowi'ie     S^e  /  ^nc*  ^yde  grete  peyne  to  see  how  he  myght  greue  thera,  lie 

them1  ''arm    na(*  w^a  ^ym  a  mocU  grete  nombre  of  men  of  amies  on  horsbak  / 

his  espyes  were  with  the  pylgryms,  whiche  toke  heede  of  alle  theyr  4 

couyne,  they  dyde  hym  to  wete  that  oure  hoost  was  deuyded  in  two 

pax-ties  /  And  that  the  lasse  partye  was  torned4  toward4  the  lyfte  side 

ner  to  hym  than  that  other  parte  /  he  was  moche  glad  and!  Ioieful 

whan  he  herde  tliyse  tydynges  /  he  sawe  that  he  was  wel  in  poynt  8 

for  to  venge  hym  /  And  had  his  men  al  redy,  and!  ordeyned  his 

He  attacked    bataylle  to  poynt  at  the  day  sette  /  departed  for  to  befyghte  oure 

break.  men,  thus  as  the  spryngynge  of  the  day  began  to  clere  /  the  men 

that  made  the  watche  this  nyght  that  were  withdrawen  a  lytil  fro  12 
thoost,  apperceyued  them,  and  cryed4  to  Amies,  And1  blewe  homes 
and?  trompettes  moche  affrayedly  /  the  hoost  awook  sodenly,  and 
our  men  armed  them  right  hastely  /  And  ordeyned  theyr  bataylles 
Tj>ey  pi«c«i    as  they  had  deuysed.     The  wymmen  /  sekemen  and  childeren  were  16 
and  children   ledd  a  part  besyde  a  water  al  ful  of  reed1,  by  whiche  men  mvght 

in  a  sale  place,  *  •  J  «*  o 

not   come   to    them,  to   fore    were   they   closed4,   with   cartes   and' 
sentmessaees  charyottes  /  wherof  they  had  grete  plente.     Ami  after  sente  mes- 

to  the  rest  or  "  •     '  J  o  r 

•md^'^ied  saSers '  VU^°    the    grete    hooste,    ffrom    whiche    they   were    folyly  20 
themselves     departed4   for   to   praye   them   that    they  dylygently  wolde  come 
socoure  them,  jJor  they  were  in  moche  grete  paryll  /  whan  theyr 
bataylles  were  thus  renged,  euen  right  the  first  day  of  Iuyll  at  the 
soiymanhad  houre  of  prynie  /  be  ye  certayn  that  Solyman,  with  a  grete  nombre  24 

20(1,000  horse-  r   J  '  J  J  J  ° 

men,  ourpeo- of  men  of  armes,  estemed4  at  two  honderd  thousand  wel  armed  to 

pie  were  but 

fewinmim-    poynt  and  horsed,  arryued.  ther  was  not  one  of  them,  but  he  was 
foot"yon      on  noi*s^ak-     Oure1  peple  were  but  fewe  /  And1  the  moost  part  of 

them  on  foote  /  And  it  was  no  merueylle  though  they  doubted  the  28 

comyng  of  theyr  enemyes. 

Of  the  bataylle  that  solyman  had  ayenst  som  of  our 
peple  that  were  departed  fro  theyr  felawship 
folyly  /  ca°  lxv°  32 

Han  the  Hooste  of  the  Turkes  smote  in  on  our  men,  the  noyse 
w       was  moche  grete  of  busynes  /  of  trompes  /  of  men,  and  of 

horses  that  none  myght  be  herd  /  and  was  grete  hydour  to 
here  the  fyrst  comyng  on  of  the  turkes  /  They  shotte  so  thycke  36 
vpon  our  peple  that  there  was  neuer  rayn  ne  hayl  so  Like,  in  so 

1  Orig.  onre. 


Ch.  LXVI.]     They  are  hard  pressed  by  the  Turks.  109 

moch  that  ther  were  many  hurte  of  our  peple.  whan  the  first  route 

1hat¥  made  theyr  shotte  /  The  second  route  cam  after  where  moo  C  i«fM, 

J  I  tig.  02  J 

Archyers  were  than  to  fore  /  &  began  shote  moche  more  thycke  than 
4  may  be  recounted2  /  Our  knyghtes  sawe  that  they  loste  theyr  horses  Our  men 

™  J  I  "a  "  "  seeing  tlu-ir 

&  them  self   by  the  shotte,  And  smote  in  to  the  turkes  vygor-  [jjjjj*.  »* 
ously,  But  the  multitude  of  the  turkes  were  so  grete  /  that  our  men  !g£££™£ 
had?  grete  dammage,  whiche  were  but  fewe.     They  that  had  theyr  0U8,y- 
8  sheldes  &  targes  they  kept  them  som  what,  But  they  that  were 
without  armour  muste  flee  /  or  ellys  they  had  be  slayn  emong  the 
horses.    And1  many  were  slayn  and!  hurte  /  There  were  slayn  of  oure  2000  of  our 

J  J  men  were 

peple,  as  wel  of  footemen  as  of  horsmen,  two  thousand.     Ther  was  slain. 

\l  slayn  a  moche  valyaunt  yong  man,  noble  and  hardy,  whiche  had? 
don  wel  alle  that  day,  Guyllam,  sone  to  the  Marquys,  Brother  of3 
Tancre  /  he  was  suioton  with  an  arowe  and1  deyde  in  the  place  / 
And  another  va'yant  man  in  like  wise  named  Robert  of  Paris.     He 

1G  deyde  by  his  prowesse  /  Tancre  that  was  hardy  made  merueylles  of 

Armcs  /  And1  abandoune;!?  hym  self,  as  he  that  sette  not  by  his  lyf  /  Boi.emnn* 

'  *  •  *  "         rescued  Tan- 

Buy inont  sawe  hym  /  &  he  brake  alle  the  prees  /  And!  cam  there  as  ered,whoirw 
he  was  /  And1  toke  hym  by  the  brydle  and!  brought  hym  bak  /  the  danger. 

20  turkes  sawe  oure  men  moche  hurte  and!  trauaylled!  and!  toke  theyr 
bowes  on  the  ly ft  Arme,  And!  after  ran  on  them  with  swerdes  and* 
maces  in  suclie  wyse  that  they  ouerthrewe4  them  and!5  put  them  a 
bak  vnto  theyr  caryage.     There  they  helde  them  And  hydde  them  Onr  men 

24  by  the  reed,  and  detfended  them  vygorously,  and!  suffred!  the  grete 
plente  of  turkes  discharge  vpon  them  one  route  after  another. 

Of  the  dilygence  that  Due  Godeffroy  made  whan  he 

was  aduertised    herof  /  And  how  Solyman  was 

28  discomfyt  &  his  bagage  taken.  Capitulo  lxvj0 

0       "VVr  barons,  godeffroy,  the  noble  due,  and?  the  other  prynces 
herde  thyse  tydynges  how  buymont  and  his  companye  were  at 
suche  meschyef  hasted  them  sore  /  ther  cam  to  gydre  the  due6  and  (Wirey  n»a 

J  '  OJ  the  oilier 

32  his  ij  bretheren,  bawdwyn  &  Eustace,  the  erle  raymont  /  hue  le  bBr™"l*""t" 
mayne,  and!   many  other  barons  ynowgh.     'l'he   peple   a  foote"  /  lKfjl"u,n''edof 
And  they  that  were  euyl  horsed  they  lefte  for  to  kepe  the  lodgys  / 
they  wente  forth  /  &  wel8  xl  /  m  /  alle  armed  &  wel  horsed  / 

2  Orig.  recoimted.  3  Orlg.  of  of.  4  Orig.  onerthrewe. 

0  Orig.  and.  6  Orig.  dnk.  7  Orig.  fooote. 

b  Caxtoii  has  omitted  "csloi-nt"  here. 


110  Godfrey  comes  to  the  Rescue.         [Ch.  LXVI. 

1  whan  they  approched  the  place  where  the  batayll  was  /  &  sawe 

them  so  put  a  bak  /  &  herde  thafraye  of  trowpes  &  hors  /  the 

When  Bote-   peple  of  buymont  espyed  them,  ano«  their  herte  cam  agayn1  /  & 

mond'sinen  .  „        ,      ,     .    „  .  ,  i     •  ,1  a 

assist-      were  eratierly  refresshyd  /  &  smote  in    to  their  enemyes  as  they  4 


mice  arriving 


pif.5i,bk.]  that  nothynge  doubted1  /  &  began  to  doo  well.    The  2good  bisshop 
L'etrtSnd       °f   Puy  was  there,  &  comforted  ofte  the  barons  &  the  knyghtes 
bravely!"0'8   f°r  tauenge  the  blood  of  the  cristen  men  whiche  thenemyes  of  our 
fayth  had  there  shedde.     Incontinent  the  barons  that  cam  smote  8 
in  to  the  turkes  so  vygorusly  3that  it  semed  that  euerich  myght 
abyde  the  burthon4  of  the  batayle.3  they  slewe  so  many,  and  bete 
The  Turks     doun  in  theyr  comynge  /  that  the  other  durst  not  abyde,  But  fledde 
comfited.       away  discomfyted  /  the  nobles  folowed  them,  &  chaced  them  wel  12 
iiij  /  myle,  sleyng  al  them  that  they  myght  atteyne.    &  they  fou?/de 
many  of  our5  men  prisonners  that  the  turkes  ledcle  with  them  / 
whom  they  delyuerd.    after  they  wente  to  the  tentes  of  solyman,  and 
our  men        there  they  foimde  so  grete  plente  of  rychesses  /  of  vytaylles  /  of  16 

found  great  .  ,     . 

booty  in  ti.e    sheep,  of  horses,  &  other  beestes  that  it  can  not  be  recounted  / 

tents  of  Soly-  r'  ' 

man.  Robes,   vayssel,  &   pauyllons   of   dyuerse    colours   &    of   straunge 

facions  in  suche  wyse  that  ther  was  none,  but  he  was  ryche.  ffor  ye 
may  well  knowe  that  /  ij  CM  /  men  that  solyman  had  /  behoued  20 
grete  plente  of   lodgys  &  of   other  estoremeutes.6   our  peple  cam 
agayn  in  to  oure  tentes  with  grete  ioye  &  honour,    ther  were  lost 
wel  in  that  batayll  of  our  men  a  foote7  aboute  a  .iiij.  M.,  &  of 
horsmen  but  fewe.     Of  the  turkes  were  founden  dede  /  iij  /  M.,  &  24 
there  were  of  them  many  grete  men  /  this  batayll  endured  fro  the 
hour  of  pryme  vnto  nygh  none  /  &  ofte  our  peple  had  the  Averse, 
ffor  as  I  haue  said,  solyman  had  /  i j  C  /  M  /  men  alle  on  horsbak. 
our  peple  were  but  /  1.  M  /   6n  horsbak  whan  they  were  alle  28 
assembled  the  one  with  the  other  /  whan  our  lord  had  thus  gyuen 
The  cm-       this  victorye  to  his  peple  /  they  rested  them   in  this  fayr  place 
themseiveif    where  the  tentes  were  /  thre  /  dayes  /  theyr  horses  refresshed  them 


xi  i in-i i 


ii.'.rses  ih.ee    right  wel  in  this  whyle.    of  the  armures  &  other  gayne  that  they  32 


had   conquerd    vpon   theyr   enemyes,  they  arrayed  &  apparaylled 
them  right  wel  /  that  to  fore  were  euyl  armed  /  Moche  wel  dyde 

1-1  Caxton  has  mistranslated  his  French.  Fr.  "-quant  ilz  aprouchierent,  ct 
les  gens  de  Buymont,  qui  cstoient  si  audessoubz,  oyrcnt  les  trompes  ct  Vcffroy  des 
chevaux  qui  venoicnt,  si  leur,  revint  Ic  cucr  a  tous." 

3—3  Yr.  "qu'il  sembloit  a  ung  chascun  d'eulx  que  Vcn  s'atendoit  a  lui  dc 
toute  la  besoingne,"  that  it  seemed  to  each  one  of  them  that  he  was  expected  to 
take  the  whole  burden  of  the  battle  on  himself.  4  Orig.  bnrthon. 

5  Orig.  our.  6  Fr.  " estorcments,"  equipments.  7  Orig.  foete. 


Gh:  LXV1L]     The  Crusaders  continue  their  Journey.  Ill 

thev  in  this  bat  ay  lie,  &  "rete  honour  had  they  and*  shal  euer  haue,  Ti.ey  win 

J  »         »         °  "  ever  receive 

and  in  especial  they  that  here  be  named  /  Bawdwyn  le  borgh  /  gre«  honour 
thoraas1  de  fedre  /  regnault  de  beauvays  /  Gale2  de  chamont  /  tattle. 
4  gaste  de  bedyers  /  &  geart3  de   cherysy  /  thenne  was    ordeyned 
&  acorded  by  the  barons  &  cryed  in  thoost  /  that  no  man  shold 
ryde  fro  thens  forth  by  hym  self  without  leue  of  the  captayns. 

How  the  iiij  day  after  this  victory e  our  peple  went 

8  forth  on    their  waye  /  &  of  the  grete  mesease 

of  thoost  the  same  day  /  cap"  lxvij0. 

a4      Fter  this,  whan  they  had  abvden  there  thre  dayes  /  the  fourth  Thefonrth 
daye  folowyng1,  by  tymes  to  fore  day,  they  dyde  doo  soAvne5  victory  Uwy_ 

12  theyr   trompettes,    &   wente   forth   on   theyr   waye   /   Syth   they  way. 
passed1  6bythyne  /  And  entred  in  to  the  londe    that  was  named  C*^r^j 
piside.     They  trauaylled  so  long,  that  at  the  laste  they  fonde  a 
eontre    moche   drye  &  infertile,  without  waters  /  The   tyme  was 

16  moche  hoot  and  brennyng1,  as  it  falleth  ofte  in  Iuyll  /  They  bad1  so 

srete  thurst  /  that  they  wyst  not  what  to  doo.     the  peple  on  fote  They  mferad 

0  i  j        j  *    *  go  from  thirst 

specially  faylled  and  faynted,  alle  for  the  duste  /  for  the  heete  /  hiUij^wrch 
and7  for  thurste  /  ther  deyed  wel  this  same  day  of  mysease  fyue  "loneuay. 
20  honderd    men  &  wymmen.     And   knowe  ye  certayidy  that   ther 

1  lapped  a  merueyllous  thynge  that  day  in  the  hoost,  that  we  fynde 
nowher  in  none  other  historye  /  ffor  the  wymmen  with  childe,  that 
yet  were  not  come  to  theyr  terme  /  by  thanguyssh  of  the  heete,  & 

24  of  the  mesease  of  thurst,  that  they  were  delyuerd  of  theyr  childeren 
&  childed  /  &  not  only  the  pour  wymmen  /  but  the  ryche  also  / 
this  was  a  grete  sorow,  &  pyte  to  see  /  The  men,  that  ought  to  be 
more  hard  &  stronge  ayenst  trauaylle,  wente  theyr  niouthes  open  / 

28  &  sought  thayer   and  moysture   therof,  whiche   they  myght   not 

haue  :  the  heete,  and  also  the  swote  destroyed?  them  /  ye.  shold  haue 

seen  the  horses  and  other  beestes,  that  myght  not  goo8  forth,  in 

suche  wyse  that  they  muste  leue  them,  whiche  deyde  in  the  waye  / 

32  houndes    for    the    chace    &    huntyng  /  fowles    for    the    flyght,  as  Homi6>,  fol- 

*     c     '  wiio,  mill 

ffaweons  /  hawkes  /  &  sperhawkes,  ye  shold  haue  seen  that  day  }>»wj«  dw.1 

'  '  x  '   "  hy  llie  way, 

abyde  &   deye.     &    in   lyke   wyse   the   grete   stedes   &   cursours, 

1  Fr.  "  Thomas  de  Fere."  2  Fr.  "  Gale  de  Chaumont." 

3  Fr.  "  Girarl  de  Chcrisi."  4  Orig.  Fter.  5  Orig.  sowue. 

7   Orig.  and. 

8  Fr.  "  alter  avant,"  go  further. 


112  They  arrive  at  Antioche  the  Less.     [Ch.  LXVIII. 

nnrt  iior*ei>  whiche  were  moost  perylloM*  /  becam  alle  araged  and  wood  for 
Uckof  water,  thurst1  /&  with  grete  payne  were  ledde  forth  /  whan  they  had' 
our  Lord  had  ben   long»  in   this  mesease  /  Our2  lord  beheld  them   in  pyte,  & 

pity  on  His  .  .  .  .  _       ,    „  . 

people.  made  them  to  adresse  in  to  a  valeye,  where  they  londed  a  rennyng  i 

and  led  tliem 

to  a  running  water,  fayr  &  grete.  thenne  ranne  oure  peple  to  the  brynke  or 
ryuage  with  grete  haste,  many  ther  were  that  drarck  so  moch  that 
they  deyde  vpon  the  place ;  ffor  som  of  them  that  had1  eschewed 
the  deth  /  fonde  it  there,  by  cause  they  kepte  no  mesure.  &  this  8 
fylle  vnto  knyghtes  &  other  men,  and  beestes,  whiche4  dranke  as 
moche  as  they  wolde  /  whan  they  were  escaped1  this  euyl  aduenture, 
they  cam  in  to  a  londe  moch  fayr  and  fertile,  ful  of  woodes,  of 
They  arrived  ryuers,  of  medowes,  and  of  good!  feldes  labourable  /  This  was  by  12 
theLess,       anthyoche  the  lasse  /  whiche  is  the  chyef  cyte  of  the  londe  of 

and  quartered  '  . 

the  army       pisside  ;  and  there  lodged  thev  with  theyr  hoost. 

there.  *  '  "  * 

How  somme  of  the  grete  Barons  of  thoost,  after  to 
haue  approucbed  Antyoche   the  lasse,  departed  16 
for  to  goo  vytaylle  them.  Capitulo  lxviij" 

some  went     f        Ro  thens  departed  /  som  of  the  barons  of  thoost  /  &  helde 

farther  on,  .  ,  ., 

because itwaB  their  waye,  by  cause  it  was  a  greuous  thyng1  to  tynue  vytayJles 

difficult  to  J    •     J 

[5if.52,bk.]  8to  so  moche  peple  to  gydre  /  The  fyrst  was  Bawdwyn,  Brother  to  20 
visionrs°tbr  so  the  due ;  with  hym  was  peter6  therle  of  scaruay,  Reynart  therle  of 
Baldwin        toul  /  Bawdwyn  de  borgh,  &  guyllebert  de  montcler  /  ther  wer 
hn,i!!eer,'Ld    wel  v  /  C/  on  horsbak  /  &  ladde  with  them  men  a  fote  largely  / 
amriSed   The  second!  was   tancre  /  &  with   hym   Rychard  du   pryncipat,  24 
Robert  danse,7  &  other  knyghtes8  grete  nombre,  that  they  were  / 
v  C  /  on  horsbak,  &  had  also  many  men  a  foote  as  the  other  had. 
theyr  entencion  and?  purpose  was  to  ride  about  the  thoost  in  the 
contre,  for  to9  seche  somme  aduenture  and  vytaylle ;  10&  yf  they  28 
had  founde  ony  paryll  /  grief,  pas,  or  plente  of  theyr  enemy es,™  that 
they  wold!  lete  thoost  haue  knowleche  therof  /  they  wente  strayt 

1  Orig.  thnrst.  2  Orig.  Onr.  8  Orig.  foude. 

4  Fr.  "si  I'en  les  laissoit  tant  boire  comme  ilz  voulurent." 

6  Caxton  has  here  misread  his  French,  which  gives  "Pierre  conte  de  Starnoy." 
This,  in  turn,  is  a  corruption  for  Stadenois,  which  is  the  reading  of  A.  Lat. 
comes  de  Stadenes. 

7  Fr.  " Robert  d'Anse."  8  Orig.  kuyghtes.  9  Orig.  so. 
lo—io  Yt.  "  Silz  eussent  trouvc  aulcun  peril  de  grief  pas,  ou  de  plevUde  leurs 

ennemis,"  if  they  should  get  into  any  trouble,  either  from  a  dangerous  place, 
or  on  account  of  the  great  number  of  their  enemies. 


another. 


CI).  LXVIII.]     Godfrey  is  Mounded  by  a  Bear.  113 

theyr  waye,  &   passed    by  syde    ij  cytefjs :   that   one  was   named  ££!■*•£ 
lychonie,  and  that  other  Eraclee.     after,  they  torned  on  the  right  "jffig*;, 
honde,  and  passed  toward  the  see  side.     The  due  Godeffroy  &  the 
4  other  prynces  abode  in    theyr   lodgys,  for  the  plesaunt  &  delyt- 
able  places  that  they  had  fouwden,  by  cause  they  wolde  playe  & 
refresshe  them  of  the  trauaylles  &  awnoyes  that  they  had  suffred.  • 

thenne  said  they  that  they  wold  goo  hunte  in  to  the  forestes,  which 
8  were  nygh  to  them  on  alle  sydes,  &  were  ful  of  wilde  beestes  / 
On  the  morn  they  entredf  in  the  woode  /  eche  helde  his  way  at  his 
will,     the  due,  as  he  wente  a  path  thuvgh  the  foresfce,  herde  a  man  }£,ke  °jj}- 
crye  /  &  he   drewe   thederward  /  &  he  sawe  a  poure  man,  that  ^ffjfjj^ 

12  was  goo  for  to  fetche  wode  for  to  bere  in  to  the  hoost,  fledde,  ^R«reat 
strongly  cryeng*,  to  fore  a  grete.  bere  /  The  due  ran  vpon  hym,  & 
drewe  his  swerd*  for  to  delyuere  the  pour  man  fro  the  beeste  /  thenne 
the  bere  adressyd  hym  vnto  the  due,  and*  lefte  the  pour  man,  that 

1 6  fledde  fro  hym  /  he  hurte  the  dukes  hors  so  sore,  that  he  caste  the 

due  to  therthe.     The  due  leep  a  foote,  &  drewe  oute  his  swerde.  The  pnke 

*  attacked  the 

the  beeste  was  nothyng  afert?  of  hym,  but  made  a  felonnows  crye,  ^gr>ga^edrel 
horryble   &   hydous,    &   syth   ran   vpon   the   due,   &   bote    hym  wounded. 

20  right  cruelly  in  the  thye.  after,  he  adressyd  hym  right  vp,  & 
embraced  hym  with  his  potes,  or  feet  to  fore,  for  to  haue  caste  hym 
to  grounde.  the  due,  thus  hurt  as  he  was,  was  yet  moch  strong, 
&  fyl  not  to  the  erth  thenne  /  but  caught  hym  by  the  skyn  about 

24  the  necke  with  his  lyfte  hande,  for  to  put  away  his  heed  from  hym  ; 
&  with  that  other  hand  he  put  his  swerd  in  to  his  body,  thurgh 
bothe  the  sydes  vnto  the  crosse,  and  so  slewe  hym.  After,  he 
wente  and*  sette  hym  doun  on  therthe  right  by  /  ffor  he  had*  so  moch 

28  bledde  of  his  wounde  that  he  had!  in  his  thye,  and  was  so  mer- 
ueyllously  sore  hurte1  that  he  myghte  not  stonde  longe  on  his  feet. 
The  poure  man,  whiche  he  had!  delyuere?  fro  deth,  ran  hastely  in  to  nie  man 

i  i  i  111J.-L         whom  he  had 

the  hoost  /  and  tolde  them  this  tydynge2  of  the  3duc.     Alle  they  p  leaf53> 
32  that  herde  it  were  so  effrayed?  that  they  ranne  with  grete  haste  ^J^ 
theder  /  The  barons,  an<$  alle  the  other  that  myght  goo.     they  %*"£*> 
founde  hym  lyeng1  on  the  ground,  pale4  and  discoloured ;  and*  after  ^'"e3- 
toke  hvm  in  a  lyttier,  and  bare  hym  in  to  the  hoost.     But  neuer  The  harons 

J  J  ■>  J  came  and 

36  man  was  more  demened,  ne  more  sorow  made,  ne°  noe  moo  pytyous  carried  God- 
frey home 
cryes  and1  1  mentacions  thurgh  alle  the  lodgyses,  As  wel  ryche  as  J"*,itter» 

poure  /  and*  men  as  wymmen  /  Anon  were  sette  alle  the  maistres  lamentations. 

1  Orig.  hurte.  -  Orig.  tydyuge.  *  Ft.  "twin,"  weak,  faint. 

5  Orig.  nr. 

GODFREY.  I 


114  Two  of  the  great  Barons  are  dangerously  ill.     [Ch.  LXTX. 

and  cirurgens  for  to  dychte  hym  &  to  hele  hyni;  there  were 
many  /  ffor  euerych  of  the  prynces  had  of  them,  for  to  awayte  on 
them  in  the  hoost. 


Here  recounteth  thystorye  of  somme  aduentures  that  4 
thenne1  fylle  in  the  hoost  of  cristen  men  / 

cap0  lxix° 
At  the  nine  i  N  this  sayson,  the  same  tyme,  it  happed  that  another  valyauwt 
m"m»  of^rou-  man,  named  Raymont,  Erie  of  tholouse,  laye  doun  seke  of  a  8 

very  iu.         maladye  moche  greuoos  and1  peryllous  /  Neuerthelesse,  the  hooste 
wente  forth  alwey  /  Therfor  he  must  be  earyed  forth  in  a  lyttier. 
On  a  day  it  happed!  that  he  was  so  deteyned  of  his  maledye  /  that 
certeynly  they  supposed  that  he  shold  deye  /  They  that  kepte  hym  1 2 
made  the  littier  to  be  sette  doun  to  the  grounde,  ffor  they  sawe  hym 
so  feble  that  they  thought  certaynly  that  the  sowle  shold  departe. 
The  bisshop  of  Orenge,  whiche  was  a  moche  holy  man  and  a 
religyous,  sayd  the  commendacion  for  the  sowle  and  the  seruyse,  as  16 
The  army      of  one  deyeng,  sauf  syngyng  masse.     Alle  the  hoost  was  ouermoche 
™rief,'toKr  they  discomforted  /  by  cause  they  supposed  alle,  that  anon  and  sodanly 
tow  both  of    to  lese  thise  two  grete  men,  whiche  were  of  moche  grete  counseyl2 
met gre"      and  of  grete  ayde  /  They  made  prayers  and  orysons  thurgh  alle  20 
The  sick        thoost,  Where  as  they  songe  masses.     The  ryche  and  the  pour 
pntrLifcm*  prayde  moche  humbly,  and  with  good  herte,  that  our  lord  wold 
wo.iU'sVre    rendre  them  hool  and  sauf  /  for  to  socoure  and  counseyle  them  /  as 
hmrt  their  e  they  had  nede.     The  barons  departed  in  charyte  largely  almesse  24 
vnto  the  pour  peple  /  so  moche  dyde  they,  one  and  oilier,  that  oure 
lord,  whiche  is  ful  of  pyte,  herde  them,  and  gaf  helthe  to  the  two 
noble  men  in  short  tyme,  in  suche  wyse  that  they  rood  al  hool,  & 
in  good  poynt  with  thooste  they  passed  al  pissyde.     And  after  28 
entred  in  to  a  lande  named  lycaone,  And  cam  vnto3  a  Cyte  called 
licoine  /  they  founde  it  alle  voyde,  and  nothyng  therin  /  they  had? 
grete  meseases  of  vytaylle,  ffor  the  Turkes,  whiche  had  herde  the 
tydynges  that  oure  peple  cam  /  trusted  in  none  of  theyr  fortresses  /  32 
but  voyded  them,  and  fledde  in  to  the  forestes  and4  montaynes  / 
[sif.5s.bk.]  men,   wymmen   &   childtren,   5  horses,   beestes,   vytaylle,   &    alle 
other  thyng  they  earyed  with  them  /  They6  suffred  moche  disease 

1  Orig.  theune.         2  Orig.  couuscyL         3  Orig.  vnto.         4  Orig.  and. 
"  Fr.  "  Car  ih  M  hasterent  moult  de  passer  eellui  pays,"  they  hastened,  not 
' '  suffered. " 


Ch.  LXX.]  Tancrcd  besieges  Tarsus.  115 

to  passe  that  contre.     They  cam  in  to  Eraclee  /  And  after  cam  in  to  Tiiey  went  on 

*  J  i  to  Knu-le, 

a  cyte  named  Marase  /  There  they  lodged!  and  soiourned  thre  dayes  /  *1"^ifro1m 
Bawdwyn,  brother  of  the  Due,  that  was  departed1  fro  the  hoost,  lefte  Mura»«. 

4  his  wyf  with  his  two  bretheren  /  She  deyde  there  of  sekenesse  /  Here  Ml- 
She  was  an  hye  lady  of  Englond,  valyaunt,1  wyse,  and  good  /  gutie™,  was 
gutier2  was   her  name  /   She  was   buryed   and   enteered   moche  •"• died- 
honorably  in  the  same  place  /  She  was  moche  bewaylled  in  the 

8  boost 

How  Tancre,  that  was  departed  fro  the  hoost,   as- 
sieged  Tarse  /And  toke  it  by  certeyn  couenauut. 

cap®  lxx* 
12  t       Ancre,  whiche  was  a  wyse  a  man,  and  of  grete  courage,  rode 

thurgh  the  londe  sekynd  auenture,  in  suche  wyse  that  he  fonde  Tancred-* 

°  •  party  arrived 

in  his  waye  a  cyte  called  Tarse.     This  londe  of  Scylyce  is  a  couwtre  »t  Tarsus, 
of  thoryent,  toward  the  sonne  gooyng  doun.     In  this  londe  ben 

16  two  grete  cytees,  whiche  ben  Archebisshoprichs,  that  one  named 

Tarse,  of  whiche  I  said  to  fore  /   Therin  was  born  seynt  poul  g*5^ 
thappostle  /  That  other  was  named  anauazie  /  And  eche  of  thise  two  *°m. 
cytees  haue  other  cytees  vnder  them  /  Tarse  founded  one  of  the 

20  childeren  of  Noe  Ionen,  whiche  was  sone  of  Iaphet  /  the  sone  of 
Noe.  Neuerthles,(19)  solins  sayth  that  perseus  founded  it  /  but  it 
maye  be  wel  that  one  founded  it  /  And  that  other  repayred  and 
amended  it  /   Tancre   assieged  this  cyte,  and  constreyned  them  janered 

'  °  ■  .  .  besieged  it, 

24  within,  what  by  menaces  and  fayr  wordes  /  that  they  yelded  it  to  •I,,d^"to 
hym  in  a  manere  /  They  sette  this  banere  vpon  the  hyest  toure  of  surrender, 
the  toun.     And  he  swar  and  affermed  to  kepe  them  from  damage 
and  hurte ;  ne  non  shold  be  put  out  of  his  hows,  ne  lese  ony  thyng 

28  that  apperteyned  to  them  vnto  the  comynge  of  the  grete  hoost. 
And  thenne  shold  they  yelde  the  toun  vnto  the  grete  prjnces  of 
thoost  without  ony  debate  /  Thus  was  it  acorded  bytwehe  hym  and 
them  of  the  toun.     In  this  toun  were  cristen  men,  hermyns,  and  in  this  city 

J  were  Cliris- 

32  grekes  /  And  in  alle  the  londe  about.3     But  the  turke  helde  alle  the  ''»"».  Greeks 

°  '  and  Ar- 

fortresses  that  medled  with  armes  /  And  had  the  seygnorye  vpon  ^uel"^'?1,.urk, 
this  peple  /  And  wold  not  suffre  them  of  nothyng1,  sauf  to  occupye  "feJjJ  t,^111J,'lls 
and  laboure  therthe,  and  for  to  marchaunte  to  bye  and  selle. 

1  Orig.  valyaut.  2  Fr.  Guluere,  Lat.  Gutucra. 

8  Orig.  abont. 

I   2 


116  Baldwin  arrives  at  Tarsus.  [CL.  LXXI. 

How  Bawdwyn,  brother  of  GodefFroy,  sechyng1  his 
auentures,  sawe  tancre  &  his  peple  to  fore  tarse, 
&  adressed  hym  to  them  /  ca°  /  lxxj 

E»  ie»r  54]  2b     Awdwyn,  Brother  of  the  Due,  and  the  peple  that  he  ledde  4 
Baldwin1*  with  hym,  were  entred  in  to  a  countre  nioost  barayn,  where 

many'hHrd-  they  suffred  grete  peyne  for  vytaylle.     After,  they  cam  vpon  a 

at » inoun-  montavne.  where  they  myght  see  alle  the  londe  of  Scilice  ./  and 

tain  from  J       '  J         JO  ' 

wiwnMtta?   the  cytees  vnto  the  see.     They  sawe  tarse  nygh  them,  and3  the  8 
Ti'.u™*1*      panyllons,  And  they  supposed  that  they  had  be  turkes  /  that  had 
assieged  the  cyte  /  They  descended?  doun  for  to  knowe  what  peple 
they  were  /  And  also  for  tenquere  the  beyng1  of  the  countre  about  / 
They  that  were  with  tancre,  in  thauaunt  garde,  sawe  thyse  men  of  12 
Tancred  mis-  armes  approuche,  And  lete  theyr  lord  haue  knowleche  /  Tancre 
Turk*  as  they  wende  certaynly  that  they  had  be  turkes,  that  cam  for  to  socoure 
them  of  the  toun,  and  made  eche  man  to  arme  hym  dylygently  / 
and  went  out  and  sette  them  in  ordenannce  ;  And  after  yssued  oute  ayenst  them  /  16 

The  bivners  displayed-     But  whan  they  approuched  that  one  to  the 
They  soon      other  /  And  knewe  eche  other  by  the  armes  /  they  opened  theyr 

recognized  '  .  •  A      Ji 

each  other     helmes  and  embraeed  eche  other,  and  made  moche  grete  loye,  And! 

as  friends.  .    , 

after  cam  to  the  cyte.     And  thenne  bawdwyn  was  by  tancre  right  20 
wel  and  honourably  lodged,  ffor  tancre  had  grete  plente  of  vytaylles, 
of  whiche  bawdwyn  and  his  peple  had  grete  nede. 

Of  thenuye  that   bawdwyn  &  his   peple  had  to  see 
the  baner  of  tancre  vpon  the  walle  of  the  toun  /  24 
'  &  how  tancre  departed.  ca°  /  lxxijl 

i        N  the  morne  whan  the  sonne  was  vp,  and  cleer  daye,  bawdwyn, 
and  they  that  were  with  hym,  sawe  the  baner  of  tancre  vpon 
Baldwin  and  the  hyest  tour  of  the  toun.     And  had  therof  moche  grete  enuye ;  28 
jeaioutnw'he'ne  and  began  to  murmure  and  speke  maliciously  of  that  they  had 
crec'is banner  gretter  power,  and  moo  peple  and  better,  &  said  that  they  ought 
to  haue  the  worship  of  this  toun  /  It  is  trouthe  that  vnto  this  day 
there  /  bawdwyn  and  Tancre  had  ben  lyke  two  bretheren,  in  moche  32 
pryue  acqueyntaunce  and  trewe  loue  /  But  bawdwyn,  by  enuye  of 
his  herte  and  by  euyl  wordes  that  som  of  his  men  made  hym  to 
vnderstonde,   was   thus    of   this  thynge  meuyd.     Tancre,  whiche 
was  moche  wyse,  attemperat  and  resonable  man,  vnderstode  thise  36 
1  Orig.  sechyng.  3  Orig.  and. 


Ch.  LXXIL]    .    Tancred  departs  for  Adana.  117 

wordes,1  And?  dyde  moche  payne  for  tapesse  hym.     And  cam  in  J^"*^ 
persone  to  bawdwyn,  and*  shewde  hym  /  how  to  fore  that  he  was  Baldwin, 
comen  /  ne  that  noman  knewe  of  his  comynge,  were  thyse  couen- 
4  auntes  made  bytwene  hym  and!  them  of  the  toune  /  And  his  baner 
sette  vpon  the  toure.     An*  hcrin  he  vnderstode  not  that  he  myght 
haue  ony  shame  ne  dishonour.     Bawdwyn  was  not  2content  of  [» if.  m,  bk.] 
thise  wordes,  and  he  founde  somme  that  attysed  hym  in  his  folye  / 
8  he  spak  grete  wordes,  ylle  and  iniuryouses,  to  tancre  /  in  suche  B^Mwin  mi- 
wyse  /  that  with  lytil  more  they  wolde  haue3  don  armed1  theyT  men,  invitingly, 
for  to  haue  destroyed  eche  other.     then?ie  sente  bawdwyn  for  them 
of  the  toun  /  And  whan  they  cam,  he  menaced1  them  strongly,  and 

1 2  saide  that  they  shold  throwe  doun  the  baner  of  Tancre  to  therthe  /  and  mm- 
And  sette  vp  his  on  the  tour  :*  And1  yf  they  dyde  not,  they  shold  gjtj™^*1 
wel  knowe  that  he  wold  destroye  them,  and*  alle  that  they  had  «££«** 
without  the  toun  /  and  take   the  toun  and  caste  it  to  therthe, 

1 6  maulgre  alle  that  tancre  myght  doo  /  They  of  the  cy te  sawe  that 
tancre  myght  not  waraunte  ne  deffende  them  ayenst  bawdwyn, 
made  with  hym  snche  couenauntes  as  they  had4  made  to  fore  with 
tancre  /  And  sette  his  baner  where  as  he  commaunded5  /  Tancre 

20  saw  the  force  that  was  don  to  hym,  and  was  gretely  desplesyd,  and 
had  grete  yre  in  his  herte  /  But  he  couerd  his  thought  wysely,  And 
wold  not  suffre  the  peple,  that  were  comen  in  this  pylgremage  for  to 
make  warre  ayenst  thenemyes  of  the  fayth  of  Ihesu  Crist,  shold 

24  slee  eche  other  for  thoccasion  of  hym.     he  departed1  fro  this  place  /  Tunned,  to 

"  ,  ,    avoid  a  con- 

ffor  he  doubted  that  somme  noyse  or  medle  myght  sourde  herof.  flkt.ieft 

J  and  went  to 

And  cam  to  a  cyte  nygh  by,  named  adane  /  There  myght  he  not  Adana. 
entre  /  ffor  a  noble  man  of  burgoyn,  named  gelphes,  was  parted  fro 

28  thoost  with  a  grete  route  of  men  of  armes  as  the  other  dyde,  for  to 
seke  auentures,  and  he  had  taken  this  cyte  by  force  /  And1  had 
caste  out  the  turkes  /  And*  helde  it  entierly.  Tancre  herde  that 
somme  of  our  peple  helde  it,  and  sente  good1  messagers  to  gelphes, 

32  And6  prayd  hym  to  opene  the  yates,  and1  suffre  his  men  that  they  The  lord  ^r 
myght  goo  in  to  the  toun  for  to  bye  to  them  suche  as  they  neded  /  §^^eive<1 
This  Gelphes  dyde  it  debonayily  /  And  hym  self  gaf  to  them  k^;m"d 
largely  for  nought  /  ffor  he  had  founde  the  toun  ful  of  gold  and  ^*^Uing 

36  syluer,  of  Robes,  of  beestes  /  of  whete  /  of  wyne  /  of  oyle  /  and  cf  needed- 
alle  good  that  a  man  had  nede  of  / 

1  Orig.  wrodes.  s  Orig.  hane.  *  Ori<j.  tonr. 

s  Orig.  commanuded.         6  Orig.  Aud. 

1    1 


118  Tancred  takes  Anamystre  by  Assault.     [Cli.  LXXIII. 

How,  a  lytil  after,  tancre  cam  to  the  cyte  of  anam- 
ystre, whiche  the  turkes  helde  it,  and  toke  it  by 
assault  /  cap°  lxxiij" 

Tancred  took  t       Ancre  on  the  morn  toke  leue  of  his  hooste,  And!  toke  his  way  4 
host  the  next  with  his  peple  /  And!  rode  so  fer  that  he  cam  to  a  Cyte,  named 

ami  went  on   anamystre1  /  This  was  one  of  the  heste  cytees  of  that  londe  /  It 
mystia.         was  fayr  /  and  moche  delytahle.     Tancre  cam  theder,  and  knewe 
certeynly  that  the  turkes  helde  it  /  he  assieged  it  al  aboute,  And  8 
p  leaf  55]    fro  2the  tyme  that  he  cam  he  assaylled?  the  toun.     thus  he  dyde  the 
first,  the  second,  and  the  thirde  day  /  so  many  assaultes  he  made  to 
them,  and  hurted  them  of  the  toun,3  that  they  were  strongly  greuyd 
He  took  this  and  abasshed.     they  without  toke  4the  toun,  and  entred  vnder  the  12 

city  after  a  J 

three  days'     -walles,4  And?  thus  was  the  toun  taken  by  force  /  And*  alle  them  that 

assault.  '  . 

he  fonde  therin  of  hethen  peple,  he  put  to  deth  without  mercy. 
The  toune  was  ful  of  rychesses,  and  alle  maner  of  vytaylles  were 
grete  plente.  Tancre  departed  al  the  gayn  and  the  goodes  of  the  16 
toun  to  his  men,  as  he  that  Avel  knewe  how  that  he  sholdf  doo  /  and! 
to  eche  man  after  that  he  was  /  in  suche  wyse  that  alle  his  men 
They  re-  were  ryche.  They  refresshedf  them  moche  wel,  and  theyr  beestes, 
xehes  and      0f  the  mesease  that  they  had  suftred!  in  theyr  waye.    They  soiourned  20 

I  heir  horses  J  J  J  J 

here.  there  a  grete  whyle  with  moche  grete  deduyt. 

How  bawdwyn  entred  in  Tarse.  And  how  /  iii.C  of 
our  pylgryms  were  slayn  of  the  turkes  to  fore  the 
same  toun.  ca°  lxxiiij.  24 

After  the       b       Audwyn  sawe  /  that  Tancre  was  departed  fro  Tarse,  And?  sente 

departure  of  iiiii-ii. 

Tancred,  for  them  of  the  toun3  and  sayde  to  them  that  they  snob?  lete 

ltaldwin  com- 
manded the    them  entre  in  to  the  toun,  ffor  hym  thought5  shame  to  lve  long 

inhabitant!  »  •>  °  ■* 

admit' him°    aiu*  aDyde  tnere  ydle  without  doyng  ony  thyng,  tyl  the  comynge  28 
into  the  city.  0f  the  grete  hoost  /  They  sawe  and  aduysed  wel  that  they  had1  not 
power  ynough  to  resiste  them,  and'  thought  yf  they  lete  them  not 
entre  with  theyr  agreement  /  that  they  wold  entre  ayenst  theyr 
wylle  &  without  force6  /  thenrce  they  opened  their  gates  /  &  wold  32 

1  Fr.  Anamistre,  Lat.  Mamistrane.  3  Orig.  tonn. 

4— 4  Fr.  "prinrcnt  eschieles  et  entrerent  pardessus  Us  murs." 

5  Orig.  thonght. 

6  Fr.  "  et  a  force,"  and  by  force.     Caxton  has  said  here  exactly  the  con- 
trary of  what  he  intended,  probably. 


Ch.  LXXIV.]     The  Turks  Jlcc  secretly  from  Tarsus.  110 

that   bawdwyn  shold  haue  two  toures  where  he  ahold   lodge,  &  ngjg^ 
other  of  thoste  in  the  howses  in  the  toun  alle  peasibly,  the  turkes  hmrj^wu 
that  had  the  seygnorye  of  the  toun  helde  yet  the  other  towres  in 
4  theyr  puissaunce  /  they  had  in  moche  grete  doubte  and  suspection  ™J^j;*{J 
bawdwyn  and  his  men  that  were  lodged  in  the  toun  /  And  they  ggj^ 
thought  that  they  shold  haue  no  socours  /  And  aboue  this  they  had 
moche  grete  drede  of  the  grete  hoost  that  shortly  shold  arryue 
8  there  /  and  sought  emonge  them  the  moyens  and!  manes  /  How 
they  myght  yssue  oute  of  the  toun,  and  lede  with  them  theyr 
wyues1  and"  childeren2  with  theyr  pryncipal  bageus  and  Iewellys  / 
It  happed*  that  this  same  nyght  thre  honderd  men  atbte  that  were  ■***£ 

12  departed?  fro  Buymont  for  to  folowe  tancre  arryued?  alle  to  fore  this  "J"*** 
Cyte  of  Tarse,  where  they  thought  to  fynde  hym  /  whan  bawdwyn  ™£™JMy 
knewe  what  peple  they  were  /  and"  that  they  wente  in  thayde  of  %£$£* 
tancre  /  he  wold  not3  suffre  them  to  entre  in  to  the  toun  /  They 

16  were  wery  and  Hrauaylled  and  prayd  hym  moche  swetly,  and?  cryed?  [*  if.  5.-.,  bk.] 
hym  mercy  many  tymes,  that  for  the  loue  of  god  he  wold?  doo  so 
moche  that  they  myght  this  nyght  be  lodged  in  the  toun  /  ffor  they 
wold  no  thyng  but5  good",     herof  the  fotemen6  of  this  companye 

20  prayd  hym  in  lyke  wise  /  But  he  wold1  in  nowyse  here  them  / 
Neuertheles  by  cause  they  without7  had  mesease  /  the  mene  peple 
in  the  toun  aualed  doun  with  cordes,  breed  ynough,8  and  wyn  in 
barellys,  and?  other  vytaylles,  with  whiche  they  myght  wel  passe 

24  this  nyght  /  whan  our  peple  were  a  slepe  in  the  toun,  And  they 

without  began  theyr  first  sleep  it  happed  that  the  turkes  that  were  gg  "£ 
within  the  toures  /  opened  the  yates  of  whiche  they  had?  the  keyes  '*£$*  lIie 
secretely  withoute  noyse,  &  ledde  out  theyr  wyues,  theyr  childeren,  £ayjj*Ita, 

28  &  alle  their  thynges,  And  all  the  hethen  men  of  the  toun  thought  and  property, 
they  were  not  sure  with  theyr  ghestes,  and  yssued  out  of  alle  the 
toun  :  whan  theyr  wyues  and  childeren  were  withdrawen  a  lytil  fro 
•  the  toun  /  they  wolde  leue  tokenes  cruell  and*  ylle  of  theyr  depart- 

32  yng1  /  they  cam  vnto  the  thre  honderd  pylgrims  that  l;iye  withoute 

gate  &  slepte  strongly  as  they  that  doubted  of  nothyng  /  Ami  him 
put  them  alle  to  deth  and  slewe  them  /  yf  ony  of  them  escaped  he  ofthewaib. 
was  happy. 

1  Orig.  wynes. 

2  Caxton's  French  text,  which  is  corrupt,  gives :  "  avee  leurs  aaltres  prin-^ 
cipalcs  bages,"  which  he  has  followed  by  translating  "bageus  and  jewellery." 
The  Lat.  gives  "ct  omni  mada  substantia  xua,"  which  the  better  French  texts 
translate,  by  " toutcs  leurs  ckoses."  3  Orig.  not.  B  Orig.  bnt. 

6  Fr.  "desa  companye"  of  his  own  army.     7  Orig.  without.     8  Orig.  ynough. 


120  Baldwin  is  greatly  blamed  for  his  Conduct.     [Ch.  LXXV. 

How  the  peple  of  bawdwyn  knewe  the  departyng  of 
the  turkes,  and  of  the  slaughter  of  the  cristen 
men.  cap"  lxxv° 

in  the  mom-  o       N"  the  mome  erly  whan  oure  men  awoke  in  the  toun  they  sawe  4 

ing  Baldwin's 

men  dis-  the  toures  where  the  turkes  had?  be  lodged1  open  ana  the  howses 

covered  tlie  m  j 

Hg,d'*df  v°y&e  I  They  knewe  wel  that  they  were  fledde.  They  serched  the 
t'riUnd1  walles  and?1  yates  for  to  enquyre  how  they  were  goon,  they  wente 
taken  place.    so  ferre  ^\rd^  they  fonde  this  grete  occision2  and  slaughter  at  the  8 

gate.     Thenne  began  a  sorow  and  a  moche  grete  crye  in  the  toun, 
The  common  Alle  men  nut  the  blame  and?  culpe  on  Bawdwyn  and!  hys  knygtes, 

soldiers  put  *  .  ,  , 

the  hiame  on  ffor  they  wold?  auenge   the  deth   of   theyr  bretheren,  whom    the 

Baldwin.  J  °  J 

sarasyns  had  so  shamely  and?  vylaynously  slayn.     By  cause  that  the  12 
knyghtes  of  bawdwyn  and  also  he  hym  self  wold?  not  suffre  them 
to  come  in  to  the  toun.     And?  in  dede  the  men  of  foote  sayd  this 
was  don   by  grete  oultrage  &  grete  falshede.     And  yf  they  had 
not  lyghtly  withdrawen  them  in  to  the  toures  /  they  had?  smyten  16 
them  alle  to  deth  /  The  knyghtes  helde  them  alle  stylle  tyl  that 
The  knights    the  footemen  were  cooled?  /  and*  after  sente  messagers  wliiche  spak 
souhe.s'tobe  to  them  and?  requyre  them  to  forbere  so  long  /  tyl  that  Bawdwyn 
q'[3eieaf56]    3had?  spoken  to  them  /  they  were  content  to  here  Bawdwyn  speke.  20 
"mid^ddvls"  Bawdwyn  excused?  hym  to  fore  alle  /  and1  swar  and?  affermed  that 
them.  £or  none  ofcner  thynge  thentre  was  deffended?  them,  but  for  that  he 

had  sworn  to  them  of  the  toun  /  that  by  hym  shold  none  entre  tyl 
the  grete  hooste  cam  /  By  thyse  wordes  and?  by  cause  other  enter-  24 
meted  to  make  the  peas  and?  spoken  debonayrly  to  the  mene  peple, 
was  bawdwyn  acorded  to  the  foote  men  and?  his  knyghtes  also.     In 
one  morning  this  toun  they  soiourned  and  abode  a  certayn  whyle,  vntyl  a  morn- 
fleet  m  the     yng  /  they  sawe  in  the  see  nygh  them4  a  shippe  aboute  iij  myle  fro  28 
them,a  them  /  They  yssued?  oute  of  the  toun  and?  descended  to  the  see  / 

they  that  were  in  the  ship  approched  to  them  in  suche  wyse  that 
they  spak  to  gydre  /  they  of  the  ship  sayde  that  they  were  cristen 
from  men,  they  demaunded  of  what  contre,  and  they  answerd  of  fflauu-  32 

Hai'ianT'and  dres  /  of  holande  /  and  of  ffryselande  /  And  trouth  it  was  they 
Fnesiand.      ^  ^  escumours4  0f  the  see  and  robbers  the  space  of  viij  yere. 
Now  they  repented  them  /  And  by  penaunce  cam  in  pylgremage  to 
Iherusalem  /  they  desyred?  them  to  come  a  londe  /  And?  they  cam  36 

1  Orig.  aud.  2  Orig.  occisiou. 

4  Fr.  "  une  navie,"  a  fleet,  instead  of  a  single  ship.     Lat.  classis. 

5  Fr.  "  cscumcurs,"  pirates,  corsairs. 


Ch.  LXXV.]  Tancred  attacks  Baldicin.  121 

and  made  to  gydre  grete  ioye  /  they  had  a  maister  ouer  them  named  Th« 
guynemer.1     And!  was  born  of  boloyne  vpon  the  see  in  the  londe  of  g^*"^ 
Erie  Eustace,  fader  of  the  said*  due  Godeffroy  /  whan  he  herde  that 

4  Bawdwyn  the  soue  of  his  lord  was  there,  he  lefte  his  ship,  And1  said 
he  wold  goo  with  hym  to  Iherusalem  /  he  was  moche  ryche  of  this 
euyl  gayne.  And  had  many  men  with  hym  /  that  he  ladde  in  his 
ship  /  thenne  Bawdwyn  lefte  /  v.C  men  of  amies  for  to  kepe  the 

8  toun  wel  in  poynt.     And  after  he  toke  his  waye  for  to  seke  somme  Baldwin  wm 

r    J  startet  out 

auentures  as  he  dyde  to  fore  /  he  helde  the  right  way  til  he  cam  to  ^^j^0/ 
the  cyte  of  anamyster,  whiche  tancre  had  goten  by  force  of  armes  ventures, 
vpon  the  turkes,  as  I  haue  sayd  you  to  fore  /  Bawdwyn  thought 

12  wel  that  he  wold  not  lete  hym  entre  in  to  the  cyte.  And  therfor 
he  lodged  hym  in  the  gardyns  about  /  2 Tancre  knewe  that  bawdwyn 
whiche  loued  him  not2  was  so  nygh  hym  /  And  he  had  not  for- 
goten  the  wronge  and  the  oultrage  that  bawdwyn  had  don  to  hym. 

16  Thenne  he  dyde  do  arme  his  men,  and  sayde  that  thenne  was  tyrae  Tailored 

J  **  armed  tiiin- 

for  to  venge  hym  /  ffor  he  was  nygh  his  retrayt,  &  bawdwyn  was  ■rir.*^S ., 
fer  fro  his.     They  sente  Archiers  to  fore  in  grete  nombre  for  toyto.to«*n5* 

v  °  the  insult  oi 

hurte  and   slee  theyr  horses,  whiche  they  had  sente  in  to  the  'i'-,rsU:<- 
20  pastures.     Tancre  had  with  hym  fyue  honderd  men  of  armes  in 
good  poynt  and  wel  horsed.      And   smote   in  sodanly  in  to  the 
peple  of  bawdwyn  whiche  were  not  aduysed  of  them  /  they  slewe 
many  and  moo  they  hurted,  the  men  of  bawdwyn  ran  hastely  to 
24  3arme  them  &  cam  &  fought  with  them  that  ran  by  the  tentes  /  pit  56,i.k] 
there  began  a  bataylle  bytwene  them  moche  grete  and  fiers,  but  it 
endured  not  longe,  ffor  tancre  had  not  so  grete  plente  of  peple  that 
myght  endure  a  yens  t  the  men  of  bawdwyn,  therfor  they  wold  with- 
28  drawe  them  in  to  theyr  toun  /  but  theyr  enemyes  enchassed  them  Baldwin's 
strongly  so  moche  that  they  muste  flee  /  there,  was  a  brygse  ouer  a  Tancred  «mi 

°  J  J  '  Jnri  his  men  bnrk 

water  bytwene  the  hooste  and  the  cyte  /  the  peple  of  tancre  entred  tatotheciiy. 
so  thyck  that  many  were  lost  and  slayn  vpon  the  brygge  and 

32  drowned  in  the  water  /  whan  they  were  put  in  to  the  toune  agayn 
they  were  moche  angry  in  their  herte  /  and  wold  take  more  peple 
and  retorne  agayn ;  but  the  nyght  cam  that  destroubled  it4  /  In 
this  scarmuche  was  taken  Rychard  le  pryncipat,  cosyn  germayn  of 

30  tancre,  and  robert  danse,  both  two  were  noble  men,  by  their  coun- 
seyl  and  atysement  tancre  had  ronne  vpon   Bawdwyn.     Of  that 

1  Ft.  "  gttynemcrs." 

-— -  Fr.  "  Tancre  savoit  que  Baudoin  qu'il  naimoil  mie." 

4  Fr.  "  to  conacU,"  i.  c.  their  plan. 


122  Tancred  and  Baldwin  are  reconciled.     [Ch.  LXXVI. 

other  syde  was  taken   a   moche   noble  man,  named  Gylbert   de 
Mountcler.     they  were  moche  angry  on  that  one  syde  and?  on  that 
other  for  them  that  they  had  loste,  ffor  they  doubted  that  they  had 
in  the  ben  slayn  or  drowned  /  whan  it  cam  on  the  morn  and  theyr  hertes  4 

morning  "  '  •' 

messengers     a  jytQ  aswaged  /  they  sente  messagers  eche  to  other  /  And  knewe 

ot  reconcilia-  J  °        '  ■»  °  ' 

sent  between  certaynty  that  thyse  men  that  were  taken  lyued  of  whom  they 

the  armies.     (jredde  that  had  ben  deed,  and  good  men  wente  bytwene  /  And 

medled  for  to  speke  of  pees  in  suche  wyse  that  they  cam  agayn  to  8 

entier  concordaunce  and  parfyght  loue  by  the  grace  of  the  holy 

The  two        ghoost  that  adressyd  theyr  hertes  /  They  amended  theyr  trespaas 

barons  kissed  iii  i  r 

and  became    eche  to  other  /  And  kyssed  to  gydre  as  frendes  in  good  fayth  / 

How  the  sayd  Bawdwyn  retorned  to  the  grete  hooste  / 12 
And  how  Tancre  mayntenyd  hym  moche  wel  in 
conqueryng  contrees.  Capitulo  lxxvi° 

b       Awdwyn  had  counseyl  whan  he  was  come  to  Maraze,  as  I 
Baldwin  re-  have  recompted   that  he  shold   goo  no   ferther  forth  /  But  16 

main  army     retorned  in  to  thoost  of  the  barons,  By  cause  he  herd  saye  how  the 
brother.        due  his  brother  had  be  hurte  peryllously  /  And  wold  see  and  knowe 
of  his  estate  and  how  he  ferde  /  theyr  counseyl  was  that  tancre  shold 
goo  forth.     Bawdwyn  lefte  with  hym  guy  neuers(20)  /  And  them  20 
Tancred  and   that  were  in  his  companye  comen  fro  the  shippe  /  They  passed  all 
on  through     sylyce  and  bete  doun  alle  the  forestes1  of  the  hethen  men  that  they 
myght  fynde.     they  brente  the  townes,  and  slewe  theyr  enemyes. 
[2  leaf  57]    And  after  cam  vnto  a  cyte  called  Alexandrye  the  lasse,  2that  they  24 
Alexandria     toke  by  force,  and  conquerd  al  the  contre  about.     The  hermyns  and 
assault?  by    turkes  that  dwellyd  in  the  montaynes  of  this  contre,  herde  tydynges 
that  Tancre  and  his  men  were  so  valyaunt  and  so  myghty  that 
nothyng  myght  holde  ayenst  them  /  And  sore  dredde  that  lyke  as  28 
he  conquerd  the  playne,  he  wold  come  vpon  them  in  the  mon- 
taynes /  And   destroye   the   londe   entierly   and   the   peple,    ffor 
tappease  his  courage  they  sente  to3  hym  good  and  certeyn  mes- 
sagers,  whiche  brought  to  hym  grete  yeftes,  as  gold  /  syluer  /  pre-  32 
cious  stones  /  clothes  of  sylk  /  horses  /  and  mulettis  /  they  sente 
hym  moche  largely  /  ffor  whiche  cause  Tancre4  lefte  them  in  peas. 
Thus   dyde  he  wel  his  honoure  and  his  prouffyt5  in  alle  places 
that  he  went  by  /  in  suche  wyse  that  it  semed  wel  to  euery6  man  /  36 

1  Fr.  "fortresses,"  not  "forests."  3  Orig.  ta.  4  Orig.  Taucre. 

8  Orig.  prontl'yt.  6  Orig.  entry. 


Ch.  LXXVIL]  Baldwin  apologizes  before  the  Army  for  his  Conduct.  123 

that  oure  lord  god  adressyd  his  way  and   mayntened  his  werkes 
vertuosly. 

How   bawdwyn    couquerd   a   grete  contre  vpon  the 

4  turkes  by  the  counseyl1   of  a  knyght  hermyn, 

named  pancrace2  /  ca°  lxxvij0 

n       Ow  ye  haue  herd  how  Tancre  mayntened  hym  in  sylyce  /  the 
grete  hoost  that  folowed  hym  cam  vnto  marase  /  Bawdwyn 
8  that  had  seen   his   brother  the  due   hool   and  sound,  had   herd  j^wi..^ 
agayne  tydynges  of  Tancre,3  how  he  dyde  by  the  contre  where  he  '^e[f^d 
wente  /  he  had  moch  grete  desire  to  gadre  to  gydre  peple,  &  goo  £*££**£• 
serche  the  contre  lyke  as  he  dyde  to  fore  /  But  he  had*  lost  moche  in*"** 
12  the  <*ood  wvl  ami!  "race  of  thoost,  tfor  they  of  thoost  had!  herd!  tolde  But  he  was 

la  o  J  in  j  j  much  dis- 

thoultrage  that  he  had  don  to  tancre  and  to  his  men.     And!  ther-  HkeJ, 
fore  many  doubted1  for  to  entreprise  the  way  with  hym  /  Buymont 
and1  his  men  also  had  not  lyghtly  suffred  this  thyng  vnauenged*,  ne 
16  had  it  ben  for  the  loue  of  the  due  his  brother  /  Therfor  bawdwyn  and  few  me.. 

xw   »»<«  *    »«    ^«x*  ,  „        would  aciiim- 

founde  but  few  felawes  that  wold  goo  with  hym  /  Godeff  roy  the  pa»y  Mm. 
due,  whiche  was  a  moche  wyseman  /  and  of  good  wyll  /  blamed  and 
repreuyd!  moche  his  brother  of  this  werke  /  he  brought  hym  herto 

20  that  he  knowleched  his  folye  to  fore  alle  the  peple,  and  sayde  that  ^E^".116 
he   had   made   amendes   to   tancre  /  after  his  will  &   yet  wolde  ^^.e 
amende  it  vnto  his  playsyr  /  &  swar  that  he  had  doon  it  more  by  |^,?8™ade 
the  counseyl  and  atysement  of  other  /  than  of  hym  self.     By  thyse  to«lL 

24  wordes  he  appeasyd1  the  hertes  of  many  men  ;  for  he  was  a  moche 
valyaunt  man  and!  moch  curtoys  /  &  neuer  was  perceyued  in  hym 
vylowye.  he  had  an  hermyne  with  hym  moche  pryue  /  named 
pancrace  /  he  was  right  wyse  and  an  hardy  knyght.     But  he  was 

28  ouermoche  trycherous  and!  4vntrewe,  he  was  escaped!  oute  of  the  [♦  if.57,bk.] 
prison  of  themperour  of  constantynoble.     And  cam  in  to  the  hoost 
at  nycene,  where  he  acqueynted   hym  with  bawdwyn  /  And!  he 
prayd!  hym  and!  admonested!  that  he  shold  take  men  and!  goo  in  to  a 

32  countre  where  he  shold?  lede  hym  to  /  whiche  was  moche  plentyuous 
auc?  ful  of  goodes  /  And?  yf  he  wold  goo  /  he  shold  conquere5  it 
licrhtlv  /  so  ofte  he  said!  to  hym  herof  that  he  began  to  take  his  way  Baldwin  and 

o         J    I  «  *-"  two  hundred 

and!  departed!  with  two  honderd?  knyghtes  and!  other  men  of  amies  kniifJ;it^;|fUi. 
3G  ynough  and!  feotemen  grete  nombre  /  They  folowed1  pancrace  alle  /  MiegoWtanw 

tius. 

1  Orig.  couuseyL  2  Lat.  Pancratius.  '  Orig.  Taucre. 

5  Orig.  couquere. 


12-i  The  Turks  are  much  afraid  of  Baldwin.     [,Ch.  LXXVTIL 

whiche  brought  them  toward  byse  in  a  moch  ryche  lond  /  they  that 
dwellyd  in  this  londe  were  alle  cristen  men,  sauf  a  fewe  turkes 
which  helde  the  fortresses  /  they  were  lordes  of  the  contre  /  and' 
suffred  not  the  cristen  men  shold  meddle  with  ony  armes  in  no  i 
wyse  /  whan  they  that  were  of  oure1  fayth  sawe  bawdwyn  and  his 
men,  they  were  glad  and  ioyeful  /  ffor  they  loued  not  the  turkes, 
timehe'n      tue^  delyuerd  ouer  tne   contre  where  they  had  puyssaunce  /  in 
t"eUndUM    sucne  wyse  tliat  in  a  short  tyme  that  he  had  conquerd  alle  the  8 
Euphrates.     loncle    vnto    tne   floocl    eufrates  :    Bawdwyn   was    moch    drad   & 
doubted  thurgh  alle  the  contre  ther  about  in  such  wyse  that  fur 
drede  /  they  lefte  hym  alle  the  fortresses  wel  garnysshed,  and  toke 
them  without  debate  /  the  cristen  men  whiche  had  receyued  hym  12 
The  Chris-     in  to  his  londe,  bycam  so  fiers  and  hardy  /  that  they  hunted  alle 

thins  of  the  ^  J    '  J 

country         the  he  then  men  out2  of  the  contre.     ther  were  somme  barons  of 

helped  him. 

the  contre  that  seruyd  bawdwyn  with  alle  tlieyr  puyssaunce  /  and 
heelpe  hym  to  brynge  alle  thyng  to  his  wylle  /  16 

How  they  of  rages  sente  theyr  messagers  to  bawdwyn, 
prayeng  hym  that  he  wold  come  to  them. 

cap"  lxxviij" 
t        He  renorame  of   this   grete   man,  of  whom   his   prowesse  &  20 

wytte  spredde  oueral,  cam  vnto  the  cytezeyns  of  rages,3  hopyng* 

by  hym  to  be  delyuerid  of  the  seruage  in  whiche  they  had  ben  long. 

The  Chris-     The  grettest  men  that  had  the  gouernaunce  of  the  toun  sente  cer- 

tiansof  Rages  ° 

H-lhiwin  to'0  tayn  Messaoers  to  Bawdwyn,  and  prayd  hym  for  the  loue  of  God,  24 
come  and       for  his  honoure  and  prouffyt,  that- he  wold  come  vnto  thevr  cyte, 

deliver  them.  *■  ■»    *  ..         */       7 

whiche  was  named  rages4  (21)  /  as  is  founden  in  the  byble  /  Thether 
sente  thobye  his  sone,  yong1  Thobye,  for  to  demaunde  the  moneye 
that  Gable  Ids  cosyn  ought  hym  /  and  on  the  way  wedded  sara  his  28 
saint  Jn<ie      wyf  /  the  Cytezeyns  of  this  cyte  receyued  cristen  fayth  anon  after 

the  Apostle        ,        ,     .        -  iiti 

converted  the  deth  of  oure  lord  lhesu  criste  /  by  the  prechyng1  of  seynt  Iude 
the  christian  appostle,  brother  of  seynt  Symon5  /  as  it  is  founde  wreton  6the  book 
[6  ieaf5R,       of  Eusebee  of  cesaire  /  they  helde  yet  fermly  this  lawe  that  tyme  /  32 

sig.  71.] 

1  Orig.  onre.  2  Orig.  ont. 

3  Fr.  llohdes.     Lat.  Rhagcs. 

4  Lat.  "  est  autcm  L'dessa  nobilis  Mesopotamia,  qua:,  alio  nomine,  PJiagcs 
apprMatur." 

6  Fr.  "Si  comme  Vcn  treuvc  ou  premier  livre  (A.  inserts  here  'de  Ves(oire') 
dc  saincte  Eglisc,  que  Eusebee  de  Cesaire,  etc." — as  is  found  in  the  first  book  of 
the  Ecclesiastical  History  of  Easel i us  of  Ccsarca. 


Ch.  LXXVIII]       Bahhvin  goes  to  Rages.  125 

but1  the  turkes  that  were  about2  them  cinstreyned?  them  so  moch 
that  they  made  them  paye  greuous  and  grete  tributes  euery3  yere, 
in  so  moche  /   whan    tyme  cam  for   to   gadre  theyr  fruytes,   of 

4  theyr  vynes  and  other  /  they  raunsouned?4  them  and  muste  paye  at 
theyr  wylle  /  or  ellys  they  wolde  destroye  alle  /  Neuertheles  in  the  mto*wtl», 
toun5  durst  noman6  dwelle  but  he  byleuyd?  in  Ihesu  criste,  ffor  this  ^'J,^ in 
only  toun  was  holden  hool  and?  entierly  in  the  fayth.     the  hethen  county. 

8  peple  had?  conquerd?7  the  other  townes  /  andf  therfor  they  greued? 
moche  the  cristen  peple  of  this  toun  /  ne  wold  not  suffre  them  yssue 
out  of  the  toun  for  to  doo  theyr  nedes,  ffor  on  alle  sydes  of  them 
was  the  puyssaunce  of  the  turkes  /  In  this  toun  had  the  seygnorye  The  lord  ^ 
12  a  "reek  that  was  moche  ool(?(22)  /  and  had?  no  childeren,  he  had1  an  a^danli 

O  \        /    /  childless 

ben  there  syth  the  tyme  that  this  londe  was  vnder  themperour  of  Turk. 
Constantynoble,  ffor  he  was  sente  thyder  by  themperour  for8  to  be 
baylly.     And?  whan  the  turkes  toke  alle  the  countrey  /  he  departed? 

1 6  not  thens,  but  abode  alwey  in  his  baylliage  /  Neuertheles  he  was 
that  made  neyther  hoot  ne  cold  /  ne  kept  not  the  peple  /  but  at 
theyr  wyll  /  whan  the  Cytezeyns  were  acorded?  for  to  sende  for 
bawdwyn  he  knewe  it  wel  and  was  content  /  whan  Bawdwyn  herde 

20  that  they  of  rages  had?  sente  for  hym  by  comyn  courcseyl  and 
acorde  /  he  toke  couwseyl  with  his  men  &  fonde  by  his  counseyl 
for  to  goo  theder.     he  ordeyned  lxxx  horsmerc  without  moo  for  to  Baldwin  went 

with  eijjlily 

goo  with  hym  /  he  passed  the  rvuer  of  euf  rates  /  and  lefte  the  horsemen  to 

J         I  r  "  '  the  city. 

24  remenaunt  of  his  peple  in  the  fortresses  that  he  had  conquerd"  in 
the  co»tre  to  kepe  them  surely  /  the  turkes  that  dwellyd  in  this 
larcde  knewe  the  tydynges  how  bawdwyn  shold?  come  to  rages  with 
a  fewe  men,  &  made  an  embusshement  by  the  waye  where  he 

28  shold  passe  /  and  sette  there  grete  plente  of  men  of  armes  /  thyse  The  Tin**  «t 
tydynges  wer  sayde  to  bawdwyn,  &  therfor  he  torned?  to  a  castel  t<>  attack  lum 
by,  whiche  an  hermyn  helde  /  he  receyued  hym  gladly  &  al  bis 
men  moch  honorably,  &  was  lodged  there  ij  days  /  the  turkes  that 

32  were  ennoyed  to  be  so  long  so  embusshed,  yssued  out  and  cam  with 
baners  displayed  to  fore  the  castel  where  bawdwyn  was  Inne  /  none 
yssued'  out  for  ther  were  ouer  many  men  /  The  proye  that  they 
founde  in  the  pastures  /  they  brought  alle  with  them.     And?  after 

1  Grig.  bnt.  2  Orig.  abont.  3  Orig.  enery. 

4  Caxton  has  omitted,  "  cstovoit,"  they  were  obliged,  to  ransom  their  lands 
and  fruits. 

5  Orig.  tonn.  6  Orig.  uoman.  7  Orig.  conquerd. 
B  1 1 rig.  fro. 


12G      The  Citizens  of  Rages  receive  Baldwin  joyfully.     [Ch.  LXXIX. 

Baldwin        torned  in  to  theyr  count.ey1  /  On  the  thirde  daye  Bawdwyn  yssued 
went  .»M  to      out  and  toke  his  wave  and1  cam  to  Rajres  /  The  due  of  the  toun2  that 

ltuges,  *  °       ' 

was  a  greek,  as  I  haue  said  to  fore,  cam  ayenst  hym.     And  alle  the 
where  i.e       other  on  horsbak  &  a  foote  with  trompes  and  busynes  /  The  peple  4 

w.i*  received  r  j  i  r    r 

imi!'.~reat      °^  ^ne  ^0Un  receyued  hym  3with  procession  the  moost  honorably 
p  if.  58,  bk  ]  they  myght,  euerych  peyned  hym  to  make  hym  f este  after  his 
puyssaunce. 

How  the  due  that  was  at  rages  varyed  for  to  holde  8 
this  that  he  had  promysed  to  Bawdwyn  / 

capitulo  lxxix° 
g       Rete  suspection  had  the  due  in  his  herte  whan  he  sawe  this 

Ioye  that  alle  made  to  Bawdwyn.  thenne  by  enuye  he  began  12 
to  fynde  occasions  by  whiche  he  myght  /  parte  fro  the  couenauntes 
Baldwin  is     suche  as  he  had  sente,  whiche  were  suche  /  Bawdwyn  shold  haue 

to  have  half      ,,-,-r,  *     n        i        /-i  i 

of  the  income  half  the  Rentes  of  alle  the  Cyte  and  of  alle  thexploytes  /  as  long  as 

of  the  town  J  l       J  '  ° 

at  present,      the  due  lyued  /  After  his  deth,  whiche  was  olde,  he  shold  haue  alle  16 

and  the  whole  ■*  '  ' 

nueke'8de0atdh  tne  seygnorye  entierly  and  hool.     Now  the  due  wold  not  holde 
The  old  Duke  this  /  But  sayde,  that  yf  bawdwyn  wold  deffende  the  cyte  fro  the 

did  not  keep 

this  agree-      strengthe  of  the  turkes,  and  fro  theyr  gryeues  that  they  made  in 

the  countre  he  wold  gyue  to  hym,  and  his  men  resonable  souldye  20 
and  good  wages  /  whan  Bawdwyn  herd  this  that   he  was  come 
theder  for  to  be  a  souldyour  /  he  had  moche  grete  desdayne,  and 
sayd  that  he  wold  not  abyde  there  so  /  but  wold  ordeyne  for  hym 
&  his  men  for  to  retorne  /  the  Cytezeyns  of  the  toun  sawe  that  24 

The  people     this  thynge  wente  not  wel  /  And  cam  tu  the  due  /  and  shewde  liym 

of  the  town  "      °  '  '       ,  J 

were  m>  in-     that  grete  euyl  &  peryll  shold  folowe  yf  he  lete  this  noble  raa« 

dignant,  that  °  *  *      *  * 

the  Vorced  to  ^ePai^e  /  ^or  Dy  thayde  of  hym  they  and  alle  theyr  thynges  shold 
w'-!im  his    De  ^eP^  *n  Peas  an<^  deffended4  /  and  they  shold  be  in  grete  fran-  28 
chyse.     The  due  sawe  wel  by  thyse  wordes  that  he  shold  do  folye  / 
yf  he  sette  hym  ayenst  them  of  the  toun  /  therfore  he  couerd  his 
herte  for  that  tyme  /  not  withstondyng  he  considered  many  thynges 
and  thought  /  But  sayde  that  he  wold  acorde  therto  /  and  made  32 
semblaunt  that  he  dyde  it  with  good  wille  in  the  presence  of  alle 
them  of  the  toun,2  and  avowed  bawdwyn  to  his  sone  /  and  graunted 
hym  the  half  of  alle  that  he  had  and  shold  haue  his  lyf  duryng  / 
And  after  his  decees  to  haue  alle  as  his  heyr  /  Grete  ioye  had  they  36 
in  the  cyte  whan  this  was  made  /  And  had  moost  ferme  hope  for  to 

1  Orig.  couutrey.         2  Orig.  tonn.         4  Orig.  tlefleuded. 


Ch.  LXXX.]         Baldwin  assails  Famoscttc.  127 

rccouure1  the  franchyse  of  the  tributes2  that  the  turkes  had  charged 
them  with,  ffro  that  day  forth  they  began  to  remembre  in  theyr 
liertes  the  wronges  and1  gryefs  that  theyr  due3  had!  don  to  them 
4  in  tyme  passed  /  And  thought  moche  that  yf  tyme  and  place  cam 
to  poynt  /  they  wold  suffre  it  no  lenger  /  But  thought  how  they 
myght  auenge  this  that  they  had1  su  fired  alle  the  tyme  that  he  had! 
be  due. 

8  4How  Bawdwyn  wente  to  assaylle  famosette,  the  cyte  i*  teem 
nyghe  to  Rages  /  Capitulo  lxxx° 

a       Cyte  was  there  nyghe  by  /  moche  stronge  and1  wel  garnysshed  /  Bland™ 

was  lonl  of 

named  famosette.     An  vntrew  turke  named1  blanduc5  was  lord!  Famosette.  n 

neighbouring 

1 2  therof  /  he  was  a  trychour  /  but  he  was  noble  and1  hardy  in  armes  /  city- 
This  sarasyn  had  don  moche  harme  to  the  cytezeyns  of  Rages  :  he 
sette  on  them  trybutes  am?  dyuerse  demaundes  ofte,  as  they  had 
ben  his  bondemen  /  And!  for  to  haue  thyse  thynges  he  had  good1 

1G  ostages.    he  helde  theyr  childeren  so  fowle  as  they  had   ben    in  He  held  the 

i  ii  t  i  -ii-ti  itoi     children  of 

seruage,  he  made  them  to  bere  donge  and  fylthe,  and  doo  fowle  tiie  people  of 

Rages  as 

werkes  /  herof  they  of  rages  were  mcche  greuyd.    They  cam  to  fore  hostages, 

'  J  °  .  and  l rented 

bawdwyn,  and  kneled  to  hym  at  his  feet,  and  prayd  hym  with  them  cruelly. 
20  ioyned  handes  right  humbly,  wepyng1  grete  teres  /  that  he  wold 

delyuer  them  fro  this  turk  forsayd,  in  suche  wyse  that  they  myght  Tiiey  en- 
recouure  theyr  childeren  /  whom  he  helde  so  shamefully  /  Bawdwyn  Baldwin  to 

*  '  J   l  J       recover  their 

wold!  fayne  doo  theyr  requeste,  after  theyr  desire  at  this  theyr  first  children. 

24  requeste  /  And  to  gete  theyr  loue  and  thanke  /  he  dyde  do  arme 
hym  and  alle  them  that  he  myght  haue  /  And  yssued  with  them 
out  of  the  toun  /  And  cam  to  fore  famosete  /  And  assaylled  the 
toun  moche  vygorously  /  But  they  within  deffended  them  as  men 

28  wel  garnysshed  and  in  a  strong  place  /  whan  Bawdwyn  had  ben 
there,  I  wote  not  how  many  dayes,  and  sawe  it  coude  not  lightly 
be  taken,  he  lefte  in  a  fortresse  nyghe  by  lxx  knyghtes  /  and  put  Baldwin  left 
in  it  garnyson  of  men  of  armes  and  vytaylles,  And  commanded  them  >"*»  t.">  be- 

'  siege  it, 

•*>2  that  euery  day  they  shold  renne  to  fore  the  toun  of  famosete,  And 

surfre  to  yssue  of  the  toun  neyther  man  ne  beste.  and  after  he  cam  and  returned 
agayn  to  rages  /  the  Cytezeyns  of  the  toun  sawe  wel  that  bawdwyn  Kagee. 
was  a  moche  curtoys  man  /  wyse,  noble,  and  valyaunt  in  alle  his 

3G  thynges  /  And!  had!  despyte  and  grete  desdayne,  that  this  old  due 

1  Orig.  recounre.  "  Orig.  trnbutcs.  3  Orig.  dnc. 

5  Fr.  Baudvs.     Lit.  Dalduc. 


128  Baldwin  is  made  Lord  of  Rages.     [Ch.  LXXXI. 

whiche  was  nought  worth,  ant?  that  had  don  to  them  moche 
sorowe  /  1and  was  not  his  felaw,  but  his  lord  in  the  toun1  /  therfor 
they  toke  counseyl  emonge  them  /  and  sente  for  a  puyssaunt  man, 
whiche  had  many  fortresses  by2  them  in  the  montaynes,  named'  4 
They  decided  constantyn,  &  acorded  alle  to  gydre  for  to  slee  their  due,  & 
duke,  and  to   wold  make   bawdwyn   due  &   lord   vpon    them,    ff  or   they  moch 

make  Bald-  .  J 

win  their       hated  this  old  man,  that  without  fayll  had  greued3  them  long  tyme 
in  many  maners  /  for  he  toke  fro  them  gold  &  syluer,  &  all  that  8 
plesyd  hym  in  the  toun,  &  ther  was  none  so    hardy  that  durst 
withstarede  hym  ne  displese  hym,  ffor  yf  they  dide,  anon  by  the 
turkes  with  whom  he  was  acqueynted,  made  them  to  destroye  theyr 

[« if.  59,  bk.]  vygnes  4and  fruytes,  and  brenne  theyr  whete  and  corne  /  and  lede  1 2 
away  theyr  beestes  /  And  yf  ony  of  them  went  out  of  the  toun, 
they  had  fere  for  to  lese  theyr  heedes  / 

How  they  of  the  toun  of  rages  slewe  theyr  due,  and 
chees  bawdwyn  for  to  be  theyr  lord  /    cap0  lxxxi0 16 

t        Hey  had  not  forgeten  the  wronges  and  Iniuryes5  that  they 

;had  suffred  of  theyr  due  /  they  hoped  al,  that  yf  he  were  deed  / 

They  went     that  bawdwyn  shold  deffende  them  better  than  he.     Therfore  they 

all  armed  '  .  . 

to  the  t»wer    wente  al  armed,  as  it  was  enterpnsed,  vnto  a  tour  where  as  he  lave.  20 

where  the  r  J 

Duke  lay.  And  began  strongly  tassayle  it,  and  enuyronned6  round!  about  /  The 
due  sawe  that  the  peple  was  so  sore  meuyd  and  angry  on  hym  /  And 
called  bawdwyn,  and  prayd  hym  to  take  of  his  tresour  as  moche 

Baldwin  tried  as  he  wolde,  and  repease  the  p'eple  /  Bawdwyn  cam  emong  them,  24 

the  people,  and  trauaylled  moche  by  prayers  and  menaces  for  to  haue  supposed 
to  haue  repeased  them  /  but  he  myght  doo  nothyng,  ffor  al  way 
ther  cam  moo  and  more,  in  suche  wyse  that  the  companye  encreced  / 
Bawdwyn  departed  thus  fro  them,  and  spak  to  the  Due,  and  said  28 
that  he  shold  take  to  hym  suche  counseyl7  /  that  he  myght  eschewe 
the  furye  of  the  peple  /  ffor7  he  myght  not  remedy e  it.     tlienne  the 

The  Duke  in   due,  as  a  man  despayred,  bonde  a  corde   to  a  wyndowe  and  de- 

desoending 

from  a  win-    scended  doun  therby  /  But  whan  they  apperceyued  he  was  tlmrgh  32 
piei.ed  with    smeton  with  arowes  er  he  myght  come  to  therthe.     Thenne  they 

arrows,  and  " c  ^ 

mi  down       t0ke  hym  ai  deed/  And  drewe  hym  thurgh  the  toun  /  And  after 

1-1  "and"  should  be  omitted,  and  "not  only"  supplied  here,  to  make  the 
translation  correspond  with  the  original.  Fr.  "  estoit  non  mie  scuUment  son 
pareil  mats  son  seigneur."  2  Fr.  "prcs  d'culx,"  near  them. 

3  Orig.  grened.  5  Orig.  Ininryes.  6  Orig.  ennyronned'. 

7—7  Fr.  "  commc  il  pourrait  pour  miculx  clucvir  auccqucs  culx." 


Ch.  LXXXII.]     Baldwin  becomes  Lord  of  Rages.  129 

smote  of  his  heed!  /  And!  coude  not  doo(  ynowgh  to  satisfie  theyr 
crueltees.  On  the  morn  they  toke  bawdwyn  hy  force,  ayenst  his  7,J|{'(fwI?J;,^1 
will  in  deffendyng  hym  self  /  and  lyft  hym  vp  as  theyr  kyng1  and  by  force. 
4  lorde  /  They  made  to  hym  oth  of  feaulte  /  And  after  delyuerd*1  to 
hym  the  grete  fortresse  of  the  toun  /And2  gaf  to  hym  at  his  will 
Eychesses  and  moche  grete  tresours  that  the  grekes  had  assembled 
by  long1  tyme  /  Thus  was  the  cyte  of  Rages  delyuerd  withoute  con- 
8  tradiction  to  bawdwyn  /  Banduc,  that  was  lord  of  ffamosete  /  sawe 
how  Bawdwyn  conquerd!  alwey  the  londes  and!  contrees,  and1 
encreced!  his  puyssaunce  /  And!  sente  to  hym  messagers  whiche  lete 
hym  wete  how  that  his  Cyte  was  moche  stronge  /  and  myght  not 

12  lightly  be  wonne,  but  he  wold  selle  it  hym  yf  he  wold   gyue  Bwiducsoi.^ 
hym  .x  /  M  /  besauntes  /  Bawdwyn  aduysed!  hym  herupon  /  &  gjj^^ 
by  counseyl  acorded  to  bye  it,  and!  payd!  to  hym  that  somme,  &  i*sants. 
receyued  the  toun  entierly  /  &  Banduc  rendred!  thostages  that  he 

16  had1  holden  alle  thenne  /  And!  thus  he  conquerd!  the  hertes  and! 

loue  3of  them  of  the  toun  /  that  they  called  hym  theyr  fader  /  And!  Pk*f3 
they  dyde  alle  that  plesyd!  hym  to  theyr  power,  and!  redy  tobeye 
hym  to  the  deth. 

20  How  bawdwyn  wente  and  assieged  the  toun  of  serorge, 
nygh  to  rages,  and  toke  it  /  And  of  his  orden- 
aunces.  cap0  lxxxij0 

i       N  this  londe  was  a  Cyte  named!  serorge,4  wherin  dwellyd*  none 
94  other  peple  sauf  hethen  men  /  The  lord!  of  the  toun  was  named  Baiak  was 

"^  r    r  '  lord  of  the 

balak.   the  turkes  that  were  therin  dyde  many  traueyls  and  vylayn-  city  serorSc. 
ous  oultrages  /  so  many  that  they  prayde  bawdwyn  theyr  lord  for 
the  loue  of  god*  /  and!  for  thaffection  that  he  had1  to  them  /  that  he 

28  wold!  take  counseyl  and!  sette  a  remedye  of  this  thyng  /  he  answerd 
curtoysly  /  And  sayde  that  he  wold  doo  it  gladly,  thenne  he  com- 
maunded*  that  euery  man  shold  arine  hym  dylygently  /  And  whan 
they  were  redy  /  they  shold1  yssue  out  of  rages,  and!  goo  strayt  for  to 

32  assiege  the  cyte  of  sororge  /  Thenne  dressyd!  they  theyr  engyns,  and  JjJ^iT 
began  to  leye  the  siege  /  And  brak  the  walles  ond!  torettes.     The  city. 
Turkes  that  were  within  the  toun  were  moch  abasshed,  ffor  they 
thought  wel  that  bawdwyn  ne  his  peple  wold!  not  leghtly  departe 

36  fro  the  siege  /  ne  they  vnderstode  of  no  socours  fro  noo  syde  /  wher- 

1  Grig,  delynerd'.  2  Orij.  Aud.  *  Sororge. 

GODFUEV.      '  K 


130  Godfrey  and  his  Army  arrive  at  Maresc.     [Ch.  LXXXIII. 

fore  they  sente  theyr  messagers  to  bawdwyn  /  And  so  entreted  that, 
The  Turks     theyr  lyues  saued,  they  wolde  yelde  the  toun  to  hym.     Bawdwyn 

yielded,  the  j      1 

town  to  him.  receyued  the  toun  /  And  put  in  the  grettest  fortresse,  one  his  bayly, 

that  shold  doo  his  commauradement  in  that  countrey  /  And  ordeyned  4 

a  moche  grete  tribute  on  them  of  the  toun,1  and  lefte  hem  therin  / 

ffor  he  had  not  other  peple  ynough2  for  to  people  the  toun  yf  they 

iiy  tins  con-    wente  theyr  waye  /  By  the  prise  of  this  cyte,  was  alle  the  way 

way  from       delyuerd  of  the  hethen,  fro  rages  vnto  anthyoche  /  ffor  to  fore  my  "lit  8 

Rages  to  An-  D  J  I  J  o 

takeheryom     none  &00  vllto  ^e  ryue1'3  °f  eufrates  for  the  peple  of  sororge  /  Thus 
the  Turks,      cam4  Bawdwyn  to  grete  honour  and  to  moche  ioyous  feste  in  the 
cyte  of  rages  /  Now  we  shal  leue  to  speke  of  Bawdwyn  /  And  shal 
speke  now  of  the  grete  hooste  that  cam  be  hynde  after.  12 


JIow  the  grete  boost  cam  to  fore  marese.5  And  how 
the  turkes  that  were  within  fledde.  And  how 
our  peple  payned  them  to  conquere  countrees  / 

capitulo  lxxxiij"  16 

t        lie  due  godeffroy  &  the  grete  plente  of  the  barons  &  knyghtes 

and  noble  men  and   other  with   them,   they   passed   moche 

Godfrey  and   6greuous  wayes,  and  were  comen  by  valeyes  and  montaynes  vnto 

his  army  nr-  ...  , 

rived  before    a  Cyte  named  Marese.    this  is  not  that  toun  that  I  spak  of  to  20 

the  city  J  .  r 

Marese,  from  fore,  ff or  that  is  named  Maraze  /  This  cytj   named    Marese  was 

which  the  '  _  I  J 

Tmks  fled,     enhabyted  with  Cristen  men.     Neuerthelesse  the  Turkes  helde  the 
fortresses,  And  had  the  seignorye  of  the  toun.     And  euyl  entreted 
the  cristen  peple.  thyse  hethen  peple  herd  of  the  corny ng  of  our  24 
peple,  &  fledde  by  nyght  for  fere  of  them  /  And  ther  abode  none 
of  the  toun  sauf  they  of  oure  fayth  /  whan  the  hooste  approuched, 
the  barons  knewe  the  trouth  of  this  toun.     Thenne  they  defended 
generally  that  none  shold  doo  no  harme  to  them  of  the  toune  ne  to  28 
theyr  thynges  /  They  lodged  them  in  a  moche  fayre  place  and 
delytable  /  And  had!  vytaylles  ynough  and  good  cheep.     They  of 
There  was  a    the  countre  lete  the  barons  of  thooste  haue  knowleche  /  that  ther 
by,  called       fast  by  /  was  a  ryche  Cyte  and  ful  of  goodes  named  Artaysse  /  32 
And  dwellyd  in  the  fortresses  of  the  toun  none  other  but  hethen 


[«  If.  60,  bk.] 


men.     The  prynces  toke  counseyl  herupon  /  And?  sente  Robert  the 
Erie  of  fflaundres  theder  /  he  toke  with  hym  Robert  de  Rosoye 

1  Orig.  tonn.  2  Orig.  ynongli.  3  Orig.  ryiier. 

4  Ft  rcrint,  returned.  °  Orig.  marese. 


Ch.  LXXXIIL]     The  Turks  lay  in  Ambush  fur  the  Christians.     131 

And!  Gossolyn  the  sone  of  aconon1  de  montagu  /  they  were  wel  a  ^^r^f 
thousand  men  of  amies  whan  they  cam  to  lore  the  toun  /  Anon  *»^  «£.<*- 
they  assieged   it.     The  turkes  that  were  within  trusted1  not  the  **• 

4  walles  of  the  toun  /  And  wold1  haue  withdrawen  them  to  the  gretter 
fortresses  of  the  toun.  But  the  hermyns  and  the  other  men  of  our 
fayth  /  to  whom  the  turkes  had  don  long  tyme  grete  shames  & 
moch  harme  in  the  toun  /  whan  they  sawe  oure  men  they  had  grete 

8  affyance  and!  truste  in  them  /  And?  toke  vnto  them  moche  grete 
hardynesse  /  And*  ranne  to  armes  /  and!  er  the  turkes  myght  with 
drawe  them  in  to  the  fortresses2  and  toures  /  they  slewe  them  /  and! 
threwe  their  heedes  ouer  the  walles  to  our  men  /  &  aftir  opened  Thech™- 

'  tliiMB  in  the 

12  the  gates  &  receyued  them   in  to  the   toun  with  grete  ioye,  &  ^^^ 
therin  they  fonde  al  that  they  had  nede  of   /  ffor  the  cyte  Wasournie»- 
merueyllously  ryche.  ffro  thens  vnto  Anthyoche  was  but  xv  myle  / 
this  cyte  of  whiche  I  speke  is  vnder  the  patriarke  of  anthyoche  / 

1 G  &  for  fere  of  oure  peple  were  the  moost  parties  of  the  turkes  fledde 
in  to  anthyoche.  whan  they  herd  saye  that  artayse  was  thus 
taken  /  &  they  had  slayn  them  that  were  lordes,  they  toke  counseyl 
eraonce  them  for  to  aduyse  how  they  myght  hurte  thoost.    they  The  Turks 

o  •>  •>  * u  •    resolved  upon 

20  choos  out  /  x  m  /  to  whom  they  comaraded  tacco?raplysshe   this  v1e'!Ke1aiJi<'^. 
thyng*  /  they  wente  forth  /  and  whan  they  approched!  thoost  /  they  *"d*mblls' 
put3  them  all  in  a  busshemerat  sauf  /  xxx.  wel  horsed  and!  lightly 
armed!,  whom  they  sente  forth  for  to  drawe  men  fro  thoost.   they 

24  approched  so  nygh  /  that  the  hooste  of  the  toun  sawe  them  /  ffor 

4they  made  semblaurct  for  to  take  fourriers5  and1  the  horses  nyghe  [*  leaf  6i, 
them  /  oure  peple  ran  to  armes  /  &  began  to  folowe  so  ferr  that 
they  fought  to  gydre  folyly  vpon  theyr  watche  /  they  sprange  out, 

28  and!  wold  haue  ronne  bytwene  them  and!  the  toun  for  tenclose  them 

in.  but  our  men  assembled  them  and  ran  to  gydre  /  and  cam  def-  But  our  men 

'  u"  escaped.  mid 

fendyng1  them  /  vntyl  they  cam  into  the  toun  in  suche  wyse  that  ^'1lie'1  lluine 
they  loste  noman  /  The   turkes  sawe   wel   that  they  myght  not 

32  recouure  the  toun,  and  began  to  assiege  it  /  ffor  they  had!  peple 
ynowgh,  and!  after  began  tassayle  it.  they  within  deffended!  them 
wel  that  they  without  loste  more  than  wan.  whan  the  turkes  sawe 
that  the  grete  boost  made  them  redy  and  approuche  /  And  that 

36  they  prouffyted  not,  they  toke  counseyl  /  and1  retorned!  in  lo  The  Turks 
anthioche  /  But6  the  brygge  that  was  bytwene  they  garnysshed  J1™** 
moche  wel  /  The  Erie  of  fflaundres  and  the  other  that  were  with 

1  Fr.  Conon,  not  Acoiwn.  2  Ori<j.  fotressos.  5  Orig.  pnt. 

0  Fv.forien,  forsigei'S.  6  Qrig.  lint. 


132  The  Co-usadcrs  start  once  more  for  Antioch.     [Ch.  LXXXIV. 

Goreiyn,  son   hym  within  artayse  went  not  out,  but  kept  the  toun  /  but  that  day 

of  Conon  of  -  „  . 

Montagu,       a  maladye  toke  goselyn,  the  sone  ot  aconon  oi  montagu,  a  yong 

died,  and  was  o  «/  •,-,->  n    ,i_    .  1    j  / 

buried  with     man,  curtoys   and?  moche  valyaunt.    he  deyde  or  that  maladye  / 

great  lament-  >  ■/  J  •*  __  •        « 

ation.  And'  was   buryed?   in   that   toun  with  moche  worship  and  grete  4 

lamentacion. 


How  it  was  commaunded  vnto  alle   the  barons   to 
come  vnto  thoost  for  to  goo  vn  to  anthyoche, 
and   of  ao'm   recountres   that  they  had   in   the  8 
waye  /  cap"  lxxxiiij0 

w      Han  the  turkes  that  were  come  fro  anthyoche  for  to  recouure 
artayse  were  departed*  from  thens  /  at  the  spryngyng1  of  the 
day  /  tydynges  cam  that  the  grete  hooste  was  lodged?  nygh  by,  ffor  1 2 
they  had1  herd*  saye  /  how  therle  of  fflaundres  was  besieged1  /  And 
therfor  by  comyn  counseyl  they  had!  sente  xv  /  C  /  horsmen  to 
fore  to  socoure  them  yf  they  had  nede.     They  commaunded1  them 
that  yf  the  siege  were  departed  /  they  shold  leue  peple  resonably  to  1 G 
kepe  the  toun  /  And  shold  saye  to  therle  of  fflaundres,  and?  to  them 
The  great       that  were  with  hym,  that  they  shold  come  agayn  in  to  the  hoost. 
ail  ordered  to  Tancre,  whiche  had  conquerd?  alle  sylyce,  had  in  commaundement 
Antioch.        to  come  agayn  /  and  he  retorned,  and  alle  the  other  also  that  were  20 

departed  fro  the  hooste  generally  were  comen  agayne  /  sauf  Bawd- 
Baidwin  wyn,  whiche  abode  aboute  Rages,  where  he  did?  wel  his  thynges. 
at°inf.agesyed    1  whan  the  hoost  was  thus  coimseylled  &  ordeyned,1  they  dyde 

do  crye  thurgh  out  al  thoost  that  noman  shold?  departe  without  24 
leue.     Thenne   toke   they  al   theyr   way  for   to   goo    strayt  vnto 
[Mf.  ci.bk.i  Anthyoche  /  they  herd  2wel  saye  that   ther  ran  a  water  whiche 
they  muste  passe.     But  the  brygge  vpon  this  water  was  moche  wel 
garnysshed*  of    theyr  enemyes,  to    thende    thenne   that  the  hoost  28 
shold?   not   be   destroubled?  for  to    passe  whan  they  shold  arryue 
Robert  of       there   /   by  comyn   counseyl  of   them   alle,   Robert,   the   due   of 
went'i'nad-     normandye,  shold?  goo  to  for  to  knowe  yf  he  myght  delyuere  the 
ir'the bri.ige   passage  /  and?  to  sende  worde  to  the  barons  what  he  founde.  Avith  32 

could  be  r  o     / 

passed.  hym  wente  euerard?  du  puysaut  and?  Rogyer  de  barneuylle,  thyse 

two  he  made  conestables  of  his  hooste,  and  had?  thauaunt  garde  / 

1-1  Fr.  "  Sc  fu  rasemblez  enterinement,"  viz.,  "when  the  army  was  again 
entirely  assembled." 


Cli.  LXXXIV.]     Antioch  is  strongly  defended.  133 

ffor  they  were  bothe  moche  cheualrous  and  prouod  in  amies,  thus 
departed  they  fro  the  hooste  and  cam  to  the  brygge  /  Hhe  brygge  ™,J^»ge 
was    lift    vp   whiche    is    named    esenclaues   /  And    in    scripture  oronu*. 
4  Orontes1  /  Also  it  is  called  in  the  contre  helle.2     The  brygge  was 
moche  strong  /  And1  had1  at  thentre  on  this  syde  hye  towns  and 
stron^e  /  In  euerv  tour  were  J  /  men  of  Annes  for  to  deffende  with  J'wwwdi 

o      '  J  I  defended,  ami 

bowes  and  arabalestres  the  entree  of  the  brygge  and  the  passage  of  jjj™,^^. 
8  the  water.     On  that  other  syde  toward1  autyoche  were  comen  seuen  ••>» ,iere- 
honderdf  horsmen  for  to  kepe  that  syde  of  the  water  toward  them  / 
this  ryuer  of  helle  renneth  on  the  syde  of  Antyoche,  And  cometh 
by  another  cyte  named"  cesaire  /  But  it  sourdeth  by  another  cyte 

12  named  Eliopee,  And  is  called  mallec,3  and  descendeth  in  to  the 
see  by  there  as  I  haue  sayd  /  whan  our  peple  were  comen  to  this 
brygge  /  thentre  was  wel  denyed  them,  ffor  grete  plente  of  turkes 
were  descended1  doun  to  the  bariers  /  The  other  toures  rested  not 

16  to  caste  stones  and  shote  so  sore  that  it  was  a  moche  grete  scar- 

muche  and  tiers,   they  fought  so  moche  to  gydre  that  tydynges  cam 

in  to  the  hoost  which  alwey  meuyd,  and  was  thenne  not  fer  fro 

the  brvgae.  they  auaunced  theyr  paas  and  sowned  trompes  ant?  onr  main 

,  1         i_  /  ji       army came 

20  busynes  /  and1  smote  on  them  that  held  ayenst  them  the  paas  /  they  uP>  and  soon 

that  were  in  the  toures  durst  holde  them  no  lenger  there  for  fere  of  bridge. 

the  grete  peple  that  they  sawe  come  with  the  grete  hoost  /  ffor  they 

thought  they  shold  not  be  there  sure.     The  other  also  descended  / 

24  And  were  put  alle  to  flyght  /  in  suche  wyse  that  oure  men  toke  the 
brydge  /  the  other  knyghtes  of  oure  peple  that  myght  not  come  to 
the  baryers  for  the  prees  whilis  the  scarmuche  was,  were  moche 
anguysshous  and  descended  doun,  where  as  there  was  a  place  to 

28  passe  whiche  they  of  the  contre  knewe  not  of,  And  passed  ouer  and 
discomfyted  the  seuen  honderd  sarasyns  that  kepte  the  bancke  / 
So  moche  dyde  one  and  other  that  alle  the  hooste  passed  delyuerly  our  men  m 

.  passed  safely 

ouer,  And  caryage  after  /  they  lodged  them  in  a  moche  /  fayr  place,  over. 
32  a  /  vj  /  myle  fro  the  toun  /  On  the  morn  they  4approched  alle  the    [« leaf  62] 

1-1  Mistake  arising  from  a  corrupt  text.  The  correct  French  is,  "  li  ponz 
cstoit  stir  I'caue  qui  a  non  es  anciennes  escripturcs,  Orontes. " — In  C'axton's  French 
text,  "  csanciennes  "  is  written  as  one  word. — Caxton  read  it  "  csenclavcs,"  and 
then  left  out  part  of  the  sentence  in  order  to  make  an  intelligihle  sentence  with 
his  new  word. 

2  Caxton  follows  his  French  text,  and  translates  "  VEnfcr  "  by  Hcllc.  The 
correct  form  is  "  El  Fer,"  the  Fer.  Lat.  "  Orontes  appelatur,  verbo  vulgari,  Fer 
didus." 

3  Fr.  Maubcc,  Lat.  Malbcc. 

1  2 


134  The  different  Names  of  Antioch.     [Ch.  LXXXV. 

grete  waye  bytwene  the  montaynes  and!  the  ryuer,  in  suche  wyse 
that  they  lodged  but  a  myle  fro  the  cyte. 


Antioeh  is  a 
nohle  city, 
whose  patri- 
arch is  tli i id 
after  that  of 
Rome. 


Saint  Peter 
was  the  first 
bishop  here. 


The  first 
council  was 
held  here. 


Saint  Peter 
converted  it 
with  his 
preaching. 


How  Antyoche,  by  succession  of  tyme,  had  dyuerse 
names,  and  of  the  noblesse  of  auncyeute  /  4 

cap0  lxxxv0 

a       Nthyoche  is  a  moche  noble  cyte  /  which  conteyneth  the  third 
place  eniong  the  patriarkes,  after  the  chirche  of  Rome.     This 
cyte  was  named  somtyme  Esencianes1  /  after  that  the  wrytynges  8 
witnesse  /  Nabugodouosor,  kynge  of  babylone,  brought  sedechyas, 
kyng  of  Iherusalem,  theder,  whan  he  had  taken  hym  /  And!  slewe 
his  sones  to  fore  hym  /  And!  after  put  out  his  eyen,  as  is  founden  in 
the  fourth  book  of  kynges.     whan  Alysaundre,  kyng  of  macedone,  12 
was  deed!,  Anthyochus  had?  this   part  of  the  londe,  &  enforced! 
moche  the  cyte  of  grete  toures  and  wallys  /  And  wold  haue  it 
named  after  hym  Anthyoche,  and!  ordeyned  it  chyef  of  alle  the 
Royame  /  the  pry  rice  of  thappostlys,  seynt  Peter,  was  first  bisshop  16 
there,  in  a  chirche  that  theophilus  made  to  hym  of  his  hows,  which 
was  a  noble  and  a  myghty  man  in  the  toun  /  Seynt  luke,  the  holy 
euangelyste,  was  born  in  this  toun2  /  to  the  same  theophle  wrote  he 
thactes  of  thappostles  /  whiche  was  the  .vij  /  bisshop  in  anthyoche  /  20 
ther  was  the  first  counseyl  of  them  that  byleuyd!  in  Ihesu  Criste 
after  his  deth.     And  thenne  was  establysshed!  that  they  shold  be 
called!  crysten  men  of  crist ;  ffor  byfore  they  were  called  nazaryens, 
of  the  cyte  that  he  was  of  /  this  cyte  was  conuerted3  by  the  prechyng  24 
of  Seynt  Peter,  therfore  he  gaf  it  the  name  of  theopoble  /  whiche  is 
as  moche  to  saye  as  of  god!  oure  lord1  /  vnder  Antyoche  ben  .xx. 
grete  cytees  /  of  whiche.  ben  /  xiiij  Archebisshopriches  /  The  sex 
haue  two  Primates,  whiche  ben  called!  catholicos  /  that  one  is  in  the  28 
cyte  whiche  is  named!  Amene,  And!  that  other  is  at  bandras.4    5 And 
alle  this  claymeth  thoryent5  / 

1  Caxton's  text  has  the  same  corruption  here  as  in  p.  133.     The  correct 
sentence  reads  ' '  cestc  ot  non  cs  a,7icicnncs  cscripturcs  Rcblada. " 

2  Orig.  tonn. 

3  Orig.  counerted. 

4  Fr.  Baudas,  Lat.  Baldacenses. 

5_5  Fr.  «et  tout  ce  claime  en  V orient"  viz.  "and  all  this  is  called  the 
Orient." 


Ch.  LXXXVL]     The  Situation  of  Antioch.  135 

Of  the  situation  of  Anthyoche.  capitulo  lxxxvj" 

t        His  cyte,  of  whom  I  haue  spoken,  is  anthyoche  /  And  stondeth 
in  the  londe  of  this  Surye  /  And  is  parte  of  the  londe  of  the 
4  crete   surye.     It  stondeth  in  a  moche  fayr  place  and  delytable  /  Antioch  ims  a 

°  J  j       r  j  i    fi|ie  3itUilli011- 

Now  I  shall  recounte  to  you  how  it  stondeth  /  It  is  a  moche  grete 
towne  /  And  aboute  moche  good1  londe,  for  to  here  habondannce  of 
awhete,  of  corn,  of  fayr  fontaynes  and  smale  rennyng  waters  /  and  [l  if.  62,  bk.] 
8  it  is  emong  the  montaynes  toward  the  eest,  whiche  contre  dureth  North  of  it  is 

a  lake ;  on 

wel  xl  myle  of  lercgthe,  &  wel  vj  myle  of  brede  /  aboue  ther  is  a  two  other 
lake  or  mere,  assembled  of  sprynges  &  wellys,  that  re?me  therin  /  mountains, 
whiclie  is  ful  of  fysshe  /  Of  this  lake  yssueth  a  rennyng*  water, 
12  whiche  cometh  nygh  the  cyte,  And  renneth  in  to  the  ryuer  that 
renneth  by  the  toun  /  the  montaynes  closed  the  two  sides  of  the 
toun.  Neuertheles,  ther  ben  vnder  them  fressh  waters  and  erable 
londe.     The  mount  whiche  is  toward  the  south  is  named  Oronte  /  onemoun- 

.  tain  is  named 

16  lyke  as  I  sayd  you  of  the  ryuer;  ffor  seynt  Gregoire  sayth  that  Orontes; 
antyoche  is  sette  bytwene  oronte  the  ryuer  &  ororete  the  montayne  / 
one  partie  of  this  montayne,  that  goth  toward  the  see,  is  moch  hye, 
in  such  wyse  that  it  hath  a  name  by  hym  self.     Somme  peple  wene 

20  that  this  hylle  be  pernasus,  a  montayne  of  whiche  scripture2  speketh 
moche  /  by  cause  of  a  fontayne  that  is  atte  the  foote  of  the  same 
hylle,  which  is  named  leschielle  buymand  /  But,  without  faulte.3 
this  is  not  the  mount4  of  whiche  the  auctors5  speke  :   ffor  this 

24  montayne  pernasus  stondeth  in  the  lande  named  Thessaylle  /  That  the  other  one 

is  ealleo  The 

other  montayne,  whiche  is  toward  the  south,  is  named  the  black  Black  Moun- 
tain, 
montayne,  fulle  also  of  sprynges  and?  wellys  /  of  wodes  and  of 

pastures  /  There  were  wonte  aunciently  thermytes  for  to  dwelle  / 

28  thurgh  this  valeye  renneth  the  Ryuer  that  I  spak  of  to  fore  /  And 

renneth  to  ward  the  see  /    In  the  montayne  fcnvard  the  south, 

begynneth  the  walles  of  Antyoche,  and  come  vnto  the  Ryuer6  /  hit 

is  a  crete  espace  within  the  closure,     ther  ben  enclosed  within  the  The  enclosure 

°  x  ol  the  city  is 

32  wallcs  two  montaynes7  /  vpon  the  hyest  stondeth  a  fortresse,  so  ve,T  b*&t 
stronge  that  it  is  not  prenable,  but  by  famyne.     Bytwene  thyse  two 
montaynes,  whiche  ben  moche  hye,  is  a  valeye  risdit  depe,  but  it  is  eontrfntoB 

j  >  si     '  *  **  *    *  two  nioun- 

strayt  /  in  that  renneth  a  litil  water,  right  faste  and  swyfte,  and  Jj2jJ**anda 
36  entred  in  to  the  toun  :8  and  doth  moche  good  to  the  toun  /  In  the  nver- 

2  Fr.  escriptures,  the  books,  the  ancient  writings,  not  "tttc  Scriptures." 

3  Fr.  sans  faulte,  without  doubt.         '  Orig.  mouut.         5  Orij.  anctors. 
6  Orig.  Eyner.         7  Orig.  montayues.         8  Orig.  toun. 


136  Anccan  is  now  Lord  of  Antioch.     [Ch.  LXXXVII. 

Cyte  ben  many  fontaynes  /  but1  the  beste  is  the  fontayne  whiche  is 
named  the  fonteyn  of  seynt  poul,  And!  is  nyghe  to  the  eest  gate  / 
ther  is  another  fontayne  without  the  toun,  which  by  crafte  and 
ah  the  waiu  conduytes  is  brought  in  to  the  toun  right  subtvlly  /  Alle  the  walles  4 

are  marvel-  .  ,  * 

lousiy  thick,   of  the  toun  /  that  is  to  wete,  they  that  ben  on  the  montaynes,  and? 

and  there  are 

many  towers,  they  that  ben  hangyng  /  And  also  they  that  ben  in  the  playn,  ben 

merueyllous  thycke,  ffor  they  ben  of  ouer  stronge  werke  /  Ther  ben 

toures  moche  hye  and!  wel  defensable,  that  is  toward!  the  sonne  8 

goyng1  doun  /  The  ryuer  renneth  so  nygh  the  toun  /  that  the  brygge 

r2  on  whiche  men  passe  ioyneth  to  the  walles  and  to  the  gate  of  the 

The  town  is    cyte  /  The  lengthe  2of  the  toun  is  wel  two  or  thre  myle  /  hit  is 

two  or  three  '  .,  • 

miles  long,     nyghe  vnto  the  see  /  xij  myle  of.  1 2 

Who  that  was  thenne  lord  of  antyoche  /  And  in  what 
manere  he  was  comen  vnto  this  seygnorye  / , 

cap0  lxxxvij0 
Anceanwas    o       F  this  cyte  of  Anthyoche  was  lord1  3a  turk,  named  Ancean  of  16 
Antioch.  the  mesque  /  ther  had!  ben  a  puyssaunt  sowdan  of  perse3  /  of 

Heipi.et,  sou-  whom  we  haue  spoken  to  fore,  named  belphet,  which  had  conquerd 
i.ad  con-ersia'  alle  thyse  londos.    And1  after,  whan  he  wold1  retorne  agayn  in  to  his 

quered  all  "  11.  i_-  j  nA 

this  country,  coutrey  /  he  departed!  entierly  his  conquest  to  his  neueus,  and  to  JU 
somme  of  his  meyne  /  by  cause  that  he  wold?  that  they  that  were 
his  trewe  men  and  frendes,  shold  holde  peas,  eche  in  his  partye  / 
and!  shold?  be  as  defendours  and!  the  closyng1  of  the  londe  /he  gaf 
He  had  given  to   his  neuew  solyman,  nycque,  or  nycene,  with  alle  theyr  ap-  24 
sdiyman,  and  pertenauntes,  as  ye  haue  herd  to  fore  /  to  another  neuew,  named 
n'ucar!tus "°  dutar,4  he  gaf  the  Cyte  of  damaske  /  And!  alle  the  countre  about  / 
and*  wold  that  eche  of  them  shold  here  the  name  of  soudan  /  and? 
lyke  dygnyte  /  Solyman,5  by  cause  he  marched1  on  the  grekes,  had  28 
euery  day  debate  ayenst  themperour  of  Constanty noble  /  Ducar  was 
ayenst  them  of  Egypte  /  And?  ofte  made  warre  eche  to  other,  ffi>r 
they  loued!  not  to  gydre  /  To  thende  thenne  that  thyse  two,  Solyman 
and  ducar,  myght  the  better  mayntene  theyr  warre,  he  wold?  that  32 
they  were  puyssaunt  and  hye  men  as  soudans.     To  one  his  seruaunt, 

1  Orig.  bnt. 

s-3  Caxton  has  spoiled  the  sense  by  dividing  his  sentence  incorrectly.  Fr. 
"  un  Turc'qui  avoit  non  Ancean;  de  la  maignie  avoit  este  d'ung  puissant  Soudan 
de  Perse."  *  Fr.  Ducar,  Lat.  Ducac. 

6  Fr.  " Soliman  farce  quit  marchissoit  aux  grecs"  i.  e.  "because  he  was 
neighbor  to  the  Greeks." 


Ch.  LXXXVIIL]     Ancean  sends  to  the  Sultan  of  Persia  for  Aid.     137 

named  assougur,  which  was  fader  of  sangum,  And  gramit  fader  of 
Moradyn,  of  whom  ye  shal  here  here  after  /  he  gat'  the  renommed1 
cyte,  called  halappe  /  To  this  Ancean,  of  whom  I  spak  to  fore,  he  To  Ancean 
4  gaf  this  hye  and  nohle  cyte  antyoche,  and*  lytil  lond  ahout  /  ffor  AnUoch. 
the  Calyphe  of  Egypte  helde  alle  the  conntre  vnto  the  boundes  of 
Surye.     this  ancean,  whan  he  herd  that  the  grete  hoost  of  cristen 
men  cam,  he  sente  messagers  and  lettres  to  the  barons  of  thoryent  /  f™^™^ 
8  and  hym  self  spak  to  them  by  mouth  expressedly,  and  requyred  the  ^™t8.°rthe 
caliphe  of   bandras    and  the   soudan    of   perse,  which   was    more 
myghty  than  ony  other  /  that  they  wolde  socoure  his  londe  and1 
hym.     They  beleuyd  al  this  lyghtly  /  ffor  Solyman  was  comen  to 

12  them  /  that  had  wel  assayed1  what  oure  men  coude  doo  /  therfore2 
he  also  requyred  moche  to  greue  oure  cristen  men,  And  that  they 
wold  auenge3  hym  /  Ancean  requyred  that  they  wold!  deffende 
hym  /  The  grete  barons  of  thoryent,  and1  other  hye  and1  noble  men, 

16  promysed  hym  that  they  wold  helpe  hym  certaynlye  /   Ancean  [4  ]f  63  bk] 
formate  not  in  the  4mene  whyle  /  but  gadred  as  moche  peple  as  they  he  dm 

^  '       '  °  L  gathered 

myght  haue  in  the  contreye  aboute  hym  /  as  they  that  fro  day  to  men,  and  got 
day  abode  the  siege,  he  assembled  vytaylles,  Armures,  engyns,  and  ^ffff"*rnr 


20  alle  other  thynges  necessarye  to  peple  assyeged  /  And  prayd  moche  *  »'<*<>• 
ententifly  the  cytezeyns  of  the  toun  that  euery  man  shold1  make 
prouysyon  and  garnyson  for  hym  self  as  moche  as  he  myght. 
Thenne  wente  the  cytezeyns  of  the  toun  to  vyllages  and  other 

24  places  ther  aboute  /  And  brought  alle  in  to  the  cyte,  whete,  wyn  /  Hew^o 

1  '  diligent  that 

Ovle  /  and  alle  maner  of  beestes  /  so  moche  that  the  toun0  was  the  town  was 

J         i  .  goon  well 

nierueyllously  garnysshed.  many  hye,  puyssaunt  and  noble  men,  garnished. 
were  comen  fro  the  contrees  that  oure  peple  had  passed  /  whiche 
28  were  fledde  in  to  this  stronge  toun  for  to  kepe  them  self  /  in  so 
moche  that  it  was  sayde  /  and  was  trouthe  /  that  ther  were  in  the 
cyte  /  vij.  M  /  horsmen,  alle  armed  and  wel  in  poynt  /  And  of 
footemen  there  were,  that  bare  harnoys,  moo  than  /  xx.  M  / 

32  Dyuerse  oppynyon  of  our  men  to  fore  they  assieged 
Anthyoche  /  And  how  they  acorded  alle  for 
tassiege  it  /  cap"  lxxxviij? 

1  Orig.  remommed. 

3  Fr.  "pour  ce,  s'entre  semonaient  moult  cfforccmeni  de  grever  nos  xpicns." 
Caxton  has  also  omitted  "  Soliman  prioit"  before  "  that  they  would  avenge 
him."  ■*  Orig.  aueuge.  *  Orig.  tonu. 


138    Debate  as  to  when  Antioch  should  be  besieged.   [Ch.  LXXXVIII. 

o       Vre  men  were  approched  so  liygh  the  cyte,  that  they  sawe  it 
nygh  to  them.     After,  they  assembled?  for  to  take  counseyl 
our  men  were  how  they  shold  procede  forth  /  ffor  there  were  somme  of  the  barons 
about  besieg-  that  counseylled1  /  that  they  shold  tarye  the  siege  vnto  the  newe  4 

ing  the  town.  J  '  J  J  .     ' ° 

The  winter     tyme  of  the  yere  /  ffor  the  wynter  cam  on  /  whiche  shold  be  moche 
on')8th<e'jrmg    gieuous  to  lye  out  /  On  that  other  parte,  ther  were  many  of  thooste 
nou*ge,as    that  were  sprad  about  in  the  cytees  and?  castellys,  whiche  myght 
ti"e™ needed    not  lyghtly  be  assembled  tyl  after  the  wynter.     And?  ferthermore,  8 
constantin-    they  sayde  that  themperour  of   Constantinople   shold  sende  grete 
peple  for  to  helpe  them  /  Therfor  it  were  wel  reason  that  they 
shold  abyde  them  /  Also,  on  the  other  syde  of  the  montaynes,  they 
sayde  they  shold?  haue  peple  al  fressh,  of  whom  they  had  grete  12 
nede  for  tassiege  suche  a  toun.2     And,  in  the  mene  whyle,  myght 
the  peple  and  theyr  horses  soiourne  alle  the  wynter  in  the  countre 
about,  And  shold  be  the  fressher,  and  harder,  and?  strenger  for 
tendure3  trauaylle  and  payne  whan  it  shold  nede  /    The  other  1G 
barons  acorded  that  they  shold  sette  the  siege  forth  with  withoute 
delaye  /  ffor  yf  thenemyes  that  were  in  the  Cyte  had  the  respyte  / 
they  shold  garnysshe  them  better  of  men  /  of  Armures,  of  Engyns  / 
and  of  other  estorementes  than  they  had  therme  :  They  also  that  20 
were  comyng,  shold  haste  them  the  more  yf  the  cyte  were  beseged 
[*  leaf  64]    for  to  helpe  4them  /  To  this  counseyl  acorded  fynably  alle.     they 
Finally  tiiey   ordeyned  theyr  bataylles  /  &  cam  to  fore  the  toun  /  there  they 
be!,''i"'tne      lodged  them  the  x  day  of  octobre.     In  oure  hooste  were  men  wel  24 

town  the  10th  °  ^  ,    _       _        ,_   ,        .,,  ;      i   -i 

October.  armed?  to  the  nombre  of  C  /  C.  C  /  M./  without  wymmen  /  chil- 
deren  /  and  other  men  that  bare  no  harnoys.  And  yet  myght  not 
alle  they  besiege  alle  the  cyte  /  ffor  without  the  montaynes  /  where 
was  thought  to  leye  no  siege,  5was  at  the  foot  of  the  hylle  vnto  the  28 
ryuer,  a  grete  part  of  the  walle  in  a  fayr  playn,  which  myght  not 
be  leyed  about  with  peple5  /  In  the  comyng  of  this  grete  hoost  / 
was  a  moche  grete  bruyt  and  noyse  of  buysyns  /  of  horses,  of  peple, 
of  Cartes  and  charyottes  /  But  this  daye,  ne  on  the  morn  folowynge,  32 
The  town  -was  no  noyse  /  but  semed  that  the  toun  had  ben  alle  voyde,  and 
raas  very e     noman  therin ;  but6  tliis  was  don  by  cause  they  had  moche  grete 


quiet. 


garnyson  of  peple  &  of  other  thynges. 

1  Orig.  couuseylled.  2  Orig.  tonn.  3  Orig.  tendnre. 

5~5  Fr.  "avoit  il  grant  partie  des  murs,  des  le  pie  du  tertrc  jusques  an 
flcuvc,  en  beau  plain,  qui  ne  pent  estrc  acaint  de  gens,"  a  large  part  of  the 
walls,  from  the  foot  of  the  hill  to  the  river,  were  exposed,  which  could  not  be 
surrounded  by  the  army. 

8  Orig.  but. 


Ch.  LXXXIX.]    TU  Position  of  the  Great  Barons  in  the  Skge.    139 

How,  after  the  situacion  of  the  toun,  eche  of  the  hye 
barons  of  the  hoost  were  lodged  at  the  sayd 
sieo-e.  cap°  lxxxix0 

4  a       Nthyoche  had,  conteynyeng  iii  the  cyte  /  v  /  yates  /  to  war.?  **"*J* 
thoryent  /  ther  was  one,  &  was  named  the  porte  seyut  poul,  £££*«* 
&  that  wa3  hy  cause  it  was  vnder  the  monastery  of  seynt  poul 
whiche  is  hangyng<  on  the  territoire1  /  the  second"  was  toward* 
8  thoccident.     And2  the  lengthe  of  the  toun3  is  hytwene  both  thyse 
yates,  and  that  is  named!  the  porte  of  seynt  george  /  On  the  syde  [*£•*£ 
toward!  byse  ben  thre  yates,  whiche  alle  yssue  toward  the  Ryuer  /  *°r£'g™e_ 
that  yate  aboue  is  named1  the  porte  of  the  hound1,     ther  is  a  yate 

12  to  fore  this  yate4  /  by  whiche  men  passe  the  mareys  which  is  vnder 
the  walles  of  the  cyte  /  The  seconde  is  named?  the  porte  of  the  due  : 
the  ryuer  is  ther  wel  a  myle  long  fro  thyse  two  yates.  The  thirde 
is  named  the  yate  of  the  brygge,  by  cause  the  brygge  is  there  /  by 

16  whiche  men  passe  the  Ryuer  /  ffor  bytwene  the  port  of  the  due, 
whiche  is  in  the  myddle  of  thyse  thre  /  and*  this  that  is  the  laste  on 
that  syde,  approuche  so  the  flood*  of  the  toun,  that  fro  thens  it 
renneth  costeyeng15  the  toun  alle  ioynyng  to  the  walles.    wherfor  it 

20  was  that  this  yate,  ne  the  yate  of  seynt  george,  our  men  myght  not 
assiege,  ffor  noman  myght  come  theder  but  yf  he  wente  ouer  the 
Ryuer  /  Buymont6  assieged  this  vate  aforsavd!,  with  them  that  were  Bobemnnd 

J  I  J  °  •/  "     '  besieged  tWe 

comen  in  his    companye.     beside   hym,  in7   aualyng1  donn,  were  upper  g^e. 

24  lodged1  Robert  the  due  of  Normandye,  Robert  therle  of  ffkundres  / 
Steuen  therle  of  bloys,  and  huon8  le  mayne  /  Thyse  had*  pourprised! 
fro  the  lodgys  9of  buymont  vnto  the  yate  of  thounde  /  ffor  the  P  ir.  u,  bk.] 
frensshemen  /  the  normans  and!  the  bretons,  were  with  them  to  fore 

28  this  gate  /  thenne  were  lodged!  therle  Remont  of  tholouse,  and  the  iJJESSfild 
bisshop  of  Puy,  with  them  that  were  come  in  theyr  companye  ;  that  £f9^.re°;ee"" 
were  the  prouynceaulx,  the  gascoyns,  and  the  burgoynons  /  ther  g£g*Jfc 
was  moche  grete  peple  /  They  toke  alle  the  place,  vnto  the  gate  ^n^me"- 

1  Fr.  "qui  est  ou  pendant  du  tcrtre,"  viz.  "which  is  on  the  slope  of  the 
hill,"  Lat.  "posito  in  clivo  mantis." 

-  Orig.  Aud.  3  Orig.  tonn. 

*  Fr.  "il  y  a  un  pont  devant  la  porte." 

5  Fr.  cotoiant,  extending  along  the  side  of. 

6  Fr.  "Buymont  assiega  la  porte  dessus,"  (i.  e.  the  upper  gate,  of  the  three) 
instead  of  "the  gate  aforsaid."  6  Orig.  Buymout. 

7  Fr.  en  avalant,  as  you  go  farther  down. 

8  Lat.  Hugo  Magnus,  Hugh  the  Great. 


140  Fright  of  the  Inhabitants  of  Antioch.     [Ch.*XC. 

next  after  /  At  this  gate  were  lodged!  the  due  Godeffroy  /  Eustace 
his  brother  /  Bawdwyn  therle  of  henawd  /  Reynold  therle  of  Toul  / 
Guemes1  de  montagu  /  And?  other  barons,  many  whiche  alwey  helde 
them  with  thyse  piynces.     ther  were  the  lorayues,  the  henewers,  4 
Godfrey  and   they  of  sessougne  ,'  they  of  bauyere,  and1  they  of  francoine  /  They 

liis  friends  "  "  '     .         * 

extended        toke  vp  alle  the  place  almoost  to  the  yate  of  the  bryg^e  /  And 

almost  to  the  r  x  J  Joo      l 

Brid°eftl'e     ne^e  ^he  Ryuer  that  ranne  there.     In  this  partye,  toward  the  toun, 

was  grete  plente  of  apple  trees  /  of  fygtrees,  and  of  other  trees  8 

beryng  fruyt  /  whiche  our  peple  cut,  &  hewe  of  alle  for  to  lodge 

The  towns-     them,  they  of  the  toun2  by  helde,  by  the  hourdeys3  and  batyllemens 

watched  the    of   the   walles,   the   manere   and*   contenaunce   of   thooste   /  And? 

encampments  ' 

of  our  men     meruaylled  moche  of  the  Amies  /  of  the  tentes  /  and  of  the  facion  12 

with  great  "  '  I 

curiosity.       anij  manere  that  they  had  for  to  lodge  them  /  They  were  in  grete 

doubte  /  ffor  they  were  wel  adcerteyned  /.  that  so  moche  and  grete 

peple  wold  not  lightly  departe  fro  this  siege  without  doyng1  them 

They  were     grete  dammage  and  harme  /  Ther  Avere  many  that  were  so  gretely  16 

"iwmedat     effra}red  for  theyr  wyues,  theyr  childeren  &  theyr  other  frendes, 

atious.  that  they  wold  that  they  had  ben  deed  and  buryed  long  to  fore  / 

to  thende   that  they  shold  not   see  the   destruction  which  they 

doubted  for  to  see.  20 

How  our  peple  assembled  in  counseyl  for  to  fynde 
the  moyen,  for  to  sende  for  vytaylle  /  &  of  a 
brydge  that  they  made.  ca°  /  lxxxx. 

our  men  had  o       Wr   peple,  that  were   thus  lodged,  founde  not   about  them  24 
cuitv  in  find-  pastures  for  theyr  horses  ne  for  theyr  other  beestes  /  Therfore 

ing  food  for  r  J  J  ' 

their  animals,  them  behoeued  ofte  to  passe  the  ryuer  /  and  to  renne  thurgh  the 
contrey  /  thus  dyde  they  many  tymes  /  by  cause  they  of  the  toun 
meuyd  not  yet  /  And  it  was  a  noyous  and  greuous  thynge  to  passe  28 
the  Ryuer  /  ffor4  ther  was  no  brygge  /  but  feried  ouer5  m  botes 
bothe  horse  and  man.  whan  the  turkes  of  the  Cyte  apperceyued6 
The  Turks  this,  they  sente  secretely  ouer  theyr  brygge  theyr  peple,  which  toke 
ot  them  while  and  slewe  our  men,  that  they  fonde  so  sprad  in  the  contre.     And  32 

foraging. 

this  dyde  they  surely  ynowgh  /  by  cause  they  myght  not  retourne 

1  Fr.  guennes  de  Montaigu.     Lat.  Conon  de  Montaculo.  2  Orig.  tonn. 

s  Fr.  "  Arehieres  et  hordeis,"  i.  e.  from  the  openings  for  the  archers,  and 
from  the  palisades. 

*  Fr.  "Car  il  n'y  avoit point  de  gv4,"  for  there  was  no  ford  there. 
6  Orig.  oner.  6  Orig.  appcrceyned. 


CI).  XCL]      The  Bridge  made  by  the  Crusaders.  141 

but  by  1  the  ryuer  /  4c  they  of  thoost  (myght  not  socoure  them.    P  leaf  65] 
wherfor  our  barons  cowseylled  them  to  gydre,  and  concluded2  that 
they  wold*  make  a  brygge  in  somme  nianer  by  which  e  they  myght 
4  passe  without  dau»ger3  of  them  of  the  toun  /  tliey  fonde  shippes  in 
the  Live,  and*   aboue   in   the   ryuer   they   toke  and1  ioyned!   them  o.ir  baron* 

■'     '  j  j  j  nnide  si  bridge 

to  gydre,  and  sette  plankes  on  tliem,  and  nayled  them  in  suche  ol  8||'P8 
wyse  that  thre  or  four  men  myght  pas  e  on  a  front  /  this  brigge 
8  dyde  moche  ease  to  alle  thoost  /  This  brygge  was  nygh  the  lodgys  mm-God- 

J  JOa  ii^.        frcy'a  ciunp. 

of  due  godeffroy,  right  ayenst  the  yate  that  he  kepte  ;  And  therfor 

the  yate  was  named!  the  yate  of  the  due4  /  ffro  this  brygge  of  tree 

vnto  the  brygge  of  stone  was  a  grete  myle,  as  I  sayd  to  you  to  fore  / 

1 2  by  this  yate  &  by  this  bryge  was  moche  harme  dou  to  our  peple  / 

And  by  the   yate  named*  the   porte  of  the  hounde,  they  greuedf  The  people 
moche  our  peple  ;  ffor5  they  had!  a  brydsre  of  stone  by  the  toun,  of  madewiiiei 

r   i       >  J  jo  j  from  the  town 

dyuerse  waters  gad  red?  to  gydre,  that  ran  there  /  by  that  brygge  g>™«'' t,,a 
16  they  made  theyr  assaylles  day  and?  nyght  vpon  the  peple  of  therles  H(,u"d- 
of  tholouse,  which  kepte  the  gate.  Oftymes  they  opened!  the  yates  / 
and?  yssued!  out  vpon  theyr  lodgyes,  and  dywerse  they  hurted!,  and 
slewe  many.  And?  whan  they  had!  don,  they  retorned!  in  to  the 
20  toun  /  ffor  oure  men  myght  not  poursiewe  them  but  by  the  brygge. 
therfoie  hit  happed!  that  the  bisshoppe  of  puy,  therle  of  tholouse, 
and!  the  other  barons6  that  were  there  /  were  more  hurte  in  theyr 
mounture7  than  alle  the  other  of  thoost. 


24  How  our  peple  stopped  a  yate  of  the  toun  without 
forth  /  And  of  a  castel  of  tree  that  they  made. 

cap°  lxxxxj0 

t       His  peple  had  grete  despyte  &  grete  shame  of  the  domages 
28  and!  harmes  that  were  thus  don  to  them  /  And!  toke  counseyl  Our  men 

took  counsel 

that  they  wold  bete  doun  the  brygge.     And!  theder  they  cam  alle  how  to  put  a 

J  JO°  J  stop  to  this 

Armed!8  vnder  theyr  targes  and!  sheldes  of  yron  and!  grete  plente  of  damage. 

2  Orig.  concluded. 

3  Fr.  "Sans  dangier  de  ceitlx  de  la  vile."  4  Orig.  dnc. 

5  Caxton's  text  is  corrupt  here,  the  sense  being  ruined  by  omissions.  A. 
gives  the  correct  version  :  "  Car  il  y  avoit  ung  port  de  picrrc,  pour  jiasser  le 
paluz  qui  cstoitfetz  de  diverses  eaues,"  etc.  6  Orig.  barous. 

7  Fr.  monteurcs,  i.  e.  their  mounts  (horses,  mules,  etc.).  Lat.  "in  equis 
ct  mulis." 

8  Fr.  "  Et  soubs  leur  cscuz  gram  marteaulx  eurcnt  defer,  ct  grant  plante  de 
pis."     Caxton  has  spoiled  the  sense  here  by  his  omissions. 


142  The  Christians  attempt  to  destroy  a  Bridge,     [Ch.  XCII. 

pyquoys  /  And  began  to  smyte  for  to  breke  the  brydge,  bnt  the 
walles  were  so  strong  and  harde  that  they  myght  not  hurte  it. 
And"  on  that  other  syde  they  of  the  toun  were  on  the  walles  and 
tourettes,  whiche  threwe  grete  stones  and*  thycke  on  them  that  so  4 
pecked1  to  breke  the  brygge,  that  they  were  fayn  to  leue  their  enter- 
prise and  retorne  fro  thens  /  After  this  they  thought  of  another 
Tiiey  mnde     thynge  and  made  a  newe  castel  of  tree  /  And1  sette  it  ayenst  the 

a  wooden  J     °  .  , 

euKine,  and    bryese  for  to  kepe  it  that  they  shold  not  passe  ouer  it  /  on  them  /  8 

set  it  against         J  °°  l  . 

the  bridge,     ft  was  moche  werke  and!  payne  to  make  it  /  whan  it  was  1  sette  and? 
°'        dressyd1  /  Therle  garnysshed  it  with  his  men  /  they  of  the  toun 
adressyd  theyr  gonnes  and  engyns  at  this  castel,  and*  smote  it  with 
grete  stones  /  And1  they  in  the  toures  shotte  ther  at  grete  plente  of  12 
Arowes,  so  many  in  such  wyse  that  none  durst  abyde  in  this  castel 
ne  about2  it  /  On  a  day  it  happed?  that  our  men  withdrewe  them 
fro  the  brydge  and  fro  ther  about  /  And  they  within  opened  the 
yate  and  yssued  out3  by  the  rowtes  /  They  that  were  in  the  castel  16 
The  Turks      of  tree  fledde  /  And  the  other  sette  fyer  on  it  /  And  brent  it  to 
the  ground,    asshes  /  Our  men  sawe  wel  thenne4  that  they  warred  not  wel  thus. 
And?   ordeyned?  thre   gonnes5  for  to  shote  stones  at  the  brygge, 
whyles  they  shotte  none  of  the  turkes  yssued  oute  there  /  But  as  20 
sone  as  they  cessed?,  they  cam  oute  &  made  theyr  assaylles  as  they 
dyde  to  fore.     It  displesyd?  moche  to  oxire  barons  that  they  myght 
not  sette  no  remedye  ayenst  the  comynge  oute  of  thyse  turkes  / 
our  men  then  Atte  laste  6they  acorded?  that  they  wold?  take  grete  stones  of  the  24 
the  bridge      Roche,  such  as  were  conuenyent7  for  a  gate,  and  stoppe  the  passage.6 

with  big 

stones.  They  toke  an  honderd  men  and  more,  and?  stopped  the  gate  ouer 

the  brydge.  ther  were  so  many  that  it  was  doon  in  suche  wyse 
that  it  coude  not  be  lightly  broken  agayne  /  They  had?  grete  28 
trauaylle  and  payne  to  make  it  /  But  they  that  were  lodged  there 
kepte  alle  armed  them  that  brought  the  stones.  Thus  was  the  gate 
stopped  in  suche  wyse  that  thoost  abode  alle  in  peas  there  /  ffor  the 
Turkes  myght  nomore  make  theyr  assaylles  there.  32 

How  our  peple  were  in  grete  meschyef  for  as  moche 
as  they  of  the  toune  yssued  aud  entred  in  and 
oute  with  grete  rowtes.  Capitulo  lxxxxij" 

2  Orig.  abont.         ■  Orig.  ont.         4  Orig.  thenue.         5  Orig.  gounes. 
G— 8  Fr.  "  ilz  s'accordcrent  a  ce  qu'ilz  prinrent  grans  roches,  tels  qu'il  con- 
venoit  Men  a  Vune  porter,  C  kommes  on  plus,  et  estoupcrent  la  portc." 
7  Orig.  conueuyeut. 


CI).  XCIL]     Skirmishes  between  the  Turks  and  Christians.  143 

o       Nn  a  day  it  happed*  that  ther  wente  out  of  thoost  as  wel  on  Onedaywo 

men  went 

foote  as  on  horsbak  a  thre  honderd  men  /  and*  passed*  ouer  f,»th  '""'> 

'  '  tlie  army  to 

the  brydge  of  tree.     And*  spradf  the  contreye1  as  men  that  wente  *•«*•> 
4  on  foragyng  /  It  is  the  custome  of  an  hooste  for  to  goo  out2  so 

oftynies  &  retorne  without  dammage  or  hurte  /  Therfor  they  had? 

supposed*  to  hane  ben  sure  /  They  of  the  toun  apprceyiied*  it  and* 

yssued*  out  with  grete  plente  of  peple  /  And!  wente  ouer  the  brydge  The  towns. 
8  of  stone  anil  ranne  on  them  that  they  sawe  goo  so  folyly  /  And  towadamiat- 

i  o       e      i •  tacked  them. 

somme  they  slewe  /  And  other  fledde  to  the  brydge3  of  shippis 
where  they  supposed*  to  haue  passed'  /  But  thenemyes  were  there 
to  fore.  And  deffended*  them  the  waye  /  in  suche  wyse  that  many 
12  of  Hheni  were  drowned  in  the  water  that  supposed  to  haue  passed  [*  leaf  oe, 
ouer  /  other  of  oure  men  recourctred  the  turkes  that  had  slayn  & 
discowfyted  our  men  &  bare  away  with  them  their  proyes  and 
despoylles,  And  ran  on  them  /  The  Turkes  fledde  /  and  our  men  TheTuriw 

r    J  '  '  '  fled,  and  mir 

16  poursiewed  them  s-leyng  and!5  betyng1  them  vnto  within  the  brydge  men  in  nun 
of  stone  /  They  of  the  toune  that  sawe  theyr  men  so  poursiewed 
sprang1  out  with  grete  prees  and  passed  the  brydge,  &  ran  on  our  More  of  the 

townspeople 

men  /  whiche  wold  haue  deffended  them  /  but  they  myght  not  came  out  to 

'  l  J  JO  assist  their 

20  suflre  so  grete  nombre  of  peple  and  fledde.     they  folowed  them  fellow* 
doyng  to  them   grete  dommage,   til  they  cam   to   the  brydge  of 
shippis  /  there  they  assaylled  them  so   harde"  /  that  many  men 
aimed  fyll  in  the  water  whiche  were  there  drowned  and  loste 

24  Oure8  men  lost  there  many  men  on  foote  and  on  horsbak  /  In  this 
manere  were  they  of  thooste  in  grete  mesease  /  ffor  they  were  better 
besieged  than  they  of  the  toun  /  There  were  many  of  theyr  enemyes 
in  the  woodes  and  montaygnes  whiche  ofte  ranne  vpon  our  peple 

28  whan  they  sawe  them  goo  without  ordenaunce,  and  they  of  the  toun 

yssued  out  whan  it  plesed  them  /  in  suche  wyse  that  our9  men  After  tins. 

our  men  did 

durst  not  goo  fer  fro  thooste  for  to  foura'jre  ne  for  none  other  thyng  /  not  dare  to 

...  °  J     °  '   B<>  far  from 

And  also  in  theyr  lodgys  were  they  not  assured,  ffor  the  tydynge  V,e  al.ni-v. 
32  was  that  the  turkes  assembled  moche  grete  plente  of  peple  for  to 
smyte  in  thooste  on  that  one  side  /  &  they  of  the  toun  on  that 
other  side  shold  yssue  on  them  / 

1  Fr.  " et  s'espandireni  par  U  pays."        2  Orig.  ont.         *  Orig.  brdyge. 

5  Orig.  aud?.         6  Orig.  tonn. 

7  Fr.  s'entassercnt,  L  e.  they  crowded  ou  so  thickly.         s  Orig.  Oure. 

9  Orig.  our. 


144 


The  Christians  suffer  greatly  by  Famine.     [Ch.  XCIII. 


Victuals  be- 
gan to  fail 
uur  men. 


Both  men 

and  beiihts 

suffered 

greatly. 


[2  If.  66,  bk.] 

Parties  of 
men  went 
forth  into  the 
country  to 
find  pro- 
visions. 


The  Turks 
slew  many  of 
these  parties, 
so  that  they 
dared  go  no 
more. 


Many  died 
for  hunger. 


Of  the  famyne  and  mortalyte  of  thoost  after  that 
they  had  be  at  the  sayd  siege  the  space  of 
two   monethes.  cap"  lxxxxiij0 

f       Or  to  recounte  alle  thauentures  that  were  in  so  grete  a  siege  4 

shold  be  ouer  greuous  and  a  moche  long*  thyng  /  Therfor1  I 
shal  saye  to  you  this  that  longeth  to  the  comyn  /  thooste  had 
holden  siege  vnto  the  thyrde  moneth,  vytayll  began  to  fay  lie  / 
And*  was  grete  suffrete  and  scarsenes  in  thoost  f  they  had?  in  the  be-  8 
gynnyng*  largely  and  grete  habundaunce  both  for  men  and  horses ; 
but  they  made  grete  waast  &  more  than  neded,  &  so  by  their 
oultrage  &  folye  they  lacked  in  short  tyme  /  which  myght  haue 
long  susteyned  them  yf  they  had  kepte  it  wel  &  gouerned?  by  12 
mesure.     they  suffred!  grete  penurye  in  thoost  of  vitayl  for  men 
&  beestes,  in  such  wise  that  the  pour  peple  were  in  grete  peryl  / 
euery  day  assembled  /  ij  /  or  iij  /  C  men  of  armes  to  gydre  for  to 
serche  the  contrey  and  fetche  vytaylles  /  they  swore  to  gydre  that  16 
alle  the  gayne  that  they  myght  fynde  &  conquere  /  they  shold 
departe  egally  emonge  them.     They  wente  forth  2fer  fro  thoost  / 
and!  fonde  the  townes  moche  wel  garnysshed?  by  cause  they  were 
fer  fro  thoost  /  they  thought  that  noman  shold  robbe  ne  take  20 
nothyng  fro  them  /  And  thus  brought  vytayll  to  thoste.      But 
whan  the  Turkes  of  the  toun,  and1  also  other  in  the  countrey,  had 
apperceyued  this  /  they  made  embusshementes  and1  ranne  vpon  our3 
men  whan  they  retorned,  or  other  whyle  whan  they  weret  forth,  &  24 
slewe  them  somme  tyme  alle  that  none  retorned?  for  to  brynge 
tydynges  to  thoost  /  And  therfor  durst  they  goo  nomore  a  four- 
agyng  /  The  derthe  was  moche  grete  in  thoost  /  &  euery  day  grewe 
the  famyne4  in  suche  wyse  that  a  man  ete  wel  at  a  mele   in  28 
brede5  four  /  d  /  a  cowe  was  worth6  four  marc  weyght  of  syluer, 
which  a  man  myght  haue  at  begynnyng*7  for8  echt  or  ten  shyllyngis  / 
A  lambe  or  a  kyd  was  at  sex  shyllyngis,  whiche  to  fore  was  worth 
but  thre  or  four  pens  /  the  mete  for  an  horse  for  a  nyght  cost  .xvj  /  32 
pens  /  ther  deyde  many  for  honger  in  suche  wyse  that  at  the 
begynnynge  of  the  siege  the  horses  were  nombredf  at  .lxx  /  M  / 

1  Lat.  "  unde  omissis  spccialibus,  generalia  proscquemur." 
3  Orig.  onr.         4  Orig.  fainyme.         6  Fr.  " pour  deux  soulz  dc  pain." 
6  Lat.  duabus  marcis.  7  Orig.  legynnyng*. 

s  Fr.  V.   B.  a  v  livrcs  ou  iiij.     A  a  cinq  soulz,  ou  iiij.     Lat.  quinque 
solidus. 


Ch.  XCIV.]     The  Christians  send  out  Foragiwj  Parties.  145 

Am*  at  that  tyme  were  scarse  /  ij.M.  And  they  were  so  poure, 

feble,  and  lene  that  vnneth  they  myght  helpe  ony  man  /  the  tcntes  ^ei^uioni 

and  pauyllons  roted  /  ffor  it  rayned  continuelly  a  rayno  so  thycke  JJ***"^ 

4  and  grete  that  no  cloth  myght  susteyne  it,  wherfor  moche  peple  in  ™!;^ual 
the  hooste  deydo  for  colde  and  mesease.     Theyr  clothes  roted  on 
theyr  backes  by  cause  they  myght  fynde  no  place  to  drye  them, 
ther  was  one  so  grete  mortalite  in  thoost  /  that  vnnethe  myght  be 

8  fonden  men  for  to  burye  them  that  deyde  /  Many  that  sawe  this  jjpjjg^ 
grete  daunger  and  peryll  in  thooste  wente  and  departed  pryuely  to  ™j£f ,l  lo  ' 
Rages  where  bawdwyn  was  /  &  in  to  Scilice  where  other  cytees 
were  also  /  Thus  were  many  slayn.     And  grete  plente  deed  of 
12  famyne  and  of  other  maladyes  /  And  the  boost  was  so  mynuysshid 
that  ther  were  not  half  so  moclie  peple  as  they  were  at  begynnyng. 

How  our  peple  ordeyned  grete  rowtes  for  to  goo  for 

vytayll,  &  to  reteyne  the  peple  which  fled  for 

16  hunore  /  ca°  lxxxxiiij" 

O 

o       Ftymes   assembled   the  barons   for   to   fynde   counseyl   how  £*  Womr 

they  myght  reteyne  the  peple  that  thus  departed  /  &  also  in 
what  maner  &  how  they  myght  aduyse  <fe  ordeyne  for  vytayll  for 

20  thoost,  &  they  concluded  that  one  partye  of  the  barons  shold  haue 

grete  plente  of  men  with  them,  &  go  right  depe  in  to  the  londe  Ti.cy  se.it 
of  the  paynews  for  to  brynge  vytaylles  and  alle  that  they  myght  N*  i^';^, 
fynde  and  gete  on  theyr  enemyes  /  to  this  were  chosen  buymont 

24  &  the  erle  of  fflaundres,  Thoost  was  delyuerd  to  therle  of  thoulouse 

and  to  Huon  le  xmayne  to  gouerne,  ifor  the  due  of  normandye  was  P^j^f*- 
not  there,  And  due  godeffioy  laye  seke  moche  greuously  /  They 
departed  for  to  goo  on  fourage,  many  folowed  for  to  gete  somme 

28  gayne  /  whan  the  turkes  of  the  toun 2  sawe  thooste  thus  voyde 
and  waxe  lasse,  And  knewe  for  certayn  that  therle  of  fflaundres3  / 
Buymont  /  and  the  due  of  Normandye  went  not  there  /  And  that 
the  due  godeffroy  laye  in  his  bedde  seke  /  They  preysed  and  doubted 

32  moch  the  lasse  the  remenannt,     And  toke  counseyl  that  they  wold  ^j**™*^, 
make  an  assayllyng  by  the  brydge  /  but  they  that  kept  thoost  had  g*^*^ 
knowleche  herof  /  And  were  aduertysed4  /  And  were  al  armed  on  «"** 
horsbak  and  cam  ayenst  them  and  slewe  many  of  the  turkes  that 

36  were  come  to  fore  and  were  many  grete  men  of  the  toun  /  whan 
the  other  ^rons  sawe  this  what  for  sorow  and  for  fere  were  discom 

2  Orig.  tonn.  s  Orig.  fllan  wires.  *  Orig.  adnertyscd'. 

GODFREY.    .  L 


146 


Loss  of  the  Christians  in  a  Skirmish.     [Ch.  XCV. 


fyted  and!  fled  agayn  in  to  the  toun  /  But  a  grete  mesauenture 
happed1  to  oure  peple  /  ffor  as  the  turkes  fledde  dyscomfyted  one  of 
them  was  beten  doun  of  his  hois  /  And  his  hors  fledd  toward  the 
lodgys  /  And  many  of  our  men  ran  after  to  wynne  hym  /  The  mene  4 
peple  and  other  that  sawe  the  horse  supposed  that  our  men  had 
been  disconfyted  and!  that  they  had1  fled  to  fore  theyr  enemyes  / 
u.y  mistake    And  they  began  to  flee  /  And!  other  that  sawe  them  flee  /  fledde 

the  Crusaders  .  I 

fled  and  lost  also  in  suche  wyse  that  alle  torned!  to  discomfyture  ouer  fowle  /  8 
whan  the  turkes  behelde  this  and  sawe  that  our  men  disconfyted1 
them  self,  anon  they  re  torned*  and  passed1  the  brygge  /  And  began 
to  chace  them  that  so  fledde,  and  bete  and  slewe  them  fro  the 
brydge  of  stone  vnto  the  brydge  of  the  shippis  /  there  were  slayn  12 
of  our  men  on  horsbak  a  /  xx  /  And  a  foot  yet  moo.  the  turkes 
retorned  in  to  theyr  cyte  demenyng  grete  Ioye  and1  foste  for  this 
iourneye. 


Boliemond 
and  liis  com- 
panions 
found  a  rich 
town  full  of 
provisions. 


[«  If.  07,  bk.] 


Tl>e  Earl  of 
Flanders  was 
discomfited 
in  an  engage- 
ment with 
the  Turks, 
and  fled. 


How  buymont  and  therle  of  fflaundres  mayntened  hem  16 
beyng  in  fourage  /  Of  theyr  recountrees  and  of 
the  gayne  that  they  made.  Capitulo  lxxxxv" 

b       Vymont  And  therle  of  fflaundres  that  were  sente  by  comyn 
counseyl  in  fouragyng1,  entred  fer  in  to  the  lande  of  theyr  ene-  20 
myes.     And  founde2  a  moche  Jtyche  toun  good  and  ful3  of 
thyng  that  they  had  nede  of  in  thoost;  they  toke  all  /  ffor  they 
fonde  neyther  man  ne  woman  that  empasshed  ne  letted  them  / 
Thyse  two  barons  had  sente  theyr  espyes  in  dyuers  partyes  of  the  24 
londe  for  tenquyre  &  serche  where  they  myght  gete  more  vytayl 
for  to  lede  the  hooste  /  Now  it  happed  that  one  of  the  spyes  cam 
to  buymottt  &  sayde  that  a  grete  company  of  turkes  were  em- 
busshed  in  a  place  nyghe  by  them,  for  to  renne  on  them  whan  28 
4 they  wente  on  fouragyng*.     Thenne  they  ordeyned  that  therle  of 
fflaurcdres  shold  goo  forth  with  his  men,  &  buymont5  shold  come 
fer  after.     And  so  was  doon  /  Therle  of  fflaundres  fonde  thyse  men, 
And  assembled  to  gydre  fiersly,  the   batayll  was  long  &  cruel  /  32 
ffor  the  turkes  had  mo  men  than  therle  of  fflaundres.     At  the  laste 
our  men  were  discomfyted,  for  the  flemynges  myght  not  endure 
but  fledde  er  buymont  cam  /  And  so  were  lefte  of  our  men  there 
wel  an  hunderd  or  more  in  the  place  /  And  thenne  our  men  retorned  36 
in  to  thoost  with  grete  good  and  gayn  that  they  had  gadred  to 
1  Orig.  aud.         2  Orig.  fonude.         3  Orig.  fnl.         5  Orig.  buyniout. 


Ch.  XCVL]  Victory  of  the  Christians.  1*7 

gydre  /  whyles  they  were  there  cam  to  them  other  espyes  of  an 
other  contre  /  that  aduertysed  them  of  other  tuvkes  that  way  ted  to 
hurte  them  whan  they  sawe  theyr  aduantage  /  they  were  thenne 
4  moo  men  and  better  armed  than  they  had  ben  to  fore  /  they  were 
in  cou?*seyl  /  &  therle  of  fflamidres  wold1  that  noman  shold1  enter-  Tiie  Earl  of 

J      I  Handera  ae- 

prise  the  batayl  but  he.     But  he  toke  mo  men  with  hym  than  he  £™£«2 
dyde  tofore  /  Buymont1  cam  after  with  as  many  as  he  myght  defeat. 
8  haue.     Therle  of  fflaundres  hasted  hym  and  surprised  the  Turkes  He  surprised 

,       ,         the  TurkB  in 

in  a  valeye  stray  t,  in  suche  wyse  that  they  myght  not  renne  netlier  a  narrow 
ne  theder  for  to  shote.     But  were  constreynedf  to  deffende  them 
strongly  with  theyr  swerdes  and  maces  /  whiche  was  not  sure  for 

12  them  /  By  cause  whan  oure  meyne  discarged1  on  them  they  myght 

not  susteyne  it,  but  fledde  anon  /  Oure  men  folowedf  them  in  hew-  "££»*** 
yng  &  sleyng1  them  /  ant?  ouerthrewe  many  of  them,  They  wanne 
horses  /  mules  /  Armoures  and?  robes  grete  plente,  &  after  retorned 

16  in  to  the  hoost  with  grete  victorye  &  grete  gayne.  Grete  ioyc 
was  made  thercne  in  thoost  whan  they  were  comen  /  alle  they  were 
ret'resshyd  &  alleged  of  their  meseases  that  they  had  longe  suffred1  / 
They  had  vytaylles  resonable  a  certeyn  tyme.     But  it  endured  not 

20  longe  that  whiche  they  had  brought  with  them  / 

How  a  grete  rowte  of  Cristen  men  were  in  this  tyme 
slayn  by  the  turkes  bytwene  fynemyne  and 
terme  /  cap?  lxxxxvj0 

24  i        N  this  tyme  cam  tydynges  fro  Eome2  that3  doubled"  theyr  ^™'m 
sorow  and  anguysshis4  and   theyr  mesease  doubled,  it  was  Boumanta. 
sayd   &  trouth   it  was  that  an  hye  noble  man  &  puyssauwt   of 
denmarke,  named  guennes,5  of  moch  fayr  beaulte  &  of  good  maners, 

28  herd  say  that  the  barons  of  ffraurace  &  the  valyaurct  men  of  that 
lo»de  were  goon  in  pylgremage  ouer  the  see  for  to  make  warre  to 
the  sarasyns  /  this  noble  man  to  fore  named!  whiche  had  a  valyaunt 
herte  and!  hye  6had  grete  wylle  for  to  goo  after  them  /  he  toke  of  P^gf 

32  his  fader  certeyn  good!  /  anil1  ledde  with  hym  wel  /  v  /  C  /  knyghtes  gMmmor 
and  other  men  yong1  and!  wel  armed!,  he  hasted  moche  for  to  ouer-  <£«■  *Jj ' 

1  Orig.  Bnymout. 

2  Fr.  Roumanie,  Roumania,  not  Rome.     Lat.    "  intcrca  dc  partibus  Ro- 
mania;." 

3  Fr.  "  qui  moult  leur  mist  grant  doulcur  ct  grant  angoissc  cscuers,  ct  leur 

mesaise  doubla."  *  Orig.  angnysshis. 

5  Fr.  guenncs.     Lat.  Danorum  regis  filius  Sucno  Tiominc. 

L   2 


148 


The  Treachery  of  Latyns.         [Ch.  XCVIL 


had  en- 
camped be- 
tween tlie 
cities  Fyne- 
mine  :mii 
Terme. 


Here  he  was 
attacked 


and  slain  by 
the  Turks. 


take  thoost  of  the  ffrensshemen,  but  he  myght  not  ouertake  them  / 
ffor  he  cam  ouer  late  /  And  had1  none  in  his  companye  sauf  men  of 
his  countrey  /  he  cam  by  constantinoble1  /  where  themperour  dyde 
to  hym  honour  /  and  after  he  wente  to  Nycene  with  alle  his  com-  4 
panye  /  And!  lodged  hym  bytwene2  two  cytees  /  that  one  was 
named  fynemyne  /  And?  that  other  terme,  there  they  dyde  not  as 
they  ought  to  doo,  by  cause  they  were  in  the  londe  of  theyr  ene- 
myes  /  but  they  assured!  them  ouermache  /  in  suche  wyse  that  on  a  8 
nyght  a  grete  partye  of  the  turkes  that  had!  espyed!  them  smote  in 
sodanly  on  them  and!  began  to  slee  them  in  theyr  beddes  /  Neuer- 
theles  somme  ther  were  that  apperceyued?  them  and1  ran  to  theyr 
armes  /  &  cam  ayenst  the  turkes  and1  sold1  theyr  lyf  dere  /  but  in  12 
thende  they  were  alle  slayn,  and  none  escaped  of  alle  thoost  except 
a  thre  or3  foure  atte  moste. 


Latyns,  the 
deceitful 
Greek,  had 
carefully 
watched  our 
army. 


Seeing  how 
mutters 
stood,  he  ad- 
vised our  men 
to  leave  the 
siege, 


and  promised 
to  bring  aid 
from  the 
Emperor,  in 
the  spring. 


[*  If.  6S,  bk.] 


How  the  vntrew  greek  latyns  (23)  departed  fraudelously 
fro  the  hoost.     And  other  moo  by  thensample  of  16 
hym  /  cap"  lxxxxvij. 

1        Atyns  this  disloyal  greek  of  whom  we  haue  spoken  to  fore, 
whom  themperour  had1  delyuerd  to  oure  peple,  for  to  lede  and 
conduyte  them  had  foynously  taken  heede  of  the  gouernaunce  of  20 
thoost  vnto  this  day  /  and!  of  the  rewle  of  the  barons,  &  alway 
peyned  hym  for  to  deceyue  them  in  alle  the  maners  that  he  myght. 
Now  apperceeued!  he  wel,  that  thaffayres  of  thooste  were  not  in 
good  poynt  /  ne  in  good  disposition  and  doubted  moche,  for  he  was  24 
ful  of  cowardyse,  and  thought  the  pylgryms  shold!  somme  day  be 
surprised  of  the  turkes  of  the  toun,  and  shold  alle  be  slayn,  therfor 
he  spak  secretely  to  one  and  other,  and  counseylled  them  to  leue 
the  siege.     And  that  al  thooste  shold  departe  in  to  the  cytees  that  28 
our  men  helde  vnto  the  newe  tyme,  ffor  it  was  certayn  he  sayde  that 
themperour  had  sente  for  the  grettest  hooste,  that  he  myght  assem- 
ble for  to  come  and  socoure  them  as  sone  as  he  myght  fynde  grasse 
on  the  erthe  for  the  horses  /  And  he  hym  self  /  By  cause  he  loued  32 
the  werke  of  oure  lord  with  the  noble  men  that  he  had,  wold  enter- 
prise vpon  hym  for  the  coniyn  prouffyt  a  grete  trauayll,  And  he 
hym  selfe  wold  goo  dylygently  to  themperour  for  to  haste  hym  with 
his  hoost  and  alle  the  vytaylle  that  he  myght  fynde  /  And  to  make  36 
hym  come  /  Many  of  the  Barons  knewe  vpon  4this  poynt  his 
1  Orig.  ccmstantinoblL  2  Orig.  bytwnee.  s  Orig.  on. 


era  were  now 
in  great 
strau-, 


Ch.  XCVIII.]        Great  Suffering  for  Food.  149 

falsenes  /  And  apperceyucd  that  he  sought  nianore  by  this  waye  for 

to  flee.     And  byleuyd  hym  not  /  but  acorded  that  he  shold  goo  his  The  Barons 

waye;  lie  made  semblaunt  for  to  retoume  and  come  sone  ageyn,  baiieved'him 

4  aud  lefte  his  pauyllons  and  som  of  his  men  to  whom  pereaduenture 
he  had  sayd  that  they  shold  folowe  and  come  after  /  or  ellys  that1  he 
neraught  what  myght  come  of  them.     Thus  departed  he  whom  the  He  departed, 
deuyl  had  brought,  And  lad  hym  away  agayn ;  ffor  by  the  wordes 

8  that  he  had  sowen  /  and  by  thensample  of  his  departyng,  began  and  many 
many  men  to  departe  fro  thoost  /  And  toke  no  regarde  to  theyr  example,  thus 

breaking 

auowe  ne  to  the  oth  that  they  had?  promysed  /  but  wente  secretly  their  oath, 
one  after  another  /  The  famyne  was  moche  grete  in  thooste.     The 

12  barons  coude2  fynde  no  remedye  ne  counseyl  therfore.     Trouth  it 

was  they  sente  ofte  two  and*  two  of  the  grettest  lordes  with  grete  The  Crusad- 
companye3  of  men  for  to  pourchasse  vytaylles,  They  wente  moch  in  gnat 
surely  in  the  landes  of  theyr  enemyes  right  deep  and  ferre.     And? 

16  sleyng1  many  of  them  that  wold!  haue  deffended  theyT  passage  /  but 

vytaylles  brought  they  none,  ffor  the  turkes  of  the  contre  that  had  and  eouid 
apperceyued  that  oure  peple  wente  for  to  seche  vytalles  had*  do  victual.0 
ledde  away  alle  theyr  beestes  and  theyr  vytaylles  vnto  the  mon- 

20  taynes  and  deserte  places  where  none  myght  come,  &  somme  had1 
they  hydde  in  the  wodes  and1  caues  vnder  the  erthe,  whiche  our 
men  coude  not  fynde. 

How  the  prelates  of  the  hoost   counseylled   to    doo 
24  penaunce    for    tappese    god,    And    of    thorden- 

aunces  that  were  made  teschewe  synne  / 

Capitulo  lxxxxviij0 

f        Amyne  /  raortalyte  /  and!  many  other  peryllys  cessed  not  to  Famine  and 
28  renne  on  the  peple  of  oure  lord  /  The  noble  and  wysemen  of  aifsides!"  °n 

thoost  that  were  trewe,  good,  and  relygyous  as  the  bisshop  of  puy, 
that  was  legate  for  oure  holy  fader  the  pope,  and  other  spak  to 
gydre  thenne  /  And  sayd  it  was  moche  to  drede  and  doubte  that 
32  our  lord  were  angry  with  his  pylgryms  for  their  synnes.  therfor 
they  aduysed  that  they  wold  speke  with  the  barons  for  to  make 
peas  and  acorde  vnto  our  lord.  And  was  ordeyned  by  the  consente- 
ment  of  alle  them  of  thoost,  that  they  shold  faste  in  prayers  and  in 

1  Fr.  "ou  pent  estre  Tie  lui  en  chaloit  ce  quHlz  devenoient,"  or  perhaps  it 
made  no  difference  to  him  what  became  of  them. 
s  Orig.  conde.  3  Orig.  compauye. 

1  3 


150  Duke  Godfrey  suddenly  recovers.      [Ch.  XCIX. 

They  cried     penaunce  for  to  crye  mercy  vnto  our  lord  by  the  space  of  iij  dayes, 
imt™they      to  thende  that  he  wold?  pardone  theyr  trespaces  &  beholde  them 
three  days,     in  pyte.  this  was  don  with  grete  wepyng  &  wayllynges  of  herte  / 
after  this  they  commanded  that  alle  the  coniyn  wymmen  of  euil  lyf  4- 
shold  be  voyded  &  cast  out  of  thoost  /  &  was  cryed  thurgh  out 
al  the  hooste  /  that  who  that  after  that  were  taken  in  adulterye  or 
p  leaf  69,      in  1fornycacion  shold*  haue  his  heed!  smeton  of  /  Incontinent  the2 
Great  reform  droncardys  of  the  tauernes,  the  players  of  dyse,  and1  the  grete  othes  8 
edfattw1*"'"  were  deffended  vpon  the  same  payne,  fals  mesures  and?  thefte  /  alle 
may'  suche  thynges  were  commaunded  to  be  lefte  and1  eschewed1  /  there 

were  choosen  wise   men   and  trewe,  that  shold  take  heed  for  to 
punnys8he  the  malefactours3  /  After  thyse  ordenaunces  and  statutes  12 
were  somme  founden  culpable  in  the  same  /  where  were  so  pun- 
nysshed  therfore  /  that  the  other  were4  chastysed  therby  /  whan 
the  peple  were  amended  vnto  our  lord,  the  mercy  of  our  lord  cam 
without  taryeng  on  them  /  ffor  the  due  Godeffroy,  whiche  was  all  16 
the  surete  of  thoost  /  And  as  theyr  estandart  /  had  ben  longe  seke 
by  thoccasion  of  his  hurte,  that  he   had  taken   in   the  londe  of 
pysside  by  a  here,  as   it   hath   be   sayd   to   fore,  nygh  by  lytil 
D.ikeGodfrey  Anthyoche,  and  was  now  sodenly  come  to  good  helthe  /  wherof  alle  20 
I-eroveredTto  they  of  thooste  had  moche  grete  ioye  /  and  byleuyd  fermely  that 
of"11-  theyr  penaunce  and  prayers  had  lengthed  his  lyf  and  respyted  it. 

How  Bnymont  fonde  a  subtil  remydye  for  to  delyuer 
and  purge  the  hoost  of  the  espyes  of  the  turkes  /       24 

eap°  lxxxxix" 

The  r,e*8  of   g       Rete  renommee  was  spradd   thurgh  out   al   thoryent  /  and 

Ant'oX?  toward  the  contrees  of  the  south  /  that  ouer  grete  nombre  of 

'nreadaii      peple  of  the  contrees  where  the  sonne  goth  doun  were  comen,  and  28 

E1!T"Bhthe    had  besieged  the  noble  cyte  of  Anthyoche  /  hit  was  a  grete  thyng- 

in  trouth  /  But  the  tydynges  were  moche  more  gretter  withoute 

coinparyson  /  Eueryche  of  the  puyssaunt5  lordes  of  that  countrees 

and  londes  had  sente  theyr  espyes  in  to  the  hoost  /  and  ther  were  32 

so  many  that  they  cessed  not  to  come  and  goo,  and  continuelly  / 

&  vnnethe  myght  ony  thyng  be  don  or  sayd  in  thooste  ne  in  the 

lodgys,  but  that  it  was  anon6  knowen  in  the  panemye7  /  It  was  a 

2  Fr.  "Us  beuvcries,  lee  tavernes,"  etc.        s  Orig.  malefactonrs. 

*  Fr."  que  lesautrcs  sen  chastierent."        5  Orig.  puyssannt.        6  Orig.  auon. 

7  Fr.  paiennic,  heathendom. 


Ch.  XCIX.]     How  the  Spies  were  driven  away.  151 

light1  and  easy  thyng1  for  them  to  be  with  our  peple  in  thost  /  Ther 
were  of  the  turkes  that  coude  speke  greek  /  and1  the  langage  of  Greek,  sj  nan 
Ermenye  /  And  toke  thabyte  of  the  surreyens,  of  grekes  /  and"  of  nim  spiel! 
4  them  of  hermeny  /  ther  were  many  of  suche  maner  of  peple  /  the  in  our  anny 

i_  .,  ,  iii  id  in  great  unm- 

barons  toke  couneeyl  eniong  them  how  they  myght  voyde  &  purge  be"- 
thoost  of  this  pestelence  of  espyes,  ffor  they  helde  them  in  grete 
paryll  &  grete  daunger  /  that  theyr  couyne  &  purpoos  shold  be 
8  knowen  in  the  lowdes  of  theyr  enerayes,  and  it  was  no  light  thynge  it  was  a  dim- 
to  knowe  them  that  were  suche  espyes  /  Emonge2  alle  other  thynges  get  rid' of 
they  coude  3fynde  none  other  remedye  /  but  to  holde  theyr  coun-  p  tt  Wi  bk  -j 
seyl  secrete  /  and  fro  them  forthon  eaye  lasse  to  the  peple  than 

12  they  were  woont  to  doo  /  Buymont,  whiche  was  of  moche  grete 
wytte  and?  hye  herte,  spak  to  the  barons,  and  sayd  in  this  manere  / 
"  ffayr  lordes,  I  praye  you  that  4ye  wil  late  me  cheuysshe  with  this  Bohemond 
matere  /  ffor  I  haue  remembryd  how  we  shal  be  delyuerd  of  this  of  tin* 

16  peryl4  /  wherfor,  I  praye  you,  gyue  to  mo  the  charge  therof  "  /  The 
barons  helde  Buymont6  for  a  moche  wyseman,  and  prudent  /  Andf 
gladly  sette  the  charge  therof  on  hym,  and  departed  fro  the  coun- 
seyll  /  Buymont6  forgate  not  this  that  he  had  promysed  /  whan 

20  tyme  of  soupper  cam  /  he  disposed  and  ordeyned  hym  for  to 
souppe  /  he  made  the  knyghtes7  of  his  contre  to  take  out  somme 
turkes  that  he  had  in  prison,  And  made  theyr  throtes  to  be  cutte  / 
And  after  smote  them  in  pyeces  and  arrayed  them  for  to  be  rosted. 

24  Thenne  began  they  to  demaunde  what  he  wold  doo  /  Thenne 
Buymont8  sayd  to  his  men  /  And  bad  his  men  also  to  saye  to  other  / 
"  that  alle  the  barons  had  thus  ordeyned  and  sworn,  that  alle  the  He  tiireat- 

.  .     ,  ened  to  roast 

espyes  that  myght  be  taken  m  thost  shold  be  rosted  and  seruyd  at  «»<»  eat  nil 
28  the  tables  of  the  barons  /  And  the  barons  shold  ete  them  by  their  »P'e». 
oth."   thyse  tidynges  were  anon  spred  thurgh  out  thoost  /  that 
suche  Iustyce  was  don  in  the  lodgys  of  buymont.     Alle  men  ran 
theder  for  to  see  this  merueylle  /  The  turkes  them  self  that  were  T1|e  Turks 

were  greatlv 

32  coraen  in  to  thoost  for  to  espye,  were  moche  aff rayed,  And  euerych  frightened  at 
of  them  thought  longe9  or  he  was  departed  fro  the  lodgys,  by  cause  n,a,'y left  tl,e 
they  doubted  that  they  shold  be  seruid  in  lyke  wyse  /  Aftir  whan 

1  Orig.  lihgt.  2  Orig.  emonge. 

*—*  Fr.  "  vou8  me  laissiez  convenir  et  chevir  de  ceste  chose,  car  jai  pense"  unc 
dclivrance,  de  ce  peril,"  viz.,  let  me  settle  this  matter  for  you,  for  I  have 
thought  of  a  way  to  deliver  us  from  this  danger.  *  Orig.  Buymout. 

6  Orig.  Bnymont. 

7  The  correct  French  text  gives  "bouchicrs"  (butchers),  instead  of  "cho- 
valicrs."     Lat.  camifices.        8  Orig.  Bnymont.        9  Orig.  lougc. 


132  The  Messengers  of  the  Caliph  appear.         [Ch.  C. 

they  were  retorned  home  to  their  lordes  /  that  had!  sent  them,  they 

hom^Ind'     Sa^  to  ^em»  ^-n(l  to^e  a*  aboute  the  countrey  /  that  suche  men 

as  were  come  for  tassiege  Anthyoche  suffred  moche  mesease  /  And1 

were  harder  ayenst  trauayll  and!  laboure  than  stone  or  yron  /  Of  4 

reported  that  cruelte  they  passed!  alle  beres  and  Lyons  /  ffor  the  wylde  beestes  ete 

the  Crusaders  "  '  J 

surpassed  all  men  alle  liawe,  But  thyse  men  roste  them  afore,  &  after  deuouve 

men  in  *  —  ' 

cruelty.        them.     This  tydynge  was  in  suche  wyse  knowen  and!  publysshyd* 

in  alle  paynemye  /  that  after  the  Soudan  and1  the  grete  admyrals1  8 
After  this  no  myght  neuer  fynde  man  wolde  come  and!  espye  the  hoost.   They  that 

Tss'Kthe  Were  in  ^e  cyte  ^y^d  were  so  eff rayed  and  had  so  grete  hydour 
christians.     0f  this  /  that  fro  that  tyme  afterward  the  counseyl  of  the  barons  was 

better  kept  and*  more  secretely  than  it  was  to  fore.  12 

How  the  Calephe  of  Egypt  sente  his  messagers  with 
grete  yeftes  vnto  our  hoost  /  Capitulo  C" 

[a  leaf  70]    2e     Mong  other  mescreauntes  grete  lordes  and  prynces,  The  caliphe 

of  Egipte  was  the  moost  myghty  of  men  and!  moost  ryche  of  16 
goodes;  he  sente  his  messagers  vnto  the  barons  that  were  in  thoost, 
There  has      And  I  shal  saye  how  and  by  what  occasion  /  (24)  Grete  hate  and  moche 

long  been  "  '  *       ' 

great  hate      tiers  hath  ben  bytwene  the  Turkesa  of  thoryent  and?  the  Turkes3  of 

between  the  * 

oriem  and6   -Egypte  /  And  hath  be  of  auncyent  and!  long  tyme,  By  cause  they  20 
those  of         discorde  in  theyr  creaunce  and!  mysbyleue  /  And!  eche  sayd  to  other 
and  yet  doo  that  they  be  fals  sarasyns  /  as  I  haue  sayd  to  fore  in 
the  begynnyng  of  this  book,  And  therfore  they  ben  ofte  in  wane  / 
Somtyme  one  partye  is  aboue  /  And!  another  tyme  that  other  /  In  24 
the  tyme  that  our  peple  were  to  fore  Anthyoche  /  this  caliphe  of 
whom  I  speke  now,  helde  alle  the  londe  of  Egypte  vnto  the  Cyte4 
of  Sureye  /  whiche  conteyneth  wel  /  xxx  /  Iourneyes  longe  /  The 
Soudan  of  Perse,  a  lytyl  tofore  that  oure  peple  cam,  had!  conquerd!  28 
the  toun  of  Anthyoche,  whiche  is  by  the  Eoyame  of  egypte  /  and 
alle  the  londe  entierly  vnto  the  braas  of  seynt  george,  as  I  haue 
sayd  to  fore  /  Now  had!  the  calyphe  of  egipte  in  moche  suspection 
the  Sowdan  of  Perse,  and  moche  plesyd  hyni  his  destruction  and  32 
The  caiipn  of  dommage  /  And  had!  moche  ioye  that  Solyimm  had!  lost  Nycene, 
much  pleased  whiche    Solvman  was  neuew  to  the  sayd  Soudan  /  and  was  so 

that  Solvman  "  itjii^ 

lu.iiost         enfebled!  of  his  men.     And1  also  he  was  plesyd!  that  our  cnsten 

Jwcxa. 

peple  had  besieged  the  Cyte  of  Anthyoche  /  Therfor  he  sente  good  36 

1  Fr.  Amiraulx,  i.  e.  Emirs.  3  Orig.  Tnrkes. 

4  Fr.  La  Lickc  dc  Surie.     Lat.  usque  Laodiccam  Syriac. 


Ch.  CI.]     Anccan  sends  in  all  Directions  for  Aid.  153 

messagers  to  speke  to  them  whiche  brought  right  grete  yeftes  /  And  He  sent  rich 
moche  ryche  presentes  /  yf  they  wold  receyue  them  /  And  they  ti.ecii.i- 

tiiinn  before 

sayde  that  the  Caliphe  was  redy  for  to  gyue  to  them  socoure  and  *n«ooh,  and 

J  f  J  OJ  promised  to 

4  ayde  right  largely  of  men  /  of  good  and!  of  vytayll,  and  prayd  them  "e'p t,,em- 
moche  derely  that  they  wold  mayntene  and  contenue  theyr  siege. 
The  barons  of  our  hoost  receyued  the  noble  men  that  were  comen, 
and  seitt  from  hym  honorably,  and  made  them  to  soiourne  with 
8  them  /  And  they  that  were  wyse  knewe  anon  the  wytte  &  vygour 
of  our  barons,  and  begonne  to  haue  moche  grete  doubte  &  suspection 
that  our  peple  were  so  valyawit  /  &  that  yet  they  sholde  do  grete 
dommage  in  theyr  londe  /  so  that  they  deuysed  in  this  thyng1  as  ye 
1 2  shal  nowe  here  hi  redyng  hoolly  this  book. 

How  Ancean,  the  lord  of  anthyoche,  and  his  barons 
sente  vnto  the  turkes,  theyr  neyghbours,  for  to 
demaunde  socours1  /  cap"  Cj° 

16  t       He  lord  of  Anthyoche  and  the  other  grete  and  noble  men  of  The  Lord  of 

Antioch  was 

the  toun,  seyng  that  our2  men  suftred  so  moche  famyne  and  much  aston- 

'       J    °  J  ishedatthe 

3mesease  /  as  we  haue  sayd  to  fore  /  and  fore  alle  thyse  thynges  [3  it.  70,  bk.] 
wold  in  no  wyse  leue  theyr  siege,  but  shewed  by  theyr  counten-  [hooiirilS8  °f 

20  auuces   that   this  trauayl  greued  them  not  /  wherfore  they  were  wftifitoilding 
moche  abasshyd.     And  thenne  Ancean,  by  the  counseyl  of  his  men  ing», 8" 
and  them  that  were  moost  pryue  with  hym,  sente  messagers  and 
lettres  to   his   moost   ryche   neyghbours  /  And   prayd  hym  right  and  sent  to 

2-4  derely  for  the  honour  of  theyr  lawe,  for  the  sauyng1  of  them  self  /  bou,s  lor 
And  for  his  loue,  that  they  wold  come  and  socoure  them  without 
taryeng.     And  he  sente    them  word  in  what   maner   they  shold 
approche  secretely  to   Anthyoche.     And  after   they  shold   couere 

28  them  in  a  busshement  nygh  by  /  And  there  abyde  the  pylgryms  as 
they  had  ben  acustomed,  and  at  suche  tyme  as  they  shold  come 
to  the  brydge  /  ffor  there  shold  they  sprynge  out  of  the  toun  /  And  They  devised 
shold  assaylle  them,  &  whyle  they  were  besy  in  fyghtyng,  they  attacking  the 

32  that  were  embusshed  shold  sodenly  breke  &  come  by  hynde  onali»'des. 
them  &  fyght,  And   so  shold   they  be  enclosed   bytwene   them 
Avithin  And  them  withoute,  in  snche  wyse  that  none  shold  escape  / 
They  that  herd  thise  lettres  and   thyse  messagers  doubted  them 

36  moche  of  oure  peple  /  wherfor  they  acorded  gladly  to  this  counseyl. 
they  assembled  them  of  hallape  /  them  of  cezayre,  them  of  haman  / 

*   t  ^  1  Orig.  soconra.  2  Ori'j.  our. 


154 


How  the  Native  Christians  aid  the  Crusaders.     [Ch.  CII. 


A  large  mrai> 
ber  assem- 
bled, ami 
approached 
Antioch. 


The  native 
Christians 
revealed  this 
plan  tn  the 
Crusaders. 

Tlie  Crusad- 
ers took 
counsel. 


[3  leaf  71] 


At  night, 
they  went 
out  to  meet 
the  enemy, 
secretly. 


Tn  the  morn- 
ing they  ar- 
ranged them- 
selves in  six 
battalions, 


and  the  battle 
commenced. 


and  of  other  cytees  about,  tyl  they  were  a  grete  nomhre  of  peple  / 
And  this  dyde  they  the  moost  secretely  they  myght,  as  was  to  them 
conimaunded,  and  1  egan  to  departe  and1  approuclie  Anthyoche  / 
And  cam  to  a  castel  named*  harant,  whiche  is  fro  thens  a  .xiiij  /  4 
myle.  there  they  lodged  and1  thought  on  the  morn  as  sone  as  the 
scannuche  shold  he  bytwene  the  pylgryms  and!  them  of  the  toun  / 
they  shold  smyte  in  with  theyr  spores  vpon  oure  men.     And1  oure 
cristen  men  were  in  grete  peryl  /  But  one  thyng  ther  was  thenne  /  8 
that  tho  and  other  tyrnes  dyde  them  grete  good!  /  ffor  ther  were 
cristen  men,  hermyns  and  surryens  in  the  cytees  of  whiche  the 
turkes  were  departed,  whiche  anon  lete  the  barons  of  thooste  haue1 
knowleche   how  it   was   concluded   bytwene   the   turkes   /   They  12 
assembled  anon  for   to    take   aduys  herupon,  And   was   acorded 
emonge  them  /  that  alle  they  that  had  ony  horses  to  ride  on  shold 
be  arayed  And2  on  horsbak  as  sone  as  it  were  nyght  /  And  that 
euery  man  shold   drawe   in    to    his   bataylle   lyke   as  they  were  16 
assygned  /  And  after  shold  yssue  out  of  tlioost  Avithout  ony  noyse. 
the  peple  on  foote  shold  abyde  styll  alle,  and  be  redy  to  deffende 
the  lodgys,  yf  ony  thyng  sourded  ayenst  them. 

How  oure  peple  knewe  the  couyne  of  the  turkes  /  of  20 
thenbusshe  3that  they  made,  and  of  their  victorye 
and  gayne  that  they  had.  Capitulo  Cij° 

a       S  sone  as  it  was  nyght  they  yssued  out  lyke  as  they  were  com- 
manded /  They  passed  the  brydge  of  shippes,  And  they  were  24 
not  passyng  /  vii  /  C  /  men  on  horsbak  /  they  that  wewte  cam  to  a 
laye,  whiche  was  bytwene  the  lave  of  whiche  I  haue  spoken  to  fore/ 
And  the  Eyuer  named4  hel!e  /  whiche  ben  that  one  fro  that  other, 
nyh  a  myle  /  there  they  rested  them  this  nyght.  theyr  enemyes  that  28 
knewe   nothyng  of    theyr  comyng  /  were  this  nyght   passed   the 
brydge,  whiche  is  vpon  the  Ryuer  of  helle.     In  the  niornyng<,  as 
sone  as  our  men  apperceyued  the  day,  they  armed  them  and  made 
vj  bataylles  of5  them  /  The  turkes  had  seute  by  fore  their  corroiirs  /  32 
which  cam  &  sayde  that  the  grete  peple  cam  ayenst  them  /  they 
sente  to  fore  ij  of  theyr  bataylles,  &  aftir  cam  the  grete  peple  / 
whan  they  approuched  they  were  in  grete  desraye  /  the  Archers 
approuched  first,  whiche  shotte  thycke ;    But  oure  men  smote  in  36 
with  the  speres  moche  asprely  in  suche  wyse  that  they  made  them 
1  Grig.  banc.        2  Orig.  Aud.        *  Orig.  uamed*.        B  Orig.  ef. 


Ch.  CI II.]  Great   Victory  over  the  Turks.  155 

to  flee,  and  chaced  them  to  theyr  grete  bataylles.  There  were  they 
in  suche  a  destrayt  bytwene  the  Ryuer,  and  the  laye  that  they 
myght  not  shote  ne  flee  after   theyr  customnie.     There  was   the  The  conflict 

4  medlyng  grete  and?  tiers  /  And  the  barons  and  men  of  armes  dyde  wid  fierce, 
moche  wel,  But  the  turkes  that  had  lost  the  maner  of  fyghtyng  / 
myght  not  deffende  them,  ne  endure  the  strokes  of  oure  peple,  but 
fledde  theyr  way  al  that  they  myght.     Thenne  whan  our  barons 

8  sawe  this  /  they  began  to  doo  wel,  And  commaunded  that  noman 
shold  favcne,  but  folowe  the  chaas  asprely  /  The  turkes  fledde  vnto  The  Turks 

*f  o       '  *■        w    '  tied,  una  our 

hernant.     Oure  men  folowed  alwey,  sieyng  and  hewyng  of  heedes  ™nto™J™£| 
and  armes,  that  al  the  wave  that  they  passed  by  was  sowen  with 

12  dede  men  /  This  chaas  endured  wel  .x  /  inyle  /  The  turkes  that 
were  within  the  castel  of  hernant  sawe  that  that  theyr  men  cam 
alle  discomfyted  /  They  sette  fyere  on  the  castel,  &  they  them  self 
fledde  /  But  the  hermyns  and  the  other  cristen  men  of  whom  were 

1 C  many  in  the  castel  recouuerd  the  fortresse  /  and  yelded  it  to  oure 

men  whan   they  cam.     This  daye  were  slayn  of  the  turkes  moo  MowOim 
than  /  ij  /  thousand  /  They  toke  .v  /  C  /  heedes  of  them  that  were  g"**^ 
best  arrayed,  And  brought  with  them  in  signe  of  vyctorye.     They  ^"y"^, 

20  war  there  wel  a  /  M  /  horses  for  Armes,  grete  and  myghty,  wherof  sP°iU- 
they  had  grete  nede.     Thus  retorned  they  to  tlieyr  lodgys  charged 
ful  of  prayes  of  armures  &  of  dispoylles,  makyng1  grete  ioye,  and 
thankyng*  oure  lord  that  had  comforted  Hhem  in  theyr  meseases.       [•  if.  7i,  i*J 

24  How   the   turkes   of  Anthyoche2   sprange    out3   and 
assayled  the  lodgys  of  oure  peple.     Capitulo  Ciij0 

t       He  cytezeyns  and  habytantes  of  Anthyoche  had  herd  tydynges  / 
how  the  turkes  that  had  ben  so  discomfyted  were  departed',  and 

28  meuyd  fro  theyr  contrees  for  to  come  socoure  them,  Therfor  they 

had  theyre  eres  opene  to  here  tydynges  of  theyr  comyng  /  And  Ti.^e  inimbit- 
were  alle  armed  and  redy  for  to  make  thassaylle  by  the  brydge  alle  jjjjjjgjj 
incontinent*  whan  they  shold  see  them  /  but  whan  they  sawe  that 

32  the  nyght  passed,  and  that   the-  day  cam  without  hauyng5  ony 
knowleche  of   theyr  approuchement  /  Theyr   espyes   made   them 
certayn  that  our  men  were  goon  on  horsbak  ayenst  them,  Therfore  assailed  our 
they  toke  herte  /  And   yssued  vnto  the   lodgys,  flor   our  men  rants. 

2  Orig.  Autliyoche.  3  Orig.  ont.  4  Orig.  incoiitiuent. 

6  Orig.  hauyug. 


156  The  Christians  victorious  in  another  Skirmish.     [Ch.  CIV. 

•were  not  yet  comen  agayn  in  to  thooste.  1They  assaylled?  them 
moche  asprely  and?  harde  /  so  longe  that  somme  of  them  that  were 
in  the  playnes  within  the  toun  wente  vpon  the  toures  and*  vpon  the 
walles,  hy  cause  that  oure2  men  that  fought3  shold?  he  ahasshed  hy  4 
thoccasion  of  theyr  peple  that  shold  come1  /  And  as  oure  peple 
Fmm  the       approuched  the  turkes  /  they  apperceyued  that  the  other  that  they 

towers  they  .,.-, 

sa»v  our  men  abode  /  were  discoinf  vted?,  by  cause  oure  men  cam  loyously  with 

returning  •  •« 

victorious,     alle  theyr  despoylles.    Thenne  aroos  the  sorow  grete  thurgh  alle  the  8 

and  were  very  J  tr    J  o  o 

sorrowful,  toun.  Our  men  approuched  the  toun  /  And*  dyde  do  throwe  ij.  C  / 
th.ew  200  heedes  of  the  turkes  that  they  had?  brought  with  engyns  in  to  the 
Tmks into     cyte  for  to  make  them  certayn  of  theyr  victorye,  And  yet  to  thewde 

that  they  shold  not  forgete  theyr  sorowe  that  was  entred  in  to  theyr  12 
hertes.  The  other  iij  C  /  that  were  lefte  they  pyght  them  on 
stakes  at  the  foote  of  the  walle  /  And  sette  there  men  for  to  kepe 
them  /  By  cause  they  shold!  be  alwey  in  theyr  syght.  whan  they 
cam  to  the  deffence  /  the  nombre  of  them  that  were  disconfyted  16 
were  /  xxviij  /  M.  Thus4  were  somme  grete  turkes  taken  & 
This  was  brought  prisonners  /  This  was  don  in  feuerer  the  /  vj  /  day  the 
d"yCof  Febm-  yere  of  thyncarnacion  of  our  lord  /  M  /  lxxxxvij0. 

Of  a  castel  that  our  men  made  of  somme  pylgryms  20 
that  arryued  at  the  porte,  and  how  they  were 
discomfyted  by  a  busshement  of  turkes  / 

cap0  Ciiij0. 

a       lie  the  barons  of  thoost  toke  counseyl,  and  acorded?  that  ypon  24 

a  territoire,  whiche  was  at  the  tentes  of  Buymont,5  shold  be 

[6  leaf  72]    6made  a  fortresse,  which  shold  be  wel  garnysshyd  with  good  men 

declied'to8     of  amies,  to  thende  that  yf  the  turkes  made  theyr  assayllies,  as  they 

fortrt^  near  were  acustomed1  /  they  of  this  fortresse  shold*  renne  on  hem.     And?  28 

hohemond  s   ^.g  ^^  wag  &  ^arbycane  0f  thooste  /  like  as  they  had?  deuysed? 

1—1  Caxlon  has  exactly  followed  his  original  here,  which  is  very  faulty  : 
A.  gives  the  correct  reading:  " Dxtrement  i  assaillircwt,  et  longuemcnt,  tant 
que  cil  qui  cstoient  sur  les  bcates  les  virent,  lors  leur  firent  signe  quit  sen  retor- 
nasscnt,  car  il  vcotint  venir  genz.  Cil  entrerent  en  la  rile,  et  montercnt  sur  les 
tors,  et  sur  les  murs  for  connoistre  si  ccstoit  leur  gent  qui  venoient."  Lat. 
"pene  tota  die  nostris  gravissima  intulerunt  certamina,  quousque  dc  supcriori- 
bus  civilatis  significantibus  excubiis  nostrorum  adventum  in  urbem  se  reciperunt, 
ubi  super  turres  et  moenia  et  loca  eminentiora  constitui  adventare  quidem 
considrrant  legiones  ignari,  tamen  nostrorum  an  suorum  essent,  castra  que 
accedrrcnt."  2  Orig.  onre.  8  Orig.  fonght.        *  Orig.  Thns. 

5  Orig.  Bnymont. 


Ch.  CIV.]     Pilgrims  and   Victuals  brought  by  a  Genoese  Ship.       157 

&  ordeyned,  so  was  it  made  without  ta^yeng1 :  and  valyaunt  men 
and?  hardy  were  setto  in  this  fortresse  largely,  thenne  was  alio 
thost  assured  as  they  had  hen  within  the  walles  of  a  good?  Cyte  / 

4  The1  siege  had  endured  thenne  .v.  monethes  /  A  shippe  of  genewes  The  siese  imd 
cam  tlieder,  whiche  had  brought  pylgryms  and?  vytaylles.     they  Ave  months, 
aryued  at  the  porte,  &  sette  them  in  the  Ryuer  of  helle,  as   it 
falleth  in  to  the  see  /  they  had  sente  ofte  messagers  in  to  the  hoost  / 

8  that  they  shold  fetche  them  by  som  of  the  grete  barons,  with  so 
good  company  that  they  myght  be  saufly  conduyted  in  to  thoost. 
they  of  the  toun  had  thenne  apperceyued  that  messagers  wente  and1  MeB«enKeis 

were  sent 

cam  fro  the  shippe  in  to  thoost  /  And  sente  out  men,  that  slewe  between  the 

rr  '  town  :ind  the 

12  som  me  of  them  :  And  therfor  durst  none  goo,  more  without  grete  sea,  to  a 

'  °     »  o  Genoese  ship. 

companye.  Our  barons  had  aduysed  to  make  a  grete  fortresse  at 
thende  of  the  brydge,  in  a  mahommerye2  /  that  the  turkes  had,  and 
wold1  sette  men  of  armes  there  for3  to  kepe  and  deffende  thyssue  of 

16  the  brydge,  yf  the  turkes  Avolde  come  /  But  by  cause  that  th-jre 
were  peple  yssued  out  of  thoost  for  to  goo  to  the  ship,  were  chosen 
somme  of  the  barons,  whiche  shold  goo  and  fetche  them,  ffor  they 
were  peple  that  were  goon  for  to  here  tydynges  of  theyr  contrees  / 

20  and  wold  haue  comen  acrayn,  but  they  durst  not.     therto  was  chosen  Bohemond 

°    J  J  and  a  party 

buymont  /  the  Erie  of  tholouse,  Euerard  du  puyssat,  And  therle  of  men  were 
garnyer  of  crece,  whiche  also  shold  conduyte  the  messagers  of  the  protect  timse 

°         •  °  '  J  °  going  to  the 

calyphe  vnto  the  port  of  the  seo,  and  at  retornyng  shold?  brynge  Bea- 
24  agayn  and  conduyte  them  of  thooste  /  they  of  Anthyoche  herd  saye 
that  the  sayd   Barons  were  departed  fro  thoost,   and  descended 
toward  the  see  /  And  sent  out  four  /  M  /  knyghtes4  of  the  moost 
noble  that  they  had,  for  to  lye  in  a  wayte  at  theyr  retornyng.     It 
28  happed!  that  the  fourth  day  that  our  men  sette  them  on  the  way  for 
to  retorne,  and   brought  Armures   and  many  horses   laden   with 
vytaylles  and?  other  thynges  /  And  toke  none  heede  of  them  that 
laye  in  a  wayte  /  The  turkes  brake  sodenly  on  them  /  And  surprised*  a»  they  were 
32  oure  men  at  a  paas.     The  erle  of  tholouse  had  the  v award5  /  And  Turks  at - 

t  '  tacked  them. 

Buymont  cam  after.  The  crye  began  moche  grete.  6whan  the 
Turkes  sawe  thyse  noble  men,  they  held  them  al  sty  He6  /  And? 

1  After  city  Caxton  has  omitted  "  Car  devers  Orient  cstoit  cclle  garnison 
venue.  Devers  midy  les  murs  de  la  palus  qui  eostoient  le  mur.  Devers  Occident 
et  devers  bine  le  gardoit  lefleuve,  qui  se  espandoit  vers  la  mcr." 

-  Fr.  Mahomcrie,  Lat.  "ubi  erat  quoddam  eorum  superstitionis  oratorium." 

3  Orig.  sor.         4  Orig.  kuyghtes.         B  Fr.  Vavantgarde. 

6-6  Fr.  "  quand  les  Turcz  vindrent,  les  preudhommes  sc  tindrcnt  tout 
oyement." 


158  Godfrey  addresses  the  Army.  [Ch.  CIV. 

began  tenseigne  the  peple  on  foote,  that  they  shold!  holde  them  to 
gydre.     They  of  the  grete  affraye  that  they  herde,  ffor  drede  that 
['  if.  72,  bk.]  they  had1,  hydde   them  x  in   the   busshes,  and1   fledde   in    to   the 
menyfled.our   montaynes  and  woodes,  and1  toke  none  heed  to  that  they  brought  /  4 
■whan  our  barons  sawe  this,  they  knewe  wel  that  theyr  strengthe 
was  not  lyke  theyres,  And1  began  to  come  to  the  lodgys  dylygently 
with  as  many  men  as  they  myght  conduyte.     The  other,  that  wold! 
At  least  soo    not  folowe,  ne  myght  not,  were  alle  there  slayn  /  there  were  slayn  8 
wel  of  men  and  wymmen  to  the  nombre  of  iij  C.  /  this  duryng 
tydynges  cam  to  the  hoost,  that  alle  they  that  were  comyng  were 
al  slayn  &  put  to  deth  by  the  turkes,  that  had  espyed  them  /  Of 
the  barons2  them  self,  that  conduyted?  them,  was  not  knowen3  12 
whether  they  were  a  lyue  or  deed1,     the  due  Godeffroy,  that  was 
not  ydle,  had  grete  anguyssh  in  his  heite  for  the  peple  of  our  lord1 
that  was  thus  lost,  And  lete  do  crye  that  alle  men  shold  arme  them 
in  thoost  on  peyne  of  deth  /  and1  that  none  shold!  abyde  behynde  16 
Duke  Godfrey  in  so  grete  a  werke  /  alle  assembled,  &  passed  the  brygge  of  the 
five  battalions  shippis  /  and  they  made  .v  /  bataylles  /  robert,  due  of  Normawdye, 
who  had  been  lad  that  one ;  The  .ij  /  lad  tlierle  of  Flauradres  /  the  thyrd1,  huon  le 
prised.  mayne  /  The  forth,  Eustace  /  brother  to  the  due4  Godeffroy  /  And  20 

the  due4  hym  self  had  the  fyfthe.  whan  they  were  all  ordeyned, 
the  due4  called  them  ;  And!  alle  they  heryng,  sayde  in  this  manere  / 
"  Fayr  lordes,  yf  it  be  trouthe  thus  as  the  tydynges  renne,  that  for 
oure5  synnes6  thise  cruel  houndes  and!  fals  /  haue7  slayn  so  valyaunt  24 
men,  and!  of  so  grete  counseyl,  whom  ye  sente  to  the  see  side  /  And 
Avith  them  be  perysshed  also  our  felows,  whom  they  shold  haue 
He  exhorted    conduyted  /  I  see  not  but  of  two  wayes  that  one  /  or  that  we  deye 

them  either  .  .  '         .  .  _0 

todieas        with  them  as  good!  cristen  men  m  this  world,  and  certeyn  to  receyue  J« 

Christians,  or  ,        ,     -     ,    _ 

toavenae       the  reward!  of  Ihesu  Criste,  whom  we  shal  serue  vnto  the  deth  j  Or 

their  fellow-  '  ' 

soldiers.        yf  oure  ior(j  Wy]i  that  oure  seruyce  be  to  hym  acceptable  /  that  we 
take  vengeaunce  on  thyse  mastyfs,  that  haue  thus  enpayred  cristi- 
«■  a»  for  my.   ente,  and  endommaged  and  destroyed  thyse  valyaunt  men.     As  for  32 
"I Would  'e'  my  self,  I  saye  to  you8  certaynly  /  I  had!  leuer  to  deye  presently, 
thaifnotbe     than  to  lyue  without  to  be  aduenged!  on  them  /  Now  vnderstonde 

riil'.-lnriul  "  _ 

ye  what  I  shal  saye  to  you ;  me  semeth  that  thyse  turkes,  yf  they 
haue  the  victorye  vpon  oure  men,  as  it  is  sayd!  /  they  shal  be  now  36 
mounted  in  grete  pride  /  And  by  grete  bobance,  for  to  angre  vs,  wyl 
come  to  the  cyte  /  And  brynge  theyr  proyes  and!  fardellys  to  fore 

2  Orig.  barous.        3  Orig.  kuowen.        *  Orig.  dne.        5  Orig.  onre. 
6  Orig.  fyunes.        7  Orig.  hane.         8  Orig.  yon. 


revenged. 


Ch.  CV.]         Preparations  to  receive  the  Enemy.  159 

vs  /  And  ye  shal  wel  see  that  they  shal  not  kepe  them  wel  in 
ordenaunce,  but  shal  goo  folyly  ;  And  this  shal  be  grete  auantage  to 
vs  /  Therfore,  xby  my  counseyll,  yf  it  be  so  /  that1  we  hold  vs  al  ||Wem«»t 

4  redy  for  to  doo  the  seruysc  of  oure  lord,  ffor  whiche  we  departed!  ^'»«  ^ 
oute  of  oure  countrees  /  late  vs  haue  in  hym  stedfast  hope,  ffor  he  £»ice  of  our 
2guerdonneth  right  wel  his  souldyours  /  whan  our  enemyes  shal    P  i«*f  ?:<] 
come  to  vs,  late  vs  receyue  them  vygorously  with  glayues  /  speres 

8  and*  swcrdes  /  late  eueryche  of  you  remembre  wel  in  his  herte  of  the 
wronge  and  shame  that  they  haue  don  oure  lord1,  and  to  oure  self." 
This  worde,  that  the  due  sayde,  was  wel  vnderstande  of  alle  /  And 
plesyd  them  merueyllously  well.     They  began  to  warne  eche  other,  ™« ££;«£- 
12  and  somone  to  doo  well  /  As3  there  they  knewe  to  gydre,  AnJgMtojrtort 
there  helde  them  al  redy  /  And  thenne  buymont  aryued,  &  cam  do  their  t^t. 
emoDc  them  /  And  a  lytil  whyle  after  cam  therle  of  tholouse  :  And  Boiiemomi 

o  ""■ "       /  J  •>  arnved,  mm 

they  tolde  to  them  of  theyr  mesauenture.     They  had  moche  grete  te»;|( 
16  ioye  of  their  comyng,  and  that  they  were  escaped  /  They  moche  i«a  *&ty. 
comforted  eche  other  /  And  after  sayd  to  them  the  counseyl  of  due 
godeffroy  /  They  acorded  therto  /  and  sayd  that  it  ought  so  to  be 
doo ;  And  so  abode  there  alle  they  to  gydre  /  Ancean,  Capytayn  of 
20  the  Cyte,  by  thyse  semblaunces  that  he  sawe,  knewe  that  his  peple 
had  discomfyted  the  oures.     Moche  doubted  he  of  theyr  comyng1 
agayn,  by  cause  that  our  men  were  yssued  ayenst  them  /  therfor  he  ^J*™  d  ^ 
dyde  do  crye  in  the  toun  /  that  alle  men  shold  arme  them  and  ggJJ**^ 
24  come  to  the  yate  of  the  brydge,  for  to  be  redy  in  araye  for  to  ^"j^d 
socoure  their  peple,  yf  nede  were  /  Our  men  had  sente  their  espyes  "eei  '*■ 
and  theyr  courreurs  in  dyuerse  partyes,  for  tenquyre  and  knowe 
whan  the  turkes  shold  come,  and  fro  what  parte. 

28  Of  a  batayll,  where  our  men  auenged  them  of  the 
turkes  /  and  of  a  stroke  that  due  godeffroy  gaf 
in  this  bataylle.  cap0  Cv° 

i        T  was  not  longe  after,  but  whyles  as  they  taryed  there,  mid 
32  had  theyr  hertes  desyryng  to  doo  prowesse,  yf  they  had  tyme 

and  place,  that  theyr  messagers  arryued  alle  rennyng1,  whiche  told 
to  them  that  the  turkes  were  nygh  /  They  began  to  recomande  them 
self  to  oure  lord,  and  wente  forward  in  theyr  bataylles  like  as  they 
36  were  ordeyned  /  whan  they  sawe  tyme  and  place,  they  smote  theyr 

1-1  Fr.  "  Pour  ce  e'est  mon  conscil,  si  rous  voiez  qu'il  soit  bon,  que,"  etc. 
3  Fr.  "  si  comme  ih  sc  cognoissoicnt." 


ICO 


The  Great  Barons  do  wonderful  Feats  of  Arms.     [Ch.  CV. 


Our  men 
attacked  the 
arriving 
Turku 
fiercely, 


80  that  they 
retreated  to 
i  lie  bridge. 
[i  If.  73,  bk.] 


Duke  Godfrey 
was  ready  for 
these,  and 
slew  them  or 
drove  them 
back. 


All  of  the 
barons  did 
great  feats 
of  arms. 


Ancean  sent 
his  men  to 
attack  ours 
in  turn. 


hors  with  theyr  spores  /  And!  cam  to  so  fiersly  that  the  turkes  were 
al  abasshed  /  thenne  they  began  to  smyte  asprely  on  the  right  syde 
and  lyft,  And  flewe  in  to  the  presse  in  suche  wyse  that  euery  man 
wold8  be  the  best  and1  moost  valyaunt  /  in  so  moche  that  they  gaf  4 
to  theyr  enemyes  no  leyser  to  aduyse  them  what  they  shold!  doo  / 
They  myght  not  endure  the  grete  strengthe  of  oure  men  /  but  wold 
haue  drawen  toward  the  brydge  /  xBut  the  due  godeffroy  /  that 
moche  knewe  of  suehe  thynges,  was2  pourueyed*  therof  to  fore  /  And  8 
had  taken  a  lytil  territoire,  whiche  was  ayenst  the  brydge  /  And* 
there  he  helde  hym  in  his  bataylle  /  Alle  the  turkes  that  they 
chaced  toward!  hym  /  he  slewe  them,  or  he  made  retome  ayenst 
them  fro  whens  they  cam,  where  they  slewe  them  alle  and1  hewe  12 
them  /  the  erle  of  fflaundres  dyde  right  wel  this  day,  as  a  good, 
valyaunt  &  hardy  man  in  amies  /  the  Due  of  Normandye  brak 
the  presse,  that  no  turke  durst3  approche  hym  /  the  Erie  of  tholouse 
hym  self  wold  auenge  this  /  that  they  had  made  hym  to  spore  his  1 6 
hors  the  daye  to  fore  /  huon  le  mayne  forgate  not  to  shewe  of  what 
lygnage  he  was,  and  of  what  contre  /  4but5  semed*  that  he  dyde  to 
his  enemyes  /  that  alle  the  werke  and  charge  had*  ben  his  /  thenne 
eustace,  brother  of  due  godeffroy ;   Bawdwyn,  erle  of  henawd  /  20 
hughe,  therle  of  seynt  poul ;  And  alle  the  other  barons,  knyghtes 
and!  noble  men,  in  theyr  countrees  dyde  meruaylles  of  annes,  ther 
was  neuer  man  lyuyng1  that  sawe  ony  werk  better  enterprised  and 
more  valyauntly  achyeuyd,  and  that  communely  of  alle  /  Ancean  24 
sawe  this  bataylle  so  grete  /  6And!  sawe  his  peple  yssue  out7  for  to 
gyue  them  herte  and  courage6  /  And  to  put  awaye  thesperaunce  of 
theyr  flyght,  commaunded!  to  shette  the  yates  after  them,     they 
cam  pryckyng  ayenst  oure  men  /  &  wold!  haue  made  theyres  to  28 
letorne  whiche  were  discomfyted,  but  the  affray e  and*  the  drede  was 
so  grete  in  them  that  they  neuer  made  semblaunt  therto  /  they  them 
self,  that  frely  cam  on,  whan  they  sawe  the  prowesse  of  our  men, 

2  Fr.  "s'estoit  par  avant  moult  prevu,"  i.  e.  he  had  thoroughly  prepared 
himself  in  advance. 

3  Orig.  dnrst. 

*  Caxton  is  very  obscure  here,  although  he  seems  to  have  understood  his 
French.  Fr.  "aincois  sembloit  a  ce  qu'il  faisoit  sur  ses  ennemis  que  toiUe  la 
besoigne  estoit  sienne,"  viz.  it  seemed,  to  judge  from  what  he  did  to  his  enemies, 
that  the  whole  burden  of  the  fight  lay  on  him. 

8  Orig.  buf. 

6-6  Fr.  "si  fist  ces  gens  issir  hors,  et  pour  culx  dormer  cuer."  Caxton 
seems  to  have  read  vist  (saw),  instead  of  fist  (made). 

7  Orig.  ont. 


Ch.  CV.]     The  Great  Stroke  made  by  Duke  Godfrey.  161 

and  the1  grete  strokes  that  they  gaf,  tonsed  thcyr  hackes  with  the 

other  /  ne  neuer  made  grete  resistance  /  there  was  the  fyghtyng  The  conflict 

I  "  ■  was  tumble. 

grete,  and  merueyllous2  betyng1  doun  of  the  turkes,  that  men  myght 
4  not  but  with  grete  payne  passe  /  ther  was  so  grete  noyse,  so  grete 
crye,  &  so  terryble  neyhyng1  of  horses  oueral,  that  a  man  shold 
not  haue  herd  tliondre.  they  that  bad  made  the  yates  to  be  shette 
after  them,  3were  ofte  this  day  in  peryl  to  lese  theyr  lyues.3  the 
8  wyuos  of  the  turkes,  the  maydens  and!  feble  peple  of  the  toun,  were 
voon  the  walles  and  tourettes,  where  they  sawe  theyr  peple  torne  to  The  Turks 

r  were  worsted, 

meschyef  and  to  destruction  /  ye  may  wel  thynke  that  they  hat? 
giete  sorowe  /  wepynge,  and?  moche  ^rye  and!  noyse.  wel  cursed 
12  they  that  tyme,  that  they  so  longe  had  lyued  that  they  shold  see 
suche  meschyef  happen  to  them  /  Ancean  sawe  that  he  loste  alle  bis 
nion,  and  had  none  hope  for  to  recoure  them  /  conimaunded  that  and  Ancean 

'  r  '  opened  the 

that  yate  shold1  be  opened1  for  to  receyue  in  to  the  toun  them  that  gate*  of  the^ 
16  were  lefte  /  whan  the  turkes  sawe  the  yate  opene  /  they  had1  so  the  fugitives. 
4grete  wylle  to  entre  in  to  the  toun  /  that  vpon  the  brydge  they  [*  leaf  74, 
pressyd!  so  euyl  for  haste,  that  they  fylle  in  to  the  water  of  them 
grete  plente.     The  Due  Godeffroye,  that  al  that  day  had1  so  wel 

20  don,  And  whan  it  cam  for  to  departe  to  fore  the  bridge  /  he  gaf  a 
strook1  moche  valyaunt  /  and  suche  one  /  that  it  shal  perpetually 
and  euermore  be  spoken  of  in  wele  and  in  honour  /  ffor  I  trowe 
ther  happed  neuer  none  suche  to  fore  /  ne  neuer  shal  happen  here 

21  after.  There  were  this  daye  many  heedes  smeton  of  /  Armes  and 
sholders  at  one  stroke  /  he  wel  apperceyued  one  of  his  enemyes, 
whiche  helde  hym  nygh  to  Godeffroy,  And  auamiced  hym  ofte,  and 
nevned  to  ereue  hvm  /  The  valyaunt  Due  smote  hym  with  his  uuVe  r.odfrey 

l     J  o  *         i  •/  "  smote  m  m:ui 

28  swerde  by  suche  myght  and  vertue,  that  he  smote  hym  in  two  m  ^t0JK'^f 
pyeces  in  the  myddle  /  in  suche  wyse  that  the  ouerste  part  of  hym  «»» sword, 
fyl  to  the  ground  /  And!  that  other  parte  abode  styll  syttyng  on  the 
hors  /  whiche  entred  in  to  the  Cyte  with  the  other  /  And  knowe 

32  ye  certaynly  that  this  sayd  Turke  was  armed  with  a  good  hauberk, 

and  moche  stronge  /  Alle  they  that  sawe  this  merueylle  /  were  ah  who  saw 
yretely  abasshed  :   And  the  Turkes  them  self  had  grete  fere  ami!  were  greatly 

°  "  *  abashed. 

dretle.     50  mercyful  God,  what  myght  and  strengthe  gyuest  thou 

36  to  thy  seruauntes,  that  haue  their  fayth  and  truste  in  the  /  Suche  a 

stroke  hath  not6  be  herd  of  to  fore  this  tyme5  /  That  same  daye 

1  Fr.  scntirent,  left  out  by  Caxton.         2  si  omitted. 

3_3  Yr.  "finat  a  vaunt:,  Ic  jour,  prrdnz  ks  vies,"  he  caused  many,  that 
day,  to  lose  their  lives."            b~ 5  Inserted  by  Caxton.  6  C'rij.  not. 

GODFREY.  M 


162  The  Turks  suffer  great  Loss.  [Ch.  CVL 

they  of  Anthyoche  loste  moo  than  two  thousand!  men.     And1  yf  the 
nyght  had  not  comen  so  sone  on,  they  shold  haue  hen  so  enfebled 
of  men  /  that  with  payne  shold  they  haue  conne  holden  and  kept 
Tiie  Turks     the  toun  ayenst  oure  men.     It  semed  wel  that  at  the  brydge  were  4 
irnmb^  of    many  Turkes  slayn,  ffor  it  was  thycke  there  of  deede  hodyes.     The 
ryuer  that  descended  to  the  see  /  was  alle  hlody  vnto  the  See  / 
Somme  Cristen  men  of  the  londe  yssued  oute  of  the  touu,  And  cam 
■nd  twelve     to  our  peple  /  that  told  them  that  .xij  /  grete  admyrals  had  the  8 
Turkes  loste  in  the  bataylle  /  For  whom  they  were  ouermoche 
sorouful ;  For  they  were  so  endommaged  /  that  neuer  in  theyr  lyf 
shold  they  be  therof  restored. 

How   the    Cristen   men   thanked   oure   lord   of  this  12 
vyctorye  /  And  made  a  Castel  in  theyr  mahom- 
merye,  where  there  they  fonde  grete  gayne. 

Capitulo  Cvj° 
pit7*»bk.]1t      He  next  day,  whan   the   daye   was  wel   cleer,  the   barons  16 
The  barons  assembled  alle.  for  humbly  to  thancke  our  lord  of  the  victorye 

forethi8Rgrejit  that  he  had  gyuen  to  them ;  And  after,  spak  of  the  comyn  besynes. 
Comynly  was  deuysed  and  acorded  of  alle  /  that  there  shold  be 
made  a  tour,  as  they  had  enterprysed  at  thende  of  the  brydge,  for  20 
to  take  away  the  yssue  fro  them  of  the  toun  /  And  for  to  kepe  and 
warante  oure  peple  whan  they  ranne  to  fore  it  /  There  had  the 
Turkes  buryed  by  nyght  the  dede  men  that  had  ben  slayn  in  the 
Ti.e «>mmon  bataylle  to  fore  /  whan  the  peple  afoote  knewe  this,  they  ranne,  24 
hurtSttT    And  there  vnburyed  them  /  And  toke  them  out  of  theyr  sepultures 
piunde  "<id     and  graues  /  And  toke  and  bare  away  Gold  /  Syluere  /  And  theyr 
their  graves.  ^^  ^  whiche  they  had  buryed  with  them  in  their  sepultures, 

after  theyr  customme  /  They  of  the  toun  had  moche  sorowe,  by  28 
cause  they  eawe  to  fore  theyr  eyen  the  corses  taken  vp  of  theyr 
frendes,  whiche  they  had  buryed  with  grete  costes  and  despenses. 
And  it  displesyd  them  moche  that  the  nombre  of  theyr  deed  men 
shold  be  knowen  /  whom  they  had  supposed  to  haue  kepte  secrete  /  32 
ffor  without  them  that  fylle  in  the  flood  or  Ryuer,  And  withoute 
them  that  were  buryed  in  the  toune  /  And  them  that  were  hurt 
1500  men       vnto  the  deth,  and  buryed  in  the  toun,  were  taken  vp  oute  of 
ukeVu"oot  theyr  graues  in  the  mahomerye  a  thousand  and  fyue  honderd.  36 
They  smote  of  thre  honderd  heedes,  and  sente  them  to  Themperour, 
for  to  late  hym  haue  certayn  tydynges  of  the  bataylle  that  they  had 


cf  their 


Ch.  CVIL]     The  Barons  make  a  strong  Fortress.  163 

ayenst1  the  turkes  /  The  messagers  of  the  Calyphe  of  Egypte  were 
not  yet  departed  fro  thens.     And!  whan  they  sawe  this,  they  were  i^meMen- 
ioyous  of  the  deth  of  theyr  enemyes  /  But  they  were  alway  after  jW*  j^ 
4  afeerdf,  and*  dred  oure  peple  /  There  were  many  of  oure  owne  men  ^f*?r0^d 
that  had1  fledde  in  to  the  woode8  andf  montaygnes,  whiche  after  men- 
retourned*  in  to  thooste  /  There  cam  many  in  to  thooste  /  that  men 
supposed1  had  hen  deed1  /  the  barons  commanded1  that  the  fortresse  a  fortress 
8  shold  be  made,  &  adressyd1  moch  hye  and  strowge,  hastely.     It  was  ggjjjgjjfjj 
made  of  such  stones  as  they  drewe  out  of  the  tombes  &  sepultures  Ju&wSl 
of  the  turkes  /  &  after,  the  barons  began  to  aduyse  to  whom  the 
kepyng  of  this  tour  shold  be  delyuerd,  which  was  fayr  &  strong;  & 

12  to  fore  was  made  a  dyche,  moche  depe.     ther  were  Barons  ynowe, 
whiche  excused4  them  by  many  reasons  why  they  myght  not  kepe  it  / 
But  the  valyant  Erie  of  Tholouse  prouff red1  hym  self  /  Andf  prayde  ™°,^£  of 
that  it  myght  be  delyuerd1  to  hym  ffor  to  gouerne  /  ffor  by  the  grace  ■*■■**» 

16  of  God1  he  shold1  kepe  it  wel  /  AUe  the  Barons  coude  hym  moche  gg*^ 
good  thancke  /  And1  2by  this  recouerd3  he  the  grace  and  loue  of  the  P  ie»f  75, 

°  i  J  °  rig.  92] 

corayn  peple  /  whiche  he  had1  alle  loste  /  ffor  fro  the  sorner  to  fore, 
by  thoccasion  of  a  sekenes  and1  maladye  that  he  had1  /  4he  had  don 

20  none  auauncement  of  ony  werkes  and  nedes  of  the  hoost.4  Eueryche 
of  the  other  barons  had  don  his  power  /  But  he  dyde  right  nought  / 
therfore  thempyre  coude  hym  thank  /  ffor  it  was  supposed  that  he 
was  the  rychest.     but  for  tentreprise  of  this  thyng,  they  sayd  wel 

24  alle  that  he  was  not  a  ferd,  ne  euyll.  And!  on  that  other  syde,  yet 
he  dyde  more,  ffor  he  leyd  out  .v  /  C  /  marck  weyght  of  syluer  in 
the  hand  of  the  Bisshop  of  puy,  and1  other  good1  men,  for  to  helpe 
to  restore  the  dommages  of  the  horses  that  the  poure  men  had1 

28  taken  in  the  bataylle.  there  were  many  after,  that  were  the  more 
hardy  for  to  goo  ayenst  theyr  enemyes,  for  hope  to  haue,  and 
recouere  thevr  horses  /  ffor  thvse  thvnges  was  therle  of  tholouse  He  was,  on 

"  '  *  J     °  this  account, 

moche  louyd  and!  preysed1,  in  so  moche  that  they  callyd  hym  fader  ™p^,hgI!eand 
32  and  wardeyn  of  thoost.  SlttSi? 

Of  a  fortresse  that  Tancre  made  ouer  the  Ryuer  and 
deffended  it  valyauntly.  capitulo  C  /  vij° 

1  Orig.  ayenst.  3  Orig.  reconerd. 

*-4  Fr.  "  sestoit  si  for/ait  (var  " soitstrait,"  which  is  the  correct  reading), 
dc  toutcs  les  besongnes  de  I'ost."  Lat.  "Nam  ab  aestate  praeterita,  per  totam 
inscqiientem  hyemem,  occasione  cujusdam  aegritudinis,  ita  rcmissus  jaciccrat, 
et  pene  inutilis. " 

il    2 


1G4  Tancred  builds  another  Fortress.       [Ch.  CVII. 

i        N  this  uewe  fortresse  of  the  brydge  therle  of  tholouse  sette 

thyrin  /  v.C.  men  of  Armes,  hardy  and  valyaunt  knyghtes  and 

By  thu  new   otner  /  And  by  cause  of  this  fortresse  the  yssuyng  and?  goyng  out 

fortress,  the        «,  pi*  »«•-••» ;   i  <-» 

Turks  were    of  them  of  the  toun  was  deffended  /  Oure  men  thenne  wente  surely  4 

kept  from         . 

Koing  in  and  in  the  countre  /  the  turkes  myght  not  yssue  but  by  the  west  yate  / 

town.  whiche  is  bytwene  the  foot  of  the  hylle,  And1  the  ryuer  of  helle. 

And  this  yssue  myght  not  moche  greue  ne  hurte  oure  men  /  ffor 

alle  the  lodgys  were  ouer  the  ryuer  /  but  alway  by  that  waye  cam  8 

vytaylles  and  fresshe  metes  to  them  of  the  toun1  /  And  thus  they 

were  not  ynowgh  constreyned  /  by  so  moche  as  they  had  this 

yssue  /  The  barons  assembled  and  counseylled2  how  they  myght 

take  this  waye  fro  them  /  they  acorded  wel  that  this  myght  not  be,  12 

But  yf  ther  were  a  fortresse  made  ouer  the  Eyuer  whiche  muste  be 

They  decided  delyuerd  to  one  of  the  Barons  for  to  kepe.     They  acorded  well  alle 

second  that  the  fortresse  shold  be  made  /  But  none  proferd  ne  sayde  that 

fortress, 

he  wold  kepe  it  /  Many  of  them  sayde  that  Tancre  was  ryght  pro-  16 

pyce  to  this  thynge.     But  he  excused  hym,  And  sayd  that  he 

was  ouer  poure  for  tendure  and  here  so  gTete  dispence.     Therle  of 

[» if.  75,  bk.]  Tholouse  sterte  forth  to  3fore  /  and  gaf  to  hym  an  /  C  /  marck  of 

of  which        syluer  for  to  make  it  with.     And  It  was  ordeyned  that  he  shold  20 

should  be      haue  euery  moneth  .xl  marke  of  the  comune.     Tancre,  whiche  was 

placed  in  . 

command,     moche  valyaunt  and  wyse,  dyde  do  make  this  tour,  m  a  lytu  tertre 
hygh  ynowgh  to  the  gate,  And  after  receyued  it  in  to  his  warde  and 
kepyng.     And  god  gaf  to  hym  so  moche  worship  /  that  he  loste  24 
nothynge  /  But  kepte  it  al  hool  .vnto  the  ende  of  the  siege.     In  the 
on  the  river   syde  bynethe  by  the  Byuer  was  a  moche  fayr  playne  in  whiche 
town  were     habouwded  many  fayr  pastures4  /  And  grete  plente  of  trees  a  /  iij  / 
niicd  with   '  or  four  myle  fro  the  Cyte.    They  of  the  toun  by  cause  they  had  not  28 
pastures  ynowgh  /  they  had  sente  grete  plente  of  theyr  horses  and 
mounture  in  to  that  place  /  whan  they  of  thoost  apperceyued  it  / 
They   assembled    knyghtes    ynowe   and    other   valyaunt    men   of 
Avmes  /  And  wente  theder  /  but  not  by  the  right  waye  /  but  by  32 
The  crusad-   pathes  and  hyd  wayes,  so  longe  that  they  assayled  them  that  kept 
saiiy,  and      them  and  slewe  them.     They  brought  in  to  the  hoost  /  ij  /  M. 
many  of        horses  for  men  of  Armes  grete  gente,  and  fayr  /  besyde  the  mules 

and  other  beestes,  wherof  they  had  largely.     Of  this  gayne  had  36 
they  grete  ioye  /  ffor  they  had  of  nothyng  so  grete  nede  in  thoost  as 
of  horses  /  ffor  they  had  ben  mynnysshed  moche  and  lassed  in  the 
bataylle  /  And  many  deyed  that  tyme  for  hungre  and  mesease. 
1  Orig.  toun.  2  Orig.  connseylled.  *  Orig.  pastutures. 


Ch.  CVI1L]  Great  Gifts  from  Baldwin.  165 

How  thenne  the  turkes  of  the  toun  began  to  haue 
mesease  and  sorowe  /  And  our  peple  ease  / 

Capitulo  Cviij° 
4  t       Han1  the  Cyte  was  thus  on  alle  sydes  assyeged  that  the  turkes 

niyght  not  yssue  oute  /  they  began  within  to  haue  mesease,  The  Turk* 
2 ffor  the  Turkes  had  not  vytayll  ynowgh,2  wherof  it  happed1  that  (feat  dincom- 

"       u         "  °  ■  ■  fort  from  the 

they  niyght  not  helpe  them  in  theyr  nede  /  ffresshe  mete  ffaylled1  siege> 
8  them,  whiche  greuyd1  them  moche  /  Oure  men  had1  bandon  to  goo 
vnto  the  Porte  of  the  See  /  3By  whiche  they  had1  so  moche  to  suffre 
as  they  had1  endured  all  the  wynter3  /  ffor  the  pryme4  temps  and 
swete  tyme  was  come  in  suche  wyse  that  shippes  myght  goo  and  ships  brought 

our  men 

12  come  by  the  See  /  whiche  brought  vytaylles  ynowgh.     There  were  provisions  by 
many  of  oure  people  that  had  soiourned  all  the  wynter  in  the 
Townes,  whiche  thenne  cam  agayne  in  to  thooste  alle  fressh  &  wel 
armed.  /  bawdwyn  the  brother  of  due  Godeffroy  /  of  whom  ye 

1 6  haue  wel  herd  speke  to  fore  /  whiche  had  so  moche  rychesse  /  had 

herd   tydynges5  that  the  barons  6had  sutfied  many  meseases  in  [6  leaf  76, 

sig.  93] 

thoost  /  And  sente  to  them  alle  grete  yeftes  and  prcsentes  /  not  Baldwin  sent 
only  to  the  grete  prynces  /  But  also  to  the  moyen  peple  /  And  to  thTcru-  * 

20  the  leste  gaf  he  also  ynowgh  of  his  owen,  wherfor  had  the  loue  &  "" 
grace  of  alle  this  companye  /  he  gaf  to  his  brother  the  Due  alle 
thyssues  of   his  londe  that  he   had  on  this  syde  the   Ryuer  of 
Eufrates  /  with  which  he  gaf  to  hym  the  Cyte  of  torbesel  &  the 

2  4  contre  ther  about7  wherin  was  moche  whete  /  wyne  &  oyle.     And 

yet  aboue  al  this  he  gaf  to  hym  /  L  /  M.  besauntes  /And  there  lie  sent  his 

,  ,  ,    ,  ,   .  '  ,T  ,  brother  G.nl- 

was  a  noble  man  of  hermonye  whiche  was  named  Nycose,  whiche  frey  50,000 

besaute. 

was  wel  acqueynted  with  bawdwyn.  And  for  his  loue  sente  vnto 
28  due  Godeffroy  a  pauyllon,  the  moost  fayr  and  moost  ryche,  that 
myght  0  wher  be  seen  /  It  was  of  ouer  straunge  facion  and  mer- 
uellously  grete  /  But  whan  his  messagers  bare  it  in  to  the  hooste8  / 
One  pancrace  a  moche  ryche  man  of  Hermonye  /  Of  whom  I  haue  Pancratius 
32  spoken  to  fore,  dyde  do  espye  them  by  the  waye  /  And  dyd  to  take  pavilion  sent 

to  Uodfrey, 

1  Fr.  Quand. 

2-2  Fr.  "car  leurs  chevaulx  n'avoient  mie  assez  viandes — "  for  their  horses 
— (not  "  the  Turks  ")  had  not  food  enough. 

3—3  Fr.  "dont  ilz  n'avoient  mais  tel  souffrete  comme  ilz  avoient  enduric 
tous  ryver."  Lat.  "Nude  et  ni  castris  ex  parte  plurima  relevata  crat  ilia 
victus  inopia  qua  periculosc  nimis  per  totam  hyemem  laboraverat  excrcitus." 

4  Fr.  doulx  temps,  spring  time.  5  Orig.  tydyuges. 

7  Orig.  abont.  8  Ori/j.  haoste. 

1  *» 


166  Duke  Godfrey  gets  back  'his  Pavilion.     [Ch.  CIX. 

ami  e*ve  it     it  from  them  /.     And!  after  sente  the  pauyllon  to  Buymont.     And! 
'  was  presented!  to  hym  in  his  name,    whan  the  seruantes  of  Nycose 

cam  to  Due  Godeffroy  /  And!  had1  told!  hym  alle  this  that  pancrace 
Godfrey  was   had!  don  to  hym  /  he  had!  therof  moche  grete  desdayne  /  Syth  he  4 
veiy  angry  a  ^e  wjtn  hym  the  Erie  of  fflaundres,  to  whom  he  had!  more  loue 

and1  acqueyntaunce  than  to  ony  other  of  the  barons  /  And  wente  to 
and  de-  buymont  and  demaunded!  his  pauyllon  that  was  gyuen  to  hym  / 
mviiion  from  Buymont  answerd!  that  therof  he  knewe  not  /  that  it  was  longyng  8 

to  hym  /  ffor  a  noble  man  of  the  countre  had1  gyuen  it  to  hym. 

But  whan  he  knewe  that  the  due  wold  not  suffre  it  /  By  hys  cur- 
Bohemond     tosye  aud  atte  prayer  and  requeste  of  the  other  barons  he  rendred 
keep  the        and  delyuerd!  to  him  his  sayd!  pauyllon,  to  thende  that  no  noyse  12 
rendered  it     shold  sourde  ne  arryse  betwene  them  and  myght  lette  the  werke 

to  Uodfrey .  -         ,        .  _  ,  .,    , 

of  oure  lord*  /  Thus  were  they  good  frendes  /  Many  men  merueylled! 
them  how  that  so  valyaunt  a  man  as  the  Due  Godeffroy  was  /  In 
whom  was  no  thynge  founden  to  be  reprehended  was  so  meuyd  /  16 
ayenst  so  hye  and!  noble  a  man  for  so  lytil  a  thyng  as  was  a  pauyllon. 
Ne  I  can  see  none  other  reason,  But  that  a  noble  herte  maye  not 
suffre  shame  /  And!  it  was  late  hym  vnderstande  that  it  shold!  be 
to  hym  a  grete  shame  /  And  also  it  shold  be  ayenst  his  honour  yf  20 
he  suffred  it  to  be  taken  away  from  hym,  ffor  couetyse  he  dyde 
it  not  / 

How  the  Erie  Estyeuen  of  Chartres  and  of  Bloys  fledde 
c>  if.  76,  bk.]  afro  the  hooste  shamefully  /  Capitulo  Cix°  24 

it  was  re-      t       He  renommee  sourded!2  moche  grete  /  &  grewe  euery  day  how 
Ihe'sondanof  the  Soudan  of  Perse,  whiche  was  so  ryche  and!  puyssaunt, 

i-omingwHh  by  the  requeste  of  them  of  Anthyoche  had1  doo  somone  his  peple 
irmy    of  alle  his  power  for  to  come  socoure  this  cyte  /  he  had!  assembled1  28 
merueyllous  grete  peple,  ffor  the  tydynge  cam  not  only  to  them  of 
thooste  /  But  it  was  sayd  of  many  men  that  yssued!  out  of  the 
Cite  for  to  come  in  to  thooste  as  hermyens  and  surryens,  whiche 
Steven.  Earl   were  cristen  /  wherof  it  happed  that  Steuen,  therle  of  chartres  &  of  32 
■ndBtouir     bloys,  whiche  was   so    noble   puyssaunt   and  wyse,    that  for  his 
wysdom  the  other  barons  of  thooste  named!  hym  the  fader  of  coura- 
left  the  cm-    seyl,3  made  hym  self  seke  as  was  sayd  /  he  toke  leue  of  his  frendes. 
wei.ttoan       By  cause  he  sayde  he  wold*  goo  in  to  Allexandrye  the  lasse  /  whiche  36 
the  Less",      was  nyghe  to  the  porte  /  And*  wolde  abyde  there  til  he  were  deed* 

2  Oruj.  soni-decV.  3  Fr.  scfist  maladc,  fell  ilL 


Ch.  CX.]  Many  Men  desert  the  Army.  167 

or  ellys  hool  /  Thus  he  departed1  and  lad"  away  witli  hyni   grete 
good1  /   &  with  hyin  departed!  .iiij/M.  men,  whiche  were  of  his 
companye  and*  of  his  coimtreye,  he  wente  strayt  in  to  Allexandrye 
4  the  lasse  /  And  there  helde  hym  to  thende  /  that  yf  our  peple  had  Ti.-rehe 
vyctorye  of  the  bataylle  whiche    they  awayted  dayly,   he  wold  J^^^0/ 
retorne  in  to  thoost  as  guarysshyd  and  hool  of  his  maladye ;  and  yf  Ai.uoci.. 
it  had  meshapped  them,  anon  he  wold  haue  entred  in  to  shippis 
8  whiche  were  all  redy  for  to  retourne  in  to  his  country  /  Of  this 
thynge  all  the  barons  of  thooste  were  so  abasshed  &  angry  that  ^'^-^ 
they  wepte  hoote  teeris  for  pyte,  that  they  had  of  so  hye  and  noble  JJ*^*^ 
man  that  toke  none  hede  to  his  gentilnesse,1  to  his  wytte  /  ne  to  |g£J*^ 

12  the  worshyppe  that  men  dyde  to  hym  /  But  departed  so  euyl  in  $*£"* 
poynt  /  (25)  that  many  men  had  no  shame  to  withdrawe  them  after  SUven- 
hym  /  Thus  departed  many  /  The  Barons  had  counseyl  to  gydre  / 
And  dyde  do  crye  thurgh  the  hooste,  that  noman  shold  be  so  hardy 

16  to  departe  withoute  leue  /  ffor  yf  ony  wente,  they  shold  be  holden 
for  murdyTere,  And  Iustyce  shold  be  doon  to  suche  men  /  By  this 
ordenaunce  for  teschewe  the  payne  and  for  to  kepe  theyr  honour  Hw  great 

1     ^  *  "  barons  finally 

they  held  them  in  peas  in  thoost  /  And  obeyed  alle  in  pees  in  the  brought  the 
20  hooste,   And   obeyed   debonayrly  to  the   barons  of   thooste,   2As  obedience. 
Monkes  or  Cloystrers  to  theyr  Abbot,  withoute  depai-tyng1  ony  of 
theyr  company.2 

How  a  Cristen  man,  Emyrferius,  whiche  was  iu  An- 

24  thyoche,  3acqueynted  hym  with  Buymont  /  ?£*$ 

ca°  Cx° 
a       Nthyoche,  this   holy  cyte  that   I   haue  spoken  of   to   fore,  AHtiadiwa» 
was  conuerted  by  the  prechyng  of  seynt  peter  thappostle  /  ^p^'^Jjj^ 

28  alway  it  helde  wel  this  fayth,  and  yet  holdeth  certaynly,  god  be  aP°stle» 
thanked.    Wban  the  disloyalte  and  falsenes  of  mahomet  ran  thurgh 
thoryent  this  cyte  wold  neuer4  receyue  his  lawe,5  and  whan  the 
myghty  men  of  the  countre  wold  constrayne  them  by  force  to  this 

32  euyl  lawe,  they  deffended  them  well  ayenst  alle  suche,  wherof  it 
happed  that  whan  the  deuyl  had  sette  this  false  byleue  thurgh  alle 
the  londe  of  Perse  vnto  the  braas  of  seynt  George  /  and  fro  Inde 
vnto  spayne  /  this  cyte  abode  alway  in  the  fayth  of  the  trouthe  of  JP**^^ 

36  Ihesu  Criste  /  Trouthe  it  is  that  fourten  yere  to  fore  that  our  peple  «** •»*--"» 

1  Fr.  " sa  gentillesse,"  etc.,  to  his  rank,  etc. 

*— 2  Fr.  "comme  moines  cloistricrs  a  Inir  abe,  sans  partir  nullevicnl  dc  leur 
c&mpagnie."  *  Orig.  nener.  s  Fr.  M,  religion,  faith. 


1 68  The  Armenian  Emirferius  sends  Messengers  to  Bohemond.  [Ch.  CX. 

cam  theder  /  the  grete  Soudan  of  Perse  had  conqucrd  alle  the  londes 
vnto  Anthyoche  /  And  hy  cause  they  were  not  myghty  to  hold  it 
ony  lenger,  they  yelded?  it  vnder  the  puyssaunce  of  this  grete  man. 
Thenne  after  cam  oure  men  for  tassiege  it.     Almost  alle  they  of  the  4 
The  Chris-     toune  helde  the  fayth  of  oure  lord1.     But  withoute  fay  lie  they  had1 
p^wer  in  t"e  no  power  ne  noo  seygnorye  in  the  cyte,  ffor  they  medled  of  nothyng 
nfied  by  the*  sauf  theyr  craftes  and  theyr  merchaundyses  to  wynne  theyr  hreed  / 
Uhe  turkes  had  the  hataylles  /  and  wente  to  armes  whan  it  was  8 
nede.1     ther  was  none  so  hardy  of  the  cristen  men  that  durst  arme 
hym  /  and  specially  syth  our  peple  cam  to  fore  the  toun  The  cristen 
men  that  were  therin  were  holden  suspect  that  they  durst  not  yssue 
ne  goo  oute  of  theyr  howses  /  there  were  many  of  suche  cristen  men  12 
that  were  of  grete  lygnage,  to  whom  was  doii  moche  shame,     there 
There  wns      was  a  lygnage  of  noble  men  that  were  heremyens.     They  were 
Chri"«niiB«    named  in  theyr  langage  Bam  and1  Cyrra2  /  that  is  to  saye  the3  sones 
oi  Arme-       of  haubergyers  /And?  for  certeyn  of  the  same  langage  were  descended?  16 


111:1119 


theyr  lygnages,  and  yet  hen  ther  somme  that  make  hauberks  /  they 
had?  a  toure  whiche  was  named?  the  tour  of  the  two  sustres.    In  this 
toure  were  /  ij  /  bretheren  that  were  lordes  of  this  lygnage.     The 
The  ei.iest      oldest4  had?  to  Name  Emerferyus,5  a  moche  sage  and1  prudent  man  /  20 
Emerferius.    Acqueynted?  he  was  and1  pryue  with  the  lord*  of  the  toun,  in  suche 
wyse  that  he  had1  made  hym  his  notarye  within  the  palays  /  This 
man  herde  men  speke  moche  good?  of  Buymont  fro  the  begynnynge 
of  the  siege.     And1  wel  vnderstode  by  the  comyn  renommee  that  he  24 
was  a  wyse  man,  And?  trewe  of  grete  herte  and1  enterpryse  /  Ther- 
He  sent  mes-  fore  he  sente  to  hym  his  Messager  /  And1  acqueynted?  with  hym 
Bohemond  to  moche  6pryuely,  and  lete  hym  knowe  alle  the  beyng  &  state  of  the 
reveluo  wm  Cyte  /  and  the  PurP00S  of  tne  turkes  /  but  they  were  bothe  two  28 
uleTurkVin  wysemen,  therfor  coude  they  wel  couere  theyr  counntenannces  / 
the  city.        There  were  but  few  peple  about  buymont  that  knewe  hym. 

1— T  Mistranslation  owing  to  corrupt  original.  A.  gives  the  correct  read- 
ing. "Les  Turcs  avoicnt  les  baillics  et  aloient  as  armes  quant  mestier  estuit," 
"The  Turks  possessed  all  administrative  power,  and  went  to  war  when  neces- 
sary." Lat.  "solis  Turcis  et  infidclibus  militarc  licebat,  et  inajores  civitatis 
administrate  dignitatis." 

2  B.  gives  "Bam  and  Cyrra ; "  followed  by  Caxton.     A.  gives  Bar.  zarra. 

3  "  sons  of  the  cuirass  makers."  Lat.  "  Qui  dicebatur  Beni  Ferra,  quod  in 
lingua  latina  inter pretatur,  filii  loricatoris. " 

4  Orig.  oldesc.  6  Fr.  Emirferius.     Lat.  Emirfcirus. 


Ch.  CXI.]     He  offers  to  deliver  Antioch  to  him.  169 

Of  sorame  deuyses  that  the  sayd  Emyrferius  sente 
to  buymont,  &  in  what  maner  he  acorded  to 
delyuer  to  hym  the  toun.  ca°  Cxj° 

4  s  Euen  inonethes  had  tho  endured  the  siege  to  fore  the  toun  / 
Buymont  the  wyse  and  subtil  /  hat?  many  tymes  essayed*  his 
frende  of  the  toun  /  how  the  cyte  myght  be  yoldeti  to  the  cristen 
men.     So  ofte  he  sente  to  hym  by  his  sone  that  sayd  thus  to  hym  Emirferiu* 

8  in  this  manere  /  "  fayre  swete  syre,  I  trowe  certaynly  that  our  lord?  friendly  "mes- 

,  saxes  to 

Ihesu  Criste  wold  that  I  had  this  acqueyntaunce  with  you  and1  this  Bohemond, 
loue;  1ffor  euer  syth  I  haue  be  acqueynted  with  you,  myn  herte 
neuer  rested  to  drawe  and  acorde  euery  day  more  and1  more  in 

12  your  bonnte,1  and  your  maner  plesyd  me  moche  /  I  haue  veray 
ferme  &  fast  hope  that  I  and  the  myne  shal  be  yet  in  tyme 
comynge  moche  holpen  and  honoured  by  you2  of  this  thynge  that 
ye  haue  discouerid  to  me  /  of  which  I  haue  ben  merueyllously 

16  pensyf  /  syth  I  haue  herd!  of  it  /  I  haue  moch  counterpeysed3  the 

wayes  of  that  one  side  and  of  that  other,  ffor  I  thynke  wel  certeynly  and  Promi«- 

.       ,         ,  iiig  to  deli  vet 

that  yf  I  may  delyuer  my  countrey  fro  the  peple  that  ben  enerayes  the  city  u> 
•of  oure  lord1,  and1  rendre  and  delyuere  it  to  the  seygnorye  of  my 
20  fayth,  I  shal  haue  grete  guerdon  of  oure  lord  and  grete  honour  in 
the  world  /  But  yf  it  so  happed  thus  that  this  werke  were  des- 
couered  that  I  haue  enterprised,  to  fore  er  it  cam  to  an  ende  or 
conclusion  / 1  shold  be  delyuerd  to  alle  the  tormentes  of  the  world  /  notwith- 

'  "*  _         _  standing  that 

24  &  alle  my  lygnage  effaced  and  destroyed,  that  it  neuer  shold  be  h«  "^"^.J*^ 
spoken  of  after.     4And  neuertheles  many  thynges  be  put  in  aduen-  if  discovered. 
ture,4  therfore  I  wylle  discouere  to  you  alle  my  herte,  as  to  hym 
that  I  hold  for  a  trewe  frende  /  yf  the  barons  that  be  in  your  com- 

28  panye  wylle  graunte  as  trewe  men  as  they  be,  that  this  Cyte  shal 
be  youres  for  euermore  and  your  h  eyres  yf  it  may  be  conquerd  / 
5 1  shal  put  me  in  aduenture5  so  that  I  shal  delyuer  to  you  this  tour 
that  I  holde  /  whiche  is  moche  strong  and  wel  garnysshed  /  And  Thjsjie 

32  this  I  shal  doo  for  goddes  loue  and  youres  /  But  yf  they  entende  ^'fj?$e 
that  euery  men  shal  haue  his  part  /  as  of  thyng  goten  by  warre  /  ofBohemond. 

l— *  Fr.  "  Car  oncques  puis  que  jefus  de  vous  acointe,  ne  me  fina  le  cucr  de 
traire  a  accordcr  chascun  jour  de  plus  en  plus  a  vostre  bonte." 

2  Orig.  yon.  3  Fr.  centre  pensees,  carefully  weighed. 

*— 4  Fr.  " ct  neant  moins  dc  plusiers  choses  se  unci  Vcn  aventure" — viz.  "in 
several  resjtects  great  risks  are  to  be  run." 

5— ■  Fr.  "je  me  mettrai  en  aventure."  "  I  will  take  the  risk  on  myself  (t.  c. 
of  delivering  the  city  to  you)." 

1  k  * 


170         Bohemond  reveals  this  Offer  to  the  other  Princes.     [Ch.  CXII. 

therupon  wyl  I  not  laboure  ne  doo  payne  /  ffor  I  wote  neuer  to 

['  leaf  78]    what  ende  it  shold1  1come.     therfor  I  pray  you,  fayr  swete  syre  and 

uohemond  to  trew  frende,  that  ye  put  you  in  deuoyr  &  payne  that  this  toun  be 

labour  earn-  .  ,  " 

e»tiy  for  tiie    youres  /  not  for  couetyse,  but  for  the  prouffyt  of  the  cyte  Cnsten  /  4 

same  object.      „     T 

&  1  promyse  to  you  that  the  day  that  I  shal  knowe  that  it  shal 

be  thus  graunted  to  you,  I  shal  delyuer  to  you  the  entree  of  the 

did  mnsfbe    toun-     Alway  one  thynge  I  saye  to  you  for  certayn,  that  yf  it  be 

done  quickly,  not  niayde  within  short  tyme  that  ye  shal  neuer  day  of  the  -world  8 

u  succour      recouere  it  /  ffor  euery  day  come  to  the  lord  of  this  toun  lettres  and? 

from  beyond 

w*9Edali!uate8  messaoers  certefyeng1  that  they  that  come  to  socoure  the  toun  ben 
expected.       about  the  ryuer  of  eufrates  whiche  is  not  ferre  /  And  they  ben  wel 

a  .ij  /  C  /  M  /  men  of  Armes.    yf  they  come  an  you  on  that  one  syde  /  12 
And!  they  of  the  Cyte  on  that  other  /  ye  may  not  suffre  ne  with- 
stande  them  /  but  ye  shal  be  alle  deed  or  taken  /  And  therfore  take 
ye  here  vpon  hasty  counseyl." 

Howbuymont  discouerd  this  thynge  to  due  godeffroy,  16 
to  huon  the  mayne,  to  the  due  of  Normandye, 
and  to  therle  of  fflaundres  /     Capitulo  /  C  /  xij° 

f        Eo  the  day  that  buymont2  had  herd1  this  /  he  began  tenquyre3 

moche  subtylly  and  examyne  the  hertes  of  the  barons  /  And  20 
demaunded  them  otherwhyle  what  they  wold  doo  with  this  Cyte  yf 
it  were  taken  /  Of  the  ansuer  somme  of  them  thought  that  it  was 
Bohemond     fer  of  /  Therfore  taryed  buymont  to  discouere  his  herte  andl  his 

did  not  reveal 

his  plan  im-    thought  till  he  sawe  better  his  poynt  and  tvme  /  neuertheless  he  24 

mediately  to  B  v  J  "  ' 

an  tiie  other  drewe  a  part  due  godefroy,  huon  de  mayne,  the  due  of  normandye, 
and  therle  of  fflaundres.  To  them  he  sayde  that  he  trusted  so 
moche  in  oure  lord,  that  yf  the  cyte  myght  be  grauntedf  to  hyni  it 
uiyght  be  wel  in  short  tyme  conquerd.  They  a  corded  it  and  moche  28 
preysed  in  theyr  courage  the  wytte  of  this  man  that  had1  in  wylle 
ah  hut  the  to  accomplysshe  so  grete  a  thyng  /  By  thaccord  of  them  this  thyng 
louse  agreed    was  discouerd  to  therle  of  tholouse  /  he  ansuerd  that  he  wold  neuer 

that  the  town 

Bhouhtbe       yf  the  Cyte  were  taken  /  gyue  his  parte  to  another  man  /  The  32 

Bohemond  s,    J  J  I    oj  r  i 

ifsurren-       barons  prayd  hym  moche,  but  he  wold  not   consent e  therto  for 
nothynge  /  Therfor  the  thynge  was  in  suche  daunger  /  that  almost 
the  thynge  was  alle  loste  /  ffor  Buymont  put  not  the  payne  /  ne 
his  frende  of  the  toun  wold  not  but  yf  the  toun  shold  be  alle  his.  36 
Neuertheles  for  alle  this,  Buymont  sente  to  hym  ofte  grete  yeftes  for 

2  On'g.  bnymout.  3  Ori'j.  tenqnyic. 


Ch.  CXIII.]      Corbagat  collects  a  great  Army.  171 

to  kepe  hym  in  acqueyntaunce1  and  in  the  loue  that  was  begonne 
bytwene  them. 

Of  thev  grete  socours  that  the  Soudan  of  perse  had 
4  sente  to  them  2of  anthyoche,  and  how  Corbagat  p  if .78,  bk.] 

assyeged  rages  /  capitulo  /  Cxiij° 

i        N  the  whyle  that  thyse  thynges  ran  thus  in  Anthyoche  /  the 

messagers  that  fro  Ancean  were  goon  to  the  soudan  of  perse  Ancean's 
8  for  to  demannde  ayde  /  were  retorned  as  they  that  had  wel  don  now  re- 

J         '  J  turned, 

theyr  thynges,3  ffor  that  grete  prynce  atte  requeste  of  them  of 

Anthyoche,  And  atte  prayer  of  his  men,  had  enterprysed  to  efface 

and  destroye  alle  our  pylgryms  that  theder  were  comen  /  And  ther- 

12  fore  he  sente  theder  grete  plente  of  Turkes  and  of  cordyns4  in  to 

this  countre  /  And  had  delyuerd  all  the  seygnorye  and  gouernaunce  and  reported 
of  the  hooste  to  one  his  acqueynted5  /  ffor  he  trusted  moche  in  his  army  was 

*       rf  '  coming  to  aid 

wytte  /  in  his  loyalte  /  and  in  his  prowesse  /  This  man  was  named  ^'''^J.'- "": 

16  Corbagat,  he  commaunded  alle  men  to  obeye  to  hym.     he  sente 

lettres  pendantes6  oueral  his  londes,  and  commaunded  that  they 

shold  be  delyuerd  ouer  alL  that  where  he  shold  lede  them  /  that 

they  shold  goo  /  And  alle  that  he  commaunded  them  they  shold 

20  doo  without  contradiction  /  he  departed  fro  his  countrey  with  alle 

his  peple  and  his  power  /  he  passed  so  ferre  that  he  cam  in  to  the 

countre  of  rages  /  Ther  was  told  to  hym  that  one  of  the  barons  of 

ffraunce  helde  the  Cyte  of  Rage3  whiche  he  had  conquerd,  and  alle 

24  the  londe  aboute  it.     He  had  therof  grete  despyte  /  and  sayd  to  wiio  ordered 

O  fj        i  J  the  city  of 

fore  and  er  he  passed  the  Byuer  of  Eufrates  /  he  shold  take  the  »»ge8  to  be 

r  J  '  attacked  at 

toun  and  destroye  alle  the  frensshemen  that  he  shold  fynde  within  /  01,ce- 
Bawdwyn  was  not  of  lityl  courage,  And  had  wel  herd  tydynges  of 
28  this  peple  /  he  had  wel  carnysshed  his  Cyte  with  armes,  vytaylles,  But  Baldwin 

r    *         '  °  m  was  well  pre- 

and  noble  men  /  And  doubted  but  lytil  his  comynge  /  ne  the  men-  pared  with 

aces,  ne  the  grete  wordes  of  thyse  peple  that  were  reported  to  hym  /  men» 

Corbagat  commaunded  that  the  cyte  of  rages  shold  be  assieged  /  And 

32  after  dyde  do  crye  to  assault  /  grete  peyne  dyde  they,  wenyng  to  haue 

taken  the  cyte  and  alle  them  that  were  theiin  /  But  they  that  kept  and  defended 
*  ill    jug  [0WI1  wen. 

the  toun  deffended  them  moche  wel,  in  suche  wyse  that  they  en- 

1  Orig.  acqneyntannce. 

3  Fr.  bcxrmgncs,  duties.  *  Lat.  Citrdinorum. 

5  Fr.  "un  sien  acointe"  one  of  his  trusted  friends. 
•  Fr.  lettres  pendantes,  letters  with  hanging  seals. 


172    Corbagat' s  Delay  before  Rages  saved  the  Crusaders.    [Ch,  CXIV. 

dommaged?  nioche  them  that  were  without,  And  they  within  loste 
After  tinee     no  thynge.     They  helde  theui  about  the  toun  thre  wekes,  he  had? 

weeks'  fruit- 

less  siege,      no  worship  ne  prouff  yt  there.     At  laste  the  grete  and  noble  men  of 

thooste  cam  to  hym  /  And  sayde  and  counseylled  hym  to  departe  4 

fro  the  siege  /  ffor  he  ought  fyrst  do  that  thyng  for  whiche  he  cam  / 

corbagat  was  that  is  to  saye,  for  to  take  and  slee  alle  them  that  were  to  fore 

on  to  An-       Anthyoche.     And  after  in  his  retornyng  in  a  morowtyde  he  shold 

tioch. 

haue  the  toun  of  Rages.     And*  Bawdwyn,  yf  he  were  not  deed,  8 
p  leaf  79]    they  shold  take  and!  bynde  ahym,  And'  preseute  hym  to  theyr  lord' 

as  a  sheep  or  a  moton.  he  acorded!  to  theyr  counseyl  and  departed 
But  thu delay  fro  thens.  But  allewaye  the  taryeng  that  the  turkes  had  made 
the  crusaiers  sauyd  oure  pylgryuis2  /  ffor  the  mater  was  not  so  acorded  bytwene  12 

before  An-  *  . ~.  ' 

tioch.  Buyinont  and  his  frende,  that  yf  they  had?  comen  strayt  to  Anthy- 

oche /  oure  men  had?  ben  in  ouer  grete  meschyef  bytwene  them  that 
he  brought3  /  and  the  other  turkes  that  were  in  the  toun. 

How  our  men  beyng  aduertysed4  of  the  grete  hooste  16 
of  corbagat,  sente  somme  of  theyr  knyghtes  for  to 
esteme  them  /  And  what  they  reported  of  that 
they  had  seen  /  ca°  Cxiiij° 

t       He  tydynges  began  strongly  to  growe  of  this  people  that  cam  /  20 
And  it  was  no  merueyll  yf  they  were  effrayed!  in  the  hooste  of 

the  pylgryms  /  The  barons  assembled1  in  counseyl  /  And1  ordeyned 
The  Chris-  by  comyn  acord  /  that  somme  of  theyr  wy  semen  that  uhderstode  / 
some  or  their  them  in  suche  thynges  as  to  esteme  peple  in  the  felde  shold  goo  24 

best  warriors  .  ,.  .  _.  i       -vr    11 

to  inspect  the  and  knowe  their  couyne  /  to  this  were  chosen  JJreues  de  JN  elle, 
my,  and        Clarembault  de  venduel  /  Euerard'5  de  cherysy  /  &  Remind1,  therle  of 

report.  ' 

toul  /  They  ledde  with  them  other  knyghtes,  knowen  and  preuyd? 

in  Armes  /  they  departed?  fro  thoost  so  ferre,  that  they  approuched?  28 

the  turkes,  whom  they  sawe  and?  fulowed  them  fro  fer  /  Neuertheles 

they  wel  apperceyued,  that  lyke  as  water  renneth  in  the  see,  cam 

fro  alle  partes  grete  rowtes  and?  merueyllous  plente  of  peple  in  this 

hooste  of  Corbagat.     Thise  noble  men  wente  so  ferr  that  they  sawe  32 

They  re-        and  knewe  alle  theyr  beyng  and?  strengthe  /  And1  syth  drewe  them 

repovtedthnt  to  the  barons,  and*  sayd  to  them  the  trouthe  /  The  barons  prayde 

!umy!  * v  '    and  deffended  them  also,  dere  as  they  had?  the  werk  of  oure  lord  / 

that  they  wold  not  descouere  this  thyng  to  the  foote  men  of  thoost  36 

2  Orig.  prlgryns.  3  Orig.  brought.  4  Orig.  adnertysed. 

0  Caxton's  text  gives,  Everard  de  Chcrisi,  A.,  aud  the  Lat.  Girart  do  Cherisi. 


Ch.  CXV.]     Tlvc  Crusaders  prqmre  for  the  Coming  of  Cvrhagat.    173 

in  no  wyse  /  but  kepe  it  secrete  fro  them  /  ffor  it  shold  be  gTetc 
peryll  y£  they  knewe  the  trouth  that  they  shold  flee  away  by 
nyght  /  And  be  alle  in  de6payr  / 

4  Of  the  counseyl  that  our  pcple  toke  for  to  ordeyne 
theyr  nedes  whan  they  knewe  the  comyng  of  this 
right  grete  hoost1  /  ca°  Cxv° 

t        He  barons  toke  counseyl  /  on  whom  the  faites  and  burthon  of  The  baron* 

*     '  .  «  .     look  counsel 

8  this   werke   laye,  how    they  myght    conteyne   them    in    this  "^"^{J81 

greuows  poynt  in  which e  they  were  /  som  ther  were  that  gaf  coun-  do,,e- 
seyl  that  they  shold  departe  fro  the  siege  /  And  that  somme  of 
them  2on  horsbak  /  and  they  on  foote  shold  abyde  for  to  kepe  that  p  if.  t<j,  bk.] 
12  they  of  the  toun3  shold  not  mowe  ioyne  to  the  other.     And  somme 
other  the  best  horsed  shold  lede  of  them  on  foote  a  grete  partye 
ayenst  Corbagat,  and  fyght  ayenst  hym  /  The  thyng  was  in  grete  Everybody 

J  o      '  »o^  wag  |n  gle.lt 

doubte,  And  wyste  not  how  to  accorde.     Buymont,  whan  he  sawe  perpiexiiy. 
16  them  so  surprised  called  the  Due  Godeffroy,  therle  of  fflaundres  / 
Huon  de  mayne,  the  due  of  normandye,  &  therle  of  tholouse  / 
And  syth  sayd  to  them  thise  wordes  /  "  ffayr  lordes,  I  see  you  in 
moche  grete  doubte,  and  it  is  no  merueyl  /  ffor  the  comynge  of  this  Bohemond 

•     1        T_  L        rn:lde  a 

20  puyssaunt  man  that  cometh  on  vs  and  bryngeth  with  hym  so  grete  cpeed.,  »ho«-- 

1     J  ing  the  des- 

plente  of  our  enemyes.     Ne  ye  be  not  yet  acorded  m  what  maner  permtenee*  of 

1  J  J  J  their  eon- 

ye  shal  attende,  ne  what  shal  be  your  countenaunce  whan  he  shal  <iition, 
come  /  Ne  I  can  not  saye  to  you  as  me  semeth  thyng  that  by  this 

24  way  may  moche  auaylle  /  ffor  yf  we  yssue  alle  ayenst  the  turkes  / 
lyke  as  somme  men  counseylle,  somme  in  one  partye  /  And  that 
other  to  abyde  /  as  other  counseyl,  we  haue  loste  our  payne  and 
oure  dispencis  in  the  siege  of  this  toun,  ffor  as  sone  as  we  shal 

28  departe  fro  hens,  or  alle,  or  half  /  they  that  comen  shal  sende  in  to 
the  toun  grete  plente  of  vytaylles,  and  fresshe  men  put  in  to  it.  yf 
noman  abyde  at  the  siege  this  shal  be  good  for  them  to  doo.  And 
yf  ther  abyde  a  parte  they  shal  not  leue  for  them,  for  whan  we  be 

32  alle  to  gydre,  vnnethe  maye  we  constrayne  them  of  the  toun.  thenne 
the  fewe  that  shal  abyde  /  how  may  they  haue  the  force  and  myght 
ayenst  them  within  /  Therfor  me  thyncketh  that  we  muste  seche  and  declaring 
other  remedye  and  counseyl,4  that  we  may  fynde  maner  how  this  means  than 

.  forcible  onus 

36  cyte  maye  be  yolden  to  vs,  And?  that  we  maye  be  within  to  fore  er  mo*  i* 
thyse  turkes  come,  this  shal  be  a  more  sure  thyng  /  yf  ye  demaunde 

1  Orig.  hooost.  3  Orig.  tonii.  *  Orig.  connseyl. 


174     The  Barons  decide  to  accept  the  Offer  of  Emir/erius.     [Ch.  CXVL  .  * 

how  this  maye  be  /  I  shal  shewe  you  the  way  and  manere  how  it 

h«  then  «-    shal  wel  be  as  me  semeth  /  I  haue  a  frende  in  this  Cyte,  a  trewe 

plan  of         man  and  wyse,  after  that  I  can  apperceyue.    we  haue  couenaunted,1 

he  and1 1  to  gydre,  wherfor  he  ought  to  delyuer  to  me  a  tour  moche  4 

strong  and  wel  garnysshed  of  alle  that  nedeth,  whiche  he  holdeth  / 

whan  I  shal  demaunde  hym  /  I  muste  gyue  to  hym  thus  doyng  a 

grete  partye  of  my  good  and  hauoyr  and  franchyses   and  other 

Thi»  can  be    alyaunces  muste  kepe  to  hym  and  hys.     But  this  maye  not  be  /  8 

only  on  con-  but  that  eche  of  you  gyue  ouer  his  part  to  me,  And  quyte  hym  of 

dition  that  ,  _  .         -      ,       -       ,  . 

the  city  be     ony  part  of  the  cyte,  that  it  shal  abyde  to  me  &  to  myn  heyres 

given  to  Bo-  *  «.  i  •>  11  .  »     « 

hemond  «nd   for  euermore,  ffor  other  wyse  he  entendeth  not  that  shall  delyuer 

his  heirs  for  '  J  J 

ever.  hit.  yf  it  plese  you,  in  this  maner  ye  may  haue  the  toun.     And  if  12 

ye  wil  graunte  this,  2I  somone  and  warne  you  to  fere  in  suche  wyso, 
[» leaf  so]  that  thyse  couenauretes  3be  wel  accomplysshed  by  godes  grace2  / 
And  yf  it  plese  you  not  /  And  ye  maye  fynde  ony  other  maner,  I 
am  redy  tacquyte  alle  my  parte  to  one  of  you  /  or  to  another  of  oure  1 6 
companye  /  yf  he  wyl  delyuer  to  vs  the  Cyte  /  And  god  knoweth 
It  shal  plese  me  wel,  And  I  shal  be  right  ioyous  in  good  fayth." 

How  after  that  Buymont  had  declared  his  fayte  to  alle 
the  hooste,  they  acorded  that  the  toun  shold  be  20 
his  /  sauf  the  Erie  of  Tholouse  /      Capitulo  Cxvj° 

Ti.e  barons     w      Han  the  barons  herd  this  /  they  had  grete  ioye  in  their  hertes, 
agiS £> this,  and  anon  acorded  to  this  that  buymont  requyred  /  euery  man 

EaViof  graunted  his  part  that  he  shold  be  quyte  therof,  except  only  therle  24 
of  tholouse,  whiche,4  in  a  reuerrye  wheryn  he  was,  sayde  /  that  he 
wold  not  acquyte  his  part,  ne  gyue  it  ouer5  to  noman  lyuyng*.  The 
other  barons  promysed  certeynly  to  holde  it  /  And  gaf  to  hym  theyr 
fayth  that  they  shold  not  discouere  it  to  noman  /  They  prayd  hym  28 
that  he  wold  wysely  brynge  this  mater  aboute,  And  dyly  gently 
laboure  taccomplisshe  it  /  ffor  grete  peryll  myght  come  in  the 
taryeng  of  it  /  The  counseyl  departed  /  thus.  This  Buymont,  which 
was  wyse  and   trewe,  spak  to   the  messager6  that  knewe  theyr  32 

1  Orig.  couenauuted. 

2— 2  Caxton  seems  to  have  misunderstood  his  French  text.  Fr.  "je  le  (i.  e. 
Emir  ferius)  semondrai  de  convenances,  telement  que  la  chose  sera  Men  accompli 
a  Vaide  Dieu,"  viz.,  I  will  summon  him  to  keep  his  agreement,"  etc. 

4  Fr.  "qui  par  une  reverie  ou  il  estoit  cntri,"  L  e.  who  on  account  of  a  fit 
of  obstinacy  into  which  he  had  fallen.  5  Orig.  oner. 

6  Lat.  "  Amicum  solilis  convenit  nuntiis." 


Ch.  CXVI.]     Emirferius  arranges  for  the  Surrender.  175 

couyne  /  And  sente  hym  to  his  frende  /  And  bad  hym  saye  that  Bnhemond 

the  barons  had  graunted  to  hym  that  the  toun  shold  be  hoolly  his  ine»»enger, 

with  moclie  glad  chere  /  Therfor  he  somoned  hym  by  his  fayth  /  summoning 

4  that  he  shold  accomplysshe  this  next  nyght   hooly  that   he    had  to  fuim  hi* 

i    i  ,   „  ,,  ,  ,,      ,   .  .,  ,     promise,  and 

promysed  hym  /  One  thynge  happen  this  same  day  that  was  moch  deliver  up 
helpyng  to  this  werke  /  &  to  thaccomplisshyng  therof  /  ffor  this 
frende   of    buymont    named    Emyrferyus   entremedled    moche   of 
8  thaffayres  and1  thynges  of  ancean  and  of  the  toun.     This  same  day  nib  *ame 
whan  he  was  besy  in  this  werke  /  he  sente  his  sone,  that1  was  tho  tetixuwa» 
grete  to  his  hows  for  to  fetche  somwhat  /  whan  he  cam  to  the  tour  wroti!°wTtii 
hastely  /  he  founde  that  one  of  the  grete  admyrals  of   the  toun  *"*'  emir* 

it  io  i     i   i     »        •»!     i  •  i  i  ,  of  the  town. 

12  pleyed^  and  deled  with  his  moder.  whan  he  sawe  this  /  he  had 
so  grete  sorowe  in  his  herte  that  he  ran  agayn  to  his  fader  / 
And!  told!  to  hym  lyke  as  he  had  founden  it.  The  fader  was  a 
moche   wyseman,  And  was   moche  sore   angry,  And   sayd!   thyse 

16  wordes  to  his  sone:  "  Fayr  sone,  it  semeth  not  ynowgh  to  thyse 
fals  houndes  that  they  take  fro  vs  alle  that  we  haue,  and  kepe  vs 
fowle  in  their  seruage.  But  with  this  /  they  doo  vs  alle  the  shame 
that  they  maye  /  By  the  ayde  of  Ihesu  criste,  sin  whom  I  byleue  /  p  if.  so,  bk.j 

20  I  shal  laboure  and1  doo  payne  to  fynde  the  maner  by'whiche  theyr 
power  and  myght  shal  be  lassed,  mynnysshed,  and!  shorted1  /  And! 
they  shal  haue  guerdon  for  the  euyl  that  they  haue  don  to  vs."  he 
made  thenne  no  semblaunt4  of  Angre  that  he  had  /  But  sente  his  He  concealed 

24  sone  to  buymont  anon  by  the  maner  that  he  was  acustomed  to  goo,  Mitiwj  to" 
And!  badde  hym  that  he  shold  be  redy.  ffor  as  to  hym  he  wold  hold  that  he 
hym  this  nyght  alle  his  couenauntes5  /  he  badde  hym  also  that  alle  ready  ■*■* 

r>  night. 

the  Barons  of  thooste  shold  yssue  oute  about6  none,  euery  man 
28  armed!  in  his  bataylle,  And!  make  semblaunt  for  to  goo  ayenst 
Corbagat.  And!  after  in  the  begynnyng1  of  the  nyght  to  retorne 
agayn  pryuely  withoute  noyse  /  And  kepe  them  so  armed!  and1  redy 
to  doo  that  shal  be  sayd  to  them  aboute  mydnyght.  Buymont"  Bohemond 
32  was  moche  ioyous  /  whan  he  herd  this  message  /  And  aftir  ledde  baron* Vm 
hym  to  fore  the  barons,  to  whom  this  thyng  was  discouerd  /  And  they  heard 

it  .       ,,  ,,  .  iiii  i  .    j  this  message. 

made  hym  saye  in  theyr  presence  the  wordes  as  he  had  brought  / 
The  barons,  whan  they  herd  hym,  were  moche  Ioyous  /  And8  sayd 
36  wel  that  this  counseyl  was  good  and  faythful,  and  of  grete  courage 
acorded  therto  / 

1  Fr.  "quil  avoitja  grant,"  viz.  "  who  was  now  grown  up." 

2  B.  jouoit  avec  sa  mere.     A.  gisoit  avcc  m  mere.         *  Orig.  semblannt. 

5  Orig.  couenauutes.         6  Orig.  abeut.         "  Orig.  Bnymont.         *  Orig.  Ainil. 


The  people 
of  the  town 
had  hegun 
to  suspect 
treachery. 


176    The  people  of  Antioch  were  suspicious  of  Treachery.  [Ch.  CXVII. 

How  they  of  Anthyoche  had  fere  of  treson  /  And 
how  they  assembled  in  counseyl  /  And  of  that 
whiche  Emyrferius  deposed  there  at  / 

Capitulo  .C  /  xvij°  4 

o       Ne  thyng  happed  in  this  toun  /  that  is  acustomed'  ofte  to  come 
in  grete  werkes  /  They  that  had  the  kepyng  and*  charge  of  the 
tonn  /  began  to  haue  suspection  within  theyr  hertes,  and*  deuyned! 
that  the  Cyte  sholdf  be  by  trayed  /  they  knewe  no  reson  ne  how  /  8 
ne  they  apperceyuedf  no  grete  semblaunce  /  But  alway  that  one  spak 
to  that  other  of  the  grete  men  /  And1  them  semed  that  it  shold  falle. 
So  nioche  aroos  this  murmur  and  wordes,  that  they  assembled  to 
fore  Ancean  lord  of  the  toun  /  And  told  to  hym  that  his  men  12 
had  such  fere,  &  it  was  not  without  reson,  ffor  the  cristen  men 
were  in  the  toun,  and  were  in  doubte  that  by  them  dommage 
myght  come  to  the  Cyte  /  They  ledde  so  Ancean  with  wordes  that 
they  made  hym  to  be  aferd  also  /  Anon  he  sente  for  hym  that  was  16 
named!  Emyrferyus,  And  told  to  hym  how  this  worde  ranne  about  / 
And  by  cause  he  helde  hym  for  a  wyseman  /  he  demaunded  what 
counseyl  he  wold  gyue  here  on  /  he,  that  was  sharp  of  entendement 
&  apperceyuyng*,  knewe  anon  /  that  his  lord  demaunded  thy  so  20 
wordes  for  to  knowe,  yf  he  shold  answere  ony  thyng1,  By  1  whiche 
he  shold  be  suspecte.    And  knewe  wel  that  this  assemblee  was  there 
made  by  cause  they  had  suspection  /  he  thought  wel  to  brynge  them 
out  of  this  wenyng  by  his  answere  /  and  sayd  :  "  Fayr  lordes,  ye  be  24 
hye,  noble,  and  wy semen,  2ye  ought  to  conne  them  good  thancke  / 
And  the  lord  specially  of  this  that  they  ymagyne  and:  doubte  of 
trayson2  /  ffor  in  so  grete  a  thyng  as  ye  haue  to  kepe  /  ought  to  be 
doubted!  alle  that  may  be  falle  /  ffor  we  be  in  peryll  of  our  lyues  of  28 
oure  franchyses  /  of  wyues,  of  Chylderen  /  and  herytages  /  3Thise 
ben  thynges  that  ought  to  be  well  vnderstanden  and  kepte3  /  But 
me  semeth  that  by  two  wayes  maye  be  gyuen4  counseyl  in  this 
thyng  in  suche  wyse,  that  yf  ony  were  vntrew  &  suche  a  traytre  32 
that  wold1  destroye  his  countrey  he  shold  haue  no  power  /  This 


Ancean  sent 
for  Emirle- 
rius,  ami 
asked  his 
advice  in  this 
matter. 


[i  leaf  81] 


Etnirferius 
replied  that 
in  two  ways 
this  danger 
<if  treason 
initjlit  he 
ai'crted. 


2-2  Caxton's  translation  is  unintelligible.  Fr.  "Moult  vos  doivent  tons 
ceaulx  de  la  vile  scavoir  bon  gri,  et  Ic  seigneur  principalcment,  de  ce  que  vous 
ymaginczet  doubtez  de  trayson,"  etc.,  viz.  "all  the  people  of  the  town  ought 
to  be  grateful  to  you,  especially  the  lords,  because  you  are  on  your  guard 
against  treason." 

a— 3  Fr.  "  ce  soni  choscs  ou  Ven  doit  bicn  entendre  a  garder." 

4  Orig.  gynen. 


Ch.  CXVIIL]     Good  Advice  given  the  Turks  by  Emirfcrius.  177 

thynge  myght  not  be  don  ne  spoken  of  but  by  them  that  haup  the 
toures  in  kepyng  /  Therfor  me  thynketh  yf  ye  haue  suspection 
her  of  ye  may  wel  remedye  it,  By  ofte  remeuyng  them  fro  theyr  Hmt,  ciian^ 
4  places,  ffor  this  thyn0e  may  not  be  deuysed  but1  by  moche  grete  thetowen. 
leyser.  And  whan  ye  chauwge  them  thus  ofte  /  in  suche  wyse  that 
they  that  be  here  this  nyght  /  shal  be  sette  the  next  nyght  fer 
thons  /  2  where  he  shal  haue  no  knowleche,2  &  her  by  ye  shal  take  Second,  do 

'  '  J    J  not  let  the 

8  fro  them  alle  the  ease  for  to  commune  or  speke  of  ony  trayson  "  /  men  kl':1"' 

r  j  j  i    where  they 

whan  they  herd  this  couraseyl  that  this  cristen  man  emyrferytts  gat'  "ln°ed 
to  them  /  they  acorded  alle  well  therto  /  &  by  this  fylle  from  them 
alle  the  suspection  fro  theyr  hertes  that  they  had  ayenst  them  /  & 

12  thus  as  he  had  deuysed  sholdf  haue  don  yf  it  had  not  ben  so  late, 
for  it  was  nyght  /  and  so  grete  remeuyng3  myght  not  be  made  but 
by  space  of  tyme  /  The  lord  commaunded  them  to  kepe  alle  the  cyte 
hoolly  /  Thus  departed  they  fro  the  counseyl  /  Emyrferyus  that  Bmirferius 

16  sawe  wel  that  the  thynge  that  he  had?  enterprised*  /  yf  he  and*  Buy-  hemustmak* 
mont4  hasted*  not  /  that  it  shold  neuer  take  good1  ende  /  Therfor  he 
thought  moche  to  brynge  his  purpoos  to  effect  without  that  ony  man 
shold  perceyue  it  / 

20  Of  the  meschyef  that  the  turkes  made  euery  daye  to 
the  cristen  men  that  were  in  Anthyoche  enhabyt- 
yng  with  them.  ca°  Cxviij" 

f       Ro  the  begynnyng5  that  the  Cyte  was  assyeged  /  the  turkes  of  inthebeRin- 

,      ,     .  ~  ningoftbe 

24  the  toun  had   in  great  suspection  the  Grekes,  Suvryens  and1  »'<*«,  the 

heremyns,  and  generally  alle  the  other  Cristen  men  that  duellyd  in  tians  haA 
Anthyoche.    wherof  it  happed*  that  the  poure  Cristen  men  that  had  awaJ- 
not  in  theyr  howses  garnyson  sufficiant  for  longe  tyme  /  they  made 

28  cthem  to  voyde  the  toun  and1  alle  theyr  meyne,  ffor  they  wold*  not  [8  if.  si,  u.-.] 
that  the  Cyte  were  charged!  ne  encombied  with  them  /  They  reteyned 
the  ryche  men  within  by  cause  they  had  vytayll  ynowgh  /  they 
kepte  them  strayte,  and  by  fals  occasions  robbed  them  euery  daye,  The  rich  ones 

32  and  toke  fro  them  alle  theyr  thynges.     They  chaced  them  to  the  kept  were 

.      m  daily  robbed, 

labours  and  werkes  of  the  toun  /  yf  they  had  walles  for  to  make  and'abused. 
or  amende  /  They  bare  the  stones,  the  morter,  and  sande ;  yf  they 
wolde  adresse  engyns  for  to  caste  stones  /  or  other  Instrumontes  of 
36  warre  they  muste  drawe  the  cordes,  And?  neuer  as  longe  as  they 

1  Orig.  bnt.         2—a  Fr.  "  nu  ilzn'auront  nulle  cognoisscmcc." 

3  Orig.  remeuyug.         *  Orig.  Buyuont.         6  Orig.  begynnyng. 

GODFREY.    '  N 


178  Treatment  of  the  Christians  in  Antioch.     [Ch.  CXVIII. 

fonde  cristen  men  they  sought  none  other  for  to  doo  suche  werkes  / 
The  Turks  And1  whan  they  had  trauaylled?  longe  /  in  stede  of  rewardes  /  they 
and  drove*     ledde  them  and  bete  them  thurgh  the  stretes  in  suche  wyse,  that 

lliem  to  °  J       ' 

labour.  they  had  leuer  to  haue  ben  caste  out1  of  the  toun  atte  begynnynge  4 

with  the  other  2than  to  be  receyued  with  thyse  fals  houndes, 
that  thus  greued  them  of  the  toun  that  were  cristen  /  Thus  were 
they  acordedf.  viij  /  dayes  to  fore  to  speke  to  Emyrferyus,  frende  of 

They  had  at-   Buymont  /  that  they  wolde  slee  alle  the  cristen  men,  and  had1  don  8 

ready  decided  .    _ 

to  kin  ail  the  it2  yf  one  of  the  admyrals  of  the  toun  had  not  letted  /  and  empes- 

ChrUtiai.9  ill  J  _  J  '  r 

the  city.  shed  it  /  which  was  alway  pryue  and  frende  of  the  cristen  men.  he 
made  to  delaye  it  /  vij  dayes  by  this  reason,  ffor  he  sayd?  to  them  : 
"Fayr  sirs,  I  hope  that  the  cristen  men  that  haue  assieged  vs  shal  12 
departe  fro  the  siege  with  in  viij  dayes  for  doubte  of  corbagat  which 
cometh  /  &  yf  they  departe,  why  shal  we  slee  the  cristen  meu 
that  ben  in  this  toun  /  And!  yf  they  departe  not,  thenne  maye  ye 
doo  as  ye  haue  deuysed!."  Thyse  .viij.  dayes  were  now  passed,  in  1G 
suche  wyse  that  it  was  commaunded?  moche  pryuely  to  them  that 

This  very       had?  the  charge,  that  they  shold!  slee  them  the  same  nyght.  thenwe 

night  was  .  iiiii  r 

set  for  the      the  same  day  at  none    it  was   cryedf   thurgh   the   hooste  of   the 

massacre. 

pylgryms  /  that  alle  they  that  had    horses  were  armed1,  and!   to  20 
drawe  euery  man  to  his  bataylle,  where  he  was  constituted  and* 
ordeyned?  /  for  to   doo   that   theyr   Captayns   shold   commaunde 
them.     The  men  on  foote  knewe  nothyng1  what  they  shold  doo  /  ne 
the  horsmen  neyther  /  sauf  they  that  buymont   had  aduertysed.  24 
TheOnisn-     thus3  departed  they  fro  thoost  alle  in  ordenaunce  /  It  semedf  wel 

ders,  this  day,  .  i   ■     / 

ordered  their  that  they  wold?  goo  ferre  /  They  wente  forth  tyl  it  was  nygnt  / 

army  forth 

out  of  camp—  whan  it  was  derke  it  was  commaunded  that  they  sholde  retorno 

to  return 

quietly  at       agayn  secretely  without  ony  noyse  /  And  that  they  shold  holde  them  28 

dark-  armed  in  theyr  lodgys.     This  valyaunt  man  Emyrferius,  of  whom  I 

haue  spoken  to  fore,  had  a  brother  with  hym,  But  he  was  not  of 

suche  courage  as  he  was  /  the  good?  man  had  sayd?  no  thynge  to 

p  leaf  82]    hym  of  that  he  purposed?  to  doo  /  ffor  he  doubted?  moche  4he  wold?  32 

Emirferius     not  be  agreable  therto  /  They  were  to  gydere  in  the  tour  at  the  hour 

brother  in      of  none  whan  the  bataylles  yssued?  of  thooste,  they  behelde  it  by  the 

the  tower 

1  Crig.  ont. 

*— 2  The  wrong  division  of  the  sentence,  and  the  omission  of  some  words, 
has  rendered  the  translation  obscure.  Fr.  "  que  d'etre  retenuz.  Ce  ne  souffisoU 
mie  a  ces  desloyaulz  chitns  quilz  grevoient  aiiisi  la  chrtsticrntz  de  la  vill-e,  aina 
s'estoieiU  accordis  VIII  jours  award — qu'ilz  parlassent  a  Vamy  dc  Buymont, 
quilz  les  occiroient  tous ;  et  pUca  il  eust  iUfaict."  *  Orig.  thns. 


Ch.  CXIX.]     Emirferius  tries  his  Brother  about  tlie  Christians.     179 

batayllementes.     Emyrferyus  wold1  preue  and  knowe  the  courage  of  JJJa^«  JJ^ 
his  broder  whiche  was  yonger  than  he  /  And  sayd  to  hym  /  "Fayr 
swete  broder,  I  haue  moche  grete  pyte  of  thyse  hye  men  thai  thou  g^*^"to 
4  seest  there,  ffor  they  be  of  oure  creaunce,  moche  faythful  andf  good  £&*•£»»- 
cristen  men.    Now  ryde  they  also  surely,  As  yf  they  ought  nothyng  «g  *°ff«- 
to  doubte,  And  their  deth  is  ful  nygh  them,  ffor  it  may  not  be  that 
they  may  resiste  ayeust  them  that  come  /  and  ayenst  them  of  the 
8  toun1  /  And  yf  they  knewe  it  I  trowe  they  wold  take  other  coun- 
seyl."  his  broder  answerd  /  "this  is  a  moch  folyssh  pyte  that  thou 
hast  /  And2  I  see  the  in  a  grete  musardye.     Certainly  it  shold  plese  g***^ 
me  wel  /  that  the  turkes  had  nowe  smeton  of  alle  their  heedes,  and  "J™*** 

12  slayn  them  alle  that  thou  seest  there  departe  /  And  alle  the  other  g&ftE. 
in  lyke  wyse,  ffor  neuer  syth  they  entred  in  to  this  londe  /  we  had  *  cut  off- 
neuer  good  day  ne  one  good  nyght,  but  haue  made  vs  suffre  many 
euilles  by  thoccasion  of  their  comyng  /  &  therfor  I  may  not  loue 

16  them.  But3  I  Avoid  that  they  shold  haue*  an  euyl  endyng1,  and  that 
right  soone."  whan  emyrferyus  had  herd  thyse  wordes  he  doubted 
to  fore  what  to  saye  to  his  broder  of  his  purpoos.  but  fro  this  forth 
he  doubted  nomore  /  and  began  to  hate  hym  moche  in  his  courage  / 

20  he  thought  wel  that  by  hym  myght  be  destroubled  the  gTete 
avauncement5  of  Cristendom.  Therfore  he  was  in  grete  anguysshe 
how6  he  myght  delyuer  hym  / 

Of  the  dilygence  that  buymont  made  in  this  werke  / 
24  And   how   Emyrferyus    slewe   his   brother,   and 

delyuerd  the  toun  to  the  cristen  men  / 

Capitulo  Cxix0 

b       Uymont  slepte  not  this  nyght,  ffor  he  shold  haue  ben  moche 
28  displesyd  /  yf  by  his  neclygence  this  werke  shold  be  taryed*. 

He  wente  ofte  to  the  Barons,  that  knewe  of  this  thynge,  for  to  be  That  night, 
counseylled  /  He  helde  in  his  honde  a  laddre  of  cordes,  moche  {^p^.8 
suhtylly  made  /  Aboue,  it  shold  be  fasted  to  the  creneaux7  of  the  jjjjyjj* 
32  walle,  with  good  and  stronge  crochettes  of  yron,  And  for  to  fastne 
also   in   therthe.     whan  it  cam   aboute   mydnyght  /  he  toke  his 
messager,  that  knewe  his  secrete  pryuely  /  And  sente  hym  to  his 

1  Orig.  tonn.  2  Fr.  "dc  grant  musardec  tc  voipenscr." 

3  Orig.  Bnt.  4  Orig.  haue.  5  Orig.  auauncement. 

6  Fr.  "Comment  il  s'en  porroit  drtirrrr,"  viz.   "how  he  might  get  rid  of 
him."  7  Orig.  crcueaux  ;  Fr.  creneaux,  loop  holes. 

N    2 


180  Emirferius  hills  his  Brother.        [Ch.  CXIX. 

BohemornVs   frende  to  knowe  /  yf  it  were  yet  tyme  that  he  shold1  approuche  to 

weiuCtoger      the  wallys,  ffor  hym  thought  that  alle  the  Cyte  was  in  moche  peas 

[I'if.'sXbk.]  and!  reste  /  whan  this  messager  cam  /  he  had*  hym  abyde  * there 

to  seeimdhe    stylle,  and?  saye  no  worde  tyl  that  the  mayster  of  the  watche  were  4- 

amvid.         departed  and  passyd  by ;  ffor  the  custome  was  suche  in  the  cyte, 

that  aboue  the  watche  that  was  ordeyned  and  aduysed  /  that  a 

noble   and  wyseman   shold  serche   and  vysyte    euery  nyght   the 

watche,  And  amende  that  as  they  founde  amys.     And  he  wente  8 

thus  thre  or  four  tymes  in  the  nyght,  with  a  grete  companye  of 

peple,  that  bare  light     It  was  not  longe  after,  that  he  cam  &  sawe 

in  the  tour  where  Emyrferyus  was,   and  sawe  alle   thynges  wel 

ordeyned  and  in  good  disposicion ;  And  it  plesyd  hym  wel,  and1  12 

He  waited      passed12  forth  /  This  man  sawe  thenne  that  it  was  tyme  to  performe 

witch passed  his  werke,  And  sayd  to  the  messager:  "goo  thy  way  dylygeutly, 

woVd'toBo-    and  saye  to  thy  lord1  that  now  is  tyme  to  doo  well,  and  that  he 

come  to  fore  this  tour;  and  see  that  he  haue  good  companye  with  16 
hym  and  trewe  "  /  The  messager  departed  forthwith  /  Emyrferyus 
entred  in  to  the  tour,  and  founde  his  broder  slepyng  moche  faste. 
he  had  fere  that  he  shold  awake  er  the  werke  were  accomplysshyd, 
and  that  he  myght  destrouble  it ;  therfore  he  toke  his  swerd,  &  20 
roof  hym  thurgh  bothe  sydes,  and  slewe  hym.     The  messager  cam 
to  Buymont,  and  told  hym  his  erande.     he  cam  incontinent  to 
fore  the  tour,  And  the  other  barons  with  hym,  that  knewe  of  the 
werke.     Eche  of  them  had  but  a  fewe  with  them,  but  they  were  2 1 
good  &  trew.     emyrferms  put  out  his   heed  &  salewed  them,  & 
Emirferius     they  resalewed  hym  ;  and  after  aualed  a  corde  doun  the  wall,    they 
lord  and  da,ew  toke  it,  &  bomjde  it  faste  to  thewde  of  the  laddre  of  cordes  /  whan 
up    e  a     r.^  ^^   bounden   and   drawen  vp,   fastned  &   attached  with   the  28 

crochettes  of  yron  aboue,  there  was  none  that  was  so  hardy  that 
Bohemond  wold  fyrst  goo  vp.  whan  Buymont  sawe  this  /  he  toke  thenne  the 
Udder  first!6  laddre  first,  as  a  valyaunt  man  &  ardant  taccomplysshe  the  werke, 

And  wente  vp  til  he  cam  to  the  batillement.  Emyrferyus3  knewe  32 
anon  that  it  was  buymont;4  And  toke  hym  by  the  arme,  and 
kyssed  his  honde.  Buymont  wente  vpon  the  walle,  And  kyssed 
hym5  swetly.  He  thanked  hym  of  the  seruyse  that  he  had  don  / 
Emyrferyus  ladde  hym  in  to  the  towre,  And  sayde  to  hym :  36 
Emirferius  "  Beholde,  and  see  what  I  haue  don  for  god  and  you.  This  man, 
m's°beothe?s  that  ye  see  here  deed,  is  my  brother  Germayn  /  I  haue6  slayn  hym 

dead  body. 

2  Fr.  "  il  pasta  oulbre."  *  Orig.  Emyrferyns.  *  Orig.  buymout. 

5  Orig.  hym.  *  Orig.  hanc. 


Ch.  CXX.]     Bohcmond  mounts  upon  the    Walls  of  the  City.  181 

by  cause  he  wolde  not  acorde  to  this  werke  that  ye  and?  I  hauo 
enterprysed1."     Buymont1  had!  nioche  grete  Ioye,  ffor  fro  thenne  whm  Botie- 
forthon  knewe  he  well  that  his  frende  dyde  alle  in  good?  fayth  /  that,  '">  •"> 

**      .  *       J    lunger  sns- 

4  Thenne  cam  to  the  creneuls,2  and!  put  oute3  his  heede  and!  called1  his  i,e< tti1  "r 

'  *  doubted  him. 

peple,  and1  sayd1  that  they  shold1  come  vp  dylygently  by  the  laddre. 
They  durste  4not  go  vp  /  But  alway  supposed1  it  had1  be  deceyu-    [« icnf8.rj 
aunce.     Buymont,  that  was  moche  valyaunt  and1  lust,  put  doon  his  The  other 
8  foote  on  the  laddre  /  And  descended  doun  to  the  erthe,  and  sayd  to  not  follow. 
them  :  "  fayr  lordes,  ye  tarve  ouer  longe  /  there  is  no  doubte  /  ffor  nohemond 

.  descended, 

knowe  ye  certaynly  that  this  good  man  hath  shewde  to  me  his  and  assured 

J  •>       J  °  them  that 

brother,  whom  he  hath  slayn  for  loue  of  vs  "  /  whan  they  herd  this,  everything 
'  J  i  j  j  was  n(ji,t_ 

12  they  all  toke  the  laddre,  he  that  myght  best  heste  /  And  mounted 
vp  so  many,  that  ther  were  men  ynowgh  on  the  walle  /  Therle  of 
fflaundres  went  vp,  and  Tancre,  for  tenseyne  the  other  how  they  They  then 

.  ,  ,  mounted  iind 

shold  doo  /  whan  the  fyrst  towr  was  wel  garnysshed  with  men,  they  took  the 

'  towers, 

16  ranne  to  the  other  by,  And  slewe  the  watche  men,  and  helde  the  laying  the 

"  watch. 

toures. 

Of  the  mayntene  of  the  cristen  men  in  this  pryse, 
And  of  the  affraye  of  the  turkes  of  the  toun. 
20  Ca°  .C.xx° 

a       T  the  foote  of  the  laddre  abode  somme  of  the  Barons,  for  to 

conduyte5  thooste  /  whan  they  sawe  that  they  had  vpon  the 

walles  men  ynowe  that  myght  garnysshe  dyuerse  /  towres  /  They 

24  ran  hastely  to  the  lodgys  for  to  make  the  peple  arme  them  /  And  to 
drawe  nerer  /  to  thendc  that  they  myght  al  be  redy  for  to  entre  in 
6  whan  our  men  were  on  the  walles  /  they  were  not  ydle6  /  but  were 
noble  and  hardy  /  in  such  wise  that  they  had  anon  ,x  /  towres 

28  taken7  alle  in  arenge  /  And  had  slayn  alle  them  that  they  founde 

therin,  And  the  cyte  was  not  yet  meuyd  ne  awaked  /  ffor  the  grete  The  people 
men  of  the  toun,  whan  they  herde  the  noyse,  had  supposed  certaynly  hearing  tile 
that  they  had  slayn  the  Cristen  men  /  lyke  as  they  had  com-  thought  that 

32  maimded,  And  that  this  affraye  had  be  for  none  other  thynge  :  And  ciirUUmw 

being  iikus- 

they  meued  not  oute  of  theyr  beddes.     In  this  partye,  where  oure  sacred. 

1  Orig.  Buymout.  2  Orig.  creueuls. 

3  Orig.  onte.  "  Orig.  conduyte. 

*— 6  Caxton  has  made  a  " bourdon" -by  leaving  out  all  between  the  two 
" sur  les  murs."  Fr.  "quand  leur  gens  qni  estoient  sur  les  murs,  leur  en 
feroient  signe.  Nos  gens  qui  estoient  montees  sxtr  les  murs  n'estoient  raie 
oyscaux,"  etc.  7  Fr.  "  loutes  en  un  renc,"  all  in  a  row. 

1  5 


182  Bohemond's  Banner  is  placed  on  the  Tower.     [Ch.  CXX. 

men  were  goon  vp,  was  a  posterne.     Our  men  that  were1  on  the 
Our  men  now  walles  descended  and  brake  vp  the  lockes,  and!  opened1  the  vate.  in 

opened  the  r  *         ' 

gates  of  the     suche  wyse  that  many  entree?  of  oure  peple.     And  after  cam  to  the 

city.  * 

grete  gate,  that  was  called  the  gate  of  the  brydge  /  And  alle  the  4 
watche  that  kepte  it  they  slewe,  And  after  opened  the  gate  /  A 
squyer  of  Bnymontys  ran  til  he  cam  to  an  hye  towre,  whiche  was 
vpon  the  tertre  by  the  dongeow  of  the  toun  /  there  he  fyxed  the 
Baner  of  Buymout  his  lord,  whan  oure  peple  that  were  in  the  8 
toun  apperceyued  that  the  daye  was  nyghe,  And  the  dawenyng 
appiered,  thenne  they  made  to  sowne  theyr  trompettes  and  busynes, 

p  if.  83,  bk.]  for  to  calle  al  the  people  of  the  hooste  /  The  Barons  2  vnderstode  the 

signe,  and  smote  the  hors  with  the  spores,  And  entred  by  the  yates  1 2 
whiche  they  founde   opene  with  alle  theyr  bataylles.     The  foote 
men  of  thooste  awooke,   that  knewe  nothyng  of  this  counseyll. 
They  sawe  the  tentes  empty  and  voyde,  and  apperceyued  that  the 
toun  was  taken,     thenne  began  they  hastely  to  renne  to  the  gayne,  16 

The  Turks     in  suche  wyse  that  none  abode  other.     The  turkes  of  the  toun 

now  awoke,  ,-.■■•.  i  .,  .»  .«  <•     ,« 

mid  »aw  timt  awoke,  and  herde  the  novse,  and  sawe  the  men  of  amies  thurgh  the 

they  were  .  __ 

taken.  stretes.     Thenne  apperceyued  they  in  what  poynt  they  were.     They 

began  to  flee  out  of   theyr  howses,   and   lede  theyr  wyues   and  20 
some  fled,      chylderen  with  them,     whan  they  fledde  fro  one  rowte  of  our  men, 
benteii  and     they   recountred  another   gretter,  whiche    slewe  them  alle.     The 
surryens,  the  hermyens,5  and  the  other  cristen  men  of  the  toun 
apperceyued  that  the  thyng  wente  so.     they  had  moche  grete  ioye,  24 
and  toke  the  armes  hastely,  and  wente  forth  with  our  men  and 
tolde  to  them  the  places  where  mooste  peple  were,  And  where  the 
tresours  were :  They  them  slewe  the  turkes  moche  gladly.     They 
payned  them  moche  to  rendre  to  them  the  guerdon  of  betynges  and  28 
tormentes  that  they  had  don  to  them.     Thoost  was  thenne  entred 
in  to  the  toun ;  The  barons  had  sette  their  baners  on  the  toures ; 
There  was     grete  occision   and  slaughter  had   be  in  the  toun;   they  spared 
fageand'       noman,  ne  woman,  ne  childe  /  they  brak  vp  dores  and  chestes ;  ye  32 
"aug  Ur'      shold  haue  seen  gold  and  syluer  departed  in  the  stretes  ;  4It  semeth 
well  a  thyng  conquerd5  and  wonne  by  warre.     what  shal  I  make 
more  than      long  deuyses,4  ther  were  slayn  of  them  of  the  toun  that  day  moo 
iny  bare  In*8  than  .x.  M.,  of  whom  the  bodyes  laye  alle  bare  in  the  wayes  and  3G 
stretes. 

1  Orig.  wore.  3  Orxg.  hermyens. 

*-*  Misunderstood   by  Caxton.     Fr.   "  Bien   sembloit   ehoses  conquisrs  ct 
gaignics  par  guerre,  taut  enfaisoit  on  largcs  devises."  5  Orig.  conquerd'. 


tlie  streets. 


Ch.  CXXI.]         Anccan  flees,  and  is  killed.  183 

How  Ancean,  lord  of  anthyoche,1  fledde  by  a  posterne 
out  of  the  toun,  And  he  was  recountred  and  put 
to  deth.  ca°  Cxxj'.' 

4  w      Han  Ancean  sawe  that  the  cyte  was  thus  bytrayed,  And  that 

his  peple  that  myght  escape  fledde  an  hye  in  to  the  fortresse 

of  the  dongeon.     he  doubted  moch  to  goo  theder,  ffor  he  thought 

wel  that  the  cristen  men  wold1  enuyronne  incontinent  this  tour  yf 

8  he  entred ;  therfor  he  yssued  out  at  a  posterne  out  of  the  toun,  and1  Ancean  the 

wente  allone  as  lie  had"  be  oute  of  his  wytte  /  Ne  he  knewe  not  ^[°°sh  tl,e 

whether  he  myght  goo  And1  flee  for  to  kepe  hym.     whan  he  wente 

thus  by  the  feldes  moche  ferre  fro  the  Cyte,  Certeyne  Hermyns 

12  niette  hym,  and  knewe  hym,  And1  moche  merueylled  what  this 

myght  be;  And  after,  thought  that  the  Cyte  was  taken.     2And    P  ie»fw] 
they  approched1  hym  /  lyke  as  they  wok*3  haue  enclyned1  to  hym, 
as  they  were  woonte  /  but*  therme  they  toke  hym,  &  smote  hym 
16  doun  to  therthe  /  and  after,  with  a  swerde  smote  of  his  heed1,  and1  htahe.dwii 

/  *  smitten  on, 

bare  it  in  to  the  toun  /  And  presented  it  vnto  the  barons  to  fore  the  g^g** 
peple  /  one  maner  peple  was  comen  in  to  anthyoche,  which  were  town- 
not  of  the  toun,  that  were  come  for  to  deffende  theyr  lawe  /  and? 
20  other  for  to  be  souldyours  /  And  other  for  prowesse  of  armes,  & 
to  gete  honour  and  prys.  thyse  knewe  not  wel  the  beyng  of  the 
toun  /  and  were  mounted  vpon  their  horses  alle  armed,  and1  begonne 
to  renne  avenst  the  hvlle  toward  the  dongeon  /  and  by  aduenture  a  party  of 

■  *  "  .        '  .  mercenaries 

24  they  niette  a  route  of  our  men,  thus  as  they  wente  sechyng  in  the  were^aia.ke.1 
toun,  whiche  ran  on  them  moche  hardyly.     Thyse  maner  of  peple  our  men: 
wold  haue  eschewed  them,  and  smote  theyr  hors  toward1  the  valeye  / 
and  fylle  doun  of  a  bancke  in  suche  wyse  that  they  were  alle  to 

28  brused,  men,  hors,  harnoys  and  abyllementes  /  ther  were  deed  wel 
a  /  iij  /  C.  som  ther  were  that  in  the  toun  were  born  /  whan  they 
apperceyued  in  the  mornyng  that  our  men  were  within.  They  toke 
their  hors  and  rode  out  by  the  yates  that  our  men  had  opened". 

32  ther  were  of  oure  men  that  wente  aftir  and  sued  them,  and  brought 

many  of  them  agayn,  whom  they  put  in  pryson  /  som  other  escaped,  »»^H 
&  ran  vnto  the  montaynes  /  about  the  hour  of  tierce,  whan  the  tab*. 
toun  was  serched.     Our  peple  assembled,  and  anon  apperceyued 

36  that  in  alle  the  toun  was  no  vytayll ;  and  it  was  not  wondre  /  ffor  h***?* 
the  siege  had  therme  endured  nygh  ix.  monethes,  and  moche  peple  £u..d  in  the 

1  Orig.  authyoche.  *  Fr.  Tenclinerent,  i.  e.  saluted  him. 

*  Orig.  bnt. 


184  The  Crusaders  found  great  spoils  in  Antioch.     [Ch.  CXXII. 

Great  wealth  had  ben  therin  duryng  the  siege  /  but  gold,  syluer,  preceows  lewellis, 
by  the  poor    and  vessel  of  dyuerse  facions  /  clothes  of  sylke,  &  ryche  tappets, 

pilgrims,  who  ' 

were  in  great  &  of  other  thvnees  they  fourtde  so  moch,  that  eche  of  our  men 

need  of  it.  J     e  * 

was  all  charged,  as  moch  as  they  myght  here  /  It  cam  wel  to  poynt  4 
to  oure  poure  pylgryms  for  to  fynde  suche  rychesse  /  after  the  grete 
mesease  that  they  had  suffred  /  ther  were  fou/iden  in  the  tou-n1 
/  v  /  C.  good  hors  of  armes  /  But  they  were  right  lene  and  wery. 
Antioch  wa»   thus  was  the  cyte  of  Anthyoche  taken,  the  yere  of  thyncarnacion  of  8 
3rd!  1098.      our  lord  a  /  M.  lxxxxviij  /  the  iij  day  of  the  moneth  of  Iuyn. 

How  after  that  our  men  made   grete   slaughter  of 
theyr  enemyes,  our  men  helde  counseyl  for  to 
take  the  dongeon  /  the^ne  beyng  seased  of  the  12 
turkes  /  ca°  .C.xxij0 

t       He  pylgryms  that  were  theder  comen  fro  many  com/trees  by 
grete  labour,  were  themie  ful  of  shedyng  of  the  blood  of  their 
p  if.  84,  bk.]  enemyes  /  The  Barons  assembled1  in  counseyl,  and1  aduysed*  2emonge  16 
them  that  this  werk  was  not  yet  parfyght,  but  that  ther  was  yet 
trauayll  and  peryll  tyl  that  the  dongeon  were  taken  and  goten, 
The  donjon    wkiche  was  right  stronge  /  and  wel  garnysshed  with  walles  of  the 
the  hands  of  toun  /  they  sette  good  warde  and  kepers  of  alle  the  yates,  And  dyde  20 
do  crye  thurgh  alle  the  toun  to  assault,  and  commanded1  that  all 
shold  come  to  the  tour  /  that  was  on  the  montayne  /  whan  they 
cam  theder,  they  knewe  wel  certaynly  that  this  was  not  a  thynge 
The  crusa-     lightly  to  be  goten,  ffor  the  f ortresse  myght  not  be  goten  but  by  24 
thiaforweVe*  famyne ;  therfor  they  trauaylled  but  lytil,  but  withdrevve  them,  and 
taken  only     made  the  peple  to  retorne.     this  montayne,  that  is  aboue  the  toun, 
is  deuyded  in  tweyne,  like  as  I  sayd  to  fore,  by  a  depe  valleye  / 
whiche  is  as  stepe  as  it  were  plom  doun  /  The  syde  whiche  is  28 
toward  thoryent  is  moch  fayrer,  vpon  a  playne  wel  brode,  ful  of 
vygnes  and1  londe  erable.     That  other  partye,  toward?  the  weste,  is 
This  donjon    moehe  hyer,3  as  a  man  shold  goo  vp  right  /  And?  right  vpon  the 
TopoTa11'6     sommet,  at  toppe  of  the  tertre,  stondeth  the  dongecn,*  ferme  of  32 
ouer  stronge  walles  and1  thycke  toures  /  they  be  hye  and  grete 
toward  thoryent ;  and  toward  northeste,  about  the  valeye,  it  is  so 

1  Orig.  tonn. 

3  Fr.  "si  s'en  va  eontremont  en  aiguisant"  viz.  "  grows  steeper  and  steeper 
towards  the  top." 

*  Fr.  "fermcz  dc  tropforz  mars'"  surrounded  by  very  strong  walls. 


mountain ; 


Ch.  CXXIII.]-    The  Barons  take  Counsel  how  to  get  the  Donjon,     185 

deep  that  it  semeth  a  right  helle  /  And  it  is  an  hydous  thynge  to  £«*«  not 
beholde;  It  coude  neuer  be  ymagyned  how  it  myght  be  rayned1  /  mined, 
and  fro  this  dongeon  vnto  the  toun  is  a  way,  whiche  is  so  strayt 
4  tbat  with  grete  payne  one  man  allone  maye  goo  or  come.     The 
barons  acordec*  that  they  wold  close  this  litil  terter  and  waye,  to 
thende  that  they  of  the  dongeon  shold1  not  mowe  descende,  ne  doo 
euyll  ne  harnie  to  oure  men  in  the  cyte  /  They  made  a  walle  moche  The  bum* 
8  stronge  of  iyme  and"  sonde,  In  whiche  they  put  men  of  Armes  «£P"£W 
ynowe,  and  wel  in  poynt.     They  sette  on  the  walles2  stones  and  J™  *£,"„*''• 
engyns,  redy  for  to  caste  stones  yf  the  turkes  descended  &  cam  witu  •  *»»• 
doun.     the  barons  wente  in  to  the  toun  for  to  take  cou.Tseyl  of 

12  other  werkes.     It  was  ordeyned  and  deuysed  that  alle  men  slwld 
retorne  <fe  abyde  there  about  this  newe  walle  tyl  that  the  dongeon 
were  taken,  sauf  the  Due  Godeffroye,  whiche  by  comyn  counseyl  of  «*»«■ 
alle,  shold  abyde  for  to  kepe  the  gate  of  the  est  /  &  the  fortresse  u»E*.tgate. 

16  that  our  men  had  made  withoute  the  gate,  that  was  delyuerd  to 
buymont.  They  herde  tydynges  that  this  grete  prynce  Corbagat,  of 
whom  I  haue  ppoken  to  fore,  shold  arryue  shortly  /  ffor  he  was 
therane  entred  in  to  the  londe  of  anthyoche  /  It  was  acordei?  that 

20  they  sholde  sende  a  wyse  man  vnto  the  see,  and*  saye  to  them  that 
were  goon  for  to  doo  theyr  thynges  /  that  they  shold1  retourne 
hastely,  and  brynge  in  to  the  Cyte  alle  the  vytaylles  that  they 
myght  fynde.     They  them  self,  that  were  in  Anthyoche,  3ran  alle    7  leaf 85] 

24  the  countrey  abeut  for  to  seche  vytaylles,  but  they  founde  but  litil.  ££*£&,  ,„ 
The  laborers  of  the  playne  countrey  were  moche  ioyou3  that  the  jjj*Jf the 
Cyte  was  in  the  handes  of  the  pylgryms.for  they  were  of  our  fayth.  roundabout. 
all  that  they  had  hyd  they  brought ;  but  it  was  not  moch,  For  the 

28  longe  siege  had  destroyed  the  countre  without,  and  empty d<  the 
toun  within. 

How  whyles  thooste  garnysshed  the  toun,4  Somme  of 
thoost  of  Corbagat6  cam  rennyng  to  fore  it. 
32  cap*  .C.xxiij0. 

t       He  second  day  after  the  toun  Avas  taken,  whyles  oure  peple  The  second 

,     ,       day  after  the 

en  tended  to  garnysshe  the  Cyte,  cam  thre  honderd  men  of  the  town  mu 

1  This  sentence  is  rendered  unintelligible  by  omissions.  After  "myned" 
must  be  inserted  ' '  towards  the  west,  the  hill  is  lower.  Between  this  h  ill  and 
the  donjon  is  a  valley,  which  is  not  very  large  or  very  deep :  in  this  place  a  path 
descends."  a  Fr.  perritres,  not  pierrcs. 

*  Orig.  tonn."  6  Orig.  Crobagat. 

1  5* 


186  Death  of  Roger  de  Bameville.     [Ch.  CXXIV. 

a  band  of       hoost,  al  in  poynt  of  Corbagat,  wel  armed*  and  horsed  vpon  lyglit 

Corbagat's 

men  appeared  horses,  for  to  see  vf  they  myght  fynde  ony  of  oure  men  that  rode 

be  lore  the 

town.  folyly  by  the  countre.     They  embusshed*  them  alle  sauf  .xxx.,  the 

beste  horsed,  whiche  cam  to  fore  the  toun;  They  began  to  renne  4 
nycely,1  for  to  drawe  oure  men  out  of  arraye.  whan  oure  men 
sawe  them,  they  had!  grete  desdayne  /  And*  wende  that  it  had!  be  a 
grete  shame  yf  they  founde  not  to  whom  to  speke  to  /  syth  they 
were  come  so  fer  to  fore  /  A  noble  man  of  whom  I  have  spoken  8 
to  fore  /  by  whom  the  hooste  had  had?  many  prouffytes  by  his 
Roger  de  wytte  &  prowesse,  &  was  named  Rogier  de  barneuylle,  And!  was 
went  out        of  the  companye  of  the  due  of  normandye,  he  toke  with  hym 

against  them.  »»»■*»   i  •  »i  r-ii^ 

.xv.  knyghtes  that  he  had!  of  his   meyne,  And  cam  out  of  the  12 
toun   ayenst   the   turkes,   as   he    that    was    noble,    valyaunt    and 
hardy  /  And  acustomed  to  doo  fayr  faytes.     whan  he  sawe  them, 
lie  smote  his  hors  with  his   spores  toward  them,  And  they2  by 
cautele  torned!  and  fledde.     Our  men  folowed  hastely  so  ferre  that  16 
they  launced  vpon  theyr  watche,  they  sprange  oute  of  the  embusshe- 
rnent,  And1  ran  vpon  oure  men  /  ffor  they  were  many,  and  wel 
proued  in  amies.     Rogier3  relyed  his  ly til  felawship  /  And  cam 
deffendyng  hym  toward  the  toun.     whan  they  were  nyghe,  A  turke  20 
He  was         garnysshed!  with  a  stronge  bowe  smote  Rogier  thurgh  the  body,  in 
through  the    suche  wyse  that  he  fyl  doun  deed  to  fore  his  hors.     Anon  his  felaws 

body  and  ,  .  ■ 

killed.  withdrewe  them  in  to  the  toun.     The  turkes  descended!  vpon  hym, 

and'  smote  of  his  heed!,     seeyng  they  that  were  on  the  walles  /  they  24 
bare  away  the  heed,  and  thus  departed!  /  they  of  the  toun  yssued 
oute  with  grete  crye  and  lamentacion,  as  they  that  had  a  grete  losse. 
Hewai         They  toke  the  body,  and  buryed  it  honorably  and!  with  grete  sorowe 
bllrieii,  in  the  porche  of  the  chirche  of  seynt  peter  /  The  barons*  com-  28 

ami  there  was  , 

Rre»t  lamen-  plevned!  moche  aboue  the  other,  this  noble  man,  as  they  that  beste 

tation  over        r      J 

his  death.      knewe  hym  / 

p  if.  85,  wtj  5How  the  tliyrde  day  after  the  getynge  and  pryse  of 

Anthyoche,  Corbagat  with  his  hoost  arryued  to  32 
to  fore  it.  ca°  Cxxiiij° 

Prince  cor-     a       Tte  the  thyrde  day  after   that  Anthyoche  was   taken  /  this 
nextday'  grete  prynce  Corbagat  cam  to  the  cyte  in  the  mornyng  at  the 

1  Fr.  nicement,  viz.  in  a  foolhardy  way. 

2  Fr.  par  barat,  i.  e.  to  draw  them  on. 

3  Fr.  ralia,  rallied,  reassembled.  4  Fr.  plain gnoient-,  mourned. 


Ch.  CXXIV.]     five  Arrival  of  Corbagat  s  Army.  187 

Sonne  rysyng  with  so  grete  plente  of  pcple,  that  alio  the  countre  appeared 
that  myght  be  seen  fro  the  hyest  place  of  the  toun  was  couerd1  with  «>nny: 
them  /  Tlie  barons  sawe  nioche  more  peple  /  than  they  herd1  saye  of, 
4  For  theyr  hoost  encreced  euery  day  /  he  passed  the  brydge  /  And 
lodged  hym  bytwene  the  laye  /  and!  the  rjTner  of  helle,  whiche  is 
wel  a  myle  fro  that  one  to  that  other  /  he  had*  so  grete  plente  of 
knvshtes.  and1  so  crete  nombre  of  tentes  and1  pauyllons,  that  the  the  great 

JO  '  °  i.i-i        Pi"'"  ol'An- 

8'  grete    plavne    wherof    I   haue    spoken    to    fore,  where  Anthyoche  tioci.  could 

0  l  *  '  "  nut  contain 

stondeth  ne  yet  it  myght  not  alle  receyue  them  /  But  many  of  them  them. 
lodged1  them  in  the  teirytoryes1  by  /  whan  Corbagat  had?  be  thus 
thre  dayes  lodged1  hym  thought  that  he  was  ouer  far  fro  the  cyte  / 
12  And!  by  his  counseyl  wold  be  more  ner  the  dongeon  /  whiche  the 

turkes  helde  /  for  to  ayde  and  comforte  them  /  And  thought  for  to  corbagat 

'  attempted  to 

put  men  in  to  the  toun  by  the  yate  that  was  vnder  the  dongeon.  put  some 

1  "  .       "  <->  men  jllt0  ti,e 

whan  he  was  lodged  on  that  partye,  he  comprysed  fro  the  yate  of  town  by  the 

o  r        J    »  r   */  «>  gille  un(}er 

16  the  eest  to  the  west  yate  all  the  syde  of  the  toun  toward  the  south  /  the  donjon, 
by  syde  the  parte  of  the  eest  was  a  fortresse,  whiche  oure  men  had 
made  /  vpon  a  litil  tertre  as  I  haue  sayd1,  and1  was  delyuerd1  to 
Buymont2  /  But  whan  the  toun  was    taken    and    the    yate  /  he 

20  delyuerd  this  fortresse  to  other  for  to  kepe  /  Therby  lodged1  som 

turkes  of  thooste  of  Corbagat  /  They  began  tassaylle  this  tour  /  They  They  as-niied 

.  .  one  of  the 

that  were  within  dyde  grete  payne  to  deffende  them  /  But  it  was  towers 

J  °  r    "  '  guarded  by 

ouermoche  charged  with  grete  plente  of  peple  that  were  there,  and  the  crusa- 
24  also  with  Archers,  of  whom  they  had!  many.     The  due,  whiche  was 
bye  at  the  yate,  sawe  that  his  men  had  ouermoch  to  doo  /  &  had 
good  wyll  for  to  helpe  them  /  and  wold  haue  dislodged  them  that 
were  come  ouer  fer  forth  /  he  yssued!  out  with  al  his  bataylle  /  And  The  Duke 

°8  smote  his  hors  with  his  spores  toward1  the  fortresse  /  And  sawe  that  to  repulse 

/  •    tl,e  T  urk'> 

there  were  ouer  grete  plente  of  turkes  to  fore  hym  /  which  smote  in 

to  his  men,  and1  began  to  demene  them  euyll  /  ff'or  ayenst  one  of 

them  ther  were  .x.  turkes.  the  due  knewe  that  his  strengthe  was 

32  not  like  theyres,  and  began  to  withdrawe  hym  toward1  the  toun  /  butwosbim- 

But  to  fore  that  they  myght  reentre  in  to  the  gate  /  The  turkes  back. 

assayled  them  so  euyll  that  ther  were  /  ij  C  /  of  the  batayll  of  the 

due3  taken  &  deed1. 

1  Fr.  tcrtrcs,  hills.  ■  Orig.  Buymout.  3  Orig  dnc. 


188        The  Turks  enter  the  Toivn  through  the  Donjon.     [Ch.  CXXV. 

p  leaf 8«]  aHow  after  that  the  due2  was  within  the  barres  of 
the  toun  /  and  many  of  his  men  slayn,  the  turkes 
entred  in  to  the  toun  /  ca°  C.  xxv. 

t       He  Due  cam  in  to  the  toun  moche  angry  of  this  dommage.  4 
But  whan  the  turkes  knewe  that  this  had  be  godeffroye  of 
The  Turks     boloyne  that  they  had  thus  put  abak.     They8  aroos  in  moche  grete 
proud orthis  pryde  /  thevfor  they  wente  thens  vnto  the  montayne  /  &  entred? 
in  to  the  toun  by  the  yate  of  the  dongeon  /  And?  surprysed?  somme  8 
of  our  men  that  toke  none  hede  /  wyth  bowes  &  with  swerdes 
they  slewe  them  /but  whan  they  were  apperceyued  our  men  chassed 
and  entered    them,  But  they  put  them  in  to  the  dongeon  where  they  were  sauf  / 
ti1eetowntby    thus  dyde  they  oftymes  harme  /  ffor  they  knewe  another  way  to  12 
the  donjon.    descende  tnan  that  whiehe  our  men  had?  garnysshec?  /  The  barons 
assembled1  for  to  take  counseyll  what  they  shold  doo  of  the  peryll 
wherin  they  were.     By  comyn  acorde  it  was  ordeyned1  /  that  Buy- 
TheCmsa-     mont  and*  The  Erie  of  Thoolouse  shol<$  make  there  a  dyche  moche  16 
made' Thread  depe  an<i  brode  ynowgh  bytwene  the  toun  and1  the  pendaunt  of  the 
rmiwfae?    montayne.  they  made  it  there  as  it  was  deuysed*  /  And?  made  there 
mountain       a  fortresse  whiche  they  garnysshed  wel  with  men  wel  armed.     The 

"'  turkes  that  were  in  the  dongeon,  And  they  also  that  were  comen  in  20 
by  this  gate  descended  ofte  /  by  a  way  couerte  vnto  this  fortresse, 
And1  assaylled?  it  moche  fiersly,  in  suche  wyse  as  they  lete  them 
haue  no  reste,  that  it  happed  on  a  day  /  that  so  grete  plente  of 
turkes  descended  that  the  cry  aroos  in  to  the  toun  /  that  and  yf  24 
the  other  barons  and  knyghtes  whiche  were  a  brode  in  the  toun 
had?  not  come  and?  ronne  to  them  they  had*  slayn  or  taken  thyse 
noble  men  /  that   is  to  wete   Buymont  /  Euerard  du  puyssat  / 
Eaoul  de  la  fontayne  /  Rembault  crecon4  /  And1  somme  other  lordes  28 
that  were  in  theyr  companye  /  Alle  they  were  grete  men  and"  goocJ 
knyghtes  that  were  put  in  this  newe  fortresse  for  to  defende  it  / 
The  Turk*     But  therle  of  Flaundres,  the  due5  of  normandye  /  And  huon  the 
ol!etebduthi8  mayne  ranne  moche  hastely  theder  /  And?  mette  with  the  turkes  er  32 
reprui8ed.ay8    they  myght  entre  in  to  the  dongeon.     They  slewe  many,  and?  many 
they  receyued6  prysonners  /  The  other  turkes  that  escaped?  cam  to 
fore  Corbagat  /  And1  counted  to  hym  that  thyse  men  of  the  toun 
were  ouer  feers  and  hardye.    And?  it  semeth  whan  they  ben  in  werke  36 

2  Orig.  dnc. 

8  Fr.  "en  moult  grant  orgueil  montcrcnt,"  viz.,  "they  became  very  much 
•lated."  *  Lat.  Creton.  6  Orig.  dnc.  *  Orig.  receyned. 


Ch.  CXXVL]     The  Christians,  in  turn,  are  now  besieged.  189 

that  Hhey  doubte2  nothyng  the  deth,  lie  this,  ne  that.1     Corbagat,  Corb«g»t, 
whiche  was  lodged1  in  the  montayne  as  1  haue  sayd,  dyde  not  theron  lodged  in  tba 
moche  his  prouffyt  ne  his  honoure,  ne  he  founde  not  there  pasture  f®,^*^**1 
4  for  his  hors,  as  he  3dyde  bynethe  in  the  valeye  /  whan  he  sawe  this  vall«7- 

P  If-  86,  bk.] 

he  commaunded  that  lie  shold  be  dislodged,  and  descended  in  to  the 
valeye  with  his  men  he  passed  the  riuer  of  helle.  there  deuised  he 
the  places  to  his  barons  about  the  toun.  on  the  morn  it  happed 
8  that  I  can  not  say  how  many  turkes  approched  the  cyte  /  and 
descended  fro  theyr  horses  /  for  to  shote  at  our  peple  that  were  on 
the  walles  for  to  come  more  ner.     Tancre  yssued!  by  the  gate  toward  Tancred 

^  J  sallied  out 

the  eest,  and  stopped  the  way  fro  them  in  suche  wyse  that  er  they  and  slew  6 
12  niyght  take  theyr  horses  he  slewe  .vj.  of  them  /  And1  brought  them 
in  to  the  toun  for  to  recomforte  our  peple  for  the  deth  of  Kogyer  de 
berneuylle  / 

How  our  cristen  men  that  a  lytil  to  fore  assiegede  the 
16  toun  /  were  now  assieged  in  the  same  / 

Capitulo  Cxxvj? 

i        N  this  tyme  durynge  /  the  peple  of  the  cristen  men  that  had!  The  Onto- 
assieged  Anthyoche  but  a  litil  to  fore  as  ye  haue  had  /  They  »°^  '^tum, 

20  were  now  them  self  assieged4  within.     Thus  goon  the  chaunges  and  themselves, 
mutacions  of  the  world  ;  they  had  moche  grete  trauayll  for  to  kepe 
and  deffende  the  Cyte.     It  was  to  them  ouer  peryllous  that  the 
dongeon  was  so  strong*  and  so  wel  garnysshed1  as  it  was.     They 

24  made  to  them  ofte  grete  assay  lies  by  daye  and!  by  nyght,  ffor  they 
of  the  hooste  cam  in  by  the  yate  vnder  the  dongeon  as  ofte  as  it 
nlesvd  them.     Our  men  began  to  be  moche  abasshed.     Ther  were  They  were 

r        J  °  in  a  critical 

many  that  toke  no  regarde  to  theyr  oth  that  they  had*  made  to  a^"^0,^i  t0 
28  mayntene   the   companye    ne   to   theyr    honoure,    But    by    nyght  few- 
descended1  doun  of  the  walles  by  ropes  and  cordes  and1  fledde  to 
the  see.  (26)     And1  many  of  them  the  turkes  toke  whom  they  slewe 
and1   brought  in  prison.     They  that  myght    escape  cam  vnto  the  |°ra!,r)"n 
32  porte,  sayeng1  to  the  marchauns  and  to  other  pylgryms  that  were  n'gi>t. 
there  comen,  that  they  shold  disancre  theyr  shippes  and  flee  anon  / 
ffor  this  prynce  Corbagat,  whom  so  moche  peple  folowed,  had  taken 
Anthyoche  by  force,  and  had  slayn  alle  the  barons  and  alle  them 
3G  that  he  founde  within  /  And  that  they  were  escaped  by  ouer  grete 

1-1  Fr.  "  llz  doubtcnt  la  morl,  ne  tant  ne  quant,"  i.  e.,  they  have  absolutely 
no  fea4'  of  death.  a  Oi'ij.  donbte. 


190 


Some  of  the  Barons  flee  shamefully.     [Ch.  CXXVI. 


and  begged 
tlie  *ailors  to 
flee  from  the 
port,  with 
them. 


P  leaf  87] 

Even  well 
lorn  men 
behaved 

shamefully. 


Some  even 
surrendered 
themselves 
to  the  Turks, 
out  of  fear. 


Bohemond 
guarded  the 
town  dili- 
gently, 


especially 
the  four 
fortresses, 
which  must 
be  kept. 


peryll  and  fiers  aduenture  /  Therfore,  sayd  they  to  the  maronners, 
that  they  shold  departe  and  flee  withoute  taryenge  /  ffor  yf  the 
turques  cam  serchynge  the  countre  vnto  the  see  and  founde  them 
there  they  shold  he  alle  delyuered  to  deth  /  Thus  they  fledde  alle  4 
for  feere  /  And  they  them  self  that  brought  thise  tydynges  wente 
with  them.     And  to  thende  that  ye  shold  not  suppose  that  thyse 
were  but  mene  peple,  2for  the  trouthe  of   this    hystorye  spareth 
noman  /  I  shall  name  somme  that  thus  departed  shamefully,  that  8 
is  to  wete,  Guylla7?nne  de  Gratemenyl,  a  noble  man  born  in  Xor- 
mandye  /  whiche  held  grete  londe  in  puylle,  And  had  to  his  wyf 
the  suster  of  Buymont.     Aubery  charpenter,  Guy  croseaulx  (27)  / 
Lambert  le  poure  /  2And  many  other  had  they  with  them.    Somme  12 
there  were  that  wente  for  pyllage,2  And!  for  the  messease  of  hungre 
and  drede  for  to  be  slayn,  yolde  them  to  the  turkes  /  And  they 
tolde  the  certaynte  of  the  meschief  that  oure  men  suffred  alle  a 
longe  to  the  turkes.     Many  abode  in  the  toun  that  gladly  wold  16 
haue  goon  /  But  buymont  by  the  counseyl  of  the  bisshop  of  Pity 
dyde  so  make  watche  atte  alle  the  gates  and  vpon  the  walles,  And 
toke3  kepe  bothe  by  daye  and  nyght  that  none  shold  goo  vp  ne 
doun4  /  And  they  swore  alle  that  they  shold  not  departe  fro  the  20 
companye,  ne  breke  the  commaundementes5  of  Buymont.6    He  hyni 
self  wente  euery  nyght  thurgh  the  toun  wyth  grete  plente  of  men, 
and  with   grete  lyght  to  thende  that   no  peryll  shold  happe  ne 
trayson.    Foure  fortresses  had  he  whiche  he  muste  nedes  kepe,  and  24 
better  than  the  other.     That  one  was  on  the  lasse  tertre  ayenst  the 
dongeon  /  And  that  other  was  lower  ayenst  the  assaylles  that  they 
made.     The  thyrde  was  withoute   the  eest  gate,  the  whiche  was 
made  to  kepe  thooste  er  the  toun  was  take  /  the7  fourthe  was  at  28 
thende  of  the  brydge,  by  whiche  the  port  of  the  brydge  was  kept  / 
And  therle  of  tholouse  kept  it  fyrst.    But  whan  the  Cyte  was  taken 
he  lefte  it,  and  entred  into  the  toun.     Therle  of  fflaundres  toke  it 
and  garnysshyd  it  with  fyue  honderd  men  of  Armes,  of  knyghtes,  32 
and  other  wel  in  poynt,  ffor  he  thought  yf  the  turkes  toke  it  our 
men  myght  not  after  yssue  by  the  brydge,  by  which  their  strengthe 
be  moche  employed  / 


2—2  Yr.  "  de  teh  en  y  avoit  qici  en  faisoieiit  pis."  One  of  Caxton's  hasty 
translations,  he  seems  to  have  mistaken  faisoient  pis — "did  worse,"  for 
"  went  for  pillage."  3  Fr.  ' '  qui  prenoicnt  garde,"  who  kept  watch. 

4  Grig.  donn.  5  Orig.  cominauudemcn  es. 

6  Orig.  Bnymont  7  Orig.  thhe. 


Ch.  CXXVII.]     Corbagat  assails  the  Earl  of  Flanders  Fortress.     101 

How  Corbagat  dyde  do  assay  lie  a  fortresse  which 
therle  of  Flau/<dres  kepte  withoute  the  gate  and 
of  that  ensiewed  /  ca°  Cxxvij0 

4  o       N  a  daye  it  happed*  that  Corbagat  thought  that  they  of  the 
toun  had1  oueniioche  lyberte  to  yssue  oute1  and  to  entre  agayn. 
Therfor  he  cominauuded  to  a  bataylle  of  his  peple,  in  whiche  were  Corbagat 
.ij.  thousand  turkes  wel  in  poynt,  that  they  shold  so  longe  assay  lie  [££««  "' 

8  the  fortresse  of  the  brydge  tyl  they  were  taken,  and  it  happed  so 
that  therle  of  Flaundres  was  thenne  wythin  the  same  fortresse. 
Thassault  beganne  at  sonne  rysynge,  moehe  fiers  and  moche  grete. 
there  were  so  many  Archiers  aboute  it  that  none  myghte  shewe  his 
12  2head  atte  creneulx  /  but  that  aiio/i  it  Avas  couerd  with  arowes  /  pir.87.bk.] 
they  that  were  within  deffended  them  moche  well  in  suche  wyse, 
that  they  lost  nothyng  of  the  fortresse  /  And1  thassault  endured1  tyl  The  Chita- 
the  sonne  went  doun  /  The  turkes  departed  alle  wery.     Therle  of  fended  Omui- 

'  r  "  selves  uniil 

1  G  fnauwdres'3  doubte  that  they  shold  come  on  the  morn  to  thassault  /  MMidown, 

•/  '    when  the 

ffor  they  myght  not  longe  suffre  them  there  /  therfor,  as  sone  as  it  Jjjjj.*0" 

was  nyght,  he  put  out  alle  his  men  preuyly  /  and  sette  fyere  therin, 

and  brent  the  fortresse  without  fayllyng.     The  turkes  had  deuysed  Atmghi 

J      J     °  the  fortress 

20  that  in  the  mornynge  erly  they  shold  haue  begonne  agayn  thassault  ««burm 
and  that  two  /  M  /  men  more  shohl  haue  comen  than  had  ben  the 
nyght   byfore.     It  was  not   longe   after  that  a  Eouete  of   turkes 
departed  fro  thooste  of  Corbagat  /  I  wote  not  how  many  poure 

24  pylgryms   that  wente   pourchasshyng*   yf   they  myght  fynde   ony 

vytaylles  in  the  countre  /they  toke  them  and  brought  them  alle  Many  poor, 

J      J  .  ,  finished 

in  the  state  that  they  were  in  to  fore  Corbagat  /  when  he  sawe  christian. 
J  i  were  t:,ke" 

them  he  /  moche  despysed  them,  ffor  they  had  no  Armures  /  And  prisoner* 

/  rJ  ■  '  and  hn'iijrlit 

28  but  feble   bowes  of  tree,  Their  swerdes  rusty,  their  gownes  and  {Jjj^001' 
habellemens  were  old  and  roten  /  Thenne  sayd  Corbagat  by  des- 
dayne  :  "  Thyse  peple  seme  well  men  that  shold  take  away  fro  the 
soudon  of  Perse  his  Em  pyre  /  And  conquere  the  londe  of  thoryent  / 

32  Thyse  shold  be  wel  content  and  payd  yf  they  had  breed,  and4  a 
gobet  of  bacon  /  their  bowes  ben  not  stronge  ynowgh  for  to  slee  a 
sparowgh.     Now  I  shal  saye  to  you  what  ye  shal  doo  /  ye  shal  lede  corbagat, 
them  bounden  in  this  poynt  as  they  now  be  in  vnto  my  lord  the  ordered  timn 

«     J  J  J  to  be  sent  10 

36  soudan  that  hath  sent  vs  hether  /  And  telle  hym  that  he  dar  not  ti.esondan 

1  Orig.  onte.  3  Ori{f.  fflau>idees. 

*  Fr.  "en  ung  toil  a  porceaulx,"  in  a  pig-stye.     Caxton  evidently  did  not 
understand  " toit." 


192  The  Christians  suffer  from  Famine.     [Ch.  CXXVIII. 

be  fore  aferd  of  thyse  men  that  he  comen  hether  /  ffor  we  haue 
to  show  him   enterprysed  and!  begonne  warre  ayenst  suche  men  as  he  may  see  / 
sort  of  men    late  me  allowe  with  this  werke,  ffor  there  shal  not  abyde  many  of 
waging  war.  them  /  but  I  shal  efface  and  destroye  them  alle  in  suche  wyse  as  4 
there  shal  nomore  be  spoken  of  them,  as  they  had  neuer  be  born  "  / 
Thus  ledde  they  thoo  cristen  men  vnto  the  soudan.   he  werale  wel 
to  haue  don  his  honour  /  in  this  that  he  sente  them  to  the  soudan  / 
This  turned    but  it  torned  hym  afterward?  to  his  shame  /  hym  thought  a  light  8 
hiashame.     thynge  to  vaynquysshe  the  cristen  men  whiche  had  not  yet  wel 
assayled!  them  / 

Of  the  grete  famyne  and  messeage  that  oure  men 
suffred    in    the    cyte    of    Anthyoche,    beynge  12 
assyeged  on  alle  sydes  by  the  sayde  Corbagat  / 

Capitulo  C.  xxviijl 

o       N  alle  partyes  was  the  cyte  thus  assieged  /  They  of  the  toun 
Li  leaf  88]    ne  myght  not  yssue  out  for  to  pourchasse  vytaylle  fur  them.    xThey  16 
a  prievous     were  euyl  at  ease  of  this  meschyef  /  A  famyne  aroos  in  the  toun 
inthetowT  moche  grete  and  greuows  for  deffaulte  of  vytayll  /  in  suche  wyse 
that  they  ete  camels  asses  and  tho  horses,  and  yet  toke  they  werse 
thynges  /  whan  they  myght  gete  it,  ffor  who  that  had?  founden  a  20 
deed  hound  or  Catte,  They  ete  it  delyciously  in  stede  of  grete 
delices,  2ffor  the  hongry  wombes  made  no  dauwger  to  6eche  suche 
as  they  myght  fylle  them  with.2  the  grete,  hye,  and  noble  men  that 
were  acustomed  to  be  moche  honoured  /  had  now  no  shame   to  24 
E«eh  one       conie  there  wher  they  ete  suche  mete  /  but  wente  oueral  moche 
S^hl    fowlly,  and  demaurcded  playnly  such  as  they  neded  /  The  ladyes, 
might  and  it.  gentii  wymmen  ancn  maydens,  had  alle  langour  of  hongre.     They 

were  alle  pale  and  lene  /  Many  were  compelled  to  begge,  and  aske  28 
with  moche  grete  shame  /  There  was  none  that  myght  haue3  so 
harde  an  herte  but  that  he  shold  haue  had  grete  pyte  to  haue  seen 
it  /  ther  were  many  men  and  wymmen  that  aduysed  them  of  what 
soma  wen  lygnage  they  were  of  born  /  that  had  suche  courage  ferme  in  theyr  32 
dohur,da»°d  hertes  /  that  for  none  anguysshe  that  they  suffred  of  hongre  wold 
Xe»T"'  not  goo  axe  their  breed4  fro  dore  to  dore  /  Thyse  peple  hydde  them 
in  theyr  howses.     Somme  that  knewe  it  /  dyde  to  them  yet  somme 


their  houses. 


2—2 


Fr.  "  Car  les  vcntris  familleux  ne  faisoicnt  dangler  de  querre  dont  ilz 
f assent  rcmplis,"  i.  e.  "the  hungry  stomachs  did  not  refuse  to  seek  that  with 
which  they  might  be  filled."  3  Orig.  hane.  l  Orig.  beed. 


Ch.  CXXIX.]     There  was  great  Suffering  from,  Hunger.  193 

socour  /  But  ther  were  many  that  deyed  for  hongre  that  had  not  for 

to  ete  /  There  myght  men  see  knyghtes  and!  other  valyaunt  men  Even  the 

I  J  °  *  °  kniglits  were 

that  had  be  to  fore  stronge  and!  noble  in  theyr  werkes  /  that  now  ^^J*  •» 
4  were  so  feble  and!  pours  that  they  wente  by  the  stretes  lenyng  on . 
their  staues  /  and  theyr  heedes  euclynyug  doun  askynge  breed  for 
goodes  loue  /  There  shold  ye  haue  seen  the  lytil  ChiJderen  that  soke 
theyr  moders  pappes.  And!  the  moders  had  nothyng  to  ete  /  But 1 
8  threwe  them  doun  in  the  stretes  to  thende  that  other  shold  norysshe 
them,  with  grete  payne  shold  ye  haue  i'ourade  one  onely  man  emong 
so  moche  peple  that  had!  sufficiently  that  hym  neded!  /  ffor  yf  ony 
had!  be  that  had!  Gold!  or  Syluer,  It  auaylled!  hym  nothyng,  ffor  he  One  couid^ 

12  founde  no  mete  for  to  bye  with  it  /  the  barons  and  the  hye  prynces  £oenaetfor 
that  were  acustomed!  to  holde  the  fayr  courtes  /  and  to  gyue  mete 
and  drynke  to  many  men.  they  hydde  them  now  /  by  cause  none 
shold  fynde  them  etyng  ne  drynkyng,  they  had!  gretter  anguysshe 

16  in  theyr  hertes  of  this  famyne  /  than  had  the  poure  peple  /  ffor 

they  mette   euery  day  theyr   knyghtes  and   theyr  men  of  theyr 

countrees  that  deyde  for  hungre,  And  they  had  no  mete  to  gyue  to 

them  /  It  were  a  lone  thyng  to  recounte  alle  the  meseases  and1  the  it  would  take 

11111  a  'ons ,ime 

20  meschvefs  that  were  suffred  within  Anthyoche  whyles  the  tempeste  to  recount  ail 

•»  that  they 

endured  /  But  so  moche  may  wel  be  sayd,  that  selde  or  neuer  shal  ^^in 
ye  fynde  in  hystorye  /  that  so  grete  prynces,  and!  2one  so  grete  an  [*  if.  88,  bk.] 
hooste  suffred  suche  anguyssh  of  hungre. 

24  How  the  turkes,  felyng  that  our  men  were  in  suche 
meschyef  of  hongre,  enforced  them  for  tassaylle 
the  cyte  /  ca°  Cxxix. 

Hyles  that  the  Cyte  was  thus  on  alle  partes  assieged!  with 
28  w      turkes,  And!  the  famyne  ran  so  anguysshous,  They  that  were 

without  /  and  knewe  the  euyl  couyne  of  our  people  lefte  not  to  Those  out- 

'  °  side  asi-ailed 

assaylle  the  walles  alle  the  longe  daye,  The*y  of  the  dongeon,  And!  vigorously, 
the  other  that  cam  in  by  the  yate  /  cam  and!  made  grete  assaylles  in 
32  the  toun.  they  had  made  them  so  wery  /  that  oure  men  myght  not 
wel  deffende  them,  and!  vnnethe  kepe  the  toun.  ffor  whan  they  had! 
defended  them  alle  the  longe  day  /  at  euen  they  had  nothynge  to 
ete  /  wherof  it  happed  that  a  tour  by  that  syde  where  our  men  our  men  wit 

'  r  .  a  tower  un- 

36  entred  was  euyl  kept,    and  on  a  nyght  the  turkes  cam  withoute  defended. 
forth  /  And?  apperceyued!  wel   that  noman  was  within   the  tour. 

■      1  Orig.  Bnt. 
GODFREY.    ,  O 


194 


Some  Turks  mount  into  the  Towers.     [Ch.  CXXX. 


Ttie  Turks 
mounted 
and  entered. 


The  crusad- 
ers rushed 
thither,  and 
threw  them 
all  down  hi 
the  ground, 
breaking 
their  legs 
and  necks. 


thenne  they  toke  laddres  that  they  had  made,  And  mounted  vpon 
the  walles  /  ther  were  .xxx.  that  wente  vnto  this  tour  for  to  entre 
in  /  And  this  was  at  the  begynnyng1  of  the  nyght.  The  maister  of 
the  watche  wente  serchyng*  right  there  /  And!  sawe  the  turkes  4 
comen  vp  there,  And1  cryed  treson,  treson.  And  thenne  awoke 
fyrst  and  ran  theder  harry  dasque  /  and  two  of  his  cosyns  with 
hym  /  that  one  named  ffranke,  And  that  other  Semer.1  They  were 
hothe  of  the  toun  called  Mathale2  vpon  the  mase.  Thyse  thre  8 
smote  in  emong  the  .xxx.  turkes  at  theyr  fyrst  comyng  they  slewe 
four.  They  of  the  toures  sawe  them,  hut  not  so  sone.  the  other 
.xxvj.  turkes  deffended1  them.  But  this  dured  hut  a  whyle,  ffor 
they  of  the  toures  threwe  them  doun  to  the  ground  /  where  they  1 2 
brak  their  legges  and?  neckes.  Ther  was  none  that  fylle,  but  he  was 
deed  or  maymed.  Ther  was  slayn  Semer,  ffor  he  was  hurt  with  a 
swerd  thurgh  the  bely.  ffrank  was  born  away,  whiche  was  hurte 
peryllously.  16 


[*  leaf  89] 
Many  ran 
away  rather 
than  suffer 
hunger. 


The  Turks 
burnt  all  the 
ships  in  the 
harbour. 


Our  men  are 
now  in  great 
despair, 


How  Corbagat  sente  his  men  of  Armes  for  to  slee  the 
maronners  that  were  at  the  porte  /  wherof  oure 
men  bade  a  grete  losse.  Capitulo  .C.  xxx° 

a3      Han  the  famyne  grewe  thus  euery  day  in  anthyoche,  many  20 

there  were  in  the  toun  that  had1  leuer  be  slayn,  than  to  abyde 
thus  the  hongre.     They  put  them  in  aduenture  /  &  by  nyght 
yssued  4oute  of  the  toun  whan  they  myght  escape  After  they  wente 
to  the  porte  of  the  see.     Somme  shippis  there  were  yet  of  grekes,  24 
and"  of   hermyens  that   brought,  vytaylle  /  many  ther  were  that 
bought  it  /  And  cam  and  solde  it  in  the  toun5  by  nyght  in0  hydles. 
whan  the  turkes  apperceyued  this  /  many  tymes  they  awayted 
them  /  and  slewe  many  of  them  /  Atte  laste  for  to  take  away  this  23 
lytil  socour  that  they  had.  the  turkes  sente  two  thousand  horsmen 
to  the  see  /  whiche  slewe  alle  the  maronners  and  marchauntes  that 
they  founde,  And  brente  their  shippes.     Somme   ther  were   that 
laye  at  an  ancre  in  the  see,  and  they  fledde  /  Thenue  had  our  men  32 
loste  alle  theyr  hope  for  vytayll,  ffor  the  yles  of  the  see  as  Cypres 
Rhodes  /  And  other  lyenge  od  the  se3  side,  As  Cylyce,  pamphyle, 
and  of  other  costes  durste  nomore  sende  theyr  Shippes  theder  / 

1  Fr.  Soemer.     Lat.  Sigemaro.  2  Fr.  Machalc. 

3  ?  t  or  w.  6  Orig.  tonn. 

6  B.  en  musecteus,  A.  en  (upinage,  L  e.  secretly. 


Ch.  CXXXL]     The  Common  Soldiers  refuse  to  obey  the  Barons.     195 
They  of  the  toun1  of  Anthyoche  were  nowe  euyl  demened  /  ffor  to  «ndin  a 

J  J  J  I  dangerous 

fore  to  them  cam  somme  comforte  of  the  marchauns.     Now  they  rito»Uon. 
had  alle  loste  it  /  whan    the  turkes  retourned  fro  the    see    they 

4  recountred  our  pour  pilgryms  whiche  wente  that  way  /  they  slewe 
them  alle,  sauf  somme  whiche  hychle  them  in  the  husshes  /  whan 
they  of  the  toun  herde  tydynges  herof  how  they  were  slayn  they 
were  moche  sorowful,  ffor  they  had*  ouer  grete  anguysshe  in  theyr 

8  hertes  as  ofte  as  ony  mesauenture  fyl  to  their  peple.  In  this  poynt 
were  they  with  in  the  Cyte,  and  wold  take  none  hede  to  theyr  The  common 

i-i  it  i        people  would 

warde,  ne  wold  not  obeye  to  the  barons,  whiche  myght  thenne  uoo  no  longer 

mi  i  ii       i  ol)ey  their 

to  them  no  good*.     Thus  were  they  in  grete  perylle  /  leaders. 

12  How  guyllem  de  grateuylle  and  his  felaws  fugytyfs 
cam  in  to  Allexandrye  the  lasse  /  ca°  Oxxxj° 

g2      Vyllem  de  Grateuylle  &  the  other  that  fledde  with  hym  cam  At  Aiexan- 
in  to  Allexandrye  the  lytyl.     There  they  founde  steuen,  Tlierle  the  deserters 

1G  of  Chartres,  Of  whom  they  of  Anthyoche  abode  his  comynge  fro  Stephen  of 
daye  to  daye  /  ffor  the  barons  and1  the  niene  peple  supposed1  that 
he  wold  remembrc  how  he  departed  /  and?  retorne  agayn  /  They 
told  hym  the  grete  sorowe  of  the  famyne  that  was  in  Anthyoche, 

20  and  to  thende  that  they  excused  them  of  their  departyng  /  truly 

the  trouthe  of  the  mesease  was  grete,  But  they  told  moche  more  and  per- 

,  .  ,        fv        t        ,       ,  suaded  liim 

than  it  was  /  It  was  a  light  thyng  to  reteyne  this  erle,  ftor  he  had  m.ttogoto 

'  o  J      n  J  >  tlie  he,p  ()f 

no  grete  talente  for  to3  retorne.    They  toke  counseyl  bytwene  them  /  th"se  >" 
24  &  made  theyr  shippes  to  be  in  poynt  and  redy  /  And  after  entred 
in  to  them  /  and  so  wente  to  the  see  /  and  whan  they  hat?  ben,  I 
wote  not  how  many  4dayes  in  the  see.  they  arryued  at  a  Cyte  of  [♦lf.so.bk] 
themperours  of  Constantynoble,  whiche  as  was  sayd  to  them  cam  Hearing  that 

,,  ,       .  the  Empernr 

28  with  alle  his  hoost  nioch  greet  and  merueyllous,  of  grekes  and  of  ofOonxtauti- 

nople  was  at 

httyns,  and  hasted  moche  for  to  goo  to  Anthyoche.  he  was  thenne  Finimine  on 

J        '  °  J  his  way  to 

in  a  Cyte  not  ferre  from  thens   named  ffynemyne,  he  wold  well  Antioch, 
holde  couenaunte  /  that  he  had  made  to  socour  our  peple  with  the 

32  peple  of  his  Em  pyre.     And  ther  cam  in  his  companye  wel  /  xl.  M  accompanied 
pylgryms  that  had  abyden  in  his  londe  of  the  grete  hooste,  by  cause  JJJJJ  *Jjj| 
of  sekenes  or  for  other  causes.     And  grete  nombre  were  comen  syth  enms. 
fro  theyr  couratrees  for  theyr  pylgremages,  whiche  durste  not  passe 

36  his  londes  vnto  Anthyoche  by  them  self  /  And  thenne  siewed 
themperour.  whan  the  Erie  Stephen  knewe  that  the  Emperour  was 

1  Orifj.  tonn.         -  Fr.  guillamnc  dc  gratemcnil.         z  Orig.  to  for. 

v   2 


196    Stephen  discourages  the  Emperor  of  Constantinople.   [Ch.  CXXXII. 
they  went      so  nygh,  he  wente  strayt  to  hym,  And?  brought  his  felaws  cowardes 

to  him. 

with  hym.    whan  themperour  sawe  them  /  he  made  grete  ioye  / 

The  Emperor  And  receyued1  therle  esteuen  honorably,  ffor  he  helde  hym  in  pass- 
received 
them  honour- yng  thurgh  his  londe  for  a  moche  wyseman  and  a  valyaunt,  and  4 

wondered       was  wel  acqueynted?  with  hym.  he  demauwded  hym  moche  entent- 

tlmt  they  had  ^      J  J  J 

lea  their       yf[y  0f  the  renienaunt1  of  the  barons  /  And  sayde  he  had  grete 

coinp:inion8.     «      »  '  "  ° 

merueylle  /  how  he  was  thus  departed  fro  their  coinpanye. 


How  therle  of  chartres  discoraged  themperour  of  Con-  8 
stau tinople  that  he  shold  not  goo  and  socoure 
our  peple  in  Anthyoche.  Capitulo  C  xxxij0 

t        He  Erie  answerd?  in  this  maner,  and  raycle  to  themperour  / 
Sire,  the  barons  of  ffrau?*ce  whiche  passed  this  yere  by  your  1 2 

empyre,  whom  ye  receyued  so  curtoysly  &  with   grete   honour. 

whan  they  had  taken  Nycene,  whiche  they  rendred  to  you*  They 
The  Eari       passed?  vnto  Anthyoche.     They  assieged?  that  cyte  wel  ix  monethes. 
that  they       They  haue  taken  it  entierly,  Reserued?  a  dongeon,  whiche  stondeth  16 
Antiochnine  upon   an   hylle  within    the  walles,  whiche   the   turkes   holde   so 

montlis;  . 

strongly   that   it    is    unprenable    /   They   supposed1   to   haue   wel 

exployted  whan  they  had  goten  this  Cyte  /   But    thenne  they  fylle 

but  just  as     in  gretter  peryll  than  to  fore,    ffor  on  the  thirde  day  after  that  they  20 

it'cjorhagat     entred  Cam  Corbagat,  a  puyssaunt  prynce  of  perse,  whiche  brought 

besieged        so  moche  peple  that  alle  the  countrey  by  was  couerd  with  them. 

tliem  in  turn.  n»  ii  r^ 

Oure.  peple  sufrred  gret  anguyssh2  thenne,  ffor  this  Corbagat,  with 
his  peple,  enuyronned  them  on  alle  partes  in  suche  wyse  that  oure  24 
men  myght  not  yssue,  and  dyde  to  them  moche  payne  in  assayllyng 
them  with  out3  forth.  And1  the  dongeon  made  to  them  grete 
[♦leaf 90]  assaylles  within  4forth  by  whiche  our  men  suffred  grete  mesease  / 
They  were      And1  also  thanguyssh  of  hongre  was  so  grete,  that  they  had  no  28 

now  suffering  ,  _       _        "- 

great  anguish  power  to  defende  them.     On  that  other  syde  /  they  had!  otner- 

from  hunger.    *  '  .  »ii 

whyle  comfort  of  youre  londe  /  ffor  the  yles  of  the  see,  And1  also 
fro  other  portes  cam  somtyme  vytaylle  /  that  was  brought  in  to 
Anthyoche,  But  now  late  ben  comen  the  turkes,  And?  haue  slayn  32 
alle  the  maronners  and  the  marchauntes  that  they  fonde  atte  porte 

1  Fr.  "de  la  demourance  des  autres  barons."  A.  gives  "  de  la  contenance," 
which  is  the  correct  version.  Lat.  "  interrogans  igit.ur  ab  eo  Imperator  diligcnter 
de  vita  ct  salute  ct  statu principitcm,  ct  quaenam  essct  causa  quod  ab  aliis  redirct." 

-  Orig.  angyussh.  3  Orig.  ont. 


Ch.  CXXXIL]     Guy  on,  Brother  of  Bohcmond,  is  very  angry.         107 

in  suche  wyse,  that  nowe  ther  dare  nomoo  arryue  there  /  wherfore 

they  haue  loste  alle  theyr  socours  of  vytaylle  /  Am?  ahoue  alle  this  Above  «n 

tliey  of  the  toun  be  greuyd  nyght  and  day  by  them  of  the  dongeon,  jjjjfjjy^** 

4  ffor  by  the  yate  vnder  it  the  turkes  may  entre  and  ysaue  whan  it  ^^'{jj1" 
plesyth  them  /  we  sawe  that  this  werke  myght  come  to  no  good  J^u"^' 
ende  in  this  maner,  wherfor  we  warned  Ihem,  bothe  my  self  and 
thyse  that  be  in  my  companye,  whiche  be  moche  noble  &  wyse- 

8  men  oftymes,  that  ayenst  the  wylle  of  god  they  shold  not  enter- 
prise to  conquere  this  countrey  /  But  shold  departe  with  the  lest  Nor  woui.i 

^  J    '  r  they  lieed 

losse  they  myght,  And  the  peple  that  folowed  them  /  they  shold  Steven's 

»        J  °      '  r    r  '         ."  advice  to  flee 

coreduyte  in  to  such  a  place  that  they  shold  not  be  delyuerd  to  to  a  place of 
12  dcth  /  Many  tymes  we  sayd  to  them  in  this  manere  /  And  neuer 
wold  they  here  vs  ne  byleue,  But  mayntene   theyr  reuerye,  ffor 
ther  be  many  emonge  them  in  whom  is  lytil  reson  /  we  our  self 
had  ben  deed  yf  we  had  abyden  there  /  ne  we  myght  doo  none 
16  honour  to  our  lord  ne  to  our  prouffyte,  Therfor  we  departed,  And  Jl,erefo'e ''« 
commaunded  them  to  god  /  whiche  saue  them  and  kepe,  for  they  left  them, 
haue  nede  /  Ye,  syre,  to  whome  I  am  bounden  in  good  fayth  /  I 
aduyse  you,  that  ye  take  counseyl  of  your  wyse  men  to  fore  ye  goo 
20  ony  ferther  /  Trouth  it  is  that  ye  be  the  moost  hye  man  of  the 
world  /  But  for  al  that  ye  haue  not  here  now  in  your  companye  so 
moche  peple  as  Corbagat  hath  aboute  Anthyoche,  And  ayenst  one 
of  you  he  hath  seuen  /  tberfore  myn  oppynyon  is  yf  the  other  so  Stephen 

,  .  ,  advises  the 

2-t  acorde,  that  to  fore  your  men  be  put  in  so  gret  aduenture  ye  retorne  Emperor  not 
homo  agayn.     For  yf   ye  approuche  them  /  And  that  they  haue  Anttoch. 
achyeued  theyr  werke  in  the  Cyte,  ye  shal  fynde  them  redy  /  & 
the  more  ner  ye  approuche  them  /  the  more  shame  and  vyle  shal  it 

28  be  to  retorne  fro  them  whan  ye  be  so  nyghe  them,  thise  thynges 
that  I  haue  acou«ted  to  you,  knowe  wel  thise  valyaunt  men  that 
be  here  with  me  /  &  also  a  grete  parte  maye  ye  knowe  by  this 
good   man   that  ye   delyuerd    to  vs  /  that  is  wete    tantyn    your 

32  seruaunt,1  whiche  is  so  wyse  and  trewe,  whiche  departed  fro  vs  for 
many  defaultes,  that  he  apperceyued  with  vs.    whan  he  had  sayd  all 
this  /  themperour  was  moche  ameuyd  of  thise  wordes,  2with  hym  [2  if.  90,  bk.] 
was  a  brother  of  Buymont  named  guyon,  that  whan  he  had  herd  wJmuS?101 

36  therle  Stephen  thus  speke  /  he  was  alle  wroth  and  angry  /  And  as  Staspeech. 
half  araged  for  despyte  sayde  al  on  hye  /  that  he  sayd  not  the 
truthe  /  But  that  they  were  departed  as  Cowardes.     He  had  moo 
grete  wordes  /  but  goyllevn  de  gratemenyl,  which  was  a  gentilnian 

1  Oriy.  scruauut. 
1  6 


198  The  Emperor  returns  to  Constantinople.     CXXXIII. 

born  of  lygnage,  And  not  of  courage,  And*  had1  to  his  wyf  the 
suster  of  the  same  guyen,  made  hym  to  holde  his  peas,  And  blamed 
hym  by  cause  he  spak  ayenst  therle  steuen.  And  so  this  guyen 
forbare  hym.  4 

How  by  the  warnynges  of  the  sayd  Erie  /  themperour, 
whiche  wold  haue  goon  &  socoured  our1  men, 
retorned  shortly.  ca°  C  xxxiij. 

v       Pon  thyse  wordes  that  themperour  had  herd  /  he  wolde  be  8 
Tiie  Emperor  couraseylled,  and  called*  his  barons.     And  alle  they  acorded 

conndi  of  his  that  themperour  shold  retorne  fro   thens,  wher   he  was  withoute 

biuons,  and 

munThume   goyng1  ony  ferther  /  ffor  they  thought  it  were  better  to  remeue  Ids 

peple  withoute    perylle  and!  hurte  than  for  to  fyght    in  so  grete  12 
meschyef  ayenst  Corbagat,  And  to  meue  ayenst  hym  in  hate  and2 
in  warre  all  the  londe  of  thoryent  /  He  byleuyd  so  fermely  the 
wordes  of  therle  Stephen  /  that  he  doubted  that  the  turkes  had 

Hewsso      slayn  them  of  Anthyoche  /  And  wold  thenne  goc  in  to  his  londe  16 

lmicli  afraid  "  '  ° 

of  corbagat.    for  to  receyue  the  Cyte  of  Nycene  /  And  alle  the  londe  of  Bythynie, 
whiche  oure  men  had  delyuerd  to  hym  /  he  wold  garnysshe  it  / 
wliau  he  departed  fro  thens  he  brente  and  destroyed?  alle  the  londe 
fro3  the  cryne  vnto  Nycene  on  both  sydea,  4By  cause  the  turkes  20 
shold  not  folowe  hym,  vytaylle  began  to  faylle  him,  And  so  he 

intiiisway    muste  retourne4  /  Thus  it  happed  that  by  the  wordes  of  this  grete 

the  Chris-  '  trr  .      j  o 

Antf  "h  lost  niau  /  ^ia^  so  ^ow^y  departed  fro  the  other  barons  /  themperour 
tl!atu*eyUt  retorned(,  &  the  Cristen  peple  beyng1  in  Anthyoche  lost  so  grete  24 
]™jht  have  socours  /  by  whiche  myght  haue  comen  alle  theyr  delyucraunce  in 
so  grete  necessyte  as  they  were  thenne,  But  consydered?  this  that 
was  gyue  to  be  vnderstonde  to  Themperour,  yet  lie  dyde  not  /  But5 
The  result      his  deuoyre.     Certaynly  it  was  the  werke  of  our  lord,  ffor  yf  this  28 

showed  that  J  J       J  ' 

tins  was  the    Einperour   that  cam  with  his  peple,  and  grete  power  of   men  al 
Lord,  fresshe  had  reysed  the   siege  /  &  discomfyted   the  turkes  /  oure 

lord  shold  not  haue  ben  so  honoured  ne  thanked  /  And  yf  of  the 
trauayll  that  the  barons  and  the  other  pylgryms  had  suffred,  them-  32 

1  Orifj.  onr.  -  Grig.  and'. 

3  Caxton's  French  MS.  is  here  corrupted,  " Dcs  Ic  Coinc  jusqucs  a  Nique." 
A.  gives  the  correct  reading,  " Dcz  Icoinc  (Lat.  Iconium),  jusqucs  a  Nique." 

4—4  Fr.  "  Afin  que  sc  les  Turcz,  les  vauls'sscnt  suivrc,  ritaille  leur  faulsist, 
se  Irs  eust  couvenu  retoumer,"  viz.,  "in  order  that  if  the  Turks  should  desire 
to  follow  them,  food  would  fail  them,  and  they  would  be  obliged  to  return 
home."  5  Ori'j.  But. 


Ch.  CXXXIV.]    The  Crusaders  in  Antioch  arc  wliolly  discouraged.    199 

perour  that  come  laste  shold  hauc  had  the  vyctorye,  theyr  payne  jnoitettiat 

shold  not  haue  ben  so  wel  guerdonned  /  Therfor  our1  lord  snfl'red  uwumWit 

that  themperour  departed  /  And  that  the  2werke  shold  be  accom-    [»ieafai] 

4  plysshed,  as  ye  shal  here  to  his  glorye  and  honour  of  his  peple  /         HURiory,10 

and  to  their 
own  honour. 

How  our3  peple  of  Anthyoche  beyng  aduertysed  herof 
were  all  discouraged,  And  Corbagat  enhaunced 
in  pryde  /  ca°  C  /  xxxiiij0 

8  r        Enommee  cam  in  to  Anthyoche,  that   thewperour  that  was 
approched  by  the  wordes  of  therle  Stephen,  of  Guyllcm  de 
gratemenyll  /  And  of  theyr  felaws  was  torned  back  /  They  had  on 
alle  sydes  anguysshes  /  But  thyse  tydynges  empoysonned  them  alle,  ™*f*™m 

12  And  put  them  as  in  despayr  /  thenne  began  they  to  curse  the  Erie  An^chli7^e 
Stephen  and*  alle  his  companye  that  had  taken  fro  them  so  grete  g^y^* 
ayde  /  Corbagat4  that  had!  knowleche  that  Themperour  cam,  had?  Eu>Peior. 
moch  doubte  of  his  comyng  /  ffor  it  was  a  grete    thyng  of    the 

16  puyssaunce  of   themperour.     Now   was    he    certayn    that    he   was 

retorned,  Wherof  he  had  moch  grete  ioye  in  his  herte.     he  was  but  corbagat 

'  °  "  rejoiced 

risen  in  a  moch  tiers  pryde.     He  ran  the  more  asprely  on  them  of  greatly, 
the  toun  /  Oure  men  in  the  toun  were  so  abasshed,  that  them  semed 

20  wel  that  oure  lord  god!  had  alle  forgete  them.  They  lete  them  falle 
in  despayre,  And  wold  not  endure  no  trauaylle  that  apperteyned  to 
the  defence  of  the  Cyte  /  Alle  hydde  them  in  theyr  bowses  /  On  a 
day  it  happed  that  Buymont,5  whiche  had  alle  the  power  of  thoost, 

2-1  had?  to  doo  with  men  /  ffor  thassaultes  withoute  forth,  and  lor 
thassaylles  within  forth  /  He  dyde  do  crye  on  peyn  of  deth  that 
alle  shold  come,  And  there  came  none.  He  sente  his  men  for  to 
fetche  them  in  theyr  bowses  and  somone  them  to  come,  And  none 

2S  wold  come  oute.     He  was  abasshed  /  And  thought6  what  he  shold  Bohwnond 

~ "  '  u  had  to  set 

doo.  Atte  laste  he  sette  fyre  in  the  toun  in  dyuerse  places,  And  JJL^jgJ^ 
thenne  yssued  in  to  the  stretes  grete  rowtes  /  Buymont  sawe  them,  J^1^ 
and  sayd  to  hem  his  commaundement  /  And  bad  what  they  shold  u,ei1' du^- 

32  doo  /  they  dyd    it  /  A  worde  sourded   in   the    toun   that  many  u  «•«*  re- . 
knyghtes  and  Barons  had  had!  counseyl  pryuely  emonge  them  that  ["J^™* 
they  wold  yssue  oute  of  the  toun7  by  nyght,  And  leue  the  pepole  f^ffS1 
within. 

36        And  wold  doo  the  best  they  myght,  and?  drawe  them  to  the 

1  Orig.  onr.  3  Orig.  onr.  4  Orig.  Crobagat. 

5  Orig.  iiuymout.  ■  Orig.  thought  7  Orig.  toun. 


200    Godfrey  begs  the  Barons  to  continue  the  Pilgrimage.  [Ch.  CXXXV. 


Duke  Godfrey 
begged  the 
barons,  for 
the  love  of 
God,  to 
abandon  this 
thought. 

P  If.  91,  bk.] 


His  entreaties 
prevailed 
with  them. 


But  they 
complained 
bitterly  of 
their  priva- 
tions. 


porte  for  to  entre  vpon  the  see.     The  due  Godeffrey  knewe  this 
word1,  he  sente  hastely  for  the  bisshop  of  puy,  And  alle  the  barons 
and  grete  partye  of  the  knyghtes,  and  he  fylle  at  theyr  feet,1  and 
requyred2  them  for  the  lone  of  god1  that  they  wold?  neuer  thynke  4 
suche  a  thynge,  ffor  yf  they  dyd  so,  god*  shold  hate  them  /  And 
they  sholdf  lese  theyr  sowlesr  as  men  that  were  in  despayre  of  the 
mercy  of  oure  lore?.     3And  on  that  other  syde  in  the  world  they 
shold  lese  their  honour  for  euer  and  also  theyr  lygnage,  whiche  had  8 
nothyng  forfayted,  And  shold  be  shamed  euer,  and  poynted  with 
the  fingre.     The  londes  out  of  whiche  they  yssued  shold  be  the 
lasse  renomed  and  lasse  preysed  as  long  as  the  world  shold  endure. 
Of  alle  thise  departynges  myght  they  neuer  receyue  good  worde  ne  12 
honoure.     By  thyse  wordes,  and  by  the  prechyng  of  the  bisshop  of 
puy  they  loste  this  euyl  talente,  alle  that  had  be  in  this  euyll4 
purpoos.5     But  they  began  to  affeble  in  the  toun  for  honger  and* 
mesease,  in  suche  wyse  that  they  abode  not,  but  the  wylle  of  oure  16 
lord  /  Ofte  cam  in  theyr  remembraunce  what  goodes  /  Ky chesses, 
and  grete  eases  they  had  lefte  in  theyr  countrees6.for  the  loue  of  the 
seruyse  of  oure  lord.     And  now  yelded  he  to  them  suche  guerdon 
that   they  deyed  euery  day  for  honger  /  And  kept  hem  not  fro  20 
thyse  dogges  cruel,  whiche  byleuyd  not   in  hym,  but  they  slewe 
and  beheded  them  in  despyte  &  reprouche  of  the  Cristen  fayth. 
In  this  maner  wold  they  chyde  with  our  lord  often  as  men  that 
wyste  not  what  to  do  ne  saye.  24 


Harry  D'As- 
que,  one  of 
the  best 
knights  in 
the  array, 
died  of 
hunger. 


How  the  spere  was  founden  of  whiche  Ihesus  was 
percyd  on  the  crosse.  And  of  the  comfort  that 
our  pylgryms  toke  thereby.  Capitulo  Cxxxv" 

w      Hyles  as  they  were  in  this  anguysshe  therle  herman,  an  hye  28 

man  of  duche  land,  was  in  so  grete  pouerte7  /  that  due  godefroy 
dyde  do  delyuer  to  hym  euery  day  one  loof  of  breede  for  pyte 
whiche  was  not  moche  grete  /  But  the  Due  myght  no  more  gyue 
hym  /  ffor  he  had  not  wherof  /  Harry  dasque  whiche  was  one  of  32 
the  beste  knyghtes  of  thooste  was  brought  in  so  grete  pouerte,  that 
he  deyde  for  hongre.  It  were  a  long  thyng  for  to  recounte  all  their 
meseases;  but  our  lord  that  in  alle  his  werkes  may  not  forgete 
mercy  /  serete  to  them  grete  co?»fort.     ffor  a  clerk  born  in  pro-  36 


1  Orig.  feetr. 
Orig.  purpops. 


2  Orig.  reqnyred. 
6  Orig.  conntrees. 


Orig.  enyll. 
Orig.  ponerte. 


Ch.  CXXXV.]  .  TJie  Spear  with  which  our  Lord  was  pierced  is  found.  201 

uynce  named  peter,  cam  on  a  day  to  the  bysshop  of  puy  and  to  TWpo»ue 
therle  of  tholouse,  &  sayd  to  them  in  moche  grete  drede,  that  the  w~™rt»' 
holy  apostel  seynt  andrew  had  appiered  to  hym  thryes  in  the  nyght  i» »  <^m, 
i  slepyng,  &  warned  hym  that  he  shold  goo  to  the  barons  &  saye 
to  them  /  that  the  speer  with  which  our  lord  was  percid  in  the  syde  mdtade Wm 
on  the  crosse  was  hyd  in  the  chirch  of  seint  peter  in  the  cyte,  the  getert  ^ 
place  where  it  was  he  had  certainly  shewd  to  hym  /  he  said  wel  JJg^JJJ,,, 
8  that  he  was  not  come  for  to  saye  ne  signefye  them  /  but  that  seynt  »^°'d  waa 
andreu  had  menaced  hym  at  the  last  tyme  yf  he  diile  not  his 
message  /  he  shold  meshappen  in  his  body.    llt  was  no  merucylle  yf    p  leaf  02] 
the  clerke  doubted  for  to  saye  this  /  ffor  he  was  a  poure  man  and 

12  of  a  lowe  lygnage  /  And  but  lytil  lettred.  Thyse  two  hye  men 
whan  they  herd  hym  they  brought  hym  to  fore  the  other  barons. 
They  assembled  them,  and  they  wolde  that  he  shold  saye  to  them 
the  same  wordes  as  he  had  sayd  to  them  /  whan  the  other  Prynces 

1 6  herd  this,  they  mysbyleuyd  not  the  clerke  /  They  cam  in  to  the 
Chirche  of  seynt  Peter.  And  sayd  theyr  confessions.  And  cryed 
our  lord  mercy  in  teres,  wepynges,  and  wayllynges  /  And  repent- 
aunces  of  theyr  synnes.     Thenne  began  to  delue  and  dygg  depe  in  The  barons 

20  the  place  that  the  clerke  had  shewed  to  them.     They  fonde  the  and  tou.,d 

•»  "  the  spear. 

spere  lyke  as  he  had  sayd  to  them.     Thenne  had  they  a  Ioye 

emonge  them  so  grete,  lyke  as  euery  man  had  had  as  moche  as  he 

myght  /  They  ronge  the  belles.     And  this  thynge  was  anon  spred 

24  al  about  the  toun.    They  ran  alle  to  the  chirche  hastely.    And  sawe 

this  noble  relyquye  whiche  was  doluen  out  of  therthe.    Therane  were  By  tins 

J  ^    J  miracle  all 

thicy  recomforted  alle,  both  men  and  wymmen,  poure  and  ryche  /  ww^cm* 
as  they  had  our  lord  emong  them  and  seen  hym,  there  were  thus  encouraged, 

28  many  other  good  men  that  sayde  certaynly  that  certeyn  vysyons  of 
Angeles  and  apostles  were  appered  to  them (28)  /  By  thyse  thynges 
the  peple  forgate  moche  of  theyr  meseases.  The  bisshop  of  puy  and 
other  holy  men  that  were  in  the  companye  sayd  to  the  pylgryms 

32  that  oure  lord  shewde  to  them  tokene  and  signe  /  that  shortly  he  and  t°o,f  >* 

""*  °        '  as  a  sign  that 

wold  sende  to  them  his  ayde  and  his  counseyl,  They  concluded  u^y  £o«i«i 
alle,  noble  and  vnnoble,  men  and  wymmen  /  grete  and  lytil  /  And  delivered, 
s.vare  vpon  the  holy  relyques  /  that  yf  our  lord  wold  delyuer  them 

36  oute  of  the  peryll  in  whiche  they  were,  And  gyue  them  vyctorye 
of  theyr  enemyes,  that  they  shold  neuer  departe  fro  this  holy  com- 
panye vnto  the  tyme  that  they  had  conquerd  Iherusalem,  that 
noble  Cyte,  where  our  lord  suffred  deth  for  to  saue  his  peple. 

40  And  shold  delyuer  the  holy  scpulcre  oute  of  the  handes  of  the  fals 

1  I  • 


202    Peter  the  Hermit  goes  on  an  Embassy  to  Corbagat.   [Ch.  CXXXVI. 

mysbyleuyng  hoxmdes,  turkes,  and  saresyns  that  kept  it  in  theyr 
power. 

How  Peter  theremyte  was  sente  by  our  men  vnto 
Corbagat  /  the  words  what  he  sayde.     And  the  4 
answer  of  the  sayd  Corbagat.     Capitulo  Cxxxvj'! 
After  twenty-  Hey  had?  suffred  this  famyne  .xxvj  /days  in  the  Cyto  /  In 

six  days  of 

famine  tiiey  t  so  moche  that  the  people  to  whome  our  lord  god  had  sente 
good  hope  in  theyr  hertes  began  moch  to  be  comforted  /  &  8 
fylle  alle  to  one  wylle  in  such  wise  that  they  sayd  emong 
[i  if.  92, bk.]  them  that  it  were  good  to  brynge  theyr  mesease  Ho  an  ende  / 
.ie<ide<i to  Th  erf  ore  was  theyr  comyn  acorde  that  they  shold  fyght  with  the 
Turks.  turkes  that  had  assieged  them,  ffor  they  thought  a  fayrer  thyng  12 

that  yf  our  lord  wold  that  they  deyde'in  bataylle,  that  they  shold! 
doo  it  in  deffendyng1  theyr  cyte  that  they  had  conquered  to  the 
Cristiente,  than  to  languysshe  and  to  faylle  within  without  essay- 
eng  yf  our  lord  wold  ayde  them  /  herof  sourded  a  comyn  word  16 
emonge  them  that  alle  cryed  bataylle,  bataylle  /  the  bataylle,  whan 
they  myght  see  ony  of  the  Barons.     Alle  they  sayde  that  they 
taryed  alle  to  longe.     This  word  was  thus  meuyd  of  the  mene 
peple.     The  barons  thought  that  this  enterprise  myght  well  come  20 
of  our  lord.     And  so  by  comon  acord  they  assembled  in  coimseyl. 
they  alowed   muche  this  that  the  peple   made  this  request,  and 
They  sent      acorded  that  they  wold  sende  to  this  proude  prynce  Corbagat,  Peter 
Hermit,  with  theremyte,  whiche  was  an  holy  man,  moche  wyse  and  wel  bespokin.  24 
interpreter,    And  delyuerd  to  hym  for  felaw  a  valyaunt  man  named  hellom(29), 
trewe  and  of  grete  wytte  that  coude  wel  speke  the  langage  of  the 
sarasyns.    And2  specially  the  langage  of  perse  /  They  charged  them 
with  the  message,  like  as  ye  shal  here  what  they  sayde  to  Corbagat  28 
Thise  two  sad  men  to  fore  sayd  dyde  do  demaunde  trews  for  to  goo 
to  the  sayd  Corbagat  /  ffor  they  wold  speke  with  hym  in  the  name 
of  the  pylgryms  /  hit  was  grannted  with  good  wyll,  They  wente 
out  of  the  Cyte  and  toke  with  him  good  companye,  whiche  were  32 
Arriving  at    assygned  to  them  /  they  wente  so  ferre  that  they  arryued  at  the 
fm«Mhim,cy  pauyllon  of  this  noble  prynce  Corbagat.     They  sawe  hym  sytte  in 
by'hbuieii.    moche  grete  bobaunce  emonge  his  ryche  men  /  Peter  salewed  hym 

nothyng,  ne  made  to  hym  honour  ne  reuerence.     But  spak  heeryng  36 
Peter  mi.       alio  in  this  maner  /  This  holy  companye  of  bye  &  noble  men  / 
tuwT  '    '    barons,  noble  knyghtes,  and  other  peple  of  our  lord  god  that  ben 

3  Crij.  aud. 


Ch.  CXXXVI.]     Corbagat  is  very  angry  at  his  Message.  203 

yonder  /  within   the  cyte  /  sende  to  the  &  comaunde  that  thou  "TtoChrfa- 

"  I  "  '  tians  coin- 

departe  fro  this  siege  /  &  that  thou  nomore  assaylle  them  /  hut  ™mi  you  to 

I  o       /  "  '  depart  from 

late  them  haue  and  kepe  the  toun  in  pees,  which  our  lordf  Ihesu  ««■  »'ege, 
4  crist  hath  delyuered  to  them  for  to  holde  his  faith  &  for  to  doo 
hym  seruyse.     ffor  seynt  peter  the  prynce  of  thappostles  /  vpon  the 
creaunce  of  whom  our  fayth  is  founded,  hath  conuerted  it  fyrst  by 
his  prechyng  /  And  by  the  merueyllous  myracles  that  lie  dyde  /andieare 
8  our  peple  hath  conquerd  it  not  long  syth  by  the  wyll  and  ayde  of  tineh,  wirfch 
oure  lord1  vpon  the  turkes,  that  haue  holden  it  with  wrong  and  by  wted  by  st. 
force  a  certeyn  tyme.     Therfor  thou  oughtest  to  suffre  vs  to  enioye 
our  herytage  /  And*  retorne  thou  in  to  thy  countrey,  and1  yf  thou 

12  wilt  not  so  doo  knowe  thou  for  certayn  that  within  the  thyrde  day 

swerdes  1scbal  fynysshe  and1  ende  this  debate.    And!  to  thende  that    ['  leaf  93] 
thou  complayne  not  that  we  desire  and  wille  the  deth  pourchasse  of 
so  moch  peple  in  comyn  bataylle,  they  shal  offre  to  the  this  /  that  is 

16  to  wete  /  yf  thou  wilt  fyght  in  thyn  owne  persone,  they  shal  sende  Theychai- 

lenge  you  to 

ayenst  the,  one  al  so  bye  a  prynce  as  thou  art,  to  whom  thou  shalt  Mnsiecom- 

J  '  j        t-  j  1  b;ltj  witu  one 

fyght.     And1  whiche  of  you  maye  vaynquysshe  and2  ouercome  that  of  tiieir  n 
other,  shal  conquere  the  quarelle  for  euerniore  withoute  other  debate. 

20  yf  this  thynge  plese  the  not  /  take  certayn  nombre  of  thy  men, 
vj.  x.  or  xij  /  or  as  many  as  thou  wylt  /  &  our  pilgryms  shal  sette 
as  many  ayenst  them,  withoute  ony  moo  of  that  one  syde  and1  that 
other.     And?  that  they  that  shal  wynne  the  feelde  shal  allewaye 

24  haue  the  gayne  of  this  debate.     When  Corbagat  herde  this  message 

he  was  moche  wroth  and?  angry,  and1  had?  grete  desdayne  and?  corbagat  «■:■* 
despyte  /  Thenne  he  teamed  hym  toward?  Peter  and?  sayd  to  hym  /  this  ines>;.-e, 
Peter  they  that  hath  sente  the  hether,  ben  not  in  such  poynt  as  me 

28  semeth  that  they  shold?  offre  to  me  for  to  chose  of  theyr  deuyses, 
But  they  be  brought  by  my  puyssaunce  and?  strengthe  that  they 
maye  doo  nothynge  of  theyr  wylle  /  But  I  shall  doo  witli  them 
alle  my  playsyre  /  But  retourne  thou  and?  saye  to  thyse  musardes,  and  said, 

32  and  saye  to  them  that  haue  made  the  to  meue  fro  the  Cyte  and  andteiiyonr 
come  hether,  that  they  vnderstonde  not  yet  the3  maluerte  that  they  that  they  are 
be  in  /  And  byleue  certaynly  /  that  yf  I  had  wold,  I  had  or  now  ditton  to 
broken  and  destroyed  this  toun  and  sette  my  men  therin  by  force, 

36  in  suche  wyse  that  the  cresten  men  had  be  alle  slayn  /  men  and 

wymmen  /  lytil  and  grete.     But  I  wyll  that  ye  abyde  in   more 

caytyfnes  and  mesease,  dyeng  &  languysshyng1  for  hongre  /  lyke  as 

other  houndes.     And?  whan  it  shal  please  me  /  I  shal  entre  in  to 

2  Uri<j.  ami.  3  Fr.  malciirtc,  misery,  misfortune. 


204  Peter  returns  with  Corbagat's  reply.     [Ch.  CXXXVII. 

when  i  am     the  toun,  &  alle  them  that  I  shal  fynde,  men  and?  wymnien  of 

ready  I  shall 

enter  the       couenable  ease,  I  shal  put  them  alle  bounden  handes  &  feet  in 

town,  and  o    >  r 

kill  or  take     iu   pyetcws  estate,   And?  shal  lede   thsm  alle  to  my  lorde  for  to 

all  of  them  rj  '  J 

away  as        serue  hym.     And  they  shal  be  his  esclaues  /  Alle  the  other  I  shall  4 

slaves.  J  J  ' 

slee  with  the  swerd,  lyke  an  euyl  tree  that  wyll  bere  no  fruyt  / 

How  the  sayd  Peter   retorned   in  to  the  toun,  and 
wold  openly  haue  sayd  his  message  /  &  of  the 
subtyl    counseyll  of   the    due  whiche   wold    not  8 
suffre  it  /  ca°  Cxxxvij0 

*p     Eter  theremyte  vnderstode  his  pryde  whiche  was  grete,  and'  of 
[2  if.  93,  bk.]  grete   quantite  of   peple   that    he    had?1  /  And   also   of   2his 

Peter  re-       Ry  chesses  whiche  were  ouer  moche  /  Thenne  he  departed?  and'  cam  12 

turned  home,  . 

agayn  in  to  the  toun.    he  wold  haue  sayd?  the  message  of  Corbagat 
openly  in  the  presence  of  them  that  wold  here  hym  /  ffor  theder 
ran  grete  and*  smale.     But  the  due  Godeffroy  that  was  moche  wyse 
but  Godfrey    and  knewe  moche,  drewe  hym  a  part,  and  called  only  the  barons,  16 

would  not  let 

him  tell  ins    and  bad  hym  saye  that  he  hath  founden,    he  recounted  to  them 

message  to 

the  people.     alle,  as  he  that  had?  wel  reteynetl'  in  his  mynde  /  &  coude  saye  and' 
vtter  it  in  the  best  manere  /  The  due  doubted  that  yf  the  peple  had? 
herd?  this  grete  pryde  and?  the  menaces  that  Corbagat  had  sayd'  /  20 
that  they  shold  be  ouer  moche  abasshed  and  feerd'.     Therfor  he 
commaunded  to  Peter  that  he  shold  saye  none  other  thyng  /  But 
that  only  Corbagat  desyred  and  demaunded   the    bataylle  ayenst 
them,  And?  that  they  shold  make  them  redy.     Peter  acorded?  wel  24 
therto,  And'  sayd  to  them  lyke  as  the  due  had  commaunded  hym  / 
They  all        And?  vnnetlie  Peter  had?  sayd?  the  worde  /  But  that  alle  cryed  with 
accord  cried    one  voys  /  And  we  wylle  also  the  bataylle  ayenst  hym  in  godes 
corbagat.       name.     They  shewde  wel  by  theyr  sight  and  semblaunce  that  the  28 
desyre  of  the  bataylle  was  grete  in  their  hertes.     Alle  their  meseases 
were  forgoten  for  Ioye  to  haue  the  vyctorye.     The  Barons,  whan 
they  sawe  that  theyr  peple  made  suche  ioye  they  were  moche  glad', 
And  moche  the  more  trusted  in  them.     By  comyn  counseyl  they  32 
The  next  day  ordeyned  the  day  of  the  batayll  on  the  morn  /  And  that  thus  wold' 

was  set  lor  .  ,  ,    ,  , 

the  battle.  Corbagat  haue  it,  they  byleuyd?  it  wel.  And?  hastely  wente  every 
man  to  his  lodgyng*.  There  ye  sholc?  haue  seen  Armourers  put  in 
poynt,  hauberks  and  helmes  fourbousshed  /  swerdes  and  custrellis  36 

1-1  Fr.  "Pierre  Termite  entendit  son  orgucil  qui  moult  grant  cstoit,  de  la 
grant  quantite  de  gens  qu'il  avoit." 


Ch.  CXXXVIII.]     The  Crusaders  prepare  to  attack  Curbagat.        205 

whette  /  This  nyght  slepte  they  not  in  the  toun  noraan  /  They  that  KojMnrtept 
kept  the  hors  toke  good  hede  this  nyght  /  And  made  alle  thynge  ttatnigiit. 
redy.     As  soone  as  it  was  nyght,  It  was  cryed  vpon  peyne  of  deth, 
4  that  alle  man  shold  he  in  the  mornyng1  to  fore  the  sonne  rysynge 
alle  armed  as  he  hest  myght  /  And  drawe  hyra  in  to  the  hataylle 
where  as  he  was  ordeyned  /  And  that  euery  man  shold  folowe  the 
baner  of  his  Captayne  /   whan  the  spryngyng  of  the  day  apperid  in  §W™* 
8  the  mornyngthe  men  of  the  chirche  were  redy  for  to  synge  masse,  ci.urch. 
And  songe  deuoutly  /  They  that  shold  goo  to  the  batayll  were  con- 
fessyd,  ami  alle  receyued  the  bodye  of  oure  lord,  which  gaf  to  them 
surete  of  body  and  of  sowle.    Alle  rancour  and  wrath  were  en-  £«™n«w 

12  tierly  perdonned  /  by  cause  they  wold  be  in  parfyght  charyte,  And  J«™£i,r- 
therin  doo  the  sernyse  of  our  lord,  whiche  sayth  in  the  gospell, 
In  this  shal  alle  men  knowe  that  ye  be  my  disciples,  yf  ye  haue 
loue  and1  cluiryte  emonge  you  /  whan  they  were  thus  redy  /  1ourc    p  leaf  9i] 

16  lord  sente  to  them  his  grace  /  which  gaf  to  them  so  gr'ete  hardines,  TheLorf 

o  #  <j  ■-'  now  sent 

that  they  that  were  the  daye  to  fore  so  ferdfid  /  feble  and  lene  that  £"■£<**- 
they  myght  not  susteyne  them  self  for  feblenesse,  becam  stronge,  "■»££*£■ 
andf  delyuer2  in  suche  wyse  /  that  the  armes  that  they  bare  weyed 

20  nothyng  as  them  semed,  and  were  hardy  and  vygorous,  so  that  ther 
was  none  so  litil  but  he  had  talente  to  doo  grete  thyng  in  the 
bataylle.  The  tyme  cam  that  the  bisshops  and  alle  the  other  men 
of  the  chirche  were  reuested  as  for  to  synge  masse,    they  helde  the 

21  crosse  /  and  the  sainctuaryes  with  whiche  they  blessyd  the  peple 

And  recommaunded   them   to   god.     They  graunted    pardon    and  The  priests 

°  .  K:'ve  them 

remyssyon  to  them  of   alle  their   synnes,  yf   they  deyde   in    the  absoi utioii  for 
seruyse  of   our  lord.     To  fere  alle  the  other  the  bisshop  of   puy 

28  prechyd  and  spak  to  the  barons.  And  prayd  them  that  they  shold  n»BMiap 
thyncke  to  auenge  the  shame  of  our  lord  Ihesu  Criste,  that  thyse  j£^1*e,n 
vntrewe  sarasyns  had  don  to  hym  so  longe  in  withholdyng1  of  his  ^/'^"f 
herytage.     Atte  laste   he  blessyd  them  with  his   hand,  and  com-  JesU3  christ- 

32  maunded  them  to  god  deuoutly. 

How  to  fore  er  our  men  departed  /  they  made  redy 
theyr  bataylles  right  wel  in  poynt  /  &  of  the 
nombre  of  them  /  ca°  .C.xxxviij° 

3G  N  the  morn  erly  our  pylgryms  assembled  /  as  it  was  ordenyed 

o       &  deuysed  the  thyrde  day  to  fore  thentre  of  Iuyll,  to  fore  the 

2  Fr.  delivrcs,  hardy,  bold. 


206 


Hugh  the 
Gie.it  com- 
manded the 
first  batta- 
lion, 


Robert  of 
FUtundera 

tlie  second, 

Rnliert  of 
Normandy 
the  third, 


the  Bishop  of 
IJny  the 
fourth, 


[*  If.  94,  bk.] 


Reghmld  of 
Toiil  had  the 
fifth, 

Rembold  of 
Orange  and 
other  Pro- 
vencals the 
sixth, 
Godfrey  of 
Kouillou  led 
the  seventh, 
Tanrred  the 
eighth, 


Huon  the 
ninth,  and 


the  Earl  of 
I'er.«e  and 
others  the 

tt'iilh. 


They  go  forth  in  Battle  Array.     [Ch.  CXXXVIII. 

yate  of  the  brydge  /  to  fore  thyssue  oute  of  the  yate  /  They  had 
theyr  bataylles  ordeyned  and  deuysed  lyke  as  who  shold  goo  to 
fore  /  And!  who  shold!  come  after  /  The  fyrst  bataylle  had  huon1  le 
mayne,  broder  of  the  kynge  of  ffraunce,  And!  with  hym  Ancean  de  4 
Rybemont,  And  the  other  Barons  and!  knyghtes  of  theyr  countrey  / 
They  thought  wel  that  the  men  that  they  ledde  shold  not  lyghtly 
be  discomfyted.    therfore  wente  they  first  /  for  to  perse  in  the  better 
to  fore.     The  second  batayll  ledde  Robert  therle  of  fflaundres  /  8 
which  was  called  the  ffryson  /  he  had  none  other  in  his  bataylle  but 
peple  of  his  owne  countree.     The  thyrde  batayll  ledde  Robert  the 
Due  of  Normandye  with  his  neueuw,  whiche  was  moche  valyaunt, 
therle  steuen  of  Aubuale  /  And  alle  them  of  his  owen  comitreye  /  12 
The  fourth  batayll  was  delyuerd!  to  the  bisshop  of  puy  /  whiche  had 
don  of  thabyt  of  the  chyrche,  and  rode  upon  a  good  stede  /  the 
helme  laced.     And  he  bare  in  his  hond  the  holy  spere  of  whiche 
oure  saueour,  Ihesu  Criste,  was  perced  in  the  2side,  and!  conduyted  16 
vygorously  the  bataylle  of  therle  of  tholouse,  whiche  was  not  there. 
The  Erie  Reignald  of  toul  had  the  /  v.  bataylle.  with  hym  was  peter 
de  stadenous  his  broder  /  Therle  Garnyer3  of  grece,  Henry  dasque  / 
Reynart  of  Anmellac  /  Gaultier  of  domedart  /  In  the  .vj.  bataylle  20 
were  Rembold,  the  erle  of  Orenge,  Loys4  de  moucous,  and  Lambert 
sone  of  Euenam5  de  Montagu.     The  /  vij  /  bataylle  ledde  the  right 
valyaunt  Godeffroy  due  of  Loreyne  /  with  hym  was  Eustace  his 
brother  /  And  them  that  he  brought  out  of  his  countrey.    The  .viij  /  24 
bataylle  conduyted  the  noble,  wyse,  and  wel  preuyd  Tancie,  with 
the  men  that  were  delyuerd  to  hym.     The  .ix.  batayflfe  ledde  therle 
huon  of  seynt  poul.     Aniaran6  his  sone  was  with  hym  /  Thomas7 
de  boure  /  bawdwyn  de  bourgh,  Robert8  fytz9  gerard  /  Regnauld  28 
de  bauuaus10  /  And  Gales  de  chamont,11     The  .x.  ladde  therle  of 
Perse.12  And  had  with  hym  Euerard  du  puyssat,  Droon  de  money  / 
Kaoul13  fytz  godeffroy  and  Conayn  the  breton.     Of  the  .xi.   was 
Capytayn  Ysachar14  therle  of  dys.    with  hym  were  Remon15  pabes  /  32 
Gaste  de  bedyers  /  Gyrard  de  Roussylon,  Guyllem  de  monpellyer, 
And  Guyllem  ameneux  /  The  /  xij  /  and  the  laste  in  whiche  was 

1  Fr.  "  cut "  left  out.         3  Fr.  garin  de  grcs. 

4  Fr.  Looys  de  Moneon.         5  Fr.  Conon  de  Montaigu.         6  Fr.  Anjorran. 

7  Fr.  Thomas  de  Fere.         8  Fr.  Robert  Ufilz  Girart,  Robert  the  son  of  Girart. 

9  Orig.  fntz.         10  Fr.  Beuuvoys.         "  Fr.  Chaumont.         12  Fr.  Perche. 

13  Fr.  Raoul  lefilz  Godefroy,  Raoul  the  son  of  Godefroy. 

14  Fr.  Ysacart  le  conte  de  Die.     Lat.  Yscardus  comes  Dicnsis. 

15  Fr.  Ranon  Pelcz. 


Oh.  CXXXIX.]     Corbagat  learns  of  their  Ajrproach.  207 

moost  peple  was  delyuerd  to  buymont1  /  And  was  ordeyned  that  Bohemomi 
he  shoki  goo  socoure  suche  bataylles  /  as  had  moost  nede.     Therle  ]**{*• 
of  tholouse,  whiche  was  raerueyllously  seke,  lefte  they  in  the  toun  battalion. 

4  for  to  kepe  fro  the  turkes  in  the  dongeon  /  ffor  yf  ther  had  be  no 
garde  /  they  myght  haue  sprongen  and  hane  slayn  alle  the  seke  TWari  of ' 
men,  wymmen,  and  children,  and!  the  feble  men  that  abode  byhynde  j^g*^"1 
in  the  toun  /  of  whom  ther  were  grete  nombre2  in  theyr  herberous  / 

8  They  had  made,  as  I  haue  sayd  tofore,  vpon  a  lytil  tertre  a  stronge 

walle  of   chalke  /  in  whiche  were  ordeyned  places  for  to  dresse 

engyns,  whiche  were  al  redy  for  to  caste  /  They  had  left  /  ij.  C. 

men  of  Armes,  noble  and  hardy  for  to  deffend  this  paas  fro  the 

12  turkes,  whiche  were  on  hye  on  the  dongeon. 

How   Corbagat   was   aduertysed  of  thyssue  of  oure 
peple,   and   sente   his   Arckiers  for   to    deffende 
the  brydge.     And  how  they  were  disconfyted. 
10  Capitulo  /  Cxxxix0 

w      Han  they  had  thus  deuysed  theyr  bataylles  /  in  euery  batayll 

they  had  sette  men  on  foote.     It  was  acorded  emonge  them  The  footman 

J  went  first, 

that  they  a  foote  shold  goo  to  fore.     And1  the  knyghtes  that  cam  and  the 

■»  °  •?"  knights  alter. 

20  after  shold  kepe3  them.     It  was  deffended  and  cryed4  on  payne  5of    p  leaf  95j 
deth  that  none  shold  be  so  hardy  that  shold  entende  to  ony  gayn 
As  longe  as  ony  turke  detfended  hym  /  but  whan  oure  lord*  had 
gyuen  them  the  vyctorye,  Thenne  shold  they  retorne,  and  myght 

24  tarye  to  take  &  gadre  the  despoylles.     Corbagat  fro  the  begynnyng*  corbagat  had 

""■J  o  r     •/  °  ■  .I  always  feared 

of  the  siege  of  the  cyte  had  ahvaye  doubte  &  grete  suspection  that  an  attack, 
our  peple  shold  sodanly  come  vpon  his  hoost,  And  specially  syth 
that  peter  theremyte  had  be  with  hym  in  message.    And  therfor  he 
28  had  commaunded  to  them  that  were  in  the  dongeon,  that  yf  oure  and  had 

.  arranged  for 

men  thought  to  yssue  they  shold  sowne  a  busyne  /  And  sette  oute  signals,  *o 
a  baner  where  they  shold  yssue  /  wherof  it  happed  that  whan  thyse  ^j*"" 
bataylles  were  renged  to  fore  the  yate  to  fore  they  yssued  aboute 

32  the  houre  of  pry  me  /  They  of  the  tour  made  the  signe  like  as  they 
were  commaunded.  Corbagat  vnderstode  that  our  men  cam.  And 
anon  he  sente  two  thousend  Archiers  to  the  brydge  to  kepe  it  that 
they  shold  not  passe,    whan  the  turkes  cam  theder  for  to  mayntene 

36  the  passage  /  they  descended  alle  afoote.     The  yates  were  opened, 

1  Orig.  buymout.        -  Orig.  momlire. 
3  Fr.  les  gardcroient,  viz.,  should  protect  them.        *  Orig.  ceyed. 


208  The  Crusaders  are  miraculously  refreshed.     [Ch.  CXL. 

HuBii  the       oure1  men  yssued  after  thordenaunce  that  was  deuysed.     Huon2  le 

Great  opened  .  .  .  ..  »  ■   v     « 

the  attack      niayne  with  alle  his  batayile  cam  fyrst  vn  to  this  paas,  whiche-5  was 
Turks  to       kept  with  his  enemyes.    his4  archiers  and  men  a  foote  taryed  a  lytil 
and  myght  not  passe  in  no  wyse  /  whan  huon  the  noble  man  apper-  i 
ceyued  this  he  smote  the  hors  with  the  spores,  and*  so  smote  in  on 
bothe  sydes,  that  it  was  to  late  for  the  turkes  a  foote  to  take  theyr 
horses  /  Thenne  torned  they  fleyng1,  defendyng  them  &  shotyng  with 
Ancean  of      their  bowes.     Ancean  de  Eibemont  rode  ayenst  them,  and  bete  and  8 
gained  great  helde  the  5rowte  so  short  allone  that  his  men  that  cam  after  hym 
his  bravery,    myght  come  and  smyte  in  emong  them  and*  delyuerd?  many.5     And 
oftymes  he  plunged1  so  depe  in  the  presse  that  certaynly  our  men 
had  supposed  he  had  ben  lost,     but  whan  he  cam  agayn  /  he  dis-  12 
couerd  hym  wel    and   made   large   place   about   hym.     Alle  men 
behelde  hym,  he  gate  there  moche  grete  honour  and1  prys.     Huon 
le  mayne  forgate  not  his  swerd.     And  he  dyde  so  moche  that  our 
pylgryms  had  by  hym  good  luck  and  hope  at  this  fyrst  assemblee  /  16 
Therle  of  fflaundres  and  the  due  of  Normandye,  with  the  valyaunt 
erle  of  henawd  cam  to  this  chaas  /  The  Archiers  of  the  turkes  that 
so  fledde  were  so  euyl  mened  /  that  they  were  but  a  fewe  whan  they 
our  men       retorned  in  to  thoost  /Our  men  folowed  them  tyl  nygh  theyr  lodgys.  20 

pursued  the  .  1  j 

Turks  nearly  many  of  them  they  bete  doun  that  neuer  reieuyd. 


How  oure  men   reioysed   them  of  a   dew  or  rousee 
[«if.95,bk.]  descendyng  6thenne  fro  heuen.     And  of  theyr 

mayntyen  in  approchyng  the  turkes.  24 

Capitulo  C  /  xl 

o       Ne  thynge  happed  whan  oure  men  yssued  out  of  the  toun  / 
that  ought  not  to  be  forgoten  /  ffor  whan  thyse  Archiers  were 

disconfyted,  the  latynes  cam  after  in  theyr  ordenaunce  a  softe  paas  /  28 
our  men        Thenne  began  to  falle  a  rayne  or  a  dewe,  so  swete  a  rousee  was 
BreaUy0£.      neuer  seen  /  It  seined  to  euery  man  verytably,  that  it  was  the 
asfveetnTw    benediction  of  our  lord  and  the  grace  of  heuen  that  descended  vpon 

whiph   fpll. 


which  fell. 


1  Orig.  onre.  2  Orig.  Hnon. 

8  Fr.  "  qui  ainsi  des  ennemis  gamy  estoit,"  viz.,  "  winch  was  thus  guarded 
by  his  enemies." 

4  Fr.  "  que  tart  fat  a  ceulx  qui  descendoient  a  pic  qu'ilz  fussent  remontis" 
i.  e.,  so  that  those  who  had  descended  from  their  horses  were  very  anxious  to 
be  remounted. 

5_5  Yr.  "tenoit  tant  la  route,  tout  seul,  que  ses  hommes  qui  venoicnt  aprcs, 
y  povoicnt  f rapper  a  dclivre." 


Cli.  CXLL]     Men  and  Horses  both  feel  their  Strength  renewed.      209 
them  /  Anon1  they  were  as  fressh  &  al  so  light  as  they  neuer  had  »otimt  they 

'  *  °  J  felt  perler-lly 

suffred  mesease.     This  refresshement  was  not  only  in  the  men,  but  strong  a»d 

J  well. 

alle  theyr  horses  were  anon  so  stronge,  so  fresshe,  and?  so  reioyced  / 

4  As  they  had1  had1  alway  al  that  whiche  was  nedeful  for  them.     This 

was  moche  apperceyued  that  daye  certaynly,  ffor  the  horses  that  Th*  ,,0"«»    . 

many  dayes  had  nothyng  to  ete  sauf  leeues  of  trees  and  skorches2  covert  their 

or  Ryndes,  were  in  this  bataylle  more  stronge  and  more  penyble  / 

8  than  were  the  horses  of  the  turkes,  whiche  had  alwaye  as  moche  as 

they  myght  /  The  Capytayns  acorded  that  they  shold  drawe  them 

toward  the  montaynes,  whiche  was  fer  fro  the  Cyte  wel  .ij.  myles  / 

ffor  yf  the  turkes  whiche  had  moch  grete  plente  wold  goo  theder- 

12  ward  /  they  shold  be  bytwene  oure  men  and3  the  toun,  and  shold 

close  them  in.     In  this  maner  wente  one  bataylle  to  fore  another  They  d.ew 

withoute  this  /  That  one  touched  another  in  ony  wyse  /  whan  the  themoun- 
'  ,  ti)jn8  one 

turkes  sawe  them  alle  they  merueylled  and  were  abasshed,  ffor  they  battalion 

J  J  J   alter  another. 

16  had  supposed  /  that  they  had  not  be  but  a  fewe  enclosed  in  the 
toun  /  Now  they  semed  by  the  myracle  of  our  lord  that  they  were 
as  many  of  them  /  as  were  of  the  turkes,  and  yet  moo.  Einonge 
the  men   of   armes  were  the  men  of  the  Chirche    reuested  with  Among  the 

armed  men 

20  awbes4  and  stooles,  they  that  were  preestes.     And  the  clerkys  in  marched  the 

7  •>  *■  •>  priests,  in 

surplys  /  &  eche  of  them  bare  a  crosse  in  his  hand  /  they  that  were  tlieir  r^fy 

1    •       '  i  j  garments, 

abyden  in  the  toun  were  on  the  walles,  reuestyd  also,  in  prayers  and  "^'" 
oroysons  and  teeris   cryeng1  mercy  to  oure  lord  that  he  wolde  haue 
24  pyte  of  his  peple  /  And  saue  them  that  day,  &  that  he  wold  not 
suffre  that  his  name  and  his  fayth  shold  tome  to  reproche  by  the 
mescreauntes  and  hethen  peple. 

How  Corbagat  ordeyned  his  bataylles  /And  how  the 
28  two  hoostes  marched  to  gydre  in  bataylle. 

/  C.  xlj° 

b       Y  the  signes  that  they  of  the  dongeon  made  to  them  of  thoost, 
and  by  the  tydynges  that  the  Archiers  brought  /  Corbagat 
32  5knewe  and  vnderstode  certaynly  that  oure  men  were  yssued  oute     [5  leaf  96] 
of  the  Cyte,  and  cam  toward  hym  for  to  fyghte.     Thenne6  of  this  nowunder- 
that  he  was  thenne  adcerteyned  /  he  had  desdayne  to  fore  and  0urmena 

meant  to 

1  Orig.  Auon.  2  Fr.  ecorces,  bark.  fi&ht  1,im- 

3  Orig.  aud'.  *  Fr.  aubes  et  estoks,  albs  and  stoles. 

6—6  Fr.  "  lors  tint  a  certes  ce  qu'il  avoit  cu  jitsques  adoncqiics  en  dasdaing, 
et  tcnu  pour  moqucric,"  viz.,  then  he  In  gaii  to  take  seriously  that  which  up  to 
this  time  he  had  held  in  disdain,  and  consldurud  only  as  mockery. 

GODFREY.  1' 


210  The  two  Armies  arrange  their  Battalions.     [Ch.  CXLI. 

holden  it  for  mocquerye.6   he  toke  counseyl  of  his  barons  /  And 
He  arranged  hastely  ordeyned  his  bataylles  by  the  counseyl  of  his  wysemen  / 

liis  own 

battalions,     And  specially  of  them  that  were  born  in  Antliyoche,  of  whom  he 
had  many  with  hym.     He  made  a  bataylle  of  moche  grete  plente  of  i 
knyghtes,  the  best  and  nioost  hardy  that  he  had  /  This  bataylle 
delyuercl  he  to  Solyman  /  of  whom  ye  haue  herd?  in  dyuerse  places 

and  sent        to  fore.     He  cominaundec?  that  they  sholcJ  drawe  them  toward"  the 

intercept  our  see,  to  fore  er  our  men  shold  haue  taken  /  and  pourprysed  alle  the  8 
playn  bytwene  the  montayne  &  the  Cyte.    This1  grete  bataylle  cam 
thence  to  fore,  And!  .was   staked1  as  bytwene    two  townes2    and' 
closed1  /  His  other  bataylles  he  sette  in  poynt  by  leyser,  And!  made 
that  one  to  goo  to  fore  another  as  he  that  knowe  ynowgh  of  the  12 

soiyman       faytes  of  warre  /  And1  after  spak  to  the  Capytaynes,  and!  sayde  to 

arranged  Ilia 

army,  and      them,  that   they  shold   mayntene   them   as    hye    men    and   good 

exhorted  hia  '  J  J  J  ° 

men  not  to     knyghtes,  and!  not  to  be  aferd*  ne  esmayed  of  thyse  Caytyues  /  men 
famine-         enfamyned,  euyll  armed,  and  all  to  brused  of  the  grete  trauaylles  16 

weakened  »  '        •>  '  °  " 

crusaders,  that  they  had  suffred,  whan  our  men  had  pourprised  entierly  the 
playn  in  such  wise  that  they  doubted  not  to  be  closed  in  /  They 
approuched  so  nyghe  the  turkes  that  the  turkes  myght  shote  at 
them  /  They  made  theyr  trompes  and!  busynes  to  sowne  lower1,  20 
And!3  spored!  their  horses  the  thre  fyrst  bataylles  to  gydre  /  wel 
founde  they  that  receyued!  them,  ffor  the  turkes  were  grete  men 
our  men  now  and  well  armed1.  Our  men  dyde  right  wel  in  this  comyng  on  / 
ii.ein,  and      The4  ffrensshemen,  fflemynges  conteyned  them  vygorously  in  brek-  24 

a  fierce 

skirmi-.li       ynge  the  presse  /  But  thenne  cam  so  grete  rowtes  of  turkes  /  that  it 


folowed. 


behoued  the  other  bataylles  of  our  men  to  assemble  hastely  for  to 
socoure  the  thre  first  bataylles.  They  were  alle  at  the  medle,  sauf 
the  laste  bataylle,  whiche  buymont  conduyted  as  ye  haue  hen  P. 
There  shold  ye  haue  seen  fiers  skarmoche  of  swerdes,  of  maces 
&  axesse.  the5  malles  were  so  grete  and  strokes  /  that  ye  shold 
not  haue  herd   yf   it  had1  thondred".     The   due  godeffroy  sawe   a 

1  Caxton  has  here  made  a  "bourdon"  by  omitting  all  between  the  two 
"cites,"  and  then  in  consequence  of  this  omission,  he  has  mistranslated  the 
rest  of  the  sentence,  Fr.  (cecy  Ji.it  ilpar  tele  attention  que  quand  nos  gens  servient 
desconjilz,  ct  ilz  se  vouldroient  tirer  vers  la  mer  mo  vers  la  cit£),  cctte  grosse  bataillc 
leur  venist  au  devant,  ct  Jtisscnt  adoncqiccs  cntachicz  co-mmc  cidre  deux  moles,  ct 
ct  da  tout  aijrcve  ctforclos.  -  hills,  not  towns.  3  Orig.  Aud'. 

4  Fr.  ' '  Lcs  Flavians  se  contindrcnt  vigourcuscvteid,  ct  les  Normans  dcrom- 
poient  bicn  la  presse." 

5  Fr.  "le  martclcis  cstoit  si  grant,"  i.  e.,  the  hammering  (of  the  arms)  was 
so  •'reat. 


Cli.  CXLII.]  The  Onset  is  vigorous.  211 

bataylle  come  where  in  were  moo  men  than  ony  of  the  other,    well 
thought  he  that  yf  that  were  disconfyted  /  The  other  shold  be  moche 
abasshed.    he  drewc  thederward,  And1  smote  in  them  asprely  and  c.odfrey  and 
4  vygorously.    there  dyde  he   &   his  felawship  moche  wel  and1   so  fought 

bravely. 

valyauntly  that  they  slewe  many,  and  hewe  of  heedes  and  armes 
in  snche  wyse  that  the  folde  lay  ful  of  dede  men,  of  hurt  and! 
wounded,  in  so  many  that  the  turkes  2myght  no  lenger  suflre  it  ne  [2ir.96,bk.] 
8  lenger  endure3  /  But  were  disconfyted   and!  were    put   to  flyght.  The  Turks 
Solyman  that  had  the  grete  bataylle,  as  I  haue  sayd!  to  fore  /  apper-  «>g''t. 
ceyued?  fro  ferre  his  men  conteyned!  them  but  febly  /  And  approched! 
and!  sawe  the  bataylle  of  buymont  /  which  yet  had  not  be  in  the 
12  medle  with  the  ether  /  he  adressid  hym  thedre,  And  dyde  do  shote  Solyman 

'  ,  J  attacked 

at  hym  grete  plente  of  Arowes  at  the  approuchyng.4    But  after  they  Boiiemond'g 
henge  theyr  bowes  on  theyr  armes,  and  ran  vpon  them  with  axes  pressed 'them 
and  swerdes  /  And  smote  so  sore  on  them  that  almost  they  tourned 

16  the  heedes  of   theyr  horses,  ffor   they  myght   not  abide  so   grete 
estour  ne  so  sharpe  of  so  moche  peple.     The  due  Godeffroye  knewe 
&  sawe  them  fro  ferre  /  &  drewe  hym   diligently  to  that  parte.  Godfrey, 
Tancre  toke  hede  also  of  his  vncle,  &  cam  dilygently  to  socoure  came8to  the 

20  hym.    at  the  comyng  of  them  two  which  brought  many  men  with  discomfited 
them  was  Solyman  discomfyted,  and  muste  parte  fro  the  place.    But 
the  turkes  had  made  redy  fyre  grekyssh  (30)  /  And  threwe  it  in  to 
the  grasse  wliiche  was  longe  and  drye  ill  the  felde  /  Our  men  thenne 

24  departed  for  the  smoke  whiche  was  blak  and  thycke  /  whan  the 
turkes  sawe  that  they  on  horsbak  were  withdrawen,  they  ran  vpon 
our  men  afoote,  and  slewe  many  of  them,  our  men  that  were  on 
horsbak  were  yssued  out  of  the  thyck  smoke,  and  herde  the  crye  of 

28  them  that  they  so  slewe  /  And  smote  the  horses  with  the  spores, 

and  camen  agayn  alle  /  And  alle  them  that  they  founde  of  theyr  and  then 
enemyes  they  bete  and  slewe,  and  put  to  flyght.     So  ferre  they  aiongdi«™ 
chassed  them,  betyng1  and!  hewyng1  them,  that  they  cam  to  the  many."  'iy'"f 

32  grete  multitude  /  whiche  thenne  were  discomfyted  and  put  to 
flyght  / 


Of  the  fleynge  of  Corbagat  /  And  of  som  turkes  gadred 
to  gydre.     And  agayn  discomfyted  by  our  men. 
3G  ca°  Cxlij° 

1  Orig.  Ano.         8  Orig.  endure.         *  Orig.  approucliyug. 

V   2 


212  Corba  gat's  Army  is  routed.        [Ch.  CXLII. 

i        N  this  partye  where  the  bataylle  had  bee,  was  in  a  valeye  / 

As  where  descended*  in  to  the  see  a  lytil  brook  or  rennyng* 

water,    vnto  that  place  had  our  men  chassed  the  turkes  /  And  there 

TheTuvks     they  drewe  and*  assembled*  them  agayn  vpon  a  tertre  right  hye  /  4 

little  hiii.       And  made  do  sowne  theyr  trompettes  and  busynes  for  to  brynge 

their  peple  to  gidre,  but  our  men  that  therene  had  not  to  doo  in 

none  other  place  camen  alle  to  them  /  Huon  le  mayne  /  Therle  of 

fflaundres.     The  due  of  Normandye  /  the  Due  godeffroy,  Buymont  8 

and  Tancre,  And  they  that  were  with  them,  began  moche  myghtely 

[>  leaf  97]    to  1assaylle  theyr  enemyes,  thurgh  the  water  so  fiersly  and  by  so 

o.ir  men       grete  hardynesse  and  force  that  they  passed  ouer,  and  sodanly  ran 

followed,  and  •  *     11         1  i  t      *  i        i  t  -i      i  n 

dislodged       on  that  hylle  where  they  were  on.     And?  made  them  to  descende  I'z 

them.  '  J 

doun  moche  peryllously.     fro  thenne  the  turkes  had  none  hope,  to 

abyde  no  longer  on  the  felde  ne  on  the  champayns,  but  euery-  man 

Thermit        wente  and1  fledde  here  and?  there  where  he  myght  and  thought 

general.         beste.     Corbagat  the  lord  of  the  hoost,  fro  the  begynnyng  that  the  16 

bataylles  assembled  /  had  eschewed  the  peryll  /  And  was  with- 

drawen  vpon  an  hylle  a  ferre  of,  for  to  see  the  ende.     he  sente  ofte 

messagers  for  to  knowe  how   his  men  conteyned   and   demened 

them3  /  wherfore  he  abode  there  /  And  sawe  how  the  turkes  cam  20 

alle  disconfyted  without  kepyng  araye  ne  ordenauuee  of  bataylle. 

his  frendes  that  were  about  hym4  sayd  to  hym  /  Syre,  ye  see  wel 

at  this  tyme  how  it  gooth,  therfore  thynke  ye  dylygently  for  your 

self  /  And  departe  hastely  fro  this  place,     he  thenne  wente  his  24 

waye  and  fledde  as  hastely  as  he  myght ;  he  had  so  grete  fere  and 

Corbagat  fled  drede  in  his  herte  that  he  durst  abyde  in  no  place,     he  passed  the 

Euphrates.     Ryuer  and  flood  of  Eufrates  /  And  by  the  rennyng  of  his  hors  he 

withdrewe  hym  as  fer  as  he  myght.     whan  his  men  knewe  that  28 
they  were  without  Capytayne  they  were  moche  abasshed.    thenne 
thought  none  of  them  of  other,  but  euery  man  dyde  the  best  he 
coude  or  myghte  to  saue  hymself,  &  fledde  alle  as  moche  as  they 
myght  /  Our  valyaunt  barons,  whiche  that  had  sore  trauaylled  32 
theyr  horses,  durste  not  folowe  them  ouer  ferre,  lest  theyr  horses 
Tancred        myght  faylle  them  /  Tancre  with  a  companye  of  four  thousand 
4ih)o men,      folowed,  sleyng1  and  betyng1  doun5   alle  them  that  they  myght 
dared,  with    atteyne,  ffor  the  fere  and  drede  was  so  grete  in  the  hertes  of  the  3G 

his  weary  ,  ,    .         .  ._  _,. 

men  and  sarasyns  that  /  x.  men  myght  haue  chassed  /  v  /  C  sarasyns.  Iher 
was  it  euydently  proued  and  shewd,  that  there  is  no  counseyl,  ne 
none  maye  be  gyuen  ayenst  our  lord  god  /  And  that  our  lord  for- 
2  Orig.  enery.     3  Fr.  si  covimc  il  atendoit  illcc.     4  Orig.  liyin.     5  Orig.  dorm. 


Ch.  CXLIII.]     The  Crusaders  gain  great  Uichcs.  213 

geteth  not  them  that  haue  stedfast  hope  in  hym,  for  a  sinalle  peple,  Tiiiwa  small 
poure,  anil1  as  alle  deed!  for  honger,  whiche  were  come  fro  fer  coun-  rtr,ckelJ 
trees  and  londes,  hy  the  ayde  of  Ihesu  Criste  vaynquysshyd*  alle  the  gJfJJJ^j. 
4  power  of  thoryent  in  theyr  owne  londe  and  countree,  whiche  were 
so  grete  plente  of  peple  garnisshyd  and  replenesshyd  of  alle  that 
they  had  nede  of. 

How  our  peple  retorned  fro  the  chaasse,  and  wente  to 

8  the  pillage,  and  of  the  grete  Rychesses  that  they 

fonde.  ca°  Cxliij0 

t       He  hataylle  was  thus  fynysshyd,  in  suehe  wyse  that  the  pil- 

gryms  had  the  vyctorye  /  They  wente  strayte  to  the  lodgyses  Tiiecims- 

12  Jof  the  turkes,  there  founde  they  so  grete  Rychesses  of  gold*,  of  ti.e  tpnt^of 
syluer,  of  precious  stones,  of  vayssell  of  dyuerse  faciores  /  tapytes  [Hf.  97,bk.] 
and  clothes  of  sylk,  so  moche  that  neuer  man  myght  wel  preyse. 
Oxen,  sheep,  and  kyen  were  there  grete  plente,  whete  and!  mele 

16  grounden,  of  which  they  had  grete  nede;  ther  was  so  moch  that  all  fj^^fj 
they  were  encombred1  to  here  it  /  They  wan  horses  in  this  discom-  me,iee  ,icl,es- 
fyture  good?  and  fatte,  so  many  that  they  were  abagshed!  of  the 
grete  multitude  that  was  there  /  They  toke  and  gadred  the  despoylles 

20  and  the  tentes,  wherof  they  had  so  grete  rychesses  /  that  of  suche 

an  hoost,  was  neuer  none  seen  more  faire  ne  ryche  /  And?  this  cam  Never  were 
to  them  merueyllously  well  to  poynt  /  ffor  alle  theyr  tentes  &  theyr  ^j.se8een 
pauyllons  were  holly  rotten  /  wymmen,  Childeren,  and  other  peple 

24  whiche  bare  none  armes  they  founde  ouer  many  in  the  lodgyses, 
whom  alle  they  brought  in  to  the  cyte  Emong  the  other  thynges. 
the  barons  assembled!  them  for  to  see  the  tentes  of  Corbagat  whiche  The  tent  of 

°  Corb.-itr.tt  »■ 

was  meruevllous,  ffor  it  was  made  in  the  forme  of  a  Cyte  /  It  had!  specially 

•*  *  "        *  large  anu 

28  towres  and!  crestes  of  dyuerse  colours  wrought  with  fyn  sylke.     ffro  m»gn«8ewfc 
the  mayster  palays  were  aleys  in  to  other  tentes  lyke  to  stretes  in  a 
grete  toun.     Ther  myght  sytte  in  the  grete  halle  moo  than  two 
thousand  men  /  whan  our  men  had  recuyelled  thus  the  rychesses 

32  and  despoylles  /  they  alle  made  grete  trusses  full  of  ryche  thynges, 

and  charged  them  on  theyr  horses  and  backes  and1  entred!  in  to  the  They  »■ 

o  »  turned  to 

Cyte  of  Anthyoche.     yf  they  thenne  were  glad  and  ioyous,  It  was  AnUw*^ 
no  merueylle,  ffor  in  longe  tyme  to  fore,  fylle  ne  happed!  suche  *•» l«de»- 
36  aduenture  in  Cristiewte  /  They  rendred  &  gaf  to  our  lord!  many 
thankes  and  graces  of  lawde  with  alle  theyr  very  hartes  humbly 
and  deuoutly.    ffor  wel  knewe  they  that  alle  was  comen  fro  hym  / 

1  7 


214 


The  Donjon  of  Antioch  now  sumendcrs.     [Ch.  CXLITI. 


Thus  in  a 
short  time 
the  Lord 
raised  his 
men  from 
poverty  to 
riches  and 
power. 


[•leaf  98] 


The  Turks  in  The  turkes  whiche  were  in  the  dongeon  had  wel  seen  that  thcyr 
iH.wsur-        peple  were  vaynquysshyd   /  And   had1  none  hope  thenne  to  be 
rescowed  ne  of  no  socoure.     Therfor  anon  as  the  barons  were  entred 
in  the  cyte  they  made  them  to  speke  and  trete  with  them.     And  4 
acorded  to  gydre  that  they  alle  sholdf  take  theyr  wyues  and  childeren 
and  here  with  them  suche  goodes  as  they  had  /  and  rendre  and 
gyue  ouer  the  dongeon.     The  baners  of  our  barons  were  sette  aboue 
on  it  thenne.     The  werkes  of  our  lord  Ih&m  crist  ben  moche  bye  8 
and!  merueyllous,  ffor  fro  right  grete  pouerte,  cam  oare  peple  to 
ouer  grete  rychesses  in  so  short  a  tyme  /  It  is  moche  good1  to  affye 
and!  truste  in  hym  that  hath  such  power  and  myght.     It  was  nier- 
uayl  of  the  disease  &  pouerte  that  our  barons  had  suffred  /The  12 
valyaurct  Due  godefroy  was   brought   to  this   poynt  at  the   day 
of  the  batayl  Hhat  he  had!  not  wheron  to  ryde  /  But  he  must 
praye  and!  requyre  moche  swetly  therle  of  tholouse  /  whiche  re- 
meuyd  not  oute  of  the  toun,  that  he  wold  leue  to  hym  an  hors  /  16 
but  he  had  grete  payne  to  gete  it,  he  had  despended  alle  his  hauoyr 
and  good  entierly  for  to  susteyne  the  pour  gentilmen,  in  suche  wyse 
that  he  had  nothynge  hym  self.     There  were  many  knyghtes  that 
rychely  were  come  in  to  the  hooste  atte  begynnyng,  that  were  20 
brought  to  so  grete  pouerte  that  this  day  they  rode  on  asses  and  on 
pour  mares.     And  many  hye  men  as  knyghtes  valyaunt  and  hardy 
myght  not  cheuysshe  for  to  ryde,  but  wente  afoot  emong  the  foote 
men,  where  they  helde  moche  wel  theyr  place  /  ffor  they  mayntened  24 
and  taught  the  mene  peple  how  they  myght  doo  to  theyr  enemyes 
grettest  dommage.     The  power  of  perse  was  moche  affebled  this 
day.     For  ther  wer  so  many   slayn  and!  deed!  that  alle  therthe 
ther  aboute  was  conerd.     The  nombre  of  them  that  were  slayn  was  28 
neuer  verytably  /  knowen  /  Moche  was  chaunged  the  state  of  our 
men.     ffor  he  that  in  the  mornyng1  yssued  oute  alle  poure  in  suche 
wyse  that  he  had  not  for  to  ete  /  At  euen  he  en  tied  in  to  the  cyte 
ryche  of  good  and  of  vitaylles  /  in  suche  wyse  as  he  myght  haue  32 
This  good      holden  a  grete  court  and  companye.     This  good  aduenture  whiche 
happened  the  honoured  alle  cristiente  /  and  specially  the  Eoyamme  of  ffraunce 
junel,lu»8.     happed  the  yere  of  thyncarnacion  of  oure  lord  .M/lxxxxviij  /  the 

.xxi  /  day  of  the  moneth  of  Iuyn  /  36 


i  power 


TV 

of  Persia  was 
greatly  en- 
feebled that 
day. 


Ch.  CXLIV.]     The  Churches  of  Antioch  arc  purified.  215 

Of  the  fayre  ordenaunces  that  oure  peple  made  in  the 
chirches  of  Anthyoche.  And  in  other  townes 
by  /  after  this  vyctorye.  Capitulo  Cxliiij° 

4  s        Yth  that  the  barons  were  retorned  fro  the  bataylle  /  and  the 
thynges  of  the  Cyte  were  wel  ordeyned.     By  the  counseyl  of 
the  valyaunt  bisshop  of  puy,  and  by  the  prelates  that  were  in  the 
hoost  was  acorded  by  them  alle,  that  the  chirches  of  the  toun  were  The  churche* 

of  Antioch 

8  entierly  made  dene,  And1  ordeyned  to  doo  the  seruyse  of  oure  lord  were  cleaned, 
God.     And   specially  the   chyef   cathedralle  chirche  /  whiche  is  J^^, 
founded   in   thonour  of   seynt  Peter.      They  establysshed  therin  service, 
clerkes  and  curates  that  shold  serue  in  the  chirche.     And  other  to 
12  gouerne  and  kepe  the  holy  places  clene  /  tfor  the  false  and  vntrew  Thesarcens 

i  ,  .  had  fjreatlv 

sarasyns1  had  defowled  them.     They  had  sette  in   the  chirches  defiled  them, 
somme  theyr  kyen.     Oxen  and  sheep.    And  other  theyr  horses  and 
asses  /  The  comyn  wymmen  and  euylle  knaues  had  made  theyr 

16  ordure  and  fylthe  in  them  that  it  was  pyte  to  see  /  And  also  they 

defowled  thymages  of   Ihesu.    Crist,   of  our  lady,   2and   of  other  pif.  os.bk.] 
sayntes  with  fylth,  myre  and  ordure  /  And  lyke  as  they  had  ben  a 
lyue,  they  had  drawe  them  and  cut  of  theyr  noses  /  and  pycked 

20  out  theyr  eyen  /  The  barons  and  alle  the  pylgryms  acorded1  that 

there  shold   be  ordeyned   and  establyssyd  rentes  to  the  clerkes  Rent*  and 

incomes  were 

that  shold  serue  in  the  chirches.     there  was  offerd  gold  <fe  syluer  established 

for  the 

ynowgh  for  to  make  crosses   &   chalyces.     And   also    clothes  ofprieauin 

JO  -J  ^   the  churches. 

24  sylk  for  to  make  agayn  vestementes  for  men  of  the  chirche,  and3 

aournementes4  for  aulters.     The  patriarke  of  the  toun  whiche  was  The  Greek 

.      patriarch 

a  greek,  named  Iohan  /  they  ordeyned*  and  sette  hym  agayn  in  his  Sota  was 
place  with  moche  more  grete  honour  and  solempnyte  /  The  turkes 

28  had  caste  and  put  hym  oute5  with  grete  shame,  and  had  don  to 
hym  many  euyllis  for  the  fayth  of  our  sauyour  Ihesu  Criste  that 
he  helde  in  the  Cytees  beyng1  aboute  Anthyoche  /  Oure  men  sette 
bisshoppes  in  the  cytees  where  as  none  were  at  that  tyme,  But  in 

32  Anthyoche  where  as  they  fonde  one  /  they  sette  none  other  til 
afterward  that  the  good  man  apperceyued  that  he  lytil  prouffyted 
there,  by  cause  the  latyns  vnderstode  no  grekysshe  language,  And 
lefte  his  dygnyte  /  and  wente  in  to  constantynoble,  with  his  good  but  after- 

36  wyll  without  ony  forse  or  constraynt  /  Thenne  assembled  the  men  resumed  this 
of  the  chirche.     And  they  chose  and  elected  for  to  be  patriarke  the 

1  Orig.  sarasyns.  s  (frig.  aud. 

4  Fr.  aorncmciUs,  ornaments,  decorations.  *  Orig.  onte. 


216    Ambassadors  go  to  the  Emperor  of  Constantinople.    [Ch.  CXLV. 
Bernard,       bisshop  of  Tarse,  whiche  was  named  bernard,  born  at  valence.     He 

Bishop  of  * 

Tarsus,  was    -was  comen  with  the  good*  bysshop  of  puy  /  And*  he  had1  made  hym 
place.  his  chappellayn.     he  was  made  patriarke  /  The  Seygnorye  of  the 

Cyte  graunted*  alle  the  barons  to  buymont,  lyke  as  they  had'  pro-  4 
mysed  and  couenaunted,  sanf  the  Erie  of  tholouse,  whiche  helde 
the  yate  of  the  brydge  /  &  aI  wote  not  how  many  dayes  he  had 
garnysshed  it.     And1  in  no  wyse  wold  gyne  it  ouer1  /  But  sayde 
Bohemond     that  it  was  his  parte.     And*  by  cause  that  Buymont  to  fore  was  8 

was  given  the  .  pi  -l 

Keignory  of     called?  prynce  of  the  peple  of  his  contre.     Therfor  that  name  abode 

the  city,  and  r  J  r   r 

called  Prince  to  hym  and  to  alle  the  lordes  after  hym  of  the  Cyte  /  and  ben 

ofAntioch.  J  J  J         I 

alwaye  called?  Prynces  of  Anthyoche. 

How  our  peple  sente  ambassadours  to  themperour  of  12 
Constantinople  for  to  somone  hym  to  come  and 
socoure  them  as  he  had  promysed. 

Capitulo  C/xlv° 
He  tydynges  were  thus  ordeyned  in  the  cyte  as  I  haue  deuysed?  1 6 
The  barons    t       to  you  /  Thenne  was  the  counseyl  taken  emong  the  baroras  that 


sent  ambas- 


sadors to'the  they   shold    sercde    to    themperour2    of    constawtinoble   for    to 

Emperor  of 

constanti-  somone  hym  by  his  fayth,  that  acordyng  to  the  couenauntes 

that  he  had  made  to  them  that  he  shold  not  tarye,  but  come  in  his  20 
[3  leaf  99]    propre  persone  for  to  helpe  them,  &  specially  3at  the  siege  of  Iheru- 
to  summon     salem  to  whiche  they  entended?  for  to  goo  /  4yf  he  wold?  not  / 
his  promise,   thenne  knewe  they  that  he  wold?  not  forthon  holde  his  couenauntes5 

that  were  made  with  hym4  /  ne  kepe  them.     Aid!  for  to  doo  this  24 
Hush  the      message  they  chaas  huon   le  mayne,  broder  to   kyng   phelip  of 
Baldwin  of     ffraunce,  and  bawdwyn,  therle  of  henawd.     Thyse  two  departed  fro 
were  sent  on  thoost  for  to  goo  vnto  Constantinoble.     But  in  the  waye  certayn 

turkes  assaylled  them  /  in  which  medle  was  lost  therle  bawdwyn,  28 
in  suche  wyse  that  neuer  after  were  tydynges  herd?  of  hym.    Somme 
sayde  that  he  was  slayn  there  /  And  other  sayde  that  he  was  taken 

1—1  Fr.  et  ne  scat/  quantes  tours  que  illecques  avoit  garnis,  que  il  ne  voulut 
pas  rendre,  and  I  do  not  know  how  many  towers  he  had  fortified  here  and  that 
he  would  not  give  up.  Caxton  evidently  read  jours  (days)  instead  of  tours 
(towers.)  2  Orig.  themperonr. 

*-A  Caxton  has  entirely  misunderstood  his  French.  Se  il  ne  vouloit  /aire, 
hisn  sceust  il  que  ilz  ne  lui  vouluirnt  des  lors  en  avant,  cstrc  tenus  de  nulle  cou- 
venance,  viz.  if  he  would  not  do  it,  he  might  understand  that  from  this  time 
ou,  they  would  not  consider  themselves  bound  by  any  agreement  that  had  been 
made  with  him.  5  Orig.  couenauntes. 


Ch.  CXLV.]     ■  Adhcmar,  Bishop  of  Pity,  dies.  217 

ami  ladde  in  to  ferre  countrees.    But  the  trouthe  of  hym  was  neuer1 

knowen  /  huon  le  niavne  escaped  alle  hool  with  out  hurt,  and  cam  Hwb  arrived 

'  J  L  safely,  but 

vnto  constantinohle  to  themperour,  but  there  he  empeyred2  moche  inluwdhij 

r  *     '  Rood  reputa- 

4  his  renommee  /  ffor  he  that  was  of  so  hye  lygnage,  And  alway  had  l>°» 
ben  in  thoost  /  large  /  wyse,  noble,  and  a  moche  valyaunt  knyght  / 
had*  thenne  no  regarde  to  them  that  sent  hym  /  ne  wolde  not 
retourne  to  them  agayn,  but  departed  fro  themperour  and?  went  j>y  going  on 
8  strayte  in  to  fraunce  /  hit  was  a  gretter  blame  in  hym  than  in  a  ?r8a^  of 
lasse  man  /  why  lea  the  pylgryms  soiourned3  in  Anthyoche  a  mor-  J^""]'"^ 
talyte  and  deth  sourded  and  roos  emong  them  so  grete,  that  ther  *ze- 
was  no  day  but  there  were  /  xxx.  or  /  xl  /  biers  in  the  chirches  / 

12  It  was  so  grete  that  exiery  man  away  ted  presently  the  deth,  there 
was  none  that  supposed  to  haue  escaped  /  Thenne  happed  a  grete 
dommage  in  thooste,  ffor  the  valyaunt  man  of  grete  trouthe  and  of 
hye  counseyl  deyde  that  tyme  /  Aymart  the  bisshop  of  puy.    ffor  his  *jji 'emarof 

16  deth  was  grete  sorowe  thenne  thurgh  the  toun.    he  was  entered  and  u"tU|j;h°ef 
honorably  buryed4  in  the  chirche  of  seynt  peter  /  where  as  the 
spere  that  opened  the  syde  of  oure  lord  was  founden  /  he  was 
moche  bewaylled   as  the  fader  of  thoost.      After  deyde   a  right 

20  valyaunt  knyght,  a  trew  wyseman  and  of  grete  courage,  henry 
dasque,  in  the  castel  of  torbesel  /  where  he  soiourned,  and  there  he 
deyde  and  was  buryed.  In  the  same  place  /  reynard  de  mollac,5  a 
good  knyght  and  of  hye  lygnage,  deyde  in  Anthyoche ;  he  was 

24  buryed  in  the  porche  of  seynt  peter.     Alle  the  wymmen  that  were  Many  other 
in  the  toun  deyed  by  this  pestylence  sauf  a  fewe  /  in  such  wyse  died,  ami 
that  of  this  lytil  peple  deyde  in  a  lytil  Whyle  in  this  toun  L.  M.  women, 
men  and  wymmen.     The  occasion  of  this  mortalyte  was  many  tymes 

28  demaunded  of  the  fisiciens  &  wyse  clerkes.  The  somme  aayde  that 
thayer  was  corromped  /  The  other  sayde  that  the  peple  had  had 
ouer  longe  moche  anguyssh  of  hongre  &  of  thurst  /  And  whan  they 
cam  therto  &  plente  of  vytalles  /  they  toke  therof  ouer  oultrage- 

32  ously  /  By  whiche  6  they  ranne  in  a  grete  Infirmyte  and  sekenes.  [6  if.  99,  bk.] 
This  shewde  they  euydently  by  them  that  ete  but  lytil  and  by 
mesure  /  ffor  they  that  so  dyde  cam  lyghtly  to  conualence  and 
helthe. 

1  Orig.  ucuer.  2  Fr.  empira,  impaired,  damaged. 

3  Orig.  soionrned.  *  Orig.  bnryed. 

6  Fr.  Rcnart  de  Mellac.     Lat.  Reinardus  de  Amcsbach. 


218    The  Common  Soldiers  wish  to  finish  the  Pilgrimage.    [Ch.  CXLVI. 

How  the  pylgryms  of  thoost  desired  to  goo  vnto 
Iherusalem  for  to  escbewe  the  mortalite,  &  tac- 
cowplisshe  their  vowe  /  ca°.  Cxlvj° 

The  pilgrims  He  pylgryms  for  teschewe  the  mortalyte  of  the  toun.  &  also  4 

to  Jerusalem,  t        for  taccomplysshe  their  pilgremage,  began  to  crye  for  to  goo 
to  Iherusalern.  ffor  therfor  were  they  departed  out  of  theyr 
countrees  /    They  moche  prayd  the  barons  that  they  wold?  make 
them  redy.  and  dylygently  lede  and*  conduyte  them  theder  /  The  8 
The  barons     barons  that  myght  not  be  in  reste  for  theyr  requestes  /  assembled? 
u  discuss  the  and  had?  counseyl  on  this  mater.     Somme  sayde.  that  it  were  good 
that  they  shold  anon  go  forth  toward  the  holy  Cyte  /  by  cause  the 
comyn  peple  desyred  it  /  And  also  that  euery  man  was  bounden  by  12 
his  vowe  so  to  doo  /  The  other  sayde  that  it  was  not  tyme  for  to 
goo  forth,  ffor  the  brennynge  hete  was  /  ouer  grete.  and?  the  drought 
shold!  cause  that  they  shold?  lacke  water.     The  peple  shold?  not 
fynde  whete  /  the  horses  shold  lacke  pastures.     But  counseylled  to  16 
They  decide    tarye  and  delaye  this  passage  tyl  mychelmasse :  thenne  shold  the 
Michaelmas,  tyme  be  more  attempered?  and1  moderat.     And?  duryng1  the  mene 
whyle  /  men  myght  do  reste  theyr  horses,  and!  gete  newe  for  them 
that  had  none  and  had  nede  of  somme  /  and?  also  men  myght  20 
refresshe  them  self  whiche  were  wery  and   seke.     To  this  laste 
counseyll  acorded  they  alle  /   And1  therfor  it  was  late  or  they 
departed.     Thenwe  deuysed?  the  barons  that  they  wold?  remeue  for 
thynfyrmyte  of  the  place  /  &  to  goo  there,  as  they  myght  haue  24 
Boiiemond     vytailles   better   chepe,   Buymont   descended   in   to  the   londe   of 
ravages  the    Cy]yce>     There  toke  he  tarse  j  ^dane,  Mamstre,  Aunaure.     Thyse 

ta'kes'ii.ur      four  cytees  a  fore  sayd  he  garnysshed1  well  with  his  men,  And1 

helde  entierly  alle  the  countree  aboute.     The  other  wente  ferther  28 
in  the  countre,  and?  ladde  theder  theyr  horses  for  to  soiourne.    there 
were  many  knyghtes  /  and?  men  a  fote  that  passed1  the  Byuer  of 
Eufrates  for  to  goo  forth  at  al  auenture  thurgh  the  countrees  /  tyl 
some  of  the    they  come  to  bawdwyn,  broder  of  due  GodeflYoye  to  Eages  /  whiche  32 
ifcffii'af  receyued  them  gladly  /  And  gaf  them  vytaylles,  and"  made  them 
good  chere  as  long  as  they  were  there  /  And1  atte  departyng1  he  gaf 
to  them  fayre  and  good  yeftes.     It  was  not  longe  after  that  it 
happed!  that  one  llodahan,  the  lord  of  halappe,  had1  debate  and!  36 
wano  ayenst  a  baron  of  his,  whiche  was  Castelayn  of  a  castel  named! 
P  tear  wo]    Hasart.     And  2ye    shal   vnderstande  for   certayn  that  there  was 
1  Fr.  pour  cc  fat  tarde  Ic  portcmcid. 


Ch.  CXLVIL]     Godfrey  goes  to  assist  the  Lord  of  Easart.  219 

founden  first  the  playe  of  dyse(31),  and  fro  tliens  it  enm,  and  it  is 
named  so.     This  grete  man  of  halappe  assembled  his  peple.  And1  Bodohw. 
assyeged  this  castel  with  alle  his  power  /  The  lord"  that  was  within  JWjppj. 
4  sawe  wel  that  he  myght  not  holde  it  ayenst  his  lord!  /  And!  he  had!  Huwrt. 
no  turkes  for  to  socouro  hym.  ne  helpe  hym  /  Therfor  he  spak  to  on 
his  frende,  a  crysten  man.  which  was  pryue  with  hym,  and  sente  to 
due1  godefroy  many  grete  yeftes.     And  requyred  and1  prayd?  hym  Ti^ordjjf 
8  moche  affecttiously  that  he  wold!  socoure  hym  in  his  nede  /  ffor  he  £rGa'*jlrey 
had  desire  to  be  his  /  and  wold  be  bounden  to  hym  to  doo  hym 
grete  playsyrs  and1  seruyses.  And1  sente  to  hym  his  sone  in  hostage 
for  surete  /  The  valyaunt  due,  that  had  a  softe  herte  and  debonayr, 

12  receyued!  the  loue  and  thalyaunce  of  the  lord  of  hasart.  he  thought 
wel  that  it  was  not  ayenst  the  wylle  of  our  lord  for  to  afeblysshe 
one  of  his  enemyes  for2  another.  Thenne  sente  he  to  his  brother 
Bawdwyn  to  Rages  for  to  sende  hym  peple  ynowe  /  fl'or  his  purpoos 

16  &  wylle  was  to  reyse  the  siege  to  fore  this  castel  for  to  socoure  his 
frende  /  Rodahan  had1  holden  .vij  /  dayes  longe  siege  to  fore  this 
castel.     The  Due  godefroy  cam  by  grete  iourneyes  /  the  messagers  Godfrey  sent 
of  the  lord  of  the  castel  were  with  hym  /  ffor  they  myght  not  goo  tojum  by  ^ 

20  in  to  the  enstel  to  their  lord  /  ffor  it  was  besieged  round  about,  g^g,1*^ 
therfor  they  toke  two  douues  or  culuers  /  which  they  had  takerc  &  soon  ta  lhere- 
brought  with  them  for  to  doo  this  /  that  is  to  saye,  they  toke 
lettres  and  wrote  theryn  alle  theyr  entent  And!  bonde  thoo  lettres 

24  to  the  tayles  of  the  douues,  and!  lete  them  flee  /  And  the  douues 
flewe  and  cam  strayt  to  hasart,  fro  whe?is  they  were,  &  had  here 
there  nourisshed  /  they  that  awayted!  on  them  toke  them  /  the  lord! 
toke  the  lettres.  and1  fonde  therin  how  he  had!  alyaunce  of  the  due  / 

28  his  loue  and  grace.  And!  how  he  cam  for  to  socoure  hym  with  grete 

strengthe.     he  had!  thenne  grete  love  /  and?  toke  to  hym  grete  The  besieged 

°  °  ,.  ,  j-     i_  took  heart. 

hardynesse  in  suche  wyse  that  he  hym  self  yssued  out  of  the  yates  and  rallied 
J  J  j  j  *         ollt  ^  iltta(.k 

with  his  men  largely  /  And  assaylled  them  of  the  siege  vygorously  /  ti.e  besie^rs. 
32  whom  he  had  sore  doubted  not  long  byfore. 


The  dylygence  that  due  godeffrc-y  made  for  to  socoure 
a  turke,  to  whom  he  had  promysed  /  And  how 
he  reysed  the  siege,  beyng  to  fore  his  castell. 
36  ca°  Cxlvij" 

1  Orig.  due.  a  Fr.  par  V autre,  i.  e.  by  another. 


220        Baldwin  assisted  Godfrey  in  this  Enterprise.     [Ch.  CXLV1II. 

n       Ow  was  the  due  Godeffroy  approuched!  whan  his  brother  cam 

with  .iii/  M   horsmen,   noble,   valyaunt  and1   hardy  men,  & 

[i  if.  ioo,  bk.]  1  right  wel  armed.     They  were  but  on  iourneye  fro  the  castel  / 

Haidwin        Therle  Bawdwyn  acorded  wel  to  thenterprise  of  the  due  his  broder  /  4 

mp  his        but  he  sayd  wel  that'  Eodohan  the  lord  of  halappe  had  moche  grete 

tins  enter-      peple,  And  that  he  knewe  wel  for  certayn  /  Therfore  he  counseylled? 

hym  that  he  shold  sende  for  the  other  barons  that  were  abyden  in 

Anthyoche.  and  praye  them  as  his  frendes  that  they  wold  addresse  8 

They  sent  for  them  taccomplisshe  this  that  he  had  enterprysed  /  Trouth  it  was 

barons  in       that  he  had1  moche  prayd  buvmont  and1  therle  of  tholouse  to  fore  er 

Antiocli.  r      J  J 

he  departed,  but  they  had  a  lytil  enuye,  by  cause  the  turke  had? 
more  requyred1  the  due  than  ony  of  them,  but  now  whan  he  had1  12 
sente  for  them,  them  thought2  that  they  myght  not  goodly  abyde 
behynde.  And  ordeyned  moche  dilygently  theyr  goyng  forth  /  And1 
wente  so  ferre  that  they  ouertoke  hym  /  whan  they  were  alle  to 
wiienRodo-  gydre  /  they  were  wel  .xxx/  M.  men  of  armes.     Rodahan  had  his  16 

ban  heard 

of  this  be       espyes,  by  whome  he  knewe  certaynly  that  thyse  men  cam  vpon 
i-ie^e,  and      hym.     he  duiibted1  them  moche,  &  he  had  wel  .xl/  M  men.  but  yet 

returned  to         J  '  # 

Haiappe.        ]ie  durst  not  abide  them  /  but  departed  fro  the  siege  /  And  retorned 

to  halappe  /  The  due  knewe  nothyng  that  the  siege  was  departed  /  20 
but  werete  strayt  toward  hasart.     There  were  ynowe  in  Anthyoche 
of  knyghtes,  gentilmen,  &  other  whiche  knewe  that  the  valyaunt 
due  had  to  doo  with  men.  and1  departed1  fro  thens,  and3  wente 
toward  hym  for  to  helpe  hym.  24 

Of  somme  pylgryms  goyng  fro  Anthyoche  toward 
goderTroy,  were  disco^fyted  by  the  turkes  /  & 
rescowed  by  the  due.  ca°  C/xlviij 

a       Grete  quantite  of  turkes  were   embusshed1  besyde  the  waye  28 
where  by  they  shold  passe,  for  to  awayte  them,     whan  our 
Some  Turks    peple  approuched1,  as  they  that  toke  none  hede  /  the  turkes  sprang 
attacked  the   on  them  sodanly,  whiche   were  many  moo  than  our  men  were. 

Crusaders  on  *"  J 

tiie  way  to      Somme  they  slewe  /  and  many  moo  toke  prysonners,  and  bonde  32 
killed  many,   them,  and  retorned  to  theyr  retrayte.     The  tydynges  cam  to  the 
due  and  to  the  hoost,  which  were  out  of  their  wytte  for  sorow  that 
they  had.     Thewne  retorned  they  hastely  for  to  siewe  the  male- 
factours.  the  people  of  the  couwtre  told  them  which  way  they  were  36 
goon  /  &  addressyd  them  toward!  thyse  turkes  /  whan  they  had 

2  Oriij.  thonglit.  3  Orig.  and. 


swore  e\  rr  to 
p  true 


Ch.  CXLIX.]     The  Loi'd  of  Hasart  is  very  grateful  to  Godfrey.     221 
ouertaken  and  approuchedf  them,  they  ran  on  them  with  grete  herte,  Tiie  Crowd- 

*r  *  **  ^  era  m  return 

and?  slewe  them  som  of  them.     And  somme  they  toke  prysonners.  jgg^jf 
fewe  or  none  escaped?  /  &  Melyuerd  them  that  were  taken  pry-  ££*^j' 

4  soners  /  the  Cristen  men  whom  they  had  taken.     Rodahan  was    [lieatiuij 
moche  endommaged  /  ffor  they  were  wel  .x.  M/  turkes  of  the  best 
and  chosen  men  /  whan  oure  men  had?  don  this  they  toke  agayn  the 
waye  toward?  hasart.     whan  they  approuched,  the  lord  of  the  toun 

8  yssued  out  with  thre  honderd?  men  on  horsbak,  And  there  as  he 
founde2  the  due  /  he  descended  to  therthe,  and  kneled  to  fore  hym, 
and  thanked  hym  moche  /  And?  after  alle  the  other  that  were  there  The  lord  of 

*  '  Hamurt  Iran 

with  hym,  for  the  socours  that  they  had?  don  to  hym  in  this  nede.  very  Rraiefni 

J       '  J  "  to  the  Lhris- 

12  Thenne  swar  he  to  fore  them  alle  /  that  to  thyse  barons  and?  to  the  j^™'* 
other  Cristen  men  he  shold?  be  euermore  trewe  and  good*  frende,  J*^ 
In  suche  wyse  that  he  wold  to  his  power  pourchace  to  them  the 
best  that  he  coude,  and  warne  them  of  theyr  harme.     he  lodged 

16  them  moch  wel  and  honorably,  and  made  to  them  grete  presentes. 
On  the  morn  therle  bawdwyn  retorned  vnto  Eages  /  And  that  other 
boost  helde  theyr  waye  vnto  Anthyoche  / 

How  the  Due  alway  enforced  liym  to  augmente  Cris- 

20  tiente,  And  of  somme  fortresses  by  hym  beten 

and  destroyed.  ca°  Cxlix" 

He  Due  Godeffroy  knewe  well  that  the  pestylence  and  mor- 
t        talyte  endured  yet  in  Anthyoche  /  and  his  broder  had  moche 

2-1  prayd  hym  that  he  wold  come  and  soiourne  in  his  londe  vnto 

August,  that  the  tyme  shold  be  better  attempered,     he  toke  with 
hym  a  lytil  company e  of  them  that  were  moost  suffrable,  and?  cam  Godfrey  went 
to  torbosel  /  and  to  two  other  castellys  /  That  one  named  hatap  /  and  Hatap 

28  And  that  other  Eauendel.     Of  thyse  lande  dyde  he  entierly  his  <ui. 
wylle.     his  brother  visyted  and  saAve  hym  ofte  whyles  he  abode 
there  /  The  peple  of  the  countre,  and  specially  men  of  Relygyon,  The  people  of 

the  country 

complayned  moche  of  two  hcrmyens  that  were  bretheren,  that  one  complained 

much  ot  two 

32  was    named   Pancrace,    and    that    other    conasylles.      They    had    a  Armenian 

J  J  brothers. 

fortresse  in  that  contre.  &  were  grete  &  noble  men  there.  But  they 
had  no  trouthe  in  them ;  they  receyued  the  Eobbours  and  theuys 
that  pylled  and  defowlled  the  holy  places  /  the  chirches.  And  dyde 
36  moch  harme  to  alle  maner  of  peple.  they  were  enhanced  in  so 
moch  pryde,  that  they  toke  the  prescnte  of  the  pauyllon  that 
-  Orig.  fonnde. 


222     Baldwins  Subjects  in  Rages  form,  a  Plot  against  him.     [Ch.  CL. 

bawdwyn  had  sente  to  his  brother  to  the  siege  of  Anthyoche,  And? 

dyde  it  to  be  presented*  to  Buymont  in  theyr  name,  whan  the  Due 
The  Duke  herde  thyse  coinplayntes  /  he  sente  .L/  of  his  men  of  Armes,  and? 
toukethe     the  people  of  his  countre  /  And1  dyde  doo  take  the  fortresses  of  4 

fortresses  rr  . 

of  these         thyse  ltwo  hermyens.  And  bete  and  destroyed  them  to  tnertne  / 

Armenians.  J  " 

f_i  if.  ioi,  bk.]  whyles  that  the  valyaunt  due  soiourned  in  thyse  partyes  /  Many  of 
Many  of  the  the  peple  of  the  hoost  wente  to  therle  bawdwyn  to  Rages,  ffor  he 
\isited  Haid-  dyde  them  moche  good,  and  refresshyd  them  wel  /  and  largely  8 

win  at  Rages      J  °     •  111  1 

at  tiiis  time,  departed  of  his  good  to  them.  The  way  was  thenne  alle  sure  and 
good,  Syth  that  the  castel  of  hasart  was  alyed  entierly  with  our 
peple,  as  ye  haue  herd. 

How  the   knyghtes  of  Rages  wolde   haue   betrayed  12 
Bawdwyn  theyr  lord,  And  how  he  was  therof 
aduertysed.  ca°  CL 

The  pe..pio  of  s  0  moche  peple  of  Cristen  men  cam  to  Rages  that  it  desplesyd 
mudf.us-6  moche  to  the  Cytezeyns  of  the  toun  /  And  thermyens  and  16 

S'.esTvisiL    latyns  discorded  in  many  thynges,  ffor  withoute  faylle  oure  men 
wold  haue  the  seygnorye.     They  dyde  many  ennoyes  and  vylonyes 
to  theyr  hostes  within  their  howses.     The  Erie  hym  self,  by  cause 
he  had  so  grete  plente  of  men  of  hys  owne  countre,  he  called  the  20 
fewer  and  lasse  to  counseyll  of  the  noble  men  of  the  Cyte  /  By 
whos  helpe  he  was  comen  to  his  hyenesse  and  noble  lordship. 
They  had  therof  moch  grete  desdayne  within  theyr  hertes,  And 
repented  them2  of  that  they  had  chosen  hym  &  sette  hym  to  be  24 
their  lord?  ouer  them  /  ffor  they  doubted  that  therle,  whiche  was  so 
lyberall  as  he  that  gaf  to  euery  man  /  shold  on  a  day  take  all  that 
they  had.     Therfor  they  serate  to  the  admyrals  of  the  turkes,  that 
They  derided  were  theyr  neyghbours,  that  they  wold  pourchasse  gladly  by  theyr  28 
io  km  Bald-    jielpe  j  how  tiierie  Bawdwyn  shold  be  slayn,  or  atte  leste  put  oute 
and  chassed  awaye  fro  the  Cyte,  in  suche  wyse  that  he  shold  neuer 
retorne.     The  turkmans  acorded  wel  to  this  werk.     This  mater  was 
so  ferforth  that  they  of  Rages  toke  alle  theyr  goodes  pryuely.  And  32 
sette  it  in  the  howses  of  theyr  acqueynted  neyghbours  in  Cytees 
and  castellys  ther  about,     whyles  they  si>ak  and  aduysed  of  this 
a  rriend,       treyson  /  A  frende  of  therle  Bawdwyn  cam  to  hym  and  recounted 
v.'XrtiL'6"  this  fayt  al  a  longe  /   he  merueylled  moch  therof  /  And  dyde  36 
plot  to  him.    g^yj.g  of  tnis  tbyng.  And  founde  that  it  was  soo  /  He  knewe  wel 

3  Orig.  thein. 


Cli.  CLI.]    Baldwin  is  in  great  Danger  from  the  Treason  of  Balak.    223 

them  that  hail  ordeyned  this  trayson.  And  by  whom  it  shold  be 

doo.     And1  secretely  he  sende  his  men,  and1  toke  the  Capytayns  of  Baldwin  took 

J  »  i  vigorous 

this  falsenes  :  he  put  out  theyr  eyen  of  theyr  heedes.      Other  that  jctfwilHUie 
4  hail  not  so  moche  trespaced,  he  chassed  them  out  of  the  toun,  And  S\1^*"*rwa 
toke  alle  that  tliey  had.    Somrae  there  were  that  he  lete  dwelle  stylle  [J^T 
in  the  Cy te,  but  l  he  toke  their  good  as  moche  as  he  myght  gete  /  he    [»  leaf  ic»] 
had  wel  by  thoccasion  of  this  murder  that  thyse  traytres  deuysed? 
8  .xx/M/  besau^tes,  But  he  departed  alle  to  the  pylgryms,  that  had 
holpen  hym  to  take  the  castellys  and!  fortresses,  and1  somme  Cytees 
about  Eases  /  He  was  moche  dradde,  and?  doubted1  moche  of  his  After  tins  he 

°       '  was  greatly 

neyghbours,  in  suche  wyse  that  none  of  them  durste2  enterprise  ony  """^J^ 
1 2  debate  ayenst  hym  /  The  grete  and  hye  men  of  the  contre  wold 
gladly  haue  pourchaced  the  moyens  and1  manors,  for  to  be  delyuerd 
of  hym,  yf  they  had  myght  / 

How  therle  Bawdwyn  was  in  daunger  of  deth  by  the 
16  treson  of  a  turk  named  Balac  /    Capitulo  CLj° 

i        N  this  Countre  was  a  grete  and  an  hye  man,  a  turk,  &  was  Balac  was 

named'   Balac.     he  was   acqueynted   and  moche    pryue  with  sororge. 
therle  bawdwyn  /  he  was  somtyme  lord1  of  the  Cyte  of  Sorarge,  to 

20  fore  that  our  peple  cam  in  to  that  couratre.  This  turke  apperceyued?3 
that  therle  bawdwyn  sayde  [not]  to  hym  alle  his  counseyll  and  secrete, 
as  he  was  wonte,  ne  shewde  hym  so  good  chere.  On  a  daye  he  cam 
to  hym  /  And!  shewde  hym  by  fayr  langage  /  that  he  shold?  come  to  He  invited 

24  a  fortresse  of  his.  whiche  he  wold  gyue  to  hym  and  delyuer,  by  visit  Mm  at 

c'u  "  "  "    one  ot  Ins 

cause  he  had  no  more,  and?  also  he  wold  haue  nomoo,  as  he  saide,  fortresses, 
ffor  his  loue  shold?  suffyse  hym.  And  he  wold1  sende  his  wyf  &  his 
childeren  in  to  rages  for  to  dwell  there  vnder  hym.  by  cause  as  he 
28  sayde  /  that  the  turkes  his  neyghbours,  &  specially  they  of  his 
lygnage,  hated  hym  moche,  &  pourchassed  alle  the  harme  they 
myght,  for  the  grete  acqueyntaunce  that  he  had  with  the  Cristen 
men.     The  Erie  thought  nothyng  but  alle  wel  /  And  sayd  that  he  Baldwin 

°  "     a  '  accepted, 

32  wold?  goo  at  his  requeste   to  this  fortresse  at  the  day  appointed  "j'dweni  on 
bytwene  them  bothe  /  Therle  cam  theder  with  an  honderd1  horsmen/  ^"^Jjjj 
Balac  wente  to  fore,  and?  as  a  fals  traytre  had  hyd!  an  honderd  of  »«»*■«■«»■ 
his  men,  well  armed?,  within  the  fortresse  /  whan  they  were  arryued! 

2  Orig.  dnrste. 

3  Fr.  "  Ic  conic  Baudoin  nc  lui  disoit  maw  tant  dc  son  conscil."  Caxton 
has  either  exactly  reversed  the  sense  of  his  Fr.  original,  or  else  there  is  an 
accidental  omission  of  the  necessary  "not." 


224  Balak's  Treason  is  unsuccessful.         [Ch.  CLI. 

to  fore  the  fortresse,  Balac  prayd  therle  /  that  he  wold  come  vp  on 
But  when  he  hye  and1  see  the  place  how  stronge  it  was,  And*  that  he  shold 

arrived  Balac  r  °  ' 

tomeVw'ith  ^ryn8e  ^nt  *ewe  men   Wltn  nym>  ^or  ne   Mjd  he  had  certayn 
hi8lymaen!w  °f  tnvDoes  of  which1  he  myght  take  harme  /  yf  they  alle  entred  /  The  4 
good?  Erie  wold  haue  doon  soo,  but  he  had  in  his  company  a 
valyaunt  knyght,  wel  aduysed  and  a  wise  man  /  whiche  aduertysed2 
his  felaws  other  knyghtes  how  it  was  grete  perylle  and  daunger  so 
to  lete  hym  goo.     And  they  wold  not  suffre  hym,  but  reteyned  8 
pif.i08.bkj  hym  by  force  /  ffor  3they  doubted  moche  the  malyce  of  this  man  / 
in  suche  wyse  that  in  theyr  hertes  they  had  suspection  of  treson  / 
Baldwin,       The  Erie  abode  by  their  counseyl  /  &  sente  vp  .xij.  of  his  men  wel 
treachery,      armed  in  to  the  touie  for  to  see  yf  ther  were  ony  thyng  to  duubte  /  12 
firbet've  men    ne  ne^e  hVIU  emong  his  men.     they  that  wente  vp  anon  apper- 
TheThrkg     ceyued  wel  the  trayson,  ffor  the  Turkes  sprange  oute  of  thevr 

sprang  on  i  i 

them,  an.i      places  where  they  were  hyd.  And  toke  thise  .xij.  men  by  force,  and 

made  them  "  J  °  "  * 

caj.tiveu.       desarmed  them,  and  reteyned  them  bounden  handes  and  feet,    whan  16 
the  erle  knewe  this,  he  was  moche  sorouful  for  his  men  that  he  had 
thus  lost.     Thenne  he  drewe  hym  forth  and  spak  to  balac  /  And 
moche  prayd  hym,  and  coniured  hym  by  the  feaulte  and  oth  that 
he  had  made  to  hym,  that  he  wold  yelde  his  men  to  hym  /  or  atte  20 

Baldwin        leste  sette  them  at  rawnson  /  and  he  wold  gyue  for  them  as  moche 

besged  Balac  '  OJ 

to  allow  him  as  he  wold  haue.4     Balac  answerd  to  hym,  that  he  trauaylled  fox- 
to  ransom  "  J 

ins  men,  but  nought  /  ffor  he  shold  neuer  haue  none  of  them  /  But  yf  he  wold 

in  vain.  o        /  /  J 

gyue  to  hym  the  Cyte  of  Sororge,  whiche  had  ben  his  to  fore.  24 
Therle  sawe  that  this  fortresse  was  not  lyghtly  to  be  goten,  ffor  it 
was   ouer    strcnge,   and   stode   in   a   strange   place,   and   rychely 
He  returned   garnysshyd  /  And  retorned  to  rages  moche   anguysshous  of  the 

sorrowful  to  J  J        '  .  °  °    J 

Rages.  paryll  that  he  had  be  in,  whan  he  wold  by  thatycemerat  of  this  28 

felora  turk  haue  goon  vp  in  to  the  tour,  And  sorouful  he  was  for 
them  that  were  taken,  he  had  delyuerd  the  Cyte  of  Sororge  to 
kepe  vnto  a  moche  wise,  valyau?it  and  good  knyght,  named  Foubert 
de  chartres  /  this  man  kept  hit  with  an  /C  men  of  Amies,  valyau?>t  32 
men  /  whan  he  herd  saye  that  his  lord  had  ben  thus  almost  be 
bytrayed  /  and  how  he  had  lost  .xij.  men  /  he  was  sory,  and 
thought  hou  he  5 myght  helpe  them  ayenst  this  fals  turk,  that  had 
don  this  feet.5     It  was  not  longe  after  that  in  a  nyght  he  sette  a  36 

1  Fr.  "  qu'ilz  cusscnt  pcu  dommaigicr."     2  Orig.  adnertysed.     4  Orig.  hane. 

5—6  Yv.  "  lui  aidier  contrc  cellui  dcsloyal  Turc  qui  ce  lui  avoit  fait,"  viz. 
help  him  against  this  false  Turk  who  has  done  this  to  him.  Caxton  has  mis- 
taken the  past  participle  fait  for  the  substantive  fait. 


Ch.  CLII.]     Baldwin  trusted  the  Turks  no  more.  225 

busshenient  nygh  vnto  this  fortresse,  a  part  of  his  men.  and  in  the 
mornynge  he  with  a  fewe  of  his  companye '  cam  to  fore  this  toure,  Baiak  came 
and1  toke  the  proye  of  beestes.     They  that  were  on   hye  on  the  them. 

4  batayllemewt  sawe  that  they  were  hut  a  fewe  /  And?  told*  it  to  balak 
and  to  the  other  men  that  were  in  the  fortresse  /  They  toke  their 
horses  hastely,  and1  folowed  them  /  for  to  rescowe  that  whiche  they 
droof  awaye  /  In  suche  wyse  they  exployted1  that  they  cam  vpon 

8  themhusshement  /  They  sprange  sodanly  oute  and1  closed*  them  in  / 
Foubert  retorned  vpon  them,  And  slewe  I  wote  not  how  many,  but  Fouberttook- 

•  e  8'x  °'  ",e 

.vi/  he  toke  a  lyue  /  ffor  whom  he  had  incontinent  vi  of  our  men,  of  Turks,  whom 

Jl  J         I  .  he  exchange.  I 

them  that  he  helde  in  his  fortresse  /  It  was  not  lonce  aftir  that  four  for  six  of  our 

'  °  inen. 

12  of  the  other  escaped  out  of  the  fortresse  and  brake  theyr  prison, 
whyles  theyr  kepars  slepte.     whan  balac  sawe  /  that  ther  were 
'noinoo  but  two,  he  dyde2  do  smyte  of  theyr  heddes.     ffro  than   [Ueafio.T] 
forth  on  therle  bawdwyn,  that  had!  acqueyntance  to  dyuerse  admyrals  From  this 

?     "  *i      '  time  on  Bald- 

16  aboute  hym,  wold  neuer  after  acqueynte3  hym  more  ne  tmste  ony  win  had  no 
turk  /  But  eschewed?  theyr  companyes  and  theyr  Amytee.     And  dence  in  the 
that  he  shewde  wel  sone  after,  ffor  ther  was  an  hye  and  grete  man, 
n  turk,  in  that  contre,  named  Balduc  /  of  whom  I  haue  spoken  to 

20  fore  /  whiche  sold  this  Auncyen  Cyte,  named  Samoloc,4  vnto 
bawdwyn  /  And  this  turk  had  encouenaunted  and  promysed  that 
he  shold  brynge  his  wyf  and  childeren  within  Rages  /  but  he 
sought5  fals  occasions  for  to  delaye  this  thynge  /  On  a  day  he  cam 

24  to  bawdwyn,  as  ho  was  acustomed  to  doo,  And  Bawdwyn  demaunded 
hym  why  he  dyde  not  that  he  had  couenaunted  and  promysed ;  he 
began  to  excuse  hym  by  thynges  that  were  not  trewe.  The  Erie 
toke  hym,  and  Incontinent  dyde  do  smyte  of  his  heed. 

28  How  therle  of  tholouse  toke  the  cyte  of  AlbaDe.     And 
there  constituted  a  bisshop  /.  capitulo  CLij° 

t        He  Due  Godeffroy  soiourned  thus  as  I  haue  sayd  in  the  land 
of  torbesel.     Therle  of  tholouse  assembled  his  peple  /  and  toke 

32  grete  plente  of  pour  pilgryms  that  were  there  ydle  and  dyde  nought  / 

ho  wente  to  a  Cyte  wel  garnysshyd  named  albane  /  ij  iourneys  fro  The  Earl  of 
Anthyoche  ;  he  assyeged  it  /  And  so  constreyned  them  within  that  besieged  ai- 
they  yelded  the  toun  to  hym,  and  he  entred  therin  and  helde  it  /  rorrenderea 

36  And  by  the  moym  therof  he  had  alle  the  countre  about,   he  thanked 

1  Grig.  dype.         3  Orvj.  acrjneynte.         *  Lab  Samosatum. 

6  Orirj.  songlit. 

GODFREY.  Q 


226  The  Mortality  was  still  great  in  Antwch.     [Ch.  CLIII. 

oure  lord!  humbly  of  thonour  that  he  had  gyuen  to  hym.     Thenne 

chasse  he  a  bisshop  in  the  toun,  a  good  wyseman,  that  was  named 

He  save  half  Peter,  and  born  in  nerbonne.     And  he  gaf  to  hym  entierly  half 

to  p'efeJ'of     this   Cyte.     After  this  he  cam  in  to  Anthioche,  and  was  there  4 

sacred1  by  the  patriarke  bernard.     And  gaf  to  hym  his  entememet1 

and  made  hym  Archibisshop.     In  the  company  of  therle  of  tholouse 

was  a  noble  knyght  and  valyaunt  named  guyllamme.     This  man 

whan  Anthyoche  was  taken  toke  by  aduenture  the  wyf  of  Ancean,  8 

lord  of  the  toun  /  and  two  of  his  neuewes  sones  of  his  broder, 

sanaa-ioi  now  named  sansadol,  and  helde  them  yet  prysoners  /  But  this  sansadol 

chiidreii,and  trp,f  to  hym  for  them  grete  good  and  rychesse,  wherfor  he  delyuerd 

his  brother's  ,  .  .  -n 

«ife.  them,  bothe  the  lady  and  childeren.    In  this  sayson  cam  grete  plente  12 

Allied  from  of  peple  out  of  Duchelande,  And  arryued  atte  port  seynt  Symeon, 
PKiwf'bk    Ancl  soiourntl  within  Anthyoche  /  but  the  mortalyte  endured  2yet 
almost  ail      in  suche  wyse  that  they  deyde  almost  alle.    ther  escaped  but  few 
ofthepesti-    but  that  they  were  alle  deed  in  short  tyme,  ffor  this  pestylence  con-  16 
tinned1  thre  monethes  hool  vnto  thentree  of  wynter  /  There  were 
deed!  of  knyghtes  only  .V.C.     of  the  mene  peple,  noman  knewe  the 
n  ombre. 

How  our  peple  retorned  in  to  Anthyoche,  and  toke  20 
counseyl  for  to  goo  to  Iherusalem,  and  of  this 
that  foloweth.  ca°  Cliij0 

t        He  fyrst  day  of  Nouembre  /  the  barons  that  were  departed  for 

the  pestelence  were  alle  retourned  in  to  Anthyoche,  lyke  as  24 
they  had  promysed  /  Theyr  counseyl3  and  delyberacion  was  that 
they  shold  goo  and  assiege  the  cyte  of  mazran,4  whiche  was  stronge 
and  wel  garnysshyd  /  ffro  Albare  that  they  had!  taken,  it  was  not 
Theoommon  but  .viij.  myle  /  Noman  myght  holde  lenger  theyr  comyn  peple.  all  28 
ve4iTm-SreW  were  desirous  to  goo  to  Iherusalem  /  Atte  daye  named  they  were 
to'jerusMem.  alle  redy.     Therle  of  tholouse  /  the  due  godeffroye,  Eustace  his 
broder,  Therle  of  fflaundres,  The  Due  of  Normandye.     And  Tancre 
Tancred  he-    cam  to  the  cyte  of  marran  and  assieged  it  /  They  of  the  toun  were  32 
moch  rych  /  and  ful  of  grete  pryde  /  And  specially  by  cause  that 
the  same  yere  at  assemblee  of  them  was  a  scarmoche  ayenst  oure 
men.  of  whome  they  toke  somme,  and  somme  slewe  in  suche  wyse 
that  they  had  the  better,  ffor  that  cause  they  preysed  the  lasse  our  36 

1  Fr.  B-  inter  iiiemcnt.     *■  qui  lui  dona  pauU.     Lat.  "  Suscepto  ab  eodem 
pallii  genio  factus  arcliiepiscopus."         3  Orig.  connscyl.         *  Fr.  Marran. 


sieges  Mar 
ran, 


Ch.  CLIIL]  Siege  of  Mar  ran.  227 

pvlgrvins,  They  blamed  and  Iniured  our  barons.  And  despyted  them  wWe  people 

i  -    o  J         '  J  ■•  iiiHnli.-i  our 

and  alle  thoost  /  They  beyng  on  the  walles  /  vpon  the  hyo  towres  »«  ftwa  the 
they  sette  vp  crosses  and  spytte  on  them  in  despyt  of  our  fayth. 
4  and1  made  other  shameful  thynges  for  to  angre  with  alle  oure  peple  / 
The  barons  were  moche  wroth  /  And  dyde  do  crye  do  assault,  &  The  baron. 

'  were  much 

assailled   the  toun  asprcly  in  suehe  wyse  that  yf  they  had  had1  wroth, 
laddres  they  wolde  haue  entred  in  to  the  Cyte  by  force  /  the  /  ij. 
8  daye  after  that  they  cam  theder.     The  thyrde  day  cam  Buymont  /  Bohtrnwoa 
whiche  brought  men  with  hym  largely,  And  lodged1  where  as  the 
Cyte  was  not  assieged.     Thenne  had  our  men  grete  despyte  of  this 
that  they  dyde  nothyng  /  And  hastely  dyde  do  make  engyns  and  the  siege « a* 

12  reysed  them  castellys,1  belfroyes,  and  slynges  to  caste  stones,  and  ^  vi«or- 
fylled  the  dyches  for  to  goo  and  vnder  myne  the  walles.  they  within 
detfended  tliem  moche  wel  /  And  threwe  vpon  them  grete  stones, 
Fyre,  brent  /  lyme,  Oyle  boyllyng,  and  shotte  at  them  with  arba- 

16  lasters  and  bowe  turquoys  arowes  passyng  thycke  /  but  god  be 

thanked  they  hurted  2but  fewe  of  oure  men.  they  within  began   [» leaflet] 
moche  to  be  mery  /  Oure   men  apperceyued   that.      And  theyr 
volente  and  hardenesse  grewe  and  encreaced,  anon  they  dressed 

20  the  laddres  ayenst  the  walles  /  &  wente  vp  dylygently  /  Emong  alle 
other  ther  was  a  noble  &  valyau??t  man,  &  was  of  limosyn,  named 
geffrey  de  tours  ;  he  3mayntened  the  fyrst  tyme  merueyllously  well  / 
Other  folowed  hym.  ther  were  ynowe  that  entred  in  to  the  toures  / 

24  they  had  taken  the  Cyte  yf  the  nyght  had  not  come  on  and 
destroubled  them,  therfore  they  left  of  til  on  the  morn,  ffor  that 
assault  had  endured  fro  the  soraie  rysyng  tyl  that  tyme  /  they  kept 
wel  the  gates  that  thay  of  the  toun  shold  not  yssue  and  made  good 

28  watch e  in  thooste.     But  the  mene  peple  sawe  that  noue  shewde 

hym  vpon  the  walles  /  And  eutred  in  to  the  toun,  And  fonde  that  when  the 
it  was  all  voyde  of  peple  /  they  toke  alle  that  they  wolde  and  had  entered  the 
nede  of,  as  they  that  lon^e  had  saflred  famyne  and  grete  pouerte.  found  that 

J  °  J  o  r  t,|e  penpie 

32  Alle  thay  of  the  Cyte  were  entred  in  to  longe  caues  and  depe,  and  had  fiedto 
supposed  to  haue  saued  and  kept  them  there.     On  the  morn  the 
barons  sawe  that  the   cyte  was  taken,  And  entred  in,  but  they 
founde  but  lytil  gayne,  ffor  the  corny n  peple  had  takyn  suche  as 

36  they  founde  /  they  knewe  wel  that  the  turkes  of  the  toun  were  hyd 

vnder  the  erthe ;  they  sette  fyre  in  the  mowthes  of4  alle  the  caues  /  They  set  fire 

to  the  months 

and  sente  in  to  it  so  moche  smoke  /  that  by  force  they  muste  come  of  these  cave». 

1  Fr.  ber/roiz,  movable  tower  of  wood. 
3  Fr.  sc  contint,  conducted  himself.  *  Orig.  cf. 

Q   2 


228  Godfrey  goes  to  Phages  to  visit  Baldwin.     [Ch.  CLIV-V. 

Many  they     out.     Oure  men  slewe  ynough  of  them.  And  the  remenaunt  they 
resT'w'ere    e  toke  prysonners.     there  deyde  of  sekenesse  the  good  man  holy  and 


taken  prison- 
ers 


relygyous,  whiche  moche  louyd  and  dredde  our  lord  god,  Guyl- 
laumme  the  hisshop  of  Orenge  /  whan  the  due  had  ahyden  there  4 
.xv  dayes  with  the  other  he  departed  with  therle  of  fflaundres  and1 
cam  in  to  Anthyoche,  where  they  had  to  do  / 

How  the  due  Godeffroy  wold  goo  to  rages  to  vysyte 
his  brother  er  he  began  his  way  to  Iherusalem  /  8 
And  of  somme  of  his  aduentures  /  ca?  CLiiij. 

g       Odeffroy  the  valyaunt  due  of  Loreyne  sawe  how  the  men  a 
fote  made  them  redy  for  taccomplysshe  theyr  vowe  and!  goo 
Godfrey  ad-    toward   Iherusalem,  and!   moche  requyred1  and   admonested?  the  12 
wns'to  the  grete  lordes  to  the  same  /  But  the  valyaunt  due  would  see  and 
ruTa'iem.  *"    vysyte  his  brother  to  fore  that  he  shold  separate  fro  this  countre  / 
He  himself     And  toke  his  pryue2  companye,  and  wente  to  Rages,    whan  he  had* 
T^visHBafd69  seen  his  hroder,  and  doo  suche  thynges  as  it  plesyth  hym  /  he  wold  16 
pir.iM.Wc.1  retorne  to  3 Anthyoche  to  the  other  barons  and  other  pylgryms  that 
abode  there  for  hym.  whan  he  was  approuched,  that  he  had  but.  six 
or  seuen  myle  to  ryde  /  they  founde  in  theyr  waye  a  moche  fayre 
place  for  to  dyne  and  ete  in  by  a  fayre  welle,  moche  delectable  and  20 
fill  of  grete  herbes  and  grasse  /  Alle  they  acorded  gladly  for  to  dyne 
in  this  fayre  place,     whyles  they  made  redy  theyr  dyner  be  ye 
certayn  that  oute  of  moche  reed  whiche  was  nyghe  a  mareys  by 
on  the  way    aroos  certayn  Turkes  wel  armed,     whan  the  noble  Due  and  the  24 
afierce ski"^  other  barons  sawe  them  come  /  they  toke  theyr  Armes  hastely  as 
"me  Tm'ks,   they  myght  /  And  toke  theyr  horses  and  ran  vpon  them  vygor- 
ously.  And  there  was  the  skarmoche  grete  &  fiers.     The  due  dyde 
in  which  he    moche  wel  and  valyauntly,  ther  were  many  turkes  slayn  /  And  the  28 
w^victori-    remenauwt  fledde>     our  men  lost  there  nothyng,  But  cam  with 
moche  grete  ioye  vnto  Anthyoche  / 

How  after  that  the  cyte  of  Albare  was  conquerd,  a 
grete  debate  arose  bytwe,ne4  therle  of  tholouse  32 
and  buymont.  ca?  CLv. 

uohemond     o       F  this  noble  Cyte  of  Albare  which  was  taken  as  I  haue  sayd 
SrxSdmS1  to  fore,  aroos  a  grete  debate  bytwene  buymont  and  the  erle  of 

1  Orig.  requyred'.  2  Orig.  pryne.  *  Orig.  btyweiie. 


Ch.  CLV.]     The  People  murmur  at  so  many  Delays.  229 

tholouse,  ffor  therle  wold  haue  alle  albare.    buyniont  sayde  he  Avoid'  had  »qnaroi 

J  J  over  tlie  city 

not  gyue  away  las  part  /  yf  he  yelded  not  and4  gaf  ouer  certeyn  of  Aibare. 
towres  that  he  held  in  Antliyoche.    And  herupon  buymont  departed, 

4  And  made  the  towres  to  be  assayled,  that  the  men  of  the  erles  of 
tholouse  helde,  and  toke  them  by  strength  and  made  them  to  goo 
out  that  kept  them  in  the  name  of  therle,  and  fro  then  forthon  he 
helde  alle  Anthyoche  witlioute  felaw  or  partener.    Therle  sawe  that 

8  Bnymont  was  departed  fro  the  Cyte  so  conquerd!  /  And  gaf  the  aii»™  «m 
toun1  entierly  to  the  bisshop  of  Albare,  whyles  they  ordeyned  and2  to  the  bisiu.p 
disposed  bytwene  hym  and  the  bisshop,  how  the  cyte  myght  be 
rnayntened  and  kept  in  suche  wyse  that   the  turkes  shold  not 
12  recouer  it  /  The  peple  a  foote  began  to  murmure  of  this  that  the  The  people 

'  r    *  i/i  it      still  inunnui'- 

hye  &  noble  men  taryed  for  to  take  this  euyl  Cytees,  and  made  ed  against 

J  ^  T,  tlle  0al'On8 

debate  and  noyse  emong  them  for  theyr  conquest.     But  the  pryn- 
cipal3  cause  wherfor  they  departed  fro  theyr  countrees  lefte  they,  as 

16  forgetyng*  and  settyng  not  therby  /  And  as  it  semed  they  sette  for not  mi- 
nothynge  by  thaccomplysshyng*  of  theyi  vowe  /  Therfor  the  mene  vows, 
peple  acorded  emonge  them  self,  that  as  sone  as  therle  of  tholouse 
shold  be  departed  fro  the  Cyte  of  marran  they  shold  confounde4  and 

20  5destroye  it  alle  vnto  the  erthe,  in  suche  wyse  that  they  wold  not   [s  leafios] 
tarye  for  hvm6  fro  than  forthon.     It  happed  that  the  barons  assem-  The  barons 

"  i-i  assembled  to 

bled  at  Kouge,  a  Cyte  whiche  is  half  waye  bytwene  marran  and  take  counsel 

°   '  J  ■  as  to  future 

Anthyoche.  ffor  to  haue  a  counseyl  there  emonge  them  /  yf  they  movements, 
24  shold  fro  thens  drawe  forth  toward  to  Iherusalem,  ffor  the  mene 
peple  languysshyd  moche  and  hasted  for  to  goo  theder.     There  the 
barons  coude  not  acorde  /  so  that  there  was  no  conclusion  taken  /  but  node- 

cision  \v;i8 

whyles  that  therle  of  tholouse  abode  at  this  parlement,  The  foote  reached. 

28  men  that  were  lefte  at  marran,  ayenst  the  wyll  and  defience  of  the 
bisshop  /  bete  doun  the  walles  and  toures  of  the  Cyte  of  Marran  / 
ffor  they  wold  not  for  thoccasion  of  this  toun7  abide  lenger  in  this 
countre.8     whan  the  erle  retorned ;  he  was  moche  angry  of  this  / 

32  that  they  had  don,  but  for  that  he  coude  not  amende  it9  /  he  couerd 

well  his  courage  without  forth.     The  men  a  foote  began  alway  to  The  people 
crye  and  requyre  moche  the  barons  that  they  wold  conduyte  them  more  uneasy, 
for  taccomplysshe  theyr  pylgremage  /  or  yf  they  wold  not  /  they 

36  wold  chese  a  knyght  and  make  hym  Capytayn  ouer  them  /  And 

1  Orig.  tonn.  2  Orig.  aud.  3  Orig.  pryucipal. 

4  Orig.  confonnde.         6  Orig.  hyin.         7  Orig.  tonn.         8  Orig.  conntre. 
9  Fr.  Wen  couvril  son  courage,  par  dehors,  i.  e.  he  dissimulated  perfectly  his 
real  feelings. 

1  8 


230     The  Earl  of  Toulouse  appoints  the  Day  to  depart.    [Ch.  CLVI. 
•ri.ey  raftered  they  shold  folowe  hym  vnto  the  Cyte  of  Iherusalem  /  On  that  other 

greatly  from  *  *  ' 

thuumf  sye*e  was  ^eie  scarsete  m  thoost  of  vytaylles,  in  such  wyse  that  the 
poure  peple  deyde  for  honger  /  Men  sayde  that  many  of  them  ete 
flesshe  of  men  and  other  thynges  that  were  not  fayr  ne  good,  clenc  /  4 
ne  honeste  for  to  ete  /  herof  sourded  a  grete  mortalyte  /  ffor  they 
had  hoklen  siege  about  this  Cyte  of  Marran  with  suche  meschyef 
of  faoiyne  that  they  had  lost  moche  of  theyr  peple,  and  not  so 
fm,  oTh'u  h  many  by  armes>  but  by  mesease  that  they  suffred.  Ther  deyde  a  8 
died'' Pau''  niocn  noble,  valyaunt  yonge  man,  Emorran,1  sone  of  huon,  Erie  of 
seynt  poul  of  a  sekenesse  /  of  whom  was  grete  dommage,  and  moch 
was  bewaylled  in  thoost. 

How  atte  request  of  the  comyn   peple  the  erle  of  12 
tholouse  ordeyned  day  for  to  conduyte  them  / 

ca°.  CLvj. 
The  Earl  of    o       F  thyse  Inconuenientes  that  ran  in  thoost  of  the  pykryms  the 

Toulou«e  was  *  fjoj 

inuchdi»-  vygorous  and  valyaunt  erle  of  tholouse  was  in  moch  grete  16 

condition  ot    anguysshe  /  ffor  he  wyste  not  wel  what  he  myght  doo.     On  that 
one  syde  he  had  pyte  and*  grete  sorowe  of  the  meseases  that  he 
sawe  the  poure   peple  suffre  /  And  was  moche  meuyd  by  theyr 
requestes  whan  they  so  swetly  prayd  hym  and  the  other  barons  to  20 
lede  them  for  taccomplysshe  theyr  vowes  &  pylgremage.     On  that 
[» if.  io5,  bk.]  2other  syde  he  had  wel  vnderstonden  that  the  barons  acorded  not 
to  this  that  the  comyn  peple  requyred.     Ami  therfor  he  that  was 
of  grete  courage  and1  valyaunt  man,  sayde  that  he  wold  no  lougre  24 
.ind  fixed  a     suffre  thus  the  pour  peple  languysshe  ne  deye.     And  ordeyned  to 
rorjerusa-     them  a  daye  that  he  wolde  departe  withoute  fay  lie  for  to  goo  stray  t 
vnto  Iherusalem  /  And  that  shold  be  the  /  xv  /  day  folowyng, 
And  for  talledge  the  mesease  of  famyne  /  he  toke  with  hym  a  part  28 
of  his  knyghtes  and  of  foote  men  the  strengest  and  most  delyuer, 
And  lefte  the  remnaunt  in  the  Cyte,  and  went  forth  and  entred  in 
to  the  londe  of  his  enemyes  and  brake  vp  tounes,  stronge  howses  / 
&  brought  grete  plente  of  beestys  &  other  vytaylles,  &  brought  also  32 
csclaues  men  and  wyramen.    whan  he  cam  to  Marran  /  he  departed 
all  the  gayn  that  he  had  goten  as  wel  to  them  that  abode  as  to  them 
that  he  had  with  hym  /  in  suche  wyse  that  they  all  were  ryche3 
broached     °f  goodes  and  of  vytaylles  /  The  daye  began  tapproche  that  therle  36 
p^.piTwere1   bad  named  /  The  comyn  peple  cryed  fast  for  the  departynge  /  And 
to  depart?      sayd  alle  playnly  that  he  shold  haue  no  lenger  respyte  of  them,  he 
1  Fr.  Enjorran.  s  Orig.  ryhc. 


Ch.  CLVIL]     They  went  Ivy   Way  of  the  Sea.  231 

wist  not  what  to  doo  /  ffor  he  knewe  certavnly  that  the  peple1  had!  TheKm-ifeit 

'  *  that  the 

right.     But  he  had  but  a  lytil  company  on  horsbak,  therfore  he  people  were 
requyred  the  bisshop  of  Albare  to  goo  with  hym  /  he  grauntedf  it 
4  to  him  gladly.     And1  k-fte  his  londo  in  the  haude  of  Guyllamme  de 
cuuylly,  valyaunt,  wyse,  and  trewe  knyght,  And  delyuerd  to  hym 
but  xxx  horsmen  and  /  xl.  men  afote.     But  it  was  not  longe  after, 
that  the  good  knyght  amended  soo  that  he  had  xl  on  horsbak  and 
8  lxxx  /  a  foote  /  whan  the  day  cam  that  was  appoynteel,  therle  put  «.  i.e  b.in.t 
fyre  in  the  Cyte  of  maiTan  and  brente  it  alle  to  asshes.  And!  after  ujj"*."^, 
toke  his  way.    he  had  in   his  companye  aboute  a  .x.M.  men,  of '«.<>""  men. 
whom  there  were  not  but  /  iij  /  C.  on  horsbak.     whan  he  was  de- 

12  parted  the  due  of  normaudye  &  tancre  departed1  after,  &  abode  for  to  ™*J^,ev,,f 
goo  with  hym.     Eche  of  thyse  two  had!  but  .xl  /  men  on  horsebak  J^EIEd 
But2  they  had  moche  peple  afote  with  them  /  In  theyr  waye  they  him- 
fonde  plenty  of  vytaylles,  ffor  they  passed  by  Cezaire  /  by  haman, 

16  and  by  chamele  /  Of  the  lordes  of  thyse  townes  had  they  grete  They  received 

w  I  i  *■"  great  fTifta 

yeftes  gold  /  syluer  and  other  rychesses,  they  presented  to  thein  :  [^,sltll'^t 
Oxen,  Kyen,  Motous  and  other  vytaylles  /  They  dyde  them  haue  ti.eyp«*.ed. 
resonable  cheep  of  alle  thynges  /  eche  of  them  conduyted  them 

20  surely  thorugh  his  countre.  And  where  as  they  had  power  /  Thoost 
encreced  and  grewe  more  and  more  fro  day  to  day  /  tfor  they  founde 
many  good  passages  oueral  where  they  wente,  of  horses  also  wherot' 
they  had  grete  nede  forade  they  grete  cheep  /  in  such  wise  that  many 

24  s bought  fressh  horses  /  And1  so  moche  dyde  thyse  to  fore  that  the   [s  leaf  iog] 
other  barons  cam,  that  dyde  so  moche  that  they  had  in  theyr  com- 
panye a  /  M  men  wel  horsed,  they  cam  thus  a  fene  fro  the  see  The  finny 

Increased 

svde.     But  after  they  acordedl  that  they  wold  drawe  them  to  the  every  day. 

*  '  "  and  went  ti>- 

28  see  syde,  for  to  here  more  lyghtly  4  tydynges  of  the  Barons  that  were  wards  the 
abyden  in  Anthyoche  /  and1  for  to  fynde  the  better  and*  bye  theyr 
necessytees  at  the  shippes  that  were  in  the  hauenes  and  portes. 

How  therle  of  tholouse  auengyd.hym  of  somme  turkes 
32        robbours  that  robbed  his  hoost  /         ca°  CLvij0 

i        N  alle  the  waye  syth  they  departed  fro  Marran  they  were  wel 
comen  in  peas  and  sauete,  sauf  only  of  one  thyng  /  that  is  to 
wete  that  somtyme  turkes  theuys  cam  after  thoost  and  slewe  somme  They  were 
36  of  our  peple,  and  toke  the  feble  and  seke  that  abode  behvnde  the  by  Turkish 

thieve*. 

other  /  Therle  was  moche  wroth  of  this  Inconuenyent,  therfor  he 
1  Fr.  avoit  droit,  were  in  the  right  of  it.         2  Oritj.  But.         *  Orig.  lygytly. 


232  They  received  Great  Gifts  everywhere.     [Ch.  CLVII. 

The  Eari  and  made  the  other1  to  goo  to  fore.     And  he  and  the  bisshop  of  Albare 

the  bishop  ot  ' 

^mbiisiHor''  reteynet*  a  ^ewe  men  wel  horsed,  embusshed  them  behynde  the 
these  men,     hoost  for  to  see  yf  they  wold  come  that  thus  endommaged  the 

hoost.     whan   they  had  a  litil  whyle  taryed  the  turkes  cam   &  4 
spra/?g  vpon  somme  of  oure  men  /  whiche  ai  wyllynge  made  sem- 
blaunt  that  they  myght  not  goo.     Therle  sawe  them  /  and  sprange 
sodenly  on  them  out  of  bis  embusshement  /  &  smote  of  alle  theyr 
and  won        heedes  /  sauf  somme  that  he  ladde  with  hym.     There  wan  he  good!  8 

great  spoils 

from  them,  horses  and1  armures  many  /  And'  after  he  cam  agayn  in  to  thooste 
with  grete  ioye  /  ffro  this  da  ye  forth  they  wente  thurgh2  the  londe 
moche  surely  without  ony  lack  of  vytaylles,   3of  Cytees  and  of 

Everyone      castellys  on  both  sydes  whan  they  passed.     Ther  was  no  lord?,  but  12 

siivt  them  ' 

presents,        he  sente  •*  to  them  grete  yeftes,  If  or  to  gete  theyr  loue,  and  dydo 
except  the      them  haue  resonable  cheep  of  vytaylles  oueral  /  Reserved?  one  castel. 

lord  ol  one  "■  *      "  '  ' 

castle,  where  the  men  that  were  therin  trusted  ouermoche4  in  theyr  for- 

tresse.     Therfor  they  sente  to  them  neuer  presente  ne  message  /  16 
But  descended?  alle  Armed1  ayenst  oure  men  for  to  deffende  them 
a  passage.     But  our  men,  whan  they  sawe  them,  assaylled?  them 
vygorously,  in  suche  wyse  that  they  were  anone  disconfyted.    There 
were  but  fewe  but  they  were  alle  slayn  or  taken,    whan  the  barons  20 

winch  our      sawt  that  they  were  rebelle  ayenst  them  /  anon  they  wente  in  to 

men  attacked  .        . 

and  burnt  to   the  fortresse  and?  toke  it  alle  at  the  fyrst  comyng,  smote  doun  the 

the  ground.  ^  J     °' 

walles  vnto  therthe,  And  the  bowses  they  brente,  after  they  had 
p  if.  loo,  bk.]  5  taken  out  all  that  they  fynde  therin.     They  ledde  away  horses  24 
ynow  whiche  they  founde6  in  the  pastures,    emong  our  men  were 
dynerse  messagers  of  the  contre  that  the  grete  lordes  and  men  ther 
ahoutes  had?  sente  for  to  see  theyr  couyne,  whiche  whan  they  sawe 
that  oure  barons  dyde  thus7  theyr  wylle  /  And?  that  nothynge  28 
myght  resiste  them,  they  wente  to  theyr  lordes,  And?  told?  them 
that   they  were  ouer   cruel   and   tiers   peple  /  aspre   and   hardy. 
they'ia"       Thenne  shold?  ye  haue  seen  brought,  An$  presented?  to  oure  men 
Mi?t»,aiHiaii  greto  presentes  and?  honorable,  and  vytaylles  as  for  nought  fro  alle  32 
through  the    partes  /  In  so  moche  they  doubted  them  /  8that  they  dyde  grete 
country.        cure  for  tacqueynte  them,8  and  to  brynge  them  in  to  theyr  loue  / 

1  Orig.  othrr.  2  Orig.  thnrgh. 

3-3  Fr.  des  citds  ct  des  chasteaulx  a  destre  ct  a  senestre,  quant  ilz  passount 
n'y  eut  oncques  nul  seigneur  qu'il  envoyast,  there  was  not  a  single  lord  of  the 
cities  and  castles,  both  on  the  right  and  on  the  left,  who,  as  they  passed,  did 
not  send  them,  etc.        4  Orig.  oeuermoch.        6  Orig.  fonude.        7  Orig.  thns. 

8-8  Fr.  ilz  mcttoient  grant  cure  a  les  acointicr,  they  took  great  pains  to 
make  their  acquaintance. 


Cli.  CLVIII.]     They  approached  the  City  of  Archis.  233 

It  -was  not  longe  but  they  passed  alle  the  contre  til  they  cam  to  the  JJg™***1 
playnes  of  an  Auncyent  cyte  by  the  see  syde,  named  archys,  they 
lodged  nygh  by  the  toun. 

4  How  therle  of  tholouse  approuched  with  his  host  vnto 
archis,  And  of  the  situacion  of  the  same. 

ca°  CLviij° 

a       Rchys1    is   a  Cyte  of   the   lande  of   Fenyce,2    and*   standeth  *£*££*" 
8  atte  i'oote  of  a  montayne  named!  Lybane,  in  a  tereitorye  moche  orPhwuicw, 

strongc  /  and  is  a  four  or  .v  /  myle  fro  the  see  /  &  hath  moche 
plenteuous  londe  aboute  it,  and  delectable  of  pastures  &  of  waters. 
The  scriptures  saye  /  that  it  was  founded3  moche  auncyently.     For 

12  Noe  that  was  in  the  arke  had  .iij  /  sones,  that  one  of  them  was 
named  Caym  (32)  /  he  had  a  sone  named  Canaham  /  Of  hym  cam  a 
sone  that  was  Arracheus  /  he  founded  /  this  cyte.    And!  after  hym  this  ™™fd,^er 
cyte  was  named!  Archys.     Ther  were  prisonners  of  oure  men  in  this  **jgg«M 

16  toun.    hit  was  sente  worde  by  the  prysonners  to  therle  of  tholouse  Many  chru- 

,  ,  jw.        tian  prisoners 

that  he  shold  assiege  this  cyte,  &  also  to  the  other  barons/  nor  were  in  ihia 
they  shold  haue  grete  good  therby.     the  cite  of  tripf ,  which  was  ™  *'in  the 
moch  noble  &  rych,   was   but  vj   myle    from    thens,  there  were  SSyXwJIS: 

20  also  of  our  peple  prysonners  /  For  syth  the  begynnynge  of  the 
siege  of  Anthyoche,  and1  after  that  it  was  goten  /  our  peple  began 
to  renne  in  the  contree  nycely  &  folyly  for  to  l'eche  somme  vytaylles 
&  other  necessitees4  that  they  lacked  /  they  were  taken  in  many 

24  places  in  such  wyse  /  ther  was  vnneth  cyte  ne  castel  in  the  contre, 
but  ther  were  therin  som  of  our  pylgryms  prysoners.5  In  the  cyte 
of  trypple  were  moo  than  /  ij  /  C.  They  them  self  had1  sente  to 
oure  men  that  yf  they  wolde  make  semblaunt  to  conquere6  the 

28  countree  /  The  kynge  of  tripple  wold!  gyue  them  grete  hauoyr  and 

good!  for  to  departe  7thens,  and  shold!  delyuer  to  them  alle  theyr  pieafior] 
prysonners.  It  happeed  thenne  to  them  thus  that  our  peple  our  men  ap- 
approuched  the  cyte  of  archis  for  to  see  what  semblaunt  they  wold  awhinMhu 

32  make,  &  also  for  tabyde  the  other  barons  that  shortly  shold  come  ^&J^" 
and  folowe  them  / 

1  Orig.  Rrhys.         2  Fr.  Fenice,  Lat.  Phoenicia.         3  Grig,  fonnded. 
*  Orig.  uecessitees.         e  Orig.  prysouers.         6  Orig.  couqnere. 


234 


The  Capture  of  Tortuose. 


[Ch.  CLIX. 


Of  a  toun  named1  tortuose,  whiche  Raymont  toke  with 
a  Rowte  of  pylgryms,  And  of  the  departynge  of 
the  other  barons  fro  Anthyoche  /  Capitulo  CLix° 

t        Her  yssued!  out  of  our  lodgys  of  oure  men  /  an  honderd  men  on  4 

liorsbak,  and!  two  honderd!  a  foote  /  And  made  theyr  Capytayne 
Raymont  pelet,  whiche  was  a  wyseman  and  a  moclie  valyauut  knyglit. 
They  wente  to  fore  a  cyte  whiche  was  named  tortuose,2  for  to  see  yf 
they  myght  fynde  ony  auenture  for  to  gete  som  gayne  /  They  ap-  8 
prouched  the  cyte  and  began   tassayle  it  vygorously  and  moclie 
sharply  /  They  within  deffended  them,  bothe  men  and  wymme» 
valiaurttly,  3but  our  men  left  but  litil  or  nought.3   the  nyght  cam  on 
them,  And  they  left  thassault  for  to  be  more  fressh4  on  the  morn  /  12 
And  abode  for  more  companye  of  thooste  that  shold?  folowe  them  / 
And*  to  begyn  on  the  morn  thassault  agayn  /  They  of  the  toun  had 
moch  grete  drede  that  our  men  wold  assaille  them  agayn  on  the  morn, 
and  myght  not5  resiste  them,     therfor  in  the  nyght  they  wente  16 
pryuely  out  of  the  toun  and  wente  to  the  montaines,  and  caryed 
nothyng  with  them  but  theyr  wyues  and  childeren.     Alle  theyr 
other  geer  they  lefte  in  the  toun  /  Oure  men  that  knewe  no  thynge 
herof  aroos  erly  and!  began  to  make  redy  and  encorage  eche  other  to  20 
doo  wel  at  thassault.    they  approched!  the  walles  alle  armed,  and 
they  herde  noman  /  they  entred  in  to  the  toun,  and  opened  the 
yates  in  such  wyse  that  alle  entred.    thenne  sawe  they  that  they  of 
the  toun  were  yssued  and*  goon,   they  founde  the  Cyte  ful  of  goodes,  24 
in  so  moche  that  they  were  alle  ryche,  they  trussed  all  /  and  bare  as 
moche  as  they  myght  in  to  thoost,  &  recounted?  theyr  aduenture,  of 
whiche  they  were  alle  glad  and!  ioyous,  and?  thanked  our  lord,   whan 
the  moneth  of  Marche  was  come,  and  that  the  season  was  more  28 
attemperat,  the  people  that  was  left  in  Anthyoche  sawe  that  it 
The  pilgrims  was  tyme  to  departe  /  they  spak  to  due  godeffroye  &  to  therle  of 
"Lnul March  fflaundres,  &  prayed!  them  moche  affectuously  that  they  wold  enter- 
l^i.tedby     pryse  &  conducte  them   to  Ihrlin  for  taccomplysshe   their  pilgre-  32 
the  Eari  of1    mage  /  the  goyng  forth  of  therle  of  tholouse,  the  due  of  normandye  / 
L<  ir.  1^7,'bk.]  &  Tancre,  caused  them  moche  to  haue  the  wyll  forth,  6ffor  they 
were  goon  to  fore,  and  ledde  with  them  grete  nombre  of  pylgryms  / 
And  they  happened  wel  in  the  waye,  and  had  therby  grete  prouffyte  36 

1  Orig.  uamed.  2  Fr.  Tortouze. 

3_3  Yi:  "  telement  que  nos  gens  nc  forfirent  Hen  ou  pou." 

4  Orig.  t'ecsh.  5  Orig.  uot. 


Raymond 
Peiet  assailed 
the  city  of 
Tortuuse, 


which  was 
vigorously 
defended 
during  the 
day: 


but  at  niirlit 
the  inhabit- 
ants left 
secretly,  and 
tied  tn  the 
mountains. 


Our  men 
entered  the 
next  day, 
and  round 

great  riches. 


Ch.  CLX.]        Bohemond  remains  in  Antioch.  235 

and  grete  honour.     By  thysc  wordes  were  the  barons  gretely  stered 
and  meuyd  /  They  ordeynedf  tlieyr  affayres  dylygently,  and  toke  alle 
theyr  peple,  as  wel  on  horsbak  as  a  foote,  and1  wente  so  fer  forth  that 
4  they  cam  to  the  lyche  of  surrye  /  They  were  /  xxv.  M  /  men  all  in  They  were 

•>  J  *       *  "  '  '  25,11(10  men, 

poynt  and1  armed1,  eueryche  after  that  he  was  /  The  good?  man  and!  j^*11 
valyaunt  knyght  buymont  conueyed1  them  theder  with  his  men. 
But  it  was  not  theyr  entente  ne  wyll  that  he  shold  goo  ony  ferther, 
8  ffor  the  cyte  of  anthyoche  was  newly  conquerd,  and1  theyr  enemyes 
were  fast  by  /  Therfor  it  behoued  hym  not  to  withdrawe  hyin  ferre 
fro  it  /  but  therfor  he  toke  good  hede  continuelly  daye  and  nyght  / 
But  of  his  grete  courage  he  had  conueyed!  them  theder  /  And!  there 
1 2  toke  his  leue,  and  wepte  moche  at  departyng.   he  recomaurcded  them  They  wept 

,  much  on 

to  <'od,  &  retornedf  agayn  to  Anthyoche  /  And  the  hoost  abode  there,  parting  with 

°  Bohemond. 

The  lyche  is  a  moche  auncyent  cyte  and  noble,  &  stondeth  vpon  the 
ryuage  of  the  see  /  That  was  the  only  cyte  in  surye  of  which  them-  The  Lyche  is 
16  perour  of  constantinoble  was  lord?  /  longe  to  fore  oure  men  cam  in  Syria 

1  belonging  to 

theder  was  comen  guyneuyers,  of  whom  I  spak  long  to  fore  that  Constauti- 
was  born  at  boloyne  vpon  the  see  syde.  And?  arryued  at  tharse  / 
whyles  that  bawdwyn,  broder  of  the  due,  helde  it.  he  was  comen 
20  to  the  lyche  with  his  shippe,  and  supposed  to  haue  taken  the  toun 
by  force  /  and  folysshly  he  conteyned  hym  and  assaylled  it.  They 
of  the  toun  vssued  out  lyghtly  And*  toke  hym,  and?  yet  helde  hym  ouinemers 

'  '  Till  WH9    ''ele    ''e'^ 

in  pryson  whan  oure1  barons  cam  theder.     The  Due  knewe  that  he  in  prison; 
24  was  born  in  the  londe  of  his  fad  re  /  And  that  he  had  been  in  the 

companye  of  therle  Bawdwyn  his  brother.     Therfor  he  demaunded  Duke  Godfrey 

1        J  J  -ii  demanded  his 

hym  of  the  grete  men  of  the  toun  /  And  praydc  them  entierly  that  release, 
they  wold  delyuere  them  to  hym  /  They  durst  not  gayne  saye  hym  / 
28  but  delyuerd  hym  and  his  felawship  with  his  shippe.  the  Dae  com-  which  was 

granted. 

maundid  hym  that  he  shold  goo  to  the  see,  and  alwaye  coosteyeng1 
by  the  hooste.    he  dyde  it  gladly  /  And  saylled  forth. 

How  the  due  asseeged  Gybelet,  and  of  a  trayson  by 
32  whiche  he  lefte  the  siege  /  ca°  CLx° 

t        He  hoost  departed    fro  the  lyche  /  whan  oure  Barons  had 

receyued  theyr  prysonners.     They  that  were  late  departed  2fro   [s  leaf  iosj 
Cylyce,  fro  Anthyoche,  &  fro  other  cytees  aboute,  were  alle  comen  The  pilgrims 
36  and  arryued  theder  in  suche  wyse,  that  alle  wente  to  gydre  by  the  g^,u> 
see  syde  vnto  a  Cyte  named  Gybelet,  whiche  was  fro  the  lyche 

1  Orig.  onre. 


236  Siege  of  Gibelet.  [Ch.  CLX. 

about  a  /  xij.  myle  /  They  abode  there  and  assieged  the  Cyte  /  A 
A  bailiff  of     baylly  of  the  Calyphe  of  Egypte  1helde  this  Cyte  on  the  see  side 
power  here, "  vnder  the  power  of  the  Calyphe  of  Egypte1  /  This  baylle  yssued  out 
by  sauf  cowduyt,  &  spak  to  due  godefroy,  to  whom  he  offred  vj.  M.  4 
besauntes,  and*  many  grete  yeftes  aboue  that  for  to  departe,  and 
who  tried  m    reyse  the  siege  fro  thens.     The  due  wok?  in  no  wyse  here  thyse 
offGodfrey     wordes  /  but  sayde  that  it  were  treson  and  vntrouthj  and  god  for- 
me"'  bede  that  I  shold?  take  suche  hyre.    he  thenne  departed'  whan  he  8 
sawe  he  myght  not  make  his  bargayn  with  the  noble  due.     After 
he  sente  his  messagers  to  therle  of  tholouse,  and  offred  to  hym  this 
grete  somme  of  moneye  /  yf  he  myght  fynde2  the  moyen  to  reyse 
but  wa»  more  the  siege  fro  this  toun.     It  was  sayd  that  he  receyued  the  moneye  /  12 
wmfu.eVri  and  for  to  make  the  barons  to  departe  /  he  founde  a  lesynge3  /  ffor 
whoZokhu  he  dyde  to  be  sayd?  to  them,  that  he  was  wel  acerteyned?  by  mes- 
sagers and?  lettres  /  that  the  Soudan  of  Perse  had*  so  moche  /  angre 
and1  desdayne  of  this  that  Corbagat  his  conestable  had  be  discon-  16 
fyted,  and  so  moche  peple  of  his  slayn,  that  he  assembled  alle  his 
power,  And?  cam  with  grete  peple  for  to  fyght,  and  to  destroye  them 
alle  that  he  coude  fynde  of  the  cristen  fayth.    Thise  tydynges  sente 
therle  of  tholouse  by  the  bisshop  of  Albare  to  the  due4  a  fore  sayd'-  20 
ami  sent  word  and  to  therle  of  fflaundres,  and  sente  to  them  his  lettres,  by  whiche 
leaveGibeie't0  he  prayd  them  moche  swetly  and  expresly,  that  they  wold  leue 
:md  come  to    ^^^^  s.^e  ^^  come  dy]ygently  to  hym,  in  suche  wyse  that  they 

myght  be  alle  to  gydre  whan  this  peple  cam.    whan  the  Due  and'  24 
other  Barons  herde  this  thynge,  they  were  moche  anguysshous  and? 
meuyd,  ffor  they  supposec^  certaynly  that  alle  this  had?  be  trewe. 
Anon   they  departed?  fro   gybelet.    by  the  cyte  of  valerne5  they 
wente  /  whiche  was  aboue  the  castel  of  margat.    syth  they  cam  to  28 
marclee  /  whiche  is  the  first  cyte  of  the  londe  of  fenyce,   whan  they 
wente  toward  the  northeest,  fro    thens  they  cam    to    the  cyte  of 
tortuose.     There  is  an  Isle  /  where  somtyme  was  a  Cyte  /  there 
abode  the  Shippes,  theyr  nauye.     I  wote  not  how  many  dayes  after  32 
Tancred  re-    they  hasted  and*  cam  to  fore  the  Cyte  of  Archys,  Tancre  yssued? 
treaeimyeof    oute  of  thoost  and*  cam  ayenst  them  /  And'  tolde  to  them  alle  a 
Touiome°to    longe  the  trompcrye  and  the  barat  that  therle  of  tholouse  had  don  / 

tiir  pilgrims, 

*— l  "(enoit  cclle  cite.  Ccstc-cy  cstoit  la  prcmiire  cite"  de  la  marine  sur  le 
pouvoir  a" Egypte,"  viz.,  this  was  the  first  city  on  the  sea-coast  under  the  power 
of  Egypt.  Caxton  has  made  a  "bourdon"  here  by  omitting  all  between  the 
two  cites.  -  Orig.  fyude.  3  Fr.  men^ongc. 

4  Orig.  due.  3  Fr.  Valcnie. 


Ch.  CLXI.]         Unsuccessful  Siege  of  Archis.  2.S7 

They  were  moche  angry  /  therfore  they  lodged    them  a  part  fro  who  were 

very  ani/rv. 

them  /  tli.it  had  doo  broken  theyr  syegc.     The  Erie  knewe  that  he 
had!  Jnot  the  loue  of  the  barons  that  were  newe  conien,  therfor  he  C1  if.  108,  i.k.] 
4  sente  to  them  messagers  /  that  sayde  to  them  in  his  name  moche 
fayre  wordes  /  And  brought  to    them  giete  yeftes  /  wherfore  in 
short  tyme  it  happed  that  they  were  alle  repeased  and  amyable  and  Ti.e  Karl 
good  frendes  to  tjydre  /  sanf  only  Tancre,  whiche  acorded  not  with  ''>»  peace 

°  OJ  I  .1  >  wjth  a„_  ex. 

8  hym,  but  accused!  hym  of  many  thynges.     A  fore  the  coniynge  of  wptTuucred. 
thise  laste  barows  /  the  peple  of  therles  of  tholouse  myght  nothynge 
auaylle  and  prouffyte  ayenst  the  Cyte  whiche  they  had  assieged. 
But  now  they  had  grete  hope  /  that  it  shold  now  soon  be  brought 

12  to  an  ende  /  and  accomplysshyd  by  thayde  of  them  that  were  newe 

come  /  Neuertheles  it  fyll  not  so  as  they  supposed,  ffor  alle  the  Thepiigmn* 
tymes  that  they  contryued  by  ony  engyne  for  tassaylle  the  walles  ciiis  in  vain, 
alway  it  fyll  contrarye  to  that  they  purposed  /  and  they  of  the  toun 

1 6  brake  all  theyr  ouurages  /  in  suche  wyse  that  they  loste  their  costes 
and  payne.     It  appered  wel  that  our  lord  had  withdrawen  fro  them 
his  ayde  and  his  good  wyll.     They  within  the  toun  slewe  many  of  and  lost 
them  without.     There  deyde  tweyne  noble  and  valyaunt  knyghtes.  i"«"- 

20  That  is  to  wete,  Ancean  of  liibemont  /  that  alway  dyde  valyauntly 
where  sommeuer  he  cam  /  And  potom  de  baladon,  an  hye  man  and 
wel  acqueynted  with  therle  of  tholouse.  This  siege  displesyd  ouer 
moche  to  alle  them  of  thooste.  And  in  especial  to  the  footemen 

2-4  whiche  had?  moche  grete  desyre  taccomplysshe  theyr  vowe  to  Iheru- 
salem,  &  also  whan  the  due  was  comen  they  that  had  ben  there  to 
fore  /  began  to  withdrawe  them  fro  the  werke  in  suche  wyse  that 
euery  man  dyde  nought,  ffor  it  plesyd  them  wel  that  therle  were 

28  greued  and  ennoyed  that  he  myght  departe  and  lede  them  forth 
with  the  other  barons. 

How    thoost    murmured    of    the    spere   founden    in 
Anthyoche  /  &  of  the  grete  myracle  that  happed 
32  in  the  presence  of  alle  the  hoste. 

Capitulo  CLXj0 

t        Here  was  renewed  a  word  by  whiche  the  comyn  people  &  /  The  people 
also  somme  of   the  barons  whiche2  began  to   doubte  of  the  against  the 

spear  found 

36  spere  /  that  was  founden  in  Anthyoche,  lyke  as  ye  haue  herde  to  >»  Antioch. 
fore,  ffor  somme  sayde  certaynly  that  it  Avas  the  very  spere  that 
2  "which,"  interpolated  by  Caxton. 


238 


The  Trial  by  Fire. 


[Ch.  CLXI. 


Some  be- 
lieved it  to 
be  t lie  true 
spe:ir  that 
pierced  our 
Lord, 

['  leaf  109] 

others  were 
incredulous. 


The  man  who 
found  it 
came  before 
the  barons, 


nnd  asked 
for  the  trial 
by  fire. 


This  man, 
Peter  Hertil- 
mewe,  passed 
the  ordeal 
apparently  in 
safely ; 


opened  the  Sycle  of  oure  Lord!  on  the  crosse  /  And?  that  was  with 
his  precious  Mood!  bydewed.     And!  by  reuelacion  of  oiire  lord  had* 
he  founden  hy  an  holy  good!  man  for    to  recomforte   his  people 
whiche  had  grete  necessyte  and  nede.     Other  xsayde  that  it  was  4 
not  hut  fals  harat  /  tromperye  and  abuse  /  ffor  therle  of  tholouse 
had  fonden  this  &  contryued  /  for  to  meue  the  peple  to  drawe  and 
gete  syluer  of  theyr  offrynges  /  And  this  altercacion  was  meuyd  by 
a  preest  named  Arnold,2  chappellayn,3  and  moche  acqu«'ynted  with  8 
the  noble  due  of  normandye.    he  was  wel  lettred  /  but  he  was  not 
of  good  lyf.    he  was  ouer  malycious  and  pourchassoure  of  discordes  / 
As  ye  shal  here  afterward  in  this  book.  (33)    This  rumour  was  grete 
in  thoost,  as  I  haue  sayd.    The  man  that  had  fonde  the  spere  herde  12 
the  doubte  of  the    peple  /  And  cam    to  fore   the  barons  moche 
hardily,  And  sayd  to  them  in  this  maner  /  "  Fayr  lordes,  doubte  ye 
nothyng  that  this  werke  hath  ben  by  barat  ne  by  tromperye,  For 
theryn  hath  be  none  /  But  it  is  comen  of  god  /  And  certaynly  for  16 
the  comfort  of  the  cristen  peple.     Seynte  andrew  appered  to  me  by 
the  wylle  of  our  saueour  Ihesu  crist,  whiche  deuysed  to  me  alle  the 
maner,  how  I  haue  founden  it  /  And  for  to  shewe  to  yow  /  that 
this  that  I  saye  is  trouth  /  I  praye  you  that  ye  make  a  grete  fyre  20 
and  merueyllous  /  And  I  shal  entre  in  to  it  /  And  holde  the  spere 
in  my  hand,  and  shal  passe  and  goo  thurgh  hool  and  sauf."    whan 
they  herd  this  they  acorded  alle  therto.     The  fyre  was  made  and 
brennyd  lyght,  which  was  greete  &  merueyllous.     And  this  was  on  24 
the  blessyd  good  fryday  /  And  it  plesed  them  that  this  thynge 
shold  be  thus  preuyd  the  same  day  that  our  lord  was  smeton  to  the 
herte  with  the  same  spere  /  he  that  thus  offred  hym  self  thus,  and 
enterprysed  for  to  preue  it  was  named  Peter  bertilmewe,  4clerk  /  28 
and  but  litil  lettred,  after  that  it  coude   be  vnderstonde  without 
forth,4  and  was  a  moche  symple  man  /  Thenne  was  alle  thooste 
assembled  aboute  the  fyre  /  Peter  cam  forth  &  kneled  doun  for  to 
recommande  hym  vnto  god  /  whan  he  had  made  his  prayer  /  he  32 
toke  the  spere  And  entred  in  to  the  fyre  /  And  passed?  thurgh  it, 
and  was  nothynge  on  hym  perysshed  ne  hurte  that  ony  man  coude 
see  or  knowe.    whan  the  peple  sawe  this  alle  they  ranne  for  to  kysse 
hym  /  And  made  to  hym  moche  grete  ioye.     Of  this  doubte  thenne  36 

2  Fr.  Ernoul.  3  Orig.  chppelayn. 

4-4  Fr.  "  clerc  assez  pou  Icttri,  selonc  ce  que  Ven  pooit  congnoistre  par  de- 
hors," viz.,  an  illiterate  enough  clerk,  according  to  what  could  be  judged  by 
his  outward  appearance. 


Ch.  CLXII  ]     Amhiissadors  come  from  Eyypt.  239 

they  ivende  veryly  that  it   had  be  quenchid,  But  yet  sourded1  a 

eretter  errour  and  murmur  than  to  fore  /  ffor  it  was  not  lonce  after,  butnoon  ;.aer 

6  '  B  '  lie  diea, 

but  that  this  Clerke  deyde  /  thenne  sayde  somme  that  by  than- 
4  guysshe  of  the  fyre  he  toke  his  deth  /  And!  that  shold1  be  thoccasion 
therof.  The  other  sayde  that  he  yssued1  oute  al  liool  am?  sauf  fro 
the  fyre.  But  it  was  the  wylle  of  oure  lord  syth  the  trouthe  was 
knowen  that  he  shold1  deye  thi.s,  or  peraduenture  the  prees  that 
8  cam  vpon  hym  was  so  grete  whan  he  '  yssued  out  of  the  fyre  /  that  [l  if.  109,  bk.) 
he  was  therby  hurte  that  he  deyde  /  In  this  maner  murmured  vet  and  the 

,,  ,  J  .,  J  '  J         people  Mill 

the  peple  emong  them.  murmured. 

Of  thambassade  of  Egipte  comen  with  our  men  in  to 

12  thooste  of  pylgryms  /  &  of  the  reuerence  that 

was  don  to  them  /  ca°  /  C  /  lxij0. 

s        Omme  messagiers  that  were  sente  in  to  Egypte  by  our  barons 
atte  requeste  of  them  that  cam  vnto  Anthyoche  fro  the  Calyphe 

16  of  Egypte,  had  he  reteyned  and  holden  there  by  force  and  barat 

wel  a  yere  /  But  now  they  were  retourned,  And  with  them  were  Ti.emesse.i- 
comen  the  messagers  of  the  Calyphe  /  which  brought  to  our  barons  Egypt  now 
fro  hym  wordes  moche  dyuerse  &  moch  chaunged  fro  that  they  had 

20  sente  to  them  to  fore  Anthyoche,  ffor  thenne  he  setite  to  them  that 
they  shold  conteyne  them  vygorously  ayenst  the  Sowdan  of  Perse. 
Andf  they  shold1  haue  of  hym  grete  ayde  of  gold*,  of  syluer,  and*  of 
vytaylles.     .Now  had1  he  chaunged!  moche  his  langage,  ffor  he  sente 

24  them  worde  that  he  thought  that  he  dyde  moch  grete  thyng  for 

them  /  yf  he  suffred  that  the  pilgrims  myght  goo  to  Iherusalem  bringing 
.ij.  C  /  to  gydre  /  or  .iij.  C  /  alle  vnarmed1.     And1  whan  they  had1  nniyMuor 

,      '    ,  iii  1  800  pilgrims 

made   theyr  prayers  and1  don  theyr  pylgremage  to  retorne  saufly  »ta  ''"""• 
28  agayn.    whan  oure  barons  herd  this,  they  had1  herof  grete  desdayne  /  on*™***- 
And  sayde  to  the  messagers,  that  they  shold1  retorne  agayn  to  theyr  Jerusalem. 
lord1  /  and  telle  hym  that  by  his  licence  ne  leue  wold  they  not  goo 
to  Iherusalem  vnarmed  one   after  another.     But   they  shold  goo  n.e  cra*a- 
32  maulgre  hym  /  alle  to  gydre  in  bataylles  renged  /  and  the  baners  word  back 
reysed  and  desployed  /  Now  I  shall  say  to  you  why  the  Calyphe  of  *»nid  go 
Egypte  was  reysen  in  so  grete  pryde  /  whan  our  men  had  discom-  a1".! '."  batlle 
fyted  Corbagat  to  fore  Anthyoche,  The  power  of  the  Soudan  of 
30  Perse  was  moche  affebled,  in  such  Avise  that  none  of  his  neyghbours 
doubted1  hym  /  ne  fered1  to  make  warre  agaynst  hym,  ffor  he  had 
alwayc  the  werse.     By  whiche  occasion  it  happed  that  a  conestable 


240  An  Embassy  from  Constantinople.     [Ch.  CLXIII. 

of  the  Calyphes  of  Egypte  named?  Emites1  J  had  taken  the  Cyte  of 
Iherusalem  fro  the  men  of  the  soudan  of  Perse,  whiche  had1  holden 
it  .xxxviij  yere.  Therfore  sawe  nowe  the  Calyphe  that  he  was  at 
his  aboue  /  by  the  disconfyture  that  our  men  had  don  to  Corbagat.  4 

The caiiph of  And?  had*  wende  that  he  shold1  not  haue  had  nede  of  ony  ayde  / 

iies'pised  our   Therfor  he  despysed  now  our  peple. 

people. 

p  leaf  no]  20f  an  ambassade  fro  themperour  of  constantinoble 
comen  to  our  pylgryms  /  &  of  thanswer  to  the  8 
sa.yd  ambassade  /  ca  Clxiij0. 

Messengers  o       N  that  other  syde  were  comen  messagers  fro  themperour  of 
Btailtinopie  Constantinoble,  whiche  complayned!  moche  on  buymont3  /  and 

p'lHining  be-  also  on  the  other  barons,  ffor  they  sayde  that  all  the  barons  "were  12 

in, .Md  held  becomen  his  men,  And  had  sworn  vpon  the  holy  ewangelyes  that 

Antiouli  eon-  i/i-i'iii 

nary  to  his     alle  suche  Cytees  and*  Castellys  by  them  conquerd?  /  whiche  had  he 
vnder  the  power  of  Constantynoble  shold  be  rendred  to  hym  as  his 
owen  thurgh  out  alle  the  londe  /  to  Iherusalem.     Now  buymont  16 
dyde  contrarye  this  whiche  helde  Anthyoche  /  and  the  other  Barons 
that  had?  gyuen  it  to  hym.     Thus  spak  they  of  the  couenauntes  / 
But  they  spak  not  of  alle  /  ffor  withoute  faylle  trouthe  it  was  that 
forgetting      they  had1  couenaunted?  this  /  but  themperour  had?  promysed?  to  them  20 
peror'i'ar"  that  he  shold?  folowe  them  with  his  grete  hoost  /  And?  shold?  fur- 
pan  oTthe'8    nysshe  to  them  grete  plente  of  vytaylles  by  see.   he  was  the  fyrst 
that  had?  broken  the  couenaunt  and1  promesses,  ffor  he  had  not  don 
that  one  ne  that  other  /  And  he  myght  wel  haue  don  it  /  And  24 
therfor  they  were  not  bounden  to  holde  his  couenauntes  made  by 
oure  barons,  by  cause  he  helde  not  that  he  had?  promysed  /  ffor  the 
lawe  wyll  not  that  a  man  shal  holde  couenaurct  to  hym  that  holdeth 
The  barons     not  his.     Thus  answered?  the  barons  to  them.     And  therfor  sayde  28 
tfienToftius,  they  that  the  yefte  that  they  made  to   buymont  of   the  Cyte  of 
Anthyoche  ought  to  be  ferme  and1  stable,  And?  so  wold?  they  mayn- 
tene  it  to  hym  and?  to  his  heyres  for  euer  /  whan  the  messagers 
herd?  this,  they  moche  prayc?  the  barons  that  they  would  tarye  theyr  32 
goyng  to  Iherusalem  til  that  themperour  were  comen  /  ffor  they 
and  then  the  sayde  that  without  faulte  he  wolde  come  to  fore  thentree  of  Iuyll, 
satuTaTthe  And?  brynge  with  hym  moche  grete  plente  of  peple  /  And  yf  they 
wouhi "surely   wold  doo  thus  moche  for  hym,  he  shold  conne  them  grete  thanke  /  36 
And?  ahal  gyue  to  eche  of  the  barons  many  grete  &  ryche  yeftes  / 
1  Lat.  Emircixis.  3  Orig.  bnymont. 


come. 


Ch.  CLXIIL]     A  Dispute  arises  among  the  great  Barons.  241 

&  also  shal  departe  largely  to  the  gentil  men  &  to  the  footemen. 

whan  our  barons  herd  this  they  sayde  that  they  wold  counseylle  The  toon* 

them  to  gydre  and  drewe  them  a  part.     Therle  of  tholouse  acorded  whether 

to  believe 

4  wel  to  this  that  they  shold  abyde  so  grete  an  ayde  as  was  the  puys-  "'»» or  not. 
saunce  of  themperour  /  And  sayd  he  supposed1  certaynly  that  he 
shold  come  /  as  it  was  sayd?.    but  the  other  supposed!  that  he  sayd 
so  for  to  kepe  the  barons  and'  other  men  atte  siege  til  the  cyte  were 

8  taken  /  ffor  it  shold  be  moche  deshonour  and  fowl  for  Jhym  to  [Mr.  no,  uk.j 
departe  fro    thens  without  accomplysshyng1   that  whiche    he  had? 
enterprised.     The    other    barons2   acorded?    nothynge   therto,    but  Most  of  th^m 
wolde    that  they  shold    goo   dylygently  assiege   the    holy  cyte  of  on  without" 

waiting  any 

12  Iherusalem  for   to   doo    theyr  pylgremage  &   accomplysshe  theyr  lo,,ger- 
vowe  /  For  whiche  they  had    suffred    so   many  trauaylles3  and 
deseases,  For  they  knewe  moche  wel  the  delaye  of  themperour  / 
and  his  fayr  wordes  full  of  tromperyes  and  deceytes.     Therfor  it 

16  was  not  theyr  oppynyon  4for  to  truste  ony  more  his  couert  dissimy- 

lacions4  /  Thus  sourded  a  grete  debate  bytwene  the  barons,  And  a  great 

„,.....  %   ••%  i  i  iiii  quarrel  arose 

myght  not  acorde  /  of  whiche  it  happed  that  he  that  helde  the  cyte  about  tins 
of  tiypple  whiche  had  offred  to  them  so  moche  good  by  couenaunt 

20  that  they  shold  departe  fro  the  siege  /  and  goo  out  of  the  londe. 
Avhan  he  knewe  that  the  barons  were  einonge  them  self  in  discord e, 
he  wold  no  more  offre  to  them  ony  thyng  /  but  enterprised  so  grete 
hardynes  that  he  wold  fyghte  ayenst  them  /  The  barons  acorded 

24  therto  /  and  lefte  the  Bisshop  of  Albare  for  to  kepe  the  lodgys. 

And   whan   they  had   so   doo,   they   wente    so    alle   in    batayJles  The  barons 
ordeyned   toward    trypple    /    whan    they    cam    there   they    fonde  time  niai* 

Ttipple, 

the  lord  of  the  toun  and  the  Cytczeyns  out  with  grete  plente  of 
28  men  on  horsbak  and  afoote  where  they  had  ordeyned  theyr 
bataylles  and  abode  our  peple  /  whiche  they  doubted  not  moche. 
For  they  had  seen  that  the  Erie  of  tholouse  had  holde  siege  to  fore 
this  Cyte,  And  had  no  thynge  prenayled,  wherfor  they  preysed  our 
32  men  moche  the  lasse  than  they  dyde  by  fore.  But  whan  oure  men 
approuched  so  nyghe  that  they5  sawe  them6  /  anon  they  ranne  on 
them  moche  fiersly"  in  suche  wyse  that  they  loste  anon  .vij.C  /  of  ai.dsie»- 

seven  bun- 

theyr  men  whiche  oure  men  slewe.     And  of  oures  were  slayn  but8  dredof  the 

enemy. 

36  .xiiij.     There  helde  they  the  feste  of  ester  or  pasque,  the  x  day  of 

Apryll. 

2  Orig.  barous.  3  Orig.  tranaylles. 

*— 4  Lat.  "nnejus  labyrinthis  et  ejus  ambagibus  it-crum  involuercnt." 

6  i.  e.  our  men  (the  Crusaders).  6  Tho  Turks.  7  Orig.  firersly. 

8  Orig.  hnt. 
GODFREY'.     -  H 


242     The  People  murmur  for  not  going  to  Jerusalem.     [Ch.  CLXIV. 

How  the  comyn  peple  complayned  them  /  of  this  that 
they  wente  not  hastely  to  Iherusalera. 

ca°.  Clxiiij*! 
o       "Wr  barons  that  had  disconfyted  thise  men  /  Retourned  in  to  4 
The  people  theyr  lodgys  with  alle  theyr  gayne  /  Thenne  recommenced11 

again  com-  _  _ 

plained  of  the  and  began  agayn  the  playnte  and  the  clamour  moche  grete  that  the 

delay  in  going  o         "7>   J  f     J  o 

to  Jerusalem,  peple  made  by  cause  they  wente  not  hastely  to  Iherusalem.   all  they 

rayed  with  hye  vois  that  they  ahold  departe  fro  the  siege  /  so  long  8 

contynued  theyr  crye  that  the  valyaunt  Due  Godeffrey  /  Therle 

of  Flauudrea,  The  Due  of  Normandye  and  Tancre  sayde  that  they 

[*  leaf  ni]  2wold  doo  the  requeste  of  the  peple  afoote.     And  thenne  recuylled 

they  theyr  tentes  and  pauyllons,  brent  theyr  lodgys,  and  departed.  1 2 

The  Earl  of    It  displesyd  moche  therle  of  tholouse  /  he  prayde  them  moche  affec- 

Toulouse  woe  '      '  ■    *  ' 

displeased  tuously  to  abyde.  but  it  myght  not  be.  nor  they  them  self  that 
?^"b»ron8  fyrst  were  comen  with  hym  were  wery,  and  anguysshous  of  the 
people.  siege,  And  strayt  helde  they  the  way  toward  trypple.    whan  therle  16 

of  tholouse  sawe  that  he  myght  none  other  wise  cheuisshe  ne  accom- 
plysshe  his  empryse  /  he  wold  not  abyde  there  allone,  &  he  had 
The  whole     right,  But  dislodged  hym  /  and  folowed  the  other  /  whan  they  weie 
r^wanTand  a  .v  /  myle  fro  trypple  /  they  lodged  them,   the  baylly  that  helde  20 
before  the  cyte  and  the  countre  about  in  the  name  of  the  Calyphe  /  sente 

theder  to  them  his  messagers  /  he  had  moche  leyd  doun  his  pryde  / 
tfor  as  I  sayd  to  you  to  fore  /  he  wende  to  haue  faughten  peer  to 
peer  /  his  messagers  knewe  wel  that  he  was  to  feble,  and  that  it  24 
was  folye.  He  thenne  desyred  and  moche  requyred  that  oure  men 
wold  take  of  hym  right  largely  /  and  goo  out  of  his  power.  The 
whose  baiiif    mater  was  so  demened  that  he  gaf  /  xv.  M.  besauntes,  and  delyuerd 

gave  them 

15,000  besants  to  them  alle  the  prysonners  that  he  had  of  our  pilgryms.     And  28 
gifu  to  leave  aboue  that  he  gaf  to  them  grete   yeftes  and  ryche  presentes,  as 
unharmed,     horses,  mulet-i,  Cloth  of  sylk,  and  vessel  of  dyuerse  facions.     And 
they  promysed  to  hym  that   they  wold  doo  none  harme  to   the 
Cytees  that  he  had  and  helde  /  That  is  to  wete,  archys,  trypple,  and  32 
Ybelyn,  ne  to  their  appertenauntes.    And  he  hym  self  sente  to  them  / 
oxen  /  Kyen,  sheep,  and  moche  grete  plente  of  other  vytaylles,  to 
some  Chris-    thende  that  they  shold  not  destroye  his  londe  /  Thenne  cam  in  to 
from  Mount    thoost  somme  surryens  whiche  dwellyd  upon  the  mount  of  lybane,  36 
came  into       whiche  is  nyghe  vnto  thyse  Cytees  toward  the  est  moche  hye  / 

the  army.  •  .  . 

They  were  of  oure  fayth  wyse  men  and  trewe,  And-  were  come  for 
1  Orig.  recommeucciF. 


Chu  CLXV.]     The  Christians  of  Syria  give  good  Advice.  24-3 

to  see  our  barons  for  to  salewe  and  feste  them.  The  good  men  of 
thoost  called  them,  and1  desyred  of  them  affectuously  /  that  they 
wold1  teche  them  the  moost  strait  way  &  easiest  for  to  goo  to 
4  Iherusalem.  They  toke  aduys  and  counseylled  to  gydre,  and 
behelde  alle  thynges  that  in  suche  a  caas  hehoued,  and  cam  to  our 
barons,  and  sayd  to  them  that  they  counseylled1  to  holde  the  waye  These  coun- 

t>  j  seled  our 

by  the  see  coste  for  many  reasons  /  r  yrst,  for  the  surete  and  com-  men  to  take 
J  J  i     j    ->  th€  route 

8  forte  of  theyr  shippes  /  ffor  in  the  nauye  were  not  only  the  shippes  along  the  sea 

of  gnyneuyers  that  cam  fro  fflaundres,  but  ther  were  shippes  of 

gene  /  of  venyse,  of  Cypres  /  of  Rhodes,  and  of  other  yles  of  grece  / 

charged  with  vytaylles  and  marchaundyses  whiche  dyde  moche  grete 

12  good  in  thoost.     The  surryens  wente  to  fore  for  to  conduyte  the 

hoost.  the  baylly  of  trypple  delyuerd  xto  them  also  men  that  knewe  [>  if.  in,bk.] 
wel  the  countrees  and1  the  londe.     They  passed1  alle  the  see  syde  The  army 

*    r  ,     followed  this 

and  the  cyte  of  ybelyn  /  and  lodged1  vpon  a  Ryuer  that  renneth  advice,  and 
16  there  in  a  place  /  whiche  is  named1  Mans  /  And1  for  tabyde  the  feble  Ybeim. 
peple  that  were  not  comen  ne  arryued.   they  soiournedl  there  a  day. 


Of  the  grete  dylygence  that  our  men  made  for  to 

approche  to  Iherusalem  /  &  of  thalyaunces  of 

20  somme  turkes  made  vnto  them.   Capitulo  CLXV? 

t        He  thyrde  day  they  cam  to  fore  the  Cyte  of  Baruth,  And1  Three  days 

lodged1  them  upon  a  Ryuer  that  ran  to  fore  the  toun  /  The  came  t<> 
baylly  of  the  toun  gaf  to  them   grete  good1,  And1  made  do  come 

24  plente  of  vitayll  and  good  cheep,  for  to  spare  the  trees  &  the 
fruytes  of  the  contre.  On  the  morn  cam  they  to  the  Cyte  of 
Sayette,  there  they  lodged1  them  vpon  a  Ryuer  therby.  he  that 
gouerned  and1  kepte  the  Cyte  wold1  not  doo  thynge  ne  bounte  to 

28  them  /  I  wote  not  wherin  he  trusted,  but  he  sente  out  many  of  his  The  Governor 

'  ofSayeite 

men  for  to  doo  hurte  to  thoost,  and  for  to  atteyne  certayn  knyghtes  /  attacked  our 
which  were  lodged  by  for  tassaylle  them  /  but  our  men  toke  theyr  {^8l  ™'?' of 
horses  and  ran  on  them  vygorously  /  And?  slewe  of  them  I  wote  "••  JdnnMi. 

32  not  how  many.  And  the  other  fledde  in  to  the  cyte,  And  had 
nomore  talente  to  atteyne  our  peple  /  in  suche  wyse  that  our  men 
rested  them  in  pees  that  nyght  /  On  the  morn  for  to  reste  and 
refresshe  the  mene  peple  /  they  departed  not  thens  /  But  sente  oute 

36  for  fourage  many  men  afoote,  and  certayn  men  of  Armes  to  kej>e 
them  in  to  the  contre  and  vyllages  about.     They  brought  largely 


244       The  Pilgrims  go  on  their  Way  towards  Jerusalem.     [Ch.  CLXV. 

1vytaylles  and  horses1  wyth   grete   quantite  of  beestes,  grete  and? 

smale,  and?  cam  agayn  without  lesyng  of  ony  thyng,  alle  to  gydre 

in  foraging     sauf  only  a  knyeht2  named  Gaultier  de  ver  /  he  wente  by  his  valy- 

the  knight  ,  ,    «.  ,  i 

Uiiutierde      aiiHce    ouer  ferre  /  ffor   he    retorned   neuer  agayn,  ne  neuer   was  4 

Vere  was  lost.  ' 

knowen  where3  he  becam  /  they  were  all  nioch  sory  for  hyni  in 

The  next  day  thoost  /  The  day  af  tir  passed  they  by  a  rnoche  sharp  &  aspre  way, 

went  on, and  &  after  descended1  by  a  destrayt  in  to  a  playne.    and  on  the  right 

syde  they  lefte  this  aurecyent  Cyte  named1  Sarepte,  wherin  helyas  8 

the  prophete  was  in.     After  they  pessed  a  water  whiche  is  bytwene 

Sur  and  Sayette.     They  wente  so  fer  that  they  cam  to  this  noble4 

encamped      cyte  of  Sur.     There  they  lodged?  them  by  the  noble  fontayne,  and? 

near  a  noble  .  ,  rrt.  ,     .        ,     .  .     . 

lountain.       pytte  of  water  lyuyng  lyke  as  scripture  sayth.      lney  lodged  this  12 

[-  leaf  112]   nyght  in  gardyns  5moche  delectable,    whan  it  was  daye  they  sette 

them  forth  on  theyr  Iourneye.  And  passed  by  a  6  stray t  moche  peryl- 

lous,  whiche  is  bytwene  the  montaines  &  the  see.     They  descended 

in  to  the  playnes  of  the  Cyte  of  Acres  there  vpon,  and?  by  a  water  16 

At  Acres  they  rennyng<  they  sette  vp  theyr  pauyllons  /  he  that  had  the  charge  of 

victuals  at  a   the  toun  made  them  to  haue  vytaylles  at  resonable  prys,  7and  made 

price.  acqueyntauTices  good  and  honorable  in   this  maner,    hat  yf  ouie 

people  myght7  take  the  Cyte  of  Iherusalem,  and  dwelle  there  after  20 
xx.  dayes  in  the  Royamme,  in  suche  wyse  that  they  were  not  put 
oute  of  it  by  force  /  or  yf  they  myght  disconfyte  in  the  felde  the 
puyssaunce  of  egypte  /  that  fro  thenne  forthon  they  shold  yelde 
and  gyue  ouer  the  Cyte  of  Acres  /  without  makyng  of  ony  resist-  24 
ence.     The  pylgryms  wente  fro  thens  on  the  lyft  syde  /  they  lefte 
galylee  bytwene  the  mount8  of  Carmely9  and1  the  see  /  they  cam  in 
to  Cezaire,  whiche  is  the  second  Archebisshoprich  of  the  londe  of 
palestyne.    they  lodged  them  vpon  a  water  that  yssueth  oute  of  the  28 
Ti.ey  eeie-      palus  or  maryses,  whiche  ben  by  the  toun.    there  helde  they  theyr 
t^tat6""    penthecost  or  wytsontyde  /  thre  dayes  after  thentre  of  Iuyn  they 
wenton'the    abode  there,    on  the  .iij.  day  they  toke  their  way.     On  the  right 
June.'  side  they  lefte  Iaphe  /  And?  by  a  grete  playn  and*  euen  waye  they  32 

cam  in  to  the  Cyte  of  Lide,  where  the  bodye  of  the  glorious  martir 
seynt  george  lyeth.     In  thonoure  of  whom  /  Iustynyen,  that  was 

1~1  Fr.  "  victuailles  et  a  Iwmmes  et  a  chevaulx."  2  Orig.  kuyght. 

3  Fr.  qu'il  dcvint,  what  became  of  him.  *  Orig.  noble. 

6  Fr.  "par  ungs  destroiz  moult  perillcux,"  viz.,  by  a  very  narrow  and 
dangerous  pass. 

7— 7  The  sense  is  ruined  by  Caxton's  omissions.  Fr.  "et  fist  accointances 
bonnes  ct  honorable*  a  noz  barons,  et  aussifist  a  eulx  teles  covuenances  que  se  ilz 
yoroicnt;"  etc.  8  Orig.  mount.  9  Fr.  Carmel. 


Ch.  CLXVI.]     They  find  great  Spoils  in  Rames.  245 

Emperour  of  Rome,  made  there  a  moche  /  fair  chirche  and*  ryche  / 

But  whan  the  turkes  herde  tydynges  that  our  men  cam  /  they  hete  The  Turks 

"     "      °  iv  burnt  the 

it  doun  and?  brente  the  tymbie  werke,  whiche  was  moche  grete  /  ghnrcii  of 

<•  '  a  i    Lyrtia  ftt  the 

4  For  they  doubted1  that  oure  pilgrims  shold  take  them  for  to  make  "Pi"1,'".11  of 

J  r     o  the  Chns- 

engyns  to  caste  stones,  and  castellis  to  assaile  with  /  thenne  herde  tia"8' 
our  barons  saye  that  ther  fast  by  was  a  moche  noble  Cyte  named? 
Rames.  they  sente  the  erle  of  Flanndres  with  /  v.  C  /  horsmen  to 
8  fore  the  toun  for  to  knowe  what  semblaunt  they  wold  make  /  None 
yssued  out  whan  they  approuched  it.  they  cam  ner  /  and  founde 
the  yates  open.  And  entred1  in  to  the  Cyte.  And  founde  neyther  "'>«  ™ter*d 
man  ne  woman.     For  the  nyght  to  fore  they  had!  herd  tydynges  ^™|8i>taild 

12  how  oure  pilgrims  cam,  &  ladde   to    the  montaynes  wyues   and  deserted. 
childeren  /  and  alle  their  howshold?  /  whan  therle  knewe  herof  he 
sente  to  the  barons  how  the  mater  was,  and*  counseylled1  them  to 
come  in  to  the  toun.    they  were  moche  glad  of  thyse  tidynges  / 

16  they  made  deuoutly  theyr  prayers  at  the  tombe  of  seynt  George  / 
And1  after  cam  in  to  the  Cyte,  whiche  was  al  ful  of  wyne,  of  whete, 
of  oylle,  and!  of  other  vytaylles  to  them  necessarye  /  they  abode  Here  they 
there  .iii.  dayes  /  they  chose  ther  *a  bisshop  of  the  cyte  /  and2  was  p  if.  112, u.j 

20  a  normant  named*  Robert,  whiche  was  born  in  tharchebisshopryche  £,"*'*;  ™d 
of  Roen  /  They  gaf  to  hym  entierly  the  two  Cytees  for  euermore,  w"0m  they 
that  is  to  wete,  Lyde  and1  Rames,  and!  the  countree  and  vyllages  fUdWuiet 
about  them  /  ffor  they  gaf  it  to  honoure  god?  and?  seynt  George  for 

24  the  fyrst  gayne  of  the  same  holy  londe. 

How  the  Cristen  men  of  bethlehem  receyued  wel 
Tancre  and  his  rowte,  And  sette  his  baner  on  the 
chirche  of  our  lady.  Capitulo  CLxvj0 

28  t        He  turkes   beyng  in   Iherusalem  herde  wel  tydynges  of  the  The  Turks  in 

1     °  J     J     o  Jerusalem 

comyng  of  our  pylgryms  /  wel  knewe  they  certaynly  that  alle  were  much 
theyr  entencion  was  to  come  to  the  holy  cyte,  ffor  whiche  thynge  }\eHri!|Of . 
they  were   pryncipally   meuyd1   and!   departed?   fro   the    couretrees.  wow*. 
32  whan  they  herde  this  they  were  moche  esmeuyd  /  And  sayd  that  it 
was  reason  to  deffende  it3  /  The  Cristen  men  that  were  in  bethle- 

2  Ch-ig.  and. 

3  Here  a  whole  chapter,  and  part  of  a  second  has  been  omitted  by  Caxton's 
French  text.  This  missing  chapter  gives  details  about  the  arming  and  fortify- 
ing of  Jerusalem  by  the  Turks,  when  they  heard  of  the  approach  of  the 
Crusaders  ;  of  the  great  cruelties  inflicted  upon  the  Christians  of  Jerusalem  : 

1  9 


246  BethleJvem  is  delivered  to  (he  Pilgrims.     [Ch.  CLXVII. 

The  Chris-     hem  sente  certayn  messagera  to  the  barons,.  &  desyred  of  them  that 
lehem  offer  10  thev  wold  delyuere  the  toun  in  to  their  handes  /  if  they  wold  sende 

deliver  that  •  J  '.  , 

town  to  the    men  to  recevue  and  kepe  it.     They  sayd  that  it  was  rcson  to  doo 

pilgrims.  ■  *  "  . 

that  they  requyred.     They  toke  an   houderd  men  of   Armes  wel  4 

Tancred  and   horsed,  noble,  valyaunt,  and  hardy,  and  delyuerd"  to  them  Tancre 

went  to  re-     for  a  Capytayn.     They  that  cam  to  fetche  them  conduyted  them  in 

such  wise  that  erly  in  the  mornyng  they  entredf  in  to  the  toun. 

Alle  they  of  the  Cyte  clerkes  and  laye  men  receyued1  them  honor-  8 

ably  and1  with  moche  grete  ioye  with  procession  brought  them  in  to 

and  saw  the    the  chiiche  whiche  standeth  in  the  place,  in  whiche  tlie  gloryonse 

with  great      vyrgyne  marye  was  delyuerd  &  chylded  oure  lord  Ihesu  criste,  the 

saueour  of  the  world,    they  sawe  the  crybbe  in  which  was  leyde  in  12 
to  reste  the  swete  childe  that  made  heuen  &  erthe  /  whan  our  peple 
sawe  thyse  holy  places  they  were  moche    ioyous,  and1  had!  grete 
tendrenes  in  theyr  hertes  /  The  Cyterzeyns  of  the  toun  for  signe  of 
ioye  And?  for  demonstraunce  that  oure  lord1  and  his  dere  moder  16 
oure  lady  shold  gyue  to  them  vyctorye,  toke  the  baner  of  Tancre  / 
and1  sette  it  on  hye  vpon  the  chirche  of  oure  lady  /  They  that  were 
lefte  in  thoost  had  moche  grete  desyre  to  see  and  vysyte  the  holy 
places  that  were  nygh  by  /  as  it  was  sayd.    ffor  for  the  loue  of  god,  20 
&  for  to  honoure  hym  were  they  departed  fro  theyr  countree  /  and 
They  could     had  sulfred  many  annoyes  and  grete  trauaylles.     And1  they  myght 
ti?u  mghteM  not  slepe  this  nyght,  suche  brennyng*  desire  had  they  forto  see  the 
"[MeafTis]   cyte, 1  which  shold  be  thende  of  their  trauaylle  and  thaccomplysshe-  24 
1!!  jemaliera.  ment  of  tDeyr  vowe-    Them  thought  longe  er  the  day  cam,  and  them 
semed1  that  thys  nyght  was  moche  lenger  than  the  other  /  ffor2  to  a 
corageous  desire  ther  is  not  haste  ynowgh. 

Of  thardaunt  desire  that  the  peple  had  far   to  see  28 
Iherusalem  /   And   how   thoost   approched   and 
were  lodged  by  ordenaunce.        Capitulo  C/Lxvij° 

The  common  s       Yth  that  it  was  knowen  certaynly  in  the  lodgys  that  the  Due3 
£rmy«2irtV  hadde  receyued  this  nyght  the  messagers  of  bethlehem,  And  32 

watSff       that  he  had  sente  his  men  in  to  the  toun.     The  peple  afoote  abode 
neuer  for  leue  of  the  barons  /  ne  myght  not  suffre  til  the  daye  was 

and,  especially,  of  the  taxes  laid  upon  them,  which  were  so  heavy  that  the 
Patriarch  was  obliged  to  go  to  Cyprus  for  aid  in  paying  them. 

3  Fr.  "car  a  c&urage  desirani,  ne  haste  I'en  mie  asses,"  viz.,  for  one  can 
never  hasten  enough  to  satisfy  a  desiring  (or  eager)  heart.         3  Orig.  Due. 


themselves, 


Ch.  CLXVIL]     Skirmish  before  the  Gates  of  Jerusalem.  247 

come,  but  begun  to  calle  alle  the  nyght  for  to  goo  vnto  Iherusalem.  but  started 

'  D  "  °  Q  on  alone,  and 

whan  they  were  goon  a  whyle  forth  /  One  of  the  noble  men  of  unprotected, 
thooste  named  Gaste  de  bedyers  had1  moche  grete  pyte   of  this 
4  peple  that  they  shold  be  slayn  in  the  waye.     And1  therfore  he  toke 
his  hora,  and  toke  .xxx  /  men  of  Armes  with  hym  wel  horsed,  and  ?";'ed«  , 

'  '  Bediei's  fol- 

ordeyned  in  arraye,  And1  thought  that  he  wolde  goo  nygh  to  Ihcru-  i«waioi«o- 
salem  for  to  see  yf  they  myght  fynde  out  of  the  toun  beestes  and  J|£  *  {!"d 
8  other  gayne  for  to  take  and  lede  away  with  hym.     Alle  thus  as  he  p°*<"°ie. 
thoughte1  /  it  fylle  thus  in  partye,  ffor  whan  he  cam  nygh2  the 
toun  he  fonde  Oxen  /  &  kyen  largely  in  the  pastures  /  and  but  fewe 
that  kept  them,   they  fledde  away  whan  they  sawe  our3  men  come 
12  Gaste  and1  his  men  began  to  gadre  the  beestes  to  gydre  and  droof 
them  lustely  toward  thoost  /  but  the  herdmen  and  kepars  of  them 
made  a  grete  crye  /  In  the  toun  were  turkes  hardy,  and*  desyryng<4 
to  doo  armes  /  They  armed  them  dilygently,  &  ronne  hastely  after  He  wn« 

'  *  "  vigorously 

16  for  to  rescowe  the  proye  /  gaste  &  his  men  sawe  them  come,  &  attacked  by 

*       *        '     °  some  lurks. 

knewe  well  that  they  were  not  strong  ynough  for  the  turkes  /  ther- 

for  they  lefte  this  that  they  brought,  &  mounted  vpon  an  hye  mon- 

tayne,  therby  moche  angry  of  this  mesauentura    whan  they  had 

20  abyden  a  whyle  vpon  this  montayne,  They  behelde  in  to  the  valeye  / 

And1  sawe  Tancre  come  fro  bethlehem  retomyng*  to  thoost  with  Tancred, 

rf     °  returning 

an  /  C.  men  on  horsbak.   whan  Gaste  sawe  them  he  smote  his  hors  from  uethie- 

u*t  i    vi  ^»  liein,  came  to 

with  his  spores  &  cam  to  hym  /  and*  told1  hym  of  his  mesauenture  gj^"^ 

24  and  moche  anguysshous,  and  sayd  that  the  turkes  were  not  ferre  / tlie  Turk8- 
they  ran  alle  to  gydre  after  them  and  ouertoke  them  er  they  myght 
come  in  to  the  cyte.    In  theyr  comyng  they  discomfyted  the  turkes 
5that  they  that  myght  fledde  in  to  the  Cyte  /  The  remenaunt  they  [s  icii3,bk.] 

28  slewe,  And  oure  men  recoueryd  theyr  proye,  And1  brought  it  in  to 
thoost  with  grete  ioye  /  Alle  they  that  were  in  the  lodgys  assembled 
about  them-  And  demaunded  of  them  ententyfly  fro  whens  this 
proye  cam.     They  answerd  that  they  had  take  it  to  fore  the  yates. 

32  of  Iherusalem  /  whan  they  herde  named  the  holy  Cyte  of  Iheru- 
salem. and  knewe  certaynly  that  it  was  so  nygh  /  thenne  began  they 
tendrely  to  wepe  /  And  fylle  doun  on  theyr  knees,  and  rendred  The  pilgrims 
thankynges  to  oure  lord  with  moche  grete  syghes,  of  this  that  he  ^°Jdoft,t,,*'jlI.''e 

36  had  so  moche  loued  them,  and   conduyted   that  they  myght  see  p^"™1"-'6  u 
shortly  the  ende  of  theyr  pylgremage  /  that  is  to  wete,  the  holy  Cyte 
of  Iherusalem,  whiche  oure  lord  so  moche  louyd,  that  he  wold  dye 

1  Orig.  thonghte.  *  Orig.  uygh.  3  Grig.  our. 

4  Fr.  "  dcsiraus  dcfaire  armes"  eager  to  fight. 


248  Situation  of  Jerusalem.       [Ch.  CLXVIII. 

therin  for  to  saue  the  world.     Grete  pyte  was  it  to  see  and1  here 

the  teres  &  the  cryes  of  this  good  peple.     They  departed  in  this 

some  went     same  maner.  And  wente  so  forth  that  they  sawe  the  towres  and  the 

far  enough  to  .  .  .  , 

see  the  wails   walles  of   the   toun  /  Thenne  lyft  they  vp  theyr  handes  toward?  i 

of  Jerusalem. 

heuen  and  dyd  of  theyr  hosen  and*  shoes,  men  and*  wymmen  /  and' 
kyssed  therthe  /  who  that  had  seen  this  /  though  he  had  had  an 
herd1  herte  he  sholdf  haue  be  meuyd  to  pyte.    ffro  thens  fertkon  the 
ah  were  now  waye  greued  them  nothynge,  but  they  wente  moch  lyghtly  til  they  8 

reconciled  to  °  jo  rf 

their  labours  cam  to  fore  the  toun  /  There  they  lodged'  them  all  aftir  thordenaunce 

and  trials.  '  JO 

and  deuyse  of  the  barons  /  whiche  delyuerd  to  them  the  places. 
Thenne  semed  verytably  that  the  worde  of  the  holy  prophete  was 
entierly  accomplysshyd,  whiche  sayd  longe  to  fore.     "  Leua  Iheru-  12 
salem  /  &c."     Aryse  vp  Iherusalem  /  and  lyft  vp  thyn  eyen,  And1 
beholde  the  puissaunce  of  the  kyng  thy  sauiour  /  which  cometh  2to 
ontbynde  the  and  put  the  oute  of  the  bonde  wherin  thou  art.2     O 
lord?  god,  how  the  hye  barons,  the  knyghtes,  the  gentylmen  of  our  16 
hoost,  and  alle  the  other  generally,  men  and  wymmen,  were  recom- 
forted  and  reconcyled  of  the  grete  trauaylles  and  -meseases  that  they 
had  longe  endured  /  whan  they  founde  them  to  fore  the  holy  Cyte 
of  Iherusalem,  And  how  eche  of  them  had  good  wylle  to  conteyne  20 
hym  self  in  this  nede  and  werke. 

Of  the  situacion  of  Iherusalem  and  descripcion  /  and 
also  of  many  other  cytees,  townes,  &  countrees/ 
ther  aboute.  ca°  CLxviij°      24 

The  holy  city  t        Routhe  it  is  that  the  holy  Cyte  of  Iherusalem  stondeth  by- 
tween'two  twene  two  montaynes,  wherof  dauid  sayth  in  the  psaulter,3 


mountains. 


[*  leaf iii]    4"Fundamenta  eius  in  montibus  Sanctis"  /  The  fondementes  of  it 

ben  in  the  holy  montaynes  /  toward  the  west  is  the  see  and  the  londe  28 
of  the  philistees,  xxiiij  mile  vnto  port  Iaphe  /  and  that  in  the  next 
Near  by  is     part  of  the  see  /  Bytwene  bothe  is  the  castel  of  Emaus,  where  as 
tlmi0     oure  lord  after  his  resurexion  appered  to  two  discyples.     There  is 

modyn  the  cyte  and  the  fortresse  of  the  machabews.     There  is  the  32 
place  &  temple,  where  abymelech  the  holy  preest  gaf  to  dauid  and 

1  Orig.  aud. 

2— 2  Fr.  "dcslier  et  mettre  hors  de  lien  ou  tu  es,"  i.  e.  to  loose  thee,  and  free 
thee  from  the  bonds  in  which  thou  now  art. 

u  This  Latin  quotation  was  inserted  by  the  French  translator  ;  it  is  not  in 
the  original  text. 


Ch.  CLXVIIL]     Description  of  the  Holy  Places.  249 

to  his  squyres  the  loues  of  breed  to  ete  that  were  offred  vpon  the 
table  of  our  lord,  wherfor  saul  dyde  do  slee  hym  /  and  the  other 
adniynystratours  of  the  chirche  and  men  of  the  toun  /  There  is  lyde  Here iiafadia 
4  where  seynt  Peter  heeled  a  lame  man  named  Eneanx,1  and  had  Pauiiieatod 
ley  en  /  viij.  yere  paralityk  /  There  is  also  Iaphe,  as  I  haue  sayd, 
where  seynt  Peter  reysed  a  dede  woman  named  thabyte2  /  There 
was  seint  peter  herberowed  in  a  tanners  hows,  that  tanned  leder 
8  whan  he  reeeyued  the  message  fro  Cornelle,  whom  he  baptysed,  as  ^ter^!j*1"'i1;e,'e 
is  sayd  in  thactes  of  the  apostles,     toward  the  eest  is  the  florae  JJ^J^Jwd 
Iordan  /  And  the  deserte  is  by  yonde  where  the  holy  prophetes  cwneiiiw. 
were  woont  to  repayre  /  There  is  the  vale  sauage,3  whiche  is  named' 

1 2  the  dede  see  /  whiche  was  a  moche  fayr  and*  delectable  countre, 
lyke  a  paradys,  to  fore  that  oure  lord  made  do  synke  .v.  Cytees  / 
Sodome  and?  the   other  /  as  is  sayd?  in  Genesys  /  On  this  syde  £**££* 
Iordan  is  the  cyte  of  Iherycho,  that  Iosue  wan  more  by  prayer  than  J*^0' 

10  by  bataylle.  Theder  wente  oure  lord1  Ihesu  Criste  /  and?  made  a 
blynde  man  to  see  /  There  is  galgala,  where  helyzeus  the  proophete 
dwellyd.  Toward  the  south  is  the  cyte  of  Bethlehem,  where  our 
lord  was  born,  and  leyde  in  the  crybbe  emonge  the  beestes.     There 

20  by  is  tecua,  the  cyte  where  Amos  and  Abacuc  the  prophetes  were 
born  /  Toward  northeest  is  Gabao,4  where  atte  prayer  of  Iosue  the 
sonne  rested,   til  he  had   vaynquysshed  /  the  batayll  /  There  is  There  \» 
Sceirs,5  where  as  our  lord  spak  to  the  woman  of  Samarye.     There  where  mn- 

'  r  "  Lord  spake 

24  is  bethel,  where  as  the  peple  of  Israhel  worshipped  the  calf  of  god  ^  ^ew<>, nan 
nyenst  the  wylle  of  oure  lord  /  There  is  Sebaste,  whiche  is  named? 
seynt   Iohan  de  sebaste.      There  is  the  sepnlcre  of  seynt   Iohau  There  u  the 

J  r  "  Sepulchre  of 

baptist  /  helizeus  and  Abyas  the  prophetes  were  there  buryed?  /It  *g,^e 
28  was  sommetyme  named  Samarye.6     The  Cyte  of  naples  is  there  / 
which  somme  tyme  was  named  Sychem.     And  it  was  there  where 
Symeon  and  leuy,  sones  of  Iacob,  for  to  venge  theyr  suster,  whiche  HejeSimeon 
had   ben   enforced,  slewe  them  of  the   toun  /  and7   brente  alle  £g£SJ2*f* 
32  the  cyte. 

1  Fr.  Aeneas. 

2  Caxton  has  here  omitted  a  line  or  two  after  "  Thabite.".  Fr.  "et  estoit 
pleine  d'aulmosnes  et  de  bonnes  oeuvres,  et  la  rendit  aux  vevfvcs  femmes  et  aux 
povres  gens  a  qui  elle  faisoit  moult  grant  bien," — Lat.  "  Tabitham  plenam 
operibus  bonis  et  elymosynis,  dnfunctam  suscitavit,  et  Sanctis  ac  viduis  resignavit 
vivam."  3  Fr.  li  vaus  sauvagc,  Lat.  vallem  sylvestrem. 

*  Lat.  Gaboon.  6  Fr.  Sichors. 

6  Caxton  has  omitted  "pour  le  mont  de  Somcr  qui  est  illecques  encore 
nomme  L'en  toutc  cctte  terre,"  viz.,  from  Mount  Somer  which  is  situated  here, 
all  this  country  is  still  named.  7  Grig.  aud. 

1  ?  * 


250 


Different  Names  of  Jerusalem.     [Ch.  CLXIX. 


Jerusalem  is 
Hie  chief  city 
of  Judea. 


How  Iherusalem  had  many  names  after  dyuerse  lordes 
Pif.n4.bk.]  therin  xrennyng,  and  yet  of  the  situacion  wel  at 

a  longe  /  ca°  Clxix° 

Herusalem  is  the  chyef  cyte  of  Iudee  /  It  is  withoute  medowes  4 
and  withoute  Ryuers,  ne  no  brooke  ne  welle.     It  was  first 
called1  Salem  /  &  after  Zebus2  /  After  in  the  tyme  what  tyme  were 
caste  out  the  Iheruhesees,3  whan  dauidf  had1  regnedf  /  vii.  yere  in 
David  im-      Ebron  /  he  grewe4  and  amended  moche  this  cyte  /  And*  wold  tliat  8 
greatly,  and    it  shold  be  the  chyef  and  hede  place  of  alle  the  Royamme  /  Thenne 
name.  was  it  named  Iherusalem.     To  fore  that  dauid  assaylled!  the  loun  / 

he  toke  the  towre  of  Syon  /  whiche  was  named1  the  cyte  of  Dauyd?. 
Thenne  made  dauyd  the  cyte  to  be  made  about  the  place  whiche  12 
was  named  Mellon.  Ioab  made  the  remenaunt  of  the  toun  /  After 
whan  Salamon  regned"  in  Iherusalem  /  It  was  named1  Iherosolima, 
That  is  to  saye,  Iherusalem  of  Salamon.  As  they  seye  that  made 
After  the       thystoryes  /  Aftir  the  deth  of  Ihesu  criste,  Titus  the  sone  of  vas-  16 

dentil  of  .  .  . 

Jesus  cimst   pasian  was  a  moche  grete  prynce  of  Kome,  And  assieged  this  cyte 
Titus  con-       l  ,  ,  ,  ,    ■  , 

quered  uii.i     with  a  grete  boost  /  &  toke  it  by  force  /  and  destroyed  it,  and1 

destroyed  it.  °  '  J  >  J 

threwe  it  doun  to  therthe  /  Aftir  cam  Elyus  Adrian  the  fourth 
Emperour  after  hym  /  and  called  it  after  his  name  elye  /  ffor  he  20 
reedefyed  it  moch  wel  /  5ffirst  it  stode  in  an  hangyng  of  an  hylle,5 
6in   suche  wyse  as   toward  theest  and  south   it  was  sette  in  the 
roundnesse  of  the  tertre  of  the  mount  of  Syon,6  And  of  another 
mount   named1    Moria.      The   temple  only  and1   the  toure  named  24 
Anthone7  was  on  the  toppe  of  the  tertre.     But  the  same  Elyus 
in  rebuilding  made  alle8  the  Cyte  to  be  born  and  reedefyed1  right  on  the  toppe  or 
the  Hoiv"       s. unmet  of  the  tertre,  in  suche  wyse  that  the  place  where  oure  lord1 
«-a*  brought   was  crucyfyed  /  and  the  holy  sepulcre,  where  his  blessid  body  was  28 

within  the  ,        _,  .  .  , 

wails.  leyed1  in,  whiche  to  fore  were  w^thout  the  Cyte,  were  then  enclosed1 

within  the  walles.     The  Cyte  was  not  ouer  grete,  ne  ouer  lytle.     It 
was  more  long  than  brood  /  hit  is  on  the  four  quarters  enuyronned 
with  depe  valeyes.  toward  the  eest  is  the  valeye  of  Iophat9  /  There  32 
stondeth  a  moche  fayr  chirche  made  in  thonour  of  the  glorious 


The  city  is 
longer  than  it 
is  broad. 


2  Fr.  Jehus.        3  Fr.  Gebusdes,  Lat.  Jebuseo.        *  Fr.  creut,  i.  e.  increased. 

*— 5  Fr.  " prcmicrement  die  cstoit  assise  en  un  pendant,"  at  first  it  was 
situated  on  the  brow  of  a  hill. 

6_s  pr  «« gi  qlic  vcrs  soicii  levant  ct  vers  midi  cstoit  assise  el  roistc  del  monte 
de  Syon,"  so  that  towards  the  east  and  south,  it  was  situated  on  the  steep  side 
of  mount  Sion.  7  Fr.  Anloinc,  Lat.  Antonia. 

6  Fr.  fist  jm-tcr,  caused  the  city  to  he  moved.  ,J  Fr.  Jvsaphot. 


(Jh.  CLXX.]      Wonderful  Buildings  in  Jerusalem.  251 

vyrgyne  Marye,  where  it  is  say  J  that  she  was  buiyed.    &  ther  is  Here  u  the 
shewed   vet  the  sepulcre.     Ther  vnder  is  the   rennyng  water  of  the  virgin 

J  r  jo  Mary. 

which  seynt  Iohn  euangelyste  sayth  /  that  Ihesu  Criste  passed  / 
4  Toward  the  southe  is  a  valeye  named  Ennon,  there  is  the  felde  that 
was  bought1  with  the  pons  that  Iudas  sold1  oure  lord  lore,  which  is 
made  in  sepulture  of  pilgrims  /  &  named  acheldemach.  toward  the 
weste  is  a  parte  of  the  valeye  where  as  the  piscyne  2is,  whichc  was  p  leaf  115] 
8  a  grete  thynge  whan  the  kynges  of  Iude  were  there  :  and  it  stratcheth 
vnto  the  Cysteine,  whiche  is  called  the  lake  of  the  Patriarke.  By 
the  old  Cymetyer  whiche  is  in  the  caue,  named  the  Lyon,  toward 
the  north-eest,   may   men   croo  vp  playn  to  the  Cvte.      There  is  Here  is  the 

*  •  D     ■        *     *      "  •  plate  where 

12  shewed  the  place  where  seynt  Stephen  the  prothomarter  was  stoned  Stephen  Hie 

r  j  r  r  martyr  was 

of  the  Iuys,  whan  he  prayd  vpon  his  knees  for  them,  that  so  pytte  jtowrf  by  the 
hym  to  deth  /  And  so  deyed  a  very  marter. 

Here  tbystorye  deuyseth  of  many  merueyllyus  edy- 
16  fyees  conteyned  in  the  same  Cyte  of  Iherusalem. 

And  who  made  them.  Capitulo  Clxx0 

s        0,  as  I  haue  sayd,  two  montaynes  ben  enchayned  within  the  Twomoun- 
walles  of  Iherusalem,  a  litil  valeye  is  bytwene  them  both,  mdowd 

•  iii        within  the 

20  whiche  departed  the  toun  as  in  the  myddle  /  Syon  is  toward  the  waiu  or 

r  ...    Jerusalem. 

weste  /  on  the  sommete  or  toppe  theron  stondeth  the  chirche  which 
is  named  Syon  /  And  after  there  is  a  tour  of  dauyd,  whiche  is  the 
dongeon  of  the  toun  /  made  of  moche  stronge  werke,  walles  and 
24  barbycans  there  be  many  that  ben  aboute  the  toun.3  Trouthe  it  is 
that  to  fore  oure  pylgryms  cam  in  to  this  holy  lande,  the  place 
where  our  lord  was  crucifyed,  whiche  was  named  caluarye.  And 
there  where  the  very  crosse  was  founden,  And  where  our  sauyour  The  true- 

cross  w:it* 

28  Ihesu  Criste  was  taken  doun  of  the  crosse,  And  enovnted  with  pre-  found  on 

Calvary, 

c'wus  oynementis  /  &  envoluped  in  whyte  lynen  cloth,  this  places  "lie'ew,;ur 
were  strayte  as  lytil  chapellys  /  But  after  that  oure  cristen  men  had  crucified, 
the  power,  them  thought  that  the  chirche  was  made  ouer  strait  and 

1   Orig.  beught. 

3  Here  several  lines  are  omitted  by  Caxton,  which  were  probably  unin- 
telligible in  the  text  which  he  translated.  Lat.  of  the  missing  lines:  "In 
eodetn  quoqiw,  scd  in  dcvcr.o  quod  ad  oriente.m  respicil,  situ  est  sanctae  Kcs-nrrec- 
tionis  ccclcsia,  forma  quidem  rotunda,  quae  quoniam  in  declivo  pracdieli  monlis 
sita  est,  ita  ut  cliv-ui  cidem  imviincns  et  contiguus  ecclesiuc  tectum  habct,  crcctis 
in  sublime  trabibus  et  miro  artifieio  in  modum  coronac  contextis  apcrtum  et 
pcrpetua  patens,  umle  lumen  ecclcsiae  infunditur  nccssarhim.  Hub  quo  hialu 
jhUhIu  Halvaloris  positum  cat  monument  am." 


252  Further  Description  of  Jerusalem.      [Ch.  CLXX. 

Tiiey  wailed    lytil  wnere  so  grete  and'  noble  tliynges  were.     Therfore  they  made 
newly.  it  al  newe  walled  about  with  good  strong  werke  aud  hye,  which 

conteyned  and  enclosed  within  it  the  fyrst  chirche,1  and1  the  holy 
on  tiie  slope    names  that  I  haue  named  /  Toward'  the  parte  of  the  oryent  is  the  4 

otMt.  Moriah  '  r  J 

staiidetu  the   other  mount  named   mona.2     On  the  hangyn<'  therof  as  who  be- 
holdeth  toward  the  south  stondeth  the  temple,  whiche  the  laye 
peple  calle  it  Templem  domini.     There  as  Dauyd'  bought3  the  place 
for  to  sette  in  the  Arke  of  oure  lord.     And  Salamon  his  sone  made  8 
there  the  temple  by  the  commaundement  of  God'  /  At  the  begyn- 
nyng  of  this  book  we  sayde  to  you,  that  Omar  the  sone  of  Captap 
dyde  make  the  forme  in  this  manere  /  There  is  a  place  square  longe 
On  the  west    as  moche  as  an  Archer  may  shote  at  twyes,  And  as  brood  /  closed  12 
are  two  gates,  with  good  walles  /  stronge  and4  hye  /  And  there  toward  the  weste 
p  lf.iio,    .]  ^en  £W0  gates  by  whiche  men  entre,  6That  one  is  named  Speciosa  / 
where  seynt  peter  heeled  hym  that  was  lame  fro  his  birth,  and  satte 
Towards  the   to  fore  the  gate  for  to  demaunde  Almesse.     That  other  gate  had  no  16 
ciuiden  gate,   name  toward  the  north  eest.     Toward  the  thoryent  is  another  gate 
named  the  Golden  gate  /  Toward  the  south  is  the  hows  Eyall  / 
whiche  is  the  temple  of  Salamon.     vpon  eche  of  thyse  yatcs,  By 
whiche  men  entre  in  to  the  toun,  And  on  the  comes6  ben  hye  20 
towres  /  vpon  whiche  the  prouostes7  were  woonte  to  goo  vp  at 
certayn  howres  for  to  warne  and  somone  the  peple  to  praye  and 
within  this    saye  theyr  orysons  /  and  to  honoure  our  lord  after  theyr  custommes  / 
dareTito'maii  Sonime  endure  yet,  &  the  other  ben  falle.     in  the  cloysture  of  this  24 
place,  ther  dar  noman  dwelle  /  ne  noman  is  suffred  to  entre  but 
bare  foot  and  clene  washen  /  ffor  there  ben  porters  sette  at  alle  the 
yates  that  take  hede  therof  /  In  the  mydle  of  this  place,  whiche  is 
thus  closed,  is  another  place,  more  hye  and  square,  toward  the  28 
weste  men  goo  vp  therto  in  two  places,  by  degrees  or  stappes  /  and 
in  every        in  lyke  wyse  toward  the  southe.    But  toward  the  south  goth  noman 

comer  were  .  ,  .      ,  . 

oratories        vp,  but  by  one  place  /  In  eueryche  ot  the  angles  or  corners  were 
Saracen*        woont  to  be  oratoryes,  where  the  sarasyns  made  theyr  orysons  and  32 

used  to  pray. 

prayers  /  Somme  endure  yet  /  And  many  ben  beten  doun  /  In  the 
myddle  of  this  hye  place  stondeth  the  temple,  whiche  is  made  .  viii  / 
square  /  And  with  out  ben  the.  walles  couerd  with  tables  of  marble 

1  Owing  to  his  misunderstanding  of  the  passage  above  omitted,  Caxton  has 
also  failed  to  understand  this  line.  Fr.  "qui  enclot  et  contient  dedans  soy  la 
premiere  iglise  et  les  sains  lieux  que  je  votes  ai  nommes,"  which  enclosed  and 
contained  the  first  church  and  the  holy  places  which  I  have  mentioned  to  you. 

2  Lat.  Moria.  3  Orig.  bought.  *  Orig.  aud. 

6  Fr.  angles,  corners.  7  Fr.  provoires,  priests,  Lat.  saccrdotes. 


Cli.  CLXXI.]      IVater  Supply  of  Jerusalem.  253 

wrought  with  i'vn  gold  moche  rvchely  /  The  couerture  aboue  was  The  roof  w  of 

of  leed  alle  round!  riglit  wel  made  /  eche  of  thyse  places  aboue  and*  maw. 
bynethe  is  paued  with  moche  fayre  whyte  stone  /  in  suche  wyse 
4  wlian  it  rayneth,  alle  the  waters  of  the  temple,  of  whiche  ther 
falleth  grete  plente,  falleth  doun  cleene  and1  cleer  in  the  cysternes 
whiche  ben  within  the  cloystre.  There  bytwene  the  temple  and 
the  place  which  is  emonge  the  pylers,  There  stondeth  an  hye  Roche  within  tiie 

temple  \n  a 

8  and  lowe  bynethe  a  dyche  or  a  fosse.     It  is  sayd  that  the  Angele1  ingiinn-k 
stondeth  there  on,  whan   he  slewe  the   peple  for  the  synne  that 
dauyd  had!  nombred  his  peple,  vnto  the  tyme  that  oure  lord*  com- 
mannded*  that  he  sholdf  put  the  swerde  in  to  the  shethe.  there  made  on  wind. 

.  Daviil  made 

12  Dauycr  after  an  Aulter.    To  fore  that  oure  men  entrecr  in  to  the  an  altar, 
toun,  it  had*  been  a  certayn  tyme  all  discoueryd*  /  But  after  they 
that  holde  it,  they  couerid  it  with  a  fayr  whyte  marble,  &  made  an 
aulter  aboue  where  the  clerkes  dyde  the  seruyse  of  oure  lord*. 

16  2How  the  turkes  of  Iherwsalern,  whan  thev  knewe  the  p  leaf  ins] 
corny ng  of  our  hooste,  stopped  the  pyttes  and 
fontaynes  of  the  toun.  ca°  Clxxi0 

He  londe  in  whiche  Iherusalem  stondith  is  named*  Iurye,  by  Jenmaiem  is 
20  t        cause  that  Avhan  the  .x  /  lygnages  /  or  trybus  departed  fro  the3  oi  Judea,  «> 
heyer  of  Salamon  /  And1  helde  them  to  Ieroboam  /  The  tweyne  ">«  tnbe  of 
abode  in  Iherusalem  with  Roboam  that  were  the  try  be  of  Iuda4  / 
And  the  trybe  of  beniamyn  /  And*  of  the  name  of  Iuda  it  is  named4 
24  Iurye5  /  It  is  named1  also  palestyne  for  the  phylystees.     This  Cyte 
standeth  as  it  were  in  the  nauyll  of  the  londe  of  Byheste  or  of 
promyssion  /  after  the  termes  that  were  named  by  Josue  /  whiche 
endure6  fro  deserte  of  the  mount  of  Lybane,  and*  fro  the  grete  flood! 
28  of  Eufrates  vnto  the  see.     The  place  in  whiche  the  cyte  standeth 

in  is  moche  ayerye  &  drye  /  Ther  be  no  waters  in  the  toun  but  only  The  only 
of  the  rayn  :  ffor  in  wynter  tyme  whan   it  is  acustoramed*  to  rayne  town  m  that 

collected  in 

moche  in  the  londe,  it  is  receyuyd!  in  to  the  Cistemes  /  of  whom  be  cisterns. 
32  many  in  the  toun  /  and  they  occupye7  this  water  in  all  thynges  that 

they  haue  nede  of  /  Neuertheles  somme  scriptures  saye  that  they  there  were 

.  .-li  fountains  in 

were  woonte  to  haue  fontaynes,  whiche  were  without  the  toun,  and  uptown 

1  Fr.  s' assist  la,  sat  there. 

3  Fr.  loir,  the  heir.  *  Orig.  Inda.  5  Fr.  Judec,  Lat.  Judaia. 

6  Fr.  "  du  desert  et  du  mont  ds,  Libanr,"  from  the  desert  and  from  Mt. 
Lihanus.  '  Fr.  usenf,  employ,  use. 


254  The  Turks  stop  up  the  Fountains.     [Ch.  CLXXII. 

which  were     ran  in  to  hit  /  *But  they  were  stopped!  by  the  warre1  /  The  leste2  of 

f  topped  up  '  J  . 

during  the  alle  the  fontaynes  was  gyon,  whiche  Ezechyas  the  kyng  stopped1,  lyke 
as  the  scripture  sayth.  Gyon  is  now  a  place  in  the  toun  toward 
the  south,  within  the  valeye  that  is  named1  Ermon.  There  is  a  i 
chirche  founded1  in  the  worship  of  seynt  pretopt  marter.  There  in 
that  same  place  was  Salaraon  enoynted,  as  is  red  in  the  thirde  book 
of  kinges.  without  the  toun  a  two  myle  or  thre  ben  founden  somme 
fontaynes,  but  they  be  but  fewe  /  and  they  rendre  but  lytil  water.  8 

a  mile  from    In  the  partye  toward?  the  south,  where  as  the  two  valeyes  assemble  / 

the  town  is  f        J  ■..-.•  j  i  ;  1        i 

the  renowned  fs  a  fontayne  moch  renommed,  whiche  is  named  Syloe  /  our  lord 

fountain  of  " 

siioam.         commaundes3  to  the  blynde  man  that  neuer  had  seen  that  he  shold 

goo  wasshe  hym  in  the  water  there  of  this  fontayne,  and  he  sawe  12 

clerely  &  incontinent  was  made  hool  /  this  fontayne  is  but  a  lytil 

myle  fro  the  toun.     It  semeth  that  it  boylleth  a  lytil  /  som  tyme  it 

spryngeth  not,  somme  saye  that  alwaye  the  .iij  /  daye  the  water 

cometh  agayn  atte  ferthest.    whan  the  turkes  of  the  toun  knewe  that  16 

The  Turks      oure  men  cam  /  they  stopped1  the  mowthes  of  thyse  fontaynes  &  of 

iVuh^foun-    the  Cysternes  a  fyue  or  .vj  myle  aboute  /  ffor  they  thought  that  the 

or  six  miles    pykrryms  for  lacke  of  watres  shokie  not  mayntene  theyr  syege  to 

;u  omul 

[♦if.nc.bk.]  fore  the  toun  /  And!  4  without  fawte  that  they  had  grete  lack  and  20 

niesease  therby,  as  ye  ehal  here  folowyng :  they  that  were  within 
within  the  the  cyte  had  grete  plente  of  water  in  Cisternes  /  and  fro  the  fon- 
greatptemy  taynes  without  cam  grete  haboundannce  by  conduytes,  whiche 
while  the  pii-  descended  in  to  .ii  /  pyscynes  right  grete  by  the  temple,  that  one  24 

grims  with-  .  .  .... 

out  suffered  endurefch  yet  in  to  this  day  /  and  is  named1  probatica  piscina  / 
where  as  they  were  wonte  to  wasshe  the  flesshe  of  the  sacrefyses  / 
of  whiche  the  gospel  speketh,  and1  sayth  that  it  had  .v.  porches 
where  the  angele  descended  and  meuid  the  water  /  And  he  that  28 
fyrst  entred  after  the  raeuynge  of  the  water  was  made  hool  of  what 
dysease  that  euer  he  had1.  In  that  place  oure  sauyour  Ihesu  Crist 
heeled  a  lame  man  that  had*  leyn  there  many  yeres. 


Of  the  nombre  of  them  of  thoost  /  of  them  of  Iheru-  32 
salem,  aud  how  oure  men  lodged  them  in  the 
siege  to  fore  Iherusdem.  Capitulo  Clxxij° 

!— 1  Fr.  "mats  ellcsfurcnt  cstoupees  par  la  guerre,"  but  they  were  stopped 
up  by  war.  2  Fr.  "la  moindre,  de  Unites  les fontaines." 

3  Orig.  commanmles. 


Ch.  CLXXII.]      The  Barons  take  up  their  Positions.  255 

i        N  the  yere  of  thy::carnasion  cf  our  sauyour  Ihesu  Criste  /  The  pilgrim* 

J  *  encamped 

Mlxxxxix  in  the  moneth  of  Iuyn,  the  vij  daye  of  the  sayd*  »»'»« •>«""- 

"  *         »  "       aalt-m,  June 

nioneth,  was  lodged  the  boost  of  cristiente  to  fore  the  holy  Cyte  of  7th,  1099. 
4  Iherusaleni  /  The  nomhre  of  them  that  were  there,  as  wel  men  and  Their  number 

'  was  about 

wymmen,  were  /  xl  /  M.  There  were  not  men  defensahle  of  the  *«,ooo. 
foote  men  aboue  /  xx.  M.  On  horsback  were  not  passyng*  a  /  xv.C. 
Alle  the  other  were  feble  men,  as  seke  men  and  wymmen,  and!  also 
8  old1  peple.  within  the  toun  were  men  ahle  to  here  Armes  .xl.  thousand, 
whiche  were  comen  in  fro  cytecs  and  castellys  ther  aboute.  And!  they 
were  the  best  men  of  Armes,  and  chosen  for  the  valyauntest  that 
1hey  coude  fynde  /  After  that  oure  men  were  arryued1  to  fore  the 
12  t  inn  :  They  hadde  a  grete  counseyl  emonge  them,  And  called!  the  They  held  a 

J  °  J  o  1  council  as  to 

Cristen  men  of  the  Countree  for  to  demaunde  of  them  in  what  syde  wllicl> 8i,le  of 

J         the  city  to 

they  myght  beste  assiege  the  Toun  /  They  sawe  wel  that  toward1  ilttack  fil'8t- 
thoryent,  Ne  toward!  the  Southe  they  myght  nought  doo  for  the 
1 6  deepe  valeys  that  ben  there.     Therfore  they  accorded1  to  sette  the  They  decided 
siege  to  fore  the  northeste  /  Wherfore  it  was  so  that  fro  the  yate  North  -  East ; 

.  and  each  of 

named1  the  yate  of  Seynt  Steuen,  whiche  stondeth  in  the  Northeste  "ie  e|eat 

barons  took 

vnto  the  other  yate  that  standeth  toward!  the  weste  /  And*  is  named!  up  hi«po»i- 

'  tion  near  the 

20  the  yate  of  Dauyd*,  were  lodged1  alle  the  Barons  and  the  other  pyl-  walls- 
gryms.     The  valyaunt  Due  of  loreyne  had?  the  fyrst  place  /  In  the 
second!  was   therle  aof  fflaundres,  In  the  thyrde  was  the  due  of   ['leaf  117] 
Xormandye  /  The  fourth  place  held  Tancre  besyde  a  tour  of  a 

24  Corner,  whiche  yet  is  named  the  tour  of  Tancre  /  And  other  grete 
men  were  lodged  there  with  hym.  ffro  this  toure  vnto  the  yate  of 
Occident  comprysed!  therle  of  tholouse  the  place,  and  the  people 
that  were  with  hym  /  But  after  Tancre  sawe  that  by  cause  the  tour 

28  defended  the  yate  so  wel  /  and  also  for  the  valeye  that  was  so 
nyghe  he  myght  but  lytil  proufyte  there,  therefore  by  the  counseyl 
of  the  wyse  men  that  kiiewe  wel  the  beyng  of  the  toun  he  remeuyd 
fro  thens  /  and2  wente  on  the  tertre  on  whiche  the  cyte  is  sette  on  Tanered 

established 

32  3bytwene  the  toun  and  the  chirche  of  seynt  Symeon3  /  whiche  is  Mm""i' 

J  J  J  I  further  off 

withoute  the  Cyte  as  far  as  an  Archer  maye  shote  at  ones  /  There  between  Jeru- 

J  J  I  saletn  and  the 

he  lodged!  hym  to  thende  that  he  myght  beste  greue  the  toun  there.  c^ch  called 
And*  for  to  deffende  the  turkes  this  sayd  chirche,  whiche  is  holy, 
36  ffor  there  sowped  our  lord  with  his  discyples  /  and1  weeshe  humbly 

2  Orig.  aud. 

3-3  Fr.  "enlre  la  ville  et  Veglise  qui  a  non  Syon,"  i.  e.  between  the  city  and 
the  church  whose  name  is  Sion,  not  "Simeon."  Lat.  "  inter  urbcm  et 
ccclcsiam  quae  dicitur  Syon." 


256  The  Pilgrims  assault  Jerusalem.     [Ch.  CLXXIII. 

theyr  feet.     There  descended  the  holy  ghoost  in   fyry  tonges  on 
Tins  is  the     witsoiidaye.     In  the  same  place  passed1  oute  of  this  world1  the  glo- 

place  where  . 

M%Vd*'d      ry°us  vyrgyne  Marye  /  whiche  bare  in  her  precious  body  the  saueour 
of  the  world,    ther  is  shewde  the  sepulture  of  seynt  steuen.  4 

How  oure  men  began  tassaylle  Iherusalem  /  And  of 
the  grete  dilyge#ce  that  they  dyde  to  make 
engyns  for  to  take  it  /  ca°  Clxxiij0 

w      Han  the  barons  were  thus  lodged  fro  the  yate  toward  north-  8 

este,  as  I  haue  sayd,  vnto  the  tour  on  the  corner  which  is  vpon 
the  vale  of  Iosaphat  /  And'  fro  thens  vnto  that  other  corner  of  the 
cyte  whiche  is  on  the  pendaunt  of  the  same  vale  toward  the  south, 
thenne  was  it  thynge  euydente  that  the  one  half  of  the  toun  was  1 2 
wyth  payne  or  vnnethe  assieged.  ffor  fro  thens  that  I  haue  sayd? 
vnto  the  yate  named*  mount  Syon,  the  Cyte  was  no  thynge  assieied. 
Thefiahday  The  fyft  daye  after  that  thoost  was  lodged  to  fore  the  Cyte  /  it 
took  their      was  acorded  comynly,  and  cryed  thurgh  alle  the  lodp-ys,  that  alle  16 

positions  an  J       J  i  J  o  oj    i 

assault  was    men  shold   be   armed   the  best  wyse   they  myght   and    come   to 

thassault.     They  cam  alle,  and?   began    moche  strongly  thassaylle 

aboute  the  toun.     They  hadde  the  hertes  moche  hardy,  and?  bren- 

nyng  desyres  and  wylle  to  doo  the  werke  of  oure  lord?  /  In  theyr  20 

comyng  on  they  toke  the  barbycaraies  that  were  right  ayerast  them. 

lAnd  the  turkes  embatilled  them  within  the  grete  wallys1  /  They 

p  lf.in.bk.]  of  the  toun  were  so  eff rayed?  of  .the  grete  hardynesse  2and  prowesse 

h^u.ecity8      that  they  sawe  with  oure  peple  and?  had  ouer  grete  fere,  in  suche  24 

riarm!deaty   wyse  that  they  loste  alle  theyr  hope  for  to  deffende  the  toun,  and 

'  was  wel  knowen  afterward  /  that  yf  the  talent  of  our  men  had? 

endured,  and?  that  they  had  had  skalyng   laddres  &  castellys  by 

whiche  they  myght  haue  approuched?  the  walles  of  the  toun,3  Thfy  28 

had  taken  it  certaynly.    but  whan  thassault  had  endured  fro  erly 

mornynge  that  same  daye  vnto  one  of  the  clok  of  the  same  daye  at 

hntthepii-     after  none  /  They  apperceyued  wel    that  withoute  engynes   they 

grims  soon 

perceived       myght  not  doo  grete  hurte  ne  dommage  to  the  toun  /  therfor  they  32 

that  without         Job  o  I  J 

engines  of      withdrewe  them  abak,  &  purposed   to  come  agayn  to  thassault, 
c"',ld. not    ,   whan    theyr  engyns  shold  be  better  ordeyned.     The  barons  toke 
counseyl  emong  them  for  taduyse  /  how  they  myght  fynde  manere 
to  make  engyns  for  tassaylle  the  toun.    ffor  them  semed  that  in  alle  36 

1-1  Fr.  "ct  les  Tares  cmbatire.nt  dedans  les  grans  7ivirs." 
3  Orig.  toun. 


Ch.  CLXXIV.]     They  make  Engines  of  War.  257 

the  countree  shold  not  be  founde  trees  ne  wode  ynowe  for  to  make 

suche  thvnges  as  they  sholde  nede.     But  a  valyaunt1  man  of  the  They  found 

J     °  J  "  trees  lor  their 

countre  cam  forth  ami  told  to  them  of  a  valeye  .vj  /  or  vij.  myle  engine*  in  a 

*  •  '  "         "        valley  near 

4  thens,  whiche  was  ful  of   trees  and  grete    ynowghe  for  to  make  b-v- 
engyns  /  They  sente  theder  grete  nombre  of  Carpenters,  And  somme 
of  the  barons  to  conduyte  them  /  Eche  of  them  hewe  doun  the 
ties,  and  dyde  do  brynge  them  in  charyottes  /  Thenne  made  they 

8  come  alle  them  of  thoost  that  coude  medle  with  suche  thynge,  and 
dyde  do  make  engyns,  perierers  /  Magonneauls,  castellys,  chattes  / 
and  wayes  couerd,  moche  grete  plente  /  The  pylgryms  that  coude  ah  worked 

,,■,,!,,      diligently— 

werke  toke  none  hyre  ne  wages  yf  they  had  as  moch  as  they  myght  the  rich  gave 

J  it  J         JO        their  time, 

12  entretiene  and  kepe  them  self  /  The  other  that  were  pour  receyued  and  the  poor 

r  '  *  *  were  paid. 

tlieyr  wages  of  the  convyns  /  ffor  of  all  the  barons  of  thoost  /  ther 
was  none  that  myght  paye  the  costes  of  this  werke  sauf  therle  of 
tholouse.  ffor  he  hym  self  allone  susteined  of  his  propre  good  all  the 

16  werkemen  without  thaide  of  ony  other.  &  also  to  many  knyghtes 
that  had!  despe»ded  theyr  good  dyde  he  gyue  many  grete  yeftes. 
whyles  that  the  barons  were  thus  besy,  that  eueryche  dyde  do  make 
his  engyns  for  hym  self  /  The  other  knyghtes  &  the  mene  peple  ran 

20  vnto  busshes  and  hedges  /  ffor  to  fetche  stockes  and  roddes  with 
grete  dilygence  for  to  make  pynnes.2     None  was  ydle,  but  alle  men 
heelp  to  this  werke.     Ther  was  noman  had  shame  ne  despyte  to  No  man  was 
doo  thynge  that  myght  auaylle ;  ffor  they  sayd  well  that  alle  theyr  do  anything 

that  might 

24  trauaylle  and*  despences  that  they  had  don  &  made  in  alle  theyr  neip. 
waye  were  nothyng  worth  yf  this  enterpryse  for  to  take  this  toun 
were  not  wel  accomplysshed. 

3  How  our  peple  were  in  grete  meschyef  at  the  sayd  pietfns] 
28  siege,  &  how  the  turkes  deserted  them  by  cause 

they  myght  entre  and  yssue  in  and  out  of  the 
toun.  ca°  Clxxiiij 

i        N  thoost  had  they  grete  mesease  of  thurst,  ffor  as  I  haue  sayd  They  snffere.1 
32  to  you  the  place  where  the  cite  stondeth  in  is  moch  ayerye  &  lack  of  water. 

drye,  withoute  fontaynes,  withoute  wellys  &  pyttes  of  water  spryng- 
ynge  /  ffor  they  of  the  toun,  whan  they  herd  saye  /  that  oure  peple 
cam,  they  fylled  somme  pyttes  that  were  4  withoute  the  toun  nygh 
36  to  the  Cysternes  where  as  was  rayn  water4  /  and  they  had  couerd 
1  Orig.  valyaunt.  2  Fr.  cloyes,  i.e.  hurdles,  wattles,  not  "pynnes." 

4-4  Fr.  "Lots  de  la  ville  pres.     Lcs  citernes  mcsmcs  ou  il  avoit  eaue  dc 
pluie."     Caxton  divided  his  sentence  here  wrongly,  and  spoiled  the  sense. 
GODFREY.  b 


258  They  suffer  from  Thirst.      [Ch.  CLXXIV. 

and  stopped  them,  to  thende  that  the  pylgryms  sholde  haue  none 
The  Chris-     ease  of  .water  /  But  the  cytezeyns  of  hethlehem,  and4  they  of  a  lytil 
TOuntrytoid   cyte  called  tecua,  that  knewe  the  countre  al  ahoute  /  told*  and 
fountains «nd  ensseygned  to  them  somme  fontaynes  /  hrokes,  pyttes,  and  Cisternes.  4 
tue  city.        ther  was  grete  prees  and1  grete  mesease  /  suche  tyme  there  was,  that 
whan  the  pour  peple  myght  hrynge  theyr  harellis  &  vessellys  ful  of 
trouhled  water  and  thycke,  They  sold  it  rychely  in  thooste  /  The 
fontayne  of   syloe,  of  whiche  I  haue  spoken  to  fore,  myght  not  8 
suffyse  them,  ffor  it  spryngeth  not  alway,  and1  yet  that  was  not 
The  suffer-     right  good.     Thanguysshe  of  thurste  grewe  moche  of  the  heete  that 
thirst  grew     was  in  Iuyn  /  And1  of  the  trauaylle  that  they  suffred,  and  for  the 
mo™  ?n\ense.  duste  that  entred  in  theyr  mowthes  /  whan  two  or  thre  had  founden  12 
ony  water  rennyng  or  welle  /  alle  ran  theder  /  in  suche  wyse  that  it 
faylled  anon  /  The  men  a  foote  were  not  in  so  grete  desease  as  they 
that  had  horses  /  ffor  they  ledde  them  somtyme  thre  or  foure  myle 
ferre  for  to  watre  them,  &  yet  vnnethe  founde  they  ynowgh    there  16 
were  many  that  lefte  theyr  horses  /  and  hahandouned  to  goo  where 
they  wold,  and  other  beestys  for  defaulte  of  water,    ye  shold  haue 
seen  mules,  Asses  /  Oxen,  Kyen,  and  horses  goon  withoute  garde  or 
aii  their        kepar  in  the  feldes  /  Atte  laste,  whan  the  beestys  had  long  languys-  20 
foruSkrf"4  shed  /  they  deyde  /  wherof  cam  grete  stenche  in  thoost,  wherof  the 
ayer  was  corrupte  ouer  peryllously  /  The  peple  was  not  in  lasse 
anguysshe  there  for  thurste,  than  they  had  ben  to  fore  at  Anthyoche 
for  hongre  /  Oure  men  were  acustomed  for  to  seche  pasture  for  theyr  24 
horse  moche  ferre  fro  the  toun  in  vyllages  ther  about.     The  turkes 
of  the  toun1  marked  it,  and  yssued  where  as  the  siege  lay  not  /  and 
cam  ayenst  them  and  slewe  many,  and  toke  away  theyr  horse  /  And 
brought  them  in  to   the  Cyte.     Many  escaped  that  fledde  vnto  28 
[*if.ii8,bk.]  thooste.     Euery  daye  lassed  the  2nombre  of  the  pylgryms  by  many 
suche  aduentures  /  and  by  grete  Infyrmyte  and  sekenesses  that  were 
oreat  num-    iii  thooste  /  and  by  many  other  causes,  wherof  many  deyed  /  And 
auodied.6"    in  the  place  of  them  cam  none  other  /  But   they  in  the   toun  32 
encreced  and  grewe  euery  day,  ffor  to  them  cam  newe  ayde  &  grete 
refresshementes  of  men  and  vytaylle  that  myght  entre  and  yssue  by 
the  yates  beyng  oute3  of  the  siege. 

How  the  turkes  enforced  them  to  make  merueylleous  36 
engyns  ayenst4  the  owres,  And  of  the  meschyef 

1  Orig.  tonn.  3  Orig.  onte. 

4  Fr.  "encontre  lea  nostrcs,"  against  our  men. 


Ch.  CLXXV.]     The  Turks  make  Engines  of  Defence.  259 

that  they  dyde  to  the  cristen  men  that  dwellyd 
in  the  toun.  ca°  Clxxv° 

m      Oche  were  our  barons  in  grete  payne  for  to  make  &  adresse  the 
4  engynea.     The  mene  peple  payned  them  en  ten  ty  fly  to  seche 

and1  pourchasse  suche  ayde  and  helpe  as  they  myght  /  They  that 
were  in  the  toun  fayned  nothyng,  but  made1  grete  cure  and  grete  ™«J)j*»em 
entente  to  make  other  engyns  ayenst  oures.    they  toke  good  hede  to  ;[»£*• 
8  the  Instrumentes  that  oure  men  made  for  tassaylle   them.     And  "ar, 
they  adressyd  as  good  or  better  to  defende  them  /  ffor  they  had  **•*»*, 
gretter  plente  of  tymbre  within  the  toun  than  they  hadde  that  were  f^a0bfun- 
without.   the  toun  was  moche  wel  garnysshed  of  alle  thynges  that  *»»***. 

1 2  they  neded  to  fore  that  our  peple  cam.    they  had  grete  plente  of 
Cordes,  stones2  wel   fetyced,  and  other  thynges  more  than   they 
neded.    the  cristen   men  of   the  toun  were  more  trauaylled  and  J**  ™? 
charged  with  thyse  werkes  than  ony  other  men.     And  also  they  gffiS^ 

16  were  beten  cruelly,  And  somme  they  slewe.     And  with  alle  thyse  work» 
mesauentures3  Hhey  bare  them  on  honde  that  they  were  tray  tours,4 
and  descouerd  theyr  counseyl  to  theyr  enemyes  /  there  was  none  of 
the  cristen  men  that  durst  goo  vpon  the  walles  /  But  yf  he  were 

20  charged  or  laden  with  stones  or  tymbre,  and  yf  they  had  ony  vytaylles 

in  their  howses  it  was  take  from  them,  in  suche  wyse  that  they  *^reate<^ 
suffred  many  meseases  /  whan  one  had  nede  of  ony  tree5  /  anon 
they  bete  doun  the  hows  of  a  crysten  man  /  for  to  haue  a  lytil 

24  pyece  of  tymbre.  yf  they  taryed  a  lytil  to  come  at  the  hour  assygned, 
anon  they  were  beten  and  hurt  oner  sorowfully.  they  were  brought 
to  so  moch  sorow  /  that  there  were  but  fewe  /  but  they  had  leuer  to 
haue  been  deed  than  a  lyue.    they  durst  in  no  wyse  yssue  out  of 

28  their  howses  without  commaundement. 

6In   this   tyme  arryued  a    shippe  of  Genewys7  atte  piMfiw] 
porte  of  halappe  /  and  how  theyr  messagers  cam 
in  thoost,  and   how   to   the  barons  they  made 
32  theyr  requeste.  Capitulo  /  Clxxvj° 

1  Fr.  "  Mettoient  grant  cure,"  took  great  pains. 
a  Fr.  "pierres  toutes  fetices,"  i.  e.  stones  cut  the  proper  size. 
3  Orig.  mesaueutures. 

*— *  Fr.  "let  mettoient  sus  qu'ilz  estoient  traitrcs,"  they  accused  them  of 
being  traitors. 

8  Vr.ftut,  timber.  7  Fr.  Gcnevois,  Genoese. 

S    2 


conduct  these 
new-comers 
to  the  army 


260  Skirmish  between  the  Turks  and  Christians.     [Ch.  CLXXVI. 

a       T  the  Siege  of     Jerusalem  the  pylgryms  conteyned1  them  as  I 

haue  sayd?  /  Thenne  cam  a  messager  that  brought  tydynges  / 

SomeGenoese  that  somme  shippes  of  the  Genewes1  were  arryued1  atte  porte  of 

ships  arrived  "  * 

at  the  port  of  halappe,  And  moche  requyred  the  barons  of  thoost,  they  that  were  4 
come  in  the  shippes,  that  they  wold  sende  to  them  somme  knyghtes 
for  to  conduyte  them  vnto  thooste.     The  Barons  prayde  therle  of 
tholouse,  whiche  was  most  rychest  of  them  /  that  he  wold  sende 

The  Eari  of    theder  somme  of  his  men  /  he  dyde  that  they  requyred1,  And1  sente  8 

Toulouse  sent  t  i  •>  J        i    J         > 

ome  men  to  a  knyght  of  his  named  wyldemart  Carpynele,  and  delyuerd  to  hym 
new-comers  .xxx.  horsmen  /  and  .L  /  men  a  foote  /  After  that  they  were 
departed  /  the  barons  sayde  to  therle  that  he  had  sente  ouer  fewe 
men,  and1  prayd  hym  that  he  wold  sende  yet  moo ;  he  agreed  wel,  12 
And  sente  Remon  pelet  and  Guyllamme  de  Arsbran  with  .L  / 
horsemen.  But  er  they  had  ouertaken  this  wyldemart  /  whiche 
wente  alway  forth  til  he  was  come  bytwene  Lyde  &  rames  in  the 
playnes  that  ben  there  /  ther  mette  hym  .yj.  C  turkes  on  horsbak  16 
on  the  way  which  ran  vpon  hym  rudely.  At  this  fyrst  recountre  they  slewe 
skirmish        four  of  oure  horsmen,  &  moo  of  them  a  foote  /  vet  our  men  were 

with  the  '    J 

Turks.  not  disconfyted*  /  but  helde  them  to  gydre,  And  warned1  eche  other 

to  doo  well.     In  this  tyme,  whyles  they  fought  to  gydre  /  Thyse  20 
two  knyghtes  that  cam  after,  and  theyr  companye  sawe  this  scar- 
muche,  and  so  moche  hasted  that  they  cam  and  ioyned  with  our 
other  men.     Thenne  began  they  to  doo  wel,  in  such  wise  that  they 
disconfyted  the  turkes  and  put  them  to  flyght,  and  slewe  .ij   C.  24 
turkes  of  them  /  Of  our  men  were  slayn  two  valyaunt  knyghtes,  for 
whom  alle  the  other  were  sory,  that  one  was  named  Gylbert2  de 
treue,  And  that  other  Achart3  de  mountuille.    whan  our  men  had 
thus  disconfyted  the  turkes,  they  cam  to  Iaphe,  where  they  were  28 
receyued  with  moch  grete  ioye.    the  maronners  of  Gene  receyued' 
them  moche  honorably  /  whyles  as  they  soiourned  there,  and  dis- 
charged theyr  shippes  for  to  aduyse  and  ordeyne  how  they  myght 
come  in  the  hooste.     Sodanly  or  ony  man  toke   hede  of  hit,  the  32 
An  Egyptian  nauye  of  them  of  egypte,  whiche  was  more  redy  in  the  porte  of 
peared  in  the  Sklauonye,4  sawe  theyr  tyme  for  to  hurte  our  peple,  cam  to  fore 

harbour.  '       '  .       .  ,  .  ' 

Iaphe.    whan  oure  men  and*  the  genewes  apperceyued*  this  /  hastely 
[5  if.  ii9,  bk.]  they  descended1   to    the  see  /  fyrst  they  5 essayed?  for  to  deffende  36 
them  /  but  they,  whan  they  sawe  that  there  cam  so  moche  peple 
that  they  myght  not  resiste  them,  they  disgarnysshed?  theyr  shyppes 

1  Fr.  Gcncvois,  Genoese.         2  Orig.  de  trene,  bid  Fr.  ' '  de  Treve. " 
3  Fr.  Achart  de  Montmclle.         *  Fr.  Escaloine. 


Ch.  CLXXVII.]     The  Pilgrims  work  diligently  on  the  Engines.         20 1 
as  faste  as  they  myght,  and  bare  away  cordes,  cables  and!  saylles,  The  Geno-se 

J         J  °  *  '  *  dismantled 

and  the  other  takle,  and  bare  it  and  leyde  it  in  the  fortresse.     One  their  ships, 
shippe  of  the  genewes,  whiche  was  goon  for  somme  gayne  vpon  the 

4  see  /  cam  alle  laden  with  grete  gayne  /  and  wold?1  arryued?  at  the 
porte  of  Iaphe  /  but  they  of  the  shippe  knewe  wel  fro  ferre  that  the 
nauye  of  the  turkes  helde  the  porte.  Therfor  they  caste  about  and 
torned  theyr  saylle,  and  wente  to  the  Lyche  /  The  cyte  of  Iaphe 

8  was  thenne  alle  deserte  and  voyde  of  peple,  ffor  the  cytezeyns  of 
the  toun  trusted  not  wel  in  theyr  fortresse  /  Therfor  they  were  goon 
a  litil  byfore  that  our  men  cam,  of  which  it  happed1  that  oure  men 
kepte  nomore  than  the  tour  /  And!  whan  they  sawe  theyr  tyme,  they  then  came 

in  a  body 

12  made  them  redy,  and1  sette  theyr  thynges  all  in  ordonaunce,  and  and  joined 

"  "  "     °  our  army. 

wente  theyr  waye  and  cam  in  to  thoost,  where  they  were  receyued1  They  were 
with  grete  ioye  /  ffor  the  maronners  of  gene  were  moche   good1  ceiveu. 
Carpenters,  &  coude  wel  make  engynes  &  other  Instrumentes  of 
16  warre,  in  suche  wyse  that  syth  they  were  comen  /  the  barons  began 
more   delyuerly,  and  the   better   theyr  enterpryses  to   brynge  to 
an  ende. 

How   alle   the   pylgryms,  eueryche   after   his   estate 
20  payned  them  to  make  thengyns  for  thassault. 

ca°  Clxxvij° 

t        Hey  that  abode  in  thoost  dyde  theyr  power  for  tadresse  their  The  work  on 

•'  j  j       r  t)le  el,g,nes 

engyns  /  ffor  the  due  godefroy,  the  due  of  normawdye,  &  therle  of  »«»*  forward 

o*/        /  o  •/ »  •/     »  vigorously. 

24  fflaundres  had  a  valyaunt  maw  which  was  moch  wise  &  iuste  named 
Gace2  de  veer  /  he  had?  the  charge  for  to  take  hede  to  the  werk- 
men  /  This  man  dyde  do  make  theyr  werkes  Iustly  and1  wel  /  The 
barons  conduyted?  the  men  a  foote  for  to  gadre  to  gydre  the  Roddes 

28  and  bowes  of  trees  for  to  make  witthes  and  pynnes  for  to  couere 
the  engyns,  And!  also  to  hewe  the  grete  tymbre  and*  brynge  it  to 
the  hoost  to  the  werkmen  /  they  toko  the  hydes  of  the  beestes  that 
deyde  and  stretched?  them  vpon  thengynes  for  to  kepe  &  defend e 

32  them  fro  fyre  /  In  this  partye  toward?  the  northest  the  barons  entre-  The  barons 

J        I  xr        J  assail  the 

medled  vygorously,  as  I  haue  sayd,  for  to  assay  lie  fro  the  tour  of  dtyonthe 
the  angle  or  corner  vnto  the  west  gate  /  Tancre  trauayllecf  also 
moche,  and  the  other  knyghtes  that  were  there  lodged  for  taduyse 
36  how  the  cyte  myght  be  wel  assaylled  on  theyr  syde.     On  the  syde 

toward?  the  3south  /  there  was  therle  of  tholouse  and*  his  peple.    he   [3  leanso] 

1  Fr.  vouloit  arriver,  wished  to  knd.        a  Fr.  Gace  dc  Bear,  Lat.  Bcart. 

20 


262  They  set  the  Day  for  the  Assault.     [Ch.  CLXXVIII. 

was  nioost  ryche  of  them  /  and  therfor  he  had  the  moost  peple  that 
wrought.     They  of  Genes  were  drawen  alle  to  hym  /  whiche  had!  a 

Guiiiiam        Capytayn,  a  moche  excellent  werkman  named1  Guylliam1  Ebryac. 

rected  the      he  made  them  to  haste  moche  the  werke,  and!  to  amende  it  /  Thus  4 

work  of  the  '  ' 

Genoese         was  alle  thoost  occupyed!  in  this  werke  four  monethes  all  hool  / 

sailors.  *■  "  ' 

They  had  so  moche  exployted  that  eueryche  of  the  barons  had  doo 
made  right  that  whiche  he  had  begonne  and  entreprysed.  Therfor 
they  counseylled  emonge  them,  &  ordeyned  at  a  day  sett  to  goo  to  8 
thassault  /  But  for  as  moch  as  therle  of  tholouse  and  tancre  had  be 
grete  .Rancour  and!  wrath  /  and  somme  of  the  other  Barons  and! 
knyghtes  that  loued  not  wel  to  gyder  for  dyuerse  reasons  /  The 
The  work  is    barons,  by  the  admonestacion  of  the  bisahops,  wolde  that  of  alle  12 

finished,  and 

aii  querela     debate  shold  be  good  peas  /  and  that  eche  shold  pardone  other  all 

settled.  or/  f 

euyll  wyll  and  talente  /  by  cause  that  our  lord  shold  helpe  them 
the  better  in  doynge  and  accomplysshyng1  his  worke.  And  yf  it 
happed  them  to  dye,  the  surer  myght  they  attende  the  deth.  16 

Of  the  fayr  processions  that  oure  pylgryms  made  to 
thende  that  god  shold  gyue  them  vyctorye  /  and 
how  they  pardonned  eche  other  theyr  mal  talentes 
and  euyll  wylles  /  ca°  .Clxxviij  20 

t       He  daye  was  ordeyned  and  taken  by  comyn  acorde  of  alle, 
that  procession  shold  be  made,  &  the  relyquyes  shold  be  borne 
They  go  in  a  suche  as  were  had!  in  thoost.     They  shold  alle  goo  vnto  the  mount 
hearing  aii     of  Olyuet,  And  they  shold  mayntene  them  this  day  in  fastyng,  In  21 

the  reliques  .  . 

oi  the  army,  repentaunce  of  theyr  synnes  /  and  in  orysons  and?  prayer  vnto  our 
lord  to  thende  that  he  wold  haue  pyte  of  his  peple  /  and  receyue2 
in  gree  theyr  seruyse,  in  suche  wyse  that  by  them  his  herytages 
myght  be  recouerd  fro  the  harcdes  of  his  enemyes  which  helde  it  28 

Peter  the       in  their  possession  /  Peter  theremyte  on  that  one  part,  and  arnold, 

Hermit,  and  '  _  ,  .       .  .    , 

Arnold,  the  chappellayn  of  the  Due  of  Normandye  /  whiche  was  a  grete 
clerk  and  wyse,  of  that  other  parte,  made  the  sermon  to  the  peple. 

preach  to  the  They  exhorted  them  by  swete  wordes  to  enterpryse  vygorously  the  32 
werke  of  oure  lord  /  wherin  it  were  better  to  deye  than  to  lyue.     The 
mount  of  Olyuete  is  ayenst  Iherusalem  in  the  eeste  partye,  about  a 
myle  fer  fro  the  toun  /  ffor  the  vaal  of  Iosaphat  is  bytwene  bothe. 

[3  if.  120,  bk.]  there  assembled  our  lord,  his  discyples,  and  styed  3and  ascended  vp  36 
to  fore  them  alle  in  to  heuen  the  day  of  thassension  /  and  wente  vp 
1  Orig.  GnylliaDi.         -  Fr.  "rcceiist  en  gre  leur  service." 


Ch.  CLXXIX.]     Change  in  the  Position  of  the  Assailers.  .  263 

in  a  clowde  which  toke  hym  /  whan  alle  the  peple  had  ben  there  in  Aiuhjpeopie 
grete  wepynges  and  prayers  /  and  alle  the  debates  appeased  that  v**y- 
were  emong  them  /  they  descended  fro  the  hylle  in  to  the  chirche 
4  of  mount  syon,  whiche  is  by  the  Cyte,  as  I  haue  sayd,  in  the  side 
toward  the  southe  on  the  toppe  of  a  tertre  /  The  sarasyns  of  the 
toun  that  were   in  the  toures  and  vpon  the  walles  of   the  toun, 
merueylled  moche.    what  this  myght  be  that  oure  men  made  there  / 
8  and  where  they  myght  see  the  presse  nygh  to  them  within  shotte. 
They  cessed  not  to  shote  arowes,  and  quarellys  in  suche  wyse  that 
they  hurted   somme.  ^  Thenne   addiessyd   they  crosses  vpon   the  rkM^ 
walles  /  and  in  despyte  of  our  sauyour,  and?  in  reproche  of  oure  g™«Jt«£ 

12  fayth,  spytte  on  them,  and  made  other  shames  and1  fowle  thynges  "£*£* 
whiche  be  not  for  to  be  sayd.     The  people2  of  our  lord,  which 
were  in  holy  wylle  for  to  serue  hym  /  sawe  wel  thise  thynges  that 
the  turkes  made  /  theyr  desyre  grewe  and  encreaced  moche  in  theyr 

]  6  hertes  for  tauenge  the  shame  of  our3  lord  Ihesu  Criste  /  whan  they 
had  made  theyr  orysons  and  prayers  in  the  chirche  of  mount  Syon  / 
The  day  was  to  them  ordeyned  and  named  for  to  make  thassault  by  The  day  is 

J  «• "  set  for  the 

comyn  acorde  /  Thenne  they  retourned  to  theyr  lodgys,  yf  ther  was  assault. 
20  ony  thyng  to  be  made  on  theyr  engyns,  anon  it  was  accomplysshyd  / 
for  euery  man  toke  good  hede  aboute  hym  that  no  thynge  faylled 
that  shold  be  necessarye  to  make  thassault  ayenst  theyr  enemyes. 

How  oure   men   sodenly    transported   in   the   nyght 

24  theyr  engyns  VDto  the  other  part  of  the  toun  for 

tassaylle  on  that  side.  Capitulo  /  Clxxix* 

w      Han  the  day  approched  that  they  had  named  for  tassayle  the 

Cyte  /  the  nyght  to  fore,  the  valyaunt  due  godeffroy,  the  erle  ™« "'s1* 

28  of  fnaundres  /  and  the  due  of  normandye  sawe  that  this  partye  ta»der»°™||i 

of  the  Cyte  that  they  had  assieged  was  moche  wel  garnysshed  of  thepian of 
alle  maner  of  engyns,  and  4the  moost  defensable  men4  of  the  Cyte 
they  had  sette  there.     Therfore  they  doubted  more  this  part,  than 

32  ony  other  /  The  noble  men  had  herupon  counseyll  /  They  knewe 
wel  that  they  myght  not  endomraage  the  toun  there.  And  enter- 
prysed  a  thynge  of  a  right  grete  arfayre  and  of  moche  grete  trauaylle  / 
for  alle  thengynes  that  they  had  by  them,  And  the  castel  to  fore 

1  Orig.  aud.  2  Orig.  peole.  3  Orig.  onr. 

4_4  Yt.  "les  hommes  les  phts  dcfcnsablcs,"  their  most  capable  men.     Lat. 

viris  fortibus. 


264  Astonishment  of  the  Turks.     [Ch.  CLXXIX. 

[i  leaf  121}    the  sydes  were  Ioyned*  to  gydre,  they  bare  l  them  alle.     On  that 

their^ifines  other  syde  whiche  is  bytwene  the  gate  of  seynt  Stephen  &  the  tour 

east 'side,   '    of  thawgle  /  that  is  toward  the  northeest  /  ffor  them  semed  &  it  was 

not  so  weii     trouthe,  that  by  cause  that  the  cyte  had  not  be  assieged  on  that  4 

syde  that  ther  ahold!  be  the  lasse  defence  /  wherof  it  happed?  that 

they  woke  al  the  nyght  as  wel  they  as  theyr  peple,  in  suche  wyse 

that  theyr  engyns  were  alle  ioyned  and  reysed  vp  byfore  day  or  er 

They  draw     the  sonne  aroos,  in  the  places  where  they  ought  to  be.     The  castel  8 

up  a  great 

castle  to  the  was  so  approuched  the  walle  /  and  was  moche  hyer,  in  so  moche  that 
they  that  were  therin  were  almoost  as  hye  as  one  of  the  toures  /  and 
knowe  ye  for  certayn  /  that  this  was  noo  lytil  trauaylle,  ffor  fro  this 
place  where  they  were  fyrst  lodged?  vnto  the  place  where  they  sette  12 
theyr  engyns  was  nygh  half  a  myle.  And*  the  thynges  were  so  wel 
and  so  hooly  ordeyned,  that  to  fore  the  sonne  rysyng  all  thyng  was 
redy  at  them,  on  the  mornyng  the  turkes  byhelde  on  the  walles 
The  Turks  and?  toures,  And  merueylled  what  this  myght  be  that  our  men  so  16 
nishedin  the  trauaylled  all  the  nyght  /  they  sawe  that  the  lodgys  of  the  Due  and? 

morning  at 

this  change,   of  the  other  barons  aboute  hym  were  remeuyd.    -They  sought  them 

about  that  other  side  of  the  toun,  And  founde2  them  there,  where 

as  they  had  sette  no  garde,    whan  they  sawe  thengyns  and  the  castel  20 

dressy d  /  they  merueylled  ouer  moche,  how  they  mjght  doo  this 

werke  in  so  lytil  tyme.   ffor  this  cause  they  doubted  moche  the  more 

them  that  had'  thus  enterprysed?  and1  accomplysshed?  so  sodeynly  in 

the  nyght  about  that  syde  of  the  toun  /  the  barons  that  were  lodged1  24 

Each  of  the    as  ye  haue  herd1  to  fore  /  were  not  ydle,  but  reysed*  theyr  engyns 

brought  his    eueryche  in  his  parte  /  And  therle  of  tholouse  had  made  tapproche 

near  the        the  walles  a  castel  that  he  had  made  with  moche  grete  trauaylle 

bytwene  the  chirche  of  mount  Syon  and1  the  Cyte  /  the  other  28 
that  were  nyghe  the  corner,  whiche  is  called  the  tour  of  tancre, 
redressyd?  a  castel  of  tree  moche  hye.  Thyse  thre  castellys  that 
were  about  the  toun  were  nyhe  alle  of  one  facion,  ffor  they  were 
alle  square  /  the  sydes  that  were  toward1  the  toun  were  double  /  in  32 
suche  wyse  that  one  of  the  panes3  that  was  without  /  myght  be 
aualed  vpon  the  walles,  and  thenne  it  sholct  be  lyke  a  brydge. 
But  for  alle  that  the  side  was  not  vnclosed  ne  discouerd?,  But  it  was 
hool  for  to  deffende  them  that  were  in  the  castel.  36 

2  Orig.  fonnde.  3  Lat.  lotus. 


Ch.  CLXXX.]     The  Christians  commence  the  Assault.  265 

How  the  day  folowyng  our  peple  made  a  nierueyllous1 
assault,  And  how  the  turkes  defended  them  sub- 
tylly  and  wel.  Capitulo  Clxxx0. 

4  2t      He  daye  begonne  strongly  to  wexe  clere  /  Thenne,  as  it  was  p  if.  121,  bk.] 
enterprysed  and  deuysed,  our  men  were  alle  armed  for  tap-  oHrm^n'^ere 
proche  the  walles.     They  alle  were  and  had  one  purpoos.     That  is  assault, 
to  wete,3  or  they  wolde  take  the  toun  vpon  thenemyes  of  our  lord, 
8  And  delyuer  the  ordures  of  the  mescreauntes  fro  the  holy  places,  or 
ellys  in  this  seruyse  they  wold  rendre  theyr  sowles  to  hym  that 
made  them.     Ther  were  none  that  had  wylle  to  drawe  aback  fro 
this  werke  /  the  old  men  forgate  theyr  age  /  the  seke  men  theyr  The  old  men, 
12  maladyes,  the  wyues  and  childeren  enterprvsed  in  theyr  hertes*  to  even  the  wo- 

men  and  ehil- 

doo  grete   thynges.     Alle  generally  payned  them  to  drawe  forth  dren  were  an 
the  castelles,  to  ioyne  them  to  the  walles  in  suche  wyse  that  they 
myght  approche  them  that  defended  it ;   they  of  the  toun  cessyd 

16  not  to  drawe  and  shote  Incessantly  grete  plenty  of  arowes  and 
quarellys,  5And  with  theyr  engyns  caste  grete  stones  /  the  moyen 
peple  with  theyr  handis6  threwe  fro  the  walles  and  towres  /  their 
entente  was  therwith   to  make  oure  men  to  withdrawen  fro  the 

20  walles  /  The  good  cristen  men  that  doubted  nothyng  to  deye  couerd 
them  with  targes  &  sheldes  /  thise  &  other  habyllemews  they  sette 
to  fore  them,  for  to  kepe  them  fro  the  stones  &  shotte.     they  that  Those  within 

1  the  wooden 

were  within  the  castellis  of  tree  lefte  not  to  shote  &  caste  stones  « 'ties  »h«.t 

at  the  Turks 

24  vpora  the  turkes   Incessantly.      And  other  had  grete  leuers  and  incessantly. 
plente  of  ropes  and  Cordes  with  whiche  they  laboured  and  payned 
them  to  drawe  forth  the  castellys  /  they  that  were  put  for  to  throwe 
the  stones  and  to  occupye  thengyns  were  not  ydle,  but  had  theyr 

28  thynges  wel  adressyd,  and  threwe  to  them  that  defended  the  toun 
grete  stones  moche  asprely,  and  trauaylled  moche  for  to  do  thynge 
that  myght  greue  their  enemyes  /  But  they  that  wold  haue  put  On  account 
forth  the  castellys  myght  not  doo  that  they  wold :  for  ther  was  a  aitch  they 

J  J  o  j  could  not  get 

32  dych  moche  depe  to  fore  the  barbycane,  ffor  whiche  they  myght  not  ^"^[J0 
make  theyr  engyns  ioyne  to  the  walles.     the  strokes  of  the  stones6 
that  were  throwen  on  the  walles  dyde  not  moche  harme  to  the  walles 
of  the  cyte,  ffor  the  turkes  had  sackes  ful  of  heye  &  of  coton,  And 

1  Orig.  memeyllons.  3  Grig.  wcte.  *  Orig.  lertes. 

6—5  Fr.  "  Irs  grosses  pierres  jettoient  a  Uurs  engins,  les  memoes  ct  maniabks 
aiuc  mains,"  viz.,  they  threw  the  large  stones  with  their  engines,  the  smaller 
and  more  easily  handled  stones,  with  their  hands.  6  Orig.  stones  of. 

2  c  * 


266 


JVhich  lasted  until  Nightfall     [Ch.  CLXXXI. 


The  Turks 
protected 

themselves 
well. 


[2  leaf  122] 

The  assault 
lasted  from 
morning  to 
evening  time. 


grete  peces  of  tymbre  bounden  with  cables  of  shippes,  whiche  henge 
a  longe  by  the  walles  and*  towres  /  in  suche  wyse  that  whan  the 
stones  of  thengyns  smote  thyse  softe  thynges  /  the  strokes  were  lost 
and  made  no  hurte  to  the  walles.     On  that  other  syde  the  turkes  4 
within  the  toun  had?  moo  engyns  adressyd*  than  we  had  without  / 
&  more  quantite  of  other  artyllerye,  of  Arbalestres  withoute1  com- 
paryson  that  we  hadde  /  by  whiche  they  slewe  many  of  the  pil- 
grims, &  it  myght  not  be  but  that  our  peple  were  2sore  aferd.  8 
Thus  was  thassault  moche  grete  &  peryllous  fro  the  mornyng  vnto 
euensong  tyme  /  and  duryng  thassault  it  cessed  neuer  of  Arowes 
and!  stones  fleynge  more  thycke,  than  was  in  a  /  M.  yere  to  fore  / 
There  were  so  many  that  ofte  the  stones  mette  &  hytte  eche  other  12 
in  thayer  /  in  suche  wyse  that  they  brak  and1  flewe  in  pyeces. 
Thassault  was  in  thre  places.     And  the  barons  payned  them  sore  to 
greue  the  turkes  /  men  myght  not  wel  knowe  whiche  partye  had 
the  better  /  Oure  pylgryms  were  put  to  grete  payne  to  bere  erthe  16 
for  to  fyll  the  dyche,  to  thende  that  the  castellys  myght  ioyne  to 
the  walles  /  They  within  threwe  fyre  moche   thycke   in  to  the 
castellys  /  men  myght  see  many  arowes  brennyng,3  brondes,  pottes 
ful  of  sulphre  /  of  oylle  /  and  other  thynges,  nourysshyng  to  fyre.  20 
4 The  stones  to  brak  that  the  pyeces  flewe  thurgh  out  the  sydes  /4 
And*  it  myght  not  be  but  that  many  were  hurte  that  were  abone  for 
tassaylle  /  hyt  semedf  many  tymes  that  alle  shold*  falle  to  the 
ground,    but  our  men  quenchyd*  the  fyre  with  water  and  vyneger  /  24 
and  had1  redy  pynnes  for  to  stoppe  the  holes  /  and1  also  for  to  holde 
to  gydre  theyr  castellys  moche  Iustely,  in  suche  wyse  that  theyr 
contenaunces  were  in  alle  thynges  good  and  hardy. 

The  nyght  departed  the  sayd  assault,  Our  peple  with-  28 
drewe  them  /  and  how  they  watched  wel  theyr  en- 
gyns /  and  the  turkes  the  toun  /  Capitulo  Clxxxj° 

t        His  grete  assault  &  peryllo?^,  that  so  long  endured*  the  derk 

nyght  departed.     Our  men  retorned  to  theyr  lodgys  for  to  ete  32 
and*  reste,  they  lefte  grete  watche  aboute  theyr  engyns  /  by  cause 
the  turkes  shold  not  brenne  them,  and  they  of  the  toun  made  grete 

people  lelt  a  '  J  D 

wails-"  the  watche  to  kepe  theyr  walles,  ffor  they  /  doubted*  moche  that  oure 

peple,  whom  they  had*  seen  so  vygorously  assaylle  /  and*  defende  36 

1  Orig.  wtthoute.  3  Orig.  brennyug. 

4—4  Fr.  "  leurs  portieres  yfrappoient  si  grans  coups  quclles  s 'envoloicnt  par 
my  lis  costcs  oitltre. " 


Those  within 
threw  fire 
and  burning 
oil  on  our 
men. 


who  quench- 
ed the  fires 
with  water 
and  vinegar. 


Our  men 
relumed  to 
camp  to  eat 

and  rest. 
The  towns- 


Ch.  CLXXXII.]     In  tlve  Morning  they  recommence.  2G7 

them,  myght  by  nyght  come  vp  on  the  walles  by  laddres  and  entre 
in  to  the  toun.     Therfor  they  peyned  them  to  make  good  watche 
alle  this  nyght  /  and  to  goo  round  about  the  walles  and  serche  the 
4  towres  /  The  stretes  also  made  watche  within  the  toun  with  grete  also  in  the 

'  street*,  lor 

nonibre  of  people,  by  cause  of  fere  of  trayson.  They  sette  heron1  haxottn* 
grete  entente,  ffor  it  was  for  the  sauacion  of  theyr  lyues  /  theyr 
wyues,  theyr  childeren,  &  alle  theyr  goodes  hoolly.  Our  peple  that 
8  were  in  the  tentes  and  in  the  lodgys  had  not  theyr  hertes  in  reste, 
but  they  remembryd1  of  thassault  that  had1  be  /  Euery  man  2remem-  pif.122,  bk.j 
bryd  hym  what  he  had1  don,  And  hym  semed  that  he  had"  left 
many  thynges  vndon  that  he  ought  to  haue  don.     And   moche 

12  desired  they  alle  to  come  to  the  poynt  for  to  doo  prowesse.  the 
daye  taryed  long  er  it  cam  as  they  thought  /  them  seined?  that  they 
had  no  greef  ne  ennoye  of  the  trauaylle  that  they  had  suffred  that 
day.    They  had!  grete  hope  in  theyr  hertes  /  that  assone  as  they  The  pilgrims 

16  shold  come  agayn  to  gydre  for  tassaylle,  that  they  by  the  helpe  of  hopes  that 
our  lord  they  shold   haue   the  better.      And   they  were  in  grete  they  would 

•>  "  "  be  Buccesslul. 

anguysshe  /  by  cause  them  semed  to  be  in  more  mesease  in  their 
lodgys  than  in  thassault. 

20  How  our  peple  retomed  agayn  on  the  morn  to  thas- 
sault /  And  of  the  sorceryes3  that  they  wold  haue 
charmed  one  of  our  engyns.         Capitulo  Clxxxij° 

t        He  sprynge  of  the  daye  appiered,  the  peple  Incontinent  were 
24  awaked.     Eche  wente  to  the  place  where  he  had*  ben  the  daye  At  daybreak 

1  rrn  .  every  one  was 

to  fore  /  Thenne  sholde  ye  haue  seen  somme  renne  to  thengynes  in  his  place 
and1  other  goo   vpon   the   castellys  for  to  shote  with  bowes  and? 
arabalestres.     And1  many  abode  vnder  for  to  drawe  the  sayd  cas- 

28  tellys  forth.  Nowe  were  they  of  the  toun  anon  redy  for  to  defende 
vygorously  ayenst  the  assayllers.  There  deyed  ynowgh  on  bothe 
sydes  as  wel  of  stones  as  of  quarellys  /  but  not  for  that,  the  other 
lefte  not  /.  but  gretely  they  dyde   theyr  deuoyr  /  ne  neuer  was  never  was 

32  fouftden  lasse   cowardyse  in  so   peryllous  afrayre  &  werke.     One  cowardice  in 

J  r      J  J  so  perilous  a 

thynge  happed  that  ought  not  to  be  forgoten  /  that  is,  that  our  men  work- 
had  an  Instrument  called  Caable,  so  strong  and4  so  wel  made  that 
5it  threwe  thre  grete  stones  attones.5     And  dyde  moche  hurte  in 

1  Orig.  beron.         3  Ft.  sorcibres,  Sorcerers,  witches  :  not  "sorceries." 
*  Orig.  and. 

5-5  Fr.  "elle  getoit  Crop  grosses  pierrcs,"  it  threw  venj  large  stones  instead 
of  three  large  stones. 


268  Our  Men  grow  weary.     [Ch.  CLXXXIII. 

the  toun  where  it  atteyned.    the  turkes  sawe  wel  that  they  coude 
not  breke  it  /  ffor  it  threwe  fro  so  ferre  that  their  engins  myght  not 
The  Turks     come  ther  to  /  therfor  they  dyde  do  come  vpon  the  walles  .ij.  old' 
old  witdies     wytches  or  enchaunteresses,  whiche  shold  charme  this  engyne  /  and  4 

and  tli ice  ,         ,      -  _       . 

maidens  to     they  hac?  with  them  in  maydens,  for  to  helpe  to  make  theyr  charme  / 

charm  the  .  ' 

engines  ot      Alle  they  of  oure  hooste  behelde  them  moche  ententyfly  /  ffor  they 

our  men.  •'  _  J     J    I  J 

made  their  enchautenie/it  vpon  the  walles  /  they  abode  so  longe 
our  men        there  that  thengyne  threwe  the  stones  /  &  atteyned  the  two  old  8 

threw  stones  . 

and  killed      wytches  and?  the  thre  maydens  in  such  wise  that  they  were  smeton 

the  three  i 

maidens.  alle  to  pyeces,  and  fyl  doun  deed  fro  the  walles,  of  whom  the  sowles 
wente  forthe  to  helle.  Thenne  oure  peple  made  an  hu  and1  a  crye 
[*  leaf  123]  so  grete  /  And?1  2so  grete  ioye  therof  /  that  euery  man  of  them  was  12 
refresshyd?  of  this  good?  strook  /  They  of  the  toun  were  ouer  sorow- 
full  and?  moche  abasshed,  in  suche  wyse  that  they  semed3  that  they 
had?  loste  alle  theyr  good?  ewr  and?  fortune  for  the  losse  of  thyse  two 
wytches  that  thus  were  slayn.  16 

Of  the  despayr  of  our  peple  at  the  sayd  assault.  And 
how  they  were  recomforted  by  a  knyght  vn- 
knowen,  and  euydent  myracles. 

Capitulo  /  Clxxxiij°  20 

i        N  this  poynt  endured?  thassault  vnto  after  myddaye  /  that  men 
our  men  knewe  not  whiche  of  them  had  the  better  /  Our  men  began  to 

weary,  wexe  wery  /  4  And*  thassault  tourned?  them  to  annoye  and?  grief  /  ffor 

they  had?  longe  don  alle  theyr  power  /  And  the  werke  was  not  24 
moche  amended,  but  were  falle  in  a  desperaunce  /  in  suche  wyse 
that  they  had  talente  to  leue  the  castell  of  tree,  whiche  was  nygh  al 
to  broken  of  the  stones  and  shotte  /  and  wolde  drawe  abak  the 
and  their       other  engyns  that  smoked'  of  the  fyere  that  the  turkes  had'  caste  28 
smoking        therin,  therfore5  wold?  they  prolonge  thassault  til  on  the  morn  / 


with  fire. 


And  herof  to  doo  thus  they  had  good'  wylle.     6 Theyr  enemyes  ap- 
perceyued?  this  /  that  they  lefte  thassault6  thus,  &  were  reysed?  in 

1  eurent,  had,  omitted.  3  Orig.  seed. 

4  Fr.  "ct  leur  torna  V affaire  d  ennui,"  and  the  affair  began  to  annoy 
them. — This  is  a  good  sample  of  Caxton's  "literal"  translations. 

5  Orig.  herfore. 

6—6  Fr.  "  leurs  enncmis  s'estoient  aperceuz  qu'ilz  se  lassoient  moult  chiere- 
ment"  i.  e.  their  enemies  perceived  that  they  were  becoming  seriously  tried. 
Caxton  has  mistaken  sc  lassoient  (were  becoming  fatigued),  for  laissoimt  (were 
leaving). 


Ch.  CLXXXIII.]     A  wonder/id  Miracle  encourages  Hum.  269 

to  grete  pryde.     They  mocqued  oure  peple,  &  sayd  to  them  many  The  Turk* 
fowle  and  shamcfull  wordes,  and1  more  asprely  defended  them  self  /  with  turn 

words. 

and!  hurted!  thengyns.     In  moche  feble  poynt  wa,s  the  conduyt  of 
4  oure  pylgryms.     And  yf  ne  had!  he  the  debonayrte  of  oure  lord1  / 
whiche  by  myracle  comforted*  them,  like  as  ye  shal  here,  ffro  the 
mount1  of  olyuet  appiered  a  knyht  whiche  was  not  knowen  ne  At  this 

moment  a 

neuer  myght  be  founden.     This  knvght  began  to  shake  and  meue  knJgbi  ap- 

JO  J  °  °  penred  on 

8  his  shelde,  whiche   was   moche   cleer  and  shynyng1.     And!  made  the  Mt.  of 

J     J     °  Olivet  snak- 

signe  to  our  peple  that  they  shold  now  retorne,2  and1  come  agayne  »*% ■»Wni"8 
to  thassault  /  The  Due  godeffroy  was  in  his  estage  of  the  castel, 
And  eustace  his  broder  with  hym,  for  to  deuyse  and  ordeyne  there 

12  that  ought  be  don,  &  to  kepe  that  holde  whiche  moch  was  good,  as3 
sone  as  he  sawe  this  signe  that  this  knyght  made,  he  began  to  call 
all  thet  peple  agayn  with  a  moch  hye  voys,  &  cryed  &  affermed  that 
yf  they  wold  retorne  the  toun  shold  be  taken  /  herof  it  happed  that 

16  by  the  debonayrte  of  oure  lord!,  whiche  put  in  the  hertes  hardy- 

nesse  /  In  suche  wyse  that  they  cam  agayn  with  so  grete  ioye,  Our  men  mm 

took  heart, 

as  that  euery  man  had?  be  in  certayne  of  the  vyctorye.     So  grete  and  renewed 
4hardyne8  was  come  in  to  their  hertes  /  that  they  wrere  entierly  [*ir.iss,bk.] 

20  refresshyd  /  as  they  that  in  al  that  day  had  sulfred  no  trauaylle  / 
and!  one  thyng  happed  whiche  was  grete  meruaylle  /  ffor  they  that 
were  hurte  peryllously  /  and5  laye  in  theyr  beddes  /  sprange  vp 
anon  and  reprysed!  theyr  harnoys  and!  armes  in  suche  wyse  that 

2  4  more  dylygently  and  of  greter  herte  than  the  other  /  [they]  began  to 

assaylle.     The  Barons  of  thoost  that  were  Capytayns  of  the  people  The  great 

I  o  l   Dar0,,s  ex' 

for  to  gyue  ensa?nple  to  other  men  /  put  them  self  alway  to  fore  /  posed  tfaem- 
where  the  grettest  daurcgiers  were  /  were  founden  the  moost  hye  iiint'y t0  th« 

°  °  '  J      greatest 

28  men  of  thoost  /  by  whiche  the  mene  peple  were  the  more  hardy  /  Immsw* 
The  wymmen  that  myght  here  no  armes  ran  with  theyr  pottes  ful  of 
water  thurgh  thoost  /  and  gaf  to  all  them  that  were  wery  of  assayl- 
lyng  to  drynke  /  And  moche  admonested  them  by  fayr  wordes  for 

32  to  doo  wel  /  And  to  serue  our  lord  vygorously.     Oure  pylgryms  hai? 

so  grete  ioye  in  theyr  hertes  that  they  laboured  and  toke  the  werke  The  men 

°  J  J  J  worked  so 

so  hertely,  that  within  the6  space  of  half  an  hour  they  fylled  the  diligently 

*"  l  J      J  that  in  half- 

dyche.  And  a  barbycan,  whiche  was  moche  stronge  /  in  suche  wyse  d,!'*,u"ur  lhe 
36  that  they  brought  the  castel  vnto  the  walle.7     The  turkes  of  the  filled- 
toun  had  ha?*ged,  as  I  haue  sayd,  with  cordes  long  pyeces  of  tymbre 

1  Orig.  mount.         2  Orig.  retorue.         3  Orig.  a5.         5  Orig.  and. 

6  Fr.  "  Vespace  d'une  heure,"  within  the  space  of  an  hour. 

7  Fr.  "  Et  avoicnt  prinse,"  omitted  by  Caxton  in  translating. 


270 


They  continue  vigorously.     [Ch.  CLXXXIV. 


Two  great 
pieces  of 
timber  were 
cut  down 
from  the 
wails, 


which  our 
men  used  to 
strengthen 
their  castle. 


a  long  the  wall  for  to  receyue  the  strokes  of  the  stones  /  Emong  all 
other  there  were  two  grete  pyeces  of  tymbre  moche  longe,  of  whiche 
our  men  that  were  in  the  castel  cutte  the  cordes  in  suche  wyse  that 
they  fylle  to  the  ground.  They  that  were  vnder  toke  them  with  4 
grete  perylle  /  and!  drewe  them  ner  the  castel  for  to  helpe  to  staye 
and  sette  vnder  the  brydge  of  the  castel  whan  it  shold  be  aualed  / 
ffor  the  side  of  the  castel  that  shold  be  lete  falle  vpon  the  walle  / 
was  of  feble  tymbre  /  in  suche  wyse  /  that  yf  thyse  two  pyeces  of  8 
tymbre  had1  not  be  /  the  men  of  Armes  mocht  not  haue  passed 
on  it. 


On  the  other 
side,  the  Enrl 
of  Toulouse 


had  brought 
his  castle  up 
to  the  wall. 

[3  leaf  124] 


The  Chris- 
tians fought 
with  great 
boldness  and 
hardiness, 


in  the  hope 
that  our  Lord 
would  help 
His  soldiers. 


How  therle  of  tholouse  assaylled  vygorously  toward 
the  south  &  of  thardauwt  desire  that  eche  man  12 
had  to  doo  wel.  ca°  C  lxxxiiij. 

Hyles  as  they  conteyned  them  thus  vygorously  in  the  partye 
w      toward  the  northeest  /  the  erle  of  tholouse  and  the  other  that 

were  with  hym  on  the  side  toward  the  south  assaylled  there  16 
with  grete  strengthe :  they  had  fylled  a  dyche,  in  whiche  they  had 
laboured,  I  wote  not  how  many  dayes,  in  suche  wyse  that  by  force 
they1  had!  drawen  theyr  castel,  so  ferre  forth  that  it  was  nyghe  the 
walle  /  In  suche  wyse  that  they  that  were  aboue2  in  the  last  stage,3  20 
myght  smyte  the  turkes  with  their  glaues  that  defended  the  tour. 
A  man  coude  not  thynke.thardaunt  desyre,  ne  so  grete  anguysshe 
as  eueryche*  of  the  cristen  men  had  in  his  herte  for  to  do  wel  in 
this  assault  /  one  thinge  there  was  that  gaf  to  tliem  moche  grete  24 
courage  /  And!  merueyllously  grete  hardynesse  /  ffor  a  man  that  was 
an  heremyte  on  the  mount  of  olyuete  had  promysed  to  them  moche 
certaynly  /  that  that  same  daye  shold  be  taken  the  holy  cyte  of 
Iherusalem.     Ne  they  had  not  forgoten  the  demonstraunce  that  the  28 
knyght  made  to  them  /  whan  he  shoke  his  shelde,  ne  nauer  after 
was  seen,  they  had  moch  hope  of  the  vyctorye  by  thise  signefy- 
aunces  that  were  shewed  to  them.     It  semed  that  thassaultes  were 
bothe  in  one  poynt  in  eyther  syde  that  I  haue  named.     They  dyde  32 
bothe  right  wel  /  And  certaynly  it  appeered  wel  that  oure  lord  wold 
helpe  his  souldyours,  and   brynge  theyr  pylgremage  to  an  ende, 
whiche  so  longe  had  suffred  so  many  maners  of  mesease  for  to  doo 
to  hym  seruyse.  36 

1  Orig.  that  they.        2  Fr.  "au  derrcnicr  cstage,"  on  the  top  story. 
4  Orig.  eneryche. 


Ch.  CLXXXV.]     Godfrey  and  Eustachc  enter  Jerusalem.  271 

Of  the  pryse  and  takynge  of  Iherusalem  /  And  how 
the  Due  godeffroy  entred  fyrst  vpon  the  walles. 
And  who  folowed  after.  Capitulo  Clxxxv0 

4  t       He  people  of  the  due  godefroy  and  the  other  barons  whiche 
were  with  hyni,  as  I  haue  sayd,  fought  moche  asprely  ayenst 
theyr  enemyes  on  theyr  syde  /  &  delyuerd  to  them  a  moch  mar- 
uevllous   assault.     They  had   don  so   moche  that  theyr   enemyes  The  Turk* 

J  ■»  began  to  «  hx 

8  wexed  wery  /  and*  weryly  and  slowly  defended  them  /  xOure  men  "■gfgj** 
were  drawen  forth,  and  the  dyches  fylled,  the  barbycans  taken,  and!  m1»* «u.wiy. 
in  suche  wyse  they  cam  playn  to  the  walles  /  Ifor  they  within 
entremeted  not  moche,  but  launched  and  shotte  vpon  the  walles1  / 

12  The  due  commaunded  to  his  peple  that  were  vpon  the  castel,  that  T'^uke^ 
they  sette  fire  in  the  pokes  of  coton  &  in  the  sackes  of  heye  that  J^J**1 
henge  on  the  walles  /  They  dyde  his  commaundement  /  thenne  $£%£?* 
aroos  a  smoke  so  blacke  and  so  thycke  that  they  myght  nothynge 

16  see.     The  wynde  was  northeeste,  and  blewe  vpon  the  Turkes  that 
were  at  defence  vpon  the  walles,  in  suche  wyse  that  they  myght  not 
opene  theyr  eyen  ne  theyr  mowthes,  But  by  force  they  muste  ££*£*£, 
avoyde  the  place  that  was  delyuerd  to  them  to  deffende  /  The  withdraw. 

20  valyaunt  Due  Godeffroye,  whiche2  soynously  entended  to  the  werke, 
apperceyued  first  that  they  were  departed  /  the?me  he  commaunded 
that  they  shold  drawe  diligently  the  .ij/  pyeces  of  tymbre  that  were 
fallew  fro  the  wall  /  as  ye  haue  herd  to  fore  /  this  was  don  anon,  in 

24  suche  wyse  that  the  two  endes  of  the  two  trees  were  leyd  vpon  the 

3 castel,  And  the  two  other  endes  vpon  the  walle  /  Thenne  com- p  if.  is*,  bkj 
maunded  that  the  syde  of  the  castel  that  myght  be  late  doun  /  Godfrey  now 
shold  be  late  doun  vpon  the  two  pyeces  of  tymbre  /  And  thus  was  ^Jg0"1" 

28  the  brydge   made   good   and   strong   vpon   the   tymbre   of  theyr 

enemyes  /  The  fyrst  that  entred  and  passed  by  the  brydge  vpon  mdpMwd 
the  walles  was  the  Due  Godeffroy  of  boloyne  /  and  Eustace  his  waiu.  g- 
brother  with  hym.     After  thyse  tweyne  cam  two  other  knyghtes  /  g^£hta 

32  that  were  also  bretheren,  whiche  also  were  fyers,  noble  &  hardy. 
That  one  was  named  lutol,  and  that  other  gylbert.  They  were 
borne  in  tornay  /  Anon  ther  siewed  them  grete  nombre  of  knyghtes 

1—1  Fr.  "  li  nostre  s'estment  tirez  avant,  les  fosscz  aroicTit  empliz,  les  barbc- 
cancs  prises,  si  que  de  plein  venoicnt  aus  murs ;  car  ceulx  dedans  ne  s'entrc- 
mcttoient  mais  guaires  de  traire,  ne  de  lancer  par  dessus  les  murs,  ne  par  les 
archiercs."  The  last  part  of  this  sentence,  Caxton  has  thoroughly  misunder- 
stood, and  has  completely  inverted  the  sense.  "  Fr.  soi'jncuscmcnt. 


272  All  the  others  follow.      [Ch.  CLXXXVI. 

and  of  peple  a  foote,  whiche  ranne  moche  thycke,  as  moche  as  they 
myght  susteyne  /  Anon  the  turkes  apperceyued  that  our  men  were 
entred  in  to  the  toun,  and!  sawe  the  haner  of  the  due  vpon  the 
The  Turks      wallys.  And  were  disconfyted  and  gaf  ouer  the  toures,  and  descended  4 

yielded  the       .  ... 

towers.  in  to  the  toun,  and*  put  them  in  to  the  strayt  and1  narowe  stretes  for 
to  defende  them  /  Oure  peple  sawe  that  the  due  and  grete  partye  of 
the  knyghtes  were  now  entred  /  and*  that  they  had  taken  I  wote 

The  Knights  not  how  many  towres  /  they  abode  no  commaun dement,  hut  adressyd1  8 

mount  the        ,     ,,  ,  «  »  T  ,     ,  , 

waiis,  with-    laddres  to  the  walles  ana  wente  vp.     It  was  eommaunded  a  good 

out  waiting  . . 

further  whyle  to  fore  that  euery  lj  knyghtes  shold  haue  a  laddre,  Therfor 

ther  were  grete  nombre  in  thoost  whiche  anon  were  adressyd1  vp. 

The  due  ranne  moche  dyly gently  vpon  the  walles  /  and1  sette  the  12 

peple  as  they  cam  in  the  towres.     he  moche  hasted  for  to  take  the 

aii  the  great  fortresse.     Anon,  after  that  the  due  was  entred,  entred  in  the  due 

ed  the  city,     of  Normandye,  Therle  of  fflaundres  /  Tancre-  the  valyaunt,  Therle  of 

seynt  poul  /  Bawdyn  deltors,2  Gace  de  barce3  /  Gaste  de  bedyers,  16 
Thomas  de  fere  /  Gyralt  de  Roussylon  /  Lowys  de  Monco  /  Conam 
lybres  /  Therle  Remboult  of  Orenge,  Conain  de  Montagu,  Lambert 
his  sone,  and  many  other  knyghtes  whiche  I  can  not  name  /  whan 
the  valyaunt  Due  knewe  certaynly  that  they  were  in  the  toun  /  he  20 
called  them,  and  eommaunded  that  they  shold  goo  hastely  to  the 
yate,  named  the  yate  of  seynt  Stephen  /  And  that  they  shold  opene 
and  the  gates  it  /  whan  it  was  opeu  /  Alle  the  people  cam  in  with  moche  grete 
everybody:     prees,  In  suche  wyse  that  there  abode  but  fewe  without e  /  But  alle  24 
this  happened  were  comen  within  the  toun  /.This  was  vpon  a  frydaye,  aboute 
about  noon.    None  /  It  is  a  thynge  for  to  be  beleuyd,  that  oure  lord  dyde  this  by 
grete  sygnefyaunce,  ffor  on  this  daye  and4  about  that  hour  suffred 
he  deth  on  the  crosse  right  cruel  in  the  same  place,  for  the  Redemp-  28 
cion  of  man.     Therfore  wold  the  swete  lord  that  the  peple  of  his 
[s  ieafi25]    trewe  pylgryms  shold  5gete6  this  toun,7  and  delyuer  it  oute  of  the 
seruage  and  thraldom  of  the  hethen  men,  and  make  it  free  vnto 
Cristen  men,  that  his  seruyse  myght  be  had  therin  and  encreced.       32 

Of  the  mayntenyng  of  our  peple  entred  in  to  the 
toun  toward  the  northeest  /  And  therle  of  tho- 
louse,  herof  alle  ygnorant,  assaylled  alle  way  / 

ca°  Clxxxvj0  36 

1  Fr.  drecids,  i.  e.  set  up.  3  Fr.  Baudoin  de  Ultorc. 

3  Fr.  Gastes  de  Bcarz.  i  Orig.  aud*. 

6  Fr.  "A  cejour,"  on  this  day,  omitted.  7  Orig.  tonn. 


Ch.  CLXXXVL]     The  Slaughter  is  terrible.  273 

t        He  valyaunt  due  godeffroy  of  buyllon  /  the  knyghtes,  and  the 
other  men  of  amies  that  were  with  hym,  descended  fro  the 
walles  all  armed  in  to  the  toun  /  They  wente  to  gydre  thurgh  the 
4  stretes  with  their  swerdes  in  their  handes,  &  glayues,  alle  them  that  ah  thein- 

°     *  habitant*  nre 

they  mette  they  slewe  &  smote  right  doun,  men,  wymmen  and  BU»ght*reu 
childeren,  sparyng  none.  There  myght  no  prayers  ne  cryeng  of  m»icy- 
mercy  auaylle.  They  slewe  so  many  in  the  stretes  /  that  there  were 
8  heeps  of  dede  bodyes,  and  myght  not  goo  ne  passe  but  vpon  them 
that  so  laye  deed*.  The  foote  men  wente  in  the  other  partyes  of 
the  toun  by  grete  rowtes,  holdyng1  in  theyr  handes  grete  polaxes, 
swerdes,  malles  and  other  wepens,  sleyng1  alle  the  turkes  /  that  they 
12  coude  fynde  /  ffor  thei  were  the  men  of  the  world  whom  our  men 
had  grettest  hate  vnto,  and1  gladlyest  wold  put  to  deth  /  They  were 
thenne  comen  vnto  the  mydle  of  the  Cyte.     Therle  of  tholouse  ne  The  E»ri  or 

J  J  Toulouse 

his  men  knewe  nothyng  yet  that  the  toun  was  taken,  but  assaylled'  ^,e^tn00ftlt',i1'^ 
16  moche  fyersly  the  toun  ayenst  syon  /  The  turkes  that  defended  capture  of  the 
them  ayenst  hym  appcrceyued  not  that  our  peple  were  in  the  toun. 
But  whan  the  crye  and'  the  noyse  of1  them  that  men  slowe  began 
to  growe  /  The  turkes  behelde  and  sawe  fro  the  walles  /  And 
20  knewe  Avel  the  baners  and  Amies  of  the  cristen  men,  And  were 
moche  abasshed*.     They  lefte  alle  theyr  deffences,  &  fiedde  there 
where   they  supposed*  best  to  be  saued,  And   by  cause  that  the 
dongeon  of  the  toun  whiche  was  by,  and  was  the  grettest  strengthe 
24  of  the  cyte,  Alle  they  that  myght  entre  entred  therin  /  And*  shette 
faste  the  doores  on  them  /  The  erle  of  tholouse  made  the  brydge  of 
his  castel  auale  vpon  the  walles  /  and  entred  there  in  the  toun,  he  but  entered 

r  '  trora  this 

hym  self  /  and  the  Erie  of  dye,  yso[c]ar,  remon  pelet,  guyllem  de  g^'f^8met 
28  sabram  /  the  bisshop  of  albare  /  &  the  other  barons  moche  hastely,  "^dieoi'ih. 
&  wende  that  they  on  that  part  of  the  toun  had  be  the  first  that  city- 
had  entred.     thenne  they  wente  doun  of  the  walles  /  And<  alle  the 
Turkes  that  they  founde2  in  the  3 stretes  and1  in  the  howses  they  pir.i35.bk.] 
32  brought  to  deth  and*  slewe  doun  right  /  ffro  than  forthon  myght 
none  escape,  ffor  whan*  they  that  fiedde  to  fore  Due  Godeffroye 
and!  his  rowte,  mette  with  other  rowtes  of  oure  peple,  whiche  smote 
them  doun  and!  slewe  them  Avitliout  mercy  /  I  may  not  reherce  ne 
36  can  not  to  you  the  faites  of  euery  man  by  hym  self  /  But  there  was 

so  moche  blood  shedde  that  the  canellys  and  ruissheauls5  ronne  The  streets 
alle  of  blood  /  and!  alle  the  stretes  of  the  toun  were  couerd!  with  biood. 

1  Fr.  "de  ccux  qu'on  occioif,"  of  those  that  were  being  killed. 

2  Orig.  fouude.         4  superfluous.         s  Fr.  ruinscaul.t. 

GODFREY.  'v 


274  10,000  Turks  are  slain  in  the  Temple.    [Ch.  CLXXXVII. 

it  had  been     dede  men,  In  suche  wyse  that  it  was  grete  pvte  for  to  see,  \f  it  had! 

a  great  pity,  *  o  r  J  >  j 

had  ti.ey  not  not  be  of  thenemyes  of  our  lord  Ihesu  Creste. 

enemies  of 
our  Lord. 

How  .x/  M.  turkes  were  slayn  in  the  temple  /  And  of 
the  grete  tresour  that  Tancre  founde  in  the  sayd  1 
temple  /  ca°  Clxxxvij0 

Many  fled  to  i        N  to  thynner  part  of  the  temple  were  fledde  moche  grete  peple 

Temple.  of  the  toun  /  ]  by  cause  it  was  the  moost  seynorously  and?  rial 

place  of  the  toun.1     And  the  sayd  place  was  fast  shette  and  closed  8 

with  good  walles  /  of  towres  and  yates  /  But  this  auaylled  them 

Tanored        but  lytil,  ffor  incontinent  Tancre,  which  ladde  a  grete  partye  of 

followed, 

thoost  with  hym  /  ranne  theder  and  toke  it  by  strengthe,  and  slewe 
and  found      many  therin  /  And1  it  was  sayd?  that  Tancre  founde  therin  grete  1 2 

therein  great  ■ —  !»  * 

spoils.  hauoyr  /  and  gold  /  syluer,  precious  stones  and?  cloth  of  sylk.     He 

made  alle  to  be  born  a  way.     But  after,  whan  alle  was  sette  in 
reste  /  he  rendryd  all  /  And  made  it  al  to  be  brought  in  to  the 
comyn.     The  other  barons,  that  had  enserched  the  toun  /  and  slayn  16 
alle  the  turkes  that  they  encountred,  herd  saye  /  that  within  the 
cloysture  of   the  temple  were   fled  alle  the   remenannt  of  theyr 
enemyes  /  They  alle  cam  to  gydre  theder  /  And  founde  that  it  was 
trewe.     Thenne  commaunded  they  to  theyr  men  that  they  shold  20 
entre  in  to  the  place,  and  put  them  alle  to  deth.     And?  so  they 
dyde  /  It  was  wel  couenable  thyng  that  the  hethen  men  and  fals 
mysbyleuyd,  whiche  had  fowled1  and  shamefully  had  maculated 
with  theyr  manometry  and  fowle  lawe  of  machomet,  shold  abye  24 
there  theyr  fals  rytes  /  And  that  theyr  blood  shold  also  be  shedd, 
where  as  they  had  spred  the  ordure  of  mescreaunce.     It  was  an 
hydeouse  thyng  to  see  the  multitude  of  peple  which  were  slayn  in 
this  place.     They  them  self  that  had  slayn  hem  were  sore  e?moyed  28 
so  for  to  beholde  them,  ffor  fro  the  plarate  of  the  foot  vnto  the  heed 
was  none  other  thyng  but  blood  /  Ther  was  fou?«de  that  within  the 
[*  leaf  126]   closyng  of  the  temple  we2re  slayn  .x/M/  turkes,  withoute  them 
weresilugh-  that  leye  in  the  stretes  and  other  places  of  the  cyte.     Thenne  the  32 
enclosure lof    mene  peple  of  the  pylgryms  ran  serchyng  the  lanes  and  narow 
stretes.     whan  they  fonde  ony  of  the  turkes  that  had  hyd  them, 
were  it  man  or  woman,  anon  he  was  put  to  deth  /  the  barons  had 
deuysed  to  fore  that  the  toun  was  taken,  that  euery  man  shold  haue  36 
the  hows  in  the  toun  that  he  toke  and  fyrst  seased  /  and  it  shold 
1-1  Lat.  "eo  quod  locus  in  park  urbis  esse  viderrtur  sccrdior." 


the  temple. 


Ch.  CLXXXVIIL]     The  Christians  give  Thanks  for  their  Victory.    275 

be  his  with  alle  appertenauntes ;  Wherfor  it  was  so  that  the  Barons  The  k«URht« 
sette  vpon  the  howses  that  they  had  conquerd  theyr  baners  /  The  *£*  p^"- 
lasse  knyghtcs  and?  men  of  Armes  theyr  sheldes ;  the  men  a  foote  £*££l 
4  sette  vp  theyr  hattes  and?  theyr  swerdes,  ffor  to  shewe  the  tokenes, 
that  the  howses  were  therane  taken  and  seased,  to  thende  that  none 
other  shold  come  in  to  it. 

Of  the  fayr  ordenaunces  that  the  Cristen  men  made 

8  to  fore  they  wente  for  to  vnarme  them,  after  the 

toun  was  taken  /  Capitulo  Clxxxviij° 

Han  the  holy  Cyte  was  thus  taken,  and  alle  the  sarasyns  that 
w      coude  be  founden  were  slayn,  the  barons  assembled!  them  to 

12  gydre  to  fore  they  manned  them  /  and  commaunded  to  sette  -^^J1™" 

men  in  the  towres  for  to  make  good  watche,  and  kepe  the  toun.  gnmjwa^ 
And  sette  porters  for  to  kepe  the  yates,  that  noman  from  without  j^w™  of  lhe 
shold  come  in  to  the  toun  without  leue  vnto  the  tyme  that  they  had 

16  ordeyned  and  chosen  a  lord,  by  comyn  acorde,  that  shold  holde  the 
toun,  and  goucrne1  it  at  his  wylle.  It  was  not  merueylle  if  they 
doubted2  yet,  ffor  alle  the  countre  was  ful  of  sarasyns,  And  myght 
peraduenture  assemble  and  sodenly  come  and  smyte  in  to  the  toun 

20  yf  ther  were  not  good  watche  and  hede  taken,  thenne  departed 
the  barons,  and  disarmed  them  and  toke  of  theyr  harnoys  in  theyr 
hostellys  /  and  wesshe  theyr  handes  and  feete  moche  wel  /  and 
chaunged  theyr  clothes  /  Thenne  began  they  goo  bare  foot,  and  in  J^x^eut 

24  wepynges  and  teeres,  vnto  the  holy  places  of  the  Cyte  /  where  oure  gJ^JL"nt° 
sauyour   Ihesu   Criste   had   ben  bodyly.     they  kyssed   the   place  Places. 
moche  swetly  Avhere  as  his  feet  had  touched  /  the  Crysten  peple 
and  the  clergye  of  the  toun,  to  whom  the  turkes  had  many  tymes 

28  don  grete  shames  for  the  name  of  Ihesu  Criste,  cam  with  procession  / 
&  bare  suche  relyquyes  as  they  had  ayenst  the  barons  :  and  brought 
them,  yeldyng*  thankes  to  Almyghty  God,  vnto  the  Sepulcre  /  and 
there  it  was  a  pytous  thyng  to  see  how  the  peple  wepte  for  ioye  and  fell  down 

32  and  pyte  /  And  how  they  fylle  doun  a  crosse  to  fore  the  sepulcre  /  gjjjj^jlj 
3 It  semed  to  eueryche  of  them  that  eche  sawe  there  the  bodye  of  [3if.i26,bk.] 
our4  lord  there  deed,    there  were  so  many  teeres  and  wepynges  that 
euery  man  thought  certaynly  oure  lord!  was  there  /  whan  they  cam 

36  in  one  of  the  holy  places,  they  coude  not  departe,  but  yf  it  were  for 
thardaunt  desire  that  thoy  had  for  to  goo  in  another.     They  had  so 

1  Orig.  gonerne.  2  Orig.  don^tctP.  *  Orig.  onr. 

T    2 


276  They  give  large  Sums  to  the  Churches.     [Ch.  CLXXXVIIT. 

They  had       moche  ioye  and  gladnesse  of  this  honour,  that  our  ford!  had  svuen 

great  joy  that     , 

our  Lord  had  them  the  "race  to  see  the  day  that  the  holy  Cyte  was  delvuerd  fro 

suffered  tliein  °  J  J        J 

t^o  see  this      thenemyes  of  Ihesu  Cryste  by  theyr  trauaylles  /  in  such  wyse  that 

they  rought  not  ne  sette  not  by  the  remenaunt  of  theyr  lyues.  4 
They  gave      They  off  red  and*  gaf  largely  to  the  chirches,  and  to  men  of  the 

great  gifts  to  _  °  °     J 

tiie  churches,  chirche  /  and  made  vowes  to  yeue  yeftes  in  their  countrees,  whiche 
thenne  sette  lytil  by  temporal  thynges  /  ffor  them  thought  that 
they  were  atte  yates  and  entree  of  paradys,  ffor  neuer  in  this  world  8 
myght  gretter  ioye  entre  in  to  the  herte  of  a  man  /  than  was  in 
them  in  sechyng  and  goyng  to  the  holy  places  where  our  sauyour 
Ihesu  Criste  had  ben.     One  shold  haue  had  a  moch  harde  herte, 
and  lytil  pytous,  that  had  seen  this  syght  /  and  myght  haue  holde  12 
hym  fro  wepynge  /    whan  thyse  barons  and  alle  the  other  peple  had 
made  thus  glad  chiere  of  this  that  they  had  accomplysshyd  theyr 
pylgremage,  The  Bysshoppes,  and  generally  alle  the  peple  of  the 
chirche,  myght  not  departe  fro  the  chirche  of  the  sepulcre,  ne  fro  16 
the  other  holy  places.     They  prayd  our  lord  moche  deuoutly  and 
and  thanked   ententyfly  for  the  peple,  and  rendred  grete  graces  and  thankynges 
devoutly  for   Vnto  Ihesu  Criste  of  this  that  he  had  suffred  them  to  see  thyse  holy 

Ins  goodness.  J  J 

places,  where  the  fayth  of  Cristendom  was  fyrst  gyuen  /  In  this  20 
daye  happed  certayn  thynge  that  was  seen  of  many  men  in  the 
Cyte   of   Iherusalem,   that   was,   the   valyaunt   man   Aymart,   the 
besshop  of  puy,  whiche  was  dede  in  Anthyoche  /  lyke  as  ye  haue 
herd  to  fore  /  many  noble  men  whom  men  ought  to  byleue,  affermed  24 
certaynly  that  they  sawe  hym  first  moiuzte  and  goo  vpow  the  walles 
of  the  toun,  &  that  he  called  other  to  come  aftir  hym  /  Of  many 
other  pilgryms  also,  that  were  to  fore  by  the  waye  deed  /  It  was 
certayne  that  they  appiered  to  many  /  men  the  daye  whan  they  28 
vysyted  the  chirches  of  the  Cyte.     By  thyse  thynges  may  wel  be 
knowen  that  our  lord  loueth  this  holy  cyte  aboue  alle  other,  And' 
Many  of  the    that  this  is  the  hyest  pylgremage  that  may  be,  whan  deed  men  ben 

pilgrims  who  tip  ■%  t^ 

had  died  on    reysed  by  the   wylle  of   oure  lord  for  taecomplysshe  theyr  pyl-  32 
pearedto       gremacre  /  whan  oure  lord  Ihesu  Criste  aroos  fro  deth  to  lvf,  the 

their  com-        00/  j    5 

rades.  gospel  sayth  that  the  same  day  aroos  many  bodyes  of  them  that 

had  ben  deed,  and  appiered  to  many  in  the  cyte  /  This  myracle 
[>  leaf  127]  l  was  renewed  this  day  by  Ihesu  Criste,  by  this  cyte  whiche  had  36 
ben  longe  holden  in  the  seygnorye  of  the  paynems  /  whan  it  was 
vnder  them  that  serued  the  lawe  of  machommet.  So  grete  noyse 
was  thurgh  the  toun  of  the  ioye  that  was  made,  that  they  remem- 
bred  not  the  grete  trauaylle  that  they  had  suffred'  by  alle  theyr  40 


Ch.  CLXXXIX.]     The  Christians  of  Jerusalem  thank  Peter.  277 

waye  /  Thenne  was  accomplysshedf  alle  euydently  this  that  the  Then  wn« 

.  accomplished 

prophete  sayd  /  1Lmoye  ye  with  Ihenisalem  /  am  If  make  ye  loye  thea^yingoi 
within  them  that  ye  loue.1 

4  How  the  Cristen  men,  that  had  charged  their  message 
for  their  delyueraunce  to  peter  theremyte,  knewe 
hym  /  ca°  Clxxxix° 

a       S  many  pour  cristen  men  as  had  dwellid  in  the  toun  /  which 
8  had1  seen  Peter  theremyte  four  or  fyue  yere  to  fore  /  whan 

they  delyuerd*  to  hym  lettres  for  to  here  to  our  holy  fader  the  pope, 
and?  to  the  harons  of  ffraunce  /  to  thende  that  they  myght  sette2 
remedye  for  theyr  affayres,  they  knewe  hym  einonge  the  other.  The  poor 

i  i.riioi-1-  i  <•       Christians  of 

12  thenne  they  cam  to  hym,  ant?  fyl  doun*  to  his  feet  and  wepte  for  Jerusalem 

recognize 

ioye  /  And  moche  gretely  thanked  hym  of  this  that  he  had1  so  wel  Pettrthe 
performed  his  message,  ne  they  cessed  not  to  yeue  preysyng  and  and  |ive 
lawde  to  our  lord  that  had  gyuen  suche  counseyl  to  the  harons  and*  •}'«? who,  has 

°1'  »  delivered 

1 6  to  the  peple,  hy  which  they  had  performed  such  an  hye  werke,  *•*■"  ^ his 
which  was  ahoue  the  hope  of  alle  men,  sauf  by  thayde  of  oure  lord  / 
Alle  the  gree  and  thanke  they  gaf  to  Peter  theremyte,  whiche  so 
vygorously  had  enterprysetJ  for  to  delyuere  them  by  thelpe  of  our 

20  lord  fro  the  caytyfnes  and1  seruage  dolorous,  in  whiche  they  had  ben 
so  long  holden  by  the  cruelte  of  the  sarasyns,  lyke  as  ye  haue  herd 
to  fore.     The  Patriarke  of  Iherusalem  was  goon  in  to  Cypres  /  for  The  Patri- 

,  ,  .  ,  '  archofJeru- 

to  demannde  Almesse  and  ayde  of  the  cristen  men  there,  for  to  saiem  was  in 

Cyprus,  and 

24  helpe  and  socoure  the  cristen  men  of  Iherusalem  to  paye  the  cruel 
taillages  that  the  turkes  had  sette  vpon  them,  ffor  he  doubted  yf 
they  faylled*  of  their  payment  /  that  they  wold*  bete  and  throwe 
doun  theyr  chirches  or  put  to  deth  the  beste  of  theyr  peple,  lyke  as 

28  they  had  don  many  tymes  /  to  fore.     This  good  man,  the  Patriarke, 

knewe  nothyng  of  this  good  auenture  that  oure  lord  had  don  of  the  knewnotiiins 

.  .  of  what  had 

delyueraunce  of  the  toun  /  But  supposed1  to  haue  come  and1  to  haue  happened. 
founden4  it  in  suche  seruage  as  it  was  whan  he  departed. 

32  How  they  clensed  the  toun  of  the  dede  bodyes  /  Of 

many  other  ordenaunces.5     And  how  the  turkes  p  if.  127,1*.] 

1-1  Mistranslation:  Fr.  " esjoyessez-vous  avec  Jerusalem,  et  failes  joye 
dedans,  cculx  qui  Vaimes,"  Lat.  "  Laetamini  acm  Hicrusalcm,  el  exsultatc  in 
ea  omnes  qui  diligitis  earn." 

-  Grig,  settte.  3  Orig.  donn.  *  Orig.  fonudeo, 

2  1 


278 


They  cleanse  Jerusalem. 


[Cb,  CXC. 


After  the 
barons  had 
\isited  the 
Holy  Places 
they  met 
together, 


and  set  about 
cleansing  the 
town  lest  a» 
pestilence 


On  the  third 
day  they  held 
a  market  to 
dispose  of 
their  spoils. 


Some  Turks 
who  were 
still  in  the 
dungeon  of 
the  Tower 
David  sur- 
rendered, 


rendred  the  dongeon  vnto  the  erle  of  tholouse. 

Capitulo  Clxxxx0 

w      Han    the   barons  and'  the   other  pylgryms  had!  made   theyr 

prayers  and*   vysyted  the   holy  chirches   thurgh  the  Cyte  of  4 
Iherusalem  /  The  hye  men  of  the  hoost  assembled,  and  sayd  that  it 
was  a  peryllous  thynge  yf  the  toun  were  not  voydedf  of  the  dede 
bodyes,  and?  purged  of  the  blood  and  ordure,    ffor  in  short  tyme  the 
ayer  shold  be  corrupt  /  by  whiche  sekenesse  and  Infyrmytes  myght  8 
ensiewe  and  folowe  /  There  were  somme  turkes  yet  that  were  not 
slayn,  but  were  kepte  in  yrons.    to  them  was  commaundedf  this 
werke  for  to  bere  the  bodyes  out  of  the  toun  /  but  by  cause  they 
were  but  fewe  of  them  /  and1  myght  not  suffyse  to  doo  it  shortly.  12 
they  toke  the  poure  men  of  thoost  /  and  gaf  to  them  good  hyre  for 
to  helpe  taccomplysshe  this  werke  /  whan   the  barons   had  this 
deuysed  thyse  thynges,  they  wente  in  to  theyr  howses  and  made 
moche  grete  ioye  /  they  gaf  largeli  to  ete  &  drynke  /  ffor  the  toun  16 
was  repleneshed  of  alle  goodes,  in  suche  wise  that  they  were  to  fore 
poure  fonde  in  the  howses  alle  thyng  that  was  nedeful  to  them, 
wherof  they  had  endured  to  fore  grete  anguysshe  and  penurye,  ffor 
they  fonde  the  cysteines  alle  ful  in  alle  the  howses.     On  the  thyrd  20 
day  was  ordeyned  that  market  shold  be  holden  in  the  toun  /  And! 
that  they  shold  bye  and  selle  suche  thynges  as  they  had  conquerd 
in  the  Cyte.     They  were  moche  refresshyd  and  rested,  ffor1  they 
abode  now  no  trauayll.     They  forgate  not  our  lord,  whiche  had  24 
brought  them  in  so  grete  honour  as  for  taccomplysshe  his  werke  by 
them  /  And  by  comyn  acord  of  the  prelates,  of  the  barons,  and  of 
alle  the  people  was  ordeyned,  that  this  daye,  in  whiche  Iherusalem 
was  goten  and  conquerd,  shold  euermore  after  be  holden  feste  and  28 
holy  day  /  in  remembraunce  of  the  cristen  men  to  thanke  and  preyse 
our  lord  /  and  also  praye  to  our  lord  for  the  sowles  of  them  that 
thyse  thynges  had  accomplysshed.     A  grete  partye  of  the  turkes 
that  were  in  the  dongeon  of  the  toun  named  the  tour  dauid2  /  sawe  32 
wel  that  alle  the  cyte  was  taken  /  And  that  they  had  [no]  more  hope 
of  rescows  ne  socour  ayenst  our  men.     Therfor  they  requyred  by 
messagers  therle  of  tholouse  whiche  was  next  to  them  /  And  dyde  do 
be  sayd  to  hym,  yf  they  myght  departe  with  theyr  wyues,  children,  36 
and  suche  goodes  as  they  had  in  the  tour  /  they  wold  go  theyr  waye  / 

1  Fr.  "car  ilz  n'atendoient  mats  nul  travail,"  for  they  did  not  expect  any 
more  trouble  and  work.  2  Orig.  danid. 


Ch.  CXCL]     The  Baroiis  assemble  to  choose  a  King.  279 

and  delvuere1  ouer  the  tour  /  he  agreed  and  acorded  it  to  them,  and  were 

J  '  °  given  a  safe 

And2  so  they  departed!  /  And  he  dyde  them  to  be  conduyted  saufly  *£f%*? 
vnto  Escalonne.     Thus  was  the  tour  yolden  /  They  that  had  the    [Mean*] 

4  charge  for  to  purge  am*  voyde  the  dede  bodyes  oute  of  the  toun 
dyde  it  ententyfly  and  dylygcntly  /  in  suche  wyse  that  in  shorte  gj^*^,, 
tyme  this  thynge  was  alle  don.     ffor  they  beryed   them  in  depe  *™  ™u 
pyttes  withoute  the  toun  the  moost  parte  /  The  remenaunt  they 

8  brente  in  to  asshes,  that  the  cendres  with  the  wynde  was  blowen 

away.     Thenne  were  our  men  in  good  sewrte  and  ease  within  the 

toun  to  goo  and  walke  thurgh  the  stretes  and  other  places,  and  dyde 

dayly  goo  in  pylgremages,  that  vnnethe  myght  they  departe  thens, 

12  Thev  abode  so  gladly  there.     In  this  manere,  as  ye  haue  herd,  was  in  tins 

J  or—     ti  '  manner  was 

taken  the  holy  cyte  of  Iherusalem.    In  the  yere  of  thyncarnacion  of  taken  jeru- 
oure  sauyour  Ihesu  criste  /  M.lxxxxix.  the  .xv  /  daye  of  the  monetrh  JJJ^JJjL 
of  Iuyll  on  a  fryday  at  the  hour  of  none  /  The  /  iij.  yere  after  that 10<J9- 
16  the  pylgryms  had  enterprysed  this  viage.     Tho  was  pope  of  Rome 
Urban,  And  Henry  Emperour  of  the  Eomayns.     Alexis  emperour 
of  Constantynople,  And  phylyp  kyng  of  ffraunce. 

Howe  the  hye  barons  of  thoost  assembled  for  to  chese 

20  a  kynge  of  Iherusalem,  And  thoppynyon  of  the 

clergy e  vpon  the  same.  Capit>ulo.  Clxxxxj0 

1        Yke  as  ye  haue  herd,  the  pylgryms  whiche  had  grete  nede  of 

reste  soiourned  in  the  toun.     The  barons  deuysed  the  affaires  The  barons 

arranged 

24  of  the  cyte.  In  moche  grete  ioye  were  they  there  vij  dayes  /  On  the  affairs  of 
the  viij  daye  assembled  alle  the  barons  for  to  chese  one  of  them.  on_the  eighth 
to  whome  the  garde,  gouernaunce  /  and  kepyng  of  the  toun  shold  ^J"^^" 
be  delyuerd,  and  the  seygnorye  of  the  holy  cyte,  and  the  charge  of 

28  the  Royamme  entierly  /  as  it  was  reason  and  right.  They  made 
theyr  prayers  and  orysons,  And  with  alle  theyr  herte  called1  the 
holy  ghooste,  that  he  wold  counseylle  them  that  daye,  and  to  yeue 
to  them  grace  to  chese  suche  a  man  as  were  worthy  and  couenable 

32  to  susteyne  the  faytes3  of  the  Royamme  /.  whyles  as  they  were  in 

this  amivre,  and  moche  entended  with  good  fayth  ther  about,  An  There  was  a 

J       '  -  meeting  of 

hepe  of  clerkes  assembled,  whiche  had  not  good  entencion,  but  the  clerks  at 

*  the  same 

thought  on  malyce  by  pryde  and  couetyse  /  They  cam  where  as  the  ^d,em*iit|h  a 
36  barons  were  assembled,  And  sente  to  them  for  to  speke  to  them  a 
short  word  or  two  /  They  suffred  them  to  come  in.    whan  they  were 
1  Orig.  delynere.  3  Fr.fais,  i.  e.  the  responsibility,  burden. 


280  Some  Objections  made.  [Ch.  CXCI. 

comen  in  /  One  of  them  spak  in  this  manere  /  "  Fayr  lordes,  Ave 

[i  if.  128,  bk.]  haue  vnderstanden  /  that  ye  he  assembled  here  for  l  to  chese  a  kyng 

that  shal  gouerne  this  loride,  whiche  thyng  plesith  vs  moche.     And 

Ave  holden  it  for  right  wel  don  /  yf  ye  doo  it  in  the  manere  that  ye  4 

They  sent      ought  to  doo  it,  ffor  without  doubte  the  spyrituel  thynges  he  more 


ba!rons°thata  digne  and?  worthy  than  the  temporall  /  Therfore  we  saye  to  you, 
should  be  that  the  moost  hye  thynges  ought  to  goo  to  fore  /  And!  thus  wolde 
a  king,  we  that  ye  shold  doo  /  And  thordenaunce  shold?  not  go  forth  other  8 


wyse  than  it  ought  to  be.     Now  thenne  we  praye  you  and1  requyre 

you  in  the  name  of  oure  lord,  that  ye  entremete  not  you  to  make  a 

kynge  /  til  that  we  haue  chosen  a  patriarke  in  this  toun  that  can 

gouerne  the  cristiente.  yf  it  plese  you  that  this  he  don  fyrst,  it  shal  12 

he  good  and  Aveel  for  you.     And  we  shal  thenne  holde  hym  for 

if  not,  ti,ey    kyng  that  ye  shal  gyue  to  us.   hut  if  ye  wylle  do  otherwyse  /  we 

ac^pl  the      shal  not  holde  it  for  good!,  ne  wel  don  /  But  we  shal  discorde  /  And 

new  km-.       ^^  ^&t  ye  doo  shal  not  ^  feme  "  /  This  Avorde  semed  outward  to  16 

haue2  somme  apparence  of  weel  /  But  it  cam  of  euyl  purpoos.    Ther 

was  therin  but  deceyt  and  trecherye  /  Of  this  complot  /  and!  barate  / 

was  mayster  &  capytayne,  a  bisshop  of  Calabre,  bom  of  a  Cyte  / 

Arnold  and     Avhiche  was  named  lamane.3     This  bisshop  acorded!  moche  to  one  20 

cJSabria  hadf  Arnold<,(33)  of  whome  I  haue  spoken  to  fore,  whiche  was  ful  of  des- 

gai..etetwee"n  loyalte.    he  Avas  not  yet  subdeken,  and!  was  a  preestes  sone,  and  of 

so  euyl  and?  fowl  lyf  /  that  the  boyes  and  garsons  had  made  songes 

of  hym  thurgh  thoost.    and!  yit  not  with  stondynge  alle  this  the  24 

bisshop  of  Calabre,  ayenst  god?  and!  reson,  Avolde  haue  made  hym 

patriark,  ffor  they  knevve  ouermoche  euyl,  therfor  were  they  both 

acorded  to  gyder.4    They  had  made  a  bargain  bytAvene  them  that  as 

that  Arnold    sone  as  this  Arnold?  shold?  be  patriarke  the  sayd*  bisshop  shold  haue  28 

pMd    tharchbissoprych  of  bethlehem.    But  oure  lord  ordeyned  this  thynge 

andU?heother  in  another  maner  as  ye  shal  here  /  Ther  were  in  thoost  many  clerkes 

bi8ehop°of       0f  euyll  contenaunce,  that  lytle  entended  to  the  seruyse  of  our5  lord, 

they  litil  preysed  relygyon  and  honneste  /  ffor  syth  the  tyme  that  32 
the  valyauttt  bysshop  of  puy  was  dede,  which  was  legat  of  our  holy 
fader  the  pope,  the  bisshop  Avilliam  of  Orenge  was  in  his  place, 
whiche  was  a  relygyous6  man,  and  moch  doubted7  our  lord  /  but 

2  Fr.  apparence  dc  bien. 

3  Caxton's  text  gives  Lat,uranc ;  the  correct  reading  is  Maturane.     Lat. 
Alarturanensis.     See  p.  284,  1.  2. 

*  Orig.  gydrr.  6  Orig.  our. 

6  Orig.  relygyons. 

7  Orig.  doubted. 


Ch.  CXCII.]     Godfrey  is  spoken  of  as  a  suitable  King.  281 

he  abode  not  longe  after  /  xbut  was  deed  in  suche  wyse  lyke  as  ye 
haue  herd l  /  Thenne  was  the  clergye  without  pastour  and  garde  / 
And  lete  them  falle  in  euyl  lyf  /  The  Bisshop  of  Albare  conteyned"  *££{<* 
4  hym  holyly  in  this  pylgremage,  And"  somme  other  that  were  noble.  ggjjg^. 
But  the  couiyn  of  the  clerkes  made  it  alle  ylle.  **«• 

2Ho\v  the  due  Godeffroy  was  chosen  kyng  of  Iheru-  r.»ie.n»] 
salem,  and  how  he  was  presented  to  our  lord  in 
8  his  chirche  of  the  holy  sepulcre. 

capitulo  Clxxxxij0 
t       He  wordes  that  the  Clerkes  had"  brought  to  the  barons  in  theyr  J***™^ 
electyon  was  not  moche  preysed,  but  aretted"  it  to  grete  folye  /  ««£J^ 

12  ne  therfore  letted?  not  to  doo  that  they  haJ  bygonnen.     To  thende  the  dark", 
thenne  that  they  niyght  knowe  the  better  the  couynes  of  alle  the 
barons,    they  ordeyned*  wyse  men  that  sholdf  enserche  the  lyf  of 
eueryche  of  them  and  the  maners.     They  dyde  do  come  to  fore 

16  them  suche  men  as  were  moost  pryue  of  the  barons  /  and  toke  eche 
of  them  a  parte  by  the  leue  of  theyr  lordes.     And?  toke  of  them 
theyr  othes  to  saye  the  trouthe  of  that  they  ahold  be  examyned  that  b^n^*ti' 
was  of  the  lyf  and  manere  of  theyr  lordes  withoute  lesynge3  and  Jj^™18 

20  fayllynge  of  the  trouthe.     Thus  it  was  acordedf  emonge  them.     It  fl^,°"8B^t. 
was  a  grete  thynge  whan  the  lordes  abandouned  them  self  tenserche  ^egma" for 
theyr  lyues  /  But  the  wyse  men  that  made  this  enquest  were  trewe 
men,  and1  helde  alle  thyng  secrete  that  as  ought  not  to  be  knowen  / 

24  Many  thynges  were  sayd  to  them  of  whiche  they  toke  but  ly til 
hede.  Emonge  alle  other  thynges  they  that  were  moost  pryuee  of 
the  due  Godeffroye  /  whan  they  were  demaunded  of  his  maners  and! 
his  tetches,4  they  answer^  that  he  had1  one  manere  right  greuous  and  The  only 

'  »  °        °  complaint  of 

28  ennoyous,  ffor  whan  he  herd  masse  and  the  seruyse  of  oure  lorde,  ^"k!,f^ey 
he  coude  not  departe  out  of  the  chirche,  but  sente  after  payntours  „"ht1£J:j[0Ild 
&  glasyers  (34)  vnto  the  clerkes  &  gonernours 5  of  the  chirches  /  he  goins- 
herd  gladly  the  ryngyng  of  the  belles,  and1  6entendeth  moche  yf 

32  they  discorded  /  so  long  that  it  /  displesyd!6  moche  to  his  felawship 

•— 1  Caxton  has  here  omitted  several  words,  owing  to  his  obscure  French 
text,  which  was  unintelligible.  A.  gives  the  correct  version,  "  ainzfu  rnorz; 
Entcrrez  fu  en  Veglise  dc  Marran,  si  commc  vos  oiites,"  but  he  died.  He  was 
buried,  as  you  have  heard,  in  the  church  of  Marran.  3  Orig.  lesyuge. 

4  Fr.  tetches,  qualities,  characteristics.  5  Orig.  gonernonrs. 

6— 6  Fr.  "ct  trop  y  entendoit  telement  que  maintefoys  de--i)laisoit,"  and  spent 
so  much  time  in  this  way,  that  often  he  displeased,  etc. 

2  1  * 


282 


When  the 
good  men 
heard  that 
this  was  his 
greatest  vice 
they  were 
much  pleased. 


After  some 
talk  about 
the  Earl  of 
Toulouse, 


[*lf.  129,  bk] 


they  all 
agreed  upon 
Godfrey  of 
Boulogne. 


In  this 
manner  was 
Godfrey 

chosen  King 
of  Jerusalem. 


He  demanded 
immediately 
that  the  Karl 
of  Toulouse 
should  give 
up  his  tower 
which  he 
held; 


Godfrey  is  chosen  King.         [Oh.  CXCIII. 

and  seruauntcs.     Ami  oftymes  his  mete  appayred  by  cause  of  his 
long1  taryeng  in  the  monastery es  and  holy  places  /  whan  the  wyse- 
men  herd  this,  and!  that  this  was  the  grettest  vyce  that  coude  be 
founden  in  the  due.    they  hail?  moche  grete  ioye  /  ffor  they  thought  4 
wel  that  he  dyde  this  for  the  loue  of  oure  fayth  and  for  thonour  of 
our  sauyour  /  whan  they  had  herd  alle  that  they  wold  enquyre  of 
the  Barons  /  they  spak  to  gydre  /  And*  grete  partye  of  them  were 
acorded  upon  therle  of  tholouse,  if  it  had  not  be  for  one  thynge  /  8 
ffor  alle  they  of  his  countre,  that  were  moost  pryue  with  hym, 
thought  that  yf  he  were  chosen  kyng  that  he  shold  abyde  there 
and  reteyne  the  peple  of  his  countiey.     And  yf  he  were  not  chosen 
he  shold  sone  retorne  in  to  his  countiey  fro  whens  he  cam  /  and!  12 
2 that  desyred  they  moche.     Therfore   men  wene   that  they  were 
forsworn  wyllyngly,  And?  sayde  vpon  hym  somme  euyl  tatches  of 
whiche  he  had?  no  blame  /  Neuertheles  he  had1  neucr  Intencion  to 
retourne  to  Ids  londe,  as  it  appered  after  /  ffor  euer  after  he  abode  16 
in  the  seruyse  of  our  lord,  whiche  he  had  enterprysed  /  whan  the 
barons  herde  all  the  fetches  after  many  wordes  they  acorded  al  vpon 
Godeffroy  of  boloyne  /  And  named  hym  to  be  kyng  /  and  was  lad 
with  alle  the  peple  with  grete  ioye  vnto  the  chirche  of  the  holy  20 
sepulcre  /  And  presented  to  oure  lorde.     Euery  man  was  glad  grete 
and  sinal  /  ffor  he  was  the  man  that  had?  the  hertes  of  alle  the 
comyn  peple. 

How  the  due  godeffroy,  after  his  election,  requyred  24 
therle  of  tholouse  that  he  shold  delyuer  to  hym 
the  tour  dauid.  ca°  Clxxxxiij. 

i        N  this  maner  was  the  due  godeffroy  chosen  to  be  kyng,  and 

lord  of  the  holy  Cyte  of  Iherusalem.     Therle  of  tholouse  helde  28 
the  grettest3  fortresse  of  the  toun,  whiche  was  called  the  tour  dauyd  / 
The  turkes  had  delyuerd4  it  to  hym  lyke  as  ye  haue  herd'  to  fore  / 
It  is  sette  in  the  hyest  parte  of  the  Cyte  toward  the  weste,  strongly 
Availed  with  square  stones,  and  ther  on  men  may  see  ouer  al  the  32 
Cyte  entierly.    whan  the  Due  sawe  this  tour  was  not  in  his  power, 
It  semed  to  hym  that  he  had  not  the  seygnorye  /  whan  the  grettest 
fortresse  of  alle  the  countre  was  not  in  his  possession.     Therfor  he 
demaunded  therle  of  tholouse,  in  the  presence  of  the  barons,  &  36 
prayd  hym  debonayrly  that  he  wold  delyuer  it  to  hym.     Therle 
1  Orig.  loug.  3  Orig.  gtettest.  4  Orig.  delyuerd. 


Ch.  CXCIV.]     The  Earl  of  Toulouse  returns  home.  283 

answer*  that  he  had!  conquerd1  it,  and  thenemyes  of  cure  lord  had 
yolden  it  to  hyni  /  And  therfor  he  helde  it  /  But  he  had  concluded 
to  goo  in  to  his  countre  at  ester  /  And  thenne  he  wold  delyuer  it  whopjwnUed 

4  with  a  good  wylle.     But  in  the  mene  whyle  he  /  wold  kepe  it  /  £■»£* 
This  requyred  he  for  to  he  more  honoured1,  and  in  the  gretter  surete.  fifing" 
The  due  ansuerd  playnly,  that  yf  he  ha*  not  the  toure  /  he  wold 
leue  all,  ffor  how  myght  he  he  lord  of  the  countre  whan  another 

8  had    gretter  power  an*  gretter  strengthe   in  his  londe  than  he. 
Thus2  were  thev  in  debate.     The  Due  of  Normandye  and?  therle  of  Thereupon 

•■  arose  a  great 

fflaundres3  helde  with  the  due  godeffroy  /  Of  the  other  barons  ther  debate. 
were  Hhat  counseylled,  that  he  shold  doo  his  wil  with  therle  of 

12  tholouse.4     They  of  therles  countre5  attysed  and  counseylled  hyrn 
that  he  shold  not  leve  the  tour,  by  cause6  they  wolde  gyue  hym 
occasion  by  7this  discorde  to  retorne  in  to  his  countre  /  Atte  laste   p  leamo] 
they  acorde*  that  the  fortresse  shold  be  put  in  the  hande  of  the 

16  bysshop  of  Albare  vnto  the  tyme  that  they  were  acorded  what  shold? 
be  doo  therin.    whan  he  had  it  /  within  a  short  tyme  after  he 
delyuerd  it  to  the  due.     It  was  demaunded?  hym  why  he  had*  so  gjj^jj^; 
delyuer*  it  /  Thenne  he  answer*  that  it  was  taken  from  hym  by  »™»  »* "» 

20  force.  It  was  not  knowen  for  trouthe  whether  it  was  taken  from 
hym  by  constraynt  /  or  yf  he  delyuerd  it  with  his  gree  and  wyll. 
whan  therle  of  tholouse  sawe  this  /  he  was  moche  angry.  8An* 
hym  seme*  that  the  barons  were  not  wel  content  with  hym  lyke  as 

24  they  ought  to  be,8  consyderyng  that  by  the  way  he  ha*  don  to 
them  many  grete  bountees  and  good  seruyses,  whiche  they  remembryd 
not,  as  it  was  sayd  /  ffor  desdayne  herof ,  And  by  atysement  that 
his  knyghtes  made  to  hym,  he  enterpryse*  to  retourne  in  to  his  2**""?1 

28  countre,9  And  descende*  vnto  the  fflome  Jordan  /  And  there  bayne*  Jeft*»* 
hym  /  After  he  ordeyned  his  atfayre  for  to  departe  out  of  the  londe. 

Of  a  Patriark  chosen  and  elect  in  Ikerusalem  /  And 
how  ther  was  founden  a  part  of  the  very  crosse. 
32  Capitulo  Clxxxxiiij. 

1  Orig.  conqnerd.  2  Orig.  Thns.  3  Orig.  fflanndres. 

*-*  Fr.  "  Qui  conscilloicnt  que  Tcnfclst  la  voulcnIA  au  conic  dc  Toulouse." 

8  Orig.  conntre.  6  Orig.  canse. 

8-8  "  Luifut  avis  que  Us  barons  nc  s'estooient  pas  contenuz  vers  lui,  comme 
ilz  devoicnt,"  viz.,  it  was  his  opinion  that  the  barons  had  not  behaved  towards 
him  as  they  should. 

9  Orig.  conutre. 


284 


A  Part  of  the  True  Cross  is  found.     [Ch.  CXCV. 


The  Bishop 

Of  M:il  ill  ane 

oiirred  up 
discord  be- 
tween tlie 
barons  and 
the  people. 


Arnold  was 
chosen 
Patriarch  of 
Jerusalem. 


['  If.  130,  bk.] 


A  part  of  tlie 
true  cross  18 
loutid. 


Then  was 
there  great 
rejoicing. 


t        His  euyl  man  of  whom  I  haue  spoken  to  fore  /  the  bisshop  of 
maturane,  was  ful  of  grete  malyce  and!  of  desloyalte  /  And 
payned  hym  moche  in  alle  maners  to  sette  discorde  bytwene  the 
Barons  and  the  people  /  ffor  they  sayde  /  that  the  Barons  wold  not  4 
suffre  that  a  patriark  shold  be  chosen  by  cause  they  helde  the  rentes 
of  the  chirche  /  And?  wold?  not  delyuer  them  /  he  fonde  moche  peple 
that  byleuyd  hym  and?  acorded  to  hym,  in  suche  wyse  that  by 
thayde  of  them  /  ayenst  the  wylle  of  other  /  &  also  by  thayde  of  8 
the  due  of  normandye  /  to  whom  he  was  moche  pryue  /  &  had?  be 
at  his  table  in  all  this  werk,  he  chose  for  patriark  this  arnold  that 
was  his  felaw  in  alle  euyl  condicions  /  &  by  force  they  sette  hym 
in  the  seete  of  the  patriarche  in  the  chirche  of  the  sepulcre  /  This  12 
was  ayenst  reason  &  ayenst  alle  right  /  Therfore  it  happed?  ne  fyll 
not  wel  to  hym  ne  to  that  other  /  Thenne  it  happed?  that  a  parte  of 
the  very  Crosse  was  founden  in  therthe  by  the  Chirche  of  the 
sepulcre  in  a  secrete  place  /  ffor  the  cristen  men  that  were  in  the  16 
1toun  to  fore  it  was  taken,  in  so  grete  meschyer  as  ye  haue  herd', 
doubted  that  the  tuikes  wold?  haue  taken  it  fro.  them.     Therfore 
had  they  hyd  it  moche  surely,  and  fewe  knewe  of  it.     But  a  good 
man,  a  suryen,  whiche  that  knewe  it  /  discouerid?  it  to  the  barons.  20 
And  whan  they  had  doluen  and  dygged  a  good  whyle  /  they  fonde 
it  in  a  cheste2  of  syluer,  lyke  as  he  had  to  them  sayd  and  deuysed. 
Thenne  was  the  ioye  moche  grete  /  and?  they  bare  it  a  procession  in 
syngyng  vnto  the  temple,    all  the  peple  wewte  after,  which  wepte  24 
for  pyte,  As  moch  as  if  they  had  seen  our  sauyour  Ihesu  criste  yet 
hangynge  on  the  crosse  /  They  alle  helde  them  for  moche  recom- 
forted  of  this  grete  tresour3  that  our  lord  had  thus  diseoueryd*. 


All  were 
delighted 
that  Godfrey 
was  chosen 
king. 


How  the  due  godeffroy  payned  hym  to  amende  the  28 
Royamme  of  his  good  constitucions  and  estatutes. 

c°.  Clxxxxvl 
g       Rete  ioye  was  it  thurgh  the  londe  of  this,  that  the  valyaunt 

due  godefroy  was  chosen  kyng.     Alle  they  obeyed  hym  with  32 
good  herte.    he  amended!  dylygently  alle  the  discordes  thurgh  the 
londe,  And?  alle  the  other  thynges  that  had?  nede  of  amendement,  in 
suche  wyse  that  his  power  grewe  fro  day  to  day  moche  appertely  / 
Of  hym  shal  I  saye  in  shorte  wordes  the  very  trouthe  /  he  regned  3G 
not  but  one  yere  /  ant?  that  was  moche  grete  dommage  /  ffor  he  had 

2  Fr.  "  chasse  d 'argent,"  i.  e.  reliquary  of  silver.  3  Orig.  ttesour. 


Ch.  CXCV.]     Something  about  Godfreys  Early  Life.  285 

the  wylle,  wytte,  and  power  to  doo  grete  good*  in  the  Royamme  for  Re  wm  » 
tenfeble  theneiuyes  of  oure  lord  Ihesu  Crist,  and  for  tenhaunce  and  J^^Jl)1 
exalte  the  Cristen  fayth  /  But  our  lord  called  hym  fro  this  world!  to 
4  hym,  to  thende  that  the  malyce  of  it  shold  not  chaunge  his  herte  in 
thonour  wherin  he  was  /  he  was  born  in  the  Royamme  of  Fraunce  He  was  born 

'  *  '  at  Itoulngne 

at  boloyne  vpon  the  see  /  whiche  was  somtyme  a  Cyte  /  And  nowe  in  France, 
it  is  but  lytil  more  than  a  castel.  he  cam  of  hye  and  noble  folke 
8  and  good  crysten  peple.  his  fader  was  named  eustace,  noble  & 
puyssauwt  erle  in  that  countre,  whiche  had  doon  many  hye  werkes 
&  bou«tees  vnto  our  lord  &  noble  werkes  vnto  the  world  /  his 
moder  was  a  noble  lady  of  gentilesse  /  more  noble  of  herte  than  of 
12  hyen.es  of  lygnage.  She  was  named  yde,  &  was  suster  to  the  due 
of  Loreyne,  whiche  was  named  godeffroy  bouce.  he  deyde  withoute 
heyer.     Therfor  he  lefte  alle  the  duchye  and'  the  Countreye  to  his  He  was  his 

J  »  "  uncle  B  1 1 f ■  i r 

neuewe  whiche  bare  liis  name,  And1  adopted1  hym  in  to  sone  and1  ^  ^er'^l,y 

16  heyr  /  Therfore  he  was  due  of  Loreyne  whan  xhis  vncle  was  deed  /    P  leaf  131] 

he   had    thre   brethren,  whiche  were  moche  wise  men   and  good  He  had  three 

'  °  brothers, 

knyghtes  /  and  also  moch  fathful  and  trewe  /  That  one  was  Bawd-  Baldwin, 
wyn,  therle  of  Rages  /  whiche  after  hym  was  kyng  of  Iherusalem  / 

20  The  second  was  named  Eustace,  whiche  bare  the  name  of  his  fader,  Eustaciie, 
And  was  Erie  of  boloyne  /  The  kynge  Stephen  of  Englond  toke  his 
doughter   to  wyf,  whiche  was  namde    Maulde.2     The   barons  of 
Surye  sente  for  this  Eustace  for  to  make  hym  kyng  after  the  deth 

24  of   his  broder  bawdwyn,  whiche  deyde  withoute  heyer.     But  he 
wold!  not  goo  /  ffor  he  doubted!  the  barats  &  discordes  of  the  londe 
whiche  he  knewe  wel.     The  fourth   broder  was  william,  a  good  and  William, 
knyght  and  a  trewe.    3ne  he  discorded  not  in  the  bounte  of  his 

28  bretlieren3  /  Bawdwyn  and  Eustace  folowed  theyr  lord  and  broder 
in  the  pylgremage  to  Iherusalem.  the  fourth  broder  guylliaru  abode 
in  his  countre  for  to  kepe  the  londe.  Alle  the  four  bretheren  were 
of  moche  crete  valeur.     But  the  due  Godeff  roye  lyke  he  was  the  but  nuke 

°  l-iii       Oodfrev  had 

32  oldest,  so  bare  he  awaye  the  prys  and  auantage  of  the  other  /  as  he  ""^J  f 
that  was  ful  of  vertues,  of  bountes,  and  was  moche  noble  and  right-  the  tour, 
ful  withoute  couetyse  /  he  dredde  and  louyd  oure  lord!  aboue  alle 
thynge  /  he  honoured  relygyous  men  and  good,  he  was  moche  ferme 

36  and  constant  of  his  worde  /  he  despysed  merueyllously  bobaunces, 
pom  pes  /  and  dishonestees,  and  hated  them  /  he  was  in  alinesse 

-  Ft.  Maliaut,  Lat.  Mahaldem. 

■i— a  Fr.  "rae  sc  discordait  mie  a  la  bonte  des  ses  frbrcs,"  i.  e.  he  was  just  as 
good  as  liis  brothers. 


286  Further  Details.  [Ch.  CXCVI. 

large  and  plentyuous,1  gladly  he  herd1  the  seruyse  of  our  lord,  and 
moche  wel  vnderstonde  it.    And  in  liis  prayers  and  orysons  prayeng 
ue  pmypd      our  lord  /  he  was  right  longe  /  And  fylle  ofte  in  wepyng  habound- 
inany  tears,    antly  teeris.     And  vnto  alle  men  he  was  pytous  and  amyable.     By  4 

this  it  seined  Avel  that  oure  lord  louyd  hym,  wherof  he  was  worthy 

He  wassreat  to  haue  the  grace  of  the  world.     And  so  he  had  certaynly  /  he  was 

Lne,y»nd      grete  of  body,  not  of  the  grettest2  /  But  of  mene  gretuesse,  more 

inarms,        stronge  than  an  other  man  /  his  armes  grete  and  wel3  quartred,  the  8 

breste  moche  brode  and  largo,  and  vysage  wel  made  and  coloured, 

heeris  abourne4  /  And  in  his  harnoys  and  armes  wel  enducte  and 

acustomed,  that  it  semed  that  hit  greued  ne  coste  hym  nothyng  to 

to  here  them.  " 

Of  the  sayeng  of  the  countesse  of  boloyne,  moder  of 
the  sayd  due,  that  she  sayde  of  her  thre  oldest 
sones  was  verified.  Capitulo  Clxxxxvj. 

o       Ne  thyng1  is  sayd  for  trouth.     And  it  happed  in  the  tyrae  of  16 
the  yongthe  of  thyse  four  bretheren,  whiche  ought  not  to  be 
P  if.  i3i,  bk.]  lefte  vnremembryd  ne  forgoten  /  The  Moder  of  thyse  four  5 bretheren 
rftLZtalr   of  whom  I  haue  spoken,  was  an  holy  woman  /  and  entendable  to 
wm  aToiy     good  werkes.     It  was  nothynge  merueylle  though  oure  lord  spak  20 
woman.         ^y  ^  m0uth  a  prophecye,  fEor  it  happed  on  a  daye  that  her  thre 
oldest  sones,  whiche  were  yong  and  smale,  pleyde  eche  with  other  / 
And  as  they  chaced  eche  other  in  theyr  playe  /  alle  thre  fledde  vnto 
theyr  moder  /  where  she  satte  /  and  hydde  them  vnder  her  mantel  /  24 
Theyr  fader  Eustace  cam  there  where  the  lady  was,  And  he  sawe 
As  they         her  mantel  meue,  where  the  childeren  playde  vnder  it  /  he  de- 
aS  her     maunded  the  lady  what  it  was.     She  answerd  that  she  had  thre 
Zprophe-    grete  prynces  /  The  fyrst  of  them  shold  be  a  due,  The  second  28 
Bret  shwid8  sholde  be  a  kyng1,  And  the  thyrde  an  Erie,     ffor  Godeffroye  was  / 
tijeasecomi  a   ,juc6  0f7  Loreyne  after  his  vncle,  And  had  also  after  the  Royamme 
tC&ird  an    0f  Iherusalem.     But  he  was  neuer  crowned,  ne  wold  not  be  callyd 

kynge.     The  second  was  bawdwyn,  whiche  had  after  hym  the  sayd  32 
Royamme,  and  was  crowned  /  The  thyrde  was  Eustace,  which  after 
the  deth  of  his  fader  was  erle  of  boloygne.     now  late  vs  retorue  for 

1  Orig.  plentyuons.  2  Fr.  "  mais  dc  moyenna  grandeur." 

s  Fr.  "  bras  avoib  gros  et  quarrSz."     Quarriz  signifies  literally  square,  i.  e. 
stout,  not  well  quartered.  *  Fr.  blons,  blond. 

6  Orig.  due.  7  Orig.  ef. 


Cb.  CXCVIL]     Of  Godfreys  Feats  of  Arms.  287 


to  speke  of  the  valyaunt  Due  Godeffroy,  ffor  moche  honour1  may  "j"*]1™ 
be  sayd  of  hym  /  And!  also  of  the  valyaunces  don  by  hym.  <£&»£ 


nnour 
d 


Of  the  wagyng  of  a  bataylle  that  was  bytwene2  the 
4  due  godefroy  and  an  hye  baron  of  Almayne. 

ca°  Clxxxxvij0 

e       Mong3  all  other  hye  i'eetes  that  he  dyde,  I  shal  recounte  to 

von  one  withoute  lesynge  /  hit  was  so  certaynly  that  one  of  He  had  a 

J  j     o      i  "  dispute  with 

8  the  hyest  barons  of  Allemayne,  a  grete  and  strong  knyght  /  valyaunt  j^^™" 
and  noble,  4siewed  the  due  godeffroy,  whiche  was  his  cosyn,  in  gJJJjJJ* 
plee4  in  the  court  of  themperour  of  Almayne  /  to  whom  they  were 
men  both  two.     This  man  demaunded  of  due  godefroy  grete  parte 

12  of  his  londe  that  he  helde  in  the  duchye  of  Loreyne,  And  this 
baron  sayd  that  it  was  his  right,  &  apperteyned  to  hym.  So  longe 
wente  the  plee  forth  by  dayes  &  respytes,  that  they  of  the  court 
iuged  that  it  shold  be  determyned  by  wagynge  of  the  bataylle,  & 

16  named  to  them  a  day  to  fyght  for  it.     At  the  daye  named  they  They  derided 

^  "  °  to  settle  it 

cam  in  to  the  felde  Armed  and  aparaylled  of  that  they  ought  to  by  single 
haue  /  Thenne  Bisshops  and  good  men  laboured  moche,  And  other 
Barons  that  were  there  payned  them  moche,  for  to  seke  moyen  and 

20  manere  how  the  pees  myght  be  made  /  And  shewde  to  them  how 

they  were  of5  one  blood  and  lygnage,  And  that  they  ought  6to    Pteafws] 
deporte  them  tenterpryse  thynge  of  whiche  muste  nedes  falle  to 
one  of  them  shame  &  dishonour.6     They  payned  them  moche,  one 

24  &  other  /  but  in  no  manere  coude  they  fynde  the  peas  to  be  made 
bytwene  them  /  Thenne  began  the  bataylle  bytwene  thyse  two 
barons  moche  tiers  and  sharp,  ffor  they  were  bothe  good  and  strong 
knyghtes.     They  smote  to  gydre  right  vygorously  /  This  bataylle  JJ*jj*  WM 

28  endured  so  long  that  the  valyaunt  due  godeffroy  smote  that  other  5g^J^"a 
so  grete  a  strook  with  his  swerde  that  it  fiewe  in  pyeces  /  In  suche  ^'h,';,'"^ 
wyse  that  there  abode  nomore  in  his  hande  therof  but  half  a  foote  8Word- 
longe  aboue  the  crosse  of  the  swerde  /  The  barons  that  behelde  the 

32  felde,  sawe  how  the  due7  had  broke  his  swerde  and  had  the  werse, 
&  were  moche  sory  &  wroth  therof  /  And  cam  to  themperour,  & 

1  Orig.  honour.  2  Orig.  lytwene.  3  Orig.  Moug. 

*-i  Fr.  "tira  en  plait,"  i.  e.  brought  suit  against  him.  5  Orig.  ef. 

h_c  pr  <<  ci  qUtfz  s'cn  deportassent  d ' entreprendre  chose  parquoy  il  convenist 
que  Tung,"  etc.— misunderstood  by  Caxton.— It  should  have  been  translated, 
"ami  that  they  shouhldesist  from  undertaking  an  affair  in  which  one  or  the 
other  would  be  brought  to  shame."  "  "rig.  iluc. 


adversary. 


288  Of  a  Fair  Feat  of  Arms.     [Ch.  CXCVIII. 

they  prayd  hym  swetly  that  he  -wold  suffre  that  Hhey  myght 
comene  of  the  peas  bytwene  them1  /  he  graunted  it  gladly  /  The 
Some  rriendB  frendes  spak  to  gydre  and  acorded  vnto  a  peas,  whiche  was  ynowgh 
fora'VoiHpro-  resonable.  But  they  lefte  somwhat  of  the  dukes  right  /  whan  they  4 
but  Godfrey  brought  this  acorde  and  pees  to  them  /  The  Due  in  no  wyse  wold 
sVfai8fied,  nnd  here  herof,  But2  began  the  bataylle  more  cruel  and  fiers  than  it  was 
combat  with  to  fore  /  That  other  that  had  his  swerd  hool,  doubted  ne  feied  not 
•word,  moche  the  strokes  of  the  due,  whiche  had  but  a  tronchon3  /  but  8 

ranne  vpon  the  due  and  oppressid  hym  that  he  had  no  leyzer  to 
reste  hym,  til  the  due  began  to  thynke  and  to  take  herte  /  Thenne 
he  dressyd  hym  on  his  steroppes  /  And  smote  his  aduersarye  with 
andtims        the  pommelle  of  his  swerde  that  he  helde  /  vpon  the  lyfte  temple  12 
qnui'ied  his    suche  a  strook  thurgh  the  helme  that  he  fyl  doun  astonyed,  that  it 
semed  that  he  was  deed  /  ffor  he  remeuyd  no  foote  ne  hande  / 
Thenne  the  noble  due  a  lyght  doun  and  descended  fro  his  hors  /  and 
threwe  a  way  his  tronchon3  of  his  swerde  ;  And  toke  the  swerde  fro  16 
hym  that  he  had  beten  doun,  and  mounted  vpon  his  hors  agayn  / 
Thenne  called  he  the  barons  /  that  had  made  and  brought  to  hym 
to  fore  the  peas  /  and  sayd  to  them  :  "  ye,  lordes,  suche  maner  of 
And  then  as    peas  as  ye  offred  to  me  right  now  /  is  now  to  me  agreable,  and  am  20 
ceptedthT    redy  nowe  to  take  and  abide  /  ffor  though  I  haue  the  dommage  and 
behBd"        losse,  Atte  leste  I  haue  no  shame  ne  dishonour  /  And  it  plesyth  me 
honourable     wel  to  gyue  &  departe  of  my  right,  to  thende  that  I  slee  not  this 

when  van-  .       .   .  ..,      ,,  ■•  0. 

quired.        whiche  is  my  cosyn.       whan  the  barons  herd  this,  alle  they  began  Zi 
to  wepe.     The  peas  was  made. suche  as  he  sayde  /  he  had  more 
honoure  and  loos4  /  for  the  pees  to  whiche  he  adressyd  hym  so 
swetly,  than  of  alle  the  prowesses  that  he  had  in  this  bataylle,  In 
whiche  he  dyde  many.  "8 

[Mf.is2,bk.]50f  a  fayr  feat  of  Armes  that  the  due  dyde  in 
a  bataylle  that  the  Emperour  of  Almayne  had 
ayenst  them  of  Saxone.        Capitulo  Clxxxxviij0 

Another        a       N  other  feat  of  prowesse  I  shal  recounte  to  you,  lylce  as  it  32 
i»iuS!'  happed,  without  lesynge.     The  peple  of  Saxone,  whiche  ben 

the  mooste  felle  and  moost  cruell  of  alle  them  of  Almayne,  had1 
desdayne  and  despyte  tobeye  to  themperour  /  And  sayde  that  they 
wold  doo  nothynge  for  themperour  henry.     But  sayde  that  they  36 

i_i  Yr.  "qu'on  parlast  de  paix  entre  eux,"  that  peace  might  be  arranged 
between  them.     "  Orig.  Bnt.     3  Orig.  trouchon.     4  Fr.  los,  praise,  Lat.  laudis. 


Cli.  CXCVIII.]     Godfrey  chosen  Staiulanl- Bearer.  289 

wold  haue  a  lord  vpon  them  self,  whiche  shold  obeye  to  none 
other.  And  made  an  hye  noble  man  of  the  countre,  whiche  was 
emon«e  them,  an  Erie  named  Kaoul,  for  to  be  kynge  vpon  them,  by  They  made 

4  whom  they  wold  be  Iustised  and  gouerned.     whan  themperour  herd  their  king. 
this  he  was  moche  wroth  /  and  desired  moche  to  be  auenged  of  so 
grete  oultrage.     Therfor  sente  he  for  alle  the  barons  of  thempyre, 
and  assembled  moche  grete  court  /  and  made  to  be  sayd  and  shewde 

8  in  the  presence  of  them  alle  the  pryde  and?  rebellyon  of  them  of 

Saxone,   wherof   he   demaunded    debonayrly    counseyl   and    theyr 

helpe.     They  acorded  alle  that  this  thynge  was  for  to  be  auenged 

asprely.     They  habandouned  bodye  and  power  to  themperour  for 

12  thamendynge  of  this  trespaas.     They  departed,  and  eche  wente  in 

to  his  countre.     Themperour  somoned  his  hooste  as  strongly  as  he  The  Emperor 

c  °  "  of  German}' 

mvcht  at  a  castel  on  the   marche  of  Saxone.     whan  they  were  assembled  hii 

*  o  v  men  at  a. 

entred  in  to  the  londe,  theyr  enemyes  sayde  that  they  wolde  fyghte  certain  cast ie. 
16  ayenst  them,  ffor  they  were  prowd  and  fiers,  in  suche  wyse  that 
they  sette  but  lytil  by  the  power  of  themperour  /  whan  they  knevre 
that  they  must  fyght  /  they  ordeyned  theyr  batayJles  /  ffor  they 
had  moche  peple  /  And1  had  ynowe  /  Thenne  demaunded  thern- 

20  perour  /  of  whom  they  were  acorded  that  shold  here  thaygle  /  which 

is  the  fawcon2  of  thempyre.  /  They  choos  to  fore  alle  other  for  to  doo  Godfrey  of 

1  J        '  "  _  Lorraine  was 

that,  the  valyaunt  due  of  Loreyne,  worthy  and  moo-t  sufficiant  to  chosen  to 
do  it.     They  reputed  it  for  a  moche  grete  worship  that  he  was  eagle. 

21  thus  chosen  by  comyn  acord  of  them  alle  /  Neuertheles  he  with 
sayde  it,  and  refused  as  moche  as  he  myght.  But  he  muste  nedes 
take  it  on  hym3  /  This  daye  cam4  /  and  that  one  partye  approuched 

that  other  in  suche  wyse  that  they  assembled  fierslv  /  ther  were  They  met  the 

J  J  "  Sax. .ns  in 

28  many  men  put  to  deth,  ffor  they  were  merueillously  wroth  eche  battle, 
ayenst  other,    whyles  thus  as  the  bataylle  was  grete  and  fyers  in 
many  places,  the  due  Godeffroye,  that  conduyted  the  bataylle  of 
Themperour,  espyed  a  grete  Rowte  of  men,  wherin  was  this  Raoul, 

32  whiche  was   lorde   5of  saxone  /  ayenst  them6  the  due  dyde  do    picafmj 
assemble  the  peple  of  themperour.     The  due  knewe  this  Kaoul, 
and  smote  the  hors  with  his  spores  ayenst  hym.     And  with  the 
gonfanon  that  he  bare  /  lusted  ayenst  hym  in7  suche  wyse  that  he  ^j*™1, 

36  bare  hym  thurgh  the  bodye  audi   slewe  hym,  that  he  fylle  doun  Godfrey. 

deed  in  the  place.     And  Incontinent  he  redressyd  and  reysed  on 

1  Fr.    "si  en  fircnt  assez,"  viz.   "so  they  made  plenty  of  them  (i.  c.  of 
battalions)."         "  Corruption  or  mistranslation  for  Gonfanon.     Fr.  gonfanun. 
3  Orig.  hyin.  *  Orig.  cain.  c  Orig.  thein. 

7  "telcment  qu'il  lui  rnvoya  pariny  Ic  coiys  oultrc." 

GODFREY.     '  u 


290  Godfrey  establish  Canons  of  tltc  Cliurch.     [Ch.  CXCIX. 

heygthe  his  baner  alle  blody  /  his  peple  sawe  that  they  had!  loste 

theyr  lord,  and  anon  were  disconfyted  /  Somme  fledde,  &  somme 

T!,Vesjs"r   fy^°  d°un  vn*-o  the  feet  of  themperour,  and  put  them  in  his  mercy  / 

the  Emperor.  Alle  the  gentilmen  and1  other  gaf  good  hostages  for  tobeye  euer  4 

after  to  hym,  and  he  at  his  comniaurcment  /  Many  other  prowesses 

made  the  valyaunt  due  godeffroye  /  hut  it  behoueth  not  to  put 

them  alle  in  this  historye,  ffor  my  purpose  now  is  for  to  recountre 

of  the  holy  londe  by  yonde  the  see,  and  not  of  them  on  this  syde,  8 

but  of  them  of  whom  ye   may  vnderstande  that  he  was  in  his 

r.odfrey  gave  countre  noble  and!  a.valyauut  knyght.     Of  his  largesse  ayenst  oure 

generously  to  J  JO  o  J 

the  fimrcFi,     lord  I  shal  saye  to  you  one  thynge,  by  whiche  ye  maye  vnderstande 

the  other.     In  the  duchye  of  Loreyne  was  a  casteh,  whiche  was  12 
moost  renonimed  and  chyef  of  thonour  of  buyllon  /  And  bare  that 

when  he        name  /  whan  he  shold  meue  to  goo  in  his  pyl"remaye  by  yonde  the 

started  on  his  '  °  rj   o  c>        j    j 

piiKiim:ige.    see,  he  gaf  this  castel  as  the  mooste  noble  and  hyest  of  his  herytage 

vnto  oure  lord  in  Almesse,  in  to  the  chirche  of  lyege,  for  to  abyde  1G 
there  for  euermore. 


How  the  valyaunt  due  godeffroy  augmented  the  holy 
chirche,  And  how  he  wold  neuer1  here  crowne. 

ca°  Clxxxxix.  20 
s        Yth  that  he  had  thus  by  election  the  Royamme  /  like  as  a 
ire  loved  the  deuoute  and  a  relygyous  man  as  he  was,  he  louid  moch  holy 

service  ot  our  "  °-y 

L",i,»  chirch  &  the  seruise  of  our  lord,     by  co?iseyl  of  the  bisshops  &  of 

other  wise  clerkes  that  were  in  thoost  /  he  ordeyned  fyrst  in  the  24 
chirche  of  the  sepulcre  of  our  lord,  and  in  the  temple,  clerkes  for  to 
seme,  &  establysslied  chanonnes,  &  gaf  to   them  grete  rentes  & 
large  herytages,  2of  which  they  shold  take  theyr  prebendes.2     &  he 

and  ordained  Avoid  that  the  chirches  in  thoo  partyes  there  shold  be  ordevned  28 

the  i-l i in. -lies  . 

in  Palestine    after  the  establementis  /  vses,  and  custommes  of  the  grete  chirches 

as  they  were  ' 

in  Kraiwe.  0f  fraunce3  /  He  began  moche  hyly  /  &  wel  had  accomplysshed,  yf 
our  lord1  had  gyuen  to  hym  lenger  lyf  /  He  had1  brought  with  hym 
oute  of  his  countre  relygyous  Monkes,  whiche  sayde  and  songe  32 
[*  if.  i3*. bk.]  theyr  4howres  and  serayse  al  a  longe  the  waye  as  he  cam.  he  gaf 
an  abbey  tor  to  them  an  Abbaye  in  the  vale  of  Josaphat,  and  establysshed  them 
richly.  there,  And  endowed  them  there  moche  Kychcly  with  good  rentes 

1  Orig.  ncner. 

3—3  Fr.  "mi  Hz  devoicnt prendre  leurs  jyrorendes,".  from  which  thev  should 
draw  their  revenues.  J  Orig.  fraunce. 


Ch.  CC  ]  He  refuses  to  be  crowned  King.  291 

and  reuenues1  /  And  gaf  to  them  grete  pryueleges.  he  was  a  very 
relygyous  andf  deuoute  man,  And  had  his  herte  moche  large  vnto 
holy  chirche,  And  'faf  therto  many  grete  thynges.     whan  lie  was  wiicn  he  wat 

•>  °  "  "  chosen  kiiir, 

4  chosen  to  be  kynge  /  alle  the  barons  requyred  hym  that  he  wold  do  gj*  aboJj!i0 
hym  be  crowned,  and  receyue  thonour  of  the  Koyamme  as  hyly  as 
the  other  kynges  in  Cristendom  doo  /  he  answerde  /  that  in  this 
holy  cyte,  where  onr  sauyour  Ihesu  Criste  suft'ied  deth,  and  had 

8  born  a  crowne  of  thornes  vpon  his  heed  for  hym  and1   for  the 
synners  /  he  wold  neuer  here,  yf  it  playsyd  god,  crowne  of  gold  ne  i««  refiuw, 
of   precious   stones,   but  hym  seined'   that  it  was  ynowe  of  that  j>« wo,,w  •»•* 

1  '  »  "lie  crowned 

coronacion  that  he  hadf  the  daye  of  his  passion  for  to  honoure  alle  wjtn  e,M 

«  l  where  our 

12  the  kynges  Cristen  that  shold  be  after  hym  in  Iherusalem  /  ffor  this  J?***"^ 
cause  he  refused  tlie  crowne.     Ther  ben  somme  men  that  wyll  not 
accompte  hym  emong  the  kynges  of  Iherusalem  /  but  me  thynketh 
that   therfore    he    ought  not   to   be    lassed   ne   dymynued  of   his 

1 6  honoure,  but  the  more  and*  hyer  exalted*  and*  enhaunced ;  ffor  he 
dyde  not  this  for  despysyng  of  the  sacrament  of  holy  chirche,  but 
lie  dyde  it  for  teschewe  the  bobaunce  and  pryde  of  the  world,  and 
fur  the  grete  mekenes  &  humylyte  that  he  had  in  his  herte  /  wher- 

20  fore  thenne  I  saye  not  only  that  he  was  not  kynge,  but  he  was 
gietter  than  ony  kynge  that  holdeth  ony  Royamme  syth  that  the 
holy  londe  of  Iherusalem  was  conquerd.2 

How  the  turkes  of  Arabe  and  of  Egypte  made  theyr 

24  somautfce  for  to  come  in  to  Surye  tassaylle  our 

cristen  men  /  ca°.  CC'! 

n       Ewly  whan  the  cyte  was  taken  /  yet  er  that  the  Barons  were 
departed!,  cam  tydynges  in  to  the  toun  of  Iherusalem,  &  trew 

28  they  were  /  that  the  Calynhe  of  E<rypte,  which  was  the  mooste  Tiie  Cuiipii  of 
puyssaunt  andf  myghtiest  of  all  the  londe  of  thoryent,  had  somoned  summoned  a 
alle  his  power,  knyghtes,  gentilmen,  and*  alle  other  that  myght  here  io invade 
armes  /   in   suche  wyse    that   he   had   assembled   a   grete   hooste 

32  merueyllously ;  ffor  he  had  grete  desdayne  and  despyte  of  this  that 
so  lytil  peple,  whiche  were  of  a  straunge  londe  and1  ferre  countrey,3 
were  so  hardy  and  durst  come  in  to  this  londe  and  Ro4yamme,  and    [*ieafiao] 
had  taken  the  cyte  whiche  he  had  conquerd1  vpon  his  enemyes  /  he  T)ie  com. 

36  made  come  to  fore  hym  his  conestable,  whiche  was  prynce  of  his  H£nM»ny' 
hoost :   he  was  named  Elafdales.     To  this  man  he  commaunded!  Kilfmaw 

1  Orig.  reueunus.  2  Orig.  conqnerd.  3  Orig.  conntrey. 


292  Elafdaks  invades  Syria.  [Ch.  CC. 

that  he  shold!  take  all  this  peple  with  hyni  &  goo  in  to  Surye  /  And? 
renne  vygorously  vpon  this  peple,  that  were  so  folyssh  and  oult- 
rageous,  that  had  torned  his  peas1  and  made  warre  to  his  peple. 
Therfor  he  commaunded2  hym  that  3he  shold  efface  and  destroy e  4 
them  alle  /  In  suche  wyse  that  neuer  worde  be  spoken  of  them3  / 
bom  in  This  Elafdales  was  of  Ermenye  born,  And*  was  called1  Cimireenx4 
christian       by  another  name.     Of  the  Cristen  men  he  was  comen  /  But  for  the 

blood,  but  a"7  /.lii.iij.i.rjQ 

proselyte  to    Rychesse  that  was  gvuen  hym,  and1  for  the  lecherye  that  he  londe  o 

Mohammed-         J  OJ  *      *  ■>       ■*  -t.   n   •  *        i. 

anism.         einonge  the  mescreauntes  /  he  renyed?  our  lord?  and1  Cristen  fayth 
He  had         for  to  become  sarasyn.     This  same  man  had  conquerd  the  Cyte  of 

already  once  ,      .  ,    ,  . 

conquered      Iherusalem  vpon  the  turkes,  and  sette  it  in  the  puyssaunce  01  his 
from  the        }or(|  the  same  yere  that  the  cristen  men  had1  besieged  it,  And  had  1 2 

Turks,  J  . 

not  yet  h'olden  it  .xj/  monethis  whan  thoost  of  the  pylgryms  toke  it 
vpon  them,  and1  rendred?  it  to  Cristiente  /  hit  was  a  thynge  that  it 
moche  displaysyd  his  conestable  that  his  lord'  had  hold?  it  so  short 
a  whyle  /  And?  enioyed  nomore  his  conqueste :  ffor  this  cause  he  16 
enterprysecJ  in  hym  this  werke  /  and*  for  to  renne  vpon  oure  peple. 
And  hym  thought  it  but  a  lytil  thynge  and1  a  light  for  to  doo, 
consyderyng1  the  grete  plente  of  peple  that  he  had?  for  to  disconfyte 
and  was  now  them  that  had  taken  the  Cyte.     He  cam  in  to  Surye,  &  brought  20 
reconquer      -with  hym  alle  the  power  of  Egypte.     he  had  grete  pryde  in  his 
master.         herte  by  cause  of  the  grete  people  that  he  had?  /  And?  was  moche 
angry  toward1  our  men  /  But  our  lord,  that  can  sette  wel  counseyl  in 
alle  the  purpoos  of  men  /  ordeyned  this  werke  all  in  another  maner  24 
than  he  deuysed  /  he  cam  with  alle  his  men  to  fore  the  Cyte  of 
Escalone.     There  they  lodged  them,  and  pourprised  grete  space  of 
ground,     with  them  were  ioyhed?  alle  the  dukes  of  damaske,  and 
they  of   arabe  that  were  in  thoo  partyes  /  moche   grete  peple  /  28 
Trouthe  it  is  that  to  fore  er  oure  peple  entred?  in  to  the  londe  / 
TheEgyp-     They  of  Egypte  and?  the  turkes  of  arabe  louyd?  not  to  gydre  /  5but 
Ttnkatorad*  doubted6  moch  thencreacyng  of  the  one  and  other5  /   But  after, 
not,'0  ei      they  accompany ed?  them  togydre  to  come  vpon  oure  men,  more  for  32 

1  The  MS.  which  Caxton  followed  reads  "  trouve'e  sa  paix,"  which  makes 
no  sense,  and  was  rendered  turned  his  peace  by  him.  The  correct  reading  is 
"quil  acoit  brizie  sa  pes,"  that  it  had  broken  the  peace. 

2  Orig.  commannded. 

3-s  Lat.  "et  populum  pracsumptuosum  deleat  de  superfieie  terras,  ita  ut 
non  memoretur  nomen  illius  ultra." 

4  B.  Cimiriculx,  A.  Emiricux,  Lat.  Emirius. 

5— 6  Fr.  "aim  doubtoient  moult  le  croissement  Ics  uv-gs  des  aultres,"  but 
each  feared  greatly  the  growth  and  increase  of  the  other.  6  Orig.  doubted. 


Ch.  CCL]        The  Christians  pray  for  Victory.  293 

hate  of  oure  peple,  than  for  loue  that  they  had  emonge  them  self. 

They  were  alle  to  gydre  to  fore  Escalone,  And!  they  there  concluded1  but  united 

■»   '  °*  J  their  forces 

to  come  after  to  fore  Iherusalem  for  tassiege  the  toun1  /  Ifor  they  to  come 

°  '  *    againfit 

4  supposed  veryly,  that  oure  barons  durst  in  no  wyse  yssue  out  ayenst  Jerusalem. 
them  in  bataylle. 

2How  our  Cristen  men,  whan  they  knewe  thyse  tyd-  pif.M5,bk.] 
ynges,  cryed  to  god  for  mercy  /  and  for  to  haue 
8  the  vyctorye.  ca°  CCj°. 

w      Han  thyse  ty changes  were  spradd  thurgh  the  cyte  of  Iherusa-  Tiie  chns- 

*^  tians  were 

lem,  Alle  the  peple  were  gretely  affray  ed,  grete  and1  smale  /  greatly 
By  comyn  acord  of  the  bisshoppes  they  cam  3wullen  and  barfote3  this  news, 

12  in  the  chirche  of  our  lord.     There  were  alle  the  peple,  ant?  cryed 

mercy  to  oure4  lorde  with  syghes  and1  teeris,  And  besought  Ihesu  and  prayed 
Criste    moche   swetly  that   his    peple,  whiche   he   had    kept   and  protect  them, 
deffended  vnto  that  day  /  he  wold  delyuer  fro  this  peryll,  ne  suffre 

16  that  the  cyte  and  holy  places  that  they  late  had!  rendred  and1  yeuen 
to  his  name  and!  to  his  seruyse,  and1  that  he  wold  not  that  they 
shold!  be  remysed  agayn  and  habandouned  in  ordure  and1  fylthe, 
and  in  the  desloyalte  of  the  hethen  men.     ffro  thens  they  wewte  a 

20  procession,5  syngynge  with  moche  grete  pyte,  vnto6  the  temple  of 
oure  lord1.  There  dyde  the  bisshops  and  the  clerkes  the  seruyse  / 
And1  the  laye  peple  prayde  with  moche  gooil!  herte  and1  pytous  / 
whan  this  was  don,  the  bisshops  gaf  to  them  the  benediction  /  And 

24  after  they  departed1,  The  due  ordeynedf  barons  and1  knyghtes  that  The  nuke 

assembled 

shold!  kepe  the   cyte.     After  this  he  yssued   out,   and  therle  of  his  men, 

r  J  J  '  and  went 

fflaundres  /  And  cam  in  to   the  playnes  of   Barnes.     The    other  for**1  iUS  far 

'  r     j  M  Raines, 

Barons  abode  in  Iherusalem  /  The  cytezeyns  of  nappies  had!  sente 
28  to  fetche  eustace,  broder  of  the  due,  and  Tancre  for  to  come  theder 
to  them,  &  they  wold!  yelde  to  them  the  cyte.  They  were  goon  by 
the  commaundement  of  the  due,  and  garnysshed!  moche  wel  the 
toun  with  peple  and1  vytaylle,  of  which  the  countre  was  moche 
32  fertile  /  therfor  they  abode  there,  and  knewe  nothynge  of  thyse 

tydynges  /  But  the  due  sente  for  them,  And  they  cam  hastely  /  sending  for 
and  were  with  the  other  barons,    whan  the  due  and  the  erle  of  and  Tanered, 

who  were  in 

fflaundres7  arryued  atte  Cyte  of  Barnes,  they  knewe  wel  the  trouthe  Trippie. 

1  Orig.  tonn. 

*— 3  Fr.  "  en  lange  et  nuz  pies."     The  Lat.  gives  only  "  nudis  pedibus." 

*  Ori'j.  oure.         5  Fr.  en  procession.         b  Orig.  vuto.         7  Orig.  fUaun  Jres. 

22 


294  Our  Men  capture  a  large  Body  of  Animals.     [Cii.  CCII. 

certaynly  that  this  admiral  was  lodged  to  fore  Escalone  with  so 
He  also  sent  grete  peple  that  the  contre  was  couerd.  Thenne  sente  they  hastely 
suiem  for  the  messagers  in  to  Iherusalem  vnto  the  other  barons,  which  abode  and 

other  barons, 

awayted  the  certaynte  of  this  thynge  /  And  he  bad  them  hastely  to  4 
come  alle,  sauf  suche  as  shold  kepe  the  cyte  /  And  shold  brynge 
alle  the  peple  moche  hastely,  as  for  to  fyghte  ayenst  grete  plente  of 
theyr  enemyes. 

How  our  men   assembled  and   ordeyned  theyr  bat-  8 
[i  leaf  136]  aylles  for  to  l  fyghte  ayenst  the  turkes.     And 

how  the  turkes  were  disconfyted?. 

Capitulo  /  CCijI 

t        Herle  of  tholouse  &   the  other  barons  that  were  with  hym  12 
knewe  the  certaynte  how  theyr  enemyes  cam  vpon  them  with  so 
wimcame      grete  power  /  therfor  they  gadred  to  gydre  alle  theyr  men  that  were 
the  place       {\\  Iherusalem,  and  yssued  out  and  come  to  them  moch  dilygently 
was-  in  to  the  playnes,  where  the  due2  was,  atte  a  place  named  now  16 

ybelyn.  whan  they  were  alle  assembled?  /  they  nombred!  theyr  peple 
and  fonde  /  xijC.  horsmen  /  and  of  footemen  /  ixM.  whan  thoost 
of  our  men  had  been  there  one  day  or  therabout,  after  euensonge, 
Avhan  it  began3  to  wexe  derk  /  they  espyed  a  fer  a  greet  prees  that  20 
cam  takyng  vp  the  countrey,  and1  couerd  grete  partes  of  the  playnes  / 
Oure  men  had!  supposed  certaynly  that  it  had  be  thoost  of  the 
saiasyns  /  And!  merueylled'  moche  how  they  cam  ayenst  them  at 
that  hour.  Thenne  they  sente  oute  .ij.C  /  horsmen  armed!  lightly,  24 
&  wel  horsed,  for  to  see  more  nygh  what  peple  they  were  that  cam  & 
our  men  now  how  many  were  of  them  ;  they  roode  forth  a  good  paas,  and  whan  they 
liiense  body    approached  them  /  they  knewe  that  it  were  Oxen,  Kyen,  and  mares  / 

of  animals  tl  I  J  >       J       '  / 

approaching,  ther  were  so  many  of  them,  4that  them  semed  there  were  no  moo  in  28 
alle  the  world,  and!  that  it  myght  suffyse4  for  alle  the  peple  ther 
about,     with  thyse  beestes  were  comen  men  on  horsbak,  whiche 
kepte  them  from  theuys,  And!  commaunded!  to  the  herdmen  what 
they  shold  doo.    They  that  were  sente  forth  by  the  barons  retorned!  32 

which  they     and  sayde  that  ther  was  noue  other  but  beestes.     Thenne  alle  oure 
men  ran  theder  /  The  kepars  of  them  fledde  that  myght  /  Somme 

2  Orig.  dnc.  s  Orig.  hegan. 

4— *  Fr.  "  il  leur  estoit  avis  que  s'il  n'en  exist  plus  en  toutc  ceiic  Icrrr,  si 
deiissent  ilz  soufire."  Caxton  has  omitted  the  si,  viz.,  if  there  were  no  more 
in  all  tli is  country,  etc. 


Cli.  CCII.]     They  arrange  their  Battalions  for  Battle.  205 

tlier  were  that  were  taken,  whiche  tolde  the  trouthe  of  the  turkes, 

In  suche  wyse  that  it  was  wel  knowen,  that  this  grete  hooste  of  Tn«y  lenmed 

J  '  "  Hint  the 

sarasyns  were  lodged  but  .vij  /  in  vie  from  them.     And  that  theyr  Saracen; 

J  t>  J  /        J  J      were  „„!„ 

4  purpooa  was  to  come  on  them  and  to  slee  them  alle.     Our  barons  ■»*«;  mile* 
were  thenne  certayn  of  the  bataylle  /  Andf  deuysedf  emonge  them  / 
ix.  bataylles  /  Andf  commaundedf  that  thre  shold*  goo  to  fore  on  that  They  then 

J  I  °  arranged 

one  syde.     For  the  playnes  were  greet.     Andf  thre  sholdf  go  in  the  Uieir  men 

J  r      J  t  °  In  nine 

8  mydle  /  and  thre  shold  come  behynde  /  Of  the  sarasyns  myght  battalions. 
noman  knowe  the  nombre  /  ffor  ther  was  so  grete  plente  that  euery 
daye  they  encreacedf  andf  grewe  of  the  contre  about  /  whiche  ranne 
to  them  in  suche  wyse  that  it  was  not  for  to  be  estemedf  /  whan  our 

12  men  had  goten  this  grete  gayne  that  I  spak  of,  that  is  to  saye  of 

alle  the  beestes  /  they  had  grete  ioye  and*  ioyously  restyd1  them  They  rested 
that  nyght ;  but  they  that  had  the  charge  made  good  watche  upon  "'k'1'. 
1thooste.    On  the  morn  whan  the  sonne  was  rysen,  the  due  dyde  do  ['if.  is*, bi<.] 

16  crye  that  euery  man  shold  arme  hym  and  goo  to  his  bataylle,  and 

after  wente  forth  a  soft  paas2  right  theder  where  they  thought  to  and  went 

forth  early  in 

f ynde  theyr  enemyes  /  thev  had  stedfaste  hope  in  our  lord  /  to  the  morning 

J  <>  •>  '  "  r  'to  meet  their 

whom  is  a  lyght  thynge  to  make  that  the  lasse  in  nombre  vayn-  enemies, 
20  quysshe  the  more  &  gretter  /  they  of  egypte,  &  the  other  mescre- 
au?«tes  that  were  with  them,  cam  in  moche  grete  desraye  vnto  the 
place  that  they  sawe  oure  peple  alle  in  the  playne.3  whan  they 
sawe  andf  knewe  that  our  men  had  noo  talente  to  withdrawe  them 
2-1  ne  eschewe  them,  but  cam  for  to  seche  them  /  they  began  moche  to 

doubte.     whan  they  sawe  that  oure  men  had  taken  and1  pourprised  «o  arranged 

J  .  f         f  that  they 

so  grete  a  place  on  the  playns,  wel  supposed*  they  that  they  had  ben  «mei1  ««• 
mochemore  people  andf  in  greter  nombre.     But  the  trouthe  was  j"1,nei lse 

28  suche  as  I  haue  saydf  /  Our  men  were  but  fewe  on  horsbak  andf  a 
foote.  the  grete  company  of  beestes,  as  I  haue  sayrl,  were  with 
them4  /  whan  they  drewe  forth  on  /  the  beestes  wente  with  them  / 
the  turkes  we?ide  that  they  had  ben  alle  men  Armed  and  had  ouer 

32  grete  fere  and*  drede  /  the  grettest  men  andf  they  that  men  supposed 

shold  best  haue  born  the  fayte5  of  the  bataylle.  they  began  to  with-  The  ggyp- 
J  J  .'       b  tillM8  Heil  j,, 

drawe  them  lytil  and1  lytil  andf  lefte  theyr  bataylles  the  one  after  ,ear- 
the  other  &  fledde  all  pryuely.     whan  the  lasse  knyghtes  of  the 
3G  turkmans  apperceyued  this  /  6they  neuer  toke  hope  on  them,6  but 

2  Fr.  tout  le  pas,  briskly.  3  Fr.  tout  a  plain,  plainly. 

4  Fr.  quant  cculx  se  tiroicnt,  when  these  advanced. 

5  Fr.  fais,  burden,  responsibility. 
6-6  Fr.  "  nc  prinrent  oneqiia  md  denpit  mt  eulx." 


296  Our  Men  find  great  Spoils.         [Ch.  CCIII. 

torned  their  horses  &  smote  with  their  spores,  &  fledde  euery  man 
On  this  day    where  he  supposed  hest  to  saue  hym  /  On  this  daye  was  he  lost  /  that 

was  lost  the  . .  ,  , 

Bishop  of      had  sette  al  his  herte  for  to  sowe  &  pourchasse  discordes  ouer  al 

Maturane.  .  , 

where  he  was  hyleuyd.    Noman  wote  wher  he  becam  /  tins  was  the  4 
bisshop  of  maturane.     Sonnne  men  sayde  that  the  due  had  sente 
hym  for  to  fetche  the  barons  that  were  lefte  in  the  cyte  /  and  whan 
he  retorned  Sarasins  shold  haue  take  hym  &  slayn  hym,  or  brought 
hym  in  pryson.    what  sommeuer  cam  of  hym  it  was  no  grete  harme,  8 
when  the      so  that  he  were  effaced  out  of  this  holy  company  /  whan  oure 
tiielr'victuTy  Barons  sawe  that  our  lord  had  foghten  for  them,  And  that  he  had 
put  in  the  hertes  of  the  turkes  so  grete  fere  &  drede  /  that  they 
were  fled  without  smytynge  of  stroke,  they  had  grete  ioye  and*  12 
they  gave      rendred  graces  and  thankynges  to  oure  lorde  deuoutly ;  they  had 
g«l  " to      counseyl  that  they  shold  not  folowe  them  withoute  araye  thurgh 
the  feldes  /  ffor  they  were  ouer  grete  nombre  of  peple  vnto  the 
regarde  of  them.    And  yf  they  happed  to  relye1  and  gadre  to  gydre  16 
agayn,  they  myght  perauenture  put  oure  men  to  the  werse.     Oure 
men  rode  alle  in  ordenaimce  vnto  the  tentes  of  the  hethen  men, 
p  leaf  m]    ffor  they  that  fledde  2loked  neuer  behynde  them  /  There  founde 
h,,rayenT,d    oure  men  so  grete  plente  of  Gold,  of  Syluer,  of  Robes,  of  lewellys,  20 
spilus "' the   and  of  vessell,  that  the  leest  of  them  had  ynowgh  /  Thus  gadred 
tSS"        they  alle  that  they  fonde  there  /  &  retorned  and  wente  agayn  to 
fadenetor"e    Iherusalem  euery  man  laden  and  charged  with  despoylles,  thank- 

yng  and  preysing  our  lord,  by  whom  was  comen  to  them  this  vyc-  24 
torye  /  honour,  and  gayne.     Thenne  made  they  within  the  cyte 
moche  ioye  &  grete  /  As  doon  the  vaynquers  and  conquerours3  whan 
they  departe  theyr  gayne. 

How  somme  of  our4  barons  wolde  retorne  home  after  28 
they  had  don  theyr  pylgremage  /  ca°  CCiij° 

i        N  this  maner  they  conteyned  them  in  the  Cyte  of  Iherusalem  / 
The  two  valyaunt  men  that  had  ben  long  tyme  in  the  seruyse 

of  our  lord,  and  had  perfourmed  theyr  pylgremage,  that  is  to  wyte  32 
The  Duke  of  the  due  of  Normandye  /  And  therle  of  fflaundres  /  they  toke  leue 
HrittesLi  of  the  other  barons  and  toke  theyr  waye  for  to  retorne  in  to  theyr 
s!;mforcra    countrey  /  they  cam  by  shippe  to   Constantinople  /  Themperour 

alexys  which  had  seen  them  to  fore  receuyed  them  with  moche  36 

1  Fr.  "se  raliasscnt"  if  they  should  rally.  3  Orig.  couquerours. 

1  Orig.  onr. 


Ch.  CCIII.]     History  of  the  Duke  of  Normandy.  297 

fayr  chiere,  &  gaf  to  them  moche  fayre  yeftes  at  theyr  departyng*  / 

After  they  cam  in  to  theyr  countre  hool  and!  ioyous  /  That  one  of  Xhe  ^*k(J of 

them,  that  was  the  due  of  Normandye  /  founde  the  thynge  alle  £"l""(1£((,'eat 

4  chaunged  otherwyse  in  his  countre  than  he  lefte  it  /  fl'or  whyles  he 

was  in  mayntenyng  this  holy  pylgremage,  lyke  as  ye  haue  herd,  his 

oldest  hroder  deyde  without  heyer  of   hia  hody,   wylliam   Eous,  Hi»  eldest 

whiche  was  kyng  of  englond  by  right  /  And  after  the  customes  of  wiiiiam 
J   °  °  j     o      i  KulU8  ,„,, 

8  the  countre  the  Royamme  was  fallen  to  this  due  of  normandye ;  died  without 
but  his  broder  whiche  was   yonger,  named  Henry,  cam   to   the 
barons  of  the  countrey  and1  made  them  to  vnderstande1  /  that  the 
due  his  broder  was  kyng  of  lherusalem  /  And  had  no  talente  /  ne 
12  purposed1  neuer  to  retorne  on  this  syde  the  montaynes.     By  this  His  younger 
lesyuge  they  made  hym  kynge  of  Englond1,  and1  they  becam  his  Henry  had 
men.     whan  his  broder  retorned  fro  the  holy  londe,  he  demaunded  obtained  the 

J  kingship. 

of  hym  Ins  herytage  entierly  /  And  he  wold  not  delyuer  it  to  hym. 

1 6  The  due  made  redy  a  grete  nauye  /  and!  gadryd  as  moche  peple  as 
he  myght  in  normandye  and  other  places,  and  passed  the  see  /  he 
arryued?  by  force.2  His  broder  that  was  kynge  cam  ayenst  hym 
with  alle  the  power  of  the  lande  /  The  bateylles  were  al  redy  for 

20  tassemble.     But  the  noble  and  wysemen  sawe  that  it  shold  be  ouer 

grete  3hurt  &  damage  yf  thyse  two  bretheren  shold  fyght  thus,  pif.m.bk.j 

Therfor  they  spak  of  pees,  and!  made  it  in  this  manere  /  that  the 

saycf  henry  shold  holde  the  Royamme  /  but  he  sholde  gyue  euery  Aeompro- 

24  yere  to  his  brother  a  greet  somme  of  good  /  of  whiche  he  made  effected 

J  °  °  '  between  the 

hym  sure  /  And*  thus  retorned  the  due  agayn,  and  cam  in  to  his  'wo  brother*, 
londe.    after  it  happed  that  the  kyng  whiche  had  somme  castellys  in 
normandye  to  fore  that  he  had  the  Royamme4  of  Englond1  /  them 

28  wolde  he  kepe  as  his  herytage  /  The  due  demaunded  them.     And 
he  wold  not  delyuere  them  /  thenne  the  due  assieged  them,  and 
toke  them  by  force,     whan  the  kyng  herd  this  /  he  was  moche  which  was 
angry,  he  assembled!  grete  peple  and  passed  ouer  in  to  Normandye  /  end»haii.ie' 

32  his  brother  cam  ayenst  hym  /  And  they  fought  to  gydre  at  tynche-  at  Tiuche- 
bray5  /  ther  was  the  due  disconfyted!  and*  taken,  his  broder  put  hym 
in  pryson,  wherin  he  deyde  /  Thenne  had1  this  henry  alle  to  gydre  Henry  was 
the  Royamme  of  Englond1,  and1  the  duchye  of  Normandye  /  Therle 

1  Orig.  vnderstande. 

2  Ft.  "il  arriva  en  Angleterrc  &  force,"  he  arrived  in  England  with  an 
army. 

4  Orig.  Royamme. 

5  The  Latin  does  not  specify  the  name  of  this  place,  which  is  added  by  the 
French  translator.     Fr.  Tanchcbray. 

2  2* 


298  Wise  Measures  of  Tancred.  [Ch.  CCIV. 

of  thoulouse  cam  vnto  the  lyche  in  surye  /  there  lefte  he  his  wyf, 
TiieEariof    the  Countesse,  and  wente  vnto  Constantynople,  And*  shold  hastely 

Toulouse  .  j 

went  t<>  con-  retorne  /  Tliemperour  made  to  hym  <rrete  i<>ye  and  receyned  hym 

8lantinople  rf  J  J  J 

on  a  visit.  moohe  wel  /  and  gaf  to  hym  grete  yeftes  /  And  after  cam  agayn  to  4 
his  wyf  hoole  &  sanf  /  to  his  felawship  in  Surye,  but  it  was  two 
yere  after,  as  ye  shal  here  /  The  due  godeffroy  was  in  Iherusalem  / 
wel  gouerned  he  the  Roy  am  me  whiche  oure  lord  had  gyuen  to 
hym,  he  reteyned  with  hym  the  Erie  Garnyer1  of  grece  /  And  8 
Tanored  other  Larons,  suche  as  he  myglit  have.  Tancre  the  valyaunt  abode 
Palatine       with  hym,  to  whom  the  Due  gaf  for  to  holde  in  herytaye  the  cvte 

witli  Godfrey,  ,  . 

of  tabarye,  whiche  stondeth  on  the  laye  of  Geme.2     And  with  that 
alle  the  pryncipalyte  of  Galylee  with  the  Cyte,  whiche  was  woned  12 
to  be  named  porphire,  And  nowe  named  Cayphas,  and  alle  tliap- 
an.i  governed  pertenaunces  of  thyse  thynges  /  Tancre  helde  tliyse  londes  so  wel 

wisely  tlie 

lands  allotted  and!  so  wvselv,  that  he  was  alovved  of  god  /  &  honoured  of  the 

him.  "  _  . 

world  /  he  ibimded  chirches  of  this  countrey3  moche  rychely  /  he  16 
gaf  to  them  grete  rentes  /  and  endowed  them  with  Aournementes 
i'ayr  and  of  grete  valine.     Specially  the  chirche  of  Nazareth,  of 
tabarye,  and  that  of  mount  Tahor,  he  lefte  them  in  bye  estate  and 
in  moche  ryche  poynt.      Lut  the  harons  that  after  hym  haue  be  20 
lordes  of  the  countrey  haue  taken  from  them  ynowgh  of  their  ten- 
ours  /  This  Tancre  was  wyse  and  trewe  /  And  delyted  hym  to  doo 
wel  to  the  chirches  /  as  it  appereth  after  whan  he  was  prynce  of 
Anthyoche.     tfor  he  enhaunced  the  chirclie  of  seynt  peter,  and  the  24 
pryncipalyte  and  seygnorye  of  anthyoche  made  he  moch  tejjcrece  & 
enlarged,  as  ye  shal  here. 

[♦leaf is8]  4How  buymoiit  and  bavvdwyn  beyng  certayn  of  the 

pryse  and  conqueste  of  Iherusalem  wolde  accom-  28 
plysshe  theyr  pylgremage  /         Capitulo  /  CC.iiij° 

w      llyles  that  the  Eoyamme  of  Iherusalem  was  in  such  estate  / 
Boiiemond  Euymont5  the  prynce  of  Anthyoche,  And  Bawdwyn  Eric  of 

receive  ti.e     Uages,  broder  of  the  due  godetfroy,  had!  herd  certayn  tydynges  that  32 

news  of  the 

conquest  of    6the  other  barons  that  helde  them  to  gydre  as  bretheren  for  the 


Jerusalem, 


accompauye  of  theyr  pylgremage,  had  by  thayde0  and!  helpe  of  our 

1  Fr.  Gamier  de  Grcs.  3  Fr.  B.  Gene  :  A.  Gcncsar. 

3  Grig,  conntivy.  6  Orig.  Bnyinont. 

6— B  Fr.  "que  les  aultrcs  barons  quilz  tcnoieni  a  frcrcs,  pour  la  compaignic 
du  pelerinage,  avoient,  par  Vaide,"  viz.,  that  the  other  barons  whom  they  con- 
sidered as  brothers  in  this  pilgrimage  had,  by  the  aid,  etc. 


Cl».  CCIV.]     Bohcmoml  and  Baldwin  finish  their  Pilgrimage.        299 

lord  Ihesu  Criste  conquerd  vpon  the  turkes  and  recouerd  to  oure 
fayth  the  holy  Cyte  of  Iherusalem  /  hy  whiche  they  had1  accom- 
plysshyd  theyr  vowes  and  theyr  pylgremages.     Therfor  they  assem- 
4  hied  on  a  day  named  for  to  goo  to  the  holy  eepulore,  to  theiule  Uhat  ami  decide 
they  were  assaylled  of  theyr  vowes.1     And  desired1  moche  for  to  their  own 

J  J  J  vows. 

see  the  Due  and  the  other  Barons,  to  whom  they  wold  gyue  ayde 
yf  they  had  nede  /  that  is  to  wete  of  their  bodyes  /  of  theyr  goodes 
8  and  of  theyr  men  that  were  vnder  them.  Tliyse  two  hye  men  were 
not  at  the  takynge  of  the  holy  Cyte  of  Iherusalem,  ffor  by  the 
wylle  of  the  pylgryms  that  one  of  them  abode  in  Anthyoche  /  And  Onewswln 
that  other  at  Rages,  for  to  kepe  soygnously  /  and   defende  the  the  other '" 

12  turkes  fro  thyse  2two  Cytees  whiche  were  fer  fro  Cristiente.2  Eche 
man  had  to  doo  ynowgh  in  his  countrey.  But  they  lefte  alle  for  to 
come  to  the  other  /  Buymont  cam  fyrst  fro  his  cyte  with  a  moche 
fayr  company,  grete  nombre  of  men  of  Amies  on  horsbak  and  a 

16  foote.     he  cam  vnto  a  Cyte  vpon  the  see,  named  valeme,  on  the  They  met  at 

Valerne,  and 

castel  of  margat  /  there  he  lodged  hym  maulgre  them  of  the  cyte. 
Bawdwyn  cam  fro  his  countrey  sone  after  and  so  moch  iourneied 
after,  that  he  ouertoke  the  prynce  buymont  to  fore  this  Cyte  /  And 

20  there  they  assembled  /  In  that  same  tyme  were  ariyued  pylgryms  wereaUo 
of  ytalye  at  the  lyche  in  surye.     Emong  them  was  a  good  man  B™™other 
wyse  and  wel  lettred,  Relygyous  and  of  grete  honneste,  named 
daybart,   Archebisshop   of  Pyse  /   Another  was   in  his  company, 

24  Archebisshop  of  puylle,  of  a  Cyte  named  Aciaue.3  Thyse  men  with 
theyr  meyne  cam  in  the  companye  of  thyse  two  barons  for  to  passe 
more  surely  vnto  the  Cyte  of  Iherusalem.  Of  them  was  moche  en- 
creced  thoost  of  thyse  two  prynces  /  in  suche  wyse  that  tliey  were 

28  wel  .xxv  /  M.  on  horsbak  and  a  foote.  Thus  thenne  helde  they 
theyr  waye  by  suche  manere  /  that  they  fonde  no  Cyte  but  of  theyr 
enemyes  /  wherfore  they  passed  with  moch  grete  payne  /  Tliey 
suffred  moche  in  theyr  way  for  lack  4of  vytaylles,  ffor  they  fonde  [*lf.iS8,bk.] 

32  none  for  to  bye.     And  suche  as  they  brought  fro  theyr  countrey 

was  faylled.     They  had  grete  cold1  /  &  so  grete  rayne  that  nothyng  They  suffered 

much  on  Hie 

myght  endure  ;  it  was  so  merueylous.     It  was  in  the  moneth  of  w;|y  "'"ni 

JO  '.  J  cold  and  rain, 

Iuyll,5  whiche  is  moche  rayny  customably  in  that  countrey  /  ffor 

1-1  Fr.  "afin  quilz  fussent  absouz  de  leurs  vcuz,"  that  they  might  be  ab- 
solved from  their  vows — assayled  is  probably  a  misreading  for  asxoylcd. 

2-2  Fr.  "deux  cites  qui  tiennent  grant  lieu  a  la  xpicntc,"  viz.,  two  cities 
which  occupy  a  great  place  in  Christendom. 

3  B.  Aticne  :  A.  Arricne.     Lat.  Ejriscopus  Arricnensis. 

5  Caxton  follows  his  corrupt  French  text  here.     That  it  is  a  mistake  can 


300  The  Reception  by  the  Christians  of  Jerusalem.     [Ch.  CCV. 

this  cause  many  deyed  of  mesease  in  that  companye,  flbr  in  alle  this 

also  from       lenge  "way,  they  niyght  fynde  none  that  wold1  selle  to  them  ony 

vytaylle,  sauf  they  of  Tryple,  and  they  of  cesaire.     They  had!  grete 

At  last  they    scarcete1  of  vytaylles  for  theyr  horses  /  Atte  laste  by  the  mercy  of  our  4 

Jerusalem,     lord  they  cam  to  Iherusalem  /  There  were  they  receyued  with  moch 

grete  ioye,  of  god,  of  the  barons,  of  the  clergye,  and*  of  alle  the  peple. 

They  vysyted  the  holy  places  of  the  cyte  in  teeris  and1  grete  sorowes 

of  berte  /  they  fylle  doun  flat  and  stratched  in  the  chirches  /  they  8 

kyssed  and  ete  2therthe  that  our  lord  had  bought2  /  After  they  cam 

where  nil  the  in  to  theyr  hostellys  /  where  alle  they  of  the  toun  made  to  them 

town  received  ,  ' 

them  with      grete  ioye  /  whan  the  hye  feste  of  the  natyuyte  of  our  lord  Ihesu 

Criste  approuched,  Alle  the  prelates  and  barons  yssued  out  of  Iheru-  12 
There  they     salem  &  wente  to  Bethlehem  /  There  helde  they  theyr  Cristemas. 

celebrated 

Christmas.  There  behelde  they  gladly  and  moche  ententyfly  the  holy  crybbe, 
wherin  the  sauyour  of  the  world  laye  bytwene  the  beestes,  deuoutly 
made  they  theyr  prayers  &  orysons  in  the  place  /  whiche  is  as  a  lytil  16 
dyche  where  the  swete  lady  that  was  moder  and  vyrgyne  after  that 
she  had  chylded  /  wrapped  her  sone  with  lytil  and  smale  clothys,  & 
gaf  hym  souke  of  the  Mylke  of  her  pappes. 

How  our  Cristen  men  chosen   a  very  Patriarke   in  20 
Iherusalem  and  assigned  to  hym  rentes  / 

ca°.  CCv° 

v       X   to  this  tyme  had   the    See  of   Iherusalem   ben  Avithout3 
pastour  and  patriark  that  duely  and  truly  had  entred  /  It  was  24 
The  harons     wel  thewne  v  monethes  that  the  cyte  was  conquerd  /  Thenne  assem- 
ble,! to  choose  bled  the  Barons  for  to  counseylle  to  haue  suche  a  man  that  were 
furjeru-       worthy  of  honour  &  myght  to  bere  the  faytes  /  Ther  were  wordes 

ynowgh  /  The  somme  wolde  haue  one  /  and  other  wold  haue  an-  28 
Their  choice   other.     Atte  laste  by  the  counseyl  and  good  wyll  of  alle  they  chees 
i>..imki't,      this  Daybart,  Archibisshop  of  pyse,  whiche  was  but  newly  come. 
oiUpisa!up     They  constituted  and  sette  hym  in  the  siege  of  Patriark  /  ffor  he 

that  had  be  made  by  this  baratour  arnold,  of  whom  I  haue  spoken  32 
[♦leaf  139]    4to  fore,  lyke  as  he  was  made  ayenst  right  and  reson,  In  lyke 

wyse  he  retorned  agayn  to  nought  /  whan  this  good,  wise  man  was 

easily  be  seen  by  tbe  context.     The   "July"  should  of  course  read  "  Be- 
cembcr."  1  Orig.  sarcete. 

2-2  Fr.  "La  terre  qioc  nostre  Seigneur  avoit  marchee."  Caxton  confounds 
marcher  (to  walk)  with  marchier  (to  buy),  to  bargain.  It  should  be,  the  earth 
■ulcere  our  Saviour  had  walked.  3  Grig,  withont. 


Ch.  CCVI.]       A  Quarrel  arises  in  Jerusalem.  301 

sette  in  his  dignyte  /  The  due  godefFroy  and  the  prynce  buymont 
cam  to  fore  hym  /  whiche  had  gyuen  to  hym  thus  honour  as  for  to 
be  the  vycayre  of  Ihesu  Criste  in  that  Jonde,  and  thanked!  and 
4  preysed  alle  to  gydre  oure  lord  /  whan  this  was  don  they  assygned  Rent*  were 

i  -r->        •      1  1  l-  i  »  •    i       assigned  to 

rentes   to   the  newe  Patnark,   suche  as  his  predecessour,  whiche  >>'m  emiai.ie  . 

.  to  his  rank. 

was  a  greeke,  had  holden.     And  other  gretter  aboue  that,  in  suche 
wyse  that  he  myght  honorably  mayntene  a  good  and  honest  com- 
8  pany  of  peple  /  Thenne  bawdwyn  and  buymont  toke  leue  of  the  Baldwin  ami 
due  and  of  the   other  barons,  and  descended  vnto  Horn   Iordan,  now  took 

leave  and 

and  there  bayned  them  /  ffro  thens  they  wente  by  the  Ryuer  syde  we,it  ,0  tlieir 
til  they  cam   to  tabarye.      Thenne  passed   by   the   londe  named 
12  Fenyce  /  And1  lefte  cesayre  on  the  right  syde.     After  they  cam  to 
the  Cyte  named  manbec.1     After  helde  they  the  see  syde  and  so 
moche  exployted  that  they  cam  al  hool  and  sound  to  Anthyoche. 

How  by  thatysement  of  somme  men  a  grete  debate 

16  sou.rded  bytwene  the  due  and  the  patriarke  of 

Iherusalem  /  ca°  CCvj° 

'  He  cuftomme  of  somme  men  is  suche  /  that  they  may  not 
t        suffre  the  peas  emong  the  peple,  where  they  may  sette  dis- 
20  corde  /  By  thatysement  of  suche  maner  folke  sourded  a  debate  a  dispute 

bytwene  the  due  and  the  patriarke  /  2ffor  the  patriarke  demaunded  tween  die 

1  l         /•  n  !•!•  ii  "ew  pi'triurcli 

of  hym  the  chyef  tour  of  the  toun,  whiche  is  named  the  toure  and  the 
dauyd,  and  the  fourth  part  of  Iherusalem2  /  aboue  that  he  wold 

2-4  haue  the  cyte  of  Iaphe  and  alle  thappertenauntes,  ffor  he  sayde 
that  they  were  the  droytes  and  rightes  of  his  chirche  of  the  sepulcre  / 
Avhan  this  debate  had  a  whyle  endured  bytwene  them,  the  due 
whiche  was  humble  and  mesurable  &  moehe  doubted  our  lord  /  on 

28  candlemas  day,  in  the  presence  of  alle  the  clergye  &  all  the  peple,  Finally  the 
he  gaf  the  iiij  part  of  Iaphe  moche  debonayrly  to  the  patriarke  and  mtsed  to 

give  tlie 

to  his  chirche  to  holde  for  euermore.     After  this  whan  it  cam  to  patriarch  the 

Fourth  part  of 

the  day  of  Eester,  to  fore  all  them  that  were  assembled  at  this  Jerusalem, 

J  and  the  city 

32  feste  /  he  gaf  in  to  the  honde  of  the  patriark,  the  fourth  part  of  of  Jaffa, 
Iherusalem  &  the  tour  dauyd  with  alle  the  appertenauntes  /  Alway 

1  Fr.  Malbcc. 

-—•  Fr.  Car  le  patriarche  lui  demandoit  la  saincte  cite  dc  Jhcrusalem,  et  la 
maitrcsse  furtresse  de  la  villc,  qu'on  nomme  la  tour  David,  oultrc  phis."  The 
patriarch  demanded  the  whole  of  the  city  of  Jerusalem,  not  "a  fourth"  as 
Caxton  translates.  Lat.  "  domino  pair  iarcha  rcponccntc  ab  co  cicitatcm  sanctam 
Dro  ascriptam,  ct  cjusdem  civitatis  pracsidium,"  etc. 


302  Efiasom  fur  the  Quarrel  [Ch.  CCVII. 

forseen  by  couenaunt  that  the  due1  shold1  holde  thyse  cytees  and1 
nssonnasiie  the  londes  aboute  vnto  the  tyme  that  by  the  ayde  of  oure  lord1  he 

should  have 

conquered      ]ia(|  conquerd  vpon  the  turkes  two  other  Cytees  /  By  whiche  the 

two  other  t.  r  ,      . 

the  Turks"     Royamme  myght  be  enlarged.     And  yf  it  happed  that  he  deyde  in  4 
[2  if.  139,  bk.]  the  2mene  whyle  without  heyer,  Alle  thyse  thynges  withoute  con- 
tradiction shold  come  in  to  the  honde  of  the  patriarke  /  and  to  the 
chirche.     The  trouthe  was  suche  as  I  haue  sayd,  But  it  is  ouer 
grete  merueylle,  ffor  what  reson  this  holy  man  that  was  so  wyse,  8 
demanded  thus  thyse  cytees  of  this  noble  man,  the  due,  as  I  haue 
sayd.     They  that  knewe  the  state  of  the  londe  /  helde  and  reputed 
them  self  for  lasse,  whan  they  vnderstode  this  werke  and  couetyse 
Every  one      in  the  chirche,  and  merueylled  therof*  /  ffor  the  barons  that  had  12 
that  the '       conquerd  the  cyte  gaf  it  to  the  due  so  frely  /  that  they  wold  not  / 
si.ouui  make  that  ony  man  lvuvng  shold  haue  no  right  aboue  hym,  but  that  he 

this  demand.  J  J     J     o 

shold  holde  it  hym  self  entierly  without  making  to  ony  other  ony 
obeyssaunce.  10 

Hier   recounteth  thy  story  e  how  the  fourth  parte  of 
Iherusalem  cam  vnto  the  patriarke  of  the  same  / 

ca°  CCvij° 

From  this      a       Lway  it  is  certayn,  that  fro  the  tyme  that  the  latins  entred  in  20 

pVuriircii  "e  to  the  Cyte,  And  yet  of  more  Auncyente  /  the  patriarke  of 

ilartofthe  '    Iherusalem  had  the  fourth  part  of  the  cyte  of  Iherusalem  /  And 

helde  it  as  his  owen  /  how  this  happed,  and  by  what  reson  /  I  shal 

saye  to  you  shortly  /  ffor  the  trouthe  therof  hath  ben  serched.     It  24 

is  founden  by  thauncyent  h".storyes,  that  whyles  this  Cyte  was  in 

Jerusalem      the  hondes  of  the  hethen  peple  /  It  myght  neuer  haue  peas  that 

peacXTdt'y,  longe  endured,  But  was  ofte  assieged  of  hethen  prynces  that  were 

about  it,  ffor  eche  of  them  wold  conquere3  it  and  put  it  in  his  seyg-  28 
norye  /  Therfor  they  toke  ofte  the  proyes,  and  mesdyde  and  tres- 
butwas         paced  to  the  Cytezeyns  of  the  toun  /  They  brake  the  towres  & 
be"iaeged.e,"s  walles  moche  oultrageously  by  theyr  engyns,  And  for  the  oldenes 

of  the  walles  /  the  Cyte  was  disclosed  and  open  in  many  places  /  32 
In  this  tyme  the  Eoyamme  of  4Egypte  was  more  ryche  and  more 

1  Orig.  dnr.  3  Orig.  couquere. 

*—i  Fr.  " Egypt  cstoit  plus  riclus  ct  plus  puissant,  et  d' avoir  ct  de  sens." 
Caxton  has  here  made  a  common  paleographic  error  by  reading  fens  instead  of 
sens,  and  then  making  one  word  of  it  with  the  de.  Lat.  "Cum  igitur  ea 
tempestate,  Aegyptorum  rcgnum  viribus  et  divitiis,  sed  ct  prudentia  Sacculari 
caetcris  quae  in  Oricntc,  vel  in  Austro  erant  regnis  esset  pracstantius.,> 


Ch.  CCVIL]     Conduct  of  the  Mohammedan  Bailiff.  303 

puyssauwt  of  hauoyr  and  good1  and1  defence4  than  ony  otlier  of  the 
Eoyammes  of  Turkye  /  tfor  the  Calyphe  helde  thenne  lherusalem  ™|.Ca,ii>1),iad 
and  the  londe  tlierabout,  and  with  his  grete  hoost  that  he  sente  possession 

'  °  ol  it  at  one 

4  theder    he    conquerd    alle    snrye    vnto   the    Lyche,    whiehe    is    by  time- 
anthyoche.    Thus  had1  he  encreeed*  his  einpyre.    he  establysshyd  his 
hayllyes  in  the  cytees  that  stonde  on  the  see  ayde,  Andf  in  them 
also  on  the  londe  /  Thenne  commanded  he  that  alle  sholde  paye 

8  hym  trybute,  &  ordeyned  &  deuysed  what  he  wold  haue  of  euery 
cvte.    after  this  he  wold  that  the  cytezeyns  shold  make  agayn  the  He  decreed 

J  J  J  o    J  tint  the  walls 

wallis  of  euery  1Cyte  /  Andf  mayntene  in  good  poynt  the  towres  /  should  bo 
and  redresse  alle  aboute  suche  as  neded  /  by  the  aduys  of  his  men.   p  iesf  uoj 

1  2  And  after  theyr  establysshement  /  The  bayly  of  Iherasalem  com- 
maundedf  to  them  of  the  toun  to  repayre  theyr  walles  andf  sette 
them  entierly  in  poynt  lyke  as  they  to  fore  had  ben.  Thenne 
ordeyned  he  and  deuysed  how  moch  euery  strete  of  the  toun  shold 

16  make.     By  "rete    cruelte   and    malvce   he  commannded   that    the  The  poor 

J     °  •  Christians 

captyfs  cristiens  that  were  in  the  cyte  shold  make  the  fourth  part  were  ordered 

r  J  J  r  to  rebuild  a 

of  the  walles  /  They  were  so  pour  and  so  greued  of  tayllages  and  [°"£jh  of 
excises,  that  vnnethe  they  had  among1  them  alle  wherof  to  repayre 
l'O  two  towrettys  /  They  sawe  wel  that  he  sought  occasion  for  to 
destroye  them  alle  /  Therfor  they  assembled  and  cam  moche 
humbly  to  fore  the  bayly  /  and  fyl  at  his  feet,  And  moch  requyred 
in  waning  /  that  he  wold  comande  them  to  doo  thynge  that  they  Ti>ey  prayed 

1       o   '  J     °  •'in  vain  to  be 

24  myght  doo,  ffor  this  that  he  had1  commannded  them  to  doo  was  released  on 

J  °  '  account  of 

ouermoche  ouer  theyr  power  /  That  Inhumayn  baylly,  whiehe  was  their  poverty, 
ful  of  cruelte  and  of  pryde,  louyd*  not  the  Cristen  men,  and1  menaced1 
them  moche  fiersly  /  And  sware  that  yf  they  accomplisshyd  not  the 

28  commaundement  of  this  lord  the  Calyphe,  he  wold  do  smyte  of 
theyr  heedes  as  traytours  /  whan  they  herd  this  /  they  were  moche 
aferd  /  and1  on  that  othersyde  they  sawe  wel  that  they  myght  not 
bere  the  charge  that  he  leyde  on  them  /  therfor  they  dyde  so  moche 

32  atte  laste  by  the  prayer  of  somme  turkes  /  whiehe  had  pyte  on  them, 

that  the  Baylly  gaf  them  respyte,  til  that  they  had  sent  to  them-  sothey 

■'      J    °  r-J       >  J  finally  sent  to 

perour  of  Constantynople,  and  to  requyre  hym  for  the  loue  of  god  »>«  Kmpemr 
that  he  wold  sende  his  almesse  to  performe  this  horrible  werke,  for  nopietobeg 

r  '  for  help. 

3G  to  delyner  them  fro  the  peryll  of  deth  in  whiehe  they  were  cou- 
dempnedf  yf  it  were  not  by  them  made. 


304  Messengers  sent  to  the  Emperor.     [Ch.  CCVIII. 

Of  the  same  mater  /         ca"  CCviij" 

Messengers    t        He  messagers  cam  fro  them  to  themperour  in  to  constanty- 

wenttotell  °  r  . 

their  mis-  nople  /  they  seyd  to  hym  the  trouth  of  their  message,  how 

the  Emperor,  they  were  in  subiection,  and  what  meseases,  what  fylthes  the  turkes    4 

made  them   to  suffre.     And  fynally  they  muste  alle  deye  yf  he 

socoured  them  not  /  all  they  that  herde  them  began  to  wepe  for 

compassion  /  thenne  was  emperour  a  valyaxmt  man,  wyse,  &  of  grete 

who  was        corage  named!  constantyn,  and  surname  monamaques.    lie  gouerned    8 

named  . 

constnntine    moche  vygorously  thempyre.     whan  he  herd?  the  requeste  of  the 

Monamaques.  J  °  J  trj  t  •  •      i_  / 

poure  cristen1  men  he  was  meuyd  with  grete  pyte  in  his  herte  / 
and  sayd  that  he  wold  helpe  them  gladly,  and  shold  gyue  to  them 
so  largely  of  his  good  that  the  iiij  part  of  the  wallis  which  was  12 

[» if.  no,  hk.]  co??«ma»ded  2them  to  make  shold  be  accomplysshyd,  but  he  pro- 
mysed  them  wel  that  he  shold  doo  nothyng  but  by  couenaunt. 
That  is  to  wete  that  yf  they  myght  pourchace  of  the  lord1  of  the 
londe,  that  within  the  party  e  of  the  cyte  that  shold  be  closed  with  16 
his  money,  none  shold  dwelle  but  cristen  rae«  /  on  this  condicion 
wold  he  doo  it  /  and1  other  wyse  not.  In  this  fourme3  he  delyuerd 
to  them  his  lettres  patentes,  And  sente  to  his  bayly  of  Cypre  /  that 

He  promised  yf  the  cristen  men  of  Iherusalem  myght  pourchace  of  the  Calyphe  20 

to  help  them,  .  ,  ,  , 

it  tins  fourth  of  E<'vpte  this  that  ye  haue  herd,  that  of  the  rente  that  he  ought 

part  of  Jem-  0,/ r  J 

saiem  should  fc0  haue  in  that  londe,  he  shold1  lete  make  the  fourth4  part  of  the 

be  given  lo 

them  exciu-    wa]iyS  0f  this  holy  Cyte.     The  messagers  that  had?  thus  don  theyr 

message  Retorned  vnto  the  Patriarke  and  to  them  that  had  sente  24 
them  /  And?  recounted?  to  them  truly  how  they  had?  don  and  sped  / 
They  ansuerd  that  it  shold*  be  hard1  to  be  had,  not  withstondyng 
they  muste  essaye,  ffor  they  myght  passe   in  none  other  maner. 
they  sente  good  messagers  and  trewe  to  this  grete  lord  the  Calyphe  28 
of  Egyte  /  Our  lord  helpe  hym  in  such  wyse  that  thei  forcde  in  hym 
The  caliph  of  this  that  they  sought ;  &  shortly  to  say  /  he  delyuerd  to  them  a  good 
them  a  *       chartre  sealtd  with  his  seal,  &  confermed  with  his  propre  hand,  5that 
this  effect.      s0  closyng  the  /  iiij  /  part  /  he  graunted  to  them  the  fourth  part  of  32 
Iherusalem.5     The  messagers  retorned.     They  that  had  sente  them 
made  to  them  grete  ioye  whan  they  knewe  how  they  had  achyeued 
their  message.     The  bailyes  of  Cypre  passed  in  to  Surye  /  And 
they  made  the  fourth  part  of  the  walles  with  the  goodes  of  them-  36 

1  Orig.  ceisten.  3  Orig.  fourtne.  4  Orig.  fonrth. 

5-5  Fr.  ' '  que  par  ccfaisant  leur  octroya  la  quartc  parte,  dn  Jerusalem,"  viz., 
that  by  so  doing  he  delivered  to  them  the  fourth  part  of  Jerusalem. 


Ch.  CCIX.]  Settlement  of  the  Difficulty.  305 

perour,  lyke  as  he  had  commaunded.     And  this  werke  was  made  in  J^u  wm  ie 
the  yere  of  thyncarnacion1  of  oure  lord  .M.lxiij.    thenne  was  calyphe  y«"  ">ea. 
&  kynge  of  egypte  bommensor  /  And  this  was  /  xxxvj.  yere  to  fore 
4  the  cyte  was  couquerd.    vnto  this  tyme  the  cristen  men  were  lodged 
in  the  toun  emonge  the  turkes  comynly  one  by  another,  but  fro 
thens  forth  that  the  Calyphe  had  commaunded1,  the  fourth  part  of 
the  toun  was  delyuerd  to  them  /  Thenne  were  the  cristen  men  Then  was  the 
8  moche  eased!,  nor  whan  they  dwellyd  emong  the  turkes,  they  that  fg£™ in 
were  theyr  neyghbours  /  dyde  to  them  grete  ennoyes  and  shames  /  mucl1  eMiel-- 
But  whan  they  were  by  them  self  /  they  dyde  them  not  so  moche  / 
yf  they  had  ony  debate  emonge  them  6elf  it  was  brought  to  fore 

1 2  the  patriark.  ffor  fro  thenne  forth  was  in  that  part  of  the  toun  none 
other  iustice  but  he  /  thus  gouerned  he  it  as  his2  oune.  his  iiij  part 
is  bounded  as  I  shall  saye  to  you.  frro  the  yate  that  the  so?me  goth 
doun,  whiche  is  named  the  yate  dauid  by  the  tour  of  the  angle, 

16  otherwyse  named  the  tour  tancre.     The  walles   that   they  made 

within  is  bounded  fro3  the  chyef  way  Hhat  goth  fro  that  gate  vnto   [*iarfi«j 

the5  chaunge,  And  fro  thens  agayn  vnto  the  west  yate  /  In  this 

space  stondeth   the  mount  of   Caluarye  where  our  sauyour  Ihesu  ™« fe«j^» 

20  Crista  was  crucified  /  &  the  holy  sepulcre  /  where  he  laye  deed  in,  ^;adnt8lie 
and  out  wherof  he  aroos  fro  deth  to  lyf  /  The  hows  of  the  hospytal,  ^gh°fthe 
Two  abbayes,  one  of  monkes  &  another  of  nonnes  /  The  hows  of  city- 
the  patriarke  /  And  the  Cloysture  of  the  chanonnes  of  the  sepulcre. 

24  How  the  due  Godeffroy  for  to  augmente  the  Cristi- 
ente  /  assieged  one  of  the  townes  of  the  turkes  / 

ca°.  CCix° 
i        N  this  tyme  after  that  alle  the  Barons  that  were  come  in  pyl- 
28  gremage   were   departed  fro    the   londe,  and  retorned   in   to 

theyr  countrees,  The  valyaunt  due,  to  whom  the  Royamme  was 
delyuerd  /  &  tancre  whiche  was  abiden  with  hym,  they  were 
almost  alone  in  tho  partes,    they  were  moche  pour  of  good  and  of  Godfrey  and 

r  J  jiii  Tancred  were 

32  men.    vnnethe  myght  they  make,  whan  they  dyde  all  theyr  power,  ™yw  ^ 
thre  honderd  men  on  horsbak,  and  two  thousand  a  foote  /  The  but  few  men. 
Cytees  that  the  pylgryms  had  conquerd  were  ferre  a  sondre  /  And 
none  myght  come  to  other  without  grete  peryll  of  theyr  enemyes  / 

1  Orig.  tliyncareion.  s  Fr.  comme  sienne,  as  his  own. 

3  Fr.  est  bornec  dc,  i.  c.  is  bounded  by,  not  from. 

5  Lat.  " ad  mensas  nummular iorum." 

GODFREY.       '  x 


306    •  Treatment  of  the  Christians.         [Ch.  CCIX. 

The  vyllages  that  were  about  the  cytees  whiche  were  called!  casians1 

therin  dwellyd  the  turkes  that  were  theyr  subgettis,  and1  obeyed1  to 

the  lordes  of  the  cytees  /  but  thise  turkes  hated  nomew  more  than 

Tiie  Turks      they  dyde  the  cristen   men,  and    pourchaced  incessantly  alle  the  4 
did  every- 
thing p<>s-      harme  &  euyl  that  they  myght.    whan  they  fonde  ony  of  our  men 

sible  to  injure  J  J         JO  J  J 

tiiem.  allone  oute  of  the  way  /  gladly  they  murdred  them.     And  somtyme 

they  ledde  to  the  Cytees  of  the  sarasyns  for  to  selle  them  /  yet 
They  would    thought  they  of  gretter  meschyef  and  folye  /  ffor  they  wold1  not  ere  8 
their  lands,    ne  laboure  thevr  londes  to  therale  that  the  lordes  and  men  of  the 

so  Hint  the 

christians      cytees  shold!  not  take  theyr  rentes  /  and*  desired1  thetn  self  lyuer  to 

should  Imve        J  J  i  J 

no  profit.       suifre  mesease  /  rather  than  our2  peple  shold1  haue  ony  good1  or 

auaylle.     The  Cristen  men  were  not  well  assured1  within  the  Cytees  /  1 2 
ffor  they  had1  but  fewe  people  /  And1  there  cam  theuys  by  nyght 
that  Robbed  theyr  houses,  and  slewe  them  in  theyr  beddes  /  Ami! 
bare  awaye  alle  theyr  thynges.     By  this  occasion  many  there  were 
of  the  Cristen  men  /  that  lefte  theyr  fayr  tenementes3  and1  houses  in  16 
Many  Chris-  the  Cytees,  and1  retourned!  pryuely  in  to  theyr  countreyes  /  ffor  they 
went  home,    hadde  grete  drede  /  that  the  Turkes,  whiche  that  dwellyd1  aboute 
them  /  sholde  assemble   somme   daye,  and1    take  the    townes   by 
strengthe  &  destresse,  and  destroye  them  for  euer  in  such  wyss  that  20 
[<  if.  ni,  bk.]  neuer  sholde  be  memory  of  them,    ffor  hate  of  them  Hhat  thus 
wente  was  establysshyd  fyrst  in  that  londe,  that  who  that  helde  a 
yere  longe  in  peas  his  tenement  and  his  londe  /  he  shold  neuer  after 
answere  therof  to  ony  other,  by  cause  ther  were  many  that  for  fere  24 
and  for  cowardise  lefte  alle  theyr  thynges  and1  fled1  away.     After 
whan  the  countrey  was  better  assured1  /  they  cam  agayn,  and  wold 
haue  recouerd  them  /  but  by  this  lawe  that  was  thus  establysshyd 
they  were  neuer  herd,    whyles  that  the  Royamrue  was  thus  in  grete  28 
Duke  God-     pouerte  /  the  valyaunt  due  godeffroy,  which  had1  moche  grete  courage 
Ktandinp,       and  good  hope  in  our  lord,  enlarged1  his  Royamme.    he  assembled  as 

enlarged  his  -ii-ii  i  r  •  /-i  1 

kingdom       moche  peple  as  he  myght  /  And  wente  for  tassiege  a  byte  nygli  to 

laphe  on  the  see  Syde,  named1  Arsur.     But  he  fonde  it  wel  garnys-  32 
shed1  of  vytaylles,  of  men  of  Armes,  and  other'engyns.     And  ther 
were  therin  turkes  many,  hardy  and  defensable.     The  hoost  of  the 
Cristen  men  that  were  withouta  /  were  but  fewe  and  suffretous  by 

HeVsieged    cause  they  had1  no  shippes  by  whiche  they  myght  defende  the  waye  36 

Arsin  in  vain,      »    , ,  ,-,  ,  „  .  .,        ,  »   ,1  / 

of  the  see,  where  they  myght  entre  &  yssue  whan  it  plesyd  them  / 
ffor  thise  thynges  the  due  was  constrayned  to  leue  the  siege,  and1 

1  Fr.  Casiaux,  not  in  the  Latin  original.  2  Grig.  onr. 

3  Fr.  teneurcs,  tenures,  holdings. 


Ch.  CCX.]  Ambassadors  come  to  Godfrey.  307 

departed  thynkyng  to  come  agayn  to  the  same  place  /  whan  the  butdeter- 
tvme  shold  be  more  couenable  /  1Audl  that  he  •were  better  pour-  »  aK»'»  when 

J  '  •'he  liad  more 

ueyed  of  men  /  wherof  he  had  nede  for  to  take  the  toun.1     And  so  men- 
4  had  he  don  yf  our  lord  had  gyuen  hym  long*  lyf  in  this  world. 


How  the  turkes  brought  prcsentes  to  the  due  gode- 
ffroy  at  the  sayd  siege  and  of  theyr  deuyses  to 
gydre  /  ca°  CCx° 

8  i        T  happed1,  in  this  siege  of  whiche  I  haue  spoken,  a  thynge  that 

ousht  not  to  be  for^oten.    ffro  the  montaynes  of  the  londe  of  W'f  Turks 

o  o  *  of  Samaria 

Samarye,  in  whiche  is  the  londe  of  Nappies,  cam  summe  turkes  b[°^r||'ltR  to 
whiche  were  lordes  of  Casians  theraboute,  and!  brought,  vnto  the  «*>&*»> 

12  valyaunt  due  godeffroy  2presentes  of  brede,  of  wyn,  of  dates,  and1 
of  other  fruyte.2  It  myght  wel  be  that  they  cam  more  for  tespye 
the  beyng  and  contenaunce  of  our  men  than  for  other  thynge. 
they  prayde  so  moch  the  men  of  the  due  that  they  were  brought  to 

1G  fore  hym  /  Thenne  they  presented!  to  hym  suche  as  they  had! 
brought  /  The  noble  due,  as  he  that  was  humble  and  without  bob- 
aunce,  sat  in  his  pauyllon  on  the  ground,  &  lened  vnto  a  sak  full  of  who  received 

'  *■        J  o  »  _      them  silting 

stuff  /  There  abode  he  a  part  of  his  peple  that  he  had  sente  in  on  the 

/  rrir  ground. 

20  fourage.    whan  they  that  had  made  thyse  presentes  /  sawe  the  due 

sytte  3so  lowe,  they  merueylled  them  ouermoche,  and  began  to  de-    [3ieafU2] 

mande  of  the  peple  that  vnderstode  theyr  langage,  where  fore  it 

was  so,  that  so  hye  a  prynce  of  the  weste,  whiche  had  troubled  alle  ^ey^mar-^ 

24  thoryent,  and  had  slayn  so  many  men,  and  taken  and  conquerd  so  "{^y^ 
puyssaunt  a  Royamme,  conteyned  hym  so  pourely,  ne  had  not  vnder  axuamj. 
hym  tappytys  ne  clothes  of  sylk,  ne  habyte  of  a  kynge  on  hym.   ne 
had  not  aboute  hym  sergeantes  or  knyghtes  holdyng1  naked  swerdes 

28  or  baches  or  axis  danoys,  by  whiche  alle  they  that  sawe  hym  shold 
doubte  and  fere  hym  /  but  satte  so  lowe4  as  he  were  a  ma«  of  lytil 
affayie.  The  valiau^t  due  demaumled  of  them  that  knewe  &  vnder- 
stode theyr  langacre  what  they  sayde  /  It  was  told  &  answerd  of  this  Their 

J  °   "  J        J         I  astonishment 

32  which  they  merueylled.     Thenne5  he  sayd  that  it  was  no  shame  to  ";'^toK1 10 
a  man  mortel  to  sytte  vpon  therthe  /  ffor  theder  muste  he  retorne 

1— *  "et  que  les  hommes  ficsscnt  micuz  pourveuz  de  cc  que  mestier  fust  a 
prendre  la  ville,"  viz.,  and  when  his  men  were  better  supplied  with  what  was 
necessary  to  take  the  city. 

-— 2  Lat.  "defercntcs  sccum  exenia  panis  et  villi  caricatum  quoquc,  ct  uvae 
passac."  4.The  original  is  here  damaged.  5  Orig.  Thenur. 


308 


The  Capture  of  Bohemond. 


[Ch.  CCXI. 


after  his  deth,  and  lodge  there  in  his  body  and  become  erthe.  whan 
they  herd  this  answere,  they  that  were  comen  for  tespye  ant?  essaye 
what  he  was  /  began  moche  for  to  allowe  and  preyse  his  wytte  and 
They  ae-       his  humily te.    They  departed  fro  thens  /  sayeng  that  he  was  shapen  4 
with  admira-  and1  lyke  for  to  be  lord  of  alle  that  londe,  and  to  gouerne  the  peple  / 
Duke.  that  was  so  withoute  pryde  /  And  knewe  pouerte  and  the  fragilyte 

of  his  nature  so  weL     This  word  was  spradd  ouer  al  by  them  that 
had1  herd  hym.  he  was  so  moche  dradde  and1  doubted1  of  his  enemyes  /  8 
that  enquyred*  of  his  affayres  /  whiche  founde  not  in  hym  but 
vygour,  Rayson  and  mesure,  without  ony  pryde  or  oultrage. 


Gabriel,  lord 
of  Melitene, 
was  much 
afraid  of  an 
invasion  of 
Persians, 


and  decided 
to  give  his 
city  over  to 
Bohemond. 


[ilf.142.bk.] 


Bohemond 
started  to 
receive  this 
gift. 


On  the  way 
lie  was  at- 
tacked by 
the  Turks 
and  taken 
prisoner. 


How  buymont  was   taken   in  goyng  to  Meletene  / 
whiche  cyte  the  lord  of  the  same  wold  yelde  to  12 
hym.  ca°.  CCxj0. 

i        N  the  Royamme  of  Iherusalem  they  conteyned  them  thus  as 
ye  haue  herd1.     Thenne  it   happened1  that  a  ryche  man  of 
ermenye  named  Gabryel  was  lord  of  the  cyte  of  meletene,  which  16 
stondeth  by  yonde  the  Ryuer  of  Eufrates  in  the  londe  of  mesopo- 
tayne.     This  gabriel  doubted  moche  that  the  turkes  of  Perse  shold 
come  on  hym  /  ffor  the  men  that  they  helde  /  ran  ofte  on  hym  /  in 
suche  wyse  that  he  myght  not  wel  suffre  it  /  Therfore  he  toke  coun-  20 
seyl,  And  sente  messagers  to  buymont,  prynce  of  Anthyoche  /  that 
they  shold1  saye  to  hym  in  his  name,  that  he  shold1  haste  hym  in  to 
his  londe  /  ffor  he  wold1  gyue  ouer  to  hym  his  Cyte  by  certayn 
couenauntes  resonable  ynough  whiche  he  sente  to  hym.    he  louyd  24 
1  buymont  /  And  sayde  that  he  had  leuer  that  buymont  had  his  cyte 
by  his  agremerat,  than  the  turkes  sholde  take  it  from2  hym  ayenst 
his  wyll  /  whan  Buymont  herde  thyse  tydynges,  as  he  that  was 
hardy  hasted1  hym  moche  for  to  make  hym  redy,  And?  toke  with  28 
hym  a  good  company,  and1  went  forth  on  his  way  /  he  passed*  the 
Ryuer  of  Eufrates  and1  entred1  in  to  mesopotayne  /  And1  was  nyghe 
the  Cyte  of  meletene  /  ffor  whiche  he  wente  foi  to  receyue  /  whan 
a  puyssaunt  amyral  of  the  turkes  named  domsmayn3  /  that  had  32 
certaynly  the  very  knowleche  of  his  comynge,  And  laye  in  a  wayte 
for  hym  /  and  ranne  vpon  hym  sodenly,  and  his  men  beyng1  alle 
out  of  arraye  and  dispourueyed*  /  They  that  abode  were  alle  slayn  / 
ffor  ther  were  ouer  grete  plente  of  turkes  /  The  other  fledde,  Buy-  3G 
mont  was  taken  and  reteyned,  and  they  ladde   hym  the  handes 

2  Orig.  froin.  3  Fr.  Danisrnan. 


Ch.  CCXIL]        Baldwin  goes  to  the  Rescue.  300 

boun.Ien  with  cordes  /  And  his  feet  chayned  with  yron  /  Of  this 
auenture  mounted  the  turke  in  grete  pryde  /  And?  trusted1  moche  in  ^^J^t 
his  hoost  that  he  ledde  /  that  he  cam  to  fore  the  cyte  of  meletene,  JJ1  fj^1"6* 

4  and  assieged  it,  by  cause  he  supposed!  that  they  wold!  haue  delyuerd 
it  without  taryeng*  /  But  somme  of  them  that  escaped!  fro  thens 
where  the  prynce  was  taken  cam  fleyng  in  to  the  cyte  of  Rages. 
They  told!  to  therle  Bawdwyn  this  grete  mesauenture  that  was  fallen 

8  to  them  /  whan  the  valyaunt  Erie  herd1  this  /  he  was  moche  angrye, 

And!  had*  grete  pyte  of  the  prynce  /  whom  he  helde  for  broder  for 

the  companye  of  the  pylgremage.     And  by  cause  they  had  theyr 

countrees  so  nygh  to  gydre  1  It  shold  haue  displesyd  hym1  yf  the 

12  turkey  shold  conquere  this  cyte   that   buymont  shold1   haue   had*. 

Therfor  he  somoned  hastely  alle  his  men  that  he  myght  haue  on  but  Baldwin 

rf  went  quickly 

horsbak  and  a  fote,  and  toke  with  hym  that  was  necessarye  for  t?3h^relie'd 
suche  a  vyage  and!  wente  toward  thoo  partyes.    wel  a  thre  daye 

16  iourneye  was  Rages  fro  meletene.    he  had  sone  passed  this  waye  in 

suchewyse  that  he  was  nyghe  the  cyte.     But  the  sayd  donysmayn  ?he?urk.g.' 
knewe  wel  the  comyng  of   therle  and  durst  not  abyde  ne  fyght  JjJ?^",^6 
with  hym,  But  lefte  the  siege  and  departed  and  ledde  forth  with  and  fled- 

20  hym  buymont  faste  bounden  and  straytly.    whan  Bawdwyn  herde 

that  he  durst  not  abyde  hym  /  but  fledde  to  fore  hvm  /  he  ran  after  Baldwin 

v  chased  them 

with  his  men  and  chaced  hym  thre  dayes  longe  /  whan  he  sawe  three  days, 
that  he  myght  not  ouertake  hym  /  he  retourned  in  to  the  cyte  of  and  then 

JO  J        I  J  returned  to 

24  Meletene.     Gabryel  the  lord  of  the  toun  receyued  hym  with  moche  Meiiume, 

"  j  j  which  sur- 

grete  ioye  with  alle  his  men,  and  made  to  them  good  chere,  And  rendered  to 
after  gaf  ouer  the  cyte  to  hym  by  the  same  couenauntes  that  he  had 
offred  to  buymont.2   whan  he  had  3don  this  he  retorned4  home   pieafiis] 
28  agayn  to  Rages. 

How  the  due5  godeffroy  assembled6  alle  his  peple, 
And  entred  in  to  Arabye,  And  of  the  gayn  that 
he  made,  And  of  his  deth.  Capitulo  CCxij0: 

32  g       Odeffroy  the  valyaunt  Due  and  his  men  that  were  lefte  with  Godfrey  an.i 

liis  men  were 

hym  for  to  kepe  the  Royamme   began  to  haue  moche  grete  in  great  du- 
mesease  /  and  suffre  suche  pouerte  that  vnnethe  it  may  be  deuysed. 
Thenne  it  happed  that  good   espyes  and   trewe  brought  to  hym 

3 — l  Fr.  "moult  leur  exist  displeu  se  ilz  conquissent  les  cites,"  viz.,  it  would 
have  displeased  them  much,  etc.  2  Orig.  bnymont. 

4  Orig.  reborned.  5  Orig.  due.  tt  Orig.  assembled. 


310  The  great  Strength  of  Godfrey.     [Ch.  CCXII. 

tidynges  that  in  the  partyes  of  arabye  on  that  other  syde  of  flora 

Iordan  were  moche  ryclie  peple  whiche  doubted*  nothynge.     And 

therfore  they  dwellyd  out  of   fortresses,    yf  they  were  surprised? 

and  made  a    there  shold!  be  moch  grete  gayne  wonne  /  The  valyaunt  Due  that  so  4 

Arabia  to       moche  had  suffred  toke  with  hym  peple  a  foote  and  on  horsbak  as 

tind  food  J         r    r 

and  money,    many  as  he  myght,  sauf  the  garde  of  the  Cyte.     Thenne  entred*  he 
sodeynly  in  to  the  londe  of  his  enemyes.     There  gadred*  he  many 
Tiiere  tiiey     grete  proyes,  that  is  to  wete,  horses  /  beufes,  Kyen  and  sheep,  And  8 
spoils.  ryche  prysonners  brought  lie   grete  plente.     Thenne   retorned*  he 

toward  Iherusalem  /  Somme  turkes  ther  were  hye  and?  puyssaunt  of 
them  of  Arabye  whiche  were  moche  hardy,  and*  noble  in  Armes, 
And  had  grete  prys.  Emonge  all  other  ther  was  one  that  had  longe  1 2 
desired*  for  to  see  the  due  Godeffroye  of  boloyne  /  &  wold*  fayn 
knowe  yf  it  were  trewe  that  was  said  of  his  force  &  strerigthe  /  & 
acqueynte  hyrn  with  his  peple  of  ffraunce,  of  whom  he  hadf  herd1  so 
moche  /  that  were  come  fro  the  Occident  vnto  thoryent  /  And!  had  16 
conquerd  so  many  londes  /  And*  sette  them  in  theyr  subiection. 
one  of  the  Aboue  alle  other  he  desired  to  see  due  godeffroy  and  knowe  yf  it 
Arabia  came,  were  trouth  that  was  sayd  of  his  prowesse  &  his  strengthe  /  he  dide 


out  of 


curiosity,  to   so  moch  to  such  mew  as  he  spak,  that  he  had  good  surete  &  triews  20 
'  to  come  vnto  the  due.   he  salewed1  hym  moche  lowe  enclynyng  lyke 
as  is  theyr  customme.     And  after  he  prayd  and  desired*  of  the  due 
and  a»ked      moche  humbly  /  that  it  wold*  plese  hym  to  smy te  with  his  swerd  a 
bim  lomebat  Camel  that  he  had  brought  moche  grete.    ff'or  as  he  sayde  it  shold  24 
be  grete  honour  to  hym  in  his  countre  /  yf  he  myght  recounte  ony 
of  his  strokes  that  he  had  seen  hym  self.     The  due  knewe  wel  that 
he  was  come  fro  fer  to  see  hym  /  And  dyde  that  he  requyred  hym. 
he  drewe  his  swerd  /  and  smote  the  camel  on  the  neck  where  it  was  28 
grettest,  And1  smote  it  of  as  lyghtly  as  it  had*  been  a  sheep,   whan 
[«if.i4s,bw.]  the  turke  sawe  this  /he  merueylled  oner  moche.     In  asuch  wyse 
that  he  was  all  abasshed  /  whan  he  had  a  litil  bethought  hym  /  he 
sayd  in  his  langage,  I  see  wel,  sayd  he,  that  the  due  hath  a  good*  32 
swerd  &  wel  trenchant  &  cuttyng  /  But  I  wote  neuer  yf  he  coude 
smyte  so  grete  a  strook  with  another  swerde.     The  valyaunt  due 
demaunded1  what  he  sayde.     Andf  whan   lie  knewe,  he  began  to 
smyle  a  lytil  /  And!  after  sayd*,  that  he  shold*  delyuer  to  hym  his  3G 
r.odfrey         owen  swerde.     The  turke  dyde  so.    the  due  thenne  smote  therwith 
head  off        another  Camel,  In  suche  wys  that  he  made  the  hede  to  flee  of  moche 
at.  one  stroke'  lyghtlyer  than  of  the  other  /  thenne  merueylled  ouermoche  the  turk, 

Ant?  sayde  that  it  was  more  by  the  strengthe  of  the  Arme  tlian  by  40 


Cli.  CCXIL]  Death  of  God/raj.  'Mi 

the  bounte  of  the  swerd.  he  had  wel  preuyd  that  it  was  trewe  that 
was  saydf  of  the  Due  in  his  Countreye.  Thenne  he  gaf  to  the  ^M^nWi- 
duc  many  fayr  Iewellys  of  gold  and  of  ryche  stones,  and  moche  ££t^*y 
4  acqueynted  with  hym.  And  after  retomed  home  in  to  his  countre. 
The  valyaunt  due  cam  vnto  Iherusalem  with  alle  his  proye  /  &  the 
trusses  &  fardellys  of  his  gayn,  which  wer  so  grete  that  all  the  men 
of  his  companye  were  ryche.     In  that  moneth  of  Iuyll  the  velyaunt  Godfrey  was 

r       J  J  taken  ill  on 

8  due  godefroy  whiche  was  gouemour  of  the  Eoyamme  of  Iherusalem  ',tan*JJ™ 
had?  a  maladye  and  sekenes  moch  grete  /  Alle  the  phisiciens  of  the  expedition, 
contre  were  sente  for.     They  dyde  alle  that  in  them  was  possible  / 
But  alle  auaylled  not,  ffor  the  payne  encresyd  alway  more.     After  ah  ti.e 

12  this  he  sente  for  men  of  relygyon,  as  prelates  /  curates  &  other  good  °f  t,,e  ^ 
&  deuoute  men,  for  to  haue  counseyll  of  them  for  the  helthe  of  his  avail, 
sowle  /  he  was  moche  wel  confessyd  and  veray  repentaunt  with 
grete  wepynges  /  And1  in  his  right  mynde  Avith  grete  deuocion1 

16  departed  out  of  this  world  /  Certaynly  we  ought  to  thynke  that  the 

sowle  was  brought  vp  with  angelis  to  fore  the  face  of  Ihesu  crist. 

he  deyde  the  .xiii  day  of  Iuyll  the  yere  of  thyncarnacion2  of  oure  Hediedti.e 
J  j      j  j  •>  I,,  ml> dav  °r 

lord  .M  /  i  /  C  /  he  was  entiered  and  buryed  in  the  chirche  of  the  Juiyiioo, 

III  J  and  was 

20  holy  sepulcre  vnder  the  place  of  the  mount  of  Caluarye  /  where  our  y1  "** umler 
lord1  was  put  on  the  crosse  /  That  place  is  kept  moche  honestly  for  calvary. 
to  entere  and  burye  the  kynges  vnto  this  day. 

Thus  endeth  this  book  Intitled  the  laste  siege  and  conquest  of  Tims  en.wti. 

i        •  t       T-i  r  tu's  book, 

24  Iherusalem,  with  many  other  historyes  therm  comprysed  /  lyrst  of 
Eracles  /  and  of  the  meseases  of  the  cristen  men  in  the  holy  londe  / 
And  of  their  releef  &  conquest  of  Iherusalem  /  and  how  Godeffroy 
of  boloyne  was  first  kyng  of  the  latyns  in  that  royamme  &  of  his 

28  deth,  translated  &  reduced  out  of  ffrensshe3  in  to  englysshe  4by  me    [*ieaf  im] 
symple  persone  Wylliam  Caxton  to  thende  that  euery  cristen  man  out  of  French 
may  be  the  better  encoraged  tenterprise  warre  for  the  defense  of  wiiiiam 
Cristendom,  and  to  recouer  the  sayd  Cyte  of  Iherusalem  in  whiche 

32  oure  blessyd  sauyour  Ihesu  Criste  suffred  deth  for  al  mankynde, 
and  roose  fro  deth  to  lyf  /  And  fro  the  same  holy  londe  ascended  in 
to  heuen.  And  also  that  Cristen  peple  one  vnyed  in  a  veray  peas  / 
myght  empryse  to  goo  theder  in  pylgremage  with  strong  honde  for 

36  to  expelle  the  sarasyns  and  turkes  out  of  the  same  that  our  lord 
myght  be  ther  seruyd  &  worshipped  of  his  chosen  cristen  peple  in 
that  holy  &  blessyd  londe  in  which  he  was  Incarnate,  and  blissyd 
1  Orig.  denocion.  -  Ori'j.  thyncaruacion.  3  Orbj.  tfreusshe. 


312 


Dedication  of  the  Book  [Oh.  CCXIL 


which  book 
I  present 
unto  King 
Edward  IV. 


I  began  it  on 
the  12th  of 

March,  and 
finished  it 
the  7th  of 
June,  1181. 


it  with  the  presence  of  his  blessyd  body  whyles  he  was  here  in 
erthe  emonge1  vs  /  by  whiche  conquest  we  myght  deserue  after  this 
present  short  and  transitorye  lyf,  the  celestial  lyf  to  dwelle  in  heuen 
eternally  in  ioye  without  ende,  Amen  /  Which  book  I  presente  vnto  4 
the  mooste  Cristen  kynge,  kynge  Edward  the  fourth,  humbly 
besechyng  his  hyenes  to  take  no  displesyr  at  me  so  presumyng, 
whiche  book2  I  began  in  marche,  the  xij  daye,  and'  fynysshyd  the 
vij  day  of  Iuyn  /  the  yere  of  our  lord  .M.CCCC.lxxxj,  &  the  xxj  8 
yere  of  the  regne  of  our  sayd  sauerayn  lord  kyng  Edward  the 
fourth,  &  in  this  maner  sette  in  forme  &  enprynted  the  xx  day  of 
nouembre  the  yere  a  forsayd  in  thabbay  of  westmester,  by  the  sayd 
wylliam  Caxton.  12 


Orig.  emonge. 


2  Orig.  boook. 


313 


NOTES. 


Note  1,  p.  4.     This  Edward  was  Edward  IV.,  who  died  April  9th,  1483. 

Note  2,  p.  5.  "My  lord  Prynce  and  my  lord  Rychard,  due  of  yorke  and 
norfolke"  mentioned  here  by  Caxton,  are  the  two  young  princes  who  were  so 
cruelly  murdered  in  the  Tower  by  Richard  III.  in  1483. 

Note  3,  p.  19.  William  here  gives  the  story  of  the  capture  of  the  Cross  as 
believed  in  his  time,  and  still  received  by  the  Catholic  Church  ;  ChoBroes'  trophy, 
however,  was  not  the  whole  of  the  Cross,  as  only  part  of  it  was  left  in  Jerusalem 
by  the  Empress  Helena,  at  the  time  of  its  discovery.  The  reet  was  sent  to  Con- 
stantinople, when  it  was  again  divided,  one  half  being  inserted  by  Constantine  in 
the  head  of  a  statue  of  himself,  while  the  other  half  was  sent  to  Rome  and  deposited 
in  the  church  Santa  Croce,  in  Gerusalemme,  which  received  its  name  from  the 
sacred  relic.  In  614,  Chosroes  carried  off  the  piece  that  had  been  left  in  Jerusalem 
to  his  capital,  Ctesiphon  ;  fourteen  years  afterwards,  in  628,  Heraclius  brought  it 
back.  The  feast  of  the  Elevation  of  the  Cross  still  commemorates  the  day  of  its 
restoration. 

Note  4,  p.  19.  The  Cosdroe  of  William  of  Tyre  is  Chosroes,  or  Khosru  II., 
called  Parviz  the  Conqueror,  who  ascended  the  throne  in  590,  in  the  midst  of  a 
civil  war,  and  was  assisted  in  maintaining  his  position  by  Mauritius,  Emperor  of 
Rome.  When  Phocas  killed  Mauritius  in  602,  and  seized  the  imperial  power, 
Chosroes  decided  to  avenge  his  ally,  and  attacked  Phocas,  taking  Jerusalem  in  614. 
Heraclius,  who  succeeded  Phocas  as  emperor,  invaded  Persia  in  return,  and  con- 
quered Chosroes,  who  was  killed  soon  after,  on  the  29th  of  Feb.,  628,  but  by  the 
hand  of  his  own  son.  William's  authority  for  his  version  of  the  whole  story  was 
the  Arabian  Said  Ibn  Baktrik. 

Note  5,  p.  20.  William  refers  here  without  doubt  to  Zacharias,  patriarch  of 
Constantinople,  who  was  at  this  time  taken  prisoner,  and  carried  into  Persia  by 
Chosroes.  Theophanes  of  Byzantium  tells  us  in  his  Chronographia,  that  this 
Zacharias  was  a  contemporary  of  St.  John  of  Alexandria,  called  Eleemosynarius, — 
the  St.  John  Elymont  from  which  the  church  in  Jerusalem  was  named.  According 
to  Theophanes,  Zacharias  himself  brought  back  the  Cross  from  his  captivity,  and 
died  soon  after.  According  to  others,  Modestus,  the  successor  of  Zacharias,  was 
patriarch  when  the  Cross  was  reinstated.  The  Catalogue  of  Nicephorus  states 
that  Zacharias  was  bishop  (or,  patriarch)  from  609  to  631,  which  would  give  him 
three  years  after  his  return  from  captivity  in  628. 

Note  6,  p.  22.  This  is  the  great  and  famous  hero  of  the  Arabian  Nights  of  our 
childhood,  Haroun  al  Raschid,  or  Ressit.  His  name  is  more  properly  Harun  er 
Rashid,  Aaron  the  Orthodox.  He  was  the  fifth  of  the  Abasside  Caliphs  of  Bagdad, 
was  born  attRay,  Feb.  15th,  766,  and  died  in  808.  He  was  the  most  accomplished, 
eloquent,  and  generous  of  all  Mohammedan  princes.  Ascending  the  throne  at  the 
age  of  twenty-two,  he  soon  ruled  the  greater  part  of  the  Eastern  world.     The 


314  Notes. 

account  of  his  relations  with  Charlemagne  has,  however,  no  trustworthy  historical 
hasis. 

Note  7,  p.  24.  Hyart,  the  Idraot  of  Tasso's  Jerusalem  Delivered,  a  prince  of 
Damascus,  and  uncle  of  Annida,  whom  Tasso  sends  to  the  camp  of  the  Christians 
to  seduce  their  chiefs. 

Note  8,  p.  36.  According  to  Paulin  Paris,  the  first  church  of  St.  Mary  de  la 
Latyne  was  constructed  between  1014  and  1023,  by  some  Amalfians,  permission 
having  been  granted  them  by  the  Sullan  of  Egypt.  It  was  built  near  the  church 
of  the  Holy  Sepulchre,  in  the  street  of  the  Paumiers,  and  was  called  Latyne,  because 
the  Latin  instead  of  the  Greek  rites  were  used  :  a  monastery  was  added  to  it  to 
receive  the  pilgrims,  and  a  hospital  for  the  sick.  Godfrey  of  Bouillon  and  others 
gave  it  large  donations.  This  was  the  origin  of  the  Knights  Hospitallers  of  the 
order  of  St.  John  of  Jerusalem,  called  later  Knights  of  Rhodes  and  Malta. 

Note  10,  p.  37.  For  this  conversation  between  Peter  and  Simeon  there  is  no 
historical  authority.  It  is  not  found  in  any  of  the  known  sources,  and  seems  to 
have  been  introduced  by  William  for  rhetorical  effect. 

Note  11,  p.  40.  This  Gilbert  (who  is  known  in  history  ns  the  Anti-Pope)  held 
the  Seat  from  1080  to  1101,  under  the  title  of  Clement  111.,  but  has  never  been 
numbered  among  the  legitimate  popes. 

Note  12,  p.  47.  This  Gaultier  unthout  Icnowleche  is  called  in  English  Walter 
the  Pennyless,  his  French  title  being  not  Gautier  sans  Savoir,  which  Caxton 
translates  Gaultier  without  knou-leche,  but  Gautier  sans  Avoir.  P.  Paris  says  that, 
far  from  being  a  term  of  reproach,  the  title  Sans  Avoir  was  often  applied  to  sons 
of  noblemen  to  distinguish  them  from  their  older  and  wealthier  brothers  :  Albert 
of  Aix  calls  him  Walterus  cognomento  Ztnzavehor ;  Tudebodus,  Gualterius  sine 
habere;  Foucher  of  Chartres,  Gualterius  sine  pecunia;  Foulques  d'Anjou.  Gualterius 
sine  Avero;  and  William  of  Tyre,  Waltarius  sine  Habere.  The  Dictiounaire  des 
Oroisades,  Mii:ne,  tome  18,  says  that  his  true  name  was  Gautier  d.-  Perejo,  that 
he  was  a  nephew  of  Gautier  de  Perejo,  who  died  en  route  for  the  Holy  Land  in 
Bulgaria.  Gautier  sans  Avoir  succeeded  his  uncle  in  command  of  15,000  men, 
who  with  eight  knights  formed  the  advance  guard  of  Peter  the  Hermit.  Gautier 
was  killed  in  1097,  during  the  siege  of  Nicaea. 

Note  13,  p.  54.  These  speeches  of  the  Grecian  ambassador  to  Peter  are  quoted 
almost  verbatim  by  William  from  Albert  of  Aix. 

Note  14,  p.  56.  Soliman,  son  of  Knntul  Misch,  and  a  direct  descendant  of 
Seljuk,  passed  into  Asia  Minor  in  1074,  at  the  head  of  an  army  of  Turks,  carrying 
his  conquests  as  far  as  Nicaea.  His  eldest  son,  Kilidge  Arslan,  called  also  Soliman 
the  Younger,  and  David,  is  the  Solyman  here  mentioned.  William  of  Tyre  makes 
hiin  a  nephew  of  the  Soudan  of  Persia,  and  confounds  the  father  and  son. 

Not:>  15,  p.  62.  There  was  at  this  time  a  universal  uprising  against  the  Jews, 
especially  in  Germany,  due,  without  doubt,  to  the  general  state  of  exaltation. 
At  Spiers,  Worms,  and  Treves,  as  well  as  at  Cologne  and  Mayence,  there  were 
terrible  massacres,  at  least  a  thousand  being  slain  in  Mayence  alone.  In  England 
the  feeling  was  also  very  bitter  against  them,  and  notwithstanding  Richard's  efforts 
to  protect  them,  large  numbers  were  slain  in  Lincoln,  Stamford,  and  Lynn,  and 
also  in  York  after  Richard's  departure. 

Note  16,  p.  79.  Caxton's  Entyses  is  a  corruption  for  Eutyches,  founder  of  the 
sect  of  the  Eutychians,  presbyter  and  archimandrite  at  Constantinople.  He  affirmed 
that  after  the  union  of  the  two  natures,  human  and  Divine,  Christ  had  only  one 
nature,  that  of  the  Incarnate  Word,  and  that  therefore  His  human  body  was 
essentially  different  from  other  human  bodies.  At  the  Council  of  Chalcedon,  in 
451,  this  theory  was  declared  heretical,  and  it  was  affirmed  that  two  natures  were 
united  in  Christ,  but  without  any  alteration,  absorption,  or  confusion.  Eutyches 
died  in  exile.  ■ 

Note  17,  p.  79.     Discretus  is  a  corruption    or  mistranslation  for  Dioscurus, 


Kotcs.  3 1 5 

bialiop  of  Alexandria,  from  444  to  454.     He  also  was  condemned  for  heresy  at  the 
Chalcedon  Council. 

Note  18,  p.  95.  Belphet  is  known  in  Oriental  history  as  Alp  Arslan,  Sultan  of 
Persia,  horn  in  1030.  He  was  celehrated  for  his  justice,  his  courage,  and  his 
generosity.  His  features  were  noble  and  fine,  and  his  character  gentle  and  good. 
His  glory  and  power  were  so  great  that  he  is  said  to  have  had  at  one  time  1,200 
subject  princes  around  his  throne. 

Note  19,  p.  115.  Without  doubt  Caius  Julius  Solinus,  a  Latin  historian  and 
grammarian  of  the  third  or  fourth  century,  author  of  a  book  called  Collectanea 
lierum  Memvrabilitim,  a  collection  of  the  memorable  things  to  be  found  in  different 
countries.  His  work  is  divided  into  seventy  chapters.  The  best  ancient  edition 
is  that  of  Salmasius,  the  hest  modern,  that  of  Mommsen,  Berlin.  1864.  He  lived 
after  the  time  of  Pliny,  and  copied  him  so  closely  that  he  is  often  called  Pliny's  ape. 

Note  20,  p.  122.  Guynevers  is  a  corruption  of  Guinemers,  as  can  be  seen  from 
the  Latin  form  of  the  word,  Guinemerus. 

Note  21,  p.  124.  William  has  made  a  mistake  in  his  statement  in  respect  to 
Rages,  'ihis  is  not  the  Rages  where  Tobias  went  for  the  money  of  Gabael,  as  that 
city  is  in  Persia,  five  miles  south-east  of  Telieran. 

Note  22,  p.  125.  The  name  of  this  Greek  prince,  who  ruled  Edessa,  was 
Theodore.     It  is  given  thus  in  the  history  of  Matthew  of  Edessa. 

Note  23,  p.  148.  Latyns,  a  corruption  for  Tatinus  or  Estatin,  called  Tatinus 
the  Noseless.  He  was  a  prefect  of  the  palace  of  the  emperor  of  Constantinople  ; 
Anna  Coninenus  calls  him  Tatikios.  and  says  that  he  was  a  Saracen  by  birth.  He 
is  called  Tatice  L'Esnase  in  the  Chanson  d'Antioche. 

Note  24,  p.  152.  When  the  Crusaders  arrived  in  Asia  Minor,  the  situation  of 
the  Mohammedans  was  exceedingly  favourable  for  the  accomplishment  of  their 
purpose  ;  all  was  confusion,  and  civil  conflicts  prevailed  everywhere  ;  the  power 
of  the  Seljukes  was  greatly  broken,  several  pretenders  were  quarrelling  for  tlie 
Sultan's  throne,  and  the  emirs  or  governors  of  provinces,  having  made  themselves 
independent,  were  waging  war  with  each  other.  Several  subject  Christian  princes 
— Armenians — had  risen  in  arms  in  Taurus,  and  on  the  banks  of  the  Euphrates  in 
Mesopotamia.  On  the  south,  the  Calipli  of  Egypt  had  just  commenced  a  general 
war  against  the  Seljukes,  and  was  advancing  towards  Palestine.  The  Emir  of 
Nicaea  was  fighting  against  the  Prince  of  Mitilene  ;  the  Emir  of  Aleppo  was 
besieging  his  neighbours  of  Damascus  and  Emessa  ;  and  the  Emirs  of  Sebasta  and 
Mosul  were  engaged  in  war  with  the  Armenian  leaders,  who  were  awaiting  the 
arrival  of  the  Crusaders  with  great  impatience.  For  a  further  account  of  the 
situation,  see  von  Sybel's  GeschichU  des  Ersten  Kreuzzwges. 

Note  25,  p.  167.  Steven  paid  dearly  for  this  desert  on  of  the  Holy  Cause  ;  and 
although  he  arrived  safely  in  France,  was  so  reproached  and  condemned  by  both  his 
subjects  and  his  wife,  tbat  he  was  forced  in  order  to  satisfy  public  opinion,  and  to 
retrieve  his  cbaracter,  to  return  to  the  Holy  Land  and  fulfil  his  vows.  He  shared 
the  misfortunes  and  perils  of  the  Lombard,  German,  and  French  pilgrims,  who 
were  led  by  the  Archbisbop  of  Milan,  the  Duke  of  Bavaria,  and  the  Duke  of 
Bourgogne.  Arriving  safely  in  Antioch,  he  was  received  by  Tancred,  and  went  on 
to  Palestine,  where  he  was  killed  in  1102  at  the  battle  of  Ramla.  William,  in 
recounting  his  death,  observes  that  God  had  permitted  him  by  a  glorious  death  to 
atone  for  his  previous  sin  and  cowardice. 

Note  26,  p.  189.  Some  of  the  most  influential  men  departed  in  this  way,  by 
night;  among  those  that  are  not  given  by  name  were  Lambert  le  Pauvre,  son  of 
(  oiion  of  Montaigue,  and  Godfrey's  own  nephew,  Guillaum  de  Grantemesnil,  Aubery 
his  brother,  Guillaume  Charpentier,  and  Guy  Trosselle.  They  were  called  hereafter 
the  rope-runners,  or  funambuli,  in  derision,  and  were  regarded  as  most  ignominious 
cowards  and  sinners:  William  refused  to  name  them,  because  they  were  blotted 
out  of  the  Lamb's  Book  of  Life  for  ever. 


316  •  Notes. 

Note  27,  p.  190.  Guy  Croseaulx,  a  corruption  of  Guy  Trosseaulx,  or  Guy 
Trosselle. 

Note  28,  p.  201.  William  follows  Eaymond  of  Agiles  in  his  story  of  the  finding 
of  the  lance,  who  tells  of  infinite  signs  and  wonders  from  heaven.  As  usual, 
William  omits  the  greater  part  of  these,  and  6peaks  very  cautiously  of  the  whole 
matter:  he  evidently  is  not  a  great  believer  in  miracles.  All  of  the  different 
historians  mention  this  miracle.  Paulin  Paris,  in  a  note  to  his  edition  of  William 
of  Tyre,  speaks  of  an  early  tradition  that  the  lance  with  which  St.  Mercury  pierced 
Julian  the  Apostate  was  preserved  in  the  crypt  of  this  church  of  St.  Peter. 

Note  29,  p.  202.  This  man,  who  accompanied  Peter  the  Hermit  to  Kerbogha, 
is  called  in  French  Herluin.  He  can  speak  Turkish,  and  Tudehodus  calls  him 
Drogomandus.  Albert  of  Aix  does  not  mention  him,  because  he  wishes  Peter  to 
have  all  the  honour  of  the  embassy. 

Note  30,  p.  211.  This  is  not  supposed.to  have  been  the  real  Greek  fire,  as  ue^d 
in  ancient  times  in  the  Levant.  William  says,  "  Et  ignem,  solito  exciitientes  arti- 
ficio,  subjiciunt  in  stipvlam"  they  simply  set  fire  to  the  bundles  of  hay,  and  made 
a  dense  smoke. 

Note  31,  p.  219.  Monsieur  Littre,  in  his  dictionary,  accepts  this  origin  of  the 
word  hasard.  It  did  not  come,  however,  from  William  of  Tyre,  but  is  an  inter- 
polation of  some  French  translator,  who  put  in  "  Sachiez  que  la  fu  trovez  et  de  la 
vint  li  jeus  des  dez  qui  einsint  a  non." 

Note  32,  p.  233.  This  Cham,  or  Caym,  as  other  French  editions  give  it,  is  our 
Ham:  Chanaan  is  naturally  his  son  Canaan,  and  Aracheus  is  the  son  of  Canaan, 
who  is  called  in  our  English  Bible  the  Arkite.  The  Latin  version  of  William  of 
Tyre  states  that  he  was  the  seventh  son,  septimus  filiorum  Chanaan. 

Note  33,  pp.  238.  280.  There  seems  to  have  been  a  difference  of  opinion  as  to 
this  Arnold  of  Rohes  or  Roches.  William  of  Tyre  dislikes  him,  and  loses  no  oppor- 
tunity of  speaking  slightingly  of  him,  in  this  agreeing  with  Raymond  d' Agiles  aud 
l'Abbe"  Guibert ;  for  a  rehabilitation  of  his  character,  see  Description  des  Tombeaux 
de  Godefroid  de  Bouillon,  etc.,  by  the  Baron  de  Hody,  Bruxelles,  1855. 

Note  34,  p.  281.  Mistranslation  by  Caxton,  which  is  very  curious.  The  French 
reads,  "  Ainz  demandais  des  peintures  et  des  verrieres,  aux  clers  et  aiis  proyoires, 
Mvut  oois  volentiers  les  estoires,  et  les  vies  des  sainz  et  trop  entendoit."  This  last 
sentence  is  not  in  the  original  Latin,  but  was  interpolated  by  some  French  trans- 
lator. As  can  be  easily  seen,  it  was  the  paintings  and  the  stained  windows,  not 
the  painters  and  glaziers,  that  he  desired,  and  he  sat  a  long  time  listening  to  the 
stories  and  lives  of  the  saints.  Paulin  Paris  remarks  that  this  passage  proves  the 
early  use  of  stained  glass. 


317 


VOCABULARY. 


Abandoned  (himself),  v.  pret.,  p.  102, 

109,  exposed  himself 
Abasshed,  p.  129  ;  abasshyd,  p.  55  ;  O.F. 

e'ba[h]isser,    extended    from   stem   of 

Fr.  ebaliir,  confused,  disconcerted 
Abeut,  adv.,  p.  185  ;  A.S.  abutan,  round 

about 
Abide,  vb.  trans.,  p.  138  ;  A.S.  Cib'idan, 

pret.  sing,  dbdd  —  Goth,  usbeidan,  to 

await,  to  expect 
Abode.  See  Abide 
Abourne,    adj.,   p.  286 ;    O.F.   aubome, 

alborne,  whitish  yellow,  auburn 
Abyden,  v.  int.,  p.  195,  remained 
Abye,  v.  t.  pret.,  p.  274,  aboiighte  ;    A.S. 

abycgan,  to   pay   the   penalty   of,   to 

atone  for 
Abylliments,  p.  183.     See  Habylliments 
Abyte,  n.,  p.  27  ;   O.F.  habit,  external 

dress,  the  costume  appropriated  for  a 

particular  use  or  vocation 
Accompte,  v.,  p.  291 ;  O.F.  aconter,  to 

reckon  as,  to  hold  to  be 
Accorded  to,  v.,  p.  120;  O.F.  accorder, 

to  be  reconciled  to  or  with 
Achyeuyd,  v.,  p.   2,   achyeued,  p.  197 ; 

O.F.  acliever,  to  accomplish,  to  achieve 
Acounted,  v.,  p.  197;    O.F.  aconter,  to 

relate,  to  narrate 
Acowarded,    v.,   p.  64 ;    O.F.   couarder, 

coarder,  to  make  afraid 
Ac  |ueynted  hym  with,  v.,  p.  123,  O.F. 

s'accoiutier  de,  to   make    oneself  ac- 
quainted with 
Adcertayned,    pp.,   p.   140;    O.F.    acer- 

tainer    from   d   +    certain,    to    make 

certain 
Addressement,   n.,  p.  44 ;  O.F.  adrire- 

ment,  according  to  Cotgrave,  a  direct- 
ing or  guiding  in  the  nearest  course 
Admone8ted,  p.  43,  admonished 


Admyral,  n.,  p.  152  ;  O.F.  admiral, 
amiral,  originally  from  the  Ar.  Emir, 
an  Emir  or  prince  under  the  Sultan 

Adommaged,  v.,  p.  40 ;  O.F.  d  +  domager, 
domagier,  damaged,  injured 

Adressyd,  p.  123,  259;  O.F.  adrecier, 
set  up,  directed 

Aduowe,  v.,  p.  105;  O.F.  avouer,  ac- 
knowledge 

Afeblysshe,  p.  219  ;  O.F.  afeblir,  to  en- 
feeble 

Affectuonsly,  adv.,  p.  219 ;  F.  affectiieux, 
affectionately 

Affraye,  n.,  p.  44,  57,  disturbance,  broil, 
fear 

Affrayed,  v.  t.,  p.  293;  O.F.  afrayer, 
affrayer,  esfrayer,  etc.,  frightened, 
terrified 

Affyance,  p.  131,  trust,  confidence 

Affye,  p.  214  ;  O.F.  after,  to  trust,  to 
confide  in 

Aftirst,  adj.,  p.  51,  superlative  of  after, 
the  last,  the  hindmost 

Aitre,  p.  25  ;  O.F.  aitre,  churchyard 
porch 

Alalonge,  adv.,  p.  3,  exactly,  truly,  at 
length 

Alled-e,  v.  tr.,  p.  147,  230,  etc. ;  O.F.  al- 
leger,  alegier,  to  lighten,  mitigate,  allay 

Almesse,  n.,  p.  35,  252  ;  A.S.  aelmesse, 
aelmysse,  alms 

Alowed,  v.,  p.  55  :  F.  alouer,  praised 

Alyed,  p.  222  ;  O.F.  alier,  united,  allied 

Ameuyd,  v.,  p.  197,  moved,  influenced 

Amytee,  n.,  p.  225  ;  F.  amitie,  friendship 

Anguys8hou8ly,  adv.,  p.  58;  O.F.  an- 
gnissus,  angoisseux,  fiercely,  strenu- 
ously 

Annoyes,  n.,  p.  113;  O.F.  anoi,  anui, 
enui,  discomfort,  vexation,  trouble 

Aoimied,  p.  122;  O.F.  adarner,  adorned 


318 


Vocabulary. 


Apparayllement,  n.,  p.  46  ;  F.  apparaUle- 

ments,  equipments 
Appayred,  v.  pret.,  p.  282 ;  O.F.  empirier, 

iujured,  spoilt 
Appert,  adj..  p.  82  ;  OF.  appert,  capable 
Apperte,  adj.,  p.  90;  open,  present 
Appertenauntes,  n.,  p.  275;  O.F.  aperte- 

nance,  appurtenances 
Apperteyned,  v.  pret,  p.  40 ;  Fr.  appar- 

tenir,  belonged,  appertained 
Appertly,  adv.,  p.  284,  plainly,  openly 
Appese,  v.  tr.,  p.  61  ;  O.F.  apaisier,  to 

appease 
Approucbement,  n.,  p.  155,  from  v.  ap- 
proach ;  O.F.  aprochier,  approach 
A  raged,  p.  112  ;   O.F.  rager,  ragier,  mad 
Ar<  tted,   pp.,   p.  281;   O.F.  areter,   as- 
signed, ascribed 
Ai  inures,  n.,  p.  46  ;  O.F.  armure,  armor 
Ar.ayed,  v.,  p.  46;  O.F.  areier,  aroyer, 
to  array,  arrange,  or  dispose  in  order 
Arreche,  v.,   p.  75 ;    A.S.  ardecan.     Cf. 
Mod.  Ger.   erreichen  =  to  attain,  get 
at,  to  strike 
Arryved,   pp.,    p.   261  ;    arriver,  landed 
(the    word    has     here    its    primitive 
meaning) 
Asondre,  adv.,  p.  30 ;  A.S.  on  sundran, 

asunder 
Aspre,  adj. ;  O.F.  aspre,  severe,  cruel 
Assaylles,   n.,    p.    141  ;    O.F.  assailler, 

assaults 
Assieged,  v.  pret.,  p.  19 ;  O.F.  assegier, 

besieged 
Astonyed,  pp.,  p.  288,  either  from  A.S. 
astuniau,  or  from  O.F.  estoner,  estuner, 
estonner,    probably    of    A.S.    origin, 
stunned 
Aswage,  v.,  p.  54 ;  O.F.  asouager,  asunger, 

assuage 
Attemperat,  adj.,  p.  116,  moderate 
Atteyne,    v.,    p.    243 ;    O.F.    attaindre, 

attain,  reach,  strike 
Attysed,  v.   pret.,  p.  117;  O.F.  atisler, 

urged  on,  instigated 
Atysement,  n.,   p.   121,  instigation,  enr 

ticement 
Aualed,  v.  trans,  pret.,  p.  119,  180  ;  O.F. 

avaler,  lowered 
Auctors,  n.,  p.  135;  O.F.  autor 
Aune,  adj.,  p.  305,  own 
Aulter,  p.  253,  aultres,  p.  25  ;  O.F.  alter, 

miter,  altar 
Auysed,  p.  102;  O.F.  aviser,  to  notice, 
observe 


Auowe,  n.,  p.  149,  vow 

Avowed,  p.  126.     See  Aduowe 

Avoyde,  v.,  p.  271,  to  quit.  For  deriva- 
tion see  Voyde 

Awbes,  n.,  p.  209,  albs,  a  white  linen 
vestment,  and  also  a  close-fitting  vest- 
ment worn  by  officiants  at  mass,  of 
black  or  other  colour. — Cot.  See  the 
Lay  Folks'  Mass  Book,  p.  167 

Ayerye,  p.  253,  airy 

Bandon,  n.,  p.  165 ;  to  have  bandon  =  to 

have  full  and  free  permission 
Barat,    n.,   p.   236;     Fr.    barat,    origin 

uncertain  ;  trickery,  deceit 
Barayn,  adj.,  p.  116;  O.F.  barain,  bra- 

hain,  brehaing,  sterile 
Barbycane,  n.,  p.  156;  Barbycnm,  n.,  p. 
251  ;   O.F.  barbicaiie,  supposed  to  be 
of  Arabian   or  Persian  origin,  intro- 
duced into  Europe  by  the  Crusaders  ; 
cf.  Barbicaiie,  a  casement  or  hole  in 
a  parapet  or  wall  to  shoot  out  from  ; 
some  think  it  also  a  sentry  scout-house 
or  hole.     See  Cotgrave,  Ar.  Pers.  bab- 
khanah 
Barellys,  n.,  p.  119  ;  O.F.  baril,  barrels 
Bataylles,    n.,    p.    56,    138,    etc.;    O.F. 
bataille,   from   battere,   battuere,   bat- 
talions 
Baylliage,  n.,  p.  125,  a  bailiwick 
Bayly,  n.,  p.  24,  125,  etc.  ;  O.F.  baili, 
earlier  bailif,  a  derivative  of  bail,  a 
bailif 
Beestes,  n.,  p.  48  ;  beestys,  p.  48  ;  O.F. 

beste,  bete,  beasts 
Befylle,  v.,  p.  20  ;  A.S.  befeallan,  befel 
Behoued,  p.  110,  pret.  of  behoove;  A.S. 

behojian,  behooved 
Behoueful,  adj.,  p.  44,  needful,  fit 
Berde,  n.,  p.  36;   A.S.  beard,  beard 
Besaunt,  n.,  p.  35, 165  ;  O.F.  besant,  M.L. 
Bezantius,   from    Byzantium,    a    gold 
coin  issued   by  the  Emperors  of  Con- 
stantinople, in  the  Middle  Ages 
Besy,  adj.,  p.  153  ;  A.S  bysig,  busy 
Besynes.   n.,    p.    162,    busy    and    ness, 

business 
Bette,  v.,  p.  47  ;   A.S.  bcdtan,  beat 
Beuffes,  pi.  of  beef,  p.  35;  O.F.  boeuf, 

boef,  buef,  beeves 
Bihalue,  p.  89,  behalf 
Bobaunce,  p.  27  ;  O.F.  bobance;  cf.  M.L. 
bombicus,  from  L.  bombus,  boasting, 
pride 


Vocabulary. 


310 


Bote,   v.    pret.,   p.   113;    A.S.  bitan  = 

Gotli.  beitan,  to  bite 
Bowe  turquoys,   n.,  p.   102,  a  Turkish 

bow 
Brede,  D.,  p.  135  ;  A.S.  breM,  breadth 
Brende,   v.  pret.,  p.  51  ;  A.S.  baenuinj 

pret.  baemde,  burnt 
Breut,  v.,  p.  20.     See  Brende 
Brokes,  n.,  p.  258  ;  A.S.  broc,  brooks 
Bruyt,   n.,   p.  138;    O.F.  bruit,  report, 

rumor,  noise 
Bus8hement,  n.,  p.  131,  abbreviation  for 

anibushment ;  O.F.  embuschement,  am- 
bush 
Busynes,  n.,  p.  53,  108,  etc. ;  O.F.  bus- 
sine,  bnisine,  trumpets 
Bycam,  v.   pret.,  p.  124;  A.S.  becumen 

=  Goth,  bikuriman,  became 
Bye,  v.,  p.  61  ;  A.S.  bycgan,  pret.  bohte 

—  Goth,  bugjan,  atone  for 
Bygonne,  v.  pret.,  p.  53  ;  A.S.  beginnen; 

pret.  began,  begun 
Byheded,  pp.,  p.  52 ;  A.S.  beheafdian, 

beheaded 
Byleve,  p.  38 ;  A.S.  be  +  lie'fan,  believe 
Byse,  n.,  p.  124 ;  F.  Use,  North-east  or 

Nortli 
Bytwene,   prep.,  p.  121 ;  A.S.  betweon, 

between 
Byyonde,  p.  46  ;  A.S.  begeondan,  beyond 

Caable,  n.,  p.  267;  F.  chaoMe,  L.L. 
cadabula,  quadablum,  Gk.  xar/joXjj,  a 
machine  of  war  for  throwing  stones 
and  demolishing  walls 

Caityfnes,  n.,  p.  37  ;  O.F.  caitif,  chetif  + 
nes ;  wretchedness,  misery 

Canellys,  n.,  p.  273  ;  F.  caned,  canals 

Cariage,  p.  51,  caryajre,  p.  52,  n. ; 
O.F.  carriage,  chariage,  the  act  of 
carrying,  also  that  which  is  carried, 
the  burden 

Castelles,  n.,  p.  2,  castellys,  p.  99 : 
O.F.  chastel,  a  rolling  gallery,  flanked 
with  towers  for  attacking  a  forti- 
fied place,  called  sometimes  a  chat, 
castel 

Cautele,  n.,  p.  186;  O.F.  cautelle,  cau- 
tion, subtlety,  cunning,  fraud 

Cendres,  n.,  p.  279  ;  O.F.  cendre,  cinders, 
ashes 

Chaas,  v.  pret.,  p.  2  ;  A.S.  cedsan,  pret. 
ceds  =  Goth,  kivsan,  to  choose 

Chaas,  n.,  p.  64:  A.S.  ch«cc,cacc,  v.  sub. 
chase 


Chalyces,  n.,  p.  36;  O.F.  chalice,  calicc, 

calix,  chalice 
Champayn8,  n.,  p.  212;  O.F.  champaujue, 

plain,  field 
Channones,    n.,   p.    290;    O.F.    canone, 

chanone,    chanaine,    canons    or    pre- 
bendaries 
Charged,  v.  pret.,  p.  213  ;  O.F.  chargier, 

cargier,  loaded 
Charyotte,  n.,  p.  33;  O.F.  chariot,  dim. 

of  char,  a  two-wheeled  waggon 
Chattes,  n.,  p.  257 ;  O.F.  cliut,  a  frame 

of  heavy  timber,  with  projecting  pins 

or  teeth,  hoisted  upon  battlements  to 

be  dropped  on  assailants 
Chees,  p.  45,  pret.  of  choose 
Chere,  n.,  p.  218;  O.F.  chere,  chiere,  cheer 
Cheuysshe,  v.,  p.   151  ;    O.F.  chevir,  to 

accomplish,  get,  provide 
Chiere,  n.,  p.  276.     See  Cliere 
Childed,  v.,  p.  Ill  ;  A.S.  cildian,  gave 

birth  to 
Childeren,  n.,  p.  46 ;  A.S.  did,  children 
Choos,  v.,  p.  131,  pret.  of  choose 
Chylded,  v.,  p.  246.     See  Childed 
Cirurgens,  n.,  p.  114;  O.F.  cirurgien,  ser- 

urgien,  surgeons 
Claymeth,   v.,    p.    134;    O.F.    claimer, 

cleimer,  clamer,  call  or  name 
Closure,  n.,  p.  135  ;  O.F.  closure,  after- 
wards  extended    under   influence    of 

Lat.  claustrum  to  closture,  L.  clausura, 

enclosure 
Cloysture,  p.  252.     See  above. 
Cole,  vb.,  p.  88,  to  cool 
Comene,  v.,  p.  288.  to  talk  of  a  weighty 

matter  in  counsel  (Palsgrave),  to  dis- 
cuss, treat  of 
Commysed,  v.,  p.  21  ;  O.F.  commis,  pp. 

of  commettre,  committed,  perpetrated 
Compleyned,    vb.,    p.    186;    O.F.   com- 

plaindre,  to  lament,  to  bewail 
Conduyte,  v.,  p.  34, 181,  etc.  ;  F.  conduit, 

pp.  of  conduire,  to  conduct 
Conduytes,   n.,    p.    254  ;    O.F.   conduit, 

conduits,  tubes,  canals 
Conestable,  n.,  p.  132,  236  ;  O.F.  conne- 

stable,  general-in-chief  of  an  army 
Conne,  v.,  p.    162;   A.S.  cann,  can,  pi. 

cunnon,  to  be  able 
Contened,  v.,  p.  31  ;    O.F.  contenir,  to 

conduct  one's  self 
Conteyned  them,  p.  37.     See  above 
Contre,  n.,  p.  48,  contreye,  p.  63,  countree, 

p.  48;  O.F.  con  a  tire,  contre'e,  country 


;20 


Vocalulary. 


Convalence,  n.,  p.  219,  convalescence 
Coosteyeng,   pres.    part.,   p.   235  ;    O.F. 

costeier,  to  sail  along  the  coast,  to  go 

along  by  the  side  of 
Come,  n.,  p.  252  ;  Fr.  corne,  a  corner  or 

projecting  point 
Corromped,  pp.,  p.  217  ;  O.F.  corrompre, 

L.  corrumpere,  corrupted 
Corrours,n.,p.  154;.O.F.coureor,  coureur, 

runners,  messengers 
Costeyeng,  p.  139.     See  above. 
Couenable,  adj.,  p.  274 ;    O.F.  convena- 

ble;  earlier,  convenable,  suitable,  proper 
Couine,  n.,  p.  19,  151 ;   O.F.  covine,  cow- 
vine,  from  coveivir,  manner,  condition, 

appearance 
Counterpeysed,  vb.,  p.  69 ;  O.F.  contre- 

peser  =  to  weigh  in  the  balance,  to 

consider 
Courage,  n.,  p.  178  ;  O.F.  corage,  courage, 

heart,  mind,  thought,  desire 
Courreurs,  n.,  p.  159.     See  Conours 
Creancers,  n.,  p.  44,  creditors 
Creaunce,  n.,  p.  24,  152  ;  O.F.  creauce, 

faith,  confidence 
Creneul,  n.,  p.  181  ;  O.F.  crenelle,  dim. 

of  crena,  an  embrasure,  a  battlement, 

one  of  the  open  spaces  of  a  battle- 

mented  parapet  which  alternate  with 

the  merlons  or  cops 
Creuache,   n.,  p.   102;    O.F.   crevace,  a 

crack,  fissure,  clift 
Crochette,  n.,  p.  103 ;  F.  crochette,  dim. 

of  croc,  a  hook 
Crose,   n.,   p.   40;    O.F.   croce,  crozier, 

a  bishop's  staff 
Croysyng,  v.  sub.,  p.  3,  the  putting  on 

of  the  cross 
Crybbe,  n.,  p.  246  ;    A.S.  crib,  cryb,  a 

crib,  a  manger 
Culpe,    n.,   p.  120;    O.F.   culpe,   coupe, 

colpe,  fault,  guilt 
Culuer,  n.,  p.  219  ;  A.  S.  culfre,  culufre, 

probably  a  corruption  of  Lat.  columba, 

a  dove,  a  pigeon  ;  used  by  Spenser 
Cursour,  n.,  p.  Ill ;  O.F.  corsier,  coursier, 

a  war-horse,  a  runner 
Custrellis,  n.,  p.  204;  O.F.  coustelle,  a 

sabre  with  two  edges 
Cymetyer,    n.,  p.  251  ;    O.F.  cemetiere, 

a  cemetery 

Dampned,  p.  79,  damned 
Daunger,  n.,  p.  192 ;  O.F.  dai\qer,  dan- 
gler, difficulty,  hesitation,  power 


Debate,  n.,   p.  49 ;    O.F.  desbat,  debat, 

contention,  strife 
Debonair,  adj.,  p.  50 ;    O.F.  de  bon  air, 

courteous,  affable 
Debonairly,  adv.,  p.  22,  courteously 
Decevalle,    n.,    p.    81 ;    O.F.   decevaille, 

deception,  treachery 
Deduyt,  n.,  p.  118;   O.F.  deduit,  diver- 
sion, sport,  pastime 
Defaulte,  n.,  p.  52  ;  O.F.  defaute,  a  fault, 

a  failure 
Deffended,   pp.,   p.   24  ;    O.F.   defendre, 

forbidden 
Deffeted,  pp.,  p.  21 ;  O.F.  defeter,  defeated 
Defowled,    pp.,    p.    36;    O.F.    defoler, 

trampled  underfoot 
Degrees,  n.,  p.  252 ;  O.F.  degre'e,  steps 
Delue,   v.,   p.   201  ;    A.S.   delfan,    pret. 

dealf,  pi.  dulfon,  pp.  dolfen,  to  dig, 

f*Xf*ftV*lt6 

Delytable,  adj.,  p.  118,  130;  O.F.  delit- 
able,  delightful,  delectable 

Delyuer,  adj.,  p.  205  ;  O.F.  delime,  free, 
prompt,  nimble 

Delyuerid,  pp.,  p..  124  J  O.F.  delivrer, 
freed,  delivered 

Delyuerly,  adv.,  p.  133.  promptly,  actively 

Demayne,  n.,  p.  106  ;  O.F.  demaine, 
demeine,  var.  of  domaiu,  power,  do- 
minion 

Demened,  v.,  p.  28, 31, 37  ;  O.F.  demener, 
conducted,  managed,  treated 

Demonstraunce,  n.,  p.  246  ;  O.F.  demon- 
strance,  demonstration,  proof 

Departed,  v.,  p.  251 ;  O.F.  departir,  di- 
vided, separated 

Deporte,  v.,  p.  26;  O.F.  deporter,  to 
protect,  take  care  of 

Desheryted,  pp.,  p.  43 ;  O.F.  desheriter, 
disinherited 

Despenses,  n.,  p.  162;  O.F.  despences, 
expenses,  expenditures 

Desperpled,  p.  64;  O.F.  desparpaillier, 
etc.  —  to  scatter,  to  disperse 

Deployed,  pp.,  p.  239 ;  F.  de  +  ployer, 
unfolded 

Desraye,  n.,  p.  295 ;  O.F.  desarrei, 
disarroi,  disroi,  disarray,  confusion 

Destourmed,  p.  75,  probably  a  corrup- 
tion fur  destourned;  O.F.  destourner, 
to  hinder,  avoid,  turn  from 

Destrayt,  n.,  p.  244;  F.  destreit,  destroit, 
a  narrow  passage 

Destrobled,  v.,  p.  30 ;  O.F.  destourbler, 
var.  of  destourbier,  troubled 


Vocabulary. 


321 


Deuoyr,  n.,  p.  65 ;    Fr.  devoir,  duty,  or 

service 
Deyche,  n.,  p.  270  ;  A.S.  die,  a  ditch 
Deyde,  p.  43,  pret  of  Deye 
Deye,  v.,  p.  32;  M.E.  dien,  dyen,deyen 

=  Gotli.  diwan,  pret.  dau,  to  die 
Disancre,  v.,  p.  189,  dis  +  anchor;  A.S. 

ancor,  to  weigh  anchor 
Discarded,  v.,  p.  147;  O.F.  descharger, 

deschargier,  discarricare,   discharged, 

fired 
Disconuenyente8,  n.,  p.  52 ;  O.F.  descon- 

venance,  inconveniences,  discomforts 
Disconeryd,  pp.,  p.  253  ;  O.F.  descouvrir, 

uncovered 
Displaysyd,  v.,  p.  60;    O.F.  desplaiser, 

displeased 
Dispourveyed,   adj.,   p.    308;    O.F.   de- 

pourvu,  needy,  deprived  of 
Dispoylles,  n.,  p.  135  ;   O.F.  despouilles, 

spoils 
Distourblyng,  n.,  p.  48.    See  Destrobled 
Dolorous,  adj.,  p.  277  ;  O.F.  doloreux, 

mournful,  dismal 
Dommage,    n.,    p.   26;     O.F.    damage, 

damage,  damage,  harm 
Domyned,  v.,  p.  2  ;  O.F.  dominer,  ruled, 

controlled 
Dongeon.n.,p.251 ;  O.F.  dorijon,  the  inner 

tower,  keep,  or  stronghold  of  a  castle 
Doubted,  v.,  p.  108  ;  O.F.  douter,  feared 
Doughtres,    n.,    p.    25;     A.S.    dohtor, 

daughters 
Drad,  adj.,  p.  5,  124  ;  A.S.  draedan  (only 

in  comp.),  dreaded 
Dressed,  v.,  p.  227  ;  O.F.  dresser,  drccier, 

set  up,  arranged,  prepared  for  action 
Droef,   v.,  p.   48,   pret.  of  drive;    A.S. 

drifan  =  Goth,  dreiban,  drove 
Droncardys,   n.,    p.  150 ;    drunk  +  ard, 

drunkards 
Droytt-s,  n.,  p.  301  ;  O.F.  droits,  rjghts 
Duchemen,   n..   p.  51  ;    Dutchmen,  t.  e. 

Germans 
Duellid,   v..  p.  21,  pp.  of  dwell  (A.S. 

dwellan,  dwelt 
Dychte,   v.,  p.  114  ;  A.S.  dihtan,  pret. 

dihte,  to  dress,  to  clean 
Dylyure,  v.,  p.  39.     See  Delyverid 
Dymynued,  v.,  p.  291  ;  O.F.  diminuer, 
to  diminish 

F.erying,  v.,  p.  29.     See  Ere 
Etfrayed,  v.,  p.  113,  140;   O.F.  effrayer, 
frightened 

GODFREY.      ' 


Egally,  adj.,  p.  144  ;  F.  e'gal,  equally 

Eght,  adj.,  p.  47,  eighth 

Elis,  n.,  p.  93,  eels  ? 

Ellys,  adv.,  p.  109  ;  A.S.  elles  =  Goth. 

alis  =  L.  alms,  else 
Embusshed,  v.,   p.  125;  (XF.  enbuschn; 

embusclier,  embuissier,  to  place  in  am- 
bush 
Embusshement,  n.,  p.  125,  an  ambush- 

ment 
Empesshement,  n.,  p.  89  ;  O.F.  empesche- 

ment  =  hindrance 
Empeyred,  v.,  p.  42  ;  O.F.  empirier,  to 

injure,  damage 
Empryse,  v.,  p.  1,  21 ;  F.  empris,  pp.  of 

ewprendre,  to  undertake 
Enchassed,  v.,  p.   121 ;  O.F.  enchacier, 

enchasser,  encachier,  chased 
Endeuoyre,  v.,  p.  1,  4  ;  O.F.  in  +  dever, 

devoir,  to  endeavor 
Enducte,  adj.,  p.  286  ;  probably  a  syno- 
nym for  accustomed.     V  trained 
Endure,  v. ;  O.F.  endnrer,  to  persist 
Enforced,    v.,    p.    249  ;    O.F.    enforcer, 

enforcier,  violated,  ravished 
Enforced,  v.,   p.  134  ;   same    origin  as 

above ;  strengthened 
Enforced  them,  v.  ref.,  p.  25,  98 ;  same 

origin  as  above;   to  encourage  one's 

self,    to     put     forth     one's     greatest 

exertion 
Enhabited  with,  adj.,  p.  130;   O.F.  in- 

habiter,  inhabited  by 
Enhaunced,    v.,    p.   22;   O.F.  enhancer, 

en  +  hancer,  enhancier 
Ennoyed,  v.,  p.  125,  annoy  +  ed,.O.F. 

onoi,  enoi,  enui,  troubled,  vexed 
Enpayred,  v.,  p.  158.     See  Empeyred 
Enpesshe,  v.,  p.   107;    O.F.  empecliier, 

to  hinder 
Entente,  n.,  pp.   19,  93;    O.F.    entente, 

attention,  heed,  intention 
Entented,  v.,  p.  52,  etc. ;  O.F.  entendre, 

to   be  busy,  attend  to,  occupy  one's 

self  witli 
Ententifly,  adv.,  p.  21,  137,  diligently 
Entermeted   of,   v.,   p.   53 ;    O.F.  entre- 

mettre,  to  concern  one's  self  with,  to 

have  to  do  with 
Enticed,  v.,  p.  20;  O.F.  enticer,  enticher, 

en  +  teche,  persuaded,  enticed 
Entierly,   adv.,    p.     105,    entier   +  ly ; 

O.F.  entier,  entire,  whole 
Entreated,  v.,  p.  22  ;  O.F.  entraiter,  m- 
trn it irr,  to  treat,  to  behave  towards 

Y 


322 


Vocabulary. 


Entredeux,  loe.  adv.,  p.  83;   O.F.  entre- 
deux, of  two  minds,  undecided 
Entreprysed,  v.,  p.  44 ;   from  entrepris, 

pp.  of  F.  entreprendre,  undertook 
Entretiened,  v.,  p.   22 ;    Fr.  entretenir, 

supported,  taken  care  of 
Enuyronned,  v.,  p.  47;  O.F.  environer, 

environner,  en  +  viron,  surrounded 
Entysed,  v.,  p.  62.     See  Enticed 
Erable,   adj.,    p.    135;  O.F.   arable,   L. 

arabUis,  prob.  confused  with  the  M.E. 

to  ear,  arable 
Ere,  v.,  p.  306  ;  A.S.  erian  =  Goth,  ar- 

jan  =  L.  arare,  to  plow,  to  till 
Eschewe,  v.,   p.  128 ;    O.F.  eschuer,  es- 

chiver,  to  avoid 
Esclaues,  n.,  p.  204 ;  O.F.  sclave,  slaves 
Escumours,  n.,  p.  120  ;  pirates  O.F. ;  see 

Escunierie  =  piracy,  of  German  origin 
Eshewe,  v.,  p.  43.     See  Eschewe 
Esmayed,  v.  int.,  p.  210;  O.F.  esmaier, 

Gotli.    magan,    daunted,    filled    with 

fear 
Esperaunce,  n.,  p.  160;  O.F.  esperance, 

hope 
Estandart,   n.,    p.   150;    O.F.   etendard, 

standard-bearer 
Ester,  n.,   p.  241 ;    A.S.   edstra,  Easter 

(given  by  Beda) 
Estorementes,  n.,  p.  138 ;    O.F.   estoie- 

ments,  soldiers'  equipment,  arms 
Estour,  n.,  p.  211  ;   O.F.  estor,  O.H.D. 

sturm,  vb.  sturman,  attack,  contest 
Eurous,  adj.,  p.  4  ;  O.F.  heureux,  eureux, 

happy,  lucky 
Ewr,  n.,  p.  268  ;  O.F.  heur,  luck 
Excusacion,  n.,  p.  66 ;    O.F.  excusation, 

excuse,  apology 
Exployted,  v.,  p.  196;   O.F.  exploiter, 

exploitier,  achieved,  accomplished 
Exploytes,  n..  p.  126 ;  O.F.  exploit,  ex- 

ple'it,  achievements,  performances 
Eyen,  n.,  p.  134.  pi.  of  eye,  eyes 

Facions,  n.,  p.  23 ;    O.F.  facon,  fazon, 

etc.,  fashions,  manners,  ways 
Faite,  n.,   p.    173;    O.F.  faix,  burden, 

charge,  weight 
Faitis,  n.,  p.  273;  O.F.  fait,  deeds 
Fardellvs,  n. ;   O.F.  fardel,  fardeau,  L. 

fardellus,  said  to  be  of  Arabic  origin, 

bundles,  packs 
Fawcon,  n.,  p.  289  ;  O.F.  fancon,  banner 

=    gohfaaon.     Falco    =   vex  ilium   in 

Med.  Lat. 


Fayned,  v.,  p.  259;  O.F.  feindre,  to 
make  a  false  appearance,  pretend 

Fayte,  n.,  p.  62.     See  Faite 

Feaulte\  n.,  p.  30;  O.F.  feaulte,  feaute, 
etc.,  fealty,  faithfulness 

Feeldes,  n.,  p.  61;  A.S. /eta,  fields 

Feerd,  adj.,  p.  204,  abb.  of  afeerd ;  A.S. 
ufaran,  a  +  foeran,  frightened,  afraid 

Feers,adj.,  p.  188;  tiers,  124;  O.F.  fers, 
old  noin.  form  of  Jier,  fierce,  bold, 
savage 

Fel,  adj.,  p.  40 ;  A.S.  fel,  felo.  Cf.  O.F. 
fel,  O.D.  fel,  grim,  fierce,  ruthless 

Felaw,  n.,  p.  128 ;  Ice.  felagi,  a  com- 
panion, comrade 

Felawship,  n.,  p.  44,  fellowship 

Felly,  adv.  used  adjectively,  p.  107  ; 
same  origin  as  Fel,  and  same  meanings 

Felonnous,  adj.,  p.  113;  O.F.  felon  + 
ous,  wicked,  malignant 

Feotemen,  n.,  p.  123,  footmen 

Fer,  adv. ;  A.S.  feorr  =  Goth,  fairra,  far 

Ferde,  v.  pret.,  p.  122  ;  A.S.  faran,  to 
fare 

Ferdfulness,  n.,  p.  31  ;  A.S./arr,  fear 

Ferre,  adv.,  p.  33.     See  Fer 

Feste,  n.,  p.  278;  O.F.  feste,  feast 

Fetysed,  adj.,  p.  259  ;  O.F.  faitis,  fait  ice, 
well  made,  neat,  properly  cut 

Feuerer,  n.,  p.  156 ;  O.F.  Fevrier, 
February 

Feuytes,  p.  125  ;  a  misprint  or  corrup- 
tion for  fruytes  =  fruits 

Flawe,  n.,  p.  33;  literally  a  flake,  but 
probably  a  corruption  for  fle'an  — 
scourge,  of  which  it  is  a  translation 

Flowred,  v.,  p.  3  ;  O.F.  florir,  to  flourish 

Fol'yly,  adv.,  p.  143;  O.F.  folie  +  ly, 
foolishly 

Fondament,  n.,  p.  21 ;  O.F.  fundament, 
fondement,  foundation 

Forgate,  v.  pret.  ;  A.S.  foi-gitan,  pret. 
forgeat,  forgot 

Forleton,  n.  adj.,  abandoned 

Fosse,  n.,  p.  253  ;  F.  fosse,  a  ditch 

Fourage,  n.,  p.  55  ;  O.F.  fourage,  forage 

Fourbusshed,  v.,  p.  204;  O.F.  fourbiss, 
furbir,  M.L.  forbare  =  A.S.  feormian 
for  feorbian,  furbian,  to  furbish,  scour, 
polish 

Fourriers,  n.,  p.  131  ;  O.F.  foriers,  fora- 
gers, forage-merchants 

Fowle,  adv.,  p.  33;  A.S.  ful  =  Goth. 
fuls,  foully 

Fowlly,  adv.,  p.  192,  foully 


VocaUtlary. 


323 


Fowragyng,  n.,  p.  48,  foraging 
Franchyses,  n.,  p.   33;   O.F.  franchise, 

liberties 
Fyers,  adj.,  p.  19.     O.F.fiers,  fierce 
Fynably,  adj.  ;  fine  +  able  +  ly,  finally 
Fysshe,  n.,  p.  135  ;  A.S.  Jisc,  pi.  Jiscas  = 

fish 
Fyxed,   v.,  p.   44;    O.F.  fixer,  fichier, 

fidier,  fixed 

Gadryd,  pp.,  p.  297 ;  A.S.  gaderian, 
gathered 

Gamyson,  n.,  p.  177;  O.F.  garnison, 
garrison 

Garnysshed,  v.,  p.  124;  O.F.  gamiss, 
garnir,  Germ,  stem  ;  fortified,  garn- 
ished 

Garsoo,  n.,  p.  280;  O.F.  garson,  a  boy, 
a  servant 

Gaynable,  adj.,  p.  85,  tillable 

Gaynsay,  v.,  p.  62 ;  by  abbreviation, 
from  A.S.  agein  seyen,  to  speak  against 

Geer,  n.,  .p.  234 ;  A.S.  gearwe,  gear, 
property 

Ghestes,  n.,  p.  119  ;  A.S.  gaest,  gest,  etc. 
=  Goth,  gasts,  guests 

G  lay  lies,  n.,  p.  97,  273;  O.F.  glave, 
glaive,  glaves,  a  weapon  made  of  a  cut- 
ting blade  at  the  end  of  a  stick  or  staff 

Gol>et,  n.,  p.  191  ;  O.F.  gobet,  goubet, 
dim.  of  gob,  a  morsel,  lump 

Gunfanon,  n.,  p.  289 ;  O.F.  gonfanon, 
L.  gonfano(n)  =  A.S.  guthfana,  gon- 
falon or  banner 

Gossib,  n.,  p.  20;  A.S.  godsib,  sponsor 

Gree,  n.,  p.  277 ;  O.F.  gre,  grei,  etc.,  to 
iiccept  in  gree,  means  to  accept  kindly, 
or  with  favour 

Greues,  n.,  p.  29  ;  O.F.  grief,  gref,  greu, 
etc.,  afflictions,  grievances 

Gttarysshyd,  v.,  p.  167  ;  O.F.  gnariss, 
guarir,  cured,  healed 

Guerdon,  n.,  p.  182;  O.F.  guerdon,  ML. 
ividerdonum,  Gm.  wider  lonnm,  a  re- 
ward 

Gybet,  n.,  p.  25 ;  O.F.  gibet,  a  gibbet,  a 
gallows 

Ilabylled,  adj.,  p.  19  ;  O.F.  habiUer,  clad, 

dressed 
Habyllemen8,  n.,  p.  104;    O.F.   hibille- 

ment,  clothes,  habiliments 
Haclies,  n.,  p.  307  ;  O.F.  hache,  axes 
Happed,  v.  pret.,  p.  141,  198  ;  Ice.  happ, 

happened 


Harberowed,  v.,  p.  249,  same  origin  as 

Herberons  =  O.F.  herbergier,  to  give 

shelter  to,  to  harbor 
Hard)  nes,   n.,    p.    63  ;    hardy   +   ness  ; 

O.F.  fiardi,  O.H.G.  harti,  herti,  hardi- 
ness 
Harnoys,  n.,  p.  137,  138;   O.F.  harnas, 

harnois;    of  Celtic    origin;    harness, 

armour 
Haubergyers, .  n.,    p.    168;    makers    of 

hauberks 
Hauberks,  n.,  p.  204;  O.F.  hauberc,  hal- 

berc,  Gm.  halsberc,  halsberge,  hauberk 
Hauene,  n.,  p.  231 ;  A.S.  haefen,  a  haven, 

harbour 
Havoyr,  n. ;  Fr.  avoir,  property,  riches 
Heelpe,    v.    pret. ;     A.S.    helpan,    pret. 

healp,  pi.  holpon,  to  help 
Heer,  n.,  p.  36  ;  A.S.  hair,  hair 
Heeryng,  pres.  part.,  p.  4  ;   A.S.  hieran, 

ht-ran,  hyran  =  Goth,  hannjan,  hearing 
Henge,  v.  pret.,  p.  211  ;    A.S.  hongian, 

hung 
Herberous,  n.,  p.  207,  O.F.,  G.  or  Scand. 

origin  ;  H.G.  heri  +  O.H.G.  bergan,  a 

camp,  lodging 
Heremyte,  n.,  p.  3 ;  L.L.  eremiba,  hermit 
Hethenes,    n.,    p.    23 ;    A.S.   hazthen  = 

Goth,  haithenis.  pagans,  heathen 
Hether,  adv.,  p.  60;   A.S.  hider,  some- 
times ;  hidres  =  Goth,  hidre,  hither 
Hewing,  pres.  part.,  p.  147  ;  A.S.  he&ican, 

pret.  heow  =  Goth,  haggican,  to  cut, 

to  inflict  cutting  blows 
Heyer,  n.,  p.  302 ;   O.F.  heir,  eir,  oir,  an 

heir 
Heygthe,  n.,  p.   289;    A.S.   heiUhn   = 

Goth,  hau-hitha,  height 
Heyr,  n.,  p.  126.     See  Meyer 
Holpen,  pp.,  p.  106.     See  Heelpe 
Hool,  adj.,  p.  125,  whole 
Hourdeys,  n.,  p.  140 :  O.F.  hmirdeis,  from 

the   Gm. ;    cf.  Goth,  hanrd.s,  M.H.G., 

harden,  hort,  palisades  of  wood  placed 

on  the  tops  of  towers 
Hu,  n.,  p.  268;    O.F.  hu,  hui,  a  cry  or 

shout 
Hydles  (in),  p.  194;    A.S.  hydels.     See 

Wiolif,  Deut.  xxvii.,  6ecretely 

Inconuenyent,  p.  231  ;  O.F.  inconveni- 
ence, a  disagreeable  situation,,  mis- 
fortune 

Indigne,  adj.,  p.  5;  O.F.  indigne,  un- 
worthy 


324 


Vocabulary. 


Intituled,    pp.,    p.    18;     O.F.    iutitider, 
entitled 

Ionrneye,  n.,  p.  34  ;  O.F.  joume'e,  a  day's 

journey 
lusted,  v.,  p.  289  ;  O.F.  jotuter,  to  joust 
Iustised,  v.  pret,  p.  289 ;  O.F.  justicier, 

judged 
Iueticer,  n.,  p.  29  ;  O.F.  justiciar,  a  judge 

Knowleche,   n.,    p.   64;   know  +  leche, 

asuibilated  form   of  leke ;    lcel.  leikr, 

leiki  =  A.S.  lac,  knowledge 
Knowleched,  v.,  p.  123,  abbreviation  for 

acknowleched,  acknowledged 
Kyen,  n.,  p.  33,  pi.  of  cow,  kine 
Kynred,  n.,  p.  29;  A.S.  cynn  +  rceden, 

kindred 

Labourable,  adj.,  p.  112;  O.F.  labor  + 

able,  that  which  can  be  tilled 
Laddre,  n.,  p.  272,  ladder 
Largesse,  n.,  p.  22 ;   O.F.  largesse,  gene- 
rosity, bounty 
Lasse,  adj.,  p.  44 ;  A.S.  laessa,  less 
Lassed,  adj.,  p.  164  ;  O.F.  lasser,  lassare, 

wearied,  fatigued 
Late,   v.,   p.   48 ;    A.S.   Ia5ian  =  Goth. 

letan,  to  let 
Launced  (on),  sb.,  p.  82;    O.F.  lander, 

to  attack 
Lawe,  n.,  p.  22  ;  A.S.  lagu,  religion,  law 
Laye,  ;idj.,  p.  42 ;  O.F.  lai,  lay 
Laye,  n.,  p.  141,  154  ;  A.S.  lagu,  lake 
Layetee,  n.,  p.  43;  lay  +  ty ;  O.F.  lai, 

laity 
Layser,  n.,  p.  37  ;  O.F.  leisir,  loisir,  etc., 

leisure 
Lecherye,  n.,  p.  32 ;  O.F.  lecherie,  lechir, 

M.H.G.  lecken,  lechery 
Leed,  n.,  p.  253  ;  A.S.  ledd,  lead 
Leep,  v.,  p.  113;  A.S.  Medpan  =  Goth. 

Jdaupan,  to  leap 
Lese,  v..  p.  114,  partly  from  A.S.  losian, 

but  chiefly  a  var.  of  lesen;  A.S.  leosau, 

to  lose 
Lesyng,  n.,  p.  244.     See  Lese,  losing 
Lesynge,  n.,  p.  236,  281  ;  A.S.  leasing  = 

lcel.  lausnng,  falsehood,  lying 
Letted,  v.,  p.  146,  281  ;    A.S.  lettan  = 

Goth,  latjan,  to  strip,  retard,  hinder 
Leuer,   adv. ;    A.S.   leof  =  Goth.   Hubs, 

used    in    the    expression    "  to    have 

liefer,"  to  prefer 
Leyser,  n.,  p.  160.     See  Layser 


Leyzer,  n„  p.  5.     See  Layser 

Lodgys,  n.,    p.    110;    O.F.   logis,    M.L. 

laubla,  of  Gin.  origin,  camp 
Longed,    adj.,    p.    53,    contraction    for 

belonged 
Loos,  n.,  p. 288;  O.F.  laais,los,  praise,fame 
Lygnage,   lynage,   n.,   p.   26,  29 ;    O.F. 

linage,  family,  race,  stock 
Lyttier,  n.,  p.  113  ;  O.F.  litiere,  a  litter 
Lyuess,  n.,  p.  58,  pi.  of  life;  A.S.  lif  = 

Goth,  leif,  lives 

Macidated,  pp.,  p.  274,  stained,  spotted 
Mahometry,  n.,  p.  274  ;  Mahomet  +  ry, 

Mahommedanism 
Mahommerye,  n.,  p.  157,  162  ;  O.F.  Ma- 

home'rie,  a  mosque 
Maistres,  n.,  p.  23  ;  O.F.  maistre.  masters 
Males,  n.,  p.  51 ;  O.F.  male,  matte,  bags 

or  sacks 
Malle,  n.,  p.  273  ;  O.F.  mal,  mail,  a  mall, 

or  heavy  hammer 
Mattes,  n.,  p.  210,  same  origin  as  word 

above  =  blows 
Maluerte,  n.,   p.  203;    O.F.   malheurte, 

misfortune 
Mangonneaul,  n.,  p.  257  ;  O.F.  mangonel, 

a   mangonel,  or  engine  for  throwing 

stones 
Marchaunte,   v.,   p.    115;    O.F.  march- 

ander,  to  buy  and  sell,  to  trade 
Marchauntes,  n.,  p.  39,  mercliMnts 
Marche,  n.,  p.  289;  partly  A.S.  mearc, 

partly    from    O.F.    marche,    frontier, 

border 
Marched  (on),  v.,  p.  136  ;  A.S.  mearcian, 
.  to  border  on 
Mareys,  n.,  p.  139,  228;   O.F.   mareis, 

marais,  marois,-  a  marsh 
Marryd,  v. ;   O.F.  marrir,  Gm.  marrjan, 

to  injure 
Marueylles,   n.,   p.   55;    O.F.   merveille, 

marvels,  wonders 
Maulgre,  prep.,  p.  55, 117  ;  O.F.  maugre, 

malgre,  in  spite  of 
Maymed,  v.,  p.  194;   O.F.  mehaing,  ma- 

hain,  to  disable,  maim 
Mayntene,  n.,  p.  61,  conduct,  behaviour 
Medle,  n.,  p.  53,  97  ;   from  verb  medle, 

a  hand-to-hand  tight,  a  melee 
Medled  (with),  v.,  p.  115;    O.F.  medler, 

mesler,  to  concern  one's  self  with,  lo 

deal  with 
Medlyng,  n.,  p.  49,  155;    medle  +  wig, 

contention  in  battle,  fighting 


Vocabulary. 


325 


Meol>les,n.,p.  32;  O.F.  meuble,  furniture, 

movable  property 
Meuable,  adj.,  p.  5  ;  movable 
Meschyef,   n.,   p.    161 ;     O.F.  meschief, 

misfortune,  calamity 
Mescreauntes,  n.,  p.  3  ;  O.F.  mescreaunt, 

infidels,  unbelievers 
Mesease,  n.,  p.  25,   153;    O.F.  meseise, 

mesaise,  mes  +  aise,  discomfort, trouble 
Mesfeates,  n.,  p.  29  ',   O.F.  mesfait,  bad 

actions,  misdeeds 
Mesl lapped,  v.,  p.  167 ;    mis  +  happen, 

minus  ■+-  Icel.  happ,  to  happen  ill,  to 

go  wrong 
Messager,  n.,  p.  18,  163;  O.F.  message, 

messenger 
Messagier,  n.,  p.  239.     See  Messager 
Mesurable,  adj.,  p.  301  ;  O.F.  mesurable, 

moderate,  temperate 
Meyne,  n.,   p.  136,  177 ;   O.F.  megnie, 

menie,  suite,  members  of  a  household 
Monethe,    p.    41,    183;     A.S.    moneth, 

monoth  =  Goth,  menoth,  month 
Moo,  adj.,  p.  52,  more 
Mounture,  n.,  p.  141 ;   O.F.  monture,  a 

mount,  a  saddle-horse 
Mowe,  vb.,  p.  185,  be  able 
Moyen,  adj.,  p.  59;  same  derivation  as 

below ;   literally,   medium,   but   used 

here  in  the  sense  of  common 
Moyens,  n.,  p.  119 ;  O.F.  moien,  meien, 

means 
Mulettis,  n.,  p.  122 ;  O.F.  mvlet,  mules 
Muraylles,    n.,    p.    21 ;     O.F.   muraille, 

walls 
Murdred,  v.,  p.  35 ;   A.S.  myrthrian  = 

Gotli.  maurthrjan,  killed,  murdered 
Murdrier,   n.,    p.   32  ;    same   origin   as 

above,  murderer 
Musardes,    n.,    p.    203 ;    O.F.    musard, 

vagabond 
Musardye,  n.,  p.  179,  vagabondage 
Myllenes,  n.,  p.  51 ;  A.S.  mylen,  myln  = 

O.F.  movlin,  mills 
Mynnysshid,  v.,  p.  145;  O.F.  menusier, 

menuisier,  to  diminish 
Mysauentures,  n.,  p.  54;  O.F.  mesaven- 

ture,  ill  luck,  mischance 
Mysbeleue,  n.,  p.  152  ;  A.S.  mis  +  belief, 

false  opinion,  heresy 
Myschiefs,  n.,  p.  25.     See  Meschyef 
Myscreauntes,  n.,  p.  23.     See  Mescre- 
auntes 

Natyuyte,  n.,  p.  3  ;  O.F.  uativete,  nativity 


Nauyll,  n.,  p.  253;  A.S.  nafela  =  Gotli. 
nabulo,  tlie  navel,  the  middle 

Ner,  adv.,  p.  108,  near 

Neraught,  v.  pret.,  p.  149,  neg.  combined 
with  reckon ;  A.S.  recan,  pret.  rohte, 
not  to  lieed,  or  pay  attention  to,  or  care 

Nette,  adj.,  p.  25 ;   O.F.  vet,  neat 

Neueus,  n.,  p.  136  ;  O.F.  neven,  nephews 

Noye,  v.,  p.  104;  by  aphaeresis  from 
annoy,  to  damage,  injure 

Noyous,  adj.,  p.  140,  injurious,  trouble- 
some 

Noyse,  n..  p.  23,  138;  O.F.  noise,  L. 
nausea,  disturbance,  noise 

Nyce'y,  adv.,  pp.  187,  233;  nice  +  ly ; 
O.F.  nice,  L.  nescius,  foolishly 

Nyle,  n.,  p.  85.     See  note,  p.  85 

Obeyssaunt,  adj.,  p.  2;  O.F.  obeissant, 

obedient 
Occisyon,    n.,    p.    62;     O.F.    occision, 

daughter,  the  act  of  killing 
Occyent,  n.,  p.  55 ;    O.F.  Occident,  the 

Occident,  the  West 
Oost,  n.,  p.  55 ;  O.F.  host,  ost,  the  army 
Orguyel,  n.,  p.  20;   O.F.  orgoil,  orgvtl, 

etc.,  of  Teut.  origin  ;  cf.  O.H.G.  urgilo, 

ur  +  gel,  pride 
Orguyllous,  adj.,  p.  19  ;  O.F.  orgueilleux ; 

cf.  A.S.  orgellic,  same   origin  as  or- 

gaycl,  promi,  haughty,  ostentatious 
Orisons,  n.,  p.  26  ;  O.F.  oraison,  orisons, 

prayers 
Oroysons,  n.,  p.  269.     See  Orisons 
Ost  ages,  n.,  p.  50,  127,  etc. ;  O.F.  ostage, 

hostages 
Ottroye,  v.,  p.  5  ;    octroyer,  to  grant,  to 

give 
Ouerste,  adj.,  p.  161,  superlative  of  over; 

A.S.  qfer,  the  highest 
Ought,  v.,  p.  124,  pret.  of  to  owe ;  A.S. 

ahte 
Oultrages,  n.,  p.  49,  120 ;  O.F.  outrage, 

outrages 
Outbynde,   v.,  p.   248,   un  +  bynde,  to 
.  loosen 
Otiurages,    n.,    p.  237 ;     O.F.  outrage, 

works 
Oynementis,  n.,  p.  251 ;  O.F.  oignement, 

oigner,  oindre,  ointment,  unguent 

Paas,  n.,  p.  133  ;  O.F.  pas,  pace 
Palfroye,    n.,    p.   46  ;     O.F.   palrfrm,    a 

saddle-horse 
Palus,  n.,  p.  244 ;  Lat.  palus,  marsh 


2  h 


326 


Vocabulary. 


Paincnte,  n.,  p.  39  ;  O.F.  pavement,  pavi- 

meiii,  pavement 
Pane,    n.,    p.  264 ;    O.F.   pan,  a   piece, 

division,  part 
Panemye,    n.,    p.   150 ;     O.F.    paiennie, 

heathendom 
Parfygt,  adj.,  p.  122 ;  O.F.  parfait,  parfit, 

perfect 
Parteyes,  n.,p.  18;  partie,  parts,  countries 
Paryll,  n.,  p.  151  ;   O.F.  peril,  peril 
Pasqne,  n.,  p.  241  ;  Fr.  Pasques,  Easter 
Pauyllon,  n.,  p.  46,  165 ;   O.F.  pavilion, 

pavilion,  tent 
Paynem,  n.,  p.  145 ;   O.F.  paienime,  a 

pagan,  a  heathen 
Payssyble,   adj.,   p.   81 ;    O.F.  paisible, 

peaceable 
Peas,  n.,  p.  51  ;  Fr.  paix,  peace 
Pecked,  v.,  pret.,  p.  142 ;    A.S.  pycan, 

picked 
Pees,  n.,  p.  43.     See  Peas 
Pendaunt,  n.,  p.  188 ;    O.F.  pendant,  a 

slope,  a  hanging 
Penyble,  adj.,  p.  209 ;  O.F.  penible,  cap- 
able  of  enduring   hard  work,  pains- 
taking 
Percid,  v.,  p.   201 ;    F.  percer,  percier, 

pierced 
Perierer,  n.  ;   O.F.  pierrtires,  an  engine 

for  throwing  stones 
Perylle,  n.,  p.  35.     See  Paryll 
Peyned,  v.  ref.,  p.  64  ;   O.F.  peiner,  to 

make  an  effort,  to  give  one's  self  great 

trouble 
Pieres,  n.,  p.  3  ;  F.  pair,  peers 
Pierrye,     n.,    p.    78 ;     O.F.    pierreries, 

precious  stones 
Piscyne,  n.,  p.  251 ;  O.F.  piscine,  a  pool 
Playsyr,  n.,  p.  5;    O.F.    plaisir,  plesir, 

pleasure 
Plom,  n.,  p.  184;  OF.  plom,plomb,  plumb 
Popelican,  n.,  p.  94;   O.F.  popdican,  a 

heretic 
Popeliquans,  n.,  p.  80  ;  same  as  above 
Potes  n., p.  118;   V.patte,  of  Gin.  origin. 

Cf.  Low  Gin.  pote,  Gm.  Pfote,  paws- 
Pourchassed,  v.,  pp.  22,  23  ;    O.F.  por- 

chacier,  etc.,  captiare,  obtained,  gained 
Pourcliassoure,   n.,   p.   238 ;    O.F.   pu,r- 

chaeeor,  one  who  acquires  or  obtains. 

?  pursuer,  seeker  after 
Pourpiised,  v.,  p.  139 ;  O.F.  pmirprise, 

porprise,  seized,  occupied 
Poursue,  v.,  p.  39  ;   O.F.  pursuer,  ponr- 

sniore,  to  pursue 


Poursyewe,  v.,  p.  60.     See  Poursue 

1'ourueyaunce,  n.,  p.  36  ;  O.F.  porvei* 
ance,  porveance,  care,  foresight 

Pourueyed,  v.,  p.  160;  O.F.  porveier, 
pourvoir,  provided 

Prechid,  v.,  p.  18;  O.F.  prechier,  precher, 
preached 

Prees,  n.,  p.  133  ;  O.F.  presse,  a  press,  a 
crowd 

Prenable,  adj  ,  p.  135  ;  O.F.  prenable, 
that  which  may  be  taken 

Preuyleges,Mi.,  p.  24 ;  O.F.  privilege, 
rights,  privileges 

Preysed,  v.,  p.  36,  145;  O.F.  prisier, 
priaer,  prized,  estimated  highly 

Prime  temps,  n.,  p.  165 ;  O.  F.  print emps, 
the  spring-time 

Prise,  n.,  p.  130 ;  O.F.  prise,  the  taking, 
the  capture 

Priue,  adj.,  p.  106  ;  O.F.  prive",  private, 
intimate 

Proef,  n.,  p.  40;  O.F.  prove,  proeve, 
preuve,  proof 

Promyssyon,  n.,  p.  253,  promise 

Propice,  adj.,  p.  40;  O.F.  propice,  pro- 
pitious, suitable 

Prothomarter,  n.,  p.  251  ;  Fr.  pi-oto- 
martyr,  M.L.  protomartyr,  from  Ok. 
■KpvTOfiaprv^,  the  hrst  martyr. 

Prouffred,  v.,  p.  163,  164;  O.F.  prqferer, 
proffered  . 

Prouffyt,  n.,  p.  122  ;  O.F.  profit,  profit 

Prouostes,  n.,  p.  41  ;  A.S.  prdfost,  pro- 
vosts 

Puissaunt,  adj.,  p.  19,  powerful 

Puyssaunce,  n.,  p.  61,  124  ;  O.F.  puis- 
sance, for  power 

Pyece,  n.,  p.  259  ;  O.F.  piece,  piece 

Pyetous,  adj.,  p.  204  ;  O.F.  piteux,  com- 
passionate 

Pyked,  v.  pret,  p.  63  ;  A.S.  pycan,  to 
pick  or  strike  with  an  instrument 

Pykoys,  n.,  p.  63  ;  O.F.  pecois,  pyqnois, 
etc.,  a  sort  of  dart 

Pyler,  n.,  p.  253  ;  O.F.  pilier,  a  pillar 

Pylle,  pyle,  v.,-  p.  55,  60 ;  O.F.  pilier,  to 
pillage 

Pynnes,  n.,  p.  257  ;  A.S.  pinn,  pins 

Pytte,  v.  pret.,  p.  251  ;  A.S.  potian,  to 
put 

Qiiiirellys,    n.,    p.    263;    O.F.    quarrel, 

arrows  having  a  four-edged  he-id 
Quyt,  adj.,  p.  60;  O.F.  quite,  quit 
Ouyte,  u.,  p.  17.     See  Qvyt 


Vocabulary. 


327 


Raced,  v.,  p.  34  ;   O.F.  raser,  freq.  of  L. 

radere,  to  destroy,  to  put ;  vised  with  out 
Raunson,    n.  ;     O.F.    Rancon,    ren$on, 

ransom 
lt-iwnson,  n.,  p.  224.     See  Raunson 
Recomforte,    v.,  p.   27,  63  ;    Fr.  recon- 

forter,    re  +  comfort,    to    give    new 

strength  to 
Recouere,  v.,  p.  43  ;  O.F.  recouvrer,  to 

recover 
Recountred,  v.,  p.  195  ;  O.F.  rencontrer, 

to  encounter 
Recaperacion,   n.,  p.   4 ;    O.F.  recuper- 
ation, recovery 
Recuyelled,  v.,  p.  213 ;    O.F.  recueiller, 

gathered,  collected 
Redde,  v.  pret.,  p.  5  ;  A.S.  rozdan.  read 
Reedefye,  v.,  p.   27 ;    O.F.  reedifier,  to 

rebuild 
Refresshyd,  v.,  p.  50 ;   O.F.  refraischir, 

refreschier,  refreshed 
Reherchyng,  v.,  p.  2 ;  O.F.  reherser,  re  + 

herse,  recount,  relate 
Releuyd,  v.,  p.  208 ;   O.F.  relever,  lifted 

up,  raised 
Relyed,  v.,   p.  56,    296;    O.F.   rallier, 

united,  rallied 
Remuled,  adj.,  p.  93.     See  note,  p.  93 
Reinyse,  v.,  p.  1,  293;   F.  remis,  stem 

from  remettre,  to  put  back 
Rendrid,  v.  p.  51 ;  O.F.  rendre,  returned, 

rendered 
Renged,  adj.,  p.  108  ;  O.F.  renger,  reng, 

O.H.G.  hring,  arranged,  drawn  up  in 

line 
Renomed,  adj.,  p.  200  ;    O.F.   renomer, 

renowned 
Renomme,  n.,  p.  5,  37  ;  O.F.  renomm?'e, 

renown 
Renye,  v.,  p.  25,  45,  etc.;  O.F.  renier, 

to  deny, renounce 
Repeased,   pp.,  p.  128;    O.F.  rapaisier, 

appeased 
Repreef,   n.,  p.   25,   28 ;    O.F.  reprover, 

reprouver,  reproof 
Repreuyd.  v.,  p.   123;    same   origin    as 

repreef,  reproved 
Reprysed,  v.,  p.  262 ;  F.  repris,  pp.  of 

reprendre,  taken  back 
Respyted,    v.,    p.    150;     O.F.    respiter, 

delayed,  postponed 
Resseyue,  v.,  p.   106 ;  O.F.  recever,  re- 

coivre,  to  receive 
Retched    (not),  pret.,  p.  83,  an   assibi- 

lated  form  of  reck  =  cared  (not) 


Reteyne,  v.,  p.  89  ;  O.F.  retenir,  to  retain 

Retrayte,  n.,  p.  220 ;  O.F.  retraite,  place 
of  refuge 

Reuerrye,  n.,  p.  174,  197;  O.F.  resverie, 
resver,  a  fit  of  obstinacy 

Reuested,  v.,  p.  205 ;  O.F.  revestir,  to 
clothe,  to  put  on 

Rial,  adj.,  p.  274  ;  O.F.  roial,  regal,  royal, 
royal,  magnificent 

Rightwys,  adj.,  p.  37;  A.S.  rightwis, 
righteous 

Roted,  v.,  p.  145  ;  from  the  noun  root, 
A.S.  rut,  rooted 

Rought,  v.  pret.,  p.  276  ;  A.S.  recan,  pret. 
ruhte,  to  reck,  heed,  care 

Rousee,  n.,  p.  208';   O.F.  rosee,  dew 

Rowte,  n.,  p.  47 ;  O.F.  route,  a  troop, 
band 

Royame,  n.,  p.  60;  O.F.  royaume,  king- 
dom 

Ruissheauls,  n.,  p.  273— probably  a  cor- 
ruption of  '  ruysseaulx,  ruisseaux  ' — 
brooks  or  gutters 

Ryuage,  n.,  p.  112;  O.F.  rivage,  bank, 
brink 

Ryall,  adj.,  p.  252.     See  Rlall 

Sad,  adj.,  p.  38,  202;    A.S.  saed,  sober, 

serious,  wise 
Salewed,  v.,  p.  40 ;  O.F.  saluer,  saluted, 

greeted 
Saucly,   adv.,   p.  41  ;    O.F.   sauf  +  ly, 

safely 
Sauf,  prep.,  p.  21,  except 
Sauf,  adj.,  p.  48,  safe 
Sauf  conduyt,  n.,  p.  236 ;  O.F.  sanfeon- 

duit,  safe-conduct 
Saufly,  adv.,  p.  56,  safely 
Saufte,  n.,  p.  104,  safety 
Scaffholde,  p.  63  ;  O.F.  eschafault.,  csclia- 

faud,  scaffold 
Scarmuche,  n.,  p.  97,  121 ;   O.F.  escar- 

mouehe,  It.  schermngio,  skirmish 
Scarsenes,    n.,   p.    144,    scarce  +  ncss, 

scarceness 
Scarsete,  n.,  p.  230  ;  O.F.  escarsete,  origin 

uncertain  :  scarcity 
Scysme,  n.,  p.  41  ;    O.F.  scisme,  cismc, 

schism 
Seased,  v.,  p.  106, 274  ;  O.F.  saisir,  sciser, 

M.L  satire  till  8th  cent. ;  after,  sasire, 

to  be  put  in  possession  of,  seize 
Seche,  v.,  p.  35;  A.S.  sf-can,  pret.  iSitc, 

Goth,  sokjan,  to  seek 
Seece,  v.,  p.  52 ;  O.F.  cesser,  to  cease 


328 


Vocabulary. 


Selde,  adv.,  p.  193,  seldom 

Sensours,  n.,  p.  32,  censers 

Seruage,  p.  58,  277 ;  O.F.  servage,  servi- 
tude 

Sewed,  v.,  p.  58  ;  O.F.  suir,  sewir,  sevlr, 
suivre,  followed,  chased 

Sewr,  adj.,  p.  48  ;  O.F.  seiir,  sure 

Sewrte,  d.,  p.  58  ;  O.F,  seiirte',  security 

Seynorously,  adj.,  p.  274 ;  O.F.  seig- 
noureux  +  ly,  magnificent 

Shadde,  v.,  p.  33.     See  Shedde 

Shamely,  adv.,  p.  120;  A.S.  scedmclic, 
shamefully 

Shedde,  v.,  p.  270  :  A.S.  sceddan  —  Goth. 
skatdan,  to  slied 

Shewde,  v. ,  p.  20 1 .    See  Shzwyd,  showed 

Shewyd,  v.,  p  4,  showed 

Shippis,  n.,  p.  34,  63,  pi.  of  ship ;  A.S. 
scip  =  Goth,  skep,  sliips 

Sholder,  n.,  p.  45,  shoulder 

Sholdre,  n.,  p.  45.     See  Sholder 

Shytte,  v.,  p.  48 ;  A.S.  scyttan,  shut 

Siewed,  p.  62,  195.  See  Sewedy  fol- 
lowed 

Signefyaunce,  n.,  p.  270  ;  O.F.  signefi- 
ance,  sign 

Skalyng  laddres,  n.,  p.  256,  scaling 
ladders 

Skarmoche,  n.,  p.  210.  See  Scarmuche, 
skirmish 

Skorches,  n.  ;  O.F.  ecorce,  bark,  skin 

Slee,  v.,  p. 54 ;  A.S.  dean  =  Goth,  slahan, 
to  slay 

Slowe,  vb.,  p.  73,  pret.  of  slee,  slew 

Smeton,  v.,  p.  19  ;  A.S.  srrutan,  pret. 
smat,  pp.  smiten  =  Goth,  smeitan,  to 
smite 

Socours,  n.,  p.  35 ;  O.F.  sucurs,  secours, 
aid 

Sodenly,  adv.,  p.  58 ;  O.F.  sodain  +  ly, 
suddenly 

Sommyere,  n.,  p.  46,  51 ;  O.F.  sommier, 
beast  of  burden 

Somoned,  v.,  p.  50;  O.F.  somener, 
semondre,  summoned 

Sonde,  n. ,  p.  185  ;  A.S.  saivd,  sand 

Sorouful,  adj.,  p.  42 ;  A.S.  sorgfid,  sor- 
rowful 

Souldye,  n.,  p.  126 ;  O.F.  soldie,  pay, 
salary 

Souldyour,  n.,  p.  126 ;  O.F.  soldier,  one 
who  receives  pay 

Sowdan.  n.,  p.  136;  O.F.  souldan,  soudan, 
M.L.  sultanus  or  soldmius,  a  Moham- 
medan ruler 


Sowles,  n.,  p.  200 ;   A.S.  sawel,  sawol, 

etc.,  soul 
Sowne,  v.,  p.  53,  104  ;  O.F.  scmer,  suner, 

sound 
Sowped,  v.,  p.  255 ;  O.F.  souper,  M.D. 

soppe,  sop,  supped 
Soynously,  adv.,  p.  271  ;  O.F.  soigneux  + 

ly,  M.L.  sonia,  sunnia  +  osus;  of  Gm. 

origin,  carefully 
Spede,   v.,    p.   63 ;    A.S.  spedan,  to  be 

successful 
Spores,  n.,  p.  154  ;  A.S.  spora,  spurs 
Sprad,  v.,  p.  18,  to  spread 
Stage,  n.,  p.  270 ;  O.F.  etage,  a  story 
Stalled,  v.,  p.  2  ;  A.S.  steallian,  installed, 

placed,  set 
Stedes,  n.,  p.  46  ;  A.S.  steda,  steeds 
Stered,  v.,  p.  235,  stirreil 
Steroppes,  n.,  p.  288  ;  A.S.  stirap,  stiger- 

up  =  stirrups 
Stooles,  n.,  p.  209 ;    O.F.  estole,  stoles, 

robes 
Strayt,   adj.,  p.   47,  135 ;    O.F.  estreit, 

estrait,  narrow 
Stryf,    n.,  p.  51 ;    O.F.  estrif;   of  Gm. 

origin,  strife 
Styed,  vb.,  p.  262,  pret. ;  A.S.  stigan,  to 

mounr,  to  ascend 
Subget,  adj.,  p.  20;  O.F.  sujet 
Sued,  v.,  p.  183.     See  Sewed 
Suffrable,  adj.,  p.  221 :   O.F.  souffrable, 

souffrir,  capable  of  endurance 
Suffre,  v.,  p.  29,  115;  O.F.  soffrir,  souf- 
frir, to  suffer 
Sutfrete,  n.,  p.  144  ;  O.F.  soufreU,  want 
Suflyse,  v.,  p.  30  ;  O.F.  sujjis,  stem  from 

souffire,  L.  suffi-re,  to  suffice 
Surplys,  n.,  p.  209;    O.F.  surplis,  snr- 

pelis.  a  surplice 
Suspection,  n.,  p.  207,  a  var.  of  suspicion, 

from  suspicion 
Sustre,  n.,  p.  46,  sister 
Swote,  n.,  p.  Ill ;  A.S.  swat,  sweat 
Syghes,  n.,  p.  36,  var.  of  sike,  sik;  cf. 

Sw.  such  —  Dan.  soh,  sigh 
Syres,  n.,  p.  60  ;  O.F.  sire,  sirs 
Syth,  adv.,  p.  51,  since 

Taillage,  n.,  p.  277 ;    O.F.  taillage,  toll, 

tax,  tribute 
Takle,  n.,  p.  261  ;  M.D.,  L.G.  takel  =  Sw. 

tackel  =  Dan.  tackkel,  tackle 
Tappet,  n.,  p.   184 ;    A.S.  taepped  =  L. 

tapetum,  F.  tapis,  carpet,  tapestry 
Tapre,  n.,  p.  36  ;  A.S.  tapor,  taper 


Vocabulary. 


329 


Tapyte,  n„  p.  313.     See  Tappet 
Targe,  n.,  p.  63 ;  O.F.  targe,  a  shield 
Taryed,    v.,    p.   54;    taryen,   developed 

through  influence  of  targen,  to  wait 

for,  to  delay 
Tatche,   n.,  p.   282;    O.F.  tache,  teche; 

(origin  uncertain),  defect,  vice 
Tayllage,  n.,  p.  24.     See  Taillage 
Tere,  n.,  p.  127  ;  A.S.  tedr,  tafr  =  Goth. 

togr  =  O.L.  lacrnma,  lacrima,  tear 
Tereitorye,  n.,   p.  233;    O.F.  territoire, 

used    by    Caxton    in    the    sense    of 

Tertre,  n.,  p.  182  ;  O.F.  tertre,  a  little  hill 
Tetche,  n.,  p.  281.     See  Tatche 
Theuys,  n.,  p.  231  ;   A.S.  the6f=  Goth. 

theubs,  thief 
Throte,  n.,  p.  151,  throat 
Tliye,  n.,  p.  113,  thigh 
Tierce,  adj.,  p.  183 ;  O.F.  t'.ers,  hour  half- 
way between  sunrise  and  noon 
Tofore,  adv.,  p.  42,  before 
Torette,  n.,  p.  129  ;  O.F.  tourette,  dim., 

turret,  a  little  tower 
Tourette,  n.,  p.  99.     See  Torette 
Towres,  n.,  p.  50 ;  A.S.  tar  —  O.F.  tour, 

towers 
Trauailled,  v.,  p.   22;    O.F.    travailler, 

to  work,  to  labour 
Trauaylle,  n.,  p.  24,  labour,  pain 
Trayson,  n.,  p.  61 ;  O.F.  trahison,  traison, 

treason 
Trecherye,  n.,   p.   280;    O.F.  tricherie, 

tricher,  treachery 
Trewe,  adj.,  p.  19,  true 
Trewes,  n.,   p.  43,  pi.   of  trew ;   same 

origin  as  above,  truce 
Tromperye,  n.,  p.  236;  O.F.  tromperie, 

deception 
Trusses,    n.,    p.    213;    O.F.   trousse,    a 

bundle,  a  pack 
TrybiiB,  n.,  p.  253  ;  O.F.  tribn,  tribes 
Trycherye,  n.,  p.  60.     See  Trecherye 
Trychour,    n.,    p.    127;    O.F.    tricheor, 

traitor,  cheat 
Twyes,  adj.,  p.  252,  twice 

Unprenable,  adj.,  p.  196 ;   F.  un  +  pren- 

able,  impregnable 
Utterist,  adj.,  p.  30,  superlative  of  A.S. 

ut,  doublet  of  outerest,  outermost,  ex- 

tremest 

Valyaunce,  n.,  p.  287  ;   O.F.  vaillance,  a 
deed  of  valour 


Vaward,  n.,p.  157,  reduction  of  vantwurd, 

short  for  avant  +  ward,  advance-guard 
Veray,  adj.,  p.  2,  169  ;    O.F.  verai,  vrai, 

etc.,  true,  real 
Veri,  adj.,  p.  25.     See  Veray 
Very,  adj.,  pp.  3,  19.     See  Veray 
Viage,  n.,  p.  44;  O.F.  voiage,  viage,  etc., 

voyage 
Vnnethe,  adv.,  p.  33  ;  A.S.  unedthe,  not 

easily,  hardly,  scarcely 
Voyde,   adj.,  p.   21  ;   O.F.  voide,  vuide, 

empty 
Voyded,  v.,  p.  20 ;  O.F.  voidier,  vuider, 

to  empty 
Vycayre,  n.,  p.  301 ;   O.F.  vicaire,  vicar, 

substitute 
Vyletees,  n.,  p.  40;  O.F.  vilite',  insults 
Vysytyng,  pres.  part.,  p.  4  ;  O.F.  visiter, 

to  examine,  inspect,  visit 
Vytaylle,  n.,  p.  47 ;  O.F.  vitaille,  victu- 

aiUe,  victual,  food 

Waa8t,  n.,  p.  144  ;  O.F.  wast,  gast,  L. 

vastus,    confused    with    M.E.    iceste ; 

A.S.  western,  =  M.H.G.  wueste,  waste 
Warantise,   n.,  p.  46 ;    O.F.  warantise, 

guarantiee,  warrant 
Weder,  n.,  p.  36,  weather 
Weeslie,  v.,  p.  255,  to  wash 
Wellys,  n.,  p.  257,  wells  or  springs 
Wende,  v.,  p.  97.     See  Wene 
Wene,    v.,   p.    39 ;    A.S.    wenan,    pret. 

wende  =  Goth,  toenjan,  to   be  of  the 

opinion  of,  to  think 
Wete,  v.,  p.  108  ;  A.S.  witan,  pret.  iviste 

=  Goth,  witan,  to  know,  to  become 

aware  of 
Wexe,  v.,  p.  55,  to  grow,  to  wax 
Weyed,  v.,  p.  205  ;  A.S.  wege7i  =  Goth. 

gawigan,  to  weigh 
Whilis,    adv.,   p.   133 ;    abbreviation   of 

A.S.  thahwilc,  the  while  that,  while 
Wode,  p.  36,  257  ;   A.S.  wudu,  supposed 

to  be  of  Celtic  origin,  wood 
Wood,  adj.,  p.  112;    A.S.  wud  =  Goth. 

wods,  mad,  raging 
Woonte,   adj.,   p.    39,   contracted    from 

woned  =  Gm.    gewohnt,    accustomed, 

wont 
Worship,  n.,  p.  116,  respect,  worship 
Wote,  p.  296,  pres.  ind.,  of  witen,  1st 

pere.  ivot ;  2nd  wost;  3rd  wot,  know 
Wreton,  pp.,  written 
Wullen,  adj.,  p.  293  ;  A.S.  wyllen,  loul  + 

en.  woollen 


2  k  it 


330 


Vocabulary. 


Wyseilomme,  n.,  p.  4,  wisdom 
Wyst,  v.  pret.,  p.  57.     See  Wcte 

Yate,  n.,  p.  47,  gate 

Yefte,  n.,  p.  55,  ^ih 

Yeldyng,  pres.  part.,  p.  275,  yielding 

Yeris,  n.,  p.  2  ;    A.S.  gear,  gcr  —  Goth. 

jcr,  years 
Ynowe,   adv.,  p.  54;    A.S.  genoh,  adv. 

neut.  ace.  of  adj.,  enough 


Ynowgh,  adv.,  p.  34,  same  as  Ynowe 

Ynowhe,  adv.,  p.  19,  same  as  Ynowe 

Yolden,  pp.     See  Yeldyng 

Youen,  pp.,  given 

Yow,  pron.,  p.  25  ;  A.S.  edw,  yon 

Yssued,   v.,  p.  33 ;    mite,    pp.  of  O.F. 

issir,  eissir,  to  issue,  to  come  out,  to 

descend  from 
Yu,  pron. ;  A.S.  gi;.  ge,  ye 


331 


INDEX  OF  NAMES. 


Aaron  Ressit,  p.  22,  23,  the  Caliph 
Haroun  al  Rasehid,  fifth  Abasside 
Caliph,  b.  766,  d.  808 

Abacuc,  p.  249,  Habakkuk  the  prophet 

Abyas,  p.  249,  corruption  for  Abdias  ; 
Lat.  Abdiae,  Fr.  Abdies  ;  the  prophet 
Ohadiah 

Abymelech,  p.  248,  ALimelech 

Acharye,  p.  20,  Zacharins,  patriarch  of 
Jerusalem,  609  —  631.  See  'Pat. 
Graec.,'  tom.  86 

Adryan,  p.  94,  Adrian  I.,  Pope  from 
772 — 795,  son  of  Theodore,  a  Roman 
gentleman 

Alexandre,  p.  94,  patriarch  of  Constan- 
tinople 

Alexes  Conius,  p.  71  ;  Alexys,  p.  296. 
Alexins  Conain  =  Alexius  Comnenus 
I.,  Emperor  of  Constantinople,  1081- — 
1118,  successor  of  Romanus  Diogenes 

Alysaundre,  p.  2,  Alexander  the  Great, 
King  of  Macedon 

Amanaix  (Guillem),  p.  46;  Guillem  de 
Ainaneux,  p.  84  ;  Guyllem  Ameneux, 
p.  206;  Guillaume  Amanjeu  d'Albret, 
Gascon  nobleman 

^4mos,  p.  28,  249,  Amos  the  prophet 

Ancean,  p.  136,  226,  etc.,  Accien,  prince 
of  Antioch, called Garsian in  the' Chan- 
sond  Antioche.'  Tudebodusand  Robert 
the  Monk  call  him  Cassianus,  Foucher 
de  Chartres,  G-ratianus,  William  of 
Tyre,  Alexianus;  Abulfetla  calls  him 
Baghistan,  while  he  is  known  in  other 
Oriental  historians  as  Akby  Syran. 
His  title  among  English  historians  is 
Baghasian 

Arnold,  p.  238,  300,  etc.,  Arnoul  or 
Ernould  de  Rohes,  family  tutor  of 
Robert  of  Normandy,  having  educated 
Cecilia,    Robert's  sister ;     a    man    of 


great  influence,  but  called  Arnolph 
Mala  Corona,  on  account  of  his  dis- 
solute and  unclerical  habits.  See 
'Palsrave,'  IV.  p.  554. 

Arracheits,  p.  233,  seventh  son  of 
Canaan,  the  founder  of  the  City  of 
Archis 

Arryus,  p.  94,  Arrius  the  heretic,  sup- 
posed to  have  been  a  native  of 
Cyrenaica,  in  Africa.  He  was  ex- 
communicated by  the  first  Nicene 
Council,  and  banished  to  Illyria 

Arsbran  (Guyllaume  de),  p.  260 

Arthur,  p.  2,  King  of  the  Britons 

Assche,  Aske,  Henri  d',  p.  74,  100,  etc.,  a 
German  knight ;  Bongars  calls  him 
Henricus  de  Asca.  He  was  buried  in 
Turbessel,  where  he  died  of  an  epi- 
demic. William  of  Tyre  says  that  he 
was  a  knight  celebrated  by  birth  as 
well  as  by  bravery 

Assonynr,  p.  137,  paleographic  error 
for  Assongar,  the  Sultan  of  Aleppo, 
father  of  Sanguin,  and  great-grand- 
father of  Noureddin.  His  real  name 
was  Acsencar  Cacim  Eddaulah 

Aubmable  (Steven  d'),  p.  92,  Aubuale, 
p.  206.  Etienne  d'Aubemarle,  in  Eng- 
lish, "Steven  of  Albemarle  and  Holder- 
nesse";  "lefilsan  Comte  Odon,"  tlie 
'  Chanson  d'Antioche  '  calls  him.  He 
was  the  grandson  of  Etienne,  Count 
of  Champagne,  and  son  of  Odo,  the 
Champenois,  whom  his  usurping  uncle 
Thibaut  of  Blois  had  disinherited.  His 
mother  was  Aalis  of  Normandy,  sister 
of  William  the  Conqueror.  He  died 
in  1126 

Aumellac  (Reynart  d'),  p.  206 

Ayeme,  p.  94,  Irenaeus,  father  of  tie 
Emperor  Constantino 


332 


Index  of  Karnes. 


Aymart,  p.  45,  276,  etc.,  Adhemar  de 
Monteil,  Bishop  of  Puy,  Papal 
Legate  among  the  Crusaders 


Baltic,  or  Balak,  p.  129,  223,  etc.,  Emir 
of  Serorge,  prince  of  the  family  of 
Ortoc,  who  possessed  many  places  on 
the  Euphrates,  and  reigned  in  Meso- 
potamia and  Aleppo 

Baladon  (Potom  de),  p.  237,  Fr.  Pons 
de  Baladin,  a  great  friend  and  com- 
panion of  the  Count  of  Toulouse 

Balduc,  p.  225,  Blanduc,  p.  127,  Ban- 
due,  p.'  129.  a  Turkish  Emir,  lord  of 
S imosata 

Barce  (Gace  de),  p.  272.  See  Centon  de 
Eeart 

Barneuylle  (Rogyer  de),  p.  92,  Rogier  de 
Barneuylle,  p.  97,  etc.  ;  according  to 
Bongars,  a  gentleman  of  Normandy; 
Barneville  sur  Mer  is  a  very  ancient 

•  chateau  in  the  department  of  La 
Manche.  Roger  de  Barneville  is 
called  by  Raymond  d'Agiles,  Miles 
clarissimus  et  rarissimus  omnibus.  He 
was  killed  by  an  arrow  near  Antioch 

Bartelmewe  (Peter),  p.  201,  238,  etc., 
Pierre  Bartelemy,  a  priest  of  the 
diocese  of  Marseilles,  finder  of  the 
Sacred  lance.  He  was  attached  to 
the  suite  of  Raymond  St.  Gilles 

Basilie,  p.  70,  Basil  II.,  Emperor  of 
Greece  from  976 — 1025 

Bangenel  (Raoul  de),  p.  46,  Raoul  de 
Buuiience.  He  accompanied  Hugh 
the  Great  to  the  Holy  Land,  whose 
daughter  Mahaut  he  married  for  his 
second  wife 

Bawdivyn,  p.  45,  77,  etc.,  Baldwin, 
brother  of  Godfrey  of  Bouillon,  second 
king  of  Jerusalem,  third  son  of  Eus- 
tache  de  Boulogne  and  Ida.  He  had 
be^u  destined  lor  holy  orders,  and 
had  held  many  prebends  in  the 
churches  of  Rheims,  Cambrai,  and 
Liege,  but  marrying  Godechilda  or 
Gandechilda,  daughter  of  Ralph,  tie 
Soeny  and  Isabelle  de  Montfort,  he 
cast  off  the  sacerdotal  habit.  See 
'Pulgrave,'  IV.  p.  547. 
Beart  (Centon  de),  p.  46,  84.  Gace  de 
Barce,  p.  272.  Gaston,  fourth  Vicomte 
of  Beam,  called  Gastus  de  Berdeiz  by 
Albert  d'Aix  ;  killed  in  1130  by  the 


Moors  of  Spain.     His  blood  flows  in 
the  veins  of  the  Bourbons 

Beauvays (Regnault  de),  p.  Ill,  Bauuaus, 
p.  206 

Bedyers  (Gaste  de),  p.  84,  111,  247,  272, 
etc. 

Belphet,  p.  33,  36,  Alp  Arslan,  or  Abul- 
fath,  Sultan  of  Persia  from  1059— 
1072 

Beniamin,  p.  253,  youngest  son  of  Jacob 

Bernard,  of  Valence,  p.  216,  226,  Bishop 
of  Taisus,  made  patriarch  of  Antioch 
it)  1099 

Blois,  Steven,  Earl  of  Chartres  and  Blois, 
p.  91.  etc.     See  Chai-tres 

Boce  (Godelfroy),  p.  285,  Godefroi  le 
Bo8su,  Duke  of  Lorraine,  so  called 
because  he  was  humpbacked,  uncle 
of  Godfrey  of  Bouillon 

Boloyne  (Godefroy  of),  p.  3,  64,  etc.,  God- 
frey of  Bouillon,  second  son  of 
Enstiche  of  Boulogne  and  Ida,  b. 
1061,  d.  1100.  He  was  of  the  lineage 
of  Charlemagne,  through  Mahaut  de 
Lorraine,  his  grandmother 

Boloyne  (Eustache  of),  p.  121,  etc.,  Eus- 
tache  de  Boulogne,  father  of  Godfrey 
of  Bouillon 

Boloyne  (Eustace  of),  p.  206,'  etc.,  brother 
of  Godfrey  of  Bouillon,  eldest  son 
of  the  Eustache  above  mentioned  ; 
married  after  the  First  Crusade,  Mary 
of  Scotland,  daughter  of  Margaret  and 
Malcolm 

Bommensor,  p.  305.  El  Mustansir,  Caliph 
of  Egypt,  from  1035—1095 

Borgh  (Bawdyn  de),  [>.  Ill,  112,  206,  etc., 
also  called  Bourg,  Bort,  Borgh,  Bors, 
Bourgh,  by  Caxton  ;  cousin  of  Godfrey 
of  Bouillon,  and  son  of  Hugh,  Count 
of  Bethel,  one  of  the  seven  peers  of 
Champagne,  ancestor  of  the  house  of 
Burgundy 
Boure  (Thomr.s  de),  p.  206,  misreading 
or  corruption  for  Thomas  de  Fere. 
Lat.  Thomas  de  Feria.  See  Thomas 
de  Fere 
Broyes  (Keygnald  of),  p.  58.  Michaud 
conjectures  that  he  is  perhaps  Renaud 
de  Brei's,  one  of  the  knights  in  Peter 
the  Hermit's  army.  He  was  slain 
before  Nicaea 
Bureau  (Godefrey),  p.  57,  Godefroy 
Burel  d'Etampes,  one  of  the  knights 
in  the  army  of  Peter  the  Hermit 


Index  of  Names. 


333 


Bnrgoyn  (Gelplies  of),  p.  117 

Buym&nt,  Prince  of  Tarente,  p.  46,  76, 
77,  etc.,  Bohemond,  Prince  of  Taren- 
tum  in  Italy,  son  of  Robert  Guiscard, 
originally  from  Ilauteville  in  Nor- 
mandy 

Canaham,  p.  233,  Canaan,  son  of  Ham 

Vanderon  (Bawdyn),p. 99, originally  from 
Bassigny  in  Champagne ;  William  of 
Tyre  calls  him  nobilis  et  magnificus 
vir  in  armis  strenuus.  He  was  killed 
at  tlie  siege  of  Nicsea 

Cannae  (Aubery  of),  p.  80 

Captap,  p.  252,  Lat.  Catah,  father  of 
Omar 

Cariaintes  (Johan),  p.  27,  a  Greek,  living 
in  Jerusalem  at  the  time  of  the  First 
Crusade 

Carpynelle  or  Cainpinelle  (WyMemart), 
p.  260,  Gandemar  Carpinelle,  from 
Languedoc,  although  in  the  suite  of 
Godefrey 

Caryn  (Herman  of),  p.  80.  According  to 
Bongars  he  was  a  Norman  nobleman, 
who  accompanied  Bohemond  to  the 
Holy  Laud.  Palgrave  (IV.  551)  calls 
him  Herman  de  Cogny 

Caym,  p.  233,  Ham,  second  son  of  Noah 

Chamont  (Gale  de),  p.  Ill,  or  Giles  de 
Chaumont.  This  family  is  in  -ntioned 
in  '  Camden  '  as  from  Cornwall 

Charlemagne,  p.  3,  Charlemagne  the 
Great 

Charpentier  (Guyllame),  p.  72,  etc., 
William,  viscomte  of  Milan,  called 
the  Hammerer  or  the  Carpenter. 
Guibert  de  Nogent  says  of  him  that 
he  pillaged  his  villages  and  burghs.to 
get  the  money  with  which  to  stirt  for 
the  Holy  Land.  Robert  le  Moine  tells 
ns  that  he  was  of  royal  lineage,  and 
related  to  Hugh  the  Great.  He  was 
called  the  Carpenter  from  his  vigorous 
style  of  fighting  —  '•  Ensy  comme 
Carpentier  aloit  carpentant.'' — '  G.  de 
Bouillon,'  1.  18,042 
Chartes  (Ogan  of),  p.  80 
( 'hartres  (Foubert  de),  p.  224,  225 
Chartres,  Steven,  Earl  of  Chartres  and 
Blois,  p.  91,  etc.,  son  of  Thibaud 
III.,  Count  of  Blois  and  Champagne. 
He  was  a  brother-in-law  of  Robert 
of  Normandy,  whose  sister  he  had 
married.     He  was  a  mau  of  wisdom 


and  prudence,  and  was  made  presi- 
dent of  the  council  of  war,  which 
directed  the  military  operations  of  the 
Crusade 
C7ierisj/(Gerard),p.46.  GeartdeCherysy, 
p.  Ill,  a  knight  of  Pi<  ardy,  who  ac- 
companied Godfrey  of  Bouillon  to  the 
Holy  Land.  History  calls  him  Querise, 
Kerisi,  or  Quierizi.  Rogier  ('  Noblesse 
Francaise  aux  Croisades')  says  that  he 
belonged  to  an  ancient  and  knightly 
family  near  Soissons 
Cimirienx,     p.      292,     misreading     for 

Emirius.  See  Elafdales 
Colemant,  p.  47,  Coloinan,  King 
Hungary,  had  .just  mounted  the 
throne  as  the  armies  of  the  First 
Crusade  crossed  his  country.  He  was 
called  Bibliophile  from  his  love  of 
books.  Thurocz,  in  his  '  Chronicle  of 
Hungary,'  gives  this  portrait  of  him  : 
"Coloman  was  hideous  and  ignoble 
in  appearance,  but  artful  and  crafty 
in  mind.  He  was  hairy,  humpbacked, 
blind  in  one  eye,  lame,  and  a  stutterer." 
Conasylles,  p.  221,  corruption  for  Cova- 
siles,  an  Armenian,  whose  real  name 
was  Kogh  Basil,  according  to  von 
Sybel ;  Paulin  Paris  culls  him  Cova- 
Biles ;  Albert  d'Aix  gives  his  name 
as  Corrovasilius ;  William  of  Tyre 
calls  him  Covasilio 
Conayn  of  Brytayne,  p.  92,  Conayn  the 
Breton,  p.  206,  an  illustrious  knight  of 
Brittany,  son  of  Alain  Fergant 
Constaniyn,  Monamaques,  |».  304,  Em- 
peror of  Constantinople  from  1042 — 
1053 
Corbagat,  p.  194,  196,  etc.  Kerbogha, 
Sultan  of  Aleppo  at  the  time  of  the 
First  Crusade.  He  besieged  Antioch. 
He  is  called  Corbaran  by  the  French 
poems  on  the  Crusades 
Curnelle,  p.  249,  the  Centurion,  Cornelius, 

mentioned  in  Acts  x. 
Cosdrove,  p.  19,  20,  etc.,  Chosroes,  or 
Khosrn  II.,  son  of  Hormizd  IV.,  King 
of  Persia;  called  "Parvez"  the  Con- 
queror. He  was  killed  in  628  by  the 
treachery  of  his  own  son,  after  a 
glorious  reign  of  thirty-eight  years 
Crecon  (Rembault),  i>.  188.  The  Crecon  a 
corruption  for  Creton.  The  person 
here  designated  was  Raimbaud  Creton 
d  Estounnel.     Estourmel  is  a  village 


33-fc 


Index  of  Names. 


about  a  league  from  Cambrai.  Grain- 
dor  de  Douai  gives  us  a  portrait  of 
this  Kiiimbuud  Creton.  Ordericus 
Vitalis  says  that  he  mounted  the 
ladder  fourth  at  the  assault  of  Anti- 
och.  He  returned  safely  from  the 
Holy  Land,  and  was  killed  at  the 
siege  of  Montmorency  in  1101.  The 
family  is  called  indifferently,  Estour- 
niel  or  Creton,  but  since  1500  Estour- 
mel  has  prevailed 

Croseanlx  (Guy  de),  p.  190,  a  paleo- 
grapbic  error  for  Trosselle — Guy  de 
Trosselle 

Cuuylly  (Guyllaume  de),  p.  231,  corrup- 
tion for  Cumilly.  The  Latin  gives 
Cumliaco  ;  another  variant  is  Cimilli 

Daher,  p.  27,  Daher,  surnamed  Ledimil- 
lah,  son  of  Hakein  Biamrillah,  Sultan 
of  Egypt  from  1021—1036 

Dancelle  (Doene),  p.  72,  corruption  for 
Dreue  de  Neele 

D'Anse  (Robert),  p.  112,  121,  Robert  de 
Hansc,  according  to  Palgrave,  a  Nor- 
man from  Caen,  who  accompanied 
Bohemond  to  the  Crusades 

Dansique  (Henry),  p.  46 ;  D'asque, 
Henry,  p.  65,  etc.     See  Assche 

Dares,  p.  2,  a  Trojan  priest,  said  to  have 
lived  at  the  time  of  the  Trojan  war, 
to  whom  was  attributed  an  account  of 
that  war.  A  work  in  Latin,  purport- 
ing to  be  a  translation  of  this  account, 
and  entitled,  '  Uaretis  Phrygii  de  Ex- 
cidio  Trojae  Historia,'  was  much  read 
in  the  Middle  Ages,  and  ascribed  to 
Cornelius  Nepos ;  but  the  language 
belongs  to  a  much  later  period  than 
the  time  of  Nepos.  Dederick,  who 
has  given  an  excellent  edition,  is  in- 
clined to  ascribe  the  work  to  a  Roman 
of  the  sixth  or  seventh  century 

Dasque,  Godefrey,  p.  65,  67.     See  Assche 

Davyd,  p.  2,  David,  King  of  Israel 

Daybart,  p.  299,  300,  corruption  for 
Daimbart,  Archbishop  of  Pisa;  made 
patriarch  of  Jerusalem  by  the  Cru- 
saders 

Deltors  (Bawdyn),  p.  272.  Caxton  makes 
the  best  of  the  text  of  his  faulty  orig- 
inal here,  which  gives  Baudoin  de 
Ultore.  The  Latin  text  shows  this  to 
be  a  corruption  for  Baudoin  de  Bugb  ; 
Lat.  Balduinus  de  Burgo 

Discrete,  p.  79,  paleographic  error  for 


Dioscurus,  the  heretic  patriarch  of 
Alexandria  in  451 

Domedart  (Gaultier  de),  p.  206 

Domjsmayn,  p.  309,  Danismain,  a  Tur- 
coman Emir 

Ducar,  p.  136,  Durcas,  Sultan  of 
Damascus 

Duchelond  (Herman  of),  p.  100 

Dutar,  p.  136,  corruption  of  Ducar, 
same  as  above 

Dyctes,  p.  2,  Dictys  Cretensis,  a  Grecian 
historian,  who  wrote  probably  about 
the  time  of  Nero,  although  tradition 
assigns  him  to  a  much  earlier  period. 
The  main  interest  of  his  work  consists 
in  the  fact,  that  it  was  the  source  from 
which  the  Homeric  legends  were  in- 
troduced into  the  Middle  Ages 

Dye  or  Dys  (Ysachar,  Erie  of),  p.  206, 
273,  Isachar,  or  Isard  Count  of  Die,  a 
Provencal  nohleman 

Ehriac  (Gnylliam  de),  p.  262 

Edward,  p.  4,  Edward  IV.,  King  of 
France  and  England 

Elafdales,  p.  292,  Emirieus,  or  the  Emir 
Al  Dioyousch,  called  also  El  Afdel, 
took  Jerusalem  from  the  Turks  in  1098 

Eliopolitans,  p.  27,  Emperor  of  Con- 
stantinople.    See  Romayn 

Elyus  (Adrian),  p.  250,  Aelius  Hadrianus, 
Emperor  of  Rome  after  Titus 

Emycon,  p.  62,  64,  Emicio,  leader  of  one 
of  the  bands  of  Crusaders.  Rbnchr, 
'Zur  Geschichte  der  Kreuzziige,'  calls 
him  Graf  EmicJbO  von  Leiningen  from 
Nahegau,  and  says  that  he  was  dis- 
liked on  account  of  the  persecution 
of  the  Jews  in  the  middle  Rhenish 
cities,  which  was  vigorously  carried 
on  by  him 

Emyrferyus,  p.  168,  175,  etc.,  Phyrrus 
or  fhirruH,  the  renegade  Christian  who 
delivered  Antioch  to  Bohemond.  Ac- 
cording to  Michaud  (I.  157),  he  em- 
braced Christianity  and  followed  the 
Crusaders  to  Jerusalem.  His  ambition 
not  being  satisfied,  he  returned  to 
Mohammedanism,  and  died  abhorred 
by  both  Christians  and  Moslems.  He 
is  called  Mufero  in  'La  Gran  Con- 
quista,'  which  also  says  that  he  was 
an  Armenian.  Soui3  historians  give 
him  the  name  Adrian  ;  Abul  Faradge 
calls  him  Kuzebach,  and  says  that  he 


Index  of  Names. 


335 


was  of  Persian  descent.  Anna  Com- 
nena  assigns  to  him  an  Armenian 
origin.  William  of  Tyre,  as  we  see, 
calls  him  Emir  Feirns,  while  Sanuti 
gives  his  name  as  Hermiroferus.  In 
the  'Chanson  d'Antioche'  he  figures 
as  Dacien,  while  von  Syhel  gives  his 
true  name,  probably,  as  Feruz  az 
Ferrad 

Emytes,  p.  240,  corruption  for  Einires. 
The  Latin  gives  Emireius,  the  Egyptian 
Emir  who  captured  Jerusalem  from  the 
Persians 

Eneanx,  p.  249,  Eneas,  the  man  men- 
tioned in  Acts  ix.  34,  who  was  healed 
by  Peter 

Eutyses,  p.  79,  Eutyches,  Archimandrite 
of  Constantinople,  condemned  fur 
heresy  in  451,  at  the  Council  of 
Chaicedon 

Entries,  p.  18*  etc. 

Eusebec  of  Ccesarea,  p.  124.  Eusebius  of 
Caesnrea. — b.  276,  d.  340 — known  as 
the  father  of  ecclesiastical  history 

Ezechyas,  p.  254,  Hezekiah,  King  of  the 
Jews,  from  717  B.c.  to  688  B.C. 

Fedre  (Thomas  de),  p.  Ill,  Thomas  de 
Fferre,  p.  46,  272,  etc.,  Thomas  de  la 
Fere,  Sire  de  Marie.  He  belonged  to 
the  house  of  Coucy ;  he  was  a  most 
famous  fighter,  who  filled  the  Orient 
with  the  renown  of  his  valour.  He 
married  Ida  of  Hainault.  M.  Michaud 
calls  him  Thom;is  de  Feu.  He  was  the 
son  of  Enguerrand  de  Couci,  whose 
motto  Palgrave  gives  in  IV.  559,  Boi 
ne  Due,  ne  Prince  je  siiis ;  Je  suis  le 
Sire  de  Couci 

Fergaunt  (Alayn),  p.  92,  Alain  Ferguant 
the  sixth  Duke  of  Brittany,  father  of 
Conain 

tfkiundres  (Robert  of),  p.  84,  206,  etc. 
Robert  of  Flanders  was  the  leader  of 
the  Frisons  and  the  Flem'ngs.  He 
was  the  e'dest  son  of  Robert  the' 
Frison,  a  brave  and  dashing  noble- 
man, called  the  "Lance  and  Sword  of 
the  Christians"  by  the  Christians, 
and  the  "son  of  St.  George"  by  the 
Saracens 

ffoca  Cezar,  p.  20,  Nicephorus  Phocas, 
Kmperor  of  the  East  from  602 — 610. 
He  was  a  Cappadocian  of  humble 
origin.  A  revolution  caused  Mauritius 


to  abdicate,  and  Phocas  became  em- 
peror. He  was  an  ignorant,  brutal, 
and  deformed  man,  and  was  deposed 
by  his  successful  rival,  Heraclius,  in 
610 

Forestes  (Guillem  erle  of),  p.  84,  99,  etc. 
According  to  Van  Ilasselt,  he  was  a 
Belgian  nobleman 

Fytz  Christen  (Robert),  p.  80 

Fytz  Gerard  (Robert),  p.  206 

Fytz  Gmleffroy  (Raoul),  p.  206 

Fytz  Kaoul  (Humfrey),  p.  80 

Gable,  p.  124,  Gabael  of  the  Bible,  cousin 
of  Tobias 

Gabryel,  p.  308,  a  wealthy  Armenian. 
Alhert  of  Aix  calls  him  Gaveras 

Gaxdtier,  Sans  Avoir,  p.  48,  49,  etc. 
Walter  the  Pennyless,  one  of  the 
leaders  of  the  First  Crusade.  (See 
note  on  this  Bubjpct.) 

Gaunt  (Bawdwyn  of),  p.  99,  etc.  Pauduin 
de  Gant  or  de  Gand,  called  Bauduin 
le  Grand,  Baudouin  second  lord  of 
Alost.  He  perished  at  the  siege  of 
Nicaea 

Gatvayn,  p.  2,  Gawain  or  Gauvaine,  a 
knight  of  the  Round  Table,  nephew 
of  King  Arthur 

George  (St.),  the  Martyr,  p.  244,  born  in 
Cappadocia  of  noble  parents.  He  fell 
a  martyr  under  Diocletian  at  Lidda, 
or,  according  to  some,  at  Nicomedia. 
He  is  the  patron  saint  of  England, 
and  of  Genoa  and  Venice.  His  popu- 
larity in  England  dates  from  the  time 
of  Richard  Cceur  de  Lion,  who  suc- 
cessfully invoked  his  aid.  His  greatest 
achievemtnt  in  life  was  the  conquest 
of  a  dragon  by  which  he  delivered  a 
king's  daughter  from  death 

Ghalehot,  p.  2,  Sir  Galahad,  one  of  the 
knights  of  the  Round  Table,  sou  of 
Sir  Lancelot  and  Elaine 

Gilbert,  p.  40.  Archbishop  of  Ravenna, 
the  anti-Pope  who  deposed  Pope 
Gregory  VII.  He  was  known  ;is 
Clement  III.,  and  occupied  the  Holy 
See  from  1080—1101.  He  is  not 
numbered  among  the  legitimate  popes 

Godechan,  p.  59,  61,  etc.,  Gottschalk,  a 
German  priest  of  the  Palatinate,  who 
preached  the  Crusade  in  Genii.-my, 
and  started  after  Peter  the  Hermit 
with  20,000  men.    According  to  Roll- 


336 


Index  of  Names. 


richt,  he  was  called  in  derision,  "  Der 
Falsche  Schalk  Gottes  " 

Gratevylle  (Guyllem  de),  p.  195:  Grate- 
nienyl,  p^  197,  199,  etc. ;  William  of 
Grandmenil  or  Grantemesnil,  the 
second  son  of  Robert,  founder  of  the 
Abbaye  St.  Evreult.  He  was  attached 
to  the  house  of  Robert  Guiscard,  whom 
he  had  followed  into  Apulia,  and 
whose  daughter  Mabille  he  married, 
thus  becoming  a  brother-in-law  of 
Bohemond.  He  quarrelled  with 
Bohemond,  and  left  his  service  for 
that  of  Godfrey,  under  whom  he 
served  in  the  First  Crusade.  He  ran 
away  during  the  siege  of  Antioch  with 
his  two  younger  brothers,  Yves  and 
Alberic,  and  returned  to  Apulia, 
where  he  died  soon  after 

Grece  (Garnyer  de),  p.  206,  298,  etc., 
Gamier  de  Gres  or  de  Gray,  from 
Franche  Compte,  one  of  the  nobles 
who  accompanied  Godfrey  of  Bouillon 
to  the  Holy  Land.  In  the  Historical 
Uallery  of  Versailles  he  is  called  de 
Gray.  In  a  MS.  of  the  Arsenal  he  has 
the  title,  Gamier  deGresse.  Wilken  (I. 
p.  102)  writes  it  Werner  von  Grees. 
He  died  a  few  days  after  Godfrey 
of  Bouillon,  and  was  buried  in  the 
Basilica  of  St.  Mary,  in  the  Valley  of 
Jehoshaphat 

Gregory,  p.  40,  Gregory,  the  seventh 
pope  of  Rome,  died  May  25,  1085. 
He  greatly  extended  the  power  of 
Rome  ;  through  his  pretensions  he 
involved  himself  in  violent  disputes 
with  the  Emperor  of  Germany 

Guennes  of  Denmark,  p.  147.  Sweno,  son 
of  the  King  of  Denmark,  was  attacked 
while  bringing  succour  to  Godfrey  of 
Bouillon,  by  Solyman.  He  was  killed 
on  the  field  of  battle.  This  hero  figures 
in  Tasso's  'Jerusalem  Delivered' 

Guyllam,  p.  109,  brother  of  Tancred 

Gutter,  p.  115.  Gmdeschilde,  or  Gode- 
childa,  daughter  of  Ralph  de  Soeny 
and  Isabel  de  Montfort,  and  wife  of 
Baldwin,  brother  of  Godfrey  of  Bouil- 
lon. She  accompanied  her  husband 
on  the  First  Crusade.  She  died,  and 
was  buried  in  Meraasch  in  Asia. 
Frobese  calls  her  Godehild  von 
Conches 

Guychart  (Robert),  p.  46,  etc.,  Robert 


Guiscard,  Norman  Duke  of  Apulia 
and  Calabria,  1015—1085,  sixth  of 
the  twelve  sons  of  Tancred  de  Haute- 
ville  in  Normandy 

Guyllamme.  p.  226.  Paulin  Paris  con- 
jectures that  this  is  the  same  William 
who  distinguished  himself  at  the  siege 
of  Marrah.  The  '  Chanson  d' Antioche ' 
states  that  he  was  from  Montpellier 

Gnynemer,  p.  121,  Guy  Nevers,  p.  122, 
etc.,  Guinemers  of  Boulogne,  a  cele- 
brated pirate  captain.  He  was  taken 
prisoner  by  the  Emperor  of  Constanti- 
nople, and  kept  in  prison  in  Laodicea. 
Godfrey  of  Bouillon  restored  him  to 
liberty 

Guyon,  p.  197,  Guyen,  p.  198,  Guy  the 
Seneschal,  brother  of  Bohemond,  and 
attached  by  a  brilliant  marriage  to 
the  fortunes  of  Alexis,  Emperor  of 
Constantinople,  according  to  Anna 
Comnena 

Handeron  ( Bawdy n),  p.  99.  See  Can- 
deron.  Handeron,  a  corruption  of 
Canderon  or  Cauderon  ;  Lat.  Calderon 

Hanse  (Robert  the),  p.  80.  Lat  Robertus 
de  Anxa.     See  H'Anse 

Harry,  p.  40,  42,  279,  Henry  IV., 
Emperor  of  Germany 

Hecam,  p.  24,  Hakim  Biamrillah,  Caliph 
of  Egypt,  996—1021,  third  of  the 
Fatimite  Caliphs 

Hector  of  Troy,  p.  2,  eldest  son  of 
Priam 

Hellom,  p.  202  ;  Fr.  Herluin,  the  inter- 
preter who  accompanied  Peter  the 
Hermit  on  his  embassy  to  Kerbogha 

Helyas,  p.  244  Elijah  the  Prophet 

Helyzeus,  p.  249,  Elisha  the  Prophet 

Henawde  (Bawdwyn.  erle  of),  p.  45, 
208,  Baldwin,  Earl  of  Hainault,  a 
Flemish  nobleman  who  went  with 
Godfrey  of  Bouillon  to  the  First 
Crusade 

Henry,  p.  297,  Henry  I.,  King  of 
England 

Herman,  p.  62,  200.     See  Duchelond 

Hetam,  p.  27,  a  corruption  for  Hecam 

Homar,  p.  19,  20.     See  Omar 

Homer,  p.  2,  the  poet  Homer 

Huon  le  Mayne,  p  71,  206,  208,  etc., 
Huuh  de  Vei  inandois,  younger  brother 
of  King  Philip  of  France.  He  was 
the  second  son  of  Henry  I.  and  Anne, 


Index  of  Names. 


337 


daughter  of  Jaroslaw,  Duke  of  Russia. 
He  became  Count  of  Vermandois  by 
his  marriage  with  Adelaide,  daughter 
of  Count  Herbert.  He  was  called 
Hugh  the  Great  (Huon  le  Mayne), 
either  because  he  was  the  brother  of 
the  king  or  from  his  great  size 
Hyart,  p.  24,  Lord  of  Rames,  bailiff  of 
Hakim;  the  Hidraot  of  Tasso's 
'Jerusalem  Delivered' 

Iaphet,  p.  115,  son  of  Noah 

Ieroboam,  p.  253,  Jeroboam 

Inclta,  p.  49,  Duke  of  Bulgaria 

lohan,  p.  78,  John,  son  of  Alexis 
Comnenus 

lohan,  p.  215,  John,  patriarch  of 
Antioch,  reinstated  after  the  conquest 
of  Antioch 

lohan  Eleymont  (St.),  p.  36,  patriarch  of 
Constantinople 

Ionen,  p.  115,  Javan,  fourth  Bon  of 
Japheth 

Iosue,  p.  1,  249,  253,  Joshua 

Iude,  p.  124,  St.  Jude,  author  of  one  of 
the  books  of  the  New  Testament 

Iustynyen,  p.  244,  Justinianus,  surnamed 
the  Great,  Emperor  of  Constantinople, 
527 — 565.  He  was  born  in  Illyria, 
and  married  the  celebrated  and  beau- 
tiful actress  Theodora.  He  is  especially 
famous  as  a  legislator 

Latyns,  p.  148,  corruption  for  Tatyns, 

which    is    in    turn   a    corruption    of 

Tatinus. 
Launcelotte  de  Lake,  p.  2,  L-mncelot  du 

Lac,  chief  knight  of  the  Round  Table 
Leuy,  p.  249,  Levi,  one  of  the  twelve 

sons  of  Jacob 
Lucan,  p.  2,  Marcus  Annaeus  Lucanus, 

grandson  of  Seneca,  born  Nov.  3rd, 

39  a.d.    Most  eminent  Roman  poet  of 

the  Silver  Age 
Lutol,  p.  271.     See  Tomay 
Lybres  (Gonam),  p.  272,  corruption  for 

Conain  le  Breton 
Lylle  (Galles  de),  p.  99,  Galon  de  Lille, 

killed  with   Baldwin  of  Gand  at  the 

siege  of  Nicsea.     An  arrow  laid  him 

low  as  he  was  mounting  to  the  assault. 

The  two  received   burials  worthy  of 

great  and  noble  men 
Lyon  (Pope),  p.  79,  Leo  I.,  called  Leo 

the  Great,  Pope  from  440  to  461 

GODFREY.       . 


Lyonel,  p.  2,  Sir  Lionel,  brother  of  Sir 
Launcelot,  son  of  Ban,  King  of  Ben- 
wick,  a  hero  of  the  Arthurian  legends 

Machabeus  (Judas),  p.  2,  Judns,  called 
Maccabseus  or  the  Hammerer,  title 
given  to  Judas  Asmonseus,  the  first, 
great  hero  of  the  Jewish  revolt  against 
Antiochus  Epiphanes.  He  was  killed 
in  1 10  B.c. 

Machomet,  p.  18,  Mahomet 

Marcyen,  p.  79,  Marcianus,  Emperor  of 
the  East  from  450  to  457.  He  was  a 
native  of  Thrace,  and  became  emperor 
by  marrying  Pulcheria,  widow  of 
Theodosius 

Marie,  p.  20,  daughter  of  the  Emperor 
Mauritius  of  Rome,  and  wife  of 
Khosru  II.,  Sultan  of  Persia 

Maturane  (Bishop  of),  p.  280,  284,  296, 
etc. 

Maulde,  p.  285,  Maude,  daughter  of 
Eustache  of  Boulogne,  wife  of  King 
Stephen  of  England 

Mauryce,  p.  20,  Mauricius  Flavius 
Tiberiu*8,  Emperor  of  the  East  from 
582  to  602.  He  abdicated  in  favour 
of  Phocas 

Maxyme,  p.  24,  Maximus,  patriarch  of 
Jerusalem  in  the  time  of  Constantine 

Modeste,  p.  19,  Modestus,  colleague  of 
Zacharias,  and  his  successor  as  patri- 
arch of  Jerusalem  in  514.  It  is  not 
certain  how  matters  were  arranged, 
whether  Zacharias  was  brought  back 
from  Persia  and  became  a  colleague 
of  Modestus  or  not.  Three  homilies 
of  Modestus  are  still  preserved.  He 
was  especially  severe  against  the  use 
of  unguents  by  women 

Mollac  (Reynard  de),  p.  217,  corruption 
for  Aumellac.     See  AumeUac 

Montagu  (Conon  de),  p.  74  (Aconon  de), 
p.  131,  etc.,  one  of  Godfrey  de  Bouil- 
lon's companions  in  the  First  Crusade. 
He  was  a  Belgian  by  birth,  son  of 
Gozelon,  Count  of  Boulogne,  and  Er- 
mentrude  of  Haranzey.  Conon's  wife 
was  Ida,  said  to  be  sister  of  Godfrey  of 
Bouillon.  He  died  at  the  siege  of 
Dolheim,  April  30th,  1101 
Montagu  (Euenam),  p.  206,  corruption 

for  Conon 
Montagu  (Lambert  de),  p.  206,  272,  son 
of  Conon 


338 


Index  of  Names. 


Montagu   (Gossolyn   de),   p.    131,    132, 
•    Goscelin,  eon  of  Conon  de  Montague 
Montague  (Guemes),  p.  140,  corruption 

for  Conon 
Montcler  (Guyllebert  de),  p.  112 
Montpellyer  (Gnyllem  de),  p.  84,  206,  etc. 
William  of  Montpellier,  accompanied 
Raymond  of  Toulouse  and  Adhemar 
to  the  Holy  Land 
Montygneux  (Umfrey  of),  p.  80.     The 
Latin    gives    Humfredus    de   Monte 
Scabioso 
Movcoua  (Love  de),  p.  206,  Louis  de 
Moncon  or  Monson,  called  by  Albert 
d'Aix,  Mirabilis  in  opere  militare,  was 
one  of  those  who  entered  Jerusalem 
first.      According  to   Dansey  ('Eng. 
Grnsaders')   a  family   of   this  name 
settled    in   England    soon   after    the 
Conquest.     From    this    family    the 
present    Lord     Monson    is    said    to 
descend 

Nabugodonosor,  p.  134,  Nebuchadnezzar, 
King  of  Assyria,  604 — 647  B.C. 

Nette  (Dreues  de),  p.  172,  Drogo  de 
Neel.  He  was  among  the  prisoners 
released  by  Alexius  on  condition  that 
Godfrey  of  Bouillon  should  discontinue 
pillaging  his  country.  He  was  lord 
of  Nesles,  or  Neelles,  and  Faloy.  Lat. 
Drogo  de  Nahalla.  He  followed 
Hugh  the  Great,  shared  .his  captivity, 
and  distinguished  himself  at  the  siege 
of  Nicaea.  According  to  Albert  d'Aix, 
Drogon  was  the  son  of  Yves  de 
Nesles.  The  Castellany  of  Bruges 
belongs  to  this  family.  See  '  Croisds 
Beiges,'  p.  142 

Noe,  p.  115,  Noah 

Noradyn,  p.  137,  Noureddin  Mahmud, 
Malek  al  Adel,  the  Bcourge  of  the 
Christian  settlements  in  Syria  and 
Palestine,  b.  1116,  d.  1174.  He  is 
one  of  the  great  heroes  of  Moslem 
history 

Normandye  (Robert  Duke  of),  p.  45, 
91,  etc.,  Robert  Duke  of  Normandy, 
son  of  William  the  Conqueror,  sur- 
named  in  French  history  Courte  heuse. 
He  mounted  the  walls  among  the  first 
at  the  assault  of  Jerusalem.  He  died 
a  prisoner  in  Englund  in  1130  or '31. 
He  mortgaged  his  Duchy  of  Normandy 
to    King    William,    his    brother,   for 


10,000  pounds  in  order  to  obtain  the 
funds  for  the  First  Crusade 

Nycesores,  p.  28,  corruption  for  Nyoefores, 
Nicephorus,  patriarch  of  Jerusalem 

Nychofores  (Bothoniat),  p.  71,  Nice- 
phorus, Emperor  of  the  East,  802 — 
811.  He  succeeded  Ireneus,  and  was 
the  first  Grecian  emperor 

Nycose,  p.  165,  etc.,  an  Armenian 

Olyver,  p.  3,  Oliver,  one  of  the  paladins 

of  Charlemagne,  the   devoted  friend 

and    companion-at-arms    of    Roland, 

Charlemagne's  nephew 
Omar,  p.  19,  20,  252,  etc.,  Omar,  son  of 

Captaph,    the    second     successor    of 

Mahomet.     He  was  for  ten  years  the 

head  of  the  Moslem  Empire,  and  died 

in  644 
Orenge  (Ray bout,  erle  of),  p.  84,  etc., 

Rembout,  Earl  of  Orange,  one  of  the 

great  Provencal  noblemen  in  the  Fifst 

Crusade 
Orenge  (Bishop  of),  p.  84,  etc.,  William, 

Bishop  of  Orenge.     He  died  at   the 

siege  of  Marran,  p.  228 
Oreste,    p.    24,    Orestes,    patriarch    of 

Jerusalem  in    the    time    of    Hakim, 

whose  uncle  he  was 
Orleans  (ffoucher  d'),  p.  68,  one  of  the 

few  knights  in  Peter's  army.     Slain 

before  Nicaea 
Ovyde,  p.  2,  Ovid,  the  Latin  poet 

Pancrace,  p.  165,  221,  etc.,  Pancratius, 
an  Armenian  prince,  in  his  youth 
.King  of  Northern  Iberia.  He  joined 
the  Crusaders  in  the  hope  of  retrieving 
his  fortunes.     See  Michaud,  I,  120 

Paris  (Robert  of),  p.  109,  Robert  of 
Paris 

Pelet  (Remon),  p.  234,  260,  etc.,  Pabes, 
p.  206,  Peles,  p.  84.  Raymond  Pelet, 
a  Provencal  nobleman,  called  "  The 
Crusader  Vicomte  of  Narbonne."  He 
was  also  Count  of  Miqueil  and  Alais, 
thus  belonging  to  one  of  the  most 
distinguished  families  of  Languedoc. 
He  is  the  first  ancestor  known  of  the 
Pelets  of  Narbonne,  of  whom  there 
are  still  several  branches 

Perceval,  p.  2,  Knight  of  the  Round 
Table 

Perche  (Houtrout,  erle  of),  p.  45 ;  Erie 
of  Perse,  p.  206 ;  Rotheron  of  Perse, 


Index  of  Name*. 


339 


p.  92 ;  Roatrou,  second  Earl  of  Perche, 
who  accompanied  the  Duke  of  Nor- 
mandy. He  commanded  a  corps  of 
troope  at  the  siege  of  Antioch,  accord- 
ing to  'Chroniques  Beiges,'  V,  101. 
He  lost  his  life  in  1144,  while  besieging 
the  tower  of  Rouen  with  the  Count  of 
Anjou 

Peraetw,  p.  115,  a  hero  of  Grecian  my- 
thology, eon  of  Danae  and  Zeus,  fie 
is  said  to  have  founded  Tarsus  in 
Cilicia,  and  appears  on  the  coins  of 
that  city,  as  well  as  on  coins  of 
Pontiis  and  Cappadocia 

Peter  the  Hermit,  p.  36,  37,  38,  etc., 
born  in  Acheris,  near  Amiens,  in  the 
diocese  of  Laon.  He  returned  from 
the  Holy  Land  in  1102  with  the  Count 
of  Montaigue.  After  his  return  he 
built  the  Abbey  of  Neufmoutier  at 
Huy,  on  tie  right  bank  of  the  Meuse, 
in  honour  of  the  Holy  Sepulchre. 
Anna  .Comnena  says  that  he  was 
called  Petrus  Cucullatus,  because  he 
wore  a  cowl 

Peter  (of  Narbonne),  p.  226,  made  Bishop 
of  Albare 

Peter,  p.  201.     See  Bartelmewe. 

PhyUyp,  p.  279,  Phelip,  p.  216,  Philipe, 
p.  42,  etc.,  Phillipe  I.,  King  of  France 

Possesse  (Guy  de),  p.  46  ;  Guy  du 
Puysett,  p.  97,  Guy  de  Porsesse  ;  Lat. 
Guido  de  Porsesso,  a  French  noble- 
man from  Champagne.  Porsesse  is 
near  Vitry 

Pretopt  (Saint),  p.  254,  corruption  for 
Saint  Procope ;  Lat.  Sanctus  Procopius 

Pryncipat  (Rychard  the),  p.  80, 112,  etc., 
a  Norman  nobleman,  Lord  of  Princi- 
pata,  son  of  William  Fier-a-bras, 
Robert  Guiscard's  brother 

Puyssat  (Euerard  du),  p.  46, 206,  accord- 
ing to  Bongars,  a  nobleman  from  the 
neighbourhood  of  Chartres. 

Pyrrut,  p.  70,  Pyrrhus,  King  of  Epirus, 
318—272  B.C. 

Quyen.     See  Gwyon 

QuyUehain,  p.  285.     See  William 

Raoul,  p.  289,  Rudolph  of  Snabia,  killed 
in  1080  at  the  battle  of  Merseburg. 

Raymont,  p.  80,  Raymond,  brother  of 
Richard  the  Principal,  son  of  William 
Fier-a-bras 


Betel  (Count  Huon  de),  p.  45,  father  of 
Baldwin,  cousin  of  Godfrey  of  Bouillon 

Richard,  son  of  Erie  Ranyol,  p.  80, 
Richard,  son  of  Earl  Ramol,  or 
Ranulf  of  Roussignol 

Richard,  Duke  of  York,  p.  6,  son  of 
Edward  IV.,  one  of  the  unhappy 
princes  killed  in  the  tower  by  the 
orders  of  Richard,  Duke  of  Gloucester 

Robert  (Bishop  of  Rames),  p.  245,  a 
native  of  Rouen  in  Normandy 

Roboam,  p.  253,  Rehoboam,  son  of 
Solomon 

Rodahan,  p.  218,  220,  Lord  of  Halappe 

Romanu*  Diogenet,  p.  33,  95,  Emperor 
of  Constantinople  1065—1071,  a 
member  of  a  powerful  Cappadocian 
family,  who  had  risen  to  distinction 
in  tlie  army.  The  queen-mother 
became  enamoured  of  him  as  he  was 
brought  into  her  presence,  condemned 
to  death  for  treason,  and  released  and 
married  him.  He  was  disastrously 
defeated  by  Alp  Arslan  on  the  banks 
of  the  Araxes,  returned  home  dis- 
honoured, and  retired  to  the  isle  of 
Crete,  where  he  died  in  misery 

Romayn,  p.  27,  Romanus  Eliopolitanis, 
Emperor  of  Constantinople  from  1028 
to  1034,  called  Eliopolitanis  because 
he  was  born  in  Eliopolis.  He  usually 
has  the  surname  of  Argire 

Rosoye  (Robert  of),  p.  130,  Robert,  or 
Roger  de  Rozoi 

Roussylon,  p.  84,  206,  etc.  (Girault  de 
or  Gyrard  de),  Gerard  de  Roussillon, 
of  the  distinguished  Provencal  family 
of  that  name 

Rousygnol  (the  erle  of),  p.  80,  the  Earl 
of  Roussignol ;  Lat.  Rosinolo 

Rybemont  (Ancean  de),  p.  206,  208,  etc., 
Count  de  Valenciennes  in  Picardy, 
husband  of  Agnes  de  Roncy,  daughter 
of  Eblis  de  Roncy,  great-grandson  of 
the  famous  Bernier,  who  killed  Raoul 
de  Cambrai.  Ancean  (Anselme)  is 
mentioned  with  praise  by  Albert  d'Aix, 
Guibertde  Nogent,  and  Raoul  de  Caen. 
He  was  killed  at  the  siege  of  Archas. 
Michaud  calls  him  the  Count  de 
Bouchain.  He  went  to  the  Crusadu 
with  Bohemond 

Sabram  (Guyllem  de),  p.  273 

Salomon,  p.  253,  Solomon,  son  of  David 

z  2 


340 


Index  of  Names. 


Sangvm,  p.  137,  Etnad  Eddin  Zenghi, 
Emir  of  Mussul  and  Haleppe,  founder 
of  the  dynasty  of  the  Atabeks  of 
Syria,  known  generally  as  Zenghi. 
This  name  was  corrupted  by  the 
Crusaders  into  Sanquin 

Sansadol,  p.  226,  Sensadole  or  Sensa- 
doine,  son  of  Soliinan.  Bongars  (I, 
239)  calls  him  Sensadonia  filius 
Darsiani 

Sara,  p.  124,  daughter  of  Raguel,  who 
lived  in  Ecbatana.  See  Book  of 
Tobit 

Scaruay  (Peter  de),  p.  112,  corruption 
for  Peter  of  Stadenois 

Sedechyas,  p.  134,  Sedecias,  Grecian 
form  for  Zedekiah,  son  of  Josiah, 
King  of  Judah 

Selduc,  p.  30,  Seljuk,  grandfather  of 
Togrul  Bey,  the  first  ruler  of  the 
Turks 

Selducees,  p.  30,  the  family  or  tribe  of 
Selduc,  Seljuks,  a  Perso-Turkish  dyn- 
asty which  produced  eleven  kings 
and  lasted  138  years 

Semer,  p.  194 ;  Fr.  Soemer,  Lat.  Sige- 
maro,  p.  194 ;  cousin  of  Henry  d'AsChe 

Seynt  Pol  (Huge,  the  Erie  of),  p.  65, 
etc.,  Hugh,  second  Earl  of  Saint  Paul, 
Count  of  Champ  d'Avene,  died  in 
1130  or  31 

Seynt  Pol  (Everard  of),  p.  65 ;  Seynt 
Poul  (Eniorran  of),  p.  230  ;  Aniaran  de 
St.  Poul,  p.  206 ;  Engerran,  or  Engel- 
ran  de  St.  Paul,  son  of  Hugh.  He 
died  at  the  siege  of  Marrah,  near 
Aleppo 

Solins,  p.  115,  C.  Julius  Solinus,  author 
of  a  geographical  compendium  about 
A.D.  238 

Solyman,  p.  56,  57,  58,  etc.,  Eilidge 
Arslem,  also  called  David,  or  the 
Sword  of  the  Spirit,  and  Solyman  the 
younger.  He  was  the  son  of  Solyman. 
He  was  Sultan  of  Nice  at  the  time  of 
its  conquest  by  the  Crusaders.  William 
of  Tyre  makes  him  a  nephew  of  the 
Sultan  of  Persia,  and  mistakes  him 
for  his  father 

Sophony,  p.  21,  Sophronius,  a  monk  of 
Damascus,  who  became  patriarch  of 
Jerusalem  in  634.  He  opposed  the 
endeavours  of  Cyrus,  patriarch  of 
Alexandria,  to  secure  general  accept- 
ance   of    monothelite    views.      The 


Emperor  Heraclius  issued  an  edict  in 
638  to  put  an  end  to  the  discussion. 
Sophronius  was  patriarch  of  Jerusalem 
in  638,  when  it  was  taken  by  the 
Caliph  Omar 

Soun,  p.  23,  the.Sonna,  or  Mishna,  the 
oral  law  of  the  Mahometans 

Sourdeval  (Robert  of),  p.  80.  An  ancient 
house  of  Normandy,  bearing  the  name 
of  the  fief  of  Sourdeval,  is  situated 
between  Vire  and  Mortain.  According 
to  Eogier  ('La  Noblesse  Francaise 
aux  Croisades '),  Robert  of  Sourdeval 
was  at  the  siege  of  Amalfi  with 
Bohemond,  and  went  with  him  to  the 
Holy  Land 

Stace,  p.  2,  Publius  Papinius  Statius,  a 
Roman  poet  who  lived  A.D.  45 — 96 

Symeon,  p.  37,  etc.,  Simeon,  patriarch 
of  Jerusalem 

Tancre,  p.  80, 82,  etc.,  Tancred  of  Sicily, 
son  of  the  good  Marquis  Odon  or 
William,  and  cousin  of  Bohemond  on 
his  mother  Emma's  side.  He  is  im- 
mortalized by  Tasso 

Tantyn,  p.  197 ;  Tacius,  p.  105,  called 
in  French  Estatin  I'Esnase',  Tatinus 
the  Noseless,  prefect  of  the  palace  of 
the  Emperor  of  Constantinople.  In 
the  'Chanson  of  Antioch'  he  is  the 
nephew  of  the  Emperor.  Anna  Com- 
nena  calls  him  Tatikios,  and  says  that 
.he  was  of  Saracen  origin 

Tareste,  p.  94,  Tharasius,  patriarch  of 
Constantinople  in  787 

Thabyte,*j>.  249,  Tabitha,  the  young 
woman  healed  by  Peter  in  Acts  ix. 

Theophilus,  p.  134.  According  to  a 
story  taken  from  the  so-called  '  Recog- 
nitions of  St.  Clement,'  there  was  a 
certain  nobleman  of  Antioch  of  the 
name  of  Theophilus  converted  by  the 
preaching  of  Peter,  who  dedicated 
his  own  house  as  a  church,  in  which 
the  Apostle  fixed  his  episcopal  seat. 

^William  has  confounded  him  with 
the  Theophilus  of  the  book  of 
Luke 

Thobye,  p.  24,  the  Tobias  of  the  Apoc- 
rypha, son  of  Tobit  and  Anna 

Tholouse  (Raymond  de  St.  Gilles,  erle  of 
Toulouse),  p.  84,  96,  etc.,  leader  of  the 
Provencal  Crusaders  with  Adhemar  dc 
Monteil 


Index  of  Names. 


Ml 


Thybauld  the  old,  p.  45,  Thibaut,  second 

son  of  Stephen,  Count  of  Chartres  and 

Blois  ;  he  died  Jan.  1152 
Tornay  (Enj^elbert  nnd  Lethold  of),  p. 

271,  two  brothers  who  mounted  after 

Godfrey  of  Bouillon  at  the  taking  of 

Jerusalem 
Toid  (Bernard,  erle  of),  p.  65,  Bernard, 

a  corruption   for  Reynard  ;    Reynart, 

erle  of,  p.  112;  Reignald  of  Toul,  p. 

206 ;  Pieter,  p.  65,  brother  of  Reynard 

of  Toul 
Tours  (Geffrey  de),  p.  227,'Guelphe  or 

Gouffier  de  las  Tours 
Treue  (Gylbert  de),  p.  260 

Urban,  p.  40,  41,  etc.,  Pope  Urban  the 

*  II.,  Eudes  or  Odo,  pope  from  1088  to 

1099.     He  died  fourteen  days   after 

the  fall  of  Jerusalem,  but  before  the 

news  had  reached  Italy 

Vaspasian,  p.  250,  Vespasian  the  tenth 


of  the  twelve  Caesars,  Roman  emperor 
from  70  to  79 

Veer  (Gace  de),  p.  261,  corruption  for 
Gaston  de  Beart ;  Lat.  Gastonem  de 
Beart 

Venduel  (Clarembauld  de),  p.  72,  172 

Ver  (Gaultier  de),  p.  244 

Viator,  p.  41,  corruption  for  Victor. 
This  Victor  was  the  third  pope  of  the 
name.  He  was  chosen  in  1085,  after 
Gregory's  death.  He  did  not  consent 
to  be  consecrated  until  two  years 
after,  in  May  1087.  He  died  Sept. 
16th,  1087 

William,  p.  285,   fictitious    brother  of 

Godfrey  of  Bouillon 
Wylliam  Rous,  p.  297,  William  Rufus, 

King  of  England  1057—1087—1100 

Yde,  p.  285,  Ida,  mother  of  Godfrey  of 
Bouillon,  sister  of  Godfrey  le  Bossu, 
Duke  of  Lower  Lorraine 


25 


343 


INDEX  OF  PLACES. 


Abydon,  p.  73,  Abydos,  town  on  the 
Hellespont  at  the  narrows  of  the  Dar- 
danelles 

Acheldemach,  p.  251,  the  Aceldama  of 
the  Bible 

Aciane,  p.  299,  corruption  for  Ariane 

Acres,  p.  244,  St.  John. d' Acre,  modern 
Ptolemais,  or  Acca,  a  harbour  of  Syria 
at  the  foot  of  Mt.  Carmel 

Adam,  p.  117,  218,  to-day  Adana,  town 
of  Cilicia  in  Asia  Minor 

Adre,  or  Adria,  p.  69,  town  in  Northern 
Italy,  on  the  river  Po 

Adryane,  p.  69,  79,  85,  the  Adriatic  Sea 

Albane,  p.  225.     See  Albare 

Albare,  p.  226,  228,  called  Lanbare  in 
the  Chanson  of  Antioch,  the  El  Barie 
of  the  Arabian  chroniclers,  to  be  found 
in  Burckhardt's  map  of  Syria  under 
the  name  of  El  Bara ;  William  of 
Tyre  says  that  Albara  formed  part  of 
the  province  of  Apamia,  and  was  a 
two  days'  journey  from  Antioch.  The 
modern  El  Bara  is  between  Apamia 
and  Antioch,  and  about  thirty-seven 
miles  from  the  latter 

Alexandrye  the  Lasse,  p.  122  ;  Allexan- 
drye  the  Lytyl,  p.  195 ;  Alexandria 
the  Less,  or  Alexandrette,  on  the  coast 
of  Palestine  north  of  Antioch 

AUemaygne,  p.  65-         } 

Allemayne,  p.  40,  etc.,  >  Germany 

Almayne,  p.  288,  ) 

Alysaundre,  p.  79 ;  Alexandrye,  p.  23 ; 
the  city  of  Alexandria 

Amene,  p.  134,  corruption  for  Anient •; 
Lat.  Aniensis 

Amyens,  p.  36,  the  city  of  Amiens  in 
France 

Anamystre,    see     Mamstrye,     p.     118, 


Mamistra,  the  modern  Missis,  formerly 
called  Mopsuetis 

Anauazie,  p.  115,  city  of  Cilicia,  directly 
north  of  Antioch,  the  modern  Ani- 
zarba,  formerly  the  metropolitan  city  ; 
Mnrne,  Ency.  12c.,  is  in  doubt  about  it, 
and  cites  different  authorities  on  the 
subject 

Ancone,  p.  69,  Sea  of  Ancona,  part  of  the 
G  ulf  of  Venice 

Andrenoble,  p.  76,  or  Adrianople,  north- 
west of  Constantinople ;  on  the  Mar- 
itza,  the  capital  of  Roumania 

Anthone,  p.  250,  Antonia,  one  of  the 
towers  of  Jerusalem,  on  the  north  side 
of  the  Temple 

Antibare,  p.  85,  Antivari,  modern  name 
Antiliaris,  city  of  Dalmatia 

Antyoche,  p.  23,  34,  etc.,  Antioch 

Antyoche  tlie  Lasse,  p.  112,  chief  city  of 
Pisidia,  also  called  Antiochetta 

Aperon,  p.  68,  paleographic  error  for 
Ciperon 

Aquylee,  p.  85,  Aquileia,  ancient  capital 
of  the  Carni,  to-day  Aglar  or  Aqui- 
leya,  just  at  the  head  of  the  Adriatic 
Sea,  north-west  of  Trieste 

Arabye,  p.  18,  19,  etc.,  Arabia 

Archade,  p.  70,  Arcadia 

Archys,  p.  233,  236,  ancient  Archis,  to- 
day Area,  between  Tripoli  and  the 
sea 

Ariane,  p.  299,  town  of  Ariano  in  the 
Apennines 

Arsur,  p.  306,  to-day  Arsuf,  a  town  north 
of  Joppa,  in  the  pashalic  of  Damascus, 
said  to  have  been  built  originally  by 
Solomon;  it  still  possesses  a  fortress 
and  a  mosque 

Artaysse,  p.  130,  Artayse,  Artaysis,  p. 


344 


Index  of  Places. 


131,  132,  etc.,  to-day  Ertesi,  about 
seventeen  miles  north-east  of  Aleppo 

Asinepol,  p.  70,  Asinople 

Asye,  p.  55,  73,  etc.,  Asia 

Aufrique,  p.  23,  Africa 

Annaure,  p.  218,  corruption  for  Ana- 
varzie 

Auuergne,  p.  43,  Auvergne  in  France 

Bagnlars  (ML),  p.  70,  the  Balkan  moun- 
tains 
Bandras,  p.  134, 137,  etc.,  corruption  for 

Baudas,  the  city  of  Bagdad 
Bar,  p.  84,  Bari  in  Apulia,  Italy 
Bardare,  p.  80,  the  ancient  Achedorus, 
flows  into  the   Gulf  of  Salonica,  in 
Macedonia 
Baruth,  p.  243,  modern  Beirut,  Palestine 
Banpere,  p.  62  )  Bavaria 

Bauyere,  p.  49, 140,  \ 
Bellegraue,  p.  69,  etc.,  mod.  Belgrade, 
capital  of  Servia,  on  the  right  bank  of 
the  Danube,  at  the  confluence  of  the 
Save 
Bethleem,  p.  28,  )  Bethlehem 

Bethlehem,  p.  245,  246,  J 
Blacz,  p.  69,  70,  the  Wallachians 
Blaqueme,  p.  74,  a  palace  in  Constanti- 
nople 
Boloyne,  p.  235,  etc.,  )  Boulogne  in 
Bullogne,  p.  1,  )      France 

Bougres,  p.  70,  Bulgarians 
Baiigrie,  p.  49,  I  Bulgaria 

Bougrye,  p.  50,  69,  etc.,  j        & 
Bethnie,  p.  79,  )  Variations  of 

Bethyne,  p.  34,  (      spelling  for 

Byihyne,  p.  55,  91,  etc.,  (      fa     * 
Bythynie,  p.  198,  )  J 

.Braas  o/  St.  George,  p.  34,  35,  etc.,  the 
Dardanelles,  called  the  Braas  of  St. 
George  on  account  of  a  monastery  of 
St.  George  built  outside  of  the  walls  of 
the  city.  It  generally  means  only  the 
narrow  straits  which  separate  Asia 
from  Europe,  but  sometimes  taken  for 
the  whole  Propontis  enclosed  between 
the  two  straits:  St.  George  was  a 
Cappadocian  warrior 

Calabre,  p.  92,  Calabria 

Calcedonie,  p.  79;  Calcedoine,  p.  83, 
Chalccdon,  city  in  Bjthynia,  near  Con- 
stantinople :  seat  of  the  Council  of  451 

Calvarye,  Calvary 

Cappadoce,  p.  34,  Cappadocia,  eastern- 


most province  of  Asia  Minor,  very 
early  Christianized,  and  belonged  to 
the  diocese  of  Pontus,  erected  by  Con- 
stantine  the  Great 

Carmely,  p.  244,  Mt.  Carmel 

Cartage,  p.  23,  Carthage 

Caxtore,  p.  80,  Castoria,  city  in  Mace- 
donia 

Celessurye,  p.  34,  province  of  which  Da- 
mascus is  the  chief  city 

Cesaire,  p.  300,  )  Caesarea,  to-day 

Cezaire,  p.  231,  244,  J      called  Seidjar 

Chamele,  p.  231,  also  called  Einessa 

Cinintot,  corruption  for  Civitot,  p.  55, 
town  of  Bithynia,  on  the  Gulf  of 
Mandania,  called,  to-day,  Ghio  or 
Gemlik 

Ciperon,  p.  68,  now  called  Schoprony, 
in  Hungarian,  and  Oedenburg  in  Ger- 
man, a  town  or  small  fortified  place 
on  the  frontiers  of  Hungary 

Cleremont,  p.  42,  Cleremont  in  Au- 
vergne, France ;  the  third  Council  of 
Pope  Urban  was  held  here,  in  Nov. 
1095,  attended  by  four  archbishops 
and  225  bishops,  besides  an  immense 
number  of  lower  clergy  and  laity 

Glony,  p.  42,  Abbey  of  Cluny  in  Bur- 
gundy, France,  composed  of  Bene- 
dictine Monks,  founded  in  909 

Cobar,  p.  30, 31,  to-day  the  river  Khabur, 
on  the  frontier  of  Persia 

Coleyne,  p.  62,  Cologne 

Cvmans,  p.  69, 

Counthot,  p.  105,  corruption  for  Civitot 

Cryne,  p.  198.     See  Lychonie 

Cylyce,  p.  95 ;  Sylyce,  p.  123  ;  Cilicia, 
one  of  the  most  important  provinces 
of  Asia  Minor,  corresponding  partly 
to  the  modern  Adana 

Dalmace,  p.  85,  Dalmatia,  between  Hun- 
gary and  the  Adriatic  Sea,  on  the 
eastern  side  of  the  sea 

Damaske,  p.  19,  Damascus 

Danemarches,  p.  70,  Danemarche  the 
Mayene  is  Dacia  Mediterranea,  or 
Lower  Moesia  ;  the  Latin  gives  Dacia, 
which  was  evidently  mistaken  for 
Dania,  and  translated  accordingly  by 
the  French  translator,  whom  Caxton 
follows 

Dorylee,  Dorylaeum,  to-day  called  Eski 
Scheke,  valley  south-east  of  Nice,  in 
ancient  Phrygia 


Index  of  Places. 


345 


Duchelande,  p.  226,  etc.,  Germany 
Dunoe,  p.  62,  68,  etc.,  the  Danube 
Duras,  p.  70,  86,  etc.  ;   ancient  Dyrrha- 

chium,  to-day  called  Durazzo,  a  Turkish 

port  on  the  Adriatic 

Ebron,  p.  250,  Hebron 
Miopee,  p.  133  ;  this  word  is  a  corruption 
of  Elyople,  the  ancient  Heliopolis  or 
Baalbec.     See  Mallec  or  Malbec 

Elye,  p.  250,  iElia,  name  given  to  Jeru- 
salem by  Aelius  Adrianus 

Emaus,  p.  248  ;  there  were  two  villages 
of  this  name,  one,  twenty-two  Roman 
miles  from  Jerusalem,  also  called  Ni- 
copolis  ;  and  the  Emmaus  of  the  Bible, 
seven  and  a  half  miles  from  Jeru- 
salem ;  according  to  McClintoch  and 
Strong,  Diet.,  the  Crusaders  called 
Emmaus,  Meopolis,  but  confused  it 
with  a  small  fortress  farther  south  on 
the  Jerusalem  road,  now  called  Latron 

Ennon,  p.  51,  254,  Ennon 

Epyre,  p.  86,  Epirus 

Eraclee,  p.  115,  etc.,  to-day  called 
Heraclia;  called  also  Eregli,  city  of 
Lycaonia,  between  Iconium  and 
Tarsus 

Ermenye,  p.  292,  308,  etc.,  Armenia; 
Caxton  also  spells  it  Hermonye 

Ermon,  p.  254,  Hermon 

Escalonne,  p.  279  ;  Escalone,  p.  292,  293, 
etc. ;  city  of  Ascalon,  on  the  coast 
south-west  of  Jerusalem 

Espyre,  p.  70,  Epirus 

Eufrates,  p.  125,  165,  etc.,  Euphrates 

Famosette,  p.  127,  etc. 

Fenyce,  p.  233,  236,  etc.,  Phoenicia 

fflaundres,  p.  120,  243,  etc.  Flanders 

ffraunce,  p.  3,  42,  etc.,  France 

ffryselande,  p.  120,  Friesland 

Francone,  p.  49,  62,  Franconia,  made  a 
duchy  in  the  10th  century  ;  its  capital 
city  Nurenberg.  It  belongs  to  Ba- 
varia to-day 

Fyrvemyne,  p.  148,  195,  Von  Sybel  calls 
it  Philomelium, — a  place  near  Antioch 
in  Asia  Minor  :  also  called  by  Spruner 
Finimium.  Its  modern  name  is  Ak- 
schehr 


Galgala,  p.  249,  small  town  south-east 

of  Jericho,  on  the  Dead  Sea 
Galylee,  p.  298,  Galilee 
Geme,  p.  298,  a  corruption  of  Genesar, 

the  lake  of  Gennesaret 
Gene,  p.  243,  260,  etc.,  Genoa 
Genetoes,  p.  260,  etc.,  Genoese 
Grece,  p.  64,  Greece 
Gybelet,  p.  235,  etc.,  the  ancient  Gabala, 

to-day   known  as  Jebeil,  a  town  on 

the  coast  of  Syria  between  Beirut  and 

Tripoli 

Halappe,  p.  218,  219,  etc.,  Aleppo 
Haman,  p.  231,  the  ancient  Epiphania, 

to-day  called  Hamal 
Haswt,  p.  218,  etc.,  town  a  little  north 
of  Aleppo,  and  called  by  Arabian  his- 
torians  Azaz,   which    name    it    still 
bears 
Hatap,  p.  221,  the  modern  Aintab 
Helle,  p.  164,  the  river  Orontes,  called 
El  Fer ;  Caxton  by  a  mistake  read  it 
L'Enfer,  and  translated  it  by  Helle 
Herm&nye,  p.  165.     See  Ermenye 
Holande,  p.  120,  Holland 
Hongrye,  p.  47,  49,  etc.,  Hungary 

Iadre,  p.  19,  a  city  of  Palestine 

Iadre,  p.  85,  etc.,  Zara,  a  city  of  Dalmatia 

with  a  port  on  the  Adriatic 
Iaphe,  p.  248,  301,  etc.,  Joffa  or  Joppa, 
only  sea-port  of  Judaea  on  the  Medi- 
terranean 
Iheruhesees,  p.  250,  the  Jebusees 
Iheriisalem,  p.  20,  etc.,  Jerusalem 
Iherycho,  p.  249,  Jericho 
Ioptiat,  p.  250      j  Jeb08haphat 
losaphat,  p.  25b,  ) 
Ister,  p.  85,  Istria 


Gabao,  p.  249,  Gibeon 
Galace,  p.  34,  Galatia 


Iudee,  p.  250,  j  Judaea 
Iurye,  p.  253,  ) 


Lamane,  p.  280.     See  Maturane 

Lasse  Asye,  Asia  Minor 

Lide,  p.  244,  Lydda 

Lintans,   p.   62 ;   Lyntans,   p.   65  ;  the 

river  Leytha,  a  tributary  of  the  Danube 
Lombardye,  p.  42,  69,  etc. 
Lorayne,  p.  49,  Lorraine 
Lybane,  p.  233,  242,  Mt.  Lebanon 
Lycaone,  p.  34,  Lycaonia 
Lyce,  p.  34,  Lycia 
Lyche   of   Surrye,   p.    235 ;     Lystes    of 

Snri/e,  p.  34  ;  The  Lyche,  p.  261 ;  Lao- 


346 


Index  of  Places. 


dicea ;  in  one  of  the  French  manu- 
scripts of  William  of  Tyre,  no.  8404,  it 
is  called  Le  Chef  de  Surie.  This  city 
still  exists  under  the  name  of  Lakikieh, 
according  to  Michaud 
LycJionie,  p.  113;  Licoine,  p.  114;  an- 
other form  is  the  Cryne,  all  mistransla- 
tions of  the  French  ltlcoine,  the  city 
of  Iconium,  to-day  called  Konieh  in 
Lycaonia 

Macedomone,  p.  92,  } 

Macedonie,  p.  87,      >  Macedonia 

Machedone,  p.  70,     ) 

Machabews,  p.  248,  the  Maccabees 

Magonce,  p.  62,  Mainz  or  Mayence,  on 
the  Rhine 

Malfe,  p.  36,  modern  Amalfi,  a  city  of 
Apulia  in  Italy 

Mallec,  p.  133,  Malbec  or  Baalbec,  the 
same  city  as  Eliopee,  or  Heliopolis 

M<dleville,  p.  48,  50,  etc.,  said  to  be  the 
modern  Semlin  ;  as  the  Crusaders  did 
not  know  what  to  call  it,  it  has  been 
conjectured  that  they  dubbed  it  Malle- 
ville  on  account  of  the  sufferings 
which  they  endured 

Mamstre,  p.  218.     See  Anamystre 

Manbec,  p.  301,  same  as  Mallec 

Marase,  p.  115,  )  Marash,  formerly 

Maraze,  p.  122,  etc.,  )    called  Germanica 

Marce,  p.  47,  a  corruption  of  the  word 
Maroe,  a  river  of  Hungary 

Marclee,  p.  236,  to-day  called  Merkale, 
the  first  city  of  Phoenicia,  situated  on 
the  sea-side  between  the  castle  of 
Margat  and  Tortuose 

Marese,  p.  130,  mod.  Marasch,  in  Cilicia, 
not  far  from  Aleppo 

Margat,  p.  236,  299,  to-day  Markab  on 
the  coast  between  Giblet  and  Tortuose 

Marran,  p.  226  ;  Mazran,  p.  226  ;  Mar- 
ran,  p.  229  ;  modern  name  Maarrah  en 
Naaman 

Mase,  p.  194,  the  river  Meuse 

3Iath.ale,  p.  194,  town  of  Mechelen,  near 
Maestricht  in  Holland ;  in  French 
called  Machale  or  Machele 

Maturane,  p.  280,  town  of  Martorano  in 
Calabria,  Italy 

Mans,  p.  243,  the  ancient  Adonis ;  to- 
day called  Nahr  Ibrahim  :  Tudebodus 
calls  it  Bray  in 

Mayene,  p.  70.     See  Dancmarchcs 

Meeszebors,  p.  62,  town  at  the  junction 


of  the   Leytha   and   the   Danube,  in 
Lower  Hungary 
Meletene,  p.  308,  309,   called   also   Mil- 
iaria, between  the  Euphrates  and  Me- 
sopotamia 
Mese,  p.  70,  Moesia 
Mesopotayne,  p.  308,  Mesopotamia 
Mona,  p.  252,  corruption  for  Moriah 
Moria,    p.   250,    Mt.    Moriah    in    Jeru- 
salem 

Naples,  p.  249 ;  Nappies,  p.  293,  etc. ; 
Napoli,  or  Navplia,  or  Nabulus,  mod. 
Nabloos,  supposed  to  be  the  same  as 
Shechem  or  Sichem  :  it  is  about  thirty 
miles  from  Jerusalem.  A  Council  was 
called  here  in  1120,  by  King  Baldwin 
of  Jerusalem ;  the  object,  to  reform 
the  Church 

Nerbonne,  p.  226,  Karbonne  in  Fiance 

Nycene,  p.  46,  etc.,  Nice,  or  Nicaea,  the 
ancient  capital  of  Bithynia,  on  the 
eastern  shore  of  lake  Ascanius :  modern 
name,  Isnik 

Nychomede,  p.  93 ;  Nycomede,  p.  91  ; 
Nicomedia,  ancient  capital  of  Bi- 
thynia, situated  on  the  north-eastern 
angle  of  the  Gulf  of  Astacus,  in  the 
Propontis,  now  called  Bay  of  Ismid. 
This  city  was  built  a.d.  264  by  Nico- 
medes  I. ;  Diocletian  and  Constantine 
the  Great  lived  there.  It  is  now  the 
small  town  of  Isinid 

Nyz,  p.  40 ;  Nyze,  p.  50,  mod.  Nissa,  a 
fortified  city  of  Servia,  on  the  Nissava, 
south-east  of  Belgrade 

Olyvet  (Mt),  p.  262,  Mt.  Olivet 

Oronte    (Mt.),    p.    135,    mountain    in 

Antioch 
Oror.te,  river,  p.  135,  see  next 
Orontes,  p.  133,  ancient  name  of  the  river 

Fer,    to-day   called    El   Aasay,   "the 

rebellious  " 
Osterych,  p.  49,  Austria 

Palestyne,  p.  263,  etc.,  Palestine 
Pamphyle,  p.  194,  Pamphylia 
Pelagoine,  p.  80    >  province  in  Greece 
Pelagonne,  p.  Ho,  ) 
Pernasus,  p.  135,  Mt.  Parnassus 
Perse,  p.  19,  etc.,  Persia 
Phylystees,  p.  253,  etc.,  Philistines 
Puide,  p.  Ill,  Pisside,  p.  112,  Pisidia 
Playsance,  p.  42,  Lat.  Placentia,  city  of 


Index  of  Places. 


347 


Piacenza  in  Italy.     The  first  Council 

of  Urban  in  1095  was  held  here 
Porphire,  p.  298 
Fuylle,  p.  70,  etc.,  Apulia,  province  of 

Italy 
Pug  Nostre  Dame,  p.  42,  city  of  Puy 

Notre  Dame  in  Auvergne,  France 

Rages,  p.  218,  etc.,  the  city  of  Edessa, 
called  Rona  and  Arta  by  the  Arabians, 
and  Roh  or  Rhodes  by  the  French  of 
the  Middle  Ages.  Pococke  says  it  is 
supposed  to  be  the  Ur  of  the  Chaldees. 

Raguse,  p.  85,  the  ancient  Rhaugia,  Ra- 
gusiuin,  or  Ragusa,  a  fortified  city  of 
Dalmatia  on  the  Adriatic 

Rames,  p.  245,  etc.,  ancient  Arimathea, 
to-day  called  Ramleh,  or  Ramla,  six- 
teen miles  north  of  Jerusalem,  famous 
for  the  tomb  of  Samuel 

Raweudel,  p.  221 ;  there  are  no  traces  of 
this  castle  to-day  ;  M.  P.  Paris  sug- 
gests that  it  may  be  the  modern  Ra- 
nama,  between  Turbesel  and  Rages 

Ranenne,  p.  40,  Ravenna 

Redost,  p.  87,  to-day  called  Rodasto, 
between  Gallipolis  and  Constantinople 

Rhodes,  p.  4,  194,  243,  etc.,  the  island  of 
Rhodes 

Rome,  p.  2,  etc.,  Rome 

Rome,  p.  147,  Roumania 

Rouge,  p.  229,  Lat.  Rugiam,  to-day  called 
Riha 

Salem,  p.  250,  ancient  name  of  Jerusalem 

Salenyke,  p.  *7,  Salonica 

Salerm,  Salerno  on  the  Gulf  of  Salerno, 
south-east  of  Naples,  Italy 

Samarye,  p.  249,  etc.,  Samaria 

tkimoloc,  p.  225,  corruption  for  Samosac, 
or  Samosae;  to-day,  according  to  P. 
Paris,  Saniizat  on  the  Euphrates 

Sarepte,  p.  244,  the  Sarepta  of  the  Bible 

iSayette,  p.  243,  244 ;  Lat.  Sidonem, 
ancient  Sidon 

tone,  p.  288  289,  )s 

bessougne,  p.  14U,       ) 

Sceirs,  p.  249,  a  corruption  of  Sichar 

Sciiice,  p.  116.     See  Cylyce 

tiebaste,  p.  249,  mod.  Sebustieh,  the  re- 
puted burial-place  of  St.  John  the 
Baptist,  a  village  of  Palestine,  6  miles 
north-west  of  Nabloos 

Sr.rton,  p.  73,  the  city  of  Sestos,  on  the 
European  side  of  the  Hellespont 


Serorge,  p.  129       }  Town  near  Edespa) 

borargc,  p.  22.5,      >    tQ_d      calJed  Sarug 

bororge,  p.  224,       ) 

Sklavonye,  p.  260,  etc.,  Sclavonia 

bodome,  p.  249,  Sodom 

ISpalete,  p.  85,  to-day,  Spalatro,  a  fortified 
city  of  Dalmatia 

Sjxxrme,  p.  167,  Spain 

ktralyce,  p.  48,  69  ;  this  town  has  not  yet 
been  definitely  recognized,  although 
Albert  d'Aix  calls  it  Sternitz,  which  is 
a  city  of  Sordica,  to-day  called  Sofia 

Sitr,  p.  244,  Tyre 

Surrye,  p   19,         1  g  rfa 

burye,  p.  do,  etc.,  ) 

Syloe,  p.  254,  Siloam 

Sympole,  p.  76, 

iSyon,  p.  250,  etc.,  Sion 

Tabarye,  p.  298,  301,  Tabarieh  on  the 
Lake   of   Gennesaret;    Lat.    Tiberiar 

Tabor  (ML),  p.  298,  Bit.  Tabor 

Tarce,  p.  95,       ) 

Tarse,  p.  115,      >  Tarsus  in  Cdicia 

Thaarses,  p.  92,  ) 

Tarente,  Tarentum 

Tayllenborch,  p.  65,  Tollenburch,  town 
near  the  junction  of  the  Maretsch  and 
the  Danube 

Tecva,  p.  249,  258,  city  where  Amos  the 
prophet  was  born,  about  six  Roman 
miles  from  Jerusalem — name  is  still 
Tekua 

Terme,  p.  148,  town  in  Pisidia 

Tlieopoble,  p.  134,  former  name  of 
Antioch 

Thessavle,  p.  70,  135,  Thessaly 

Tinchebray,  p.  297,  village  in  Normandy, 
near  Doinfront 

Torbesel,  p.  217,  etc.,  the  Tel-Bacher  of 
the  Arabian  historians,  to-day  a  little 
village  called  Tel  Bacher  or  Tel  Be- 
chir,~on  the  right  bank  of  the  Sadjur 

Tortuose,  p.  234,  236,  etc.,  formerly 
called  Antaradus,  a  large  and  beau- 
tiful city  on  the  sea-side,  between 
Areas  and  Antioch 

Trace,  p.  70 ;  Thaarses,  p.  92,  Thrace 

Trypple,  p.  233,  etc.,  Tripoli 

Valerne,  p.  299,  etc.,  Valenia,  formerly 
called  Balanea,  between  Giblet  and 
Margat 

Venyse,  p.  243,  etc.,  Venice 


348 


Index  of  Places. 


Ybelyn,  p.  242,  etc.,  the  ancient  Biblim, 
also  called  Gibelet,  on  the  coast  below 
Tripoli 

Ydronte,  p.  4,  called  Hydruntum  by 
Livy  and  Pliny,  an  ancient  Roman 
colony :  to-day  Otranto,  in  Italy 


Ynde,  p.  22,  India 
Yrlond,  p.  4,  Ireland 

Zebus,  p.  250,  mistranslation  or  corrup- 
tion for  Jeims 


R.  CLAY   &  SONS,   LIMITKD,    LONDON  4   BDKGAY. 


RETURN     CIRCULATION  DEPARTMENT 

TO— *►      202  Main  Library 


LOAN  PERIOD  1 
HOME  USE 

2 

3 

4 

5                               ( 

b 

ALL  BOOKS  MAY  BE  RECALLED  AFTER  7  DAYS 

Renewals  and  Recharges  may  be  made  4  days  prior  to  the  due  date. 

Books  may  be  Renewed  by  calling     642-3405. 

DUE  AS  STAMPED  BELOW 

MAR     2  1987 

mikJUN     41' 

87 

FteC.    my  17  iqq 

Moffitt  m      ™ 

FEB  2  4 

1995 

$rP    1  £    ?P0? 

APR  0  8 1r 

FORM  NO.  DD6, 


UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA,  BERKELEY 
BERKELEY,  CA  94720 

©s 


GENERAL  LIBRARY  -U.C.  BERKELEY 


BDQDBt3Mlit.fi 


