TITLE: The history and literature of the crusades
IDENTIFIER: HistoryAndLiteratureOfCrusades
URL: https://archive.org/download/HistoryAndLiteratureOfCrusades/HistoryAndLiteratureOfCrusades_djvu.txt

Google 



This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 
to make the world’s books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 
to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 
are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that’s often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other marginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book’s long journey from the 
publisher to a library and finally to you. 



Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing this resource, we have taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 

We also ask that you: 

+ Make non- commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain from automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google’s system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attribution The Google “watermark” you see on each file is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can’t offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book’s appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liability can be quite severe. 



About Google Book Search 



Google’s mission is to organize the world’s information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world’s books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 



at jhttp : //books . qooqle . com/ 



Digitized by 




Digitized by 




THE 







HISTORY AND LITERATURE 

OF - T - V j 

THE CRUSADES. 

fbom the gebman 




VON SYBEL. 



EDITED BT 

LADY DUFF GORDON. 



LONDON: 

CHAPMAN AND HALL, 193, PICCADILLY. 
1861. 



Digitized by Google 




D 
1 58 
. S^8 



Digitized by Google 




PREFACE. 



Heinrich y. Sybel, whose Essay on the Crusades 
is now introduced to the English reader, was bom 
at Düsseldorf, in the year 1817. His father, who 
is still living, was well known as a strong advocate 
for the Liberal party in the parliamentary history 
of Prussia. Erom the Gymnasium at Düsseldorf, 
v. Sybel was sent, at the age of seventeen, to the 
University of Berlin, where he attended Leopold 
Ranke’s lectures, and shortly became one of the 
Professor’s most promising pupils. Under Ranke’s 
guidance, the original historians of the Crusades 
were carefully examined. These studies influenced 
v. Sybel’s future career, and he determined thence- 
*orth to devote himself to historical research. His 
irst attempt as an author was an Essay, published 
i.i 1837, * De Jordanis Vita et Scriptis.’ In 1841 
e published his ‘ History of the First Crusade,’ 



Digitized by Google 




11 



PREFACE. 



a work which gives evidence of great industry and 
critical skill. He subsequently printed, in various 
Reviews, essays on the Second Crusade, on the 
Kingdom of Jerusalem, and on the Legends of the 
Crusades (1850) ; and in 1855, in Munich, he de- 
livered four lectures on the Crusades. These works 
have established the reputation of v. Sybel as the 
best living authority on that remarkable portion of 
history. 

The first part of the work now submitted to the 
public, is a translation of the lectures delivered at 
Munich ; the second part is taken from the preface 
to his History of the First Crusade, published in 
1841 ; and consists of an elaborate criticism on the 
various original authorities in the eleventh and 
twelfth centuries, and on the later historians of the 
Crusades, down to the present time. There exists, 
we believe, no such critical examination of the ori- 
ginal authorities in any other language. The refer- 
ences to them in Mills’s History of the Crusades 
are somewhat meagre; while Michaud, although 
in his ‘ Bibliotheque des Croisades’ he has given 
ample extracts, has nowhere subjected the originals 
to the rigorous and minute analysis they undergo 
at the hands of the German Professor. 



Digitized by Google 




PREFACE. 



Ill 



The first impulse to a critical examination of the 
original authorities of the First Crusade was given 
b y Professor Ranke in his Historical Exercises 
(‘ Uebungen’). He began with the first books of 
William of Tyre, which he proved to be merely a 
repetition of earlier accounts by Albert of Aix, Ray- 
mond of Agiles, and from the ‘Gesta Francorum.’^ 
He then examined Albert of Aix, whose work he 
considered to be derived chiefly from oral tradition. 
Professor Ranke’s other avocations prevented his 
pursuing this subject any further; but sufficient 
was done to clear the way for other historical stu- 
dents ; and v. Sybel has carried out the method of 
his eminent teacher. 

The narrative of the First Crusade, as given by 
Mills and other modern historians, v. Sybel re- 
gards as a mingled mass of truth and falsehood, of 
history and legend, founded chiefly on the account 
of William of Tyre. William of Tyre wrote in 
1170, and with much that was valuable, he mixed 
tales borrowed from Albert of Aix (1130). The 
general character of the work is thought by the 
German Professor to be poetical and legendary. 

To revert to v. Sybel’s career. In 1839 he went 
i Bonn, and in 1842 he became Professor of 



Digitized by Google 




IV 



PREFACE. 



History at that University. In 1844, he and an- 
other Professor, of the name of Gildemeister, wrote a 
pamphlet on the Holy Coat of Treves, and on holy 
coats in general, which won for him the sympathy 
of all opponents of ultramontane tendencies. The 
Elector of Hesse hereupon offered him a profes- 
# sorship at Marburg. At that small University he 
had ample leisure to devote to literary pursuits, 
and in 1845 he published a work on the origin of 
the German Monarchy (‘ Entstehung des deutschen 
Königthums’). The book was subjected to some 
adverse criticism at the time, but subsequent in- 
quiry has done much to confirm the justice of 
v. Sybel’s views. 

He then turned his attention to more modern 
times, and went to Paris, where he ransacked the 
public archives. The fruits of this journey were 
two essays, one on Burke and the French Revolu- 
tion, and another on Burke and Ireland ; he subse- 
quently wrote essays on the Duke of Wellington and 
on Prince Eugene of Savoy. 

The years 1848, 1849, and 1850, interfered with 
his historical researches and pursuits. Like many 
others, v. Sybel was carried away by dreams of Ger- 
man unity and by hopes of a great future for Prussia. 



Digitized by Google 




PREFACE. 



V 



After the complete failure of these aspirations, v. 
Sybel returned to his Professor’s chair, and to lite- 
rature. He resumed his favourite subject of the 
French Revolution, and published the first volume 
in 1853. 

In 1856, v. Sybel was invited to take the chair of 
Professor of History at the University of Munich, and 
was made a Member of the Bavarian Academy of 
Sciences. Spite of the opposition of the ultramon- 
tane party, who had not forgiven the part he took 
in the controversy on the Holy Coat of Treves, v. 
Sybel rose higher and higher in the estimation of 
the King of Bavaria. Besides occupying himself 
with the business of the Academy of Sciences, and 
with his lectures in the University, which were de- 
servedly populair, v. Sybel found time to establish an 
historical school and an historical journal, the first 
volume of which appeared in 1859. Materials were 
placed by the King at his disposal for a history of 
Bavaria during the last century. He was also re- 
quested to superintend an edition of the Acts of 
the German Diets, and was named President of an 
Historical Commission which consisted of men like 
Pertz, Ranke, Droysen, and others. The first meet- 
ing took place in October, 1858, since which time 



Digitized by Google 




VI 



preface. 



the Historical Commission have continued their la- 
bours with considerable success ; v. Sybel’s contri- 
bution being the history of the French Revolution, 
three volumes of which have appeared. 

Unfortunately v. Sybel’s views of political matters, 
which he was too honest too conceal, were so much 
at variance with those of the King of Bavaria, that 
he was compelled in 1861 to resign his professor- 
ship at Munich, and he is now installed at Bonn 
as Dahlmann’s successor. 



Digitized by Google 




CONTENTS 



PAKT I.— HISTORY OF THE CRUSADES. 



CHAPTER I. 

Page 

Mahomet. — Project of the Mahomedans. — Charlemagne. — Fall of 
the Empire. — Depressed State of the World. — Pilgrimages. — 

The Church and the Pope. — Pope Gregory VII. — Pope Urban 
II. — The First Crusade 1 



CHAPTER II. 

The First Crusaders. — Peter the Hermit.— Arrival at Constanti- 
nople. — Quarrels among the Turks. — The Emir Bagi Sijan.— 
Siege of Antioch. — Sufferings of the Christians. — March upon 
Jerusalem. — Godfrey at Jerusalem. — Enthusiasm caused by 
the Crusades. — Poetry of the Crusades. — The Taking of the 
Cross at Clermont. — The Leaguer of Antioch. — The Gathering 
of the Paynim. — Godfrey of Bouillon 26 

CHAPTER III. 

Baldwin II. — Quarrels among the Princes. — Luxury of the Cru- 
saders. — Zenki the Bloody Prince. — Reaction against the 
Church. — Troubled State of Europe. — St. Bernard. — The Se- 
cond Crusade. — Wreck of the Second Crusade. — Noureddin. 
—Caution of Noureddin. — Rise of Saladin. — Saladin’s Su- 
premacy. — Decline of the Frankish States. — Danger of the 
Christians 63 



CHAPTER IV. 

The West rises to Arms. — Preparations in the East. — Siege of 
PtolemaU. — Frederick Barbarossa. — Death of Frederick Bar- 
barossa. — Quarrels among the Princes. — Richard Cceur-de- 



Digitized by Google 




CONTENTS. 



viii 

Page 

Lion. — Negotiations. — Treaty with Saladin. — Fresh Outbreak 
of War. — Three Years’ Armistice. — Failure of the Crusades. 

— Relations between the East and West.— rDestruction of 
Eastern Civilization. — Triumph of Christianity 95 



PART II.— LITERATURE OF THE CRUSADES. 

CHAPTER I. 

The Emperor Alexius. — Urban II. — Stephen of Blois. — Anselm of 
Ripemont. — Bohemund and Others. — Raymond of Agiles. — 

‘ Gesta Francorum.’ — Tudebod. — Guibert, Abbot of Nogent. 

— Baldric, Archbishop of DoL — History of the Holy War. — 
Henry of Huntingdon. — Fulco, Gilo, and the Monk Robert. — 
Fulcher of Chartres. — Liziard of Tours. — William of Malmes- 
bury. — Ordericus Yitalis. — Rodolph of Caen. — Ekkehard of 
Frach. — Dodechin . 131 

CHAPTER n. 

Albert of Aix. — Probable Origin of the Narrative. — Profusion of 
Detail. — Discrepancies in his Narrative. — Richness of Inven- 
tion. — No dependence on his Facts 206 

CHAPTER III. 

t- William of Tyre. — His Birth and Education. — General Character 
of the Work. — Character of William of Tyre. — Narrative of 
the First Crusade. — Its defective colouring. — William of Tyre 
a Mediator between Legend and History 255 

CHAPTER IV. 

Epochs of a later Literature. — Scholasticus Oliver. — Vincent, Bishop 
of Beauvais. — The Luneburg Chronicle. — Matthew of West- 
minster. — John of Ypres and others. — Platina. — Legends of 
the Crusades. — Ariosto. — Jacob de Vitry. — Matthew of Paris. 

— Petrarch. — The Treasurer Bernhard. — Archbishop Antonine 
of Florence. — Benedictus Accolti. — George Nauclerus. — Paulus 
Emilius of Verona. — Thomas Fuller. — Father Maimbourg. — 
Voltaire. — De Guignes. — Mailly. — Maier, Heller, and Haken. 

— Mills. — Lebeau. — St. Maurice.— Wilken. — Von Raumer. — 

Van Rampen. — Schlosser. — Michaud. — Capefigue .... 311 



Digitized by Google 




PART I. 



HISTORY OF THE CRUSADES. 



Digitized by Google 




Digitized by Google 



HISTORY OF THE CRUSADES. 



CHAPTER I. 

The subject of these pages, that series of great 
wars which we designate as the Crusades, is one 
of the greatest revolutions that has ever taken place 
in the history of the human race. They have been 
repeatedly described in various instructive and cele- 
brated works, and without doubt there are few 
who have not heard of those armed pilgrimages 
to the Holy Land; of the fame of Peter the 
Hermit and Godfrey of Bouillon, of the feats of 
Richard the Lion-hearted, or of the sufferings of 
St. Louis. Nevertheless the interest and import- 
ance of such events is, from its very nature, inex- 
haustible. During their progress a universal change 
takes place in the condition of the nations involved 
in them; and every new commentator must find 
fresh subject for interest and instruction according 

B 



Digitized by Google 




2 HISTORY OF THE CRUSADES. 

to his own requirements and inclinations. This 
may also be said of the wars of the Persians, of 
the migration of the northern hordes, or, after them, 
I of the Reformation and the French Revolution. 
Each of these events, like the Crusades, marks a 
new epoch in the state of Europe ; and it shall be 
my task to place these last plainly before you under 
this aspect, although, with such an extensive sub- 
i ject, this narrative can at best only assume the pro- 
portions of a slight sketch. 

We cannot understand the importance of the 
Crusades if we look upon them as a mere sequel 
and extension of the pilgrimages to Jerusalem. 
Such a complete change in the history of the world 
does not arise out of such insignificant causes. 
¥ The Crusades must be regarded as one great por- 
\ tion of the struggle between the two great religions 
I of the world, Christianity and Mahomedanism ; a 
struggle which began in the seventh century, on 
the confines of Arabia and Syria, and embraced in 
quick succession all the countries round the Medi- 
terranean, and after thousands of years and changes 
has disturbed our own century, as it did that of 
Gregory VII. The history of the human race re- 
cords no contest more violent or more protracted 
than this. There is none which filled a greater 
arena ; none which roused the passions or the capa- 



Digitized by Google 




MAHOMET. 



s 



bilities of the people to a greater degree. When the/ 
prophet Mahomet began his career at MeccaTArabia 
was hardly known to the rest of the world. Fifty 
years after his death his followers were already 
ruling the land from the Indus in the East, the 
Caucasus in the North, to the coasts of the Atlan- 
tic in the West. J The world never before saw a 
quicker or more complete invasioi^/ Mahomet had 
succeeded in setting the ardent imaginations of his 
countrymen on fire with the idea of a holy war- 
In short, vigorous sentences, he preached to them 
the greatness and power of one Almighty God. He 
did not reason or explain, but he carried men away 
with him. He painted the rewards of Paradise and 
the tortures of the damned in glowing colours ; and 
his whole religion was contained in these words : 
Obedience to God and to His Prophet. His teach- 
ing was the announcement of a new rule, without 
dogmatic mystery, and without any philosophical 
foundation. Man could alone be just in that he 
learned God’s will from the Prophet, and then ful- 
filled the Prophet’s ordinances. God does not de- 
liver, but he rules ; and religion is not to become 
one with him, but to obey him implicitly. Thus, 
his mission from the first was not one of instruction, 
but of subjugation; unbelievers were rebels, who 
were to be smitten with the edge of the sword, and 

B 2 




Digitized by Google 




4 



HISTORY OF THE CRUSADES. 



forced to conform to his doctrines, or to pay tribute. 
War necessarily arose out of the first principles of 
his religion ; and no sooner was he acknowledged in 
Mecca than he sent threatening admonitions to the 
Persian King and the Byzantine Emperor. The 
scorn with which they answered the unknown fa- 
natic, was met by the most furious attacks ; neither 
Roman nor Persian troops were able to withstand 
the masses of brave men, which, with the rapidity of 
lightning, inexhaustible, and with exulting contempt 
of death, spread in torrents over the country. They 
had no other thought than fanaticism for the Ca- 
liph, no other delight than war against the infidel, 
no other hope than entrance into Paradise. They 
were men with but few wants, brave in battle, and 
insensible to fatigue, easily put in motion, and 
equally untiring j inaccessible both to luxury and to 
civilization. They dwell, say s one of their poets, 
beneath the shadow of their lances, and cook their 
food upon thgJishesjof the c onquered town s. 

In the year 715 these hordes had overrun all 
Western Asia, the whole northern coast of Africa, 
and Spain, even beyond the Pyrenees. 

Muza, the ambitious conqueror of Spain, con- 
ceived the plan, which, though vast, was not too 
extensive for men accustomed to subdue the world ; 
—by two great simultaneous attacks to render 



Digitized by Google 




PROJECT OP THE MAHOMEDANS. 



5 



the whole of Christendom subservient to the Pro- 
phet. For this purpose an army was to advance 
from Asia Minor towards Constantinople, and an- 
other to march across the Pyrenees upon the empire 
of the Franks ; then from east and west to unite 
their triumphant forces in Rome, the centre of 
Christianity. Luckily for Europe, Muza at this 
time fell into disgrace with the Caliph, and his 
great project was only carried into effect piecemeal, 
and consequently without success. He began by 
attacking Constantinople, and blockaded that town 
for three years by sea and land. The Emperor Leo 
III. defended himself with great courage, destroyed 
the Mahomedan fleet with the newly invented Greek 
fire, and at last, in 718, forced their army to retire. 
Ten years then elapsed before the empire of the 
Franks was attacked in the west. In Muza’s time 
this attack might have been successful, because the 
Franks were then torn by internal discord. Since 
then, however, Charles Martel, one of the bravest 
warriors of any time, had taken his place at the 
head of the Frankish empire ; he beat the Arabian 
and African hordes in six hotly contested battles at 
Poitiers. The people of the East, says one of the 
Spanish historians, the German race, men deep- 
chested, quick-eyed, and iron-handed, have crushed 
the Arabs. After this double failure the great on- 



Digitized by Google 




6 



HISTORY OF THE CRUSADES. 



slaught of Islam was checked. Christendom had 
suffered much ; it had lost its birthplace, Palestine, 
and its earliest Churches in Asia Minor and Africa ; 
but it had saved its existence, and soon after Charles 
Martel’s death it found a representative of its unity 
and power in his grandson Charlemagne, who, as 
Emperor of Western Christendom, extorted some 
acknowledgment even from the Caliph himself. The 
struggle between the two religions now remained in 
abeyance for some centuries, except some insignifi- 
cant feuds on the frontiers of Spain, in the Italian 
Isles, and on the coast of Asia Minor, as symptoms 
* of the smouldering, embers of discord, 
vy From this moment the inward development of 
^ the two worlds were totally opposed. In the Mus- 
sulman country the religious element had thrown 
; all others into the shade ; religious warfare was the 
; sole occupation of the inhabitants, and supremacy of 
I the Caliph was the sole basis of political life. After 
I the ninth century, this distinctive peculiarity was 
broken down on all sides. Earthly enjoyments, se- 
cular culture, and national independence asserted 
their power ; the arts and sciences flourished exten- 
sively ; the dominion of the Caliph was broken, and 
limited to spiritual supremacy ; on every side tem- 
poral institutions sprang up under and around him ; 
political, intellectual, and manufacturing interests 



Digitized by Google 




CHARLEMAGNE. 



7 



displaced the enthusiasm for the war of faith. 
Islam as a conquering religion lost its terrors, and 
its warlike power fell into gradual decay. This 
change from fanaticism to culture, was in reality 
the greatest gain to the Mahomedans ; and to this 
period belongs nearly everything effected by Islam 
for the real or lasting interests of humanity, for in- 
tellectual progress and the refinement of manners. 

In the West, things took a different course. While\ 
the Mahomedans attained political life and intel- j 
lectual progress at the expense of religious vigour 
and unity, the European nations, from the ninth to 
the eleventh century, confined themselves more and 
more exclusively within the narrow ecclesiastical 
paths. This tendency is visible even in Charle- ^ 
magne. The worldly, political, and national elements 
are brilliantly represented in his reign : the imperial / 
dignity was restored and endowed with unprece- ' 
dented power ; and the Pope of Rome was subser- 
vient to him like any other bishop of his dominions. 
Science of every description was fostered, ancient 
Roman writers imitated, old German heroic legends 
collected. But with all this Charlemagne looked 
upon his imperial mission as more particularly a re- 
ligious one. On the first Diet after his coronation, 
he orders, that now the imperial dignity is restored, 
all men are to entertain the true belief in the Trinity, 



Digitized by Google 




8 



HISTORY OF THE CRUSADES. 



and to lead a godly life in Christ. Wherever he 
discovered, within the limits of the Empire, defects 
in church government, remains of heathenism, or 
schismatic tendencies, he opposed them with the 
whole weight of the power of the State. He had 
no foreign war more at heart than that against the 
barbarians, that is to say, the heathens, the Saracens 
in Spain, the pagan Germans, Danes, and Slaves. 
Where he conquered he converted; and although 
the spreading of Christianity was useful in consoli- 
dating the temporal power of the State, yet the first 
feeling was that the Emperor was lord of the world, 
trad the defender of true belief on earth. 

The clergy and all ranks of the people held the 
same ideas. We are accustomed now to look upon 
religion as a purely personal and intimate feeling, 
the closest, and at the same time freest intercourse 
of each individual soul with God, a conviction of the 
heart, which is only of value in so far as it is of in- 
ward and spontaneous growth. In those ancient 
times men strove, it is true, to attain this frame of 
mind ; but they were convinced that the only true 
path to it was by the outward observances of the 
Church. These therefore were enforced by penal 
laws, and force of arms ; religion was looked upon 
above all as the direct command of God ; and who- 
ever did not profess the true faith, was persecuted 
as a rebel against the majesty of the Lord. 



Digitized by Google 




FALL OF THE EMPIRE. 



9 



Soon after the death of Charlemagne, the Empire 
fell topieces, the organization of the State was dis- 
solved, and anarchy spread over the whole of Charle- 
magne’s former dominions, Germany, France, and 
Italy. It is true that Germany raised herself from 
this second period of disorder, to unity and power, 
under the great Imperial House of Saxony, under 
Henry I., and Otho the Great. For a moment the 
glory of the Carlovingians seemed renewed ; half 
Europe recognized the power of the Emperor of 
Germany, and under his vigorous protection, Ger- 
man song and the study of antique art put forth 
rich blossom. But this edifice was fated to last no 
longer than that raised by the Carlovingians. No 
sooner had Otho the Great closed his eventful ca- 
reer, than one country after another tore itself away 
from the Imperial supremacy, France and Burgun- 
dy, Italy and Poland, the Wends and the Danes. 
Meanwhile none of these succeeded in establishing 
for themselves any lasting government ; the mon- 
archies sank into a state of complete impotence ; un- 
ruly petty tyrants trampled all social order under- 
foot, and all attempts after scientific instruction and 
artistic pleasures, were as effectually crushed by this 
state of general insecurity, as the external well-be- 
ing and material life of the people. This was a dark 
and stormy period for Europe, merciless, arbitrary. 



Digitized by Google 




10 



HI8TORY OF THE CRUSADES. 



and violent. In Germany a few powerful sovereigns 
maintained a commanding position for a time : such 
were Conrad II. and Henry III., men of iron will, 
like their followers. But with them the imaginative 
impulse, the bright hope, and the mental activity, 
which distinguished the days of Otho the Great, 
I were wanting. It is a sign of the prevailing feeling 
of misery and hopelessness, that when the first 
/ thousand years of our era were drawing to a close, 
) the people in every country in Europe looked with 
) certainty for the destruction of the world. Some 
I squandered their wealth in riotous living, others 
\ bestowed it for the good of their souls on churches 
■ and convents : weeping masses lay day and night 
around the altars ; some looked forward with dread, 
but most with secret hope, towards the burning of 
the earth and the falling in of heaven. Their actual 
condition was so miserable, that the idea of destruc 
tion was relief, spite of all its terrors. 

In this hopeless and depressed condition of the 
world, men’s thoughts turned, as is always the case 
in any great tribulation, towards Heaven, for God’s 
salvation and refreshment. All other interests had 
become worthless ; no possession and no existence 
was safe from rude force ; nowhere was to be found, 
after the splendid line of the Othos had passed away, 
a character or a great idea capable of exciting the 



Digitized by Google 




DEPRESSED STATE OF THE WORLD. 11 

imagination of a noble heart. There was nothing 
for the deadened race of mankind to hold to, save 
religion : and, at last, a state of feeling arose, full 
of the bitterest hatred against this earthly world ; 
and, burning with desire for the joys of Heaven, 
men fled from their families, occupations, and 
neighbours ; they tore themselves from all worldly 
ties : the son abandoned his parents, the husband 
his wife; the vassal left his feudal lord, and the 
prince his people. Monasteries were more filled 
than ever; new orders were instituted, the rules 
and practices rose to the highest degree of asceti* 
cism and penance. Monastic seclusion soon ceased 
to satisfy the growing desire to fly from the world 
and those who dwelt in it. Men sought the depths 
of the forest, the loneliness of mountains, or the 
untrodden wilderness, in order to mortify the flesh 
in solitude, and turn their thoughts, with un- 
disturbed zeal, on immediate intercourse with God, 
his angels, or his saints. They awoke, with con- 
vulsive terror, to the consciousness of their sins; 
they spent night after night in breathless pleadings 
for enlightenment and grace ; their fancy drove them 
in perpetual change, through images of infernal 
torture, and divine beatitude, till at length a moment 
of exhaustion and ecstasy succeeded, — refreshing and 
dazzling visions gave to the struggling heart a cer- 



Digitized by Google 




12 



HISTORY OF THE CRUSADES. 



tainty of union with God. In order to understand 
the character and deeds of that time, we must not 
for a moment lose sight of this mystical excitement, 
full of contempt of this world ; we must not forget 
that it was the only thing that touched the imagina- 
tion of that century, and that it was then a com- 
mon and everyday occurrence. More particularly in 
France, Spain, and Italy, the three countries which 
spoke the Roman tongue, this feeling was spread 
through all classes, and pervaded every order. Every 
happiness, every earthly enjoyment, was deemed 
dangerous. The body was looked upon as the dead 
weight which hindered the soul in its flight to hea- 
ven. Men turned with contempt from science and 
art. “ Upon such toys,” wrote the celebrated En- 
■■ glish Bishop Lanfranc, “ upon such toys we have 
j wasted our youth, but now we have cast them from 
! us.” The duties of a patriot, a subject, and a citizen, 
1 lost their value and power, under the ruling passion 
of that age, because they belonged to this mortal 
and corrupted world. Men no longer had any per- 
ception oftthat plain human feeling which sees God’s 
service in useful labour, and which feels the support 
of God’s presence in the monotony of everyday life. 
Such feeling was not enough for those overheated 
imaginations. They wanted to see the Divinity with 
mortal eyes, and to grasp the mystery with the bodily 



Digitized by Google 




PILGRIMAGES. 



13 



senses. Owing to the condition of public feeling, 
pilgrims and palmers became more numerous than 
ever before. There was, indeed, hardly any other 
intercourse between nations ; commerce hardly ex- 
isted, and no one thought of travelling for pleasure,/ 
as the smallest journey was attended with difficulties/ 
and dangers of every kind./ But many thousand^ 
of people went every year to the famous Abbeys of 
Clugny or Monte Casino, to the graves of the Apo- 
stles, to Borne, or to St. Jago di Compostella ; and, 
above all, crossed the sea to Palestine, to the land 
which Christ trod, and to the rock which is said to 
have been his grave. High and low took part with 
equal zeal. Within the space of thirty years, we find 
in Jerusalem two Counts of Flanders, one Count of 
Toulouse, one Duke of Normandy, and a number 
of German bishops, all filled with the same belief, 
that they stood on the threshold of Heaven, and all 
equally horror-struck that unbelieving Mussulmans 
were desecrating this holy place. When religious 
enthusiasm had impregnated mankind to such a de- 
gree, anger against the unbeliever arose of its own 
accord, and war against the false religion appeared 
to be the most holy and praiseworthy action. Wher- 
ever the war against Islam had lasted, it now gained 
fresh vigour and life from the quantities of volun- 
teers who flocked to victory, or death and Paradise, 



Digitized by Google 




14 



HISTORY OF THE CRUSADES. 



wider the banner of the Cross. Burgundians, Pro- 
ven$als, and Normans, helped the Spanish king to 
besiege the Caliph of Cordova, and to take Toledo. 
The Normans from Naples settled themselves in 
Sicily; and the fleets of Pisa and Genoa, decked 
with Papal flags, stormed the harbour of Palermo. 
Thus the Christian faith became in time the badge 
of a great system of national defensive and offensive 
alliance, which was animated by a sacred fire, and 
eager for deadly warfare against all unbelievers. If 
from the seventh to the ninth centuries, Islam had 
harassed the Christian nations by its vigorous ag- 
gressions, now, in the eleventh, came the day of 
reckoning, in a no less violent attack, on the part of 
Christendom, upon the whole Mahomedan world. 

Every great war must have a commander-in-chief 
to direct, and a ruler to command it. In the days 
of Charlemagne and Otho, Christendom possessed 
such a leader in the person of the Emperor. Now 
that was at an end, for the Imperial power was barely 
tolerated by the German and Italian nobility, and 
not recognized at all by the rest of Europe. To fill 
up this void, and give to the Latin world a new head, 
the same ecclesiastical spirit which had roused the 
war against Islam was now at work. Temporal sove- 
i reigns did not appear capable of leading mankind 
1 to salvation : they were worldly and sinful, like the 



Digitized by Google 




THE CHURCH AND THE POPE. 15 

rest. There existed on earth but one institution in/ 
which the Spirit of God constantly and actively ma-\ 
nifested itself ; this was the Church with its servants, • 
and its head, the Pope. They, and they alone, were 
called upon to govern the earth/ Now that the Empe- — 
ror had become incapable of representing the Chris- 
tian world, the Pope was quite ready to grasp the 
temporal as well as the spiritual power, and in the 
character of chief military commander of Europe to 
begin the crusade against Mahomedan Asia. Pope 
Gregory VII. was the first Pope who assumed this 
position in the face of Europe in its full force and 
extent.^/ 

Gregory was without doubt one of the most re- 
markable men of any age. Never, as far as we 
know, has religious enthusiasm been united with/ 
such far-sighted policy, or spiritual fanaticism with 
such pronounced talents for government. Hilde- 
brand, as he was originally named, was the son 
of a poor carpenter in a small Tuscan town. He 
received his first instruction in Rome, but soon 
fled in disgust from the lawless profligacy of that 
town to the retirement of the convent. There, like 
hundreds of others, he had prayed, watched, and 
scourged himself, and had experienced ecstatic de- 
lights, tearfulpenitence and humiliation, had shared 
the belief tha]t\only by 'thus, renouncing the world 



Digitized by Google 




16 



HISTORY OF THE CRUSADES. 



could Heaven be gained. An unexpected occurrence 
however soon gave a different impulse to his life. The 
Church was in the same state of disorganization as the 
temporal power ; the Emperor Henry III., bent upon 
enforcing order and discipline, did not hesitate to 
intervene even in Rome, deposed three contending 
Popes, and appointed their successor himself. The 
young monk, who was personally attached to one of 
the three dethroned Popes, accompanied him into 
exile in Germany, equally indignant at the corrup- 
tion of the Church on the one hand, and the at- 
tempts to cure it by the profane intervention of Im- 
perial power on the other. He had brought the idea 
with him from his monastery that all the powers of 
this world were as nothing compared to the glory of 
the Church. That a layman, even though the Emperor 
himself, and with the most praiseworthy intentions, 
should dare to dictate to the Church, filled Hilde- 
brand with holy indignation ; and this it was that 
suddenly aroused his eminently practical nature 
from the 

life. V ot A ee from the world, but to redeem it 
by absolute submission to the purified Church, be- 
came henceforth the task of his existencq. In the 
year 1048 news came to Germany of the death of 
the new Pope, and the Emperor instantly named 
the Bishop of Toul as the future head of the Church. 



unproductive contemplation of monastic 



Digitized by Google 




POPE OBEGORT VII. 



17 



He — Leo IX. — whose honest and unassuming piety 
was at first alarmed by the difficulties of his new 
calling, turned to Hildebrand for help, and requested 
him to come to Rome as his adviser. The answer 
was a resolute refusal. He could, serve no Pope 
who held his office by virtue of an Imperial decree. 
His personal character and appearance were even 
then so commanding that the Pope trembled before 
the simple monk. Leo promised to go a barefooted 
pilgrim to Rome, and there to submit to the cano- 
nical election. Hildebrand, mollified by this, be- 
came henceforth the soul of the Papal government, 
till he ascended the throne of the Vatican himself in 
the year 1073. 

Scarcely had he grasped the reins of ecclesiasti- i 
cal government when this carpenter’s son developed 
such a universal genius for ruling as has only since j 
been displayed in the two greatest self-made men / 
of modern history — Cromwell and Bonaparte. He ' 
had the knowledge, the ability, and the will, to do 
everything. He became a reformer'of the Church, 
a statesman, and a conqueror, a demagogue and a 
diplomatist, all with equal vigour and masterly skill. 
While his conviction rested unshaken on a steadfast 
belief in God’s directing power, be knew that God 
compassed his ends by means of human agencies, 
and was unceasing in his endeavours to employ 

c 



Digitized by Google 




18 HISTORY OF THE CRUSADES. 

every earthly means for the consolidation of his spi- 
ritual power. In the height of his enthusiasm he 
went further than any man had dared to dream of 
doing before him. “ All princes,” he wrote, “ shall 
kiss the Pope's foot ; he alone shall wear the impe- 
rial insignia ; he alone is answerable towards God 
for the sins of kings.” “ When Christ,” he again 
wrote, “ said to Peter, * Feed my sheep,’ he did not 
except kings ; what king has ever performed mira- 
cles like so many popes and lowly monks ?” He ac- 
cordingly demanded, on no other title than this reli- 
gious one, the oath of allegiance from the King of 
England, declared Spain to be the property of St. 
Peter, summoned the Kings of Poland and the Rus- 
sian Czars to appear before his tribunal, declared the 
Emperor Henry IV. of Germany deposed, and made 
his antagonist Rudolph promise homage and alle- 
giance to him. For these schemes, which embraced 
the whole of Europe, he strengthened himself by re- 
tirement and daily sincere and anxious prayer. “ I 
behold myself,” he wrote to the Abbot of Clugny, 
“ so sunk in sin that prayer from my lips is of no 
j avail. My life, indeed, is blameless, but my actions 
! are of this world ; therefore do I entreat you be- 
j seech the devout to pray for me.” A longing after 
the contemplative quiet of the cloister dwelt in the 
mind of the proud prince of the Church amid the 



Digitized by Google 




POPE GREGORY VII. 



19 



straggle for supremacy in the world : it was the root 
of his nature and the source of his power. Forti- 
fied anew by devotion, he again rushed into the 
thick of the fight, in order to enforce by worldly 
weapons that obedience which he had already de- 
manded from kings as his due. He gained adhe- 
rents in aU countries, and bound them by solemn 
oaths and military organization to follow his gui- 
dance. In Germany Duke Guelf, of Bavaria, con- 
sented to hold his dominions on feudal tenure from 
the Pope. In France a knightly army was assembled 
for his service by the great Counts of Burgundy 
and Toulouse and the renowned Abbot of Clugny. 
In Italy he relied cm his alliances with the Norman 
Duke of Naples and the Countess Matilda of Tus- 
cany, while zealous fanatics excited the populace of 
the Lombard cities in his behalf. In a word, Gre- 



gory did not for an instant rest satisfied with esta- 
blishing a universal supremacy over crowned heads, 
but without hesitation took their subjects into his 
own allegiance ; he was on the high-road to the de- 
struction of all the existing governments of the 
world, in order that he might embody them in his 
great spiritual dominion. This was but the com- 
mencement of strife, attack, and turmoil ; and, as 



was to be expected, opposition to such an unheard- 
of system arose in every quarter ; but the plan of 



c 2 



Digitized by Google 




20 HISTORY OF THE CRUSADES. 

the edifice was drawn by a mighty hand, and the 
temporal supremacy of the Popes was announced 
as a new spiritual and' warlike impersonation of 
Christianity. 

This power at once turned its attention to foreign 
affairs. Gregory had counted, not only upon the 
obedience of the Latin nations, but also upon bring- 
ing back the Greek schism to its allegiance; and 
then, upon leading both combined to a decisive at- 
tack upon Islam. A motive was furnished by a 
warlike movement which broke out in the bosom of 
Islam itself. At two points its dominions had been 
invaded by unruly hordes of half-savage tribes, who, 
like the Arabs in Mahomet’s time, had no wish but 
perpetual warfare, no culture beyond fierce religious 
zeal. Among the Kabyles of the desert in Northern 
Africa arose the empire of the M orab ites, who, after 
subjugating in rapid campaigns, the whole district 
between the Syrtes, the Sahara, and the ocean, burst 
üpon the Christians of Spain in a furious invasion. 
Simultaneously, the wild tribes of the Seliukes . from 
the steppes of Bulgaria, poured in upon Asia, laid 
waste the possessions of the Caliph of Bagdad, and 
advanced on Asia Minor, and the dominions of the 
Greek Emperor, whom they, in a few campaigns, 
drove across the Hellespont, in disgraceful flight. 
It seemed as if the times of Muza had returned. 



Digitized by Google 




POPE GREGORY VII. 



21 



and Home was again to be threatened both from the . 
East and from the West. But Gregory VII. felt 
himself 'more secure than Charles Martel, and re- 
solved to anticipate the attack. In France he plead- 'f 
ed, with great effect, to obtain assistance for the 
Spaniards; in Rome he got together, in 1074, an 
army of 50,000 men, faithful followers of St. Peter, 
whom he intended to lead in person to the relief of 
Constantinople, and the destruction of the Turks. 

He called upon the German Emperor, Henry IV., 
with whom he was still at peace, to help him in this 
undertaking, and at the same time expressed his 
intention of first bringing back the Greeks and Ar- 
menians to the unity of the Church of Rome ; after 
which he should lead the triumphant army to the 
Holy Sepulchre at Jerusalem. It affords a fresh 
evidence, that with all his enthusiasm, the turn of 
his mind was eminently practical and calculating, 
that he should look upon the Holy Sepulchre only 
as the final ornament of victory, whilst the task he 
saw before him was the gradual extension of con- 
quest, and the establishment of a solid foundation in 
Constantinople, whence the expulsion of the Turks 
from Asia Minor and Armenia, and his own tri- 
umphal entry into Jerusalem, would follow as a 
matter of course. It was the first, and for many sub- 
sequent centuries the last time that so vast and so 



Digitized by Google 




22 



HISTORY OF THE CRÜ8ADES. 



methodical a plan of attack upon Asia had been 
conceived in Christian Europe. 

Gregory VII. was not, however, destined to reap 
these laurels. Like Napoleon, seven hundred years 
later, he was to begin his career with dreams of ori- 
ental supremacy, and then, through life, to devote all 
his energies to the subjugation of the West. Within 
a few months, the dispute with Henry IV. broke out, 
in which the Pope was victor, and saw the successor 
of Charlemagne vanquished and trembling at his 
feet, while all Europe was convulsed with civil war. 
Gregory did not live to see the end ; he was forced 
to fly from Rome before the renewed power of the 
Emperor, and died during his flight, under the pro- 
j t tection of the Normans of Naples. /Meanwhile, the 
Turks in Asia made alarming progress ; they took 
Mecca and Jerusalem. The pilgrims complained bit- 
terly of the excesses committed by the brutal sol- 
2- diery at the tomb of the Saviour. The Greek Empe- 
ror Alexius sent the most pressing entreaties for help 
to the Pope, saying, that if he did not wish to see 
Christianity perish in the East, he must render him 
assistance. Urban II., an acute and subtle man, now 
sat on Gregory’s throne ; not to be compared with 
his predecessor in energy and large mould of mind, 
but penetrated with the same religious views, filled 
with ambition, and, although more pliant, his su- 



I i i 



Digitized by Google 




POPE URBAN II. 



23 



perior adroitness in the management of details ren- 
dered him, on the whole, more successful than Gre- 
gory. He thought it a religious triumph to stir up 
the son of Henry IV. to rebellion against his far 
ther, and thus to deal a terrible blow to the Imperial 
power ; he had prevailed upon himself to forego for 
a time his pretensions to political supremacy in Eng- 
land and Spain, and thus to obtain the ecclesiastical 
obedience of those monarchs. By these means his 
influence, in the year 1094, was more generally re- 
cognized and honoured than Gregory’s had ever 
been. When, in the summer of that year, a Greek 
embassy was sent to him, he decided on using his 3 
mighty influence against the East, and calling upon 
the Latin nations to make war upon Islam. 

We see here a great difference between the two 
men. Urban did not think of taking the command 
and leading the attack in person. But that was 
not the chief distinction : in like manner as he had 
given up that immediate temporal supremacy, which 
Gregory had insisted upon in all lands, he left out 
■of his warlike plans those great ideas of military 
method and politico-ecclesiastical conquest upon 
which Gregory had impressed the stamp of his cha- 
racter. Urban viewed the task by the light of that 
mystical piety, which, disregarding all earthly consi- 
derations, and setting aside all earthly ambition, 



Digitized by Google 




24 



HISTORY OF THE CRUSADES. 



\ 



\ 



strives to follow the straight path to the heavenly Pa- 
radise. After making a preliminary announcement of 
his intentions in a Council at Piacenza, he crossed 
the Alps late in the autumn to the south of Prance, 
and held a great Council at Clermont on French af- 
fairs ; at the end of this, he called upon the people 
of Europe to aid him, not in delivering Eastern 
Christendom, but the Holy Sepulchre. According 
to worldly ideas, such an attempt on Jerusalem was 
quite illusory without a firm footing in Constan- 
tinople or Egypt ; it could not have- the slightest 
prospect of lasting success unless a fatal blow could 
thence be aimed at the whole edifice of the Turkish 
Sultanate. But Urban’s hearers were not disposed 
to listen to the wisdom of this world. In drunken 
religious zeal, they revelled in the idea of rescuing 
the tomb of the Saviour from the defilement of the 
heathen; they looked upon Christ enthroned in 
heaven as their leader, and hoped to see the gates 
of the heavenly Jerusalem thrown open at the same 
time as those of the earthly. Fifty thousand war- 
riors had volunteered to carry out Gregory’s reason- 
able plan ; at Urban’s enthusiastic appeal more than 
three hundred thousand men fastened the Cross 
upon their shoulders. In a few months the cry, 
“ God wills it,” had flown from Clermont Over half 
Europe, — throughout France and England, Italy 



Digitized by Google 




TBE FIRST CRUSADE. 



25 



and Scandinavia*; with one passionate outburst the 
people sought to free themselves from the pressure 
of earthly wretchedness. They said, God had never 
permitted a time like the present, filled with blas- 
phemy, disunion, and immorality ; civil war was ra- 
ging, truth and honesty had ceased to exist, famine 
and earthquakes had threatened destruction. In 
the depth of this misery the Lord had sent salva- 
tion. The time was fulfilled, of which it is written, 
“ Whoso will go with me, let him take up his cross 
and follow me.” Since the creation of the world, 
and the mystery of the crucifixion, writes a chro- 
nicler, nothing had been seen like this Crusade, 
which was a work of God, not of man. On the 
4th of April, 1095, says another, fire fell from 
heaven like small stars, far and wide over all lands, 
since which time France and Italy had gone armed 
to the Holy Sepulchre without any temporal com- 
mander, led only by the spirit of the Lord. In a 
moment all evil had been banished from the Chris- 
tian world, since Christ had once more vouchsafed 
his saving presence as their leader and Lord of 
Hosts. Earthquakes had ceased ; a year of unexam- 
pled plenty followed the scarcity ; peace and union 
returned among believers. Filled with these hopes, 
the western nations entered upon the First Crusade. < 



Digitized by Google 




26 



I 



* 



CHAPTER II. 

When Pope Urban II. announced the Crusade at 
Clermont in November, 1095, he secured to himself 
the leading position in the enterprise, by naming 
the Bishop Adhemar of Puy as his Legate and 
representative with the army, and by officially an- 
nouncing to the Greek Emperor Alexius the forth- 
coming help against the Turks. Preparations on a 
large scale were making in most kingdoms of Eu- 
rope. In Lorraine, Duke Godfrey of Bouillon, a 
religious and brave but not very wise man, was 
collecting a numerous army. In France, the brother 
of King Philip, Count Hugo of Vermandois, and the 
warlike Count Robert of Flanders, were enlisting 
men j the unruly and rash Duke Robert of Nor- 
mandy mortgaged his whole territory in order to raise 
a splendid troop of French and English knights-; 
besides these. Count Stephen of Blois, possessor 
of as many castles as there are days in the year, a 



Digitized by Google 




THE FIRST CRUSADERS. 



27 



stately, proud, but morally weak man ; and lastly, 
as leader of all the Provencals and Gascons, Count 
Raymond of Toulouse, more versed in war and 
richer, but also more obstinate and violent than all 
the rest. Italy, Pisa, and Genoa equipped their 
fleets, all the Norman knights of Naples ranged 
themselves under Bohemund of Tarentum, a lean, 
pale, ambitious prince, who was for ever silently 
forming comprehensive but constantly changing 
schemes, always at work and yet always patient, 
until the moment arrived for sure and victorious ac- 
tion ; he was perhaps the only man in that army 
who had nothing of the devout pilgrim spirit, and 
only thought how he might on the way entrap his 
old enemy the Greek Emperor, and at all events 
found a splendid kingdom for himself in the East. 
Everywhere the greatest activity prevailed : princes 
assembled their vassals, knights their retainers ; no 
compulsion was used towards these dependents, but 
very few of them stayed behind. The most perfect 
personal freedom prevailed during the whole Cru- 
sade in this unprecedented army. Each knight 
served at his own pleasure, first under one prince 
and then under another, as higher pay or greater 
fame attracted them. Nothing but the common 
impulse towards Jerusalem kept the whole mass 
at all together. Christ was looked upon as com- 



Digitized by Google 




28 



HISTORY OF THE CRUSADES. 



mander-in-chief, and therefore of course, according 
to the then existing views, his representative would 
have been the Papal Legate : but as he was with- 
out any military capacity, a war committee of the 
most renowned leaders and bannerets, ten, twenty, 
thirty, just as it happened, took the command; 
sometimes named a head of the whole army, whose 
power lasted as long as his commission, or as he 
could enforce obedience. We shall see that sin- 
gular good luck was needed, in order to secure the 
most moderate success in the midst of such anarchy. 

Nearly a year had passed since the Council of 
Clermont in 1095, before these knightly troops were 
armed and collected. Many prepared never to re- 

I turn ; nearly all looked forward with beating hearts 
to an unknown and distant land, brilliant with all 
the glory of miracles and the splendour of fairy 
tales. Such a state of mind,* we, in our fast and 
far-travelling days, can hardly understand ; it was 
much as if a large army were now to embark in 
balloons, in order to conquer an island between the 
earth and the moon, which was also expected to 
contain the heavenly Paradise. The lower classes 
were frantic with excitement. The peasants and 
artisans, who took no part in war, and were not 
i admitted into the regular armies, were those upon 
whom the sufferings of that period fell hardest, and 



Digitized by Google 




PETER THE HERMIT. 



29 



they pressed with the wildest zeal to join in the 
Holy Crusade. In various countries, the Crusade 
was preached to them through peculiar organs. On 
the Rhine, a certain turbulent and ill-famed Count 
Emicho got together a troop several thousand 
strong, with whom he began the war for Christ’s 
sake, by a bloody massacre and plundering of the 
^ Jews. In the north of France a native of Amiens, 
Peter the Hermit, travelled about dressed as a pil- 
grim, with sunburnt face and beard reaching to his 
middle, riding upon an ass, and told the gaping 
people how he had been in Jerusalem, where the 
heathen desecrated the Holy Sepulchre with all 
manner of filthiness, aqd how there one night 
Christ appeared to him in all his glory, and gently 
addressed him, saying, “ Sweet friend, tell my be- 
loved Christian Church, that the time is come in 
which to help me ; I have longed for her, I shall 
rejoice in her, and Paradise is open to her.” His 
hearers beat their breasts, forsook their hovels, and 
followed the hermit with their wives and children ; 
their number grew to sixty thousand. In this 
case delay was impossible, and the wild fantastic 
train poured though Germany in the summer of 
1096, down the Danube and through Hungary in- 
to the Greek kingdom, tn Constantinople the Em- 
peror Alexius welcomed with alarm the tumultuous 



Digitized by Google 




30 BISTORT OF THE CRUSADES. 

guests, who proclaimed their leader as the true 
apostle of Christ, and the author of the whole Cru- 
sade ; and who resorted to plunder to supply their 
wants, not even sparing the churches. He did aH 
he could to hasten their transit to the shores of 
Asia, where, regardless of his warnings, they rushed 
with blind zeal into the midst of the enemy’s land; 
and in the course of a few weeks were nearly all cut 
to pieces by the Emir of Nicaea. With the small 
number of survivors, Peter returned to Constanti- 
nople and awaited the coming of the main body. 
A heterogeneous mass of camp-followers had joined 
the army ; and as the princes and knights took no 
notice of them, they formed into a separate body, 
numbering about ten thousand beggars and ma- 
rauders, who followed unarmed in the wake of the 
army, and though they often increased the difficulty 
of maintaining it, they sometimes did good service 
as spies, servants, and baggage porters. Peter the 
Hermit became their spiritual leader and saint ; 
Ithey moreover elected a military commander, whom 
rahey called Tafur, the Turkish for King of the Beg- 
gars ; and laid down certain rules : for instance, no 
one was to be tolerated among them who possessed 
any money ; he must either quit their honourable 
community, or hand over his property to the King 
of the Beggars for the common fund. The princes 



Digitized by Google 




ABEIVAL AT CONSTANTINOPLE. 



81 



and knights did not venture into their camp except 
in large bodies and well armed; the Turks said of 
the Tafurs, that they liked nothing so well to eat 
as the roasted flesh of their enemies. 

In the autumn of 1096 the first princely troops 
arrived at Constantinople ; others followed in rapid 
succession, till the spring of 1097, some by water, 
some by land. The northern French mostly came 
through Italy and Epirus, the Provencals through 
Dalmatia, and the Lorrainers through Hungary. 
The Emperor Alexius was not without misgivings 
when he saw them arrive. He knew the hatred of 
the Latins towards the Greeks, particularly Bohe- 
mund’s strong hostility towards himself. But their 
scattered order somewhat reassured him, and indeed 
inspired him with an idea of making use of them 
to forward the interests of his own empire. He 
informed them that Syria and Asia Minor were 
provinces of the Roman Empire, and only alienated 
from it for the time by the superior might of the 
Turks, and that he therefore expected that when 
they were driven out the pilgrims would acknow- 
ledge him as their legitimate Sovereign, and swear 
fealty to him: under these conditions he would 
furnish them with provisions, and assist them with 
troops. Count Hugo, who landed first, made no 
difficulty ; but Duke Godfrey replied, that “ his only 



Digitized by Google 




82 



HISTORY OF THE CRUSADES. 



master was the Lord Jesus Christ, and him only 
would he serve.” Hereupon he was attacked and 
beaten by the Emperor’s troops, and obliged to take 
the oath, to save the rest of his army. Bohemund, 
the one whom the Emperor most dreaded, submitted 
at once ; he saw that most of the pilgrims had no 
mind to fight near Constantinople, which would have 
delayed their departure for the Holy Sepulchre j so 
he resolved, when once arrived in Asia, to disregard 
his oaths, and to act according to circumstances. 
His example determined the rest, except the stub- 
born and hot-headed Raymond of Toulouse, who 
would sooner die than acknowledge any other lord 
than Christ. He conceived a bitter and lasting ha- 
tred against Bohemund on this occasion ; and when 
Alexius, who by no means trusted the crafty Nor- 
man, in spite of his oaths, perceived this, he tried to 
secure the friendship of the Count, by overwhelm- 
ing him with presents, and marks of honour, and 
letting him off the oaths. One of the chief officers 
of his Court, Tatikios, accompanied the army as the 
Emperor’s representative in the States that were to 
be conquered. 

After many months had passed in these trans- 
actions, the troops at last landed on the long-de- 
sired Asiatic soil ; and the war against the enemies 
of Christ began with an attack on the Emir of 



Digitized by Google 




QUABBELS AMONG THE TUBES. 33 

Nicsea. It was fortunate for the pilgrims that the 
power of the Seljukes was greatly broken apd de-, 
cayed. Several pretenders were quarrelling for the 
Sultan’s throne, and the emirs, or governors . of 
provinces, had made themselves quite independent, 
and were waging war with each other. Several Ar- 
menian princes belonging to the subject Chris- 
tian population had risen in arms in Taurus, and 
on the banks of the Euphrates and in Mesopo- 
tamia. On the south the Caliph of Egypt had 
just commenced a general war against the Sel- 
jukes, and was advancing towards Palestine by 
the isthmus of Suez. Thus the Crusaders found 
every barrier levelled before them. When they 
arrived in Asia, .{he Emir of Nicsea was fighting 
against the Prince of Melitene, the Emir of Aleppo 
besieging his neighbours of Damascus and Emessa, 
and the Emirs of Sebaste and Mosul were engaged 
in war with the Armenian leaders ; all feeling of 
unity and even of religious zeal among the Turks 
was entirely crushed by these manifold feuds. On 
the other hand, the Armenians were awaiting the 
arrival of the Crusaders with • impatience. Some 
Frankish knights, sent on before the army, were 
cordially welcomed by them, and even the Caliph 
of Egypt, although seeking to seize Jerusalem for 
himself, received a deputation from the pilgrims, 

D 



Digitized by Google 




34 HI8T0BT OF THE CRUSADES. 

who offered him their alliance against the common 
enemy, the Seljukes. A year before, an alliance 
with one Mahomedan against another would have 
been regarded with horror by the pilgrims ; but in 
the face of reality, even fierce zealots could take a 
practical course. 

Nicaea, abandoned to its fate by the other emirs, 
fell before the Crusaders in July, 1097. The con- 
querors then marched, amid fatigue and hardship, 
diagonally across Asia Minor. They had confided 
to Count Stephen of Blois the direction of their opera- 
tions, or rather, the presidency of the council of war, 
and he chose, on arriving at the foot of the Taurus, 
to follow the road along the north of the range as far 
as the Euphrates, and then, after a considerable cir- 
cuit, to cross the mountains and advance into Syria ; 
the object of this deviation was probably to render as 
much help to the Armenians as possible. Numerous 
small garrisons were left behind in the hill forts ; 
Cilicia was called to arms by a division under Bobe- 
mund’s adventurous cousin Tancred, and Count 
Baldwin, Godfrey’s brother ; and shortly afterwards 
Baldwin was sent with a fresh detachment across 
the Euphrates into Mesopotamia, where he showed 
so much vigour and discretion in his dealings with 
the Armenians, that in the course of a few months 
they proclaimed him their sovereign in their capi- 



Digitized by Google 




THE EMIR BAGI SI/AN. 



35 



tal city of Edessa. The main army meanwhile 
inarched down the course of the Orontes upon the 
most important and best fortified of all the Syrian 
towns, Antioch, where years of fighting, triumphs, 
and disasters of all kinds awaited the Christian forces. 

In Antioch ruled an aged emir, related to the Sul- 
tan’s family, by name Bagi Sijan, who had always 
distinguished himself by rude energy and valour : he 
was now determined to resist to the last gasp. The 
Christians poured over the rich and fruitful country. 
More than a hundred of their knights established 
themselves in the castles and fortresses of the sur- 
rounding land, unmindful of the wants of the army, 
or the progress of the siege; The great princes 
were meanwhile encamped before the several gates 
of the town, without power to blockade the en- 
trance, much less to make an assault upon its 
strong and lofty walls. Bagi Sijan’s horse scoured 
the adjoining country in incessant sorties, destroyed 
scattered bodies of Christian troops, and cut off the 
supplies of the principal camp. Day after day 
passed ; winter came with endless floods of rain ; 
want, hunger and sickness began to thin the Chris- 
tian forces to a fearful degree. Of the 300,000 
fighting men, only half were at their posts; the 
horses were all dead, save a few hundreds; the 
commander-in-chief, Stephen of Blois, fell sick, 

D 2 



Digitized by Google 




<36 HISTORT OF THE CRUSADES. 

and had himself carried away from the camp to the 
nearest seaport town of Alexandretta. The others 
still persevered. By degrees they erected small 
entrenchments and forts before the gates, stopped 
-the passage of the bridge over which the Turks had 
been able to cross the river, and repulsed some of 
the emirs who tried to succour the garrison. In 
the spring, matters mended; the sickness ceased, 
many scattered parties returned, and a Genoese fleet 
brought abundant supplies, and gave the command 
of the Mediterranean. On the other hand, internal 
discord began to show itself. Bohemund had cast 
his eye on Antioch, and therefore persecuted the 
Greek Tatikios with all kinds of threats and in- 
sults, till he drove him from the camp; he then 
-declared, that if the princes would promise him the 
hereditary possession of this important town, he 
would deliver it into their hands. He had ample 
ground for this assurance. It is true that there 
were fiercer warriors among the pilgrims than the 
Prince of Tarentium. Count Robert of Flanders 
was held to be the best lance in the army, and no 
sword was more dreaded than that of Duke God- 
frey, whose powerful arm had, in one of the recent 
skirmishes, cut a fully armed Turk in two, so that 
the head and breast fell to the earth, while the lower 
ialf of the body was borne back by the horse into 



Digitized by Google 




SIEGE OE ANTIOCH. 



37; 



the town. Nevertheless, the Turks unquestionably 
looked upon Prince Bohemund as the head of the 
army, and the centre, of all its .movements; and 
accordingly Firuz az Zerrad, a grandee of Antioch, 
moved by personal hatred to Bagi Sijan, made pro- 
positions to him to the effect that he would receive 
baptism, and betray the town into his hands. When 
Bohemund made known this offer to the council, 
of war, the princes hesitated : Count Raymond of 
Toulouse, bitterly envious of his more cunning 
comrade, strongly protested against it, on the score 
of the oath by which they had all acknowledged 
the claim of the Emperor Alexius, and thereupon 
the others declared it impossible to agree to Bohe- 
mund’s request. He shrugged his shoulders and 
withdrew from the siege to bide bis time. Before 
long a general lassitiide seemed to prevail in the 
Christian camps, and threatening news arrived from 
the East. The Sultan ’having mastered his rival,-, 
had commanded the Emir Kerbuga of Mosul, to - 
gather together all the force of his dominions, and. 
to sweep the ribald crew of unbelievers frpm the 
face of the earth. He collected above half a million 
of men, who, fortunately for the Crusaders, spent 
several weeks in fruitless skirmishes against Bald- 
win before Edessa. At last their leader saw where 
the decisive blow ought to be struck, and led his 



Digitized by Google 




3S BISTORT OF TI1E CRUSADES. 

enormous army towards Antioch. The anxiety 
then became great among the Christians, for the 
worst might be anticipated, if they were shut in 
between the yet unconquered town and the over- 
whelming force which was advancing to its relief. 
In this strait the princes applied to Bohemund, but 
he, cool and unmoved, reiterated his former demand. 
Already Kerbuga’s light horse had reached the first 
outposts of the Prankish position, danger was im- 
minent, when Raymond retracted his opposition, 
and the town was promised to Bohemund. During 
the night he, accompanied by sixty knights, scaled 
one of the towers of the town wall guarded by 
Firuz ; and through the nearest gate, which he 
instantly opened to them, the army poured into 
the town, and overpowered the Turkish garrison, 
amid a frightful struggle and bloodshed. The old 
emir fled, but was killed in the mountains by a 
troop of Christian peasants ; his sou however suc- 
ceeded in throwing himself with a few followers 
into the citadel, where he repulsed Bohemund’s hasty 
attacks. 

This occurred on the 6th of June, 1098 ; on the 
9th, Kerbuga’s forces appeared in endless array ; so 
near had Bohemund’s absorbing ambition allowed 
destruction to approach. The Christians were still 
in great danger; after the assault, they had plun- 



Digitized by Google 




SUFFERINGS OF THE CHRISTIANS. 39 

dered, revelled, and wasted the small stores they 
bad found, and a blockade of a few days must 
inevitably produce a famine. The enemy, too, with- 
in the walls, entrenched in the citadel, which stood 
on the south side of the town and commanded 
it, had at onoe opened communication with Ker- 
buga. In that quarter of the city, the struggle was 
carried on day and night, almost without ceasing. 
Elsewhere Kerbuga contented himself with a strict 
blockade, and used his numerical superiority to 
keep throwing fresh troops into the citadel, whence 
their attacks constantly increased in violence. 
Weariness and despair now seized upon the Chris- 
tians ; their sufferings from hunger were frightful ; 
men were seen gnawing roots of trees, and shoes, 
and fighting for dead rats and cats. Some sank 
down in the heat of battle unwounded, but tired 
to death, heedless of the strife going on above their 
heads. Thousands gave up all hope and concealed 
themselves in the houses, which neither promises 
nor threats could induce them to leave. In this 
misery the council appointed Bohemund comman- 
der-in-chief with unlimited power. He saved them 
again this time, by ordering the town to be fired, 
so as to drive the soldiers into the streets. Up- 
wards of two thousand houses were reduced to 
ashes. This produced a complete revulsion of feel- 



Digitized by Google 




40 



BISTORT OF TBR CRUSADES. 



ing, which, from a state of deep depression, at once 
rose to fanatical enthusiasm. The strong religious 
feeling which for awhile had subsided beneath the 
influence of strange and foreign impressions, re- 
vived with renewed energy. Led by a vision, a 
Provencal discovered in a church the lance with 
which Christ was pierced on the cross; pilgrims 
-daily appeared before the council of princes, to an- 
nounce fresh apparitions of the Virgin and other 
saints, who exhorted the army to sally forth and 
■fight. Bohemund himself had no other project; 
help was not to be hoped for, and if they were not 
to starve, they must conquer. In the enemy’s camp 
dissension and insubordination prevailed ; conside- 
rable bodies of men, offended by Kerbuga, had dis- 
persed, and when, on the 28 th of July, the Franks 
sallied forth from the town, they succeeded after a 
short struggle in scattering the disconnected and 
unwieldy masses in all directions. This settled 
the whole war; a boundless dread of the Christian 
arms spread throughout the East ; if the pilgrims 
had then advanced, they might have taken posses- 
sion of Palestine without the least fear of opposition. 
' But a new difficulty now arose among the princes 
themselves. Raymond of Toulouse, who occupied a 
few towers in Antioch, reverted to his former refusal 
to deliver them up to Bohemund. The other princes 



Digitized by Google 




MARCH UPON JERUSALEM. 



41 



did not wish to offend either of these two mighty 
chiefs by a hostile , decision j and a bitter quarrel, 
which soon spread among the troops, and often led 
to bloody strife between the Provencals and the 
Normans, paralyzed all their movements. At last, 
in January 1099, when the dispute between Bohe- 
mund mid Tancred was repeated, on occasion of the 
taking of the neighbouring town Maara, the pil- 
grims would endure it no longer. A wild outburst 
ensued; the pilgrims exclaimed that they would go 
on to Jerusalem.; the princes might quarrel about 
the things of this world, but Christ would guide 
his own people. The old fanatical spirit broke 
through all the political and military considerations 
by which it had been restrained for some time. Spite 
of all Raymond’s anger, he was forced to evacuate 
Antioch, and to follow in the wake of his excited 
fellow-countrymen. Then the army, in fact without 
head or leader, rushed wildly on towards its ori- 
ginal destination. Jerusalem had meanwhile fallen 
into the hands of the Egyptians, whose inclinations- 
were originally friendly ; but to the excited feelings 
of the Christian forces, the Egyptian infidels ap- 
peared as hateful and worthy of death as any 
Seljukes.- The town was surrounded and taken 
by storm on the 15th of July. The Christian fury 
against the infidels vented itself in a sanguinary 



L^|itiz( Google 




42 



HISTORY OF THE CRUSADES. 



struggle, and in some places the besiegers waded 
knee -deep in blood ; they then, with tears of rap- 
ture, and in a state of ecstatic piety, threw them- 
selves down to pray at the Holy Sepulchre, sur- 
rounded with heaps of the slain. 

After eight days passed in the intoxication of vic- 
tory, the princes met to take counsel as to the best 
means of keeping possession of their conquest. The 
most important question was evidently the choice of 
a ruler. The men of the highest eminence were by 
this time no longer with the army. The Count of 
Blois had fled homewards from Alexandretta on 
Kerbuga’s approach. Bohemund had remained in 
Antioch, and the Papal Legate had died soon after 
the victory over Kerbuga. The princes offered the 
crown of the new kingdom to Count Raymond; 
he, however, declared that he was unworthy to wear 
an earthly crown in so holy a place. Acoording 
to some accounts, they then turned to the Duke of 
Normandy, but received the same answer. It is 
certain that at last they applied to Duke Godfrey» 
who, although he, like Raymond, refused the title 
of King, accepted the command and power in the 
course of the following month. He succeeded in 
beating an Egyptian army near Ascalon, and thus 
secured the southern frontier of the kingdom. After 
that however it became impossible to restrain the 



Digitized by Google 



GODFREY AT JERUSALEM. 



43 



masses of pilgrims who, after the fulfilment of their 
vow, longed to return home. Godfrey and Tancred 
wore left at Jerusalem with about two hundred 
knights and two thousand effective men-at-arms. 
Count Raymond attempted, with still fewer fol- 
lowers, to found for himself a kingdom in Tripoli ; 
the numbers at the disposal of Rohemund in An- 
tioch, and of Baldwin in Edessa, were ntther more 
considerable. To the duration and fate of these 
small territories we will afterwards turn our atten- 
tion. I will now offer a few remarks upon the 
effect which these events produced both on those 
who took part in them and upon the European 
public, an effect which manifested itself in mani- 
fold, and in some cases very remarkable recitals 
and descriptions. 

First, the princes themselves, in letters to the 
Pope, to their relations and friends, gave their eager 
and curious countrymen accounts of the great events 
of the war. Nine such letters have been preserved, 
some of them instructive and full of detail. There 
were also several men with the army who kept an 
accurate and continuous record of the occurrences 
as they succeeded each other — a Norman knight, a 
Provencal priest, a chaplain of Count Baldwin of 
Bouillon ; and as they belonged to various countries 
and detachments the reports of each supply the 



Digitized by Google 




44 



HISTORY OF THE CRUSADES. 



omissions of the rest, and, thus form a tolerably” 
complete whole. What they had written they sent 
by the first opportunity to Europe, where these 
journals were expected with the greatest eagerness, 
and, on their arrival, received with avidity, and ex- 
tensively read and copied. There were neither news- 
papers nor telegraphs, and in order to spread the 
much-desfred news as fast as possible, the expedi- 
ent was hit upon that the priests should read the 
newly-arrived reports, on Sundays, from the pulpit, 
and forward them one to another, from place to 
place, for this purpose. These tales were, indeed, 
much shorter than the eagerly listening crowd 
wished ; they were also drier, from their very accu- 
racy, than minds thirsting for the marvellous had ex- 
pected. But the same taste had spread among the 
-Crusaders, as well, as in Europe, and was working 
with creative energy for the satisfaction of that kind 
of curiosity. There has never yet been a large army 
without its bards and poets, faithful men-at-arms, 
grenadiers, or hussars, who, while sitting round the 
watchfire at night, invent songs in praise of their 
General, of their sweetheart at home, or of their 
fallen comrades, which pass from mouth to mouth, 
gaining new verses at every repetition. The eleventh 
century was, indeed, as we have seen, an eminently 
unpoetical period, with its gloomy contempt for the 



Digitized by Google 




ENTHUSIASM CAUSED BY THE CRUSADES. 45 



world, and its fanatical enthusiasm during that time 
hardly one piece of real poetry was produced on Eu- 
ropean soil. The Crusade, however, in which that 
fanaticism vented itself, at- once produced an agita- 
tion favourable to -liberty and progress.; While it 
lasted, men’s minds, it is true, were still affected by 
fierce . religious enthusiasm, but, at the same time, 
their senses were impressed and captivafcd by the 
spectacle of an entirely new world. Thousands who 
-till then had never caught a glimpse of anything 
beyond the narrow circle of their own parish, now 
.beheld the splendid colouring of southern nature, 
the magnificence of the Greek imperial palaces, and 
.the strange customs of the Mahomedan world, whose 
culture, even in its decay, was so far superior to that 
of the Europeans, as to inspire them with respect. 
The excitement produced by such impressions, was 
augmented by the danger which was imminent at 
every moment. Death was ever before their eyes, and 
every faculty of body and mind had to be exerted 
to preserve life, and at last to reach the glorious 
goal. Their intoxicated eyes still beheld visions of 
the saints and armies of heaven, but they no longer 
appeared in the lonely cloistered cell, or. during 
nightly penance and flagellation. They were now 
-seen in the. thick of the battlefield, with shining 
weapons, and mounted on. white steeds, dashing into 




Digitized by Google 




46 



HISTORT OF THE CRUSADES. 



the midst of the Turkish army, and opening the 
way for the heroes of the army, the darlings of the 
troops, through the swords of the infidel masses. 
3- Thus, religious sentiment was still the basis of this 
movement ; but it took a new turn, from monkish 
devotion to chivalrous enthusiasm, from ascetic re> 
nunciation of the world to knightly valour. A new 
sort of heroism was thus called into existence, and 
with the heroes, heroic poetry arose. It showed 
itself during the v war among all ranks of the army. 
Each nation celebrated its warriors, and, after every 
great battle, sang the deeds of the victorious leader, 
the goodly blows dealt by the foremost knights, and 
the heavenly joys which rewarded the fallen heroes. 
In the fragments of these songs which still remain, 
we see the natural disposition to attribute the deed 
which decided the common victory, to the hero or 
prince of each particular race, and to claim for him 
a prominent and leading position. Thus, the French 
extolled Count Hugo, the brother of their king, as 
the Duke of Dukes and the greatest leader of the 
- army. The men of Lorraine tell us that even in 
Asia Minor, Duke Godfrey was the head of all the 
princes; that the attack on Antioch remained so long 
unsuccessful because of his illness ; and that he and 
his Mend Robert of Flanders, had, on that memo» 
rable night, been the first to set the ladders against 



Digitized by Google 




POETRY OF THE CRUSADES. 



47 



the walls of Antioch, and to enter the town. Even 
the mob of King Tafur had their songs in praise of 
the Hermit, who, in consequence of his vision in Je* 
rnsalem, had induced the Pope to preach the Cru- 
sade, and had then set all Europe in motion. 

Altogether, we see with amazement how far, per- 
haps even on the very day after the event, the ima- 
gination of these poets and their hearers led them 
astray from the truth. The Council of Clermont 
was held in November; here we find it transposed 
into May, when the fields are green, and thrushes 
and blackbirds are singing : for Nature must needs 
rejoice and adorn herself in honour of such an event. 
This poetical license is continued through the whole 
course of the Crusades : side by side with the real 
events runs a fantastic story, glittering and multi- 
form ; a legendary creation, growing out of actual 
present history. We see how religious and warlike 
enthusiasm excites the love of adventure, and stimu- 
lates the power of invention, but also how untrust- 
worthy are the observations and reports made under 
its influence. 

I cannot deny myself the pleasure of giving a few 
extracts from these poems, which have come down 
to us in a later but slightly altered form. They 
are written in French rhymes. The translation has 
been abridged, and only aspires to render the ge- 
neral tone and colour. 



Digitized by Google 




48 



HISTORY OF THE CRUSADES. 



THE TAKING OF THE CROSS AT CLERMONT. 

At Clermont in Auvergne were met great hosts from near 
and far, 

From France, and from all Christendom, unto the Lord his 
war; 

Was none so young but thitherward must fare, and none so 
old. 

Came prince and peer and paladin, came knights and ba- 
rons bold, 

Bach with his stout retainers, pennon and pennoncel ; 

The abbot brought his crosier, the cowled monk left his cell. 

The King rode with his following, armed at point from head 
to heel, — 

Stout Hugh the Lord of Maine, and Count Baymond of Stl 
Gilles, 

Stephen the stalwart Duke of Blois, and Bishop Adhemar, 

Than whom was none more valiant of all those men of war ; 

Came Godfrey of Bouloigne, with his two brothers fair, 

Baldwin the sturdy striker, Eustace the debonair ; 

Bobert the Count of Flanders, Bobert the Monk also : 

.To tell the tale of all that came, were weary work, I trow. 

When that their steeds were stabled and fairly foddered all, 

That night at board and beaker they feasted them in hall, 

And fair disport and solace they held till morning-tide. 

•When that the Pope in all his might, he borne him forth to 
ride, 

The King and all his paladins gave him attendance due, 

With the merry bells a-pealing, the minster doors unto ; : 



Digitized by Google 




THE TAKING OF THE CROSS AT CLERMONT. 49 

And when the Pope had read the Mass, the multitude of folk 
Out at the doors, all in hot haste, crushing and crowding, 
broke. 

There were so many thousands there gathered, as men sayn, 
INor house nor hall, nor minster wall, e’er built, might them 
contain. 

It was a fair May morning, the birds sang roundelay. 

The trees were white with blossom, buds sprang on every 
spray; 

All golden lay the meadows in the sunlight’s gladsome sheen, 
As they sat them down by companies upon the springing 
green; 

To left and right as far as sight could stretch they hid the sod; 
The Pope he stood alone, and preached the pilgrimage of God. 
From son to sire like holy fire God’s spirit spread his word ; 
Was not one eye of thousands dry, was not one heart un- 
\Btirred. 

When now the Pope had ended, the King rose in his place, — 
“ In God’s name, Holy Father, hearken my words with grace. 
Well dost thou say ; but I am grey, and lacking youthful heat ; 
A frail man and a feeble, for such pilgrimage unmeet. 
’Twere well, in lieu of me , that my brother Hugo ride ; 

Of all my peers and paladins is none hath him outvied ; 

To him I render all my might.” — The which when Hugo 
heard, 

His heart within his bosom with rapture swelled and stirred. 
A joy past joy it seemed to him in such good grace to stand, 
To ride with ban and arriere-ban, unto his Lord’s own land. 
Quoth he, “ Gramercy, Brother,” and kissed him foot and 
hand. 

E 



Digitized by Google 




50 



HISTORY OT THE CRUSADES. 



Then to the Pope he touted tow, the cross on him to take. 
And knights and barons after him like act and tow did make ; 
Both lords of France and England, and lords of Norman 
line. 

They prayed and pressed to take the cross, the holy pil- 
grim’s sign ; 

So great the throng were many swooned, and died there as 
they lay. 

Two hundred thousand took the cross at Clermont on that 
day. 

Then loudly wailed the noble dames, and maidens weptforwoe: 
“ Out and alas for us that here henceforth alone must go 
In widowhood and orphanage ! woe worth this princes’ day, 
That strikes, as with a single blow, our joyaunce all away ! 
’Tis sad in tower, ’tis dark in bower, all empty, cold, and tone ; 
Silent all sound of singing, disport and solace flown.’* 

And many a gentle dame, I wis, her youthful lord bespake, — 
w Fair husband, that with choice of heart me for your love 
did take, 

Winning my favour with all vows that gain a lady’s ear. 

For God and Mary mother, when forth o’er sea you steer, 
And took upon the city, where our Lord hung on the tree. 
Keep thy true wife unforgotten, and give a thought to me.’* 
There were gentle eyes a-weeping, and tears on tears fhey 
flowed. 

And many a wedded woman there took the cross of God ; 
But the maidens sadly wended their weary way again. 

Back to their fathers’ castles, with their lonely weight of pain. 



* 



Digitized by Google 




THE LEAGUER OF ANTIOCH, 



51 



THE LEAGUER OF ANTIOCH, 

Now lithe and listen, lordings, while the Christians’ hap I 
tell, 

That, as they lay in leaguer, from hunger them befelL 

In evil case the army stood, their stores of food were spent : 

Peter the holy Hermit, he sat before his tent : 

Then came to him the King Tafur, and with him fifty score 

Of men-at-arms, not one of them but hunger gnawed him sore. 

“ Thou holy Hermit, counsel us, and help us at our need ; 

Help, for God’s grace, these starving men with wherewithal 
to feed,” 

But Peter answered, “ Out, ye drones, a helpless pack that cry, 

While all unburied round about the slaughtered Paynim lie. 

A dainty dish is Paynim flesh, with salt and roasting due.” 

“ Now, by my fay,” quoth King Tafur, “ the Hermit sayeth 
true.” 

Then flared he forth the Hermit’s tent, and sent his menye 
out, 

More than ten thousand, where in heaps the Paynim lay 
about. 

They hewed the corpses limb from limb, and disemboweled 
clean, 

And there was sodden meat and roast, to blunt their hunger 
keen : 

Bight savoury fare it seemed them there; they smacked 
their lips and spake,— 

“ Farewell to fasts : a daintier meal than this who asks to 
make? 

E 2 



Digitized by Google 




52 



HISTORY OP THE CRUSADES. 



’Tis sweeter far than porker’s flesh, or bacon seethed in 
grease. 

Let’s make good cheer, and feast us here, till life and hunger 
cease.” 

While King and host, on boiled and roast, were making 
merry cheer, 

The savoury reek of Paynim flesh ’gan rise into the air, 

Till to the walls of Antioch the winds that smell did blow ; 

Then rose within an angry din, and all were wild for woe. 

On house and hall and ’battled wall the swarming Paynim 
hung, 

While all around the sharper sound was heard of woman’s 
tongue. 

Up to his topmost solar was y-clomb King Garsiön, 

With Isaes his nephew, and Sansadon his son. 

Quoth Garsion to his children, — “ Now, by the great Mahoun, 

These devils eat our brethren : look, in the plain adown.” 

Tafur the king looked up from meat ; he saw the Paynim 
stand, 

Men, wives, and maids, on every wall that might a view com- 
mand ; 

No ruth the sight awakened, but thriftily he bade 

That they should see the corpses picked from where the 
heaps were laid ; 

Bade roast whatso was fresh, and whatso rotted bade them 
throw 

Into the stream that by the walls of Antioch did flow. 

“ We’ll give the fish,” quoth he, “ the smack of Paynim flesh 
to know.” 



Digitized by Google 




THE LEAGUER OP ANTIOCH, 



53 



It happed that for a chevauchie did with Count Bobert join 
Count Tancred, and Count Bohemund, and Godfrey of Bou- 
loigne ; 

All closed in steel from head to heel they chanced to pass 
that way, 

And knightly greeted they the King, and laughingly ’gan 

say — 

“ How fares it with the King Tafür ?” “In sooth,” the King 
replied, 

“ If I said 4 ill,’ fair sirs, meseems, so speaking, I had lied. 
Had we to skink a cup of drink, for food we’ve here our fill,” 
“ Now, by my fay,” quoth Godfrey, “ Here’s drink, an if you 
will;” 

And straight bade bring a pitcher, filled with his own red 
wine. 

Then drank Tafhr, and well I wot, ne’er seemed him drink 
so fine. 

Then from his solar where he stood, loud called King Garsiön 
To Bohemund, unto whose ear the wind brought every tone 
Of that fierce sound, — “ Now, by Mahound, malapert knaves 
ye bin, 

To do dead bodies such foul wrong is insolence and sin.” 
But Bohemund made answer, — “ Pair Lord, what here ye see 
Is none of our commanding, nor wight thereof have we : 

’Tis King Tafur’s devising, his and his devil’s crew ; 

An evil rout are they, God wot. The brutish taste we rue 
That boar or deer holds sorrier cheer than flesh of Paynim 
slain. 

Yet ask not us to chide them, but unto Heaven complain.” 



Digitized by Google 




54 



HISTORY OP THE CRUSADES. 



THE GATHERING OF THE PAYNIM. 

Not far from Samarkand an open meadow lay, 

Girt with dark stems of cypress, laurel, and olive grey, 

And round the place a fragrant hedge of balsam thicket 
went ; 

Upon that mead the Sultan bade pitch his royal tent. 

The tent-poles were of elmen-tree, with* silver wrought full 
rare; 

The tent-stuff was all diapered, like to a chess-board fair, 
Half of the white and cramoisy, half of the gold and green. 
And in the chequers, ouches and stones that glittered sheen : 
Twelve thousand men beneath its shade had lain at ease, I 
ween. 

And ’mid the household stuff that filled the fair pavilion 
round, 

Was set on high, in beaten gold, an image of Mahound. 
Between four magic-loadstones, all free in air it hung, 

And hitherward and thitherward, as the wind listed, swung. 

Then fourteen lords came lowly forth, each lord a king’s 
own son, 

And featly at the Sultan’s high board have service done, 
And after to the idol their sacrifice they made, 

And, grovelling upon tile ground, their gifts before it laid, 
And censered it with incense, and prayed, and still the sound 
That ended all their litanies was “Hear us, great Mahound.” 

While all were still on kneeling knees, in sudden fury broke 
Prince Sansadon before the rout, and loud and wrathful 
spoke,— 



Digitized by Google 




THE GATHERING OF THE PAYNIM. 



55 



“ Up, weakling wittols that ye are, blind fools that here are 
laid, 

Not knowing this Mahound of yours is powerless all to aid. 

’Tis through that lewd false faith of his, and trusting in his 
name, 

That I have lost my people and all mine own fair fame.’* 

Then high uprist, he clenched his fist, and smote the idol 
down, 

And trampled it beneath his feet: whereat there rose a 
stoun, 

A wild uproar and hellish rout of that mad paynimrie ; 

The knives they rained about his head, the shafts flew fast 
and free ; 

“Accursed!” cried the Sultan, “who taught thee mock 
our creed ? 

Who art thou ? What thy lineage ? A rope were thy fit 
meed.” 

Prince Sansadon declared his name, and sadly ’gan to tell 

The evil that on Antioch by Christian leaguer fell ; 

Told of the Christian archers that waste no shaft in air, 

The Christian knights, all sheathed in steel, that steel- 
sharp lances bear, 

“ Each one of whom,” quoth he, “ if down upon our hosts 
he bore, 

Would spit of our light horsemen three files, I ween, or 
four.” 

Then scornful waxed the Sultan, — “Now, stout Knight 
mote- thou be ! 

Who’d learn faint-heart and cowardice may go to school 
to thee ” 



Digitized by Google 




56 



HISTORY OF THE CRUSADES. 



Then up and spake grim Corbaran, — “ Nay, Lord, as I opine. 
He hath too much y-drunken : his head is hot with wine.” 

“ Now nay, thou Persian Admiral,” Prince Sansadon replied, 
u Light words, soon said, but by my head I swear thy jape 
goes wide. 

Tis not faint-heart, nor cowardice, nor wine that speaks 
in me. 

King Garsion bade me ride to you as fast as fast may be. 
Por your good aid he prays you : he is right sore bested. 
Behold, I bring this token, to seal what I have said.” 

And with the word, out of the pouch that like a post he 
wore 

Girt round about his waist, his sire’s grey beard he bore. 
But when the Sultan saw it, right sorry waxed his cheer. 

“ Now of a truth, when Garsiön did brook his chin to shear. 
Things stand, I wot, in evil case ; his need it is not small. 

To counsel how we best may bring him succour, one and all.” 

Long aU was hush : both prince and peer sat silently and 
still, 

As stricken to their inmost souls to hear King G-arsion’s ill. 
Then random counsel counselled they ; some this advised, 
some that ; 

At last out spake King Kangas, on Bubia’s throne that sat. 

“ Now, by Mahound, great Sultan, this seemeth best to me : 
Send through thy land, on every hand, swift posts as swift 
may be, 

And to Coronda summoti all your lords, with their array, 
And, before all, the Caliph that in Bagdad holdeth sway. 
Comes he, our Pope, salvation and strength come at his side, 
And mightiest following of all with him will eastward ride.” 



Digitized by Google 




THE GATHERING OP THE PAYNIM. 



57 



u So be it,** cried the Sultan, “ a wise word hast thou said ; 

Four hundred posts with letters shall ere to-night be sped.* 9 

* A moon had waxed, a moon had waned, and one in crescent 
stood, 

When all ways to Coronda flowed arm’d warriors like a flood 

Of horse and foot ; by night and day the mighty muster goes, 

With swords and staves and spears and glaives, with maces 
and with bows. 

From Bagdad rode the Caliph, that all the country round 

Had raised in arms by promise of the blessing of Mahound. 

Came the swart and sinewy Arabs, that make their godless 
scorn 

Of Christ his resurrection ; and, the foul Fiend’s brother 
born, 

Heu, fiery-red, and gnashing his teeth as he were wode, 

Behind whose heels of Turkish spears four hundred thou- 
sand rode ; 

Came from the furthest East a folk of strange and eldritch 
kind, 

In whom, save teeth and eye-balls, no white speck mote you 
find. 

And in the vanward of this rout, high set you might behold, 

Upon a dromedary tall, Corbaran’s mother old. 

Grey was her hair, her eyes were blear, but still her wits were 
Btrong; 

Strange things she knew from sun and moon, that to black 
art belong; 

Could read the courses of the stars, and in those lights on 
high, 

Foresaw at will the secrets of mortal destiny. 



/ 



Digitized by Google 




ÖS HISTORY OF THE CRUSADES. 

Their hosts up in the rearward the Kings of Mecca brought. 
Bearing their image of Mahound, of hollow gold 7- wrought; 
Wherein through spell of gramarye an evil spirit sate, 
And the Paynim danced before it, for worship and for state* 
I trow it was a sight to Bee, that image of Mahound 
Moving to din of shawms and drums, with harp and viol’s 
sound. 

So to its journey’s end in state the golden idol came, 
Where with his host the Caliph sate to greet Mahound his 
name. 

Whereat the lying spirit that in this idol sate, 

Blew himself up for pride before the Caliph and his state : — 
4< List what I say, and weigh my words and rightly under- 
stand; 

The Christians have never right unto the Paynim’s land, 
Por that they worship God on high ; this land I give to ye ; 
Heaven ’longeth to the Christian’s God — the land be- 
longs to me.” 

Then merry were the Paynim, and loud they cried, I wot,— 
Eight well Mahound hath spoken ; — a fool that trusts him 
not.” 

Then, as chief captain of the host, the Sultan chose a man, 
The Admiral of Olifera, the valiant Corbaran. 

By beat of drum the heathen rout he marshalled there and 
then, 

In two-and-thirty squadrons, each of threescore thousand 
men. 

His foot was in the stirrup, his grasp was at the mane, 
When his old mother, Calabra, his armed hand hath ta’en 



Digitized by Google 




THE GATHERING OP THE PAYNIM. 



59 



’Twas twice ten years since in the stars, by her black art 
she read, 

TbeChristians should be victors, the Paynims should be sped* 
“ Fair Sir,” quoth she, “ now wilt thou ride in good sooth to 
the field?” 

u Tea, and in sooth, good mother, and unseemly ’twere to 
yield, 

While still in Antioch's leaguer the Christians flout our 
bands ; 

I trow ’twere pity of his life, that in my danger stands.” 

4€ Son, take good counsel : homeward to Olifern repair. 
These Christian knights are terrible ; their stars show bright 
and fair.” 

“ What prate is this, good mother ? Say, is the story true, 
That Bohemund and Tancred are their goddikins, the two P 
That for their early breakfast, whene’er they crave to eat, 
Two thousand beeves will scarce suffice this doughty twain 
for meat. 

So runs the tale.” Then said the witch, “ Son, leave this 
flouting tone ; 

No gods these Christians worship, save Christ the Lord 
alone. 

Never a man of all this host shall Christian might defy. 

Of all the heads I count, not one but it shall lowly lie.” 
Heavy of heart that chieftain waxed, but featlv hid his pain t 
■“Now let her yelp : so old she is, she grows a child again, 
'’Twere a good deed to cut her throat.” Then into selle he 
sprang, 

And forward marched the Paynim host to the trumpet’s . 
shattering clang. 



Digitized by Google 




60 HISTORT OF THE CRUSADES. 

When the Crusade was ended, and the mass of 
pilgrims came pouring back to the places of their 
birth, they imparted these more picturesque descrip- 
tions to their fellow-countrymen. We can imagine 
in how lofty a strain they would relate these tales ; 
how imperceptibly the materials would grow be- 
neath their hands; how conjecture would become 
certainty, and feeling take the form of undoubted 
fact. What awakened the interest of their hearers 
the most was undoubtedly the choice of a King of 
Jerusalem. During the expedition there had been 
songs in praise of Count Hugo’s and Duke Robert’s 
deeds, as well as of Duke Godfrey’s ; but the atten- 
tion of Europe was now almost exclusively fixed- 
upon the ruler of Palestine and the protector of the 
Holy Sepulchre. All the world wished to know his 
birth and parentage, to hear of his deeds and vir- 
tues; his fame became decidedly and exclusively 
prominent, and cast the real or fictitious greatness 
of the others completely into the shade. He was 
made into a descendant of the fabulous Knight of 
the Swan ; it was reported that he had ever been 
the protector of innocence and the defender of the 
weak ; that he once sinfully fought against Pope 
Gregory in the service of the Emperor, since when 
he had lain in heavy sickness till the time of the 
Crusades ; then, by God’s command, and as a sure 



% 



Digitized by Google 




GODFREY OF BOUILLON. 



61 



sign of his heavenly calling, the fever had left the 
hero. Twenty years after his death, a priest of Aix- 
la-Chapelle, named Albert, collected all the songs, 
and verbal communications in praise of the Duke, 
and incorporated them in a prose recital, which 
is extremely graphic and lively. Partly from this 
source, and partly from later poetical versions of the 
original songs, subsequent writers have drawn all 
their knowledge of Peter the Hermit as originator, 
and of Godfrey of Bouillon as commander of the 
Crusade ; here Torquato Tasso found the so-called 
historical subject of his great poem ; but, as we now 
know, he did but employ his master hand in polish- 
ing and completing the great poem of a former cen- 
tury. 

I have ventured to divert the attention of my. 
readers from the contemplation of facts to the much- 
decried domain of scientific investigation and criti- 
cism. We often hear complaints that investigation 
is dry and criticism destructive. I must admit that 
in this instance Godfrey and Peter the Hermit have 
been shorn of their false glory ; and yet, if I mis- 
take not, the picture of those remarkable times 
loses nothing of its freshness or completeness. A 
critical examination of the original sources* shows 
us that certain events never really took place, and 
* See Part II. 



Digitized by Google 




62 



HISTOKT OF THE CRUSADES. 



existed only in the creative fancy of contempora- 
ries ; but we know, and have here fresh proof, that 
history does not consist solely of battles and sieges ; 
the achievements of the mind and the productions 
of fancy are among its most important features; 
and with regard to the Crusades, I have no hesi- 
tation in looking upon the composition of those 
songs as an event almost greater than the taking of 
Jerusalem. The territorial possession was lost in 
a few years, and indeed it was untenable from the 
first.; but in those legends we see the first stir of a 
vigorous new life, the first pulsation of renewed 
mental activity after a century of oppressive and 
gloomy fanaticism. This direction once taken, was 
never again lost by Europe, but gradually carried 
along the whole hemisphere in its course. 



Digitized by Google 




CHARTER III. 






The Frankish States founded in Syria by the 
First Crusade had no easy task. With an army 
consisting at the most of seven thousand horse 
and five thousand foot, they could not hope for suc- 
cour from their distant native countries ; scattered 
among a scarcely conquered hostile population, and 
surrounded by powerful and naturally implacable 
foes. At first the great battles of Antioch and 
Ascalon produced great moral effect. Internal dis- 
sensions among the Turkish potentates, helped the 
Christians through the first period of danger, and 
then, attracted by the reports of the Crusade, the 
European countries sent perpetual reinforcements, 
which arrived sometimes in small and sometimes in 
large bodies, by water and by land, some intending 
to settle there entirely, but most for a limited period. 
From all this, however, Duke Godfrey derived little 
advantage; he was so powerless that, in even Jeru- 



Digitized by Google 




64 HISTORY OF THE CRUSADES. 

salem itself, he was obliged to acknowledge himself 
the vassal of an ambitious prelate, Dagobert, who 
had been chosen Patriarch of the Holy City ; and 
he died as early as 1100, after a short and unevent- 
ful reign. He was succeeded by his brother Bald- 
wjn of Edessa, a vigorous and able ruler, who 
overthrew the supremacy of the Patriarch by arbi- 
trary force, and established the royal authority on 
all points. Within ten years he took all the sea- 
port towns from Tripoli to Jaffa, and thereby se- 
cured what was most important, freedom of com- 
munication with the Western world ; the last years 
of his life were employed in defending the southern 
boundary of his kingdom towards Egypt by a suc- 
cession of fortresses, which he planted partly round 
Ascalon, still held by the Egyptians, partly in the 
wilderness, on the spurs of the Arabian desert. 
His successor, Baldwin II., who reigned from 1118 
till 1130, carried on this warlike movement with, 
even greater energy and a more far-sighted policy. 
The rule of the Caliphs of Egypt was then in a 
feeble and decaying condition ; moreover the desert, 
and the naval predominance of the Christians, ren- 
dered any serious attack impossible. The probable, 
indeed the only danger to the Pranks was from 
the East ; in case any leader of eminence should 
arise among the vigorous and warlike Seljukes, re- 



Digitized by Google 




BALDWIN II. 



65 



concile or control the dissentient emirs, and then 
break into the country with a united force. Bald- 
win II., who, like his predecessor, had once been 
Count of Edessa, had a vivid conception of this 
danger, and accordingly wished to direct the mili- 
tary force at his disposal in Jerusalem and Antioch 
to that quarter ; and there if not wholly to destroy 
the Sultanate, at least to secure a safe and defensible 
frontier. According to this plan, they must have 
taken Damascus, Aleppo, and all the places between 
Antioch and Edessa : then a sufficient defence would 
have been formed by the Taurus mountains on the 
north, the Euphrates on the north-east, and the 
Syrian desert on the south-east, as the boundaries 
of a compact kingdom ; Baldwin followed up this 
idea by unceasing warfare and incredible exertion. 
Once, when taken prisoner by a bold adventurer, he 
lay for years a prisoner among the Turks. After 
his release, this misfortune only served to spur his 
activity into redoubled vigour. During his life the 
supremacy of the Cross was maintained in those 
countries,' Haleb and Damascus were not con- 
quered indeed, but they paid tribute, and the Mus- 
sulman merchants trembled as they passed along 
the roads between the Euphrates and Tigris, in 
fear lest the lances of the Frankish knights should 
appear on the horizon. If all the Christians had 

F 



Digitized by Google 




06 



HISTORY OP THE CRUSADES. 



shared the ideas of their King, his plan would in all 
probability have been carried out, and perhaps a 
lasting foundation of European power and civiliza- 
tion would have been laid in those lands. 

But Baldwin stood alone among his comrades in 
his political and military views. They were never 
wanting in ardour, courage, or religious zeal. No 
sooner did an enemy appear, than they received 
the sacrament with fervent tears, and rushed with 
enthusiastic contempt of death into the fight, where 
the overwhelming weight of the Frankish armour 
always told with effect. Their abilities, however, 
extended no further ; convinced that they were pro- 
tected by God himself, they attended little to earthly 
considerations. Instead pf supporting the King in 
his conquests in the north, the barons and burghers 
of Jerusalem lamented his leaving the vicinity of 
the Holy Sepulchre so often, and even neglecting it 
for such distant undertakings ; besides dragging 
about that invaluable relic the Holy Cross, on those 
accursed campaigns. Thus hindered and thwarted 
on all sides, Baldwin was unable- to accomplish his 
great design. The heroes who drew their swords 
and shook their lances so gallantly in Christ’s ho- 
nour, were quite incapable of understanding the 
political motives and consequences of their under- 
taking. It may even be said that they would not 



Digitized by Google 




QUARRELS AMONG THE PRINCES. 



67 



understand them. Every earthly consideration seemed 
to them a presumptuous interference with God^s 
ordinances, an impious intermingling of earth with 
heaven, ^fhey thus ruined their kingdom by the 
same one-sided religious zeal which had given them 
the energy to conquer it. Instead of striving to 
frame their society according to religious principles, 
and then allowing politics to obey political rules, 
and war military ones, they started upon the sup- 
position that the very existence of their dominion 
was a wonder of God’s own working, and they were 
convinced that for every fresh danger which threat- 
ened it, God had a new miracle in store. They 
were soon to discover that such a notion was as 
destructive to religion and morality, as to political 
and warlike success. 

It has been remarked, in all times, that the ex- X 
elusive piety which holds itself superior to human 
reason, is just that which panders most to earthly 
vices. Amidst the most ardent enthusiasm for the 
Church, all the most earthly passions soon asserted 
their sway. The princes of Edessa and Antioch 
quarrelled among themselves quite as fiercely as the 
emirs of Aleppo and Damascus. Ere long, even a 
knight like Tancred sought Turkish help against his 
Christian adversaries, though, according to the fun- 
damental ideas of the Crusade, any alliance with a 

p 2 



Digitized by Google 




68 



HISTORY OF THE CRUSADES. 



i ?urk was an abomination, and their blood the only 
ileasant offering to the Lord. It was, however, in- 
vitable that the bitterness of religious hatred should 
radually subside. Each day brought forth social 
and commercial relations with the infidels, as well as 
war. The Franks saw with amazement that people 
who in Europe were held to be worse than wild 
beasts, half-demons, half-brutes, could be lived with, 
dealt with, nay, even that much might be learnt 
from them. The idea dawned for the first time upon 
the Franks, that bumau nature could exist under 
other conditions than those of their own Church, 
that God’s light might be reflected in a thousand 
different ways. Such an idea is now welcome and 
consolatory to our religious feelings, but then it was 
entirely subversive of all leceived opinions. It was 
the same in all other transactions. Spite of all the de- 
votion to the Holy Sepulchre, the Crusaders plunged 
deeper and deeper into the earthly joys of Oriental 
life. Baldwin’s successor, Ki ng Fulc o, was old and 
somewhat infirm ; he forgot the orders he had just 
given, mistook his best friends, and had no memory 
but for the commands of his imperious wife Meli- 
sende, which he executed with tremulous exactness. 
Under this prince, the warlike impulse of the Bald- 
wins completely died away. The Christians devoted 
their whole attention to personal luxury and splen- 
V . : 



Digitized by Google 




LUXURY OF THE CRUSADERS. 



69 



dour. The numerous clergy led the way by their 
example. Barons and prelates vied with each other 
in the race for political influence, rich benefices and 
livings, wealth, and pleasure. There was no kingdom 
in Europe in which the beauty and power of women 
played so conspicuous a part, as in the community 
at the Holy Sepulchre. Much as Fulco feared his 
queen, he was so jealous of her that he brought 
the handsome and proud Count Hugo of Joppa, 
whom he thought she distinguished, in danger of 
his life, by a criminal suit. Thereupon Hugo fled 
to the Egyptians, and commenced a devastating war 
against the kingdom ; this was assuaged with much 
difficulty, and Hugo was recalled to Jerusalem, as it 
proved, to his misfortune, for an assassin attacked 
him in the high-road, and wounded him severely, 
which induced him to fly anew, to Europe. We 
find the same scenes repeated in the north. Count 
Joscelin of Edessa, a dwarfish, misshapen man, with 
a black beard, sparkling eyes, and gigantic bodily 
strength, left his capital in order to live joyously 
with numerous mistresses in shady country palaces, 
on this side of the Euphrates. In Antioch, Eliza,, 
the widow of Bohemund II., withheld the inheri- 
tance from her daughter Constance. Count Ray- 
mond of Poitou, a handsome and brilliant knight, 
cast an eye on the rich heiress, but soon perceived. 




Digitized by Google 




70 



HISTORY OP THE CRUSADES. 



I i that though favoured by her, he could not gain pos- 
session of the throne against the will of her resolute 
and clever mother. Upon this, he changed his tac- 
tics, and appeared as the mother’s passionate adorer, 
obtained a favourable answer, and led her in brilliant 
i array to the altar, but no further. When there, he 
suddenly turned to the daughter, married her, and 
then, before the very eyes of the astounded and be- 
wildered mother, proclaimed his and his consort’s 
accession to the throne. Amid such occurrences, it 



was no wonder that the war against the Turks did 
not progress. The desire for further conquest was 
extinct, and the Christians only prayed to heaven 



that things might but remain as they were, 
y/ Such stability is not, however, the portion of hu- 
A'\nan affairs. While the Franks rested and enjoyed 



life, trusting in God’s help, a man arose among the 



Turks, who was destined to be the author of their 



destruction. Shortly before the Crusade, the brother 
of the Seljuke Sultan had caused one of his most 
able emirs to be executed, and had thought himself 
merciful and gracious because he spared his young 
son, Emaleddin Zenki. Deprived of fortune or fa- 
vour, this boy worked his way up, from a common 
horse-soldier, by the strength of his arm and his 
intelligence. Amid the disorders of civil war, and 
more particularly since the invasion by the Franks, 



Digitized by Google 




ZENKI THE BLOODY PRINCE. 71 

his sharp sword, his undaunted courage, and his 
keen and accurate judgment, had quickly become 
famous in the Syrian countries. He rose rapidly, 
from step to step, and all the Seljukes praised 
Allah when Zenki obtained the emirate of Mosul, 
with the distinct commission to wage an extermi- 
nating war against the Franks. The adversities of 
his youth had made him stern and harsh ; he was 
more indignant at the indolent anarchy of his coun- 
trymen, than at the hostility of the Christians, and, 
while, from the beginning of his government, he left 
them not a moment’s rest, perpetually attacked them 
unawares, and soon gained from them the dreaded 
title of the “ bloody prince,” he was entirely without 
mercy, or even justice, towards a Seljuke who was 
lax in the prosecution of the holy war, or, still worse, 
was suspected of friendship for a Christian. Mili- 
tary unity and energy were thus once more estab- 
lished under the Prophet’s flag, and soon made them- 
selves felt in bloody attacks, now upon the kingdom 
of Jerusalem, now upon the northern principalities. 
In a short time the Turkish possessions, from the 
Tigris to Lebanon, were under one rule, and in 1145 
one of the most important Christian cities, Edessa, 
was taken by storm. Zenki died directly after, and 
Count Joscelin, roused from his life of indolence, 
hastened to free the town from the Turkish garri- 



Digitized by Google 




HISTORY OF THE CRUSADES. 



72 



son. Scarcely bad be set foot in it, when Nureddin, 
Zenki’s son, approached with a large army, and, 
after sharp fighting, took Edessa for the second time, 
and nearly destroyed it. From that time, the whole 
of Mesopotamia remained in the hands of the Turks. 
The Christians discovered that there was no help 
for this state of things, and that Antioch must now 
serve as the northern frontier town instead, and, as 
far as they were concerned, profound peace prevailed 
in the land. Occasionally they exhorted Europe to 
send them a few reinforcements, at their earliest 
convenience. 

There, the Holy Land had for a long time occu- 
pied but a small share of public attention. The 
reason lay in the general intellectual movement 
which had suddenly sprung up among the nations 
of Europe at the beginning of the twelfth century. 
The ascetic piety whieh despises the things of this 
world, and which had culminated in Gregory VII. 
and the Crusades, called forth a general reaction 
by its violence. In France, one of the acutest and 
boldest thinkers of any time, Abelard, dared to 
demonstrate the fallibility of the dogmas of the 
Church, and to vindicate the independence of philo- 
sophical speculation, with an energy which gathered 
around him thousands of enthusiastic disciples. 
The sunny air of Provence begau to resound with 



Digitized by Google 




REACTION AGAINST THE CHURCH. 78 

the ardent poetry of the Troubadours, free in tone, 
glowing in colour, full of the joys of this world, and 
the passions of love and war. From Italy news ^ 
spread on every side, that the great code of the 
Emperor Justinian had been discovered; it was 
read and taught in Bologna with untiring zeal, to 1 
a concourse of eager listeners ; and a picture was 
unfolded before the eyes of a wondering generation, 
of a bygone period, in which a united government 
was really all-powerful, and the heads of the Church 
were only its first servants and officers. The effect 
of this was powerfully felt in Germany as in Rome. 
The abbots in Germany complained that even their 
own monks could not be got away from their legal 
studies to attend to the services of the, Church. 
Arnold of Brescia addressed the Roman citizens * 
.with electrifying eloquence, and called up before 
them the image of the old Populua Romanus, in- 
citing them to open rebellion against the temporal 
power of a Church, which was, he said, a scandal 
to religion and morals, and ought to be made to 
disburse its treasures for the public good. 

The Papal power had however been too firmly 
established since the time of Gregory VII., to suc- 
cumb to this first movement. Too many impor- 
tant interests were bound up with it, and every 
antagonist was met by a host of enthusiastic admi- 



Digitized by Google 




74 HISTORY OP THE CRUSADES. 

rers or energetic partisans, and, as usual, an unsuc- 
cessful rebellion only served to strengthen the power 
and ambition of tho government. About 1140 it 
was principally the Abbot Bernard of Clairvaux, 
who in France and Upper Italy kept"the people to 
their allegiance towards the Pope and the Church. 
He was sufficiently well grounded in philosophy 
not to shun the conflict with Abelard ; he brought 
back the great Order to which he belonged to strict • 
rules and hard study ; he wou over the Lombards 
and Provencals, who for a time had upheld a schis- 
matical pope, by his impassioned and persuasive 
eloquence. The weak and sickly man gained the 
ear of the whole population of the West. Without 
. ambition, and free from passion, by nature contem- 
plative and quiet, Bernard obtained a European 
influence, solely by his fervent devotion to the lead- 
ing ideas of the time. His letters, in which much 
pains was evidently bestowed on the elegance of 
the style, and the impressiveness and sentiment of 
the imagery, were current in all the land, breathing 
a still dominant and irresistible spirit. He him- 
self would be nothing more than a plain and hum- 
ble monk ; any call to leave the walls of his beloved 
Clairvaux for a higher place he obstinately refused 
to obey; but kings listened to his sermons, and 
Pope Eugene thought absolute reverence for the 
Abbot his greatest virtue. 



Digitized by Google 




TROUBLED STATE OF EUROPE. 75 

Under these circumstances, Europe was obviously, 
not in a favourable state for another great under- 
taking for the relief of Jerusalem, and warfare 
against the Turks. The political condition was 
no less unfavourable. The general confusion into 
which Gregory VII. had thrown all the European 
nations, and which, like an earthquake following a 
volcanic outbreak, had found vent in the First Cru- 
sade, was at an end. 

Political power had everywhere gained strength, 
the European States showed signs of new life, and 
great national interests were fermenting. Germany 
was under the rule of the first king of the race of the 
Hohen-Stauffen, Conrad III. Always an opponent 
of the Popes, he was constantly at war with their 
allies, particularly the mighty sovereign house of 
Guelf. The latter, when conquered in Germany, 
called foreign comrades to their aid, — the turbulent 
Hungarians from the east, the ambitious Norman 
King of Naples, Roger II., from the south. Conrad^ 
on the other hand, entered into an alliance with the 
Emperor Manuel of Constantinople, who, like him- 
self, had suffered endless vexations from the Nor- 
mans and the Hungarians. Roger hereupon deter- 
mined instantly to fall upon the Greek provinces 
with redoubled vigour, and earnestly begged King 
Louis to support him either with a fleet against 




Digitized by Google 




76 



HISTOET OF THE CRUSADES. 



.Manuel, or by land against the German king. In 
b word, Europe was split into two great alliances, 
on one side the German king with most of his 
princes and the Greek Emperor; on the other, the 
| ^luelfs, Louis of France, the Hungarians, and 
Roger of Naples. In this state of things, no one 
thought of a Crusade, least of all the Syrian Franks, 
who wished indeed for the arrival of a few detached 
bodies of troops, but not for the presence of a 
whole army, in their land. 

It happened, however, that King Louis VII., on 
the occasion of an insurrection in the town of Vitry, 
in Champagne, stormed the place, cut down a num- 
ber of the inhabitants, and, amongst other buildings, 
burnt the churches also. His excitable temper made 
him ungovernable in rage, and crushed by remorse 
after the first outburst was over; he was accessible 
to but one idea at a time, and incapable of taking 
any comprehensive views. No sooner was the battle 
ended than he repented, with horror and bitterness 
of spirit, his offence against the churches, feared 
for the salvation of his soul, and vowed a Crusade 
as the expiation for his crime. Bernard, to whom 
he applied for assistance, tried to dissuade him, 
saying that it was better to fight against the sinful 
inclinations of his own heart, than against the 
Turks. When, however, the King obtained from 



Digitized by Google 




ST. BERNARD. 



77 



the Pope an order that Bernard should preach in 
behalf of the Crusade, he, with humble obedience, 
exerted all his talent in aid of the purpose which 
he disapproved, and with such success that in 
France an army of seventy thousand knights joined 
the King. King Roger joined the undertaking with 
great eagerness, in the full hope of involving the 
French monarch in a quarrel with the Greeks by the 
way, and of thus being enabled to carry out Bohe- 
mund’s old plans against Constantinople. In the 
meantime, Bernard had gone to Germany, but at first 
found very little sympathy from either king or people. 
This was natural enough. An uncommonly strong 
resolution was needed in order to leave all domestic 
cares and quarrels, from purely religious motives, and 
to march straight away to the East, there to make 
an alliance with those who had been enemies hither- 
to, and thus indirectly to break off with Emperor 
Manuel, who had been a faithful ally. But Bernard 
did not despair. One Sunday, when Conrad was 
hearing him preach, he suddenly addressed from 
the pulpit such warning, promising, and threatening 
words to the King, that he was overcome, and in a 
soft fit of repentant piety, put on the cross. The 
number of knights who accompanied him was, how- 
ever, small, and the chief part of the German Cru- 
saders consisted of rabble, of the stamp of the 



Digitized by Google 




78 HISTORY OF THE CRUSADES. 

Tafurs. The Pope, who, like Urban in 1095, put him- 
self at the head of the whole undertaking, was little 
pleased with this reinforcement, and blamed the 
King for putting on the cross without asking leave 
from Rome ; to which the King could only reply 
that the Holy Spirit bloweth where it listeth, and 
allows no time for tedious solicitations. 

Both armies marched down the Danube, to Con- 
stantinople, in the summer of 1147. At the same 
moment King Roger, with his fleet, attacked not 
the Turks, but the Greek seaport towns of the 
Morea. Manuel thereupon, convinced that the large 
armies were designed for the destruction of his em- 
pire in the first place, with the greatest' exertions, 
got together troops from all his provinces, and en- 
tered into a half-alliance with the Turks of Asia 
Minor. The mischief and ill-feeling was increased 
by the lawless conduct of the German hordes ; the 
Greek troops attacked them more than once ; where- 
upon numerous voices were raised in Louis’s head- 
quarters, to demand open war against the faithless 
Greeks. The kings were fully agreed not to permit 
this, but on arriving in Constantinople they com- 
pletely fell out, for while Louis made no secret of 
his warm friendship for Roger, Conrad promised the 
Emperor of Constantinople to attack the Normans 
as soon as the Crusade should be ended. This was 



Digitized by Google 




THE SECOND CRUSADE. 



79 



a bad beginning for a united campaign in the East, 
and moreover, at every step eastward, new difficulties 
arose. The German army, broken up into several 
detachments, and led without ability or prudence, 
was attacked in Asia Minor by the Emir of Iconium, 
and cut to pieces, all but a few hundred men. The 
French, though better appointed, also suffered severe 
losses in that country, but contrived, nevertheless, 
to reach Antioch with a very considerable force, and 
from thence might have carried the project which 
the second Baldwin had conceived in vain, namely, 
the defence of the north-eastern frontier, upon which, 
especially since Zenki had made his appearance, the 
life or death of the Christian States depended. But 
in vain did Prince Raymond of Antioch try to pre- 
vail upon King Louis to take this view, and to attack 
without delay the most formidable of all their ad- 
versaries, Noureddin. Louis would not hear or do 
anything till he had seen Jerusalem, and prayed at 
the Holy Sepulchre. The brilliant prince had better 
success with Louis’s wife, Eleanora, the Golden- 
footed Queen, as the Greeks called her, whose favour 
he won by such open homage, that Louis flew into 
a violent passion, and ordered an instantaneous de- 
parture from Antioch. In Jerusalem he was wel- 
comed by Queen Melisende (now regent, during her 
son’s minority, after Fulco’s death), with praise and 



Digitized by Google 




80 



U18TOET OF TBE CRUSADES. 



gratitude, because he had not taken part in the dis« 
tant wars of the Prince of Antioch, but had reserved 
his forces for the defence of the holy city of Jerusalem. 
It was now resolved to lead the army against Damas- 
cus, the only Turkish town whose emir had always re- 
fused to submit to either Zenki or Noureddin. Never- 
theless Nonreddin instantly collected all his available 
forces, to succour the besieged town against the com- 
mon enemy. It appeared as though, if Damascus 
should uot fall before his arrival, a great collision must 
inevitably take place. Events however took a curious 
turn. On the one hand, Melisende had heard that 
if the town were taken, Louis intended to give it; 
not to her, but to a French Count ; on the other, 
the Emir could not doubt that if Noureddin should 
relieve the town, his supremacy could no longer be 
resisted. Both Queen and Emir were equally dissa- 
tisfied with either prospect. To these small rulers, the 
hostility between East and West, Islam and Chris- 
tianity, had become indifferent ; they wished for no- 
thing but the continuance of their own comfortable 
local rule, without the interference of the great op- 
pressive potentates. Accordingly, a secret compact 
was made between Jerusalem and Damascus, in 
consequence of which the Syrian barons, by trea- 
cherous manoeuvres, forced King Louis to raise the 
siege, and the Emir then hastened .to send the 



Digitized by Google 




WRECK OF THE SECOND CRUSADE. 81 

joyful news to Noureddin, that he need give himself 
no further trouble. The German king, long since 
tired of his powerless position, returned home in the 
autumn of 1148, and Louis, after much pressing, 
stayed a few months longer, and reached Europe 
in the following spring. The whole expedition, 
undertaken in a ferment of piety, just as a man 
might dedicate a taper, or found a chapel; under- 
taken without reference to the great political rela- 
tions, or the true interests of the respective States, 
had been wrecked, without honour and without 
result, by the most wretched personal passions, and 
the most narrow and selfish policy. We see in the 
First Crusade the strength, in the Second the weak- 
ness of mediaeval religious feeling. It was only 
fitted for rapid, violent, and instant action ; lasting 
combination, fruitful action, or enduring results, it 
was unable to produce. It evaporated in heated 
enthusiasm, and narrow contempt of the world ; it 
rushed madly on, with eyes turned to heaven, in 
expectation of some wondrous miracle, and fell 
crashing to the ground, its feet entangled in some 
miserable creeping weed. 

Speedy, irresistible, overwhelming retribution 
overtook the Syrian Franks for their folly. King 
Louis had hardly set sail, when Noureddin arose 
more terrible than his father had ever been. He 

G 



Digitized by Google 




32 



HISTORY OF THE CRUSADES. 



first attacked Antioch, and misfortune rudely over- 
took Prince Raymond after all his social triumphs. 
He was killed in battle, half his army destroyed, and 
his territories traversed in all directions by the vic- 
tors. No less heavily did Noureddin visit the rest 
of the dukedom of Edessa on this side the Eu- 
phrates. Count Joscelin was taken prisoner, and 
the country finally subjugated by the Turks. The 
power which Zenki had founded rose higher and 
higher against the weak bulwarks of the Christian 
States. Noureddin grasped it with a firm and steady 
hand, embracing the whole of the East in a compre- 
hensive glance, allied now with Cairo, now with Ico- 
nium, and even on friendly terms with the Greek 
Emperor Manuel. He had inherited the bravery, 
earnestness, and religious zeal of his father, and he 
was especially distinguished by an unwearied spirit 
of order and regularity, which showed itself in his pri- 
vate dealings as strict conscientiousness, and in his 
political conduct as methodical forethought. His 
serious and thoughtful nature could only be roused 
by the strongest religious motives. Against the 
meanest of his subjects he appeared before the judge, 
like any other citizen, and never departed a hair’s- 
breadth from the precepts of the law, or was un- 
faithful for a single moment to the principles he had 
once recognized as true. His Court had the same 



Digitized by Google 




N0UREDD1N. 



83 



serious tone ; there was little outward splendour, 
but the Sovereign never relaxed from his silent and 
dignified carriage. All who were about his person 
acquired a subdued and careful demeanour, and his 
relations and great courtiers dared not be guilty of 
any wantonness or insolence, for their master was 
as inexorable to offenders as he was just to merit. 
All the harshest part of his resolute nature was felt 
by the Christians and their friends. He burdened 
his Christian subjects with intolerable taxes, the 
produce of which was devoted to the holy war. 
He excited the fanaticism of Islam against them 
by every means in his power. In all the neigh- 
bouring Turkish States he possessed friends and 
adherents in the most pious priests, the holiest 
dervishes, and the penitent fakirs, through whose 
influence the mass of the people were roused to 
such enthusiasm, that not one of the neighbouring 
Princes would have dared to disregard Noureddin’s 
call to arms. The Sultan did not forgive the Emir 
of Damascus his treaty with Jerusalem. “ Damas- 
cus,” he said, “ is useless to the cause of Islam, and 
the Christians will take it if I do not anticipate 
them.” Every kind of warfare, every means of 
victory were justified, in his eyes, by this argument. 
He sowed dissension between the Emir and his 
officers by one agent, and by another between the 

o 2 



Digitized by Google 




34 



HISTORY. OF THE CRUSADES. 



people of Damascus and their ruler, whose principal 
vizier, a Kurdish chieftain, Eyoob, was also in inti- 
mate correspondence with his brother Shirkuh,Nour- 
eddin’s chief officer. The prey was thus completely 
surrounded, and in the year 1154 Noureddin took 
the town and its dependencies without a blow. Thus 
the whole eastern frontier of Jerusalem was laid bare 
to his victorious arms. 

Meanwhile the Christians did their utmost to ren- 
der success edfey to him. It never occurred to King 
Baldwin III. to secure Damascus against him, either 
by taking possession of it himself, or by sending 
assistance to the Emir. Instead of this he turned 
the politics of his country into a channel which 
quickly led to the catastrophe. He directed his 
arms not against the strong and really dangerous 
enemy, but against the weakest and most impotent 
of his neighbours, against Egypt. He took Ascalon 
in 1153, and in 1156 he made destructive inroads 
as far as the Nile. The consequence was that Egypt, 
until now exceedingly jealous of Noureddin, was 
compelled to call on him for aid, and Baldwin’s 
scattered forces were several times almost cut to 
pieces by the Sultan. Nevertheless, in 1 1 64, Bald- 
win’s brother Amalric, who succeeded him, obsti- 
nately pursued the same disastrous course. He 
was a fat, solemn, stammering man, with a great 



Digitized by Google 




CAUTION OF NOUREDDIN. 



85 



taste for the study of history and geography, for 
legal and theological researches, and a strong pro- 
pensity for sensual indulgence, which he knew how 
to excuse with dry humour ; but above all, he was 
eager in the pursuit of gold or treasure. In order 
to extort money, he began a new war with Egypt 
immediately upon coming to the throne. He ob- 
tained considerable sums, but at the same time in- 
spired such a feeling of desperation, that one party 
in Egypt unconditionally embraced Noureddin’s 
cause; and his vizier, Shirkuh, led a troop of 
cavalry across the desert into the country, on whose 
appearance Amalric retreated, utterly disheartened, 
into Palestine. * Fortune once more offered him 
means of escape. Shirkuh behaved with the great- 
est insolence as the conqueror and ruler of Egypt, 
and the Caliph, a stupid and apathetic man, was a 
puppet in his hands. But the Caliph’s vizier Shawer, 
enraged at the ( Kurdish chief, suddenly changed 
sides, and now appealed to King Amalric for relief. 
Shirkuh was unable to resist with his handful of 
light cavalry, and hastened to Noureddin at Damas- 
cus to beg for reinforcements, describe the thoroughly 
disorganized and rotten condition of Egypt, and 
plan a systematic conquest of that country. Nour- 
eddin hesitated. These designs were too remote 
and uncertain for his cautious mind; he thought 



Digitized by Google 




86 



HISTORY OP THE CRUSADES. 



the volatile, cunning, and foolhardy Shirkuh de- 
ficient in the necessary foresight and trustworthi- 
ness, and at last, in 1166, only confided to him 
a small division, which was repulsed by Auialric 
on its arrival in Egypt. The country became, 
in fact, a Frankish province, Cairo was garrisoned 
by Christians, and a considerable yearly tribute 
was paid to Jerusalem. It was an unexpected, and, 
properly used, would have been an immense gain 
to the Christian cause. But once more everything 
was ruined by Amalric’s narrow selfishness. He 
thought he could wring more spoil from Egypt, 
scoffed at the notion of its resistance, and in 1168 
demanded, under the threat of a' devastating war, 
a tribute of two million pieces of gold. This 
was too much for the Vizier to bear ; his deepest 
feelings of indignation were roused ; “ Let Shir- 
kuh destroy us,” he cried, “ we shall at least not 
have submitted to unbelievers.” In spite of the 
recent disagreements, he once more implored Nour- 
eddin’s help. The Sultan saw that he had no 
choice left. This time Shirkuh hastened across 
the desert with eight thousand horsemen, defeated 
all the preparations of the Franks by his rapid 
movements, and while Amalric still thought him 
on Asiatic ground he was before Cairo, welcomed 
by the acclamations of its inhabitants. Hereupon 



Digitized by Google 




RISE OF SAliADIN. 



87 



Amalric quitted the country for ever, and Shirk oh 
took care that it should not again be lost to the 
Turkish rule. A fortnight after the retreat of the 
Franks, his young nephew, Saladin, ordered the 
Vizier Shawer to be arrested and executed, and the 
feeble Caliph gave the vacant office, and with it the 
government of the country, to the Turkish con- 
queror. When, a few weeks after, Shirkuh died, 
Saladin, with Noureddin’s sanction, succeeded him. 

He was then in the first fresh bloom of youth, 
and had given but few proofs of political or mili- 
tary talent. He had been living in the gardens of 
Damascus; dividing his time between scientific 
studies and social pleasures, and had followed his 
uncle to Egypt with the greatest reluctance. “ I was 
as miserable,” he said later, “ as though I had been 
led to death.” He did not, as we see, seek fortune, 
but she sought him. Once in action, however, he 
showed himself energetic and ardent; his mind 
developed itself largely and vigorously, each suc- 
cessive difficulty and danger called forth, out of his 
joyous and pleasure-loving nature, the highest 
faculties of dominion and conquest. He had no- 
thing of Noureddin’s somewhat pedantic manners ; 
he loved to be surrounded by happy faces, and to 
lay aside his external dignity in personal inter- 
course, sure of being able at any moment to resume 



Digitized by Google 




88 



HtSTORT OR TBE CRUSADES. 



the character of an absolute commander. He was 
not so stern a judge as Noureddin towards others 
or towards himself ; he often acted with great in- 
dulgence, and sometimes also with harsh and arbi- 
trary caprice, but was afterwards ready to acknow- 
ledge his injustice, and to make ample amends. 
He was altogether more amiable, frank, and natural 
than Noureddin ; his was one of those splendid 
natures, which, in the plenitude of genius, half un- 
consciously grasp the dominion over a people, but 
know no other rule or limit than their own per- 
sonal power and inspiration. They in every sense 
overstep the bounds of everyday life, they break 
through all rules, and not unfrequently neglect the 
commonest duties; they feel their own strength, 
and are possessed with the desire to give full 
scope to their faculties. The young commander, 
who a year before had angrily lamented that the 
command of the Sultan had driven him to endure 
fatigue and hardship, now held a vast kingdom iu 
his firm and supple grasp ; he had no feelings save 
those of a born ruler, and all who gainsaid him 
felt the whole force of his resentment. Several 
insurrections in Egypt were put down with such 
promptitude and so much bloodshed, that the peo- 
ple in fear and trembling gave up all thoughts of 
rebellion; and when, in the year 1171, the faint- 



Digitized by Google 




saladin’s Supremacy. 



89 



hearted Cdliph made a feeble attempt at indepen» 
dence, the news suddenly spread through the land 
that he had ceased to live ; and the race of the 
Fatimites was extinct after a reign of two hundred 1 
years. To none was the rise of Saladin more dan- \ 
gerous than to the Franks in Palestine, who were 
now surrounded, and threatened on all sides by a 
united, unmerciful, and ever restless power. Nour- 
eddin on the east and Saladin on the west, had 
only to advance with their masses of troops, and 
the Frankish States must have been crushed at once 
by the mere force of numbers. But an unforeseen 
complication of affairs on the side of the enemy 
delayed the catastrophe for a few years; it hap- 
pened that one of the great Turkish rulers had for 
the present moment a personal interest in main- 
taining the existence of the Christians. 

Saladin had come into Egypt as Noureddin’s 
subaltern, and ruled there with the title of the 
Sultan’s viceroy. In reality, he governed quite in- 
dependently, owing to the great distance between 
Damascus and Cairo, and the necessity of quick 
and decisive measures in Egypt. It was however 
certain that his absolute sovereignty would cease 
directly the two countries should be united by the 
conquest of .Palestine ; and for this reason Saladin A 
delayed under every conceivable pretext whenever 



Digitized by Google 




90 



BISTORT OP THE CRUSADES. 



^Noureddin sent him orders to begin the holy war. 
Noureddin endured this for two years, and then 
sent for his nephew Saifeddin from Mosul to Da- 
mascus, entrusted to him the government of Syria, 
and prepared to march in person at the head of a 
mighty army, in order to call the ambitious upstart 
to account. Saladin in the meantime conquered 
Nubia and part of Arabia, in order to take refuge 
there on the appearance of his angry chief. At 
this important crisis a higher power interposed in 
favour of the younger potentate. In the year 
1174 Sultan Noureddin and King Amalric died 
within a short time of each other, both leaving 
sons under age, who became the centres of anarchy 
and party feud. Thus Saladin, yet in the flower of 
life, beheld a boundless field open before him, and 
the future destiny of the East within his grasp. 
His first step was to declare to the ambitious emirs 
and pretenders to power in Noureddin’s dominions 
that he should resent eveiy injury to young Ismael 
as one offered to himself, and that he looked upon 
the son of his benefactor as his natural ward. But 
when Ismael came forward with unexpected vigour, 
and humbled all his relations and officers beneath de- 
cisive and rapid strokes, Saladin suddenly changed 
his policy, appeared with an army in Syria, con- 
quered Damascus, and as an open proclamation of 



Digitized by Google 




DECLINE OP THE PRANKISH STATES. 91 

;fais own supremacy, assumed (he title of Sultan. 
Several years were passed in confusion and fight- 
ing, during which the Christians were blind enough 
to take Saladin’s part. In 1181 Ismael died, Saladin 
strained every nerve, and in the course of three 
.campaigns, reduced all the Syrian emirs, those of 
Mesopotamia, and at last of Mosul itself to acknow- 
ledge his supremacy. In the year 1184, he was 
sole ruler from the sources of the Nile as far as the 
river Tigris, and now he began the last decisive 
attack upon the Christians, whom, spite of the ge- 
neral largeness of his mind, he hated with relentless 
hate, worthy of Zenki or Noureddin. 

In the Frankish States the near approach of dis- 
solution was foretold by inward decline, by division 
and anarchy, by miserable cowardice, and insolent 
rashness. The young King Baldwin IV. lay incura- 
bly ill with leprosy; they sought, as his future heir, 
a husband for his sister Sibylla, and Baldwin hastily 
pronounced in favour of Count Guy de Lusignan, 
a Gascon bully, without wealth or power, and what 
was worse, without understanding or character, so 
that his elevation provoked a storm of indignation 
throughout the kingdom. Two great parties were 
instantly formed. At the head of one stood nomi- 
nally Baldwin and Guy, but really Reginald of 
Chatillon, a desperado athirst for war and plunder, 



Digitized by Google 




92 HISTORY OF THE CRUSADES. 

and physically and morally ungovernable ; a man 
who under other circumstances might have been a 
common pirate, or possibly a great conqueror ; he 
fully perceived the desperate state of affairs, and 
exhorted the Christians — as at the worst they could 
but lose their lives — to fight without delay or ces- 
sation. The opposing barons ranged themselves 
against him under the former regent, Count Ray- 
mond of Tripoli, a clever but vacillating and weak 
man, who, halting between honesty and ambition, 
aspired to the crown, half from selfish, half from 
patriotic motives, and warmly advocated a peaceful 
and yielding policy towards Saladin, as the only 
chance of safety. Amid these hopeless disputes, 
Saladin’s mighty onslaught burst upon them, from 
Egypt, from Damascus, and from the sea, simul- 
taneous, and well combined, with armies each more 
numerous than the whole Christian force. Once 
more disturbances on the Tigris, in which the 
Sultan was involved, gave the Franks a moment’s 
breathing-time; Raymond of Tripoli used it to 
remove the incapable Guy, and proclaim Sibylla’s 
son heir to the throne ; but when King Baldwin 
sank under his disease, and the royal boy died un- 
expectedly, Sibylla, in spite of all objections, recalled 
her husband, and placed the crown upon his head. 
The Count of Tripoli, beside himself with rage. 



Digitized by Google 




DANGER OF THB CHRISTIANS. 93 

forgot every consideration of duty, and applied to 
Saladin for help. Guy and Sibylla thought them- 
selves fortunate to obtain by heavy sacrifices an 
armistice from the mighty Sultan, who showed him- 
self merciful from contempt. But they were not 
strong enough to compel Count Reginald to keep the 
peace ; from the fortresses of the Arabian desert he 
sallied forth and attacked the peaceful caravans on 
their passage, and thereupon Saladin declared the 
measure to be full. The Count of Tripoli, in liis an- 
ger against Guy, allowed the immense army which 
Saladin brought from Damascus to pass through his 
dominions, and on the 1st May, 1187, Saladin gained 
his first victory over the advanced Christian troops 
posted on the river Kishon, and led his overwhelm- 
ing army upon Jerusalem. Before this terrible danger 
party hatred at last was silent ; the Christians col- 
lected all their forces, and even the Count of Tripoli 
repenting the fearful consequences of his breach of 
faith, joined his former adversaries. But even so, 
they were far inferior in numbers and in general- 
ship. to their antagonist. On the 5th of July a 
battle was fought at Tiberias, which, in . conse- 
quence of Guy’s utter weakness and incompetence, 
and Saladin’s energetic dispositions, resulted within 
the first hour in the total destruction of the Chris- 
tians.- The greater part of their knights lay dead 



Digitized by Google 




94 



HISTORY OF THE CRUSADES. 



on the field, the Count of Tripoli escaped with a few 
followers by rapid flight only to die in a few days 
conscience-stricken and broken-hearted. King Guy, 
Reginald of Chatillon, and many of the principal 
barons, were taken prisoners. Saladin received them 
in his tent, and with consolatory words offered a re- 
freshing drink to the wearied King ; but when Count 
Reginald reached out his hand for the cup, he clove 
the head of the forsworn breaker of treaties with his 
sword, so that he fell with a groan and died on the 
spot. The terrific news of the defeat spread through 
the land, destroying all remaining strength or cou- 
rage. Towns and castles opened their gates wherever 
the victorious troops appeared ; Tyre alone was de- 
fended by the opportune arrival of an Italian fleet 
under the Marquis Conrad of Montferrat. Jerusa- 
lem, which, as a holy city, Saladin wished to take 
by treaty, capitulated on the 3rd of October, after 
an investment of three weeks. Saladin’s career of 
victory did not yet extend as far as Tripoli and 
Antioch, but the kingdom of Jerusalem, the pride 
and centre of the Christian rule, was destroyed. 



Digitized by Google 




CHAPTER IV. 



Although after the failure of the Second Crusade 
the interest felt by the Western nations in the king- 
dom of Jerusalem had greatly diminished, still the 
news of the loss of the Holy City fell like a thunder- 
bolt on men’s minds. Excitement, anger, and grief 
were universal ; once more before its final extinction 
the flame which had kindled the mystic war of God 
blazed high in the hearts of men. “What a dis- 
grace, what an affliction,” cried Pope Urban III., 
“ that the jewel which the second Urban won for 
Christendom should be lost by the third !” He ve- 
hemently exhorted the Church and all her faithful to 
join the war, worked day and night, prayed, sighed, 
and so wore himself out with grief and anger that 
he sickened and died in a few weeks. His suc- 
cessor, Gregory VIII., and after him Pope Clement 
III., were inspired by the same feeling, and exerted 
themselves for the great cause with untiring energy. 



Digitized by Google 




96 HISTORT OF THE CRUSADES. 

At the time of the First Crusade, Pope Urban II. 
had, as we have seen, preached but once, and then 
left the ardour of visionary enthusiasm to take its own 
effect; but now Gregory VIII. sent legates through 
every country, and through them watched the pro- 
gress of arming, made arrangements for the cost of 
the expedition, imposed a universal tax, called Sa- 
tadin’s tithe, on all classes of the European popula- 
tion, had the plans laid before him, removed political 
difficulties, and allayed dissensions, which might have 
hindered the departure of the armies, — in a word, 
he acted as though he had been the monarch of a 
large, warlike, and well administered kingdom. The 
effect was wonderful. In 1185 a number of English 
barons had put on the cross, on hearing of Saladin’s 
menacing progress; towards the end of 1187 the 
heir to the throne, Richard, followed their example ; 
some months later, King Henry II. had a meeting 
with his former enemy, Philip Augustus of France, 
at Gisors, where they vowed to abandon their earthly 
quarrels, and to become warriors of the everlasting 
God. Nearly the whole nobility, and a number of the 
lower class of people were carried away by their 
example. In Italy, Genoa had long been urging on 
the Pope, who in his turn succeeded in gaining over 
Pisa, which had always been hostile to the Genoese ; 
King William of Sicily fitted out his fleet, and was 



Digitized by Google 




THE WEST RISES TO ARMS. 



97 



only prevented by death from joining it himself. 
From Denmark and Scandinavia pilgrims thronged to 
Syria both by land and by water ; in Germany, now 
as formerly, the zeal was not so great, until in March, 
1188, the Emperor Frederick Barbarossa, at the age 
of near seventy, put on the cross, and by his ever firm 
and powerful will collected together a mass of nearly 
a hundred thousand pilgrims. All the Western na- 
tions rose to arms. 

The news of this enormous movement reached 
the East, where at first it was hardly believed, but 
grew louder and more threatening every day, and 
the ferocious war-cry of Europe was answered by a 
voice of defiance quite as eager. Saladin had stu- 
died his antagonists w.ith the eye of a true states- 
man, and had organized his dominions almost ac- 
cording to the Western system. Under an oath of 
allegiance and service in war, he granted to each of 
his emirs a town on feudal tenure ; its surrounding 
land they again divided among their followers ; the 
Sultan thus attached those wandering hordes of 
horsemen to the soil, and kept those restless spirits 
permanently together. He then invoked the reli- 
gious zeal of all Mahomedans with such success that, 
partly from fanaticism and partly from love of plun- 
der, volunteers flocked* to his standard from every 
quarter, from the depths of the Arabian desert, from 

H 



Digitized by Google 




98 



HISTORY OF THE CRUSADES. 



the country between the Euphrates and the Tigris, 
from Persia and Kurdistan. The warlike robbers 
and hunters of the Caucasus joined his camp at 
the same time as the nomads of Bulgaria, with their 
cattle and camels ; from the frontiers of Nubia came 
crowds of Negroes, “ a people of fiends and devils,” 
said the Franks, “ about whom nothing is white but 
their eyes and teeth.” These masses dispersed, it 
is true, at the beginning of every winter, and the 
Sultan was then left for a few months with only his 
feudal troops; but on the return of fair weather 
they again collected in ever-increasing numbers 
round that nucleus. The arming of the East was 
not even confined to the territories of Islam. Sa- 
ladin well knew the mutual hatred which divided 
the Greek Byzantines and the Latin Franks, and 
kept so skilfully alive in the Emperor Isaac 
Angelos the fear of the insolence of the Western 
soldiers, that he concluded an offensive and de- 
fensive alliance with Saladin against those who 
shared his own faith. On the island of Cyprus 
Isaac Comnenus had founded a separate kingdom 
in open revolt against the Emperor, and although 
he was on terms of bitter hostility with the Greek 
Emperor, Saladin won them both over to his policy, 
so that the ships of Cyprus joined the Egyptian 
fleet in guarding the coasts of Syria. Even the 



Digitized by Google 




Armenians 

existence had been saved by the First Crusade, he 
contrived to attach to his side. The whole East, 
from the Danube to the Indus, from the Caspian Sea 
to the sources of the Nile, prepared with one intent 
to withstand the great invasion of Europe. Amid 
cares and preparations which had reference to three- 
quarters of the globe, Saladin neglected his nearest 
enemy, the feeble remnant of the Christian States in 
Syria, which, although unimportant in themselves, 
were of great consequence as landing-places for the in- 
vading Western nations during the approaching war. 
The small principalities of Antioch and Tripoli still 
existed, and in the midst of the Turkish forces, the 
Marquis Conrad of Montferrat still displayed the 
banner of the cross upon the ramparts of Tyre. It 
seems as if in this instance Saladin had abandoned 
himself too much to the superb and easy carelessness 
of his nature. Hitherto he had not shrunk from the 
most strenuous exertions ; but he was so certain of 
his victory, that he neglected to strike the final blow. 
Not until the autumn of 1187 did he begin the 
siege of Tyre ; and for the first time in his life found 
a dangerous adversary in Conrad of Montferrat, a 
man of cool courage and keen determination, whose 
soul was unmoved by religious enthusiasm, and 
equally free from weakness or indecision ; so that 

; ; H 2 



PREPARATIONS IN TaE EAST. 






of Cilicia and the Euphrates, whose very 



Digitized by Google 




100 



BISTORT OF THE CRUSADES. 



under his command the inhabitants of the city re- 
pulsed every attack with increasing assurance and 
resolution. Saladin hereupon determined to try 
starvation, which a strict blockade by sea and land 
was to cause in the town; but in June, 1188 , the 
Sicilian fleet appeared, gave the superiority by sea 
to the Christians, and brought relief to Tyre. The 
Sultan retreated, and marched through the defence- 
less provinces of Antioch and Tripoli, but there too 
he left the capitals in peace upon the arrival of the 
Sicilian fleet in their waters. The following summer 
he spent in taking the Frankish fortresses in Ara- 
bia Petraea, the possession of which was important 
to him in order to secure freedom of communication 
between Egypt and Syria. Meanwhile the rein- 
forcements from the West were pouring into the 
Christian seaport towns. In the first place the two 
military and religions Orders, the Templars and the 
Knights of St. John, had collected munitions of war 
of every kind from all their European possessions, 
and increased the number of their mercenaries to 
fourteen thousand men. King Guy also had ran- 
somed himself from captivity and had gone to Tripoli, 
where by degrees the remnant of the Syrian barons, 
and pilgrims of all nations, gathered round him. 
They took the right resolution, to remain no longer 
inactive, but, with the gigantic preparations in 



Digitized by Google 




SIEGE OF PTOLEMAIS. 



101 



Europe in prospect, to begin the attack at once. On 
the 28th of August, 1189, Guy commenced the siege 
of the strong maritime fortress of Ptolemais (St. 
Jean d’Acre). A fleet from Pisa had already joined 
the Sicilian one; in October there arrived twelve 
thousand Danes and Frisians, and in November a 
number of Flemings, under the Count of Avesnes, 
French knights under the Bishop of Beauvais, and 
Thuringians, under their landgrave, Louis. Saladin, 
roused from his inactivity by these events, hastened 
to the spot with his army, and in his turn sur- 
rounded the Christian camp, which .lay in a wide se- 
micircle round Ptolemais, and was defended by strong 
entrenchments within and without. It formed an 
iron ring round the besieged town, which Saladin, 
spite of all his efforts, could not break through. 
Each wing of the position rested upon the sea, and 
was thus certain of its supplies, and able to protect 
the landing of the reinforcements, which continually 
arrived in constantly increasing numbers, — Italians, 
French, English and Germans, Normans and Swedes. 
“ If on one day we killed ten,” said the Arabs, “ on 
the next, a hundred more arrived fresh from the 
West.” The fighting was incessant by land and by 
sea, against the town and against the Sultan’s camp. 
Sometimes the Egyptian fleet drove the Christian 
ships far out to sea; and Saladin could then succour 



Digitized by Google 




102 



HISTORT OF THE CRUSADES. 



the garrison with provisions and fresh troops, till new 
Frankish squadrons again surrounded the harbour, 
and only a few intrepid divers could steal through 
between the hostile ships. On land, too, now one 
side and now the other was in danger. One day the 
Sultan scaled the Christian entrenchments, and ad- 
vanced close to the walls of the city, before the 
Franks rallied sufficiently to drive him back by a 
desperate attack ; but they soon took their revenge 
in a night sortie, when they attacked the Sultan in 
his very tent, and he narrowly escaped by rapid 
flight. Against the town their progress was very 
slow, as the garrison, under an able and energetic 
commander, Bohaeddin, showed itself resolute and 
indefatigable. One week passed after another, and 
the condition of the Franks became painfully com- 
plicated. They could go neither backwards nor 
forwards; they could make no impression on the 
walls ; nor could they re-embark in the face of an 
active enemy. There was no choice but to con- 
quer or die ; so preparations were made for a long 
sojourn; wooden barracks, and for the princes 
even stone houses were built, and a new hostile 
town arose all around Ptolemais. In spite of this 
the winter brought innumerable hardships. In that 
small space more than a hundred thousand men 
were crowded together, with insufficient shelter, and 



Digitized by Google 




SIEGE OF PTOLEVAIS. 



103 



uncertain supplies of wretched food; pestilential 
diseases soon broke out, which swept away thou« 
sands, and were intensified by the exhalations from 
the heaps of dead. Saladin retreated from their 
deadly vicinity to more airy quarters on the ad- 
jacent hills ; his troops also suffered from the severe 
weather, but were far better supplied than the Chris- 
tians with water, provisions,and other comforts, as the 
caravans irom Cairo and Bagdad met in their camp, 
and numbers of merchants displayed in glittering 
booths all kinds of Eastern wares. It was an unex- 
ampled assemblage of the forces of two quarters of 
the world round one spot, unimportant in itself, and 
chosen almost by accident. Our own times have seen 
a counterpart to it in the siege of Sebastopol, which, 
though in a totally different form, was a new act in 
the same great struggle between the East and the 
West. Happily the Western nations did not derive 
their warlike stimulus from religious sources, and 
they displayed, if not their military, at any rate their 
moral superiority, in the most brilliant manner. 

Although in the fight around Ptolemais, this su- 
periority was doubtless on Saladin’s side, there was 
a moment in which Europe threatened to oppose to 
the mighty Sultan an antagonist as great as himself. 
In May, 1189, the Emperor Frederick I. marched 
out of Ratisbon with his army for Syria. He had 



Digitized by Google 




104 



HISTORY OF THE CRUSADES. 



already ruled thirty-seven years over Germany and 
Italy, and his life had been one of war and labour, 
of small results, but growing fame. He was born a 
ruler in the highest sense of the word ; he possessed 
all the attributes of power; bold yet cautious, coura- 
geous and enduring, energetic and methodical, he 
towered proudly above all who surrounded him, 
and had the highest conception of his princely call- 
ing. But his ideas were beyond his time, and 
while he tried to open the way for a distant future, 
he was made to feel the penalty of running counter 
to the inclinations of the present generation. It 
seemed to him unbearable, that the Emperor, who 
was extolled by all the world as the defender of the 
right and the fountain-head of law, should be forced 
to bow before unruly vassals or unlimited ecclesias- 
tical power. He had, chiefly from the study of the 
Roman law, conceived the idea of a state complete 
within itself, and strong in the name of the common 
weal, a complete contrast to the existing condition of 
Europe, where all the monarchies were breaking up, 
and the crowned priest reigned supreme over a crowd 
of petty princes. Under these circumstances he ap- 
peared, foreshadowing modem thoughts deep in the 
middle ages, like a fresh mountain breeze dispersing 
the incense-laden atmosphere of the time. This dis- 
crepancy caused the greatness and the misfortune of 



Digitized by Google 




FREDERICK BARBAROSSA. 



105 



the mighty Emperor. The current of his time set full 
against him. When, as the representative of the 
State, he enforced obedience to the law, he ap- 
peared to some an impious offender against the 
Holy Church ; to others, a tyrant trampling on the 
general freedom ; and while conquering in a hun- 
dred fights, he was driven from one position after 
another by the force of opinion. But so command- 
ing was the energy, so powerful the earnestness, 
and so inexhaustible the resources of his nature, 
that he was as terrible to his foes on the last day 
as on the first, passionless and pitiless, never dis- 
torted by cruelty, and never melted by pity, an iron 
defender of his imperial rights. 

We can only guess at the reasons which may 
have induced a 'sovereign of this stamp to leave a 
sphere of domestic activity for the fantastic wars 
of the Crusades. Once, in the midst of his Italian 
feud, when the deeds of Alexander the Great were 
read aloud to him, he exclaimed, “Happy Alex- 
ander, who didst never see Italy ! happy I, had 
I ever been in Asia 1” Whether piety or love of 
fame ultimately decided him, he felt within himself 
the energy to take a great decision, and at once pro- 
ceeded to action. The aged Emperor once more dis- 
played, in this last effort, the fullness of his power- 
ful and ever-youthful nature.. For the first time 



Digitized by Google 




106 



HISTORT OF THE CRUSADES. 



during these wars, since the armed pilgrimages had 
begun, Europe beheld a spirit conscious of their true 
object, and capable of carrying it out. The army 
was smaller than any of the former ones, consisting 
of twenty thousand knights, and fifty thousand 
squires and foot-soldiefs ; but it was guided by one 
inflexible, indomitable will. With strict discipline, 
the Imperial leader drove all disorderly and useless 
persons out of his camp, he was always the first to 
face every obstacle or danger, and showed himself 
equal to all the political or military difficulties of the 
expedition. The Greek Empire had to be traversed 
first, whose emperor, Isaac, as I have before men- 
tioned, had allied himself with Saladin ; but at the 
sight of these formidable masses, he shrank in terror 
from any hostile attempt, and hastened to transport 
the German army across into Asia Minor. There 
they hoped for a friendly reception from the Emir 
of Iconium, who was reported to have a leaning 
towards Christianity ; but in the meantime the old 
ruler had been dethroned by his sons, who opposed 
the Germans with a strong force. They were des- 
tined to feel the weight of the German arm. Aft«: 
their mounted bowmen had harassed the Christian 
troops for a time with a shower of arrows, the Em- 
peror broke their line of battle, and scattered them 
by a sudden attack of cavalry in all directions, while 



Digitized by Google 




DEATH OF FREDERICK BARBAROSSA. 107 

at the same moment Frederick’s son unexpectedly 
scaled the walls of their city. The Crusaders then 
marched in triumph to Cilicia ; the Armenians al- 
ready yielded submissively to a cessation of hosti- 
lities; and far and wide thoughout Turkish Syria 
went the dread of Frederick’s irresistible arms. 
Even Saladin himself, who had boldly defied the 
the disorderly attacks of the hundreds of thousands 
before Ptolemais, now lost all hope, and announced 
to his emirs his intention of quitting Syria on Fre- 
derick’s arrival, and retreating across the Euphrates. 
On this, every highway in the country became alive, 
the emirs quitted their towns, and began to fly with 
their families, their goods, and chattels, and hope 
rose high in the Christian camp. This honour was 
reserved for the Emperor; that which no other 
Frankish sword could achieve, he had done by the 
mere shadow of his approach: he had forced from 
Saladin a confession of inferiority. But he was not 
destined to see the realization of his endeavours 
here, any more than in Europe. His army had en- 
tered Cilicia, and was preparing to cross the rapid 
mountain torrent of the Seleph. On the 10 th of 
June, 1190, they marched slowly across the narrow- 
bridge, and the Emperor, impatient to get to the 
front, urged his horse into the stream, intending to 
swim to the opposite shore. The raging waters 



Digitized by Google 




108 



HISTORY OF THR CRUSADES. 



suddenly seized him, and hurried him away before 
the eyes of his people. . When he was drawn out, far 
down the river, he was a corpse. Boundless lamen- 
tations resounded throughout the army; the most 
brilliant ornament and sole hope of Christendom 
was gone ; the troops arrived at Antioch in a state 
of the deepest dejection. From thence a number 
of the pilgrims returned home, scattered and dis- 
couraged, and a pestilence broke out among the 
rest, which was fatal L o the greater number of 
them : it seemed, says a chronicler, “ as though the 
members would not outlive their head.” The Em- 
peror’s son, Duke Frederick of Suabia, reached the 
camp before Ptolemais with five thousand men, in- 
stituted there the Order of the Teutonic Knights, 
— who were destined hereafter to found a splendid 
dominion on the distant shores of the German 
Ocean; — and soon afterwards followed his father 
to the grave. 

The highest hopes were destroyed by this lament- 
able downfall. It seemed as if a stern fate had re- 
solved to give the Christian world a distant view of 
the possibility of victory ; the great Emperor might 
have secured it, but the generation which had not 
understood him, was doomed to misery and defeat. 
A second winter, with the same fearful additions of 
hunger and sickness, came upon the camp before 



Digitized by Google 




QUARRELS AMONG THE PRINCES. 109 

Ptolemais, and the measure of misfortune was filled 
by renewed and bitter quarrels among the Frankish 
princes. King Guy was as incompetent as ever, 
and so utterly mismanaged the Christian cause, that 
the Marquis Conrad of Montferrat indignantly op- 
posed him. Queen Sibylla, by marriage with whom 
Guy had gained possession of the crown, died just 
at this juncture. Conrad instantly declared that 
Sibylla’s sister Eliza was now the only rightful heir, 
and, as he held every step towards advancement to 
be laudable, did not for a moment scruple to elope 
with her from her husband, to marry her himself, 
and to lay claim to the crown. Amid all this con- 
fusion and disaster, the eyes of the Crusaders turned 
with increasing anxiety towards the horizon, to 
catch a glimpse of the sails which were to bring to 
them two fresh leaders, the kings of France and 
of England. Their preparations had not been very 
rapid. Henry II. of England had, even since his 
oath, got into a new quarrel with Philip Augus- 
tus of France, which only ended with his death, in 
1189. His son and successor, Richard, whose zeal 
had led him to put up the cross earlier than the 
rest, instantly began to arrange the expedition with 
Philip. In his impetuous manner, he exulted in the 
prospect of unheard-of triumphs ; the government of 
England was hastily and insufficiently provided for 



Digitized by Google 




110 



DISTORT OF THE CRUSADES. 



during the absence of the King ; above all, money 
was needed in great quantities, and raised by every 
expedient, good or bad. When some one remon- 
strated with the King concerning these extortions, 
he exclaimed, “ I would sell London itself, if I 
could but find a purchaser.” He legislated with 
the same inconsiderate vehemence a3 to the disci- 
pline and order of his army : murderers were to be 
buried alive on land, and at sea to be tied to the 
corpses of their victims, and thrown into the water; 
thieves were to be tarred and feathered ; and who- 
ever gambled for money, be he king or baron, was 
to be dipped three times in the sea, or flogged 
naked before the whole army. Richard led his 
army through France, and went on board his splen- 
did fleet at Marseilles, while Philip sailed from Ge- 
noa in hired vessels. Halfway to Sicily, however, 
Richard got tired of the sea-voyage, landed near 
Rome, and journeyed with a small retinue through 
the Abruzzi and Calabria, already on the look-out for 
adventures, and often engaged in bloody quarrels 
with the peasants of the mountain villages. When 
he at last arrived in Sicily, his unstable mind sud- 
denly underwent a total change ; a quarrel with the 
Sicilian king, Tancred, drove the Holy Sepulchre 
entirely out of his head. Now fighting, now nego- 
tiating, he stayed nine months at Messina, — hated 



Digitized by Google 




RICH ABS CffitJ R-DE-LION . 



Ill 



and feared by the inhabitants, who called him the 
lion, the savage lion, — deaf to the entreaties of his 
followers, who were eager to get to Syria, and heed- 
less and defiant to all Philip Augustus’s representa- 
tions and demands. At last, the French king, losing 
patience, sailed without him, and arrived at Ptole- 
mais in April, 1191. He was received with eager 
joy, but did not succeed in at all advancing the siege 
operations ; for so many of the French pilgrims had 
preceded him, that the army he brought was but 
small, and though an adroit and cunning diploma- 
tist, a tried and unscrupulous statesman, he lacked 
the rough soldierly vigour and bravery, on which 
everything at that moment depended. At length 
Richard was again on his road, and again he allowed 
himself to be turned aside from his purpose. One 
of his ships, which bore his betrothed bride, had 
stranded on the Cyprian coast, and in consequence 
of the hostility of the king of that island, had been 
very inhospitably received. Richard was instantly 
up in arms, declared war against the Comneni, 
and conquered the whole island in a fortnight ; an 
impromptu conquest, which was of the highest 
importance to the Christian party in the East for 
centuries after. 

Still occupied in establishing a military colony of 
his knights, he was surprised by a visit from King 



Digitized by Google 




112 HISTORY OR THE CRXJ8ADE8. 

Guy, of Jerusalem, who wished to secure the sup- 
port of the dreaded monarch in his party contests 
at home. Guy complained to King Richard of the 
matrimonial offences of his rival, informed him that 
Philip Augustus had declared in favour of Conrad’s 
claims, and on the spot secured the jealous adhe- 
rence of the English monarch. He landed on the 
8th of June at Ptolemais ; the Christians celebrated 
his arrival by an illumination of the camp; and 
without a moment’s delay, by his warlike ardour, 
he roused the whole army out of the state of 
apathy into which it had lately fallen. Day after day 
the walls of the city were energetically assailed on 
every side. On the 8th July, Saladin made his 
last attempt to raise the siege, by an attack on the 
Christian entrenchments ; he was driven back with 
great loss, whereupon he permitted the besieged to 
capitulate. The town surrendered, with all its stores, 
after a siege of nearly three years’ duration ; the 
heroic defenders still remaining, about three thou- 
sand in number, were to be exchanged, within the 
space of forty days, for two thousand captive Chris- 
tians, and a ransom of two hundred thousand pieces 
of gold. The war, according to all reports, had by 
this time cost the Crusaders above thirty thousand 
men. 

Those among the pilgrims who were enthusiastic 



Digitized by Google 




NEGOTIATIONS. 118 

and devout, now hoped their way would lead straight 
to the Holy Sepulchre. But it soon became mani- 
fest that the feeling which had prompted the Cru- 
sades was dead for ever. The news of the fall of 
Jerusalem had awakened a momentary excitement 
in the Western nations, but had failed to stir up 
the old enthusiasm. On Syrian ground, the ideal 
faith rapidly gave way before substantial worldly 
considerations. Richard, Guy, and the Pisans, on 
the one hand; Philip, Conrad, and the Genoese, 
on the other, were already in open discord, which 
was so embittered by Richard’s blustering fury, 
that Philip Augustus embarked at the end of July 
for France, declaring upon his oath that he had no 
evil intentions towards England, but determined 
•in his heart to let Richard feel his resentment on 
the first opportunity. Meanwhile negotiations had 
begun between Saladin and Richard, which at first 
seemed to promise favourable results for the Chris- 
tians, but unfortunately the day fixed for the ex- 
change of the prisoners arrived before Saladin was 
able to procure the whole of the promised ransom. 
Richard, with the most brutal cruelty, slaughtered 
two thousand seven hundred prisoners in one day. 
Saladin magnanimously refused the demands of his 
exasperated followers for . reprisals, but of course 
there could be no further question of a treaty, and 

i 



Digitized by Google 




114 



HISTORY OF THE CRUSADES. 



the war recommenced with renewed fury. Richard 
led the army on an expedition against Ascalon, 
defeated Saladin on his march thither at Arsuf, 
and advanced amid incessant skirmishes and single 
combats, into which he recklessly plunged as though 
he had been a simple knight-errant. Accordingly 
his progress was so slow that Saladin had de- 
stroyed the town before his arrival and rendered its- 
capture worthless to the Christians. Again nego- 
tiations were begun, but in January, 1192 , Richard 
suddenly advanced upon Jerusalem, and by foroed 
marches quickly reached Baitnuba, a village only 
a few miles distant from the Holy City. But there 
the Sultan had thrown up strong and extensive 
fortifications, and after long and anxious delibera- 
tions, the Franks returned .towards Ascalon. Mean- 
while Conrad of Montferrat had placed himself 
in communication with Saladin, proposed to him 
point-blank an alliance against Richard, and by his 
prudent and consistent conduct, daily grew in favour 
with the Sultan. The Christian camp, on the other 
hand, was filled with ever-increasing discord; and 
the differences between Richard and Conrad reached 
such a height, that the Marquis went back to Ptole- 
mais, and regularly beseiged the Pisans, who were 
friendly to the English. Into such a miserable 
state of confusion had the great European enter- 



Digitized by Google 




TltKATY WITH SALADIN. 115 

prise fallen for want of a good leader and an ade- 
quate object. 

In April news came from England, that the King’s 
brother, John, was in open rebellion against him, 
and in alliance with France ; whereupon Richard, 
greatly alarmed, informed the barons that he must 
prepare for his departure, and that they must defi- 
nitively choose between Guy and Conrad as their 
future ruler. To his great disappointment, the 
actual necessities of the case triumphed over all 
party divisions, and all voted for Conrad, as the 
only able and fitting ruler in the country. No- 
thing remained for Richard, but to accede to heir 
wishes, and as a last act of favour towards Guy, to 
bestow upon him the crown of Cyprus. Conrad 
did not delay one moment signing the treaty with 
Saladin, and the Sultan left the new King in pos- 
session of the whole line of coast taken by the Cru- 
saders, and also ceded to hirn Jerusalem, where 
however he was to allow a Turkish mosque to exist ; 
the other towns of the interior were then to be 
divided between the two sovereigns. 

What a conclusion to a war in which the whole 
world had been engaged, and had made such in- 
calculable efforts ! After the only competent leader 
had been snatched from the Christians by an angry 
fate, the weakness and desultoriness of the others 

i 2 



Digitized by Google 




116 



HISTORY OP THE CRUSADES. 



had destroyed all the fruits of conquest. The host 
of devout pilgrims had beheld Jerusalem from 
Baitnuba, and had then been obliged to turn their 
backs upon the holy spot in impotent grief. Sud- 
denly a nameless, bold, and cunning prince made 
his appearance in this great war between the two 
religions in the world, a man indifferent to religion 
or morality, who knew no other motive than self- 
ishness, but who followed that with vigour and con- 
sistency, and had already stretched forth his hand 
to grasp the crown of the Holy Sepulchre. 

But on the 28 th April, Conrad was murdered 
by two Saracen assassins ; many said, at King Ri- 
chard’s instigation, but more affirmed it was by 
the order of the Old Man of the Mountain, the head 
of a fanatical sect in the Lebanon. Everything was 
again unsettled by this event. The Syrian barons 
instantly elected Count Henry of Champagne as 
their king ; five days after Conrad’s death he mar- 
ried his widow Eliza, and was perfectly ready to 
succeed to Conrad’s alliance with Saladin, as well 
as to his wife. But King Richard, with his usual 
thoughtlessness, allowed the scandalous marriage, 
but prevented the reasonable diplomatic arrange- 
ment. As he had a certain liking for Henry, who 
was his nephew, he wished to conquer a few more 
provinces for him in a hurry, and to win some 



Digitized by 



Google 




FRESH OUTBREAK OF WAR. 



117 



fresh laurels for himself at the same time; and 
accordingly began the war anew against Saladin. 
A Turkish fortress was taken, when more evil tid- 
ings arrived from England, and Richard announced 
that he could not remain a moment longer. The 
barons broke out in a general cry of indignation, 
that he who had plunged them into danger, should 
forsake them in the midst of it, and once more 
the vacillating King allowed himself to be diverted 
from his purpose. Again the Christians advanced 
upon Jerusalem, and again they remained long 
inactive at Baitnuba, not daring to attack the city. 
The ultimate reason for this delay was illustrative 
of the state of things : the leaders knew that the 
great mass of pilgrims would disperse as soon as 
their vows were fulfilled by the deliverance of the 
Holy Sepulchre ; this would seal the destruction of 
the Frankish rule in Syria, should it happen before 
the treaty of peace with Saladin was concluded. 
Thus the ostensible object of the Crusade could 
not be achieved without ruining Christianity in the 
East. It is impossible to give a stronger illustra- 
tion of the hopelessness and internal conflict of all 
their views and endeavours at that time. They at 
last turned back disheartened to Ramlah, where 
they were startled by the news that Saladin had 
unexpectedly assumed the offensive, attacked the 



Digitized by Google 




118 



HISTORY OR THE CRCSADB8. 



important seaport town of Joppa, and was probably ] 
already in possession of it. Richard's warlike im- 
petuosity once more burst forth. With a handful of 
followers he put to sea, and hastened to Joppa. 
When he came in sight of the harbour, the Turks j 
were already inside the town, plundering in every 
directioq, and assailing the last remains of the 
garrison. After a short reconnoitre, Richard drove 
his vessel on shore, rushed with an echoing w&r- 
cry into the midst of the enemy’s superior force, 
and by his mighty blows actually drove the Turks 
in terror and confusion out of the place. On 
the following day he encamped with contemptous 
insolence outside the gates, with a few hundred 
horsemen, when he was suddenly attacked by as 
many thousands. In one instant he was armed, 
drove back the foremost assailants, clove a Turk’s 
head down to his shoulders, and then rode along 
the wavering front of the enemy, from one wing 
to the other ; “ Now,” cried he, “ who will dare a 
fight for the honour of God?” Henceforth his 
fame was such that, years after, Turkish mothers 
threatened their children with “King Richard is 
coming,” and Turkish riders asked their shying 
horses if “ they saw the Lion-hearted King.” 

But these knightly deeds did not advance the 
war at all. It was fortunate for the Franks that 



Digitized by Google 




THEBE YEARS’ ARMISTICE- 119 

Saladin’s emirs were weary of the long strife, and 
the Sultan himself wished for the termination of 
hostilities in consequence of his failing health. 
The favourable terms of the former treaty, more 
especially the possession of Jerusalem, were of 
course no longer to be obtained. The Christians 
were obliged to be content, on the 30th of August, 
1192, with a three years’ armistice, according to 
which the seacoast from Antioch to Joppa was to 
remain in the possession of the Christians, and the 
Franks obtained permission to go to Jerusalem as 
unarmed pilgrims, to pray at the Holy Sepulchre. 
Richard embarked directly, without even taking 
measures for ransoming the prisoners. As may 
easily be imagined, the Christians were deeply exas- 
perated by such a peace ; the Turks rejoiced, and 
only Saladin looked forward with anxiety to the 
future, and feared dangerous consequences from the 
duration of even the smallest Christian dominion 
in the East, The most active and friendly inter- 
course, rarely disturbed by suspicion, soon began 
between the two nations. On the very scene 
of the struggle mutual hatred had subsided, com- 
mercial relations were formed, and political nego- 
tiations soon followed. In the place of the mys- 
tic trophy which was the object of the religious 
war, Europe had gained an immense extension of 



Digitized by Google 




120 



HISTORY OF THE CRUSADES. 



worldly knowledge, and of wealth, from the struggle 
of a hundred years. 

Saladin did not long survive his triumph over the 
combined forces of Europe ; he died on the 3rd of 
March, 1 1 93, at Damascus, aged fifty-seven. “ Take 
this cloak,” said he on his death-bed to his servant, 
“ show it to the Faithful, and tell them that the ruler 
of the East could take but one garment with him 
into the grave.” He was a man who has often been 
idealized beyond his deserts ; he was ambitious, and 
disdained no means to gratify his love of power ; a 
strict Mussulman, fanatical even to cruelty where 
religion was concerned, but otherwise of enlarged 
mind, great heart, generous and gay, accessible to 
every mental stimulus or social impression, some- 
times thoughtless in trifles, but determined and 
vigorous in every great undertaking. His kingdom 
and its institutions depended on his single person, 
and after his death the same disorganization and 
disunion broke out in the Turkish Empire that we 
have already observed among the Christians. 

I have already asserted, and I think the facts will 
\ have convinced my readers, that the spirit of the 
I Crusades was dead and gone. The war itself did 
j not therefore end directly, but continued for nearly 
| a century with various intermissions. We may de- 
signate the Crusades, — in opposition to the earlier 



Digitized by Google 




FAILURE OF THE CRUSADES. 



121 



wars against Islam, at the head of which stood the 
Frankish and Greek Emperors, and to the later, 
which was led by the great powers of Europe, — as 
the foreign policy of the Papal supremacy. So long 
as the throne of the Vatican predominated over and 
led the temporal powers of Europe, the occupants^ 
of that throne strove to direct the forces of our 
hemisphere upon the Syrian coast. But the change 
that was now beginning manifested itself at that 
point earlier than in the interior of the Western 
countries. The Popes here experienced only failures, 
or results contrary to their wishes. A large army of 
pilgrims slipped from the grasp of the most power* 
ful of all the Popes, Innocent III., and, in the pay 
of the Republic of Venice, directed the force of its 
arms against Constantinople. For a short time the 
Greek Empire was overrun with Latin knights ; but 
the only lasting gain was an enormous extension 
of Venetian commerce. The most dangerous enemy 
the Papacy ever had, the Emperor Frederick II., 
undertook another pilgrimage in fulfilment of a vow 
made in his youth. He sailed to Syria pursued 
by the excommunication of Pope Gregory IX. ; and 
while the clergy of Palestine shut their churches 
in his face, he obtained for the Christians, by a 
masterly stroke of diplomatic policy, and with- 
out drawing the sword, the possession of the Holy 



Digitized by Google 




122 



BISTORT OP THE CRUSADES. 



Places ; but be was forced to return home before 
he could complete the negotiation, in order to de- 
fend his kingdom of Naples against an attack from 
the Papal troops. Twenty years later, the Curia 
once more beheld a Crusade after its own heart, 
when St. Louis, burning with holy ardour, led a 
French army against the Sultan of Egypt. But 
after a brief success, he allowed himself to be sur- 
rounded by his opponents in the flooded valley -of 
the Nile ; and the campaign ended, without glory or 
advantage, in the capture of the whole crusading 
army. After this defeat, the Pope failed in all his 
endeavours to excite any enthusiasm for the Eastern 
war ; one Syrian fortress after the other tell into the 
hands of the victorious Mussulmans, until at length 
and last of all, the dearly won Ptolemais was cap- 
tured, after an obstinate resistance, in the year 1292 ; 
just at the time when Pope Boniface VIII., took 
the first steps towards his great conflict with King 
Philip the Handsome, of France, which resulted in 
the deepest humiliation of the Papal power. The 
system of Gregory VII. declined simultaneously in 
Europe and in Asia. 

It must have struck all my readers, that although 
during the whole period of the Crusades, the hos- 
tility between the East and the West was more 
violent, the difference between them was far less 



Digitized by Google 




RELATION’S BETWEEN THE EAST AND WEST. 128 

marked than in our own days. At the present time 
Europe, in its absolute superiority of arms, of cuh 
ture, and of manners, looks down upon the Eastern 
world much as it does upon the perishing red 
men of the West, or the falling empire of China. 
The interval that separates European nations from 
the Turks has come to be almost that between 
civilization and barbarism. But in the thirteenth 
century the relations between the two were to- 
tally different. Both East and West were then 
under similar conditions as to government and in- 
tellectual culture ; they were engaged in an active 
contest for superiority ; and we may fairly doubt 
which excelled the other in intelligence. If on the 
one hand a whole swarm of Turcoman horse was 
scattered by the Frankish chivalry ; on the other, 
there was no doubt that the Turkish system of 
warfare and strategy was very superior to the 
Christian. Municipal administration and police, 
security and order, external comforts and luxu- 
ries, were on a higher level in Cairo and Damascus 
than either in Paris or in London. Science and 
art were cultivated in Syria and Persia with at least 
as much success as in Europe. In the former as 
well as in the latter, Aristotle was studied, juris- 
prudence and theology were reduced to a science, 
and poetry flourished in youthful freshness. To 



Digitized by Google 




124 



HISTORY OT THE CRU8ADE8. 



turn to the domain of religion: while by the in- 
fluence of politics and philosophy, the original 
barbarism of Islam was softened and enriched, 
contrariwise, out of the deepest feelings of Chris- 
tianity were evolved the lust of dominion and the 
most aggressive fanaticism. In Asia both the power 
of the state and the religious feelings of indi- 
viduals had by this time freed themselves in a 
great degree from the spiritual dominion of the 
Caliph, while in Europe the Papacy took every mea- 
sure to destroy the power of the sovereigns and 
the very existence of heretics in as determined a 
manner as Mahomet had once done in the East. 
In short, in spite of all inherent differences, we find 
a decided tendency to union and assimilation, and 
a strong mutual influence of each nation upon the 
other, in the very midst of their hatred and warfare. 

It was therefore the greatest tragedy which our 
historical knowledge records, when the highly cul- 
tivated Eastern world was devastated and de- 
stroyed for ever, a few years after Saladin’s tri- 
umphs, by an overwhelming flood of barbarians. The 
savage Mongolian hordes swept down from their 
high central plains, laying waste and destroying, 
throughout Persia, Asia Minor, Turkistan, and 
Russia. It was no revivifying flood, like that which 
enriched the Roman soil when the Germans in- 



Digitized by Google 




DRSTRÜCTION OF EASTERN CIVILIZATION. 125 

vaded it. Gengis Khan’s hordes knew no joy be- 
yond building huge heaps of the skulls of the slain, 
and marching their horses over the ruins of burnt 
cities. Wherever they passed, there was an end to 
all culture, to all the joys of life, and to the future 
prosperity of nations; a dreary savage barbarism 
pressed upon countries which but a century before 
could have rivalled in civilization the very flower of 
Europe. Here and there, perchance, Islam could 
still enter the lists of military prowess with the 
Western nations, but her intellectual vigour was 
broken, and the dominion of the earth was thus for 
ever secured to the more fortunate nations of our 
hemisphere. 

It has however taken them centuries to compre- 
hend and to solve the problem thus set before them. 
We may add that they have deserved to solve it, 
not only because Islam became weaker, but also 
because Christianity has grown stronger; and it has 
grown stronger because it has more of the nature 
of inward conviction, and less of an aggressive cha- 
racter. We have seen what caused the Crusades to 
fail; not Zenki’s impetuosity, Noureddin’s firmness, j 
or Saladin’s joyous valour. In the great streams of 
history, none hopelessly sink but those who destroy 
themselves. It was the heat of religious excitement 
which called the Crusades into existence, and then 



Digitized by Google 




126 



HISTORY OF THE CRUSADES. 



irresistibly homed them to perdition. Wc have 
seen how over-excitement, thirst for the miraculous, 
and contempt for the world, rendered any regular 
and consecutive plan of conquest in the East im- 
possible from the very beginning. The Crusaders 
despised all the earthly resources of the human 
mind, and thus their mystical transports led them 
into every other miserable passion. With the Frank- 
ish States the very existence of the Christian religion 
perished in the East. In modern times, men no 
longer travel over the world, or found colonies, or 
make conquests, for religion’s sake; they neither 
trade nor fight nor found colonies according to ec- 
clesiastical principles. It is enough if their own faith 
affords the inward impulse towards justice and mo- 
rality, and leaves them free to conduct the various af- 
fairs of life according to their own several laws. They 
no longer see, as in the Middle Ages, an inveterate 
hostility between heaven and earth, or expect reli- 
gious perfection from the renunciation, but from the 
right use of earthly things. Thus it is that this age, 
apparently so lukewarm in religion, has succeeded 
in attaining an object which the zeal of Urban and 
the power of the Baldwins in vain strove to effect. 
There no longer exists on earth a hostile religion 
which can venture to threaten Christianity with im- 
punity. Wherever Christian power and Christian 



Digitized by Google 




TRIUMPH OF CHRISTIANITY. 



127 



civilization appear, the world at once recognizes, 
sometimes with joy and sometimes with anger, 
but always powerless to resist, the presence of the 
conqueror and ruler. Jerusalem, for whose con- 
quest millions once shed their blood in vain, could 
now be torn from its Turkish ruler by a protocol of 
five lines, if only our generation took any interest in 
the matter. But we now say, with St. Bernard, “ It 
is better to struggle against the sinful lusts of the 
heart, than to conquer Jerusalem.” 



Digitized by Google 




Digitized by 




PART n. 

LITERATURE OF THE CRUSADES. 

CRITICAL ACCOUNT 

OP 

THE ORIGINAL AUTHORITIES AND THE LATER 
WRITERS ON THE CRUSADES. 



Digitized by Google 




Digitized by 



Google 



131 



LITERATURE OF THE CRUSADES. 



4 

There are more materials for a history of the First 
Crusade than for any other event of the early 
Middle Ages. They consist of official reports, of 
' private communications from individual pilgrims to 
their friends at home; of many current histories 
written by eye-witnesses ; all these, again, were am- 
plified by writers in Western Europe, who were not 
present themselves, but who drew their statements 
from eye-witnesses; and finally, after a lapse of 
eighty years, these documents were collected by one 
eminently fitted for the undertaking. It might well 
be imagined that such ample materials would have 
secured for all times a true appreciation of the 
course of events. In fact, whosoever becomes fa- 
. miliar with all these narratives, is astonished at the 
fullness of the life therein depicted, and may hope 

k 2 



Digitized by Google 




132 



LITERATURE OF THE CRUSADES. 



from all these materials to obtain a competent know- 
ledge and a thorough comprehension of the truth 
they contain. 

The variety of the materials requires judgment 
in selection and arrangement. The most cursory 
examination discovers a great difference in the na- 
ture and endowments of the various authors. Every 
conceivable impulse is at work within them ; but 
that dispassionate frame of mind alone capable of 
producing a useful history is almost wholly want- 
ing. In contemporaries we have to guard against 
a distortion of facts from personal bias. Later 
historians again may be influenced by subsequent, 
events. Great care, therefore, must be taken to lay 
a good foundation, and to have some standard by 
which the various discrepancies can be reconciled. 

I. Official Reports, and Letters from Indi- 
vidual Crusaders. 

The number of letters and original narratives 
written by those actively engaged in the First Cru- 
sade is not large, nor do they constitute the most 
important sources of our knowledge of those times > 
but they must not be disregarded. They throw 
considerable light upon many special and doubtful 
points. We will mention these authorities in their ♦ 
regular order, in so far as we can. 



Digitized by Google 




THE EMPEROR ALEXIUS. 



133 



1 . Letter from the Emperor Alexius to Count Robert 
of Flanders } 

The Abbot Guibert, in his history of the Cru- 
sades, is the first to mention this letter . 2 He gives 
a tolerably detailed account of its contents. Mar- 
tene’s collection contains another version of this 
letter, agreeing in the main so much with Guibert, 
that doubt has been thrown on the authenticity of 
the whole document. The silence of Greek authors, 
and Guihert’s known carelessness, have increased the 
suspicion that this document in Martene’s collection 
might be one of the usual monkish manufactures 
of the Middle Ages, or a free version of Guibert’s 
text. Much that is singular in this document 
could not be denied. There is an absence of the 
high-flown official style of the Greek Empire. The 
praise of the Eastern women as an inducement 
for Christian Crusaders was considered unbecoming 
and childish, in the mouth of a Byzantine monarch. 

Without taking upon myself to defend this docu- 
ment as genuine, it may be asked why an intelligent 
Western author should be disbelieved because a 
Byzantine passes over in silence the fact that his 
Emperor begged for assistance from a Count of 

1 Martene, Thesaur. p. 266 et seq. 

3 Lappenberg, in Pertz, Archiv, vi. 630. 



Digitized by Google 




134 



LITERATURE OP THE CRUSADES. 



Handers. 3 It is very probable that Guibert re- 
ceived the communication from the Count Robert 
of Flanders himself. 

2. Letter from Urban II. to Alexius . 4 

In the summer of the year 1096, Urban II. wrote a 
letter to Alexius, which has been frequently printed 
in the Collection of the Councils. In it the Pope 
recommends the Crusaders to the care of the Em- 
peror. The letter contains little of importance. 

3. Stephen of Blois to his Wife. 

The Count of Blois, as far as we can learn, wrote 
three times to his wife Adela in the course of the 
Crusades. The first of these letters is lost, and is 
unimportant towards a knowledge of the Crusades, 
as it merely gives details of the journey to Constanti- 
nople. The second letter was written from the camp 
at Nicaea, shortly after the capture of that town. 5 It 
throws but little light upon the battles that had 
taken place up to that period, but gives a good pic- 
ture of the respective qualities of the Greek Empe- 
ror and Count Stephen of Blois shown in their rela- 
tion to each other. Stephen betrays the vanity of 

3 See further, under Guibert. 

4 Frequently printed in the Collection of the Councils. 

5 In Mabillon, Mus. Ital. ad Calc. Histor. Belli Sacri. 



Digitized by Google 




STEPHEN OF BLOIS. 



133 



a weak nature delighted with trifles, and manifest* 
ing itself most plainly in an assumption of humility. 
He admires the Emperor and his riches ; the Em- 
peror behaves to him like a father, and is even 
pleased with the absence of the Count from his 
court, on learning that he is at the camp. 

The third letter, written from the camp before 
Antioch, and shortly previous to the capture of that 
city, is in many respects the most instructive . 6 

At the very beginning it is stated that, for a 
time, Count Stephen had been chosen by all the 
princes as commander-in-chief, a circumstance we 
find mentioned elsewhere, but which requires some 
such confirmation as this. We are left totally in 
the dark as to the manner and importance of the 
command, and in what manner he exercised his 
influence. No events of any consequence followed 
this nomination ; so that but for the Count’s own 
testimony, the whole affair would be involved in 
considerable doubt. In the battle of Dorylaeum, 
for example, the army was divided into two parts, 
end Stephen of Blois was with the Normans, who 
were exposed to the first assault of Kilidje Arslan ; 
but there is no mention here of his issuing orders ; 
on the contrary, Bohemund at once took the com- 
mand, and won the day. • 

6 In D’Acheiy, Spicileg. iii. et seq . 



Digitized by Google 




136 



LITERATURE OF THE CRUSADES. 



“ We learned,” continues Stephen of Blois, “ that 
there dwelt in Cappadocia a Turcoman prince, by 
name Assam, whose lands we seized ; we left one of 
our princes, with many knights there, to complete 
the conquest.” It is not quite clear who was in- 
tended by this ; whether it is a mutilation of the 
name of Kilidje Arslan, 7 then strange to the Latins, 
or whether Stephen meant some insignificant prince 
of the neighbourhood. 

But still more interesting, spite of brevity, 
is the narrative of the defeat of the second attempt 
to raise the siege of Antioch made by the princes 
who dwelt around it. In this passage, the seat of the 
war, and the number of the combatants on both 
sides, are mentioned with greater distinctness than 
elsewhere. We also obtain further information as to 
the condition of the Christian host from the state- 
ment which has hitherto been overlooked, that the 
troops were distributed far and wide in the neigh- 
bourhood, as they held a hundred and sixty-five 
places , and fortresses in Syria in proprio dominio. 

4. Letter from Anselm of Ripemont to the 
Archbishop of Rheims? 

Anselm, one of the most illustrious of the Lor- 
raine barons in the army of the Crusaders, corre- 

7 As the earlier Byzantines call Alp Arslan. 

8 D’Acliery, p. 431, 



Digitized by Google 




ANSELM OF RIPEMONT. 



137 



sponded with Manasses, Archbishop of Rheims. We 
shall find more about him in the ‘ Gesta Dei/ of 
Guibert. One only of his letters has come down 
to us, written soon after the capture of Antioch, 
and giving short but distinct sketches of the occur- 
rences before and in this city. The agreement of 
the statements in his letters with those of other eye- 
witnesses, such as Raymund the author of the ‘ Gesta 
Francorum/ etc., in contradistinction in the narra- 
tive of } Ibert of Aix, is very remarkable. As an 
example I would select what occurred during the 
time of the fast, in 1098, — the decisive victory of 
the Christians and the consequent erection of the 
fort in front of the bridge-gate of Antioch. It is 
distinctly stated here that Bohemund and Raymond 
of Toulouse went to St. Simeon’s Haven to fetch 
workmen for the building of the fort, that they 
were attacked and suffered a severe loss on their 
way back, and that this was subsequently avenged 
by a splendid victory gained by the whole army, 
after which the. fort was completed with little diffi- 
culty. According to Albert’s account, the army was 
in perfect repose when Godfrey of Bouillon received 
intelligence of this unfortunate skirmish, and imme- 
diately prepared for battle. 9 

Count Stephen of Blois relates that the princes 

9 Albert, iii. 64 et geq. 



% 



Digitized by Google 




138 



LITERATURE OP THE CRUSADES. 



rode without suspicion of danger to meet the people 
coming from St. Simeon’s Haven, and fell among 
enemies ; that by the time the latter came up, the 
princes had got all the army under arms. Anselm’s 
narrative fully confirms this, and completely refutes 
Albert of Aix’s statement. The princes had ridden 
out with a settled purpose, at the desire of Bohe- 
mund, to secure their safe return by a movement 
of the whole army. The intention was that the 
whole army should march, and it was only some 
accidental delay that stopped the advance of all the 
detachments. The ‘ Gesta Francorum’ agree with 
this; and even some apparent discrepancies serve 
to confirm this view, when we call to mind the 
personal position of the author. He was, as we 
shall see, a common soldier, or at any rate what we 
should now call a non-commissioned officer. We 
can therefore easily understand that he knew nothing 
of Bohemond’s general orders to the princes; he 
only knew that the army stood ready for action when 
Bohemund arrived. At that moment, says he, “ nos 
congregati eramus in unurn;” we, that is the Nor- 
mans . 10 This does not contradict what Count Ste- 
phen says, that Bohemond arrived “dum adhuc 
convenirent nostri ;” for Count Stephen means the 
whole army. 

10 Gesta. 



Digitized by Google 



BÖHEMUND AND OTHERS. 



139 



It is true that these are mere trifles, but they 
illustrate the quality of a narrative, and the relation 
it bears to other reports. It will not be difficult for 
ns hereafter to show, on a larger scale, the agreement 
among the eye-witnesses which is here obvious, and 
the contradiction which they thus unanimously give 
to Albert of Aix ; and this will completely change 
•our view of some of the most important transac- 
tions. 

5. Letter from the Princes to all the Faithful} 1 

This report is signed by Bohemund, Raymond, 
■Godfrey, and Hugo. Martene gives the date as 
1097, but it evidently was written in July 1098. 
The whole is short, and told in a summary manner. 
There are statements of the loss of the army before 
Nicsea and Antioch, which appear exaggerated. 
The notice at the end, that the King of Persia had 
threatened them with a new war after Kerboga’s 
•defeat, and that, conjointly with the Egyptians, he 
would attack them, is quite new. 

G. Letter from the Princes to Pope Urban II} 2 

The date of this letter is not given by Fulcher ; 
# he has however inserted the whole of it into the 

11 Martene, p. 272. 

12 In Fulcher, p. 399, and Beufaer, Cur. Johannis, p. 399. 



Digitized by Google 




140 



LITERATURE OF THE CRUSADES. 



body of his narrative, as well as a postscript by 
one of the party, and many valuable variations,' 3 
which are noticed in the edition given by Reuber. 
The writers are Bohemund, Raymond, Godfrey, the 
two Roberts, and Eustace of Boulogne. That Hugo 
is not mentioned, seems to prove that he had already 
gone on his mission to Constantinople. The greater 
part of the narrative relates to the battles against 
Kerboga, and gives the most important and decisive 
details on this subject. The scanty chronological 
notices, which can be obtained from the ‘Gesta 
Fran co rum, 5 are completely confirmed. The same 
may be said of the narrative of the last great battle 
against Kerboga. These statements substantiate, in 
the most remarkable manner, the trustworthiness of 
the eye-witnesses. Albert of Aix, on some special 
information, asserts that the capture of Antioch 
by the Christians was effected by Godfrey and not 
by Bohemund. The contrary assertion made in the 
* Gesta’ receives the most ample confirmation from 
the words of this document, subscribed by the two 
princes, — “Ego Bohemundus scalas parum ante 
diem muris applicui,” etc. 

18 Fulcher, for example, has for Dorylseum in campo florido ; 
Eeuber calls it in valle Dorctillce . We see here how with the 
Europeans the corruption arose of in valle Ozellis . 



Digitized by Google 




"RAYMOND OF AGILES. 



141 



7. Letter from the Princes , afier the battle of 

Ascalon. 

Dodechin has handed this down to us. What little 
is to be said about this document will be mentioned 
in the account of Ekkehard, who made use of it. 

8. Letter from the Patriarch and the Princes, 

to the Churches of the West . 14 

The contents of this letter are unimportant. The 
writers state that they have captured ten capital 
cities, two hundred castles, and still have one hundred 
thousand warriors, not counting the common people 
and the assistance of the Saints. But their trust in 
the Saints appears but small, for this jubilation is 
followed by an earnest appeal for help, — “ Come 
hither, ye faithful ; come hither : wheresoever only 
two men are gathered together in one house, let 
one of the twain come to the Holy Sepulchre.” 

II. Raymond of Agiles. 15 

In the retinue of the Count of Toulouse and of 
the Bishop of Puy, were two Crusaders, the one a 

14 Martene, p. 271. 

15 Bongara thus gives the name. In the preface he gives 
the reading De Arguillers : in manuscripts we find it written 
De Agilles and De Aguilera (Pertz, Archiv, vii. pp. 56, 61, 81). 
I can nowhere find any reference on which he relies. 



Digitized by Google 




142 



LITERATURE OF THE CRUSADES. 



brave and worthy knight ; the other an ecclesiastic, 
uneducated, but well disposed. These two men 
were intimately bound together by friendship . 16 
The knight Pontius, Lord of Baladun, was desirous 
that the memoiy of so many great exploits shonld 
not perish for want of a chronicler. He was con- 
stantly pressing his friend to write down, in the 
quiet of his tent, the events that had occurred in the 
battle-field, to edify and stir up all the faithful, and 
especially their friend the Bishop of Vivars. The 
ecclesiastic Raymond was easily moved thereto : he 
wrote down day by day what he had seen, always 
with the help and encouragement of his friend, 
until Pontius found an honourable death in battle, 
before the castle of Arkas. Nevertheless he did 
not leave off the work begun in common with his 
friend. “ My best friend,” said he, “ died in the 
Lord ; but love dieth not, and in love will I finish 
this work ; so help me God .” 17 

Raymond only received consecration as a priest on 
his way to the Holy Land , 18 and then became one 
of the immediate personal followers of the Bishop of 
Puy and the Count of Toulouse. He was present 
at the discovery of the Holy Lance , 19 carried this 

18 Bongars has collected in his preface the notices of Pontius. 

17 These dates are taken partly from the preface of the book, 
partly from p. 163 ; the former was dictated by Pontius. 

15 Page 163. 19 Page 152. 



Digitized by Google 




BAYM0ND OP AGILES. 



14S 



relic in the battle against Kerboga , 20 and read the 
formulary at the ordeal by which Peter Bartholo- 
mew proved the identity of this instrument of the 
Passion . 21 There is no doubt, therefore, as to the 
opportunities he had of observing ; and his capacity 
to judge events may be gathered from his works. 
Above all things, Raymond is simple and straight- 
forward; he states, in the strongest and coarsest 
manner, what he thinks. We may have some doubt 
as to the correctness of his facts, but never as to 
' the truth of the impression they make on him. 
Then he is Provencal to the backbone. He is not 
highly gifted, but thoroughly enthusiastic for the 
success of the undertaking, and, whenever there is 
an opportunity, for his countrymen and their leader. 
The manifestations of his character are not always 
of the pleasantest : they display an extravagant be- 
lief in miracles, and a fierce hatred of all who are 
opposed to him, and a vile way of connecting divine 
things with the lowest motives; when to this is 
added a very rude manner of expressing himself, it 
is obvious that in the course of his narrative there 
must be many things to shock the reader. Por in- 
stance, he mentions as a glorious deed of the Count 
of Toulouse, that once when hard pressed by the 
Dalmatians, he caused the eyes of six of the pri- 
50 Page 155. « Pago 168. 



Digitized by Google 



144 



LITERATURE OF THE CRUSADES. 



soners to be tom out, and their noses, arms, and 
legs to be cut off, in order to inspire the rest with 
terror;“ At the taking of Antioch, he says, — 
“ Something pleasant and diverting occurred after 
their long tribulations. A troop of Turkish horse, 
more than three hundred in number, hard pressed 
by the Crusaders, were driven over a precipice ; a 
pleasure to see, much as we regretted the loss of 
the horses .” 23 It is true that in this war little re- 
gard was paid to humanity, but it would be difficult 
to find a second example of such excessive viru- 
lence.“ Thus he goes on, expressing delight and 
rapture with the same eagerness, and is completely 
carried away when a supernatural apparition mani- 
fests itself within his immediate circle. When the 
point of the Holy Lance projected above the earth, 
he says, “ Then I, Raymond the chaplain, sprang 
forward to kiss it .” 25 The narratives of subsequent 
visions occupy about one-fourth of the whole book . 26 
In one word, his was a vigorous but vulgar nature, 
thrown by a great impulse into an extraordinary 
course. The book would soon excite disgust, were 
it not so guilelessly written, and did it not so 
thoroughly show the personal character of the man. 

** Page 139. » Page 149. 

24 That is to say, in trustworthy histories. Albert has some 
additional particulars. 

35 Page 152. 26 Nine or ten folio sides, in Bongars’ edition. 



Digitized by Google 




RAYMOND OF AGILES. 



145 



It is obvious that his judgment is only to be 
trusted in certain cases : he can be followed when 
once he is known. He may be depended upon as 
to matters of fact, which he narrates with the 
strictest accuracy. He is rich in detail, but not in 
anecdote. A few cases, unimportant in themselves, 
may be found in which we are forced to reject his 
statements ; on the other hand, he gives conclusive 
accounts of the most important events, and, in com- 
parison with others, he must be looked upon as a 
guiding authority. On some points his narrative 
is essential to a right view of events, eg. the battle 
with Kilidje Arslan, before Nicaea — the siege of 
Antioch — and, above all, the quarrel between Bohe- 
mund and the Count of Toulouse. He agrees per- 
fectly in the main points with the ‘ Gesta Franco-, 
rum the discrepancies are few, and those only on 
special matters, quite independent of the general 
view of affairs. Moreover, the two works are quite 
independent of each other, although, from their 
similarity, it has been supposed that they had a 
common origin , 27 and that Raymond had only ampli- 

*? Such an assertion might appear true, when we compare some 
of the longer and more connected narratives, such as the siege of 
Antioch, or of Jerusalem, with the totally different account given 
of the same occurrences by Albert of Aix. We must make up 
our minds to leave the false and unfounded statements quite on 
one side ; if we attempt to connect the false with the true, it leads 
us to wrong conclusions. ‘ 

L 



Digitized by Google 




14C LITERATURE OF THE CRUSADES. 

fied the * Gesta.’ Each author tells the exact truth 
as far as he knew it, the one as to what occurred 
among the Normans, the other among the Pro- 
vencals. The events were neither secret nor in- 
volved, and the similarity of the statements of the 
two authors is therefore by no means wonderful. 
Identity of expression, even in isolated passages, 
nowhere occurs ; in two places, pointed out by 
critics, it is only apparent : but at the end of the 
book, which has not come down to us in its perfect, 
form from Raymond himself, passages have been 
added from the ‘ Gesta ’ by a foreign hand. 

The question is, when and by whom the inter- 
polations were made. In all manuscripts which 
have hitherto been found, the passages in question 
invariably occur. It is still more important that 
Tudebod, who in this instance follows Raymond, 
found these words, and copied them ii^to his text, 
perhaps comparing them with the * Gesta .’ 28 It is 
probable, indeed, that Raymond himself made the 
interpolations, that he felt the omission in his 
own narrative, and endeavoured to fill it up with 
the fragment from the ‘ Gesta.’ This circumstance 
is important, as affording the most convincing proof 

28 It is singular that the text in Tudebod is more like that of 
the * Ges^i * than that of Kaymond. However, he clearly took 
the passage from Raymond, as is proved by the words that im- 
mediately follow it. 



Digitized by Google 



RAYMOND OF AGILES. 



147 



of the contemporaneous composition of the ‘ Gesta,’ 
even if the book did not contain sufficient internal 
evidence. ' 

We have dwelt at some length on this apparently 
trifling circumstance, for various reasons. First, 
in order to establish the date of the ‘ Gesta,’ and 
next for those which relate to the subject itself. 
We hear on all sides that it is impossible to form 
an exact or authentic picture of the occurrences in 
Constantinople from the original authorities . 29 This 
is mainly owing to the confusion that prevails in 
Albert’s narrative , 30 which renders it impossible to 
combine the Latin authorities with the Alexiade, 
But if we can succeed in extracting from the eye- 
witnesses clear and unanimous statements, if we 
have the courage upon their authority to pronounce 
a strict judgment on Albert of Aix, the apparent 
discrepancies which exist in Anna Comnena’s w orks 
offer no further difficulties. 

To sum up our judgment on the work of Ray- 
mond of Agiles, we should say it was full of ample 
and trustworthy details, the value of which is 
somewhat impaired by the passion and superstition 
of the otherwise veracious author. As a writer, Ray- 
mond, in spite of his violent, zealous, and super- 

29 See Wilken’s History, i. 116, 117. Michaud, Hist. i. 19L 

30 We have treated this subject further on. 

L 2 



Digitized by Google 




148 



LITERATURE OF THE CRUSADES. 



stitiou8 nature, takes a correct view of things, and 
with all the vulgarity of his mind he is a true re- 
presentative of his time and of his country. He 
is genuine and outspoken, and no one who enters 
into his spirit can read his work without benefit. 

III. Gesta Francorum et aliorum Hierosoly- 

MITANORUM . 31 

Besly, in the preface to Tudebod’ s * History of 
Jerusalem,’ 32 positively asserts that the * Gesta Fran- 
corum,’ edited by Bongars as a genuine and au- 
thentic narrative, and frequently used as such by 
former writers, was nothing more than a plagiarism 
of the grossest kind, the anonymous author being en- 
tirely indebted to Tudebod for his facts, and thinks 
it his duty to expose such a wholesale plagiarism. 
Besly grounds this assertion chiefly upon three 
passages, — one in which Tudebod speaks of himself, 
and two wherein he mentions the death of his bro- 
thers. In these cases, Tudebod, he says, speaks 
as an eye-witness, and the anonymous author of the 
‘ Gesta Francorum’ has carefully omitted all men- 
tion of these occurrences in his narrative. 33 Besly’s 
views met with general concurrence, and have been 

81 In Bongars* Gesta Dei, p. 1 et seq, 

82 Du Chesne, iv. 773 etseq. 

88 Pages 810, 811, and 796, 803. 



Digitized by Google 




GESTA FRANCORUM. 



149 



followed by all subsequent historians of the Cru- 
sades . 34 

I must confess that the reasons urged for this 
opinion appear to me thoroughly unsatisfactory, and 
that there is evidence of exactly the reverse. In 
the case in point, Tudebod narrates an unlucky 
event which occurred at the siege of Jerusalem ; 
“the author,” he adds, “Tudebod, a priest of 
Sivray, was present, and was an eye-witness.” 
The whole narrative, to which this statement is 
appended, is omitted in the ‘ Gesta Francorum/ 
and I can conceive nothing unlikely in the suppo- 
sition that Tudebod, having got so far in his tran- 
scription of the * Gesta/ should have inserted in 
this place something he had himself witnessed. 
There is nothing to disprove that he and his bro- 
thers were present with the army, but there are 
many objections to looking upon his narrative as 
the original source of the ‘ Gesta Francorum/ 

First of all, the anonymous author invariably 
speaks in the first person ; Tudebod, sometimes in 
the first, at other times in the third person. 

further, the anonymous author, as we shall pre- 
sently see, was a knight. Tudebod was a priest. The 

34 Since the decision, which agrees with Bongars, given in the 
Hist. Litter, de la France, viii. 629, no one has had a doubt on 
the matter. 



Digitized by Google 




150 



LITERATURE OF THE CRUSADES. 



first remains true to his character, whereas Tudebod 
introduces himself sometimes as a warrior, at others 
as a priest , 35 which can easily be accounted for, if we 
consider him only as the secondary author. 

In both works passages occur which are wanting 
in the other. Those which Tudebod alone has are 
anecdotes, traits of individual character, etc., which 
can be easily inserted or omitted, without interfering 
with the narrative. But it is not so in the other case. 
It clearly appears 'that Tudebod, from a mistaken 
endeavour at compression, has omitted passages 
essential to the meaning. His narrative of the con- 
quest of Nicaea has faults inexcusable in an eye-wit- 
ness, but easily understood as the errors of a tran- 
scriber. It is impossible not to see that the * Gesta 
Francorum ’ is the source from which he draws. 

This leads me to the last and most important 
point, which Besly passes over lightly, but which 
appears to me conclusive. Tudebod makes use 
of Raymond’s work, as well as of the ‘Gesta/ 
He has inserted several passages from the former, 
word for word, in his compilation. Had the author 
of the ‘ Gesta Francorum ’ followed Tudebod, it 
would be impossible that some passage from Ray- 

35 Pages 782, 788. The cavalry is mentioned in contradistinc- 
tion to the infantry. Tudebod quietly copies the distinctive 
passages. 



Digitized by Google 




GESTA FRANCORUM. 



151 



mond should not have slipped into his text. Precisely 
the one passage which is to be found both in Ray- 
mond and in the anonymous author of the * Gesta 
Erancorum/ makes the matter quite clear. Tudebod 
follows first the ‘ Gesta/ then Raymond, and then 
repeats the last sentences from the * Gesta ’ for a 
second time. 

But the originality of the ‘ Gesta Erancorum ’ has 
been attacked from another quarter, and it has been 
traced to the ‘Historia Belli Sacri’ in Mabillon. 
But in this the character of a compilation comes 
out still more strikingly. Besides the anonymous 
author of the ‘ Gesta/ Tudebod, Raymond, and Ro- 
dolph of Caen, have been extensively laid under 
contribution . 36 

In short, in every way, and as yet against all 
comers, we are disposed to defend the originality of 
the ‘ Gesta Erancorum / and, considering the value 
of the work, the question is not an unimportant 
one. 

Our knowledge of the life. of the author is but 
slight. The work was anonymous, even to those con- 
temporaries who made use of his text ; 37 nowhere do 
we find any certain notice of the writer. We only 

36 See further on. 

37 Eobert, Baldric, and Guibert, all speak of a small anony- 
mous document, which they wished to work up. 



Digitized by Google 




152 



LITERATURE OF THE CRUSADES. 



know that he quitted Amalfi with Bohemund in 
1096, and remained with him until the victory over 
Kerboga. He served there among the knights, 38 and 
had the good fortune to take part in all the impor- 
tant actions. For instance, he was one of those 
who assaulted Antioch ; he likewise joined the band 
which in the summer of 1098 joined Robert of Nor- 
mandy and Raymond of Toulouse, in their attack 
upon Mara and Tripoli. 39 This is the last notice 
which we can find of the author. 

His personal character does not come out so 
strongly in connection with the matters which he 
relates, as it does in Raymond of Agiles, but it 
shows itself sufficiently to inspire confidence in his 
narrative. In the first place, the author is thoroughly 
imbued with the general feeling of the Crusades. 
He attributes them immediately to Divine inspira- 
tion, and in many passages calls God himself their 
true leader and protector. “ Almighty God, just 
and merciful, who letteth not his host to perish, 
sent us very present help. Thus were our enemies 
overcome by the power of God and of the Holy 

38 This appears from pp. 7 and 17. 

39 Page 25. “ Exeuntes quatuordecim ex nostris militibns, — ex 
exercitu vero Raimundi comitis,” etc. Tancred was also with this 
army, according to Rad., c. 96 ; nevertheless it is not to be un- 
derstood that the author accompanied it, as he does not once 
name him. 



! — 



Digitized by Google 




GESTA FRANCORUM. 



153 



Sepulchre. We, however, wandered securely in the 
fields and mountains, glorifying and praising the 
Lord.” With such sentences he begins and ends 
nearly every account of each single deed and skir- 
mish. We can but read such expressions with 
pleasure; indifference on such subjects in a con- 
temporary would darken and disturb the picture. 
Moreover, his enthusiasm is restrained within due 
bounds, and is never blindly violent against worldly 
considerations or polemical against hostile opinions. 
He shows an equal interest in human affairs, as 
in Heaven and all its Saints. He relates that at 
Dorylseum, when the anxiously expected succour 
came, they all exclaimed, — “ Let us fight valiantly 
in the faith of Christ ; if it be God’s pleasure, we 
shall all gain riches .” 40 And thus throughout. His 
passion for war, for its own sake, is as strong as 
his religious impulse. “Tam mirabiliter,” says he 
frequently, had they, attacked the Turks, or the 
latter the pilgrims. Occasionally, but very seldom, 
he is struck by the individual heroism of one of 
the Crusaders; he then describes the act with 
quiet pleasure, and we may be sure .that it de- 
serves mention. He then speaks of the difficulties 
and hardships they had to encounter, in the simplest 
manner, how they had nothing either to eat or to 
40 Page 7. 



Digitized by Google 




154 



LITERATURE OP THE CRUSADES. 



drink, for days, and then satisfied their hunger 
with the bark of trees, and their thirst with water. 
He makes no exclamations, no reflections ; at most 
he adds that they endured such plagues and neces- 
sities for the sake of Christ, and the Holy Sepul- 
chre. What would have filled others with a high 
idea of the value of the sacrifices in question, viz. 
the holy object of the enterprise, appears to him 
precisely what excludes any claim to admiration or 
pity. 

I cannot refrain from noticing one point especi- 
ally, as marking his sentiments, and this is the terms 
in which he speaks of his opponents the Turks, and 
the conduct of the pilgrims towards them. He does 
the Turks full justice. “ Who,” says he, “can describe 
the prudence , 41 the warlike glory, the bravery of 
the Turks ? I will tell the truth, which none can 
gainsay. Were they but steadfast in the holy faith, 
of Christ, it would be impossible to find greater,, 
stronger, or abler warriors.” Now it is a well-known 
fact, that this war was carried on with savage cru- 
elty ; there was no question of quarter being given 
or taken ; the heads of the slain were hewn off, the 
dead were mutilated. All this is mentioned with 
delight by the historians of the age. The author of 
the ‘Gesta Francorum’ is a remarkable exception to 
41 Page 7. 



Digitized by Google 




GESTA FRANCORUM. 



155 



the rule. He passes over such subjects on numer- 
ous occasions ; and when he does allude to them, 
he does it with quiet indifference, never with exul- 
tation or unction. It is obvious that his is the in- 
difference of the soldier, who passes his life amid 
blood and wounds, and who considers such horrors 
as of everyday occurrence, not worth mentioning, 
and certainly not deserving praise, or matter of edi- 
fication . 43 His position in life, and his own nature 
give the clue to the method and general intention 
of his narrative. His is the report of an eye-witness, 
not in the very highest position, nor always ac- 
quainted with the leading motives of events. So 
far as he can see them, he traces them clearly, and 
reproduces them in a correct and simple narrative. 
It is not by any means a mere diary of the personal 
life of the author; he records with minuteness only 
the most important events. He has great skill in 
distinguishing between various facts, and selecting 
the best. He is never carried away, by what is- 
strange, wonderful, poetical, or personally interest- 
ing, but continues the even tenor of his narrative. 

• Michaud complains that it is impossible to re- 
construct the plans of battles, the orders of march. 



42 He only mentions the murders in Antioch, because of the 
offensive stench from the dead bodies; and the carnage at Jeru- 
salem, because it took place against Tancred’s orders. 



Digitized by Google 




156 



LITERATURE OF THE CRUSADES. 



and so forth, out of the unskilful writers of the 
twelfth century ; 43 the rest of the modern historians 
of those events, if we may judge from their works, 
would appear to have attained the same resignation . 44 
With regard to the works of Albert of Aix and 
William of Tyre, the reproach is perfectly well 
founded; but I must deny that it applies to the 
* Gesta Francorum,’ which in this respect affords 
ample materials for the history of the First Crusade. 
The * Gesta,’ in general, is rich in details, in so far 
as they concern the matter in hand. All the events 
which the ‘Gesta’ relate are duly set forth and com- 
plete in all their parts. The battles, sieges, and 
all that appertains to those subjects, are easy to I 
trace. For instance, all the measures of defence | 
taken by Bohemund at Dorylaeum, the position of | 
the whole army, the application of the several arms, 
are accurately set forth ; then, when the remaining | 
forces have arrived, the formation of the line of 
battle, and lastly the movement of the Bishop of 
Puy, which decided the battle, are explained . 45 In 
like manner, but still better, the siege of Antioch is 
brought before us : how the Christians, in an unpro- 
tected position, and attacked on all sides, first of all 

48 Hist., t. i. pp. 187, 475. 

44 See, for example, in Wilken, i. p. 156, the battle of Dory- 
lffium ; p. 223 , the battle of Antioch ; in Raumer, the siege of 
Antioch, etc. 45 Page 7. 



Digitized by Google 




GESTA FRANCORUM. 



157 



cleared the immediate neighbourhood, then placed 
themselves in communication with the sea, at length 
completely surrounded the town with a line of forts . 46 
Each individual encounter in the course of the 
siege, the victory over Kerboga, the measures taken 
against Arkas and Jerusalem, are developed in 
the same manner. The reader feels he is on safe 
ground, and soon learns to place implicit confidence 
in his author. 

It is not often that he permits himself to judge of 
persons, or to indulge in general reflections ; where 
it does occur, he is rough and vigorous, but, 
prammis pramittendis , unprejudiced and correct. 
He always says whatever is best, and fittest for a 
man in his position to say . 47 I only know of one 
instance in which he treats of matters of universal 
import, and I never read it, rough and unpo- 
lished as is his style, without pleasure. I allude 
to the introduction to his book : — “ When the time 
was fulfilled,” says he, “ which Christ showed to 
his apostles, speaking daily and especially in the 
Gospels, Whosoever will follow me, let him deny 
himself, and take up his cross : then a great move- 
ment took place throughout France : That whoso- 

46 Page 9 et seq. 

47 This may be said also of the few expressions concerning 
Alexius and the Greeks. They are crude, but by no means false. 



Digitized by Google 




3 58 



LITERATURE OF THE CRUSADES. 



ever wished to follow the Lord with his whole 
heart, and to carry his cross after him in faith, he 
should not delay quickly to begin and walk in the 
way of the Lord. And straightway the Pope, with 
his archbishops, bishops, priests, and abbots, crossed 
the Alps, and began to teach wisely and to preach, 
and spake thus : Whosoever will save his soul alive, 
let him not hesitäte to walk in the way of the Lord. 
Whosoever lacketh money, he will, by God’s grace, 
be plentifully provided therewith. And when these 
words were bruited abroad, the Franks who heard 
them sewed red crosses on their shoulders and said 
that they would follow with one accord the footsteps 
of Christ, who had loosed them from the bonds of 
hell,” etc. 

If we consider that the author had no intention 
of giving a connected narrative of the Crusades, but 
solely meant to describe what he himself saw, this 
opening leaves little to be desired. Short as it is, it 
places us in the clearest and truest manner, in the 
midst of the beginning of the enterprise. It gives 
the source from which it originated — the religious 
impulse of the West ; it names the individual, Ur- 
ban II., who gave expression and life to this im- 
pulse ; it tells the manner in which the army was 
collected and organized by the personal enthusiasm 
of the individuals. The anecdote of Peter the 



Digitized by Google 




GESTA FRANCORUM. ‘ 



159 



Hermit is happily suppressed. Christ, the Pope, 
the whole of Western Europe, are the worthy actors 
in this great enterprise. 

I believe that what I have said justifies my as* 
sertion that we have here to do with the most im- 
portant authority for a true history of the First 
Crusade. A character like that of the author of the 
‘Gesta Francorum’ is peculiarly fitted to give a true 
picture of great events. Devoid of personal pre- 
tensions, strong in will; without any adventitious 
interests, but inspired with a great purpose and full 
of religious enthusiasm, which, however, does not 
preclude him from feeling an interest in human af- 
fairs, he shows a meritorious industry in making use 
cf the rich materials at hand to give a picture of the 
important events in which he himself had been an 
actor. It is likewise interesting to find in him the 
purest expression of national character. He exem- 
plifies the Norman type, in that mixture of the tem- 
poral and ecclesiastical, in the freedom with which 
he handles all subjects, keeping every part of his 
picture in subordination to the whole. In Raymond 
of Agiles, we saw the Provencal, full of zeal, forget- 
ting the future and the past in the immediate present, 
and pressing forward step by step in impetuous pas- 
sion. In small things there is the same antagonism, 
upon which the most important events of the Cru- 



Digitized by Google 




160 



LITERATURE OP THE CRUSADES. 



sades depend, that antagonism which from the very 
first disagreement about Antioch separated Bohe- 
mund and Raymond of Toulouse more and more, 
until the activity of the one was extinguished in the 
chains of Danischmend, and that of the other in the 
deserts of Phrygia. 48 Even now both these chiefs 
speak to us in their own tongues, each one of his 
own nature, of his deeds, and of their mutual con- 
tention. By this means, if we understand their 
words rightly, scarce any important point can re- 
main obscure to us. 



1. Tudebod. 

I have already mentioned Tudebod, the priest of 
Sivray. We know but little of his life. Besly asserts 
that he was with the army of Poitou, commanded 
first by Hugo of Lusignan, and then by Gaston of 
Bearn. But there is no positive proof of this. 49 
Besly was led to this conclusion because Hugo was 
then Lord of Sivray. 50 The book copies the ‘ Gesta 
Prancorum/ nearly word for word; many of the 

48 Their effectual action was then at an end, at least as far as 
concerns the East. 

49 Although the Hist. Litt, de la France, i. c., cites Tudebod 
himself, pp. 173 and 809 in support of it. 

60 If we allowed this to hold good, it would afford an addi- 
tional argument in favour of the originality of the ‘Gesta.* 
Why should a native of Aquitaine, devote himself so exclusively 
to the history of the Normans P 



Digitized by Google 




GUIBERT, ABBOT OF NOGENT. 161 

interpolations are mere episodes, and of little im- 
portance. He gives some details concerning the 
capture of Jerusalem, which may serve partly as an 
amplification, partly as a rectification of the ‘Gesta.’ 

2. Guibert, Abbot of Nogent. 

Guibert was bom in the year 1053, at Beauvais, 
of noble parents. 61 His youth was passed in those 
times when the Roman Church began to bring the 
world under its dominion. Many circumstances 
concurred to subject Guibert altogether to these 
ecclesiastical influences, his mother was enthusi- 
astically pious, and lived only in the mortifica- 
tion of the outward senses, and in the cultivation 
of the inward and spiritual perceptions. Before 
his birth his parents had vowed to devote their 
son to the service of the Church, 62 and long 
before manhood he assumed the monk’s cowl at 
Mavigny. 63 As he grew up, the lusts of the 
world awoke within him: he became a poet and 
learned music; he attempted imitations of Ovid 
and of Virgil’s Bucolics. But his teacher was 

w De Vita su&, L 3. 14. Cf. Bongars in pr»f. and Hist. Litt, 
x. p. 439. 

“ Vita, i. 4. 

53 Mabillon, Ann. i. 62, n. 65, gives the year 1064. I see no po- 
sitive testimony for the exact date ; the assumption of the cowl 
by no means took place later. 

M 



Digitized by Google 




162 



LITERATURE OF THE CRUSADES. 



warned in a vision, and the lad himself saw how 
he sinned against the rules of his Order. In this 
frame of mind he met with Anselm, Abbot of Bee, 
afterwards primate of the English Church, whose 
powerful influence at once directed him into the 
strict path of the Church. Gifted as Guibert 
was, he soon attained fame by his eloquence and 
learning, and at an early age became abbot of No- 
gent on the Seine. 54 He remained there, respected 
by a large circle, and distinguished in politics and 
literature, 55 until his death, in 1124. 56 

The results of such a career are visible through- 
out his writings ; he was not without abilities, and 
for the times in which he lived, he was well read. 
The advantages of his birth and of his ecclesias- 
tical dignity were of great service to him in writing 
a history of the Crusades. His acquaintances and 
connections extended over all France ; 57 he was 
indebted for many valuable hints to Count Robert 

M Vita, i. 17, 19. 

45 The third book of his autobiography gives an account of hia 
outward life ; the Hist. Litt. i. c., gives his writings. He himself 
speaks frequently enough of their effect. 

66 MabiÜon, Ann. i. 74, n. 71. 

47 But not further. His notices on the French nobility, pp. 
486-501, are very useful, as well as his statements as to the con- 
sequences of the Council of Clermont, and on the Crusades espe- 
cially, pp. 481, 508, 552. But Godfrey and Bohemund are out 
of his circle. He adduces the most fabulous accounts of both, 
pp. 485-488. 



Digitized by Google. 




GUJBEBT, ABBOT OF NOGENT. 163 

of Flanders ; 58 Archbishop Manasses of Rheims al- 
lowed him to consult the letters of Anselm of 
Ripemont 69 and he was himself present at the 
Council of Clermont. As a man of learning he 
affects a cultivated style and artistic form, but 
he only selected the Crusades as his subject, in 
order to make the ‘ Gesta Francorum,’ in his para- 
phrase, more agreeable to cultivated readers. It is 
true that he has succeeded very ill : the simple tone 
of his original is overwhelmed by his inflated and 
pompous style; he appears, conscious of his own 
high position, to disregard the opinion of others ; 
and frequently intimates that those who do not ap- 
prove his manner of writing may seek some other. 
Valuable as his work is, in his literary character, 
full of pedantry and conceit, he is most offensive . 60 
The dignified servant of the Church, the man with 
whom everything has succeeded, the ecclesiastic 
who belongs to a ruling party, is too conscious of 
a proud position. He feels all his power when 
he attacks Fulcher of Chartres, as to his doubts 

M He was Lis personal friend ; pp. 521, 535, 548. The frequently 
noticed letter of the Emperor Alexius to Hubert appears to me 
to be thoroughly trustworthy, p. 474. 

59 Pages 543, 553-4. We have before mentioned an original let- 
ter which has come down to us (in the third volume of D'Achery’s 
Spicilegium, edit. 2). 

60 Compare his preface and the prooemium of almost all the 
separate books of his history. 

M 2 



Digitized by Google 




164 



LITERATURE OF THE CRUSADES. 



with respect to the Holy Lance, and reproaches him 
with credulity and superstition as to other mira- 
cles . 61 It was not in vain that Guibert had studied 
the science of demonology, that he had himself 
seen visions, and had everywhere found the doctrine 
of apparitions and wonders flourishing . 63 Nor 
was it either doubt or enthusiasm that stirred Gui- 
bert to anger against Fulcher. The pride of superior 
learning, the consciousness of belonging to a domi- 
nant orthodox party, made him look down with 
contempt on his rival . 63 

The close of his work is remarkable j 64 hard as he 
had worked at the historical form of his book, he 
could not master his mass of learning. He had 
come to the end of the ‘ Gesta Francorum/ which was 
his guide, and he still had on hand a. variety of 
unused materials, too good to be lost to posterity. 

“ Page 562. 

® De Vit& sua, i. i. c. 20 et seq., i. ii. in extenso. We can 
conceive nothing, however extravagant, that is not here stated 
as true and defended as reasonable. We see in this instance 
how little we can trust the judgments of modem authors, who 
sometimes call him the most credulous, and sometimes praise him 
as the most philosophical of all the authors qf that time. Com- 
pare, for example, Gibbon, pp. 1069, 1072 (London edition, 1836), 
and Michaud, Bibl. i. 124. 

® What Neander quotes of St. Bernard, p. 309, from his work 
‘ De Pignoribus Sanctorum,* appears to me to suit very well the 
picture here given. It is the same belief in prodigies, reduced to 
a system ; the unmistakable influence of Anselm of Canterbury. 

11 Prom p. 539. 



Digitized by Google 




GUIBEftT, ABBOT OF NOGENT. 165 

He determined to use them at all events, and strung 
fragment upon fragment, digression upon digression, 
important and useless matter in utter confusion, 
until his store of knowledge was exhausted. These 
stories extend as late as the middle of the reign of 
Baldwin L, and it is easy to conceive how they vary 
in value and credibility ; the most ordinary and the 
most unexpected matters are mixed together ; occa- 
sionally we find individual notices on points but 
little known, which throw new light on familiar 
subjects. Such are the details as to the government 
of Robert of Normandy in Laodicea, which Lap- 
penberg has made use of, 65 and which are important 
as correcting a widely spread statement by Albert 
of Aix, 66 and the account of the Crusade of the year 
1011. 67 Of more special subjects we would also 
mention the death of Anselm of Ripemont and the 
end of Baldwin of Hennegau ; the former serves to 
supply deficiencies in the narratives of Raymond 
and Radulph, 68 the latter is remarkable for its ac- 
curate agreement with the local history of Giselbert 
of Bergen. 69 

The book was begun in the year 1108 or 1109, 
and certainly not finished till 1110. Guibert says 

65 Page 554, Lappenberg’s Geschichte von England, ii. p. 224. 

w Albert, p. 290. 67 Ibid., p. 527. 

69 Raymond, p. 164 ; Rad. c. 106. 

* In Bonquet, vol. xiii. of the Recueil. 



Digitized by Google 




166 



LITERATURE OF TUE CRU8ADES. 



that he is writing two years after the death of 
Manasses, Archbishop of Rheims, 70 which occurred 
on the 17th September, 1106, 71 and in another 
place he mentions the death of Bohemond, 73 which 
is known to have taken place in the year 1110. 

3. Baldric, Archbishop of Bol. 

Baldric was born at Meun, near Orleans. 73 He 
was] first a monk, and then became Abbot of Bour- 
gueil in 1079, and in 1107 was appointed Arch- 
bishop of Dol in Brittany. His personal character 
was a complete contrast to that of his contemporary 
Guibert. I dwell with the greater pleasure upon 
it, as it forms an agreeable relief to that of Guibert, 
and also because Baldric represents a more common 
though, at that time, an oppressed type. 

The ascetic zeal which pervaded the hierarchy of 
the eleventh century, was as hatefuLto the nature 
of Baldric as it was congenial to the Abbot of No- 
gent. Baldric saw no impediment to a Christian 
life in secular learning and art; the mortification 
of the senses was not to his mind ; sullen looks and 
strict fasts — in short, the whole pomp and ceremony 
of holy works — appeared to him not sufficient to 

70 Page 537. 71 Bonquet, xiii. p. 497. 

72 Page 483. 

73 Baldric, Carmina apud Duchesne, vol. ii. p. 268, 



Digitized by Google 




BALDRIC, ARCHBISHOP OF DOL. 167 

fill up human life. He enjoyed the quiet of his 
cloister, the smiling garden, the clear running 
stream, the budding groves, while in his own room 
there were books, manuscripts, and all the appli- 
ances of learning. “ This is the spot,” writes he 
to a friend, “in which peace can be found .” 74 
There he wrote his verses ; nothing remarkable, 
but unpretending, and a labour of love . 75 There 
also he applied himself to severer studies, and in- 
terchanged letters with friends of similar tastes. 
They carefully discussed their works, among others 
the History of the Crusades . 76 They allowed the 
ecclesiastical contests to be settled elsewhere; it 
concerned them but little that a new hierarchy had 
conquered and remodelled the world ; not that they 
neglected their duties , 77 but their true life lay in 
their books, in their gardens, and in their meadows. 
They were not always able to defend their peaceful 
existence from the incursion of a hostile element; 
their ideas were peculiar and too much opposed to 

74 Baldric, p. 269. 

75 He re-wrote an epitaph of six lines on William I. of Eng. 
land three times. 

76 His correspondence with Peter, Abbot of Maillezais, is given 
by Bongars, before the History of the Crusades.- 

77 He zealously maintained his metropolitan rights against the 
•claims of Tours, and obtained the pallium from Paschal II. All 
the documents concerning the quarrel are in Martene, * Thesau- 
rus,’ iii. 867 et seq. 



Digitized by Google 




168 LITERATURB OF THE CRUSADES. 

the dominant party. Baldric writes to the Bishop of 
Ostia : “ My vessel sails only by stealth, for pirates 
of all sorts swarm around me ; they hem me in on 
every side, gnashing with their teeth because I do 
not quit my books, because I do not go about with 
eyes cast on the ground. Thus am I flagging in 
my work. May your hand protect me .” 78 

As bishop, he remained true to himself and to his 
nature. He was very religious, but gentle and mild. 
It is true this did not always succeed in his diocese, 
with his fierce Bretons . 79 He was not fit to hold 
ecclesiastical power. He quitted Brittany, and sought 
a more peaceful asylum at Bee, Fecamp, and finally 
in England . 80 Men like him would never have 
gained honours and triumphs for the hierarchy; 
but it is a pleasure to meet with a nature so pure, 
so cheerful, and so gentle, in times so full of energy, 
war, and austerity . 81 

78 Carmina, p. 275. 79 Orderie Yitalis, p. 718. 

80 The Hist. Litt. xi. 96 et seq., gives more particulars. 

81 As may be conceived, the judgment of the Benedictines on 
him is different. Mabillon, in the Annals, accuses him of world- 
liness and lukewarmness. In the main he supports this opinion 
by those passages of Baldric’s poems, and he quotes a letter 
of Ivo of Chartres, wherein he is reported to have said that Bald- 
ric had tried every method of bribery in order to become Bishop 
of Orleans ; but it is only stated in this letter (No. 66. 5, in Du- 
chesne), that Baldric’s rival was preferred “ quia animadversi 
sunt plures ct pleniores sacouli nummorum latere in apotheeia 
amicorum istius, quam apud abbatem.” 



Digitized by Google 




BALDRIC, ARCHBISHOP OP DOL. 169 

His history of the Crusades breathes the same 
spirit. He is exact and trustworthy in his use of 
the * Gesta he has not made many additions to 
its contents, but the views and opinions which he 
expresses are in keeping with his character. He 
does not withhold praise, even from the Turks ; M he 
omits the word “ faithless,” as applied to the Em- 
peror Alexius, which constantly occurs in the ‘Ges- 
ta.’ 83 He endeavours to excuse Count Stephen of 
Blois, who is . generally styled impudens et abomina- 
bilis , on the score of the general weakness of human 
nature. 84 The additions he makes are mostly taken 
from oral testimony, and generally well selected. 85 
Of course it is only in few instances that he can be 
called an eye-witness; he undoubtedly is so where 
he mentions the effect caused by the beginning of 
the Crusades in France. 

Baldric died before 1130, as his death was 
known to Pope Honorius II. His work on the 
Crusades seems to have been widely known. Or- 
dericus Vitalis made use of it, and William of Tyre 
in many instances took it as the groundwork of his 
own history. 

® Procemium. 85 Pages 92, 93. 

84 Page 118. 

85 Praises of the chastity of the Crusaders, p. 96 : rather a 
doubtful statement. Page 137 gives a good account of the Battle 
of Asoalon. 



Digitized by Google 




170 LITERATURE OP THE CRUSADES. 

4. The History of the Holy War. 

The anonymous book bearing this title is a com- 
pilation from the * Gesta/ from Tudebod, Radulph, 
and Raymond. All these works have evidently 
been used, as we find passages taken from each 
which are wanting in all the rest. 86 But there 
are numerous original additions, from which we 
may gather some idea of the author. These mostly 
have reference to Bohemund and his affairs, so 
that we may fairly surmise that the author was a 
Norman, and apparently one of humble origin. 87 
After the war he most likely lived in Antioch, 
as while he speaks in indistinct terms of the elec- 
tion of the King of Jerusalem, he gives original 
accounts of Tancred’s rule, from 1100 to 1103, and 
ends his work with a short review of Bohemund’s 
life and adventures. 88 This gives the measure of 
his trustworthiness. His narrative is lively, and 

86 The narrative about Nicaea is from the ‘Gesta,* and is not to 
be found in Tudebod. Chapter 17 is not in the ‘ Gesta,’ but is in 
Tudebod (Tud. p. 781). Chapter 55 (p. 792), c. 69, 70 (p. 789), 
c. 5, 16, 17, init. 24, 30, are from Raymond, pp. 140-142. The 
chapters 107, 109, 129, 131, 132, 135, and 136, are out of Radulph, 
c. 106, 110. 

87 Such are c. 37, 45, 66, 67, 83, 90, 93. The ‘Gesta,* p. 5, shows 
that the Count of Eoussillon, whose death is mentioned in chapter 
45, was in Raymond’s army. Most of these statements can also 
be confirmed by Raymond and Radulph. 

88 Chapters 130, 138, 139. 



Digitized by Google 




FULCO, GILO, AND THE MONK ROBERT. 171 

very like that of the * Gesta/ It was written later 
than that work; probably about the year 1131, as 
the death of Bohemond is mentioned. 

Mabillon has given a complete edition of this 
work in the second volume of his ‘ Museum Itali- 
cum.’ 89 



5. Henry of Huntingdon . 

According to a frequent custom of his times, Henry 
of Huntingdon has inserted a history of the Crusades 
in his larger work. But it is without importance, and 
was most probably derived entirely from the ‘ Gesta/ 
I should have scarcely noticed it here, were it not 
for allusions to the work in Lappenberg’s History of 
England. He has not made much use of it. 90 

6. Fulco, Gilo, and the Monk Robert. ' 

I mention these authors together, as Gilo can- 
not well be separated from Fulco, whose conti- 
nuator he is. But Gilo, although in the first part of 
his narrative he is as independent of the ‘ Gesta ’ as 
Fulco, still belongs to the same category, as the last 



89 Muratori, Scr. Her. Ital. t. iv. It is said in the notes to the 
passage here referred to, that this chapter was taken from a 
.special manuscript jn Monte Cassin. Pertz reports that this 
manuscript only contains that edited by Mabillon (Archiv, v. 
157) ; their identity is easily verified by comparing the two. 

90 History of England, ii. 221. 



Digitized by Google 




172 



LITERATURE OP THE CRUSADES. 



four books of his work are taken word for word 
from the ‘ Gesta and lastly, it is only in connection 
with the two others that we can give our judgment 
on Robert the Monk. 

We know nothing more than his book tells us as 
to who Fulco was, where and when he lived, and 
whence he gained his information. The title of 
his work, ‘The History of the Crusades of Our 
Times,’ proves that he lived during the period of 
the Crusades. The concluding sentence of his poem : 

“ Caetera describit Gilo ,” 91 shows that he was a con- 
temporary and probably wrote from the same place as 
Gilo, and this is the utmost that we can learn of him. 

Fulco’s work treats of the first events of the Cru- 
sades until the siege of Nicaea ; it is in three books, 
and in hexameters. His verses are heavy and over- 
laden with quotations and illustrations ; he lays no 
claim to poetical skill, and the only question is whe- 
ther his work is worth examining historically : but i 
it is easy to prove the contrary ; it contains, with 
scarcely an exception, nothing but what is perfectly 
well known, utterly confused, and altogether useless. 

Instead of the usual examination, I will briefly , 
review his narrative of Godfrey’s adventures in the i 

91 The Hist. Litt. xii. 84, is wrong also when it maintains 
that Fulco has composed his book as a continuation of the work 
of Gilo. 



Digitized by Google 




•FULCO, GILO, AND THE MONK ROBERT. 173 

Greek Empire ; this will be sufficient, without enter- 
ing into any elaborate comparison with original 
authorities, to give us the measure of his work. God- 
frey, he says , 92 while in Thrace, learnt the approach 
of the other armies, and determined to wait for 
them at Constantinople. Alexius alarmed and an- 
gry, prepared to drive the Duke away by force of 
jfcrms. In the first place he refused to supply him 
with provisions ; whereupon Godfrey plundered the 
land, seized upon two thousand swine, which were 
collected for the Imperial kitchen, and eventually 
completely routed the Imperial troops. The latter, 
during their retreat, fell in with a body of Lorrai- 
ners, who, posted in Adrianople, had not been 
aware of the outbreak of hostilities, persuaded 
them to accompany them to Constantinople, and 
easily made them prisoners. In order to release his 
companions-in-arms, Godfrey agreed to the Em- 
peror’s terms and crossed over into Asia. 

All these occurrences are purely imaginary. A 
certain interest which they possess, lies entirely 
apart from their representing any historical facts. 
Godfrey did not yield to the Emperor, as has 
generally been represented, from any motive of 
princely generosity, nor out of regard to the Chris- 
tianity of Alexius, nor yet from eagerness to prose- 
M Page 896. 



Digitized by Google 




174 



LITERATURE OF THE CRUSADES. 



cute the war against the Saracens ; he was forced, 
much against his will, by the superiority of the 
Greek arms, to do homage to the Emperor. We see 
that this general result lies at the root of Fulco’s 
narrative ; the facts are strangely misrepresented 
and added to ; intense hatred to the Greeks is quite 
obvious ; and the author’s grand object is not only 
to save the personal honour of the Duke, but to 
glorify him even in his defeat. He can point to no 
written authority for his statements ; it is not pro- 
bable that he possessed any other sources of infor- 
mation than his continuator Gilo, and it appears 
most likely that the latter trusted to oral tradition. 

Gilo, 93 who came from Toucy, in the province of 
Auxerre, lived for a time at Paris, then entered 
the monastery of Clugny, and was made Bishop of 
Frascati, and Cardinal by Calixtus II* 4 He was 
subsequently employed on important missions; 95 
lastly he was sent in 1134 into Aquitaine, as legate 
from the rival Pope, Anaclete, which naturally ex- 
posed him to the most violent abuse from the oppo- 
site side. 96 When he gave in his adhesion to the 

93 The Hist. Litt. xii. 81, gives a review of his life and works. 

94 Martene, Prsef. ad Ekkeh. (Coll. Ampl. v. 508). 

95 1127, to Palestine. William of Tyre, p. 827, calls him 
^Egidius. 

96 Bibl. Cluniac. pp. 720, 767, contain violent letters of the 
Abbot, Peter of Clugny, to him. In the notes to this passage, 
p. 127, Andre Duchesne has given a biography of Gilo. 



Digitized by Google 




FULCO, GILO, AND THE MONK ROBERT. 175 

victorious Pope, Innocent, is unknown ; and we are 
not informed of the date of his death. 

When he wrote his history of the Crusades, he 
was still living in Paris. The work is in hexameters, 
and consists of seven books ; it was written after 
the year 11 IS, as the author speaks of Baldwin I. 
as having formerly reigned at Jerusalem. The three 
last books follow the ‘ Gesta ’ word for word, with 
the exception of three brief original additions. 97 
The four first books are more independent, and differ 
in numerous points from the * Gesta/ but afford 
few emendations on it. For example, let us com- 
pare the beginning of Gilo’s narrative, namely, the 
account of the siege of Nicaea, with that given by 
eye-witnesses. 98 The town was surrounded, and the 
whole army of the Crusaders united before the 
walls, from the very beginning. But we know from 
Raymond, who was himself present, that the Pro- 
vencals only arrived there on the fifteenth day of 
the siege. We learn from Fulcher, who was with 
Robert of Normandy, that the northern French, 
with the exception of Hugo, reached the camp 
several weeks after the Provencals. At the very be- 

97 Page 251: a number of new pilgrims flocked together to 
Antioch. Page 261: the mention of Kambaud at the storm- 
ing of Jerusalem (compare likewise Ead. c. 119). Page 263: 
Guichu, the lion-slayer, was the second to scale the walls of Jeru- 
salem. 98 Gilo, p. 214. 



Digitized by Google 




176 LITERATURE OF THE CRUSADES. 



ginning of the siege, says Gilo, the pilgrims saw that 
it was essential to cut off the water communication 
from the besieged ; for this reason a fleet was built, 
which compelled the besieged to offer to surrender. 
Such an offer was certainly made, not to the Cru- 
saders, but to the Emperor Alexius, and took place 
before the pilgrims thought of occupying the water 
of the lake." Gilo has it that the attempt 
made by the Sultan to succour the town followed 
upon this. On its failure, the inhabitants lost all 
heart, and gave up the town to the Greek Emperor. 
It is however well known that this skirmish oc- 
curred quite at the beginning of the siege, on the 
same day on which Count Eaymond reached the 
Christian camp, and that Nicsea offered a resis- 
tance that lasted four weeks longer. We see the 
gross errors in facts and dates contained in this 
narrative : how ill such a beginning promises for 
the rest of the narrative ! And indeed in the course 
of the work there is little to induce us to alter 

99 The manuscript from which Duchesne had the work printed, 
contains an interpolation which is not without interest for 
the dissemination of these statements. The negotiations are 
broken off, war is renewed; at night the Christians capture 
a messenger, who was to announce the approach of the Sultan, 
and so on, as we may read the story in Albert of Aix ; only it 
is written in hexameters instead of in prose. It is an addition 
entirely void of sense, as Raymond’s absence is noticed, and the 
Count is at the same time named as one of the attacking party. 



Digitized by Google 




FÜLCO, GILO, AND THE MONK ROBERT. 177 

oar judgment. Wherever the author does give more 
accurate accounts, such for instance as that of the 
occurrences before Antioch, and elsewhere, his nar- 
rative, if not exactly a copy of the ‘ Gesta,’ follows 
that authority very closely . 100 

That Gilo drew largely from oral tradition is ob- 
vious in itself, but still more so when we consider 
the work of the monk Robert. The connection be- 
tween Gilo and Robert is evident on the slightest 
comparison ; but, as far as I know, Michaud was 
the first to point this out. He does not hesitate to 
consider Robert’s narrative as the source whence 
Gilo took his history . 102 According to Michaud, 
Robert inserted into the text of the ‘ Gesta,’ 
which was his original, a number of events which 
he himself witnessed. These were again borrowed 
by Gilo, who made fresh additions to them, of 
very little value. But if we take any subject 
from these three authors, for instance, the siege of 
Nicaea, we shall perceive that Gilo and the ‘ Gesta ’ 
give two completely different versions; and that 
Robert has attempted to combine the two with 
a very bad result . 108 We can follow Robert step 
by step in this process, and can see how the 

100 Compare the single combats before Antioch. 

108 See his Bibliotheque des Croisades, article Gilo, 

108 Gesta, p. 5. Gilo, p. 218. Bob. p. 38. 

N 



Digitized by Google 




178 



LITERATURE OF TIIE CRUSADES. 



attempt to combine two such different accounts 
involves him in hopeless contradictions, and how 
he tries to reconcile them. 

If we cut out the information derived from the 
‘ Gesta Francorum’ and from Gilo, there remains but 
a small amount of original matter belonging to 
Robert the Monk, at the very most about five pas- 
sages, and those not very credible ; 104 we thus see 
that the position of this writer, who has been placed 
on an equality with the author of the ‘ Gesta,’ and 
with Raymond of Agiles, and far above the other 
copiers of those two eye-witnesses, is a very unim- 
portant one. 

/According to common report, the monk Robert 
became abbot of the convent of St. Remy, at 
Rheims; here he was subjected to severe censure 
by the abbot Bernard of Marmoutiers, who was his 
superior. This resulted in his deposition, by the 
Archbishop Manasses of Rheims. Robert appealed 



m The history of a Provencal apostate who joined Kerboga, 
which is to be found with some variations in other authors. 
Page 66 : countless numbers of heavenly warriors fight with the 
Crusaders against Kerboga. Page 70 : the remark that Bay mond 
was quite in the right in the quarrel with Antioch ; and further, 
the account of the last consultation of the princes in ELafertah. 
Page 73 : the notice that Anselm of Ripemont had been a zealous 
protector of the church at Anchin, which is confirmed by Sigeb. 
Gemblac, a.d, 1099. Lastly, page 75 : the totally unfounded as- 
sertion that Baldwin had been with the forces before Jerusalem. 



Digitized by Google 




I'ULC'O, GILO, AND THE MONK ROBERT. 179 

to Pope Urban II., received a favourable judgment 
in Rome in the year 1097, went to the Crusades, 
and was present at the capture of Jerusalem. Spite 
however of the Papal judgment, he could never_ 
obtain a restoration to his former dignity; but he 
was made instead the prior of Senuc, where he wrote- > 
his history of the Crusades. He lost the latter pre- ' 
ferment by a judgment of Pope Calixtüs II. and died 
in 1122. Por all these circumstances we have con- 
temporary authority. There are the acts of the Coun- 
cil of Rheims 105 which deposed him, letters from 
himself, from two archbishops concerning him, 106 
the acts of the Council of Poitiers which acquitted 
him ; but for his participation in the Crusades, and 
the most important of all, the composition of his 
history, we can discover nothing of the sort. In 
all those documents there is no mention of these 
facts, and no other writer alludes to them. The 
most ancient author who mentions his pilgrimage is, 

I believe, Blondus, in his ‘Decades’; 107 Marlot, 
in his ‘ Metropolis Remensis,’ is the first to speak 

106 In Mansi, in the supplement to 1097, as well as in Marlot, 
in a passage we shall give. 

106 His letter to the Bishop of Arras in Baluze, Miscell., iv. 
315. A letter of Hugo of Lyons, in Martene, Coll. Ampl., in 
the Chron. Adag. p. 998. A letter of Baldric of D61, in Du- 
chesne, iv. 276. 

107 Decad. ii. L 4 Bongars cites him in his preface. 

v O 
& 



Digitized by Google 




180 LITERATURE OF THE CRUSADES. 

of him as an author “in cellä Senucensi;” 108 but, 
until proof is afforded for both these assertions, I 
see no certainty, either of the identity of the abbot 
of St. Remy with the author of the history by the 
monk Robert, nor of the pilgrimage of the one or 
the other to the Holy Land, whether they be one, 
or two different persons. If we examine the wri- 
tings before us with reference to these points, the 
evidence is doubtful rather than affirmative. The 
author calls himself only a monk, not an abbot : he 
speaks of St. Remy, and not of Senüc, as the spot 
where he wrote his work. 109 But the work was 
written after 1118., 110 when the abbot Robert had 
long lived at Senuc. There is only one passage 
which leads one to suppose the author ever to have 
been in Jerusalem, and that by no means proves his 
participation in the Crusades. 111 

Be this as it may, the question is unimportant, 
considering the small value which we attach to his 



108 Tom. ii. 221. Mabillon, Ann. iv. 347, quotes from it, 
the Gallia Christ. Nova, ix. 230. The Hist. Litt, de la France 
follows him (x. 323) ; also Oudin, de Script. Eccles. ii. 862, 
quotes Marlot, and Joannis follows him in his statement. From 
the Hist. Litt, it has passed into all modern histories. Trithem 
■and Fabricius give no further particulars. 

109 In prsef. apol. 110 ^s Gilo is used. 

111 He says, p. 78, — “ A quodam Turco qui haec” (on the battle 
near Ascalon) “ postea in Jerusalem retulit habuimus.” I believe 
that he, like Ekkehard, was at Jerusalem at some later period. 



Digitized by Google 




FULCHER OF CHARTRES. 



181 



work, which is a compilation without any peculiar 
interest, even supposing it to have been composed 
in the camp of the Crusaders. 11 * 

IV. Fulcher of Chartres. 

The ‘ Gesta Peregrinantium Francorum,’ by Ful- 
cher of Chartres, may be divided, according to its 
method and its value, into several parts. A brief 
account of the author’s life will furnish the best 
cljie to a criticism of his work. 

Fulcher, a chaplain from Chartres, took the cross, 
in the year 1095, and joined the army of Count 
Robert of Normandy and Stephen of Blois, with 
which he marched through Apulia and Greece, and 
reached the camp before Nicaea in June, 1097. He 
remained with the bulk of the crusading army until 
its arrival in Meerasch, and went thence to Edessa 
with Count Baldwin, who then commenced his en- 
terprise against that town. 113 Up to this point his 
information is good, and frequently most important ; 
both on particular facts and on the general aspect 
of affairs. I allude more particularly to his account 
of the journey through Italy and Greece. 114 He here 

m His account of the Council of Clermont is however in a 
better- style : here he speaks as an eye-witness. 

118 Pages 383, 389, 400, in Bongars. 

114 Pages 384, 385. 



Digitized by Google 




182 



LITERATURE OF THE CRUSADES. 



shows the incorrectness of the impression that the 
armies had met together in the west of Europe, 
and that great masses of them had marched towards 
the East in regularly organized bodies. “ We wan- 
dered,” says Eulcher, “ as we could, in April, May, 
June, until October, wherever we could obtain sup- 
plies.” Adhemar had appointed Constantinople 
as the general rendezvous. 114. Moreover Fulcher’s 
narrative of the march from Dorylaeum to Eikle is- 
important, and very attractive,* from the great de- 
scriptive powers of the writer. His account of the 
occurrences in Edessa is conclusive, as he was the 
only eye-witness . 115 It agrees in the main with that 
of Matthew Eretz of Edessa, who is the next best 
authority ; whereas both Albert of Aix and Guibert 
have followed quite different reports . 110 

Unfortunately Fulcher breaks off here, and turns 
his attention to the main body of the crusading 
army, which then seemed the point of most interest. 
It is scarce credible that a contemporary, living at 
the distance of only a few days’ journey, should re- 
ceive such absurdly false accounts. What reliance 
can be placed on these traditions, when even in a 



114 Chron. Podiense, in the Hist. Gen. de Languedoc, ii. 8. 

115 Pulcher, pp. 388, 389. 

118 Fulcher, p. 389 ; Matthew Eretz, in the Notices, etc., de la 
Biblio. du Eoi, ix. ; Alb. p. 222 et seq. ; Guibert, 496. 



Digitized by Google 




FULCHEll OF CHARTRES. 



183 



few score years they circulated in the distant West 
in such wild and uncertain forms ? The chrono- 
logical sequence of events is lost ; the accuracy of 
the narrative disappears, and a blind enthusiasm 
finds vent in miraculous stories. Even here however 
some few passages are important : such as the ac- 
count of Tancred’s conquest of Bethlehem, which 
checks a different report given by Albert of Aix ; 
Tancred’s plundering of the Temple, and the sub- 
sequent negotiations, which are supported by the 
testimony of Radulph against Albert. 117 

Eulcher remained in Jerusalem, after a short ab- 
sence, until the death of Godfrey of Bouillon at 
Edessa. He then accompanied Baldwin I. to Pa- 
lestine, and remained there with the King in the 
same capacity as he had previously been with the 
Count. 118 From this time his work is most important. 
Here, where all other eye-witnesses fail, his account 
is trustworthy, and often full. Let us attempt from 
this point to determine its general character. 

It is obvious, in the first place, that the author 
by no means intended to write a history : the work j 
is in reality a diary of his own life, with all the cir- 
cumstances as they happened ; in which state Gui- 

bert saw it in the year 1108 or 1110, in the West ; 

* 

117 Alb. p. 281 ; Bad. c. 136 et seq. 

118 Pages 400, 403. 



Digitized by Google 




184 



LITERATURE OF THE CRUSADES. 



though it does in fact come down to 1127. He 
records what personally concerns himself, and de- 
votes to it more or less space, according to his own 
individual taste. I will select the first example 
that occurs to me (to which many might be added); 
the passage in which he relates Baldwin’s taking 
possession of Jerusalem. He begins with a vivid 
description of the march from Edessa : “ Collegit 
exercitulum suum,” — two hundred knights and 
seven hundred infantry ; they go from city to city ; 
the Prince of Tripolis sends bread, wine, wild 
honey, and mutton to their tents ; at the same time 
he tells them of an ambush prepared for them 
near Berytus. This they found terribly confirmed, 
for the narrow and wild passes were occupied by 
the Saracens. He then describes the battle, and 
how the Christians were at first unsuccessful. “ We 
were ill at ease,” says he ; “ we affected courage, 
but we feared death. I wished myself home again 
at Chartres or Orleans.” Luckily, however, they 
fought their way through, and Pulcher devotes 
many pages to a description of the happy manner 
in which they brought this adventure to a close. 
They subsequently reached Kaiphas, which then be- 
longed to Tancred, who, as is well known, was one 
of the leaders of the opposition against’ Baldwin’s 
succession. Fulcher enters into no explanation of 



Digitized by Google 




FULCHER OF CHARTRES. 



185 



the relations between the two princes. He only 
says shortly : “ We did not enter Kaiphas, because 
Tancred was then at enmity with us ; but,” he con- 
tinues, “ Tancred being then absent, his people sold 
us bread and wine outside the walls, for they con- 
sidered us as brothers, and were anxious to see us.” 
And a little further on : “ As we approached Jeru- 
salem, the clergy and the laity came forth to meet 
the King in solemn procession ; likewise came the 
Greeks and the Syrians, with crosses and candles, 
who received him with joy and honour and loud 
shouts, and escorted him to the Church of the Holy 
Sepulchre.” After this the narrative again becomes 
very meagre. “The Patriarch Dagobert was not 
present; he had been slandered to Baldwin, and 
bore him a grudge ; wherefore he sat apart on Mount 
Sion until his malice was forgiven.” Not one word 
explaining the cause and purport of this quarrel. 
No one could suppose that the whole existence 
of the Christian' kingdom in the Bast was at that 
moment at stake; nor does he bestow more atten- 
tion upon the King and his peculiar talent for go- 
vernment. He proceeds : — “ We remained six days 
in Jerusalem, rested ourselves, and the King made 
his first arrangements; then we started again.7 
Then follows a detailed and most lively journal .of 
his travels through the whole southern portion of 



Digitized by 



Godgk 




186 



LITERATURE OF THE CRUSADES. 



the kingdom. Later we find a short narrative of 
the Second Crusade. He was in 1102 with the 
King during an expedition against Ascalon in Joppa. 
“There,” he says, “he met several knights who 
were waiting for a favourable wind, in order to re- 
turn as speedily as possible to France. They had 
lost their horses the year before, together with all 
their baggage, during a march through Rumania.” 119 

Fulcher’s work has been much used, both by his 
contemporaries and by subsequent writers. We 
have already mentioned that Guibert knew the 
book. Spite of his obligations to Fulcher, Guibert 
speaks contemptuously of him, without however 
bringing any specific charge against him. Bartholf 
de Nangiejo was more grateful : he compiled the 
‘ Gesta Expugnantium Hierusalem,’ distinctly ac- 
knowledging his authority. 120 Many passages are 
taken from the * Gesta Francorum,’ not exactly 
word for word, but they betray their origin. Others, 
again, are evidently fabulous tales, having no pre- 
tence to authenticity. The work is in no way im- 
portant. 121 

119 There are many similar accounts of other things that hap- 
pened, of the products of the country, foreign customs, etc. ; page 
401, on the water of the Dead Sea ; page 407, on the church 
music in Jerusalem, etc. 

120 In Bongars, p. 561. The name is in Barth, p. 500. 

121 It reaches from 1095 to 1106. 



Digitized by Google 




FÜLC5EE OF CHÜLRTRES. 



1S7 



We must also here only mention the ‘ Secunda 
Pars Historic Hierusalem,’ by Liziard, of Tours, 
embracing the years 1100-1124 its contents 
are of no value. 

The work of William of Malmesbury is mixed 
up much more with foreign and even fabulous 
matter. 123 It is instructive only as regards the 
family of Godfrey of Bouillon, and the early and 
subsequent career of Robert of Normandy. 124 The 
rest of his book, where he ventures to quit Pulcher, 
does not belong to an historical account of the 
Crusades. 

The ecclesiastical history of Ordericus Vitalis is 
beyond measure more important. He compiled 
the history of the Crusades partly out of Fulcher, 
partly out of Baldric ; but added a number of cu- 
rious details, which are not all equally authentic, 
but are nevertheless interesting and important. 125 
This part of his work, and indeed the whole of it, 
contains a vast mass of local information. The se- 
veral facts are characteristic and life-like - K and, when 
taken as a whole, are of the greatest value towards 

m In Bongars, p. 594. 

123 In his * Gesta Regum Angli®/ p. 131 et seq., in Savile. 

124 Page 142, 151, and in other places. 

125 Lappenberg, in his History of England, ii. 337, gives the 
most instructive account of his work. In comparison with this 
the earlier statements in the Hist. Litt, de la France, are very 
unimportant. 






Digitized by Google 




188 LITBB.ATCB.ft OF THB CBU8ADKS. 

obtaining a knowledge of the state of things at that 
time. He gives the most valuable information con- 
cerning Peter tjie Hermit , 128 Otho of Bayeux, and 
his death , 127 and many noblemen of Normandy and 
of the north of France . 128 No one shows more com- 
pletely what view the people who lived in those 
times, took of the whole Crusade . 129 Capefigue says 
of him , 180 that he was “ le conteur d’anecdotes ; il 
regne dans toutes ses pages un esprit romanesque, 
qui se ressent deja des trouveres et de la poesie.” 
This applies only to some part of his book : the 
reports which came to him from the East bore 
that impress. They tell of pagan princesses who are 
unable to withstand the charms and merits of the 
celebrated Christian heroes .: 181 the pilgrims give 
battle not only to Turks and Saracens, but to 
hosts of lions and tigers : 132 the Lord blinds the 
eyes of the unbelievers, so that the Christians may 
destroy them at their ease . 183 Iff the midst of such 
stories we suddenly meet with facts of real import- 



1M Page 723. 
w Pages 646, 660, 664. 

128 Concerning the Grantmenils, p. 707. 

123 Pages 700-701 ; above all, pp. 718-719. 

180 Hugues Capet, iv. 232. 

m In Edessa, p. 746. The Daughter of Dalmian, p. 796. 
The daughter of Bagi-Sijans, who was willing to become a 
Christian for the sake of eating pork. 

132 Page 790. 133 Page 768. 






Digitized by Google 




FULCHER OF CHAETRES. 



189 



ance, which could only come from well-informed 
eye-witnesses, and which throw light on the most 
important events of the Crusades, 134 ' In short, we 
see that the author made inquiries in all directions ; 
much of his information was undoubtedly derived 
from men who took part in affairs ; truth and fable 
flowed in upon him; all of which he reproduces 
faithfully, and without comment. Instructive as this 
author is, tvhen properly used, his narrative would 
mislead those who are not capable of distinguishing 
these two elements. 

In conclusion, I will mention in this place the 
fragment of French history in the fourth volume 
of Duchesne : 136 though the narrative is too general 
to be traced entirely to Fulcher. It gives some de- 
tails as to the conquest of Jerusalem, which are 
only to be found in Bartholf . 136 The statement, that 
Godfrey refused the name and ensigns of royalty 
in a city where his Saviour had been crowned with 
thorns, is first mentioned in this fragment. More- 
over, the merit of this humility is given, not to 

134 On the strength of the Christian army against Kerboga* 
p. 741. On tHe negotiations before Ascalon, p. 758.’ On the 
Anglo-Saxons in the East, pp. 725, 778. 

136 Page 85. 

m E. g. that Tancred had stormed the town solely for his own 
purposes. According to the general acceptation, he was with 
Godfrey on the tower. 



Digitized by Google 




190 



LITERATURE OF THE CRUSADES. 



Godfrey himself, but to the barons who surrounded 
him . 187 

There are three authors of the twelfth century 
who have made use of Fulcher; but, from their 
entire want of original matter, it is scarce worth 
while here to enter into their merits. Stenzal 
gives extracts from a work compiled from that of 
the monk Robert, with additions from Fulcher ; 138 
secondly, there is the Chronicle of Richard of Poi- 
tou , 189 who has taken his materials from Raymond of 
Agiles and from Fulcher, and often in a very con- 
fused manner . 140 Lastly, there is the Chronicle of 
Bishop Sicard, of Cremona ,? 41 which contains some 
original but worthless notices concerning Peter the 
Hermit ; 142 in other respects, it follows Fulcher word 
for word . 148 

137 Tlie usual version is to be found in William of Malmesbury, 
p. 143. Histor. Belli Sacri, c. 130. In the preface to the As- 
sizes of Jerusalem, and in William of Tyre. 

138 Archiv für Deutsche Geschichtskunde, iv. p. 97. But it 
mentions Martene, in prsef. ad Ekkehardum. It is of the date 
of 1146. I have seen a copy of it at Bonn. 

139 Muratori, Antiquit. Ital. vol. iv. p. 1058 et seq. The Hist. 
Litt. vol. xiii. p. 530, gives sufficient information on the 
author. 

140 It gives the most contradictory accounts of the Holy Lance, 
one by the side of the other, without remark. 

141 Murat. Script, vii. 586 et seq . 

142 Ad annum 1084, ex cod. Ertensi. 

143 Pertz, in his Archiv, vii. 543, gives a copious account of 
a copy in Lambert Florid. 



Digitized by Google 




RODOLPH OF CAEN. 



191 



The true, primitive sources, the narratives of 
eye-witnesses, here cease. We possess narratives 
written bv individual members of the three na- 
tions which formed the main body of the cru- 
sading army. The parallel which we drew be- 
tween the Normans and the Provencals, may be 
extended to the Lorrainers. Raymond of Agiles is 
important for Provencal matters, but is far inferior 
to the * Gesta’ as regards a right understanding of 
the Crusades ; and the heroes of the two works, 
Bohemund and Count Raymond of Toulouse, may 
be said to stand in the same relation towards each 
other as the works themselves. In the same manner, 
Pulcher’s value rises and falls with the position oc- 
cupied by the Lorraine princes. During the march, 
he gives only a few details which are of any interest, 
but afterwards, with regard to Baldwin L, he' takes 
the first place. Bohemund was then a prisoner, 
Raymond of Toulouse was involved in difficulties 
with the Greeks, and thus the Kang of Jerusalem 
found himself the undisputed head of all the Chris- 
tian possessions in the East. 

V. Rodolph of Caen. 

The two authors whom we shall next mention, 
Rodolph and Ekkehard, were not themselves ac- 
tually present at the Crusades. Nevertheless, we 



Digitized by Google 




192 



LITERATURE OP THE CRUSADES. 



may class them among the original sources, in the 
proper sense of the word, since they describe, of 
their own knowledge, that which immediately pre- 
ceded and followed the Crusades, and since both 
of their works contain accounts of men who bore a 
part, and an important part, in those enterprises. 

Rodolph was born at Caen about the year 1080, 
entered Bohemund’s service in 1107, and was pre- 
sent at the siege of Dyrrachium. Soon afterwards 
he went into Asia, and accompanied Tancred on 
his march to relieve Edessa. 144 He remained at- 
tached to Tancred Y person, and wrote his book 
between the years 1112 and 1118, from informa- 
tion given to him orally by that prince. 145 The 
chief topic is Tancred, and his great qualities. Ro- 
dolph is an enthusiastic admirer, but he is not a 
partisan. His narrative is absolutely essential to 
a knowledge of Tancred’s character. Moreover, 
Rodolph has a strictly historical feeling, in spite of 
the poetical form which his work occasionally as- 
sumes. His eloquence carries him away : he revels 
in images, antitheses, and climaxes, but for all this 

144 The quotations appertaining to this stand together in the 
prefaces of Martene and Durand. That which is there men- 
tioned relating to his subsequent fate, notwithstanding it has 
been so constantly repeated, cannot be proved. 

146 He writes after Tancred’s death in 1112, and dedicates it to 
the Patriarch Arnulf who died in 1118. 



Digitized by Google 




EODOLPH OF CAEN. 



193 



he does not lose sight of the real character of 
events. 

We shall sooner judge of the individual import- 
ance of his work, when we consider how it was 
■written. Rodolph himself tells us in his preface , 146 
that Tancred had never expressly desired him to 
write his history, nor had he ever given him infor- 
mation with that view. What we find in Rodolph, 
therefore, can only have been obtained from the 
chance recollections of the Prince, as conversation 
brought them out; the anecdotes were naturally 
mere fragments, and the connecting them together 
Was entirely Rodolph’s concern. As far as regards 
the sequence of events, or a perspicuous view 
of affairs in general, Rodolph’s work can have no 
claim to be considered as an immediate authority 
We must also distinguish between these fragments. 
All those which immediately concern Tancred, his 
views and his actions, are entirely worthy of be- 
lief. To the latter, Rodolph was an actual eye- 
witness, and there is no reason to doubt the truth 
of his statements with regard to the former. We 
wish we could say the same of the rest of his nar- 
rative. The events recorded are of two kinds ; those 
which Tancred had no better means of knowing 
than any soldier in his army ; — the visible progress 



Digitized by Google 




194 



LITERATURE OF THE CRUSADES. 



of a battle, the spot where a combat took place, 
the date of any occurrence ; or those which Tan- 
cred’s rank and position in the army gave him 
peculiar opportunities of learning ; — the plan of an 
attack, negotiations among the princes, and the like. 
For this latter class of facts, Rodolph is clearly 
again a perfectly trustworthy authority; the only 
regret is, that they are not more numerous. The 
rest of his narrative cannot be placed in the same 
rank with that of the ‘ Gesta’ or of Raymond, as 
his information is always at second-hand. Each 
fact must be subjected to a searching criticism. 

Let us endeavour to explain our meaning by an 
example ; for instance, the siege of Antioch . 147 He 
first describes the position of the Christian army 
and its several bodies. His statements have re- 
ceived no attention, since they disagree with those 
of Albert of Aix and William of Tyre ; and excite 
our mistrust by being mixed up with subsequent 
events. Notwithstanding this, I do not hesitate to 
prefer the report of a commander on such a subject 
to all others. This opinion is justified by the extreme 
care with which Rodolph explains his plan of attack, 
without regard to the chronological sequence of 
events. When he describes the several battles fought 
by his hero, I look upon his account of them as equal 
J47 Chapter 46. 



Digitized by Google 




RODOLPH OP CAEN. 



195 



to that of an eye-witness. Then follows a whole 
series of events, all probably very correct and ac- 
curate, but for us utterly useless, since we cannot 
reduce them to the same order as that in which 
they are given by other authorities. As to the cap- 
ture of the city, his testimony is decisive. No one 
can lay claim to higher credibility as to the trea- 
chery of Firuz and the negotiations that preceded 
it, than the cousin of Bohemond, who derived his 
knowledge immediately from that prince. 

Rodolph himself is quite conscious that the 
manner in which he got his information, and the 
order in which he places events, have no refer- 
ence to each other. During the whole course of 
his book there is a want of historical proportion. 
Some events and characters are described with ex- 
cessive diffuseness, while an important measure, or 
a whole period, is dismissed with a few words. In 
many cases he appears altogether to lose the thread 
of his narrative, either in elaborate and dull de- 
scriptions or in long-winded discussions ; while he 
deals in the most arbitrary way with the detail of 
facts. As an example of this we may compare his 
account of the quarrel between Bohemond and St. 
Giles about Antioch, with that of the other autho- 
rities . 148 His details, and above all the order in 

M» Chapter 99. 

o 2 



Digitized by 



Google 




196 



LITERATURE OT THE CRUSADES. 



which he relates them, differ entirely from those of 
Raymond and of the * Gesta but we soon perceive 
that he paid no attention to details ; — that he wished 
to represent one general feature, — the antagonism be- 
tween the natures of the Normans and the Proven- 
cals ; and that he selected and arranged his mate- 
rials with that view. We are obliged to him for 
the principle thus indicated, but we know where to 
get our facts from better sources. It is the same 
with the speeches which he places in the mouths of 
his heroes, and with the letters which he inserts ; 
they are one and all, as is clearly proved by their 
style, his own invention, and merely give us an in- 
sight into the author’s mode of thought. 

The only copy of this book, that I know, is that in 
the * Historia Belli Sacri ;* taken, according to the 
opinion of the editor, from the manuscript of the 
author. This is important on account of some 
marginal notes, which thus acquire the same autho- 
rity as the text. 14 ® 

VI. Ekkehard of Urach. 

The productions of Ekkehard as an historian, as 
well as his connection with the Chronicle of Auers- 
berg and the Saxon annalists (hitherto quite pro- 
blematical ), 150 have lately been made perfectly clear 

149 Pertz, Archiv, p. 524, confirms this. 

160 The extracts belonging to this are to be found in Eccard, 



Digitized by Google 




EKKEHARD OE URACH. 



197 



by the researches of Pertz. 161 We may likewise, on 
the same authority, form a safe judgment on Ek- 
kehard’s * History of Jerusalem.’ 

Among the works of Ekkehard, concerning which 
Pertz has given us information, we will first allude 
to his ‘ Chronicle of the World,’ down to the year 
1106. At first it only came down to the year 1100, 
but after the author’s pilgrimage to the Holy Land, 
he enriched the original work with many additions, 
and continued it down to the year 1106. These 
additions have 'reference entirely to the history ofc 
the Crusades, and were partly made by the author 
while he was in Palestine. 162 

Some years afterwards Ekkehard remodelled this 
work for Abbot Erkembert of Corvey, with a special 
view to the instruction of the Abbot concerning the 
Holy Land. The account of the Crusades was ex- 
tracted from the continuous narrative of the Chro- 
nicle, and, with some alterations, appended to the 
end of the work. 153 

Lastly, there was a new edition of the Chroni- 
cle in 1125 ; the work was brought down to that 
year, and the text in many places altered. We 

Corpus Hist. Medii Mvi, n. 10. Martene, Coll. Ampl. t. iv. prsef., 
n. 1-5, t. v. p. 512. Also in the Archiv für Deutsche Geschichts- 
kunde, i. 397, iL 309, iii. 590, v. 158. 

151 Archiv, vii. 469. 153 Archiv, p. 473. 

153 Archiv, pp. 482-484. 



Digitized by Google 




19S 



LITERATURE OE THE CRUSADES. 



therefore possess four different versions ; 154 that of 
1100, that of 1106, the version arranged for Er- 
kembert, and lastly that of 1125. All of them are 
open to our inspection and comparison : the first* 
in the copy of the Saxon chronicler ; the third, iu 
Martene’s collection and in the copy of the Saxon 
annalist ; the fourth, in the copy of the Chronicle 
of Auersberg. Let us see whence they drew their 
materials, and what light they severally throw upou 
the Crusade. 

The information given by the Saxon chronicler 15 ^ 
is far inferior in minuteness and importance to all the 
others. The origin of the Crusade is only slightly 
indicated, and the narrative is singularly meagre 
until we come to the siege of Nicaea. From this 
time it is somewhat more detailed, but no measure 
is observed. Some of the statements are to be 
found nowhere else ; while many others want only 
confirmation to be of the greatest value towards a 
knowledge of what really took place. Fortunately 
this confirmation is possible. The source whence his 
statements are taken word for word, has come down 
to us, and is in the highest degree authentic. It is 
the Report or letter addressed to Pope Paschal IL, 

154 Archiv, p. 499. Further remarks are in Riedel, Nachrich- 
ten von Havelberger Handschriften, pp. 7, 11. 

155 Ad annum 1096. 



Digitized by Google 




EKKEHARD OF URACH. 



199 



on the progress and issue of the Crusades, down 
to August, 1099, by Godfrey, Raymond, the two 
Roberts, and Archbishop Dagobert. This Report 
was preserved by Dodechin, and has been often 
quoted, ..but has never, so far as I know, been ap- 
plied in this manner. Ekkehard has neither omitted 
nor added anything, he has scarcely altered a single 
word. I see not the slightest reason to doubt the 
authenticity of this document. Ekkehard himself 
quotes it in his work, 150 and Dodechin inserts it, 
after repeating Ekkehard’s annals of the preceding 
years. If we examine the several statements, we 
find them quite unprejudiced, and exempt from 
official exaggeration, omission, or misrepresenta- 
tion ; always excepting the exaggerated statement of 
the numbers at the battle of Ascalon. The contents 
are therefore most important. 

The edition of the year 1106 differs but little, 
according to Pertz, from the work written for the 
Abbot Erkembert. The time when it was composed 
does not appear to me so certain as Pertz and Mar- 
tene think. ' It was. clearly written after the year 
1108, since the author calls himself the Abbot of 
Urach ; but it is doubtful whether it was so late as 
1117, 157 for Ekkehard speaks of the taking of Accon 

158 “ Sicnt epistola docefc, ä Comite Ruperto delata.” Ursp. 
copies this ; the Ann. Saxo omits it. 

157 The ground for this assertion is, that Erkembert, for whoso 



Digitized by Google 




200 



LITERATURE OF THE CRUSADES. 



and the marriage of Baldwin I., as having just oc- 
curred. 188 The history of the Crusade in this copy 
is much enlarged. Ekkehard has also shown much 
research both as to the preparations for the First 
Crusade, and its commencement. It is evident that 
he drew his information from those who were actually 
present, 169 and he may be considered as a leading 
authority for the enterprises of Peter, Volkmar, Gott- 
schalk, and Emicho. In the year 1101, a book fell 
into his hands at Jerusalem, which, as he says, accu- 
rately described both time and place of the three 
years’ war. 160 He introduced into the text of the 
Report or letter above mentioned, numerous frag- 
ments from this book, the original of which is lost. 
We must deplore its loss, as the quotations he gives 
prove it to have been a wholly independent and 
useful addition to our other sources of information. 161 

information as to the pilgrimage he contemplated this book was 
written, started on his journey in 1117. This, it is evident, is not 
conclusive ; Erkembert might have expressed his intention some 
years before he actually set out on his pilgrimage. 

168 Page 533. 

1M As he also expressly asserts in one passage. 

190 Page 520. “ Legimus Ierosolymee libellum a loco prsesenti 
totam hujus histories seriem diligentissime prosequentem, pluri- 
mos populi Dei per triennium labores in captee Jerusalem leetis- 
sima victoria concludentem.” 

161 Compare p. 521, for Godfrey’s battles in Constantinople; 
p. 522, for the negotiations between Christians and Saraoens. 
Regard must also be had to his characteristic of Godfrey as 
the ruler of the conquered land. 



Digitized by Google 




EKKEHARD OE REACH. 



201 



The most important new matter, however, is the 
latter portion of his work, in which the author gives 
an account of his own pilgrimage in the year 1101. 
He went part of the way with the main body of the 
army which met so calamitous an end in the sum- 
mer of that year, in Asia Minor; his account of 
which is indispensable. On this matter he is to be 
Considered in the light of an eye-witness; his descrip- 
tions are lucid, his judgment clear and free from pas- 
sion; there is nothing brilliant and nothing deceptive. 

Pertz mentions 163 that this chronicle contains frag- 
ments from Sigebert of Gembloux. I know not 
whether this applies to the rest of the work, but I 
do not see it in the part relating to the history of 
the Crusades. Sigebert has clearly much that is 
•similar in his narrative, but only in fragments of the 
letter of the princes to Pope Paschal. As the whole 
of the subsequent narrative widely differs, it ap- 
pears to me more probable that they both drew 
from the same original authority. 163 Extracts from 
Sigebert are also to be found in the fragment of the 
History of Jerusalem, which Martene has published 
ad calcem Ekkehardi. 

The connection between the Saxon annalist and 

» L. c. p. 483. 

188 Here, as in the following passages, I spare myself the trouble 
of quoting the texts. The identity is too obvious not to be seen 
*t once. 



Digitized by Google 




'202 LITERATÜRE OF THE CRUSADES. 

this compilation of Ekkehard is still more evident. 
The discrepancies between the two are very small, 
and thoroughly unimportant. That which Ekke- 
hard tells in a continuous narrative, 16 * is divided by 
the Saxon annalist according to years. Some few 
things which Ekkehard assumes or repeats are cor- 
rected as to dates. 165 Peter the Hermit receives his 
letter of credentials from Heaven, and the catalogue 
of the princes is enriched with some new names. 160 

We now come to the fourth compilation of Ek- 
kehard. It would appear, so far as we can judge 
from the Chronicle of Auersberg, that little has been 
altered in the history of the Crusades ; at any rate, 
nothing that can in any way modify the real view of 
events. We must observe, in reference to the Auers- 
berg Chronicle, that indications of a double compi- 
lation are obvious. In the years 1096-1097, the 

184 It is not quit© clear in Pertz whether the history of the 
Crusades, even in this copy directed to Erkembert, was taken 
out of its regular place and transferred to the end. He says so, 
in general terms, of the amended copy of the * Chronicle of the 
World/ p. 482; but at p. 484, he calls the ‘ Hierosolymita * a 
somewhat altered repetition of the history of the Crusades. My 
account refers only to Martene’s edition. 

165 For instance, the Catalogue of the Princes, the Embassy of 
the Egyptians before Antioch. 

188 The narr at ire of the devastations of the pilgrims in Bohemia 
is added, from Cosmos, Prag, ad annum 1096. We also find here, 
as in the Chron. Ursperg., the statement that Archbishop Eot- 
hard had protected the Jews in Mayence. 



Digitized by Google 




EKKEHARD OF URACH. 



20$ 



narratives of the Saxon chronicler are repeated; 
German affairs occupy the year 1098; in 1099 the 
author briefly mentions the conquest of Jerusalem, 
and adds : — “ Concerning this divine undertaking 
I intend to add some matter.” He then repeats 
the whole book of Ekkehard, as contained in Mar- 
tene’s edition : a circumstance which does not raise 
our opinion of the Chronicler, as the two compila- 
tions of Ekkehard contain contradictions which are 
here carelessly left side by side. 167 

Ekkehard’s work has been frequently used and 
copied during the Middle Ages. I shall here men- 
tion the transcripts made in the twelfth century 
alone, without attempting to explain their connection 
with each other. There are sundry short notices 
from annals, which state only that, at the instigation 
of Peter the Hermit, a countless mass of people 
flocked to Jerusalem, and wrested that city from the 
hands of the heathen, after having forcibly converted 
the Jews. These are the Annales Wirciburgenses , 
JBrunvilarenses, and Hildesheimenses . 16S They all 
communicate the same facts, and Pertz has called 
attention to the use made of Ekkehard. 169 

187 Concerning the destruction of a host of pilgrims in Hungary* 

108 The two first in the Monum. t. ii. ; the last in t. y. 

189 In prsef. We see the origin clearly enough, when we com« 
pare the Annal. Saxo (“]Petrus in finibus emersit Hispaniae,” etc. ) 
Dodechin, who is somewhat shorter, and these Annals* 



Digitized by Google 




204 LITERATURE OF THE CRUSADES. 

Otto of Eriesingen, in the seventh book of his 
Chronicle , 170 has extracted largely from Ekkehard, 
making however many alterations as to order, (which 
are not always improvements) and many additions. 
The best known is the frequently quoted but erro- 
neous statement, that Urban II. had been reinstated 
at Rome by the aid of the Crusaders . 171 

The Chronicle of St. Pantaleone likewise copies 
the narrative of the Crusades entirely from Ekke- 
hard, with some variations which show that the 
Ursperg Chronicle had been likewise used . 173 No- 
thing more need be said of this, nor of the German 
translation. 

Godfrey of Viterbo also follows Ekkehard in his 
‘ Pantheon .’ 173 He also has made no additions worth 
mentioning. 

The narrative of Helmold, in his Hist. Slav., de- 
serves somewhat more notice . 174 It is quite clear 

170 vii. c. 2. 

171 Even Stenzel, Frank. Kaiser, ii. 160, accepts this ; so does 
Gieselar Kirchengeschichte, ii. 2, p. 46, and quotes Fulcher as 
well as Otho as authorities ; the two latter, however, state the 
real facts correctly. 

171 It contains the passage, “ non modica quippe multitudo,” 
etc., before the proposition, “ legimus Hierosolymse libellum,” etc. 

178 Pages 338, 339, in Pistori, ii. I will remark here, that the 
work which Pertz found appended to the Nuremberg Codex of the 
same author must, according to the words given at p. 658 of 
Pertz, Archiv, vii., be Albert of Aix’s, or an excerpt from him. 

174 Hist. Slav. i. 29 et seq. 



Digitized by Google 




EKKEHARD OE URACH. 



205 



that in his history of the Crusades he has followed 
Ekkehard, or one of his imitators. He, like Otto 
of Eriesingen and Godfrey of Viterbo, condenses his 
original. 

Lastly, we must mention Dodechin, who also 
abridges Ekkehard’s narrative . 176 

On reviewing this series of copiers, we recognize 
a similar leaning in all of them, especially as regards 
Godfrey of Bouillon and Peter the Hermit. Their 
method of condensing is nearly identical. They 
copy the whole passage about Peter the Hermit in 
extenso, m and then compress into the smallestlim its 
what they have to say on the Crusade. They do not 
mention Godfrey of Boaillon, as Ekkehard does, as 
the Chief chosen in Jerusalem, but generally, as the 
leader of the army. 

175 Ad annum 1096 et seq . 

176 The only exceptions are Otto of Friesingen and Godfrey of 
Viterbo» They speak of Urban IX. as the originator of the Cru- 
sade ; in this they follow Ekkehard, who places Peter and Urban 
in their proper connection. 



Digitized by Google 




206 



CHAPTER II. 

ALBERT OF AIX. 

But little is known of the remarkable Chronicle 
which now engages our attention . 1 The author is 
named on the titlepage Albert, or Alberich , 2 Ca- 
nonicus Aquensis Ecclesiae, but it is not quite cer- 
tain whether Aix in Provence or Aix-la-Chapelle is 
intended. It has been much discussed, but in truth 
no progress whatever has been made towards a so- 
lution of the question . 3 Latterly, and as I think 
with justice, the opinion is in favour of Aix-la-Cha- 
pelle . 4 At the very beginning of his book the author 
calls Prance the Kingdom in the West, which would 

1 I may perfectly dispense witli noticing the early researches 
concerning Albert of Aix. None of them contain any description 
either of his person or of the sources from which he drew. But 
the sum of all the traditional opinions about him was the utmost 
veneration. 

8 See Bongars, in pr®f. 

* The Hist, litt de la France, x. 277, contains something on 
this subject. 

4 For example, Michaud and Capefigue, 



Digitized by Google 




ALBERT OF AIX. 



207 



seem to point more to Aix-la-Cliapelle than to Aix 
in Provence. 8 There is one apparent piece of local 
information, which has been considered as decisive, 
but upon which I do not lay so much stress as upon 
the general tendency of his views of affairs, which 
admits of no doubt. 6 The traditions and interests 
of Germany and Lorraine predominate through the 
whole book. Godfrey of Bouillon is avowedly thej 
hero of it, 7 and we shall have frequent occasion to 
mark the influence of this circumstance on the tone 
of the narrative. It is true that all this merely af- 
fords a greater probability, but no real proof, of the 
German origin of Albert. 

The same uncertainty prevails likewise as to the 

period when Albert lived and wrote his work. The 

last events he describes relate to the vear 1121. The 

* 

only matter that can be maintained with any cer- 
tainty is, that the work must have been begun shortly 
after that date, as the author in many places refers to 
the direct information he received from eye-witnesses. 
For other questions of importance, such as the na- 
tion of the author, and the credibility of his book, 
we have no evidence, save that afforded by the 

6 1 , 2 1 “Amiens, qnac est in occidente de regno Irancie.” 

• vi. 36. 

7 “ Incipit liber primus expedition« Hierosolymitan® nrbis, ubi 
Ducis Godefridi inclyta gesta narrantur, cujus labore et studio 
Civitas Sancta sanctao Ecclesi® filiis est restitute,” 



Digitized by 




I 




208 LITERATURE OE TBE {CRUSADES. 

work itself. Let us therefore examine into the 
origin of the narrative, so as, if possible, to come to 
some conclusion concerning it. 

On many occasions Albert himself quotes the oral 
testimony of eye-witnesses which altogether forms 
a considerable mass of authorities. 8 He repeatedly 
speaks of several persons who communicated these 
facts to him. They touch upon the most various 
circumstances; one refers to the progress of Gott- 
schalk through Hungary ; six relate to events which 
befell the great crusading army ; and the last de- 
scribes the defeat in the year 1101, in Asia Minor. 
The character, however, of all, is similar ; the author 
relates the strangest and most wonderful things, 
for the truth of which he appeals in the most 
express manner to his authorities. In the first, 
unheard-of cruelties ; 9 in two others, the wonder- 
ful prowess of Godfrey of Bouillon ; 10 further, the 
frightful distress of the army in the Phrygian de- 
sert, 11 and at Antioch ; 12 the splendour of the Tem- 
ple at Jerusalem; 13 the miraculous preservation of 
the Christians at Ascalon ; 14 and lastly, the fabulous 
circumstances that occurred at the defeat of 1101, 
when for miles round, the earth was covered with 

8 Bongars, prsef., mentions some, but not all. 

> 9 i. 24. ii. 33; iii. 65. 11 iii. 2. 

12 iv. 55. 13 vi. 24, 14 vi. 60, 



Digitized by Google 




ALBERT OF AIX. 



209 



gold and silver vessels, while the blood of the slain/ 
flowed in mighty streams . 16 Such are the narratives', 
which he particularly calls upon us to believe, andV 
which he details with the profoundest conviction of j 
their truth. They are not exactly miracles, or proofs / 
of the direct interference of God ; but the perfection 
of human heroism, and the display of extraordinary 
splendour mixed with extreme misery. Such are 
the things which especially interest him, and stimu- 
late him to seek for information from all quarters. 

These sentiments invariably appear wherever 
the author’s book is opened. That all human 
virtues were developed to the highest degree by 
the Crusades ; that it was impossible to conceive 
greater heroes and more extraordinary deeds ; such 
were his convictions, such the chief motives to his 
researches. “ For a long time,” says he , 16 “ was I 
filled, by the singular and wonderful things that I 
heard, with a longing passion to be one of this ex- 
pedition, and to worship the Saviour at the Holy 
Sepulchre. But as this desire was not gratified, 

I will at any rate set down some things which 

15 viii. 21. 

16 “ Diu multumque his usque diebus, ob inaudita et plurimum 
admiranda ssepius aecensus sum desiderio ejusdem expeditionis. 
.... Temerario ausu decrevi saltern ex bis aliqua memorise com- 
mendare, qusB auditu et revelatione nota fierent ab bis qui prse- 
sentes affuissent.” 

P 



Digitized by Google 




210 



LITERATURE OF THE CRUSADES. 



were revealed orally to me by those who were 
present.” If such be really the case, (and there 
is not the smallest doubt that it is so) ; 17 if he 
has drawn his narrative solely from oral sources,, 
the work is a very remarkable one. No one can 
form an idea of the amount and the variety of the 
materials, which succeed one another in an inex- 
haustible supply, with wonderful vividness and in- 
dividuality. Whether he touches on the dream of 
Peter the Hermit, or on any period of the Crusades ; 
whether he treats of Godfrey’s or Baldwin’s reign, or 
the events that occurred simultaneously at Antioch 
and Edessa ; whether he narrates the general march 
of events, or enters into endless digressions, there 
is ever the same wealth of materials, the same 
graphic power of description. There is not a line of 
reflection ; nor does he ever attempt to shorten or 
condense his narrative. The mass of the army hurries 
on, the armour gleams in the sunshine, the crimson 
banners wave ; he distinguishes the several nations 
and their princes, and describes them in succession. 
Godfrey, Bohemund, the Bishop of Puy, and others, 
lead they* hosts with a wise discipline. And now the 
enemy show themselves at a distance, on the brow 
of the mountain range, mounted on fleet horses and 

^ I need not go into details to show that he is not in perfect 
accord with any author that has come down to us. 



Digitized by Google 




ALBERT OF AXX. 



211 



galloping wildly about. Immediately ten Chris- 
tian knights spring out of the ranks, and with inde- 
scribable courage disperse sixty of the enemy ; suc- 
cours arrive to both parties ; on both sides the num- 
bers and the excitement increase. Lances are splin- 
tered ; the horses snort and foam ; clouds of steam 
hang over the battle-field ; here a Provencal, there 
a Lorrainer distinguishes himself ; who knows not 
the approved valour of the one, the early deeds of 
piety of another, the strength of a third, renowned 
at home and abroad ? At length the Turkish ranks 
are broken. Then follows the pursuit through 
mountain and valley, over field and flood; gold 
and silver, camels and horses, all that is precious, 
becomes the spoil of the warriors of Christ . 18 
There is an unbroken series of incidents throughout 
the book ; the princes hold council together, the 
ecclesiastics pray, the warriors fight, everything 
is brought, with epical vividness, before our eyes. 
The talent of the author in this respect is mar- 
vellous; no passage seems to be made up for 
the occasion, or taken at second-hand; there is a 
rapid flow of lively and pertinent descriptions. It 
is impossible to deny that in this book we come 
' in contact with a host of people, who saw, suffered, 



w Almost verbatim from several passages : e. g. the battle of 
Dorylaeum, the siege of Antioch, etc. 



P 2 



Digitized by Google 




212 



LITERATURE OF THE CRUSADES. 



and acted as they describe ; the voices not of one 
but of many nations, speak to us with a thousand 
tongues ; we possess the picture of united Christen- 
dom, shaken to its foundations by an event which 
occupied the minds of all, from the highest to the 
lowest^ 

ScTfar the work is admirable and worthy of all 
Upraise ; though indeed very, little is said that can de- 
termine the value of his testimony as an historian. 
The question, whether this profusion of details throws 
much light on the main object, whether the author 
can lay claim to trustworthiness himself, remains 
wholly untouched. If we examine Albert’s mode of 
collecting and working up his materials,, strong 
doubts will arise, which we shall find confirmed, not 
alone by instituting a comparison of this writer with 
other authorities, but by an examination of his own 
statements. 

In every historical narrative, we require that the 
facts should be accurate as regards time and place ; 
and that it should not destroy its own value by con- 
tradiction. Now it cannot be said of Albert that he 
fulfils this indispensable condition ; he is regardless 
both of the external connection and internal consis- 
tency of his facts. The same free and easy method 
which aids his descriptive powers, hurries him 
along carelessly in the composition of his book, 



Digitized by Google 




ALBERT OF AIX. 



213 



and accident alone seems to determine whether the f 
separate narratives to which he gives currency, agree 
one with the other, or are totally incompatible. 
This consideration does not strike Albert; in a 
hundred passages such discrepancies are obvious, 
and it is worth our while to expose some of them. 

For instance ; he states that the Emperor Alexius 
and Godfrey of Bouillon had waged war against 
each other far into the month of January of 1097, 
and only suspended hostilities during Christmas, 
out of respect for that holy festival. 19 He connects 
this with a second notice, in which he says, with 
the most perfect indifference, that the Greek Em- 
peror sent presents daily to the Lorraine knight, 
from Christmas, when peace was concluded between 
them, until Whitsuntide. 20 

He further relates that Robert of Normandy, 
Stephen of Blois, and Eustace of Boulogne, were 
with Alexius at Constantinople, while Godfrey was 
laying siege to Nicsea. 21 Shortly afterwards he 
states, from some other authority, that among va- 
rious Crusaders, Stephen, Eustace, and others, had 
assisted at the first attack on N idea. 22 

Again, after the battle of Dorylaeum, which is 
well known to have taken place on the 1st of 
July, 1097, Albert proceeds in the following man- 
» ii. 10. w ii. 16. 21 ii. 21. 22 ii. 22. 



Digitized by Google 




214 



LITERATURE OF THE CRUSADES. 



ner — “ When the hostile attacks ceased, the 
Franks, at daybreak of the fourth day, proceeded 
further, and passed that night on the summit of the 
Black Mountain. When it was day, the whole army 
descended into the valley Malabyumas, where the 
day’s march was brought to a close by the narrow- 
ness of the pass, the number of the troops, and the 
heats of August. As there was still another Sunday 
of the same month, the thirst of the army increased, 
and so forth.” The utter indifference to all chrono- 
logy is here too obvious to require any further ex- 
amination. 

He gives two totally different accounts close 
upon each other, of the celebrated accident to Duke 
Godfrey while hunting. According to one account, 
Godfrey was wounded by a bear near Antiochetta, 
and was only cured some months later ; meanwhile, 
his illness had a baneful effect upon the whole army . 24 
According to another version, the Turks immediately 
attacked the Christian host. “ Caedem et strages 
operantur Boemundus et Godefridus : prseterea illus- 
cente die, dux Godefridus, Boemundus, et universi 
capitanei, exurgefctes armis loricis induti, iter in- 
termissum iterare jubent,” — whereas Adhemar ar- 
ranged the order of march, and Godfrey is named 
as taking the command of the rear-guard.* 

13 iii. 1. 24 iii. 3, 4, 58. 25 iii. 35, 36. 



Digitized by Google 




ALBERT OF AIX. 



215 



He introduces the history of Sweyn, the son of 
the King of Denmark, in the following manner : — 
It must be observed that Sweyn followed in the 
wake of the main army, which was then carrying 
on the siege of Antioch. “ After-the capture of Ni- 
^caea, he had delayed his march a few days, was well 
received by the Emperor Alexius, and then went 
right through Rumania .” 26 It appears to me obvious 
that here he follows two totally discrepant accounts ; 
from the one the mention of Nicaea, from the other 
that of the Emperor is taken. As a whole, as the 
passage now stands, the statement is devoid of 
sense. N 

The author then proceeds to state that Sweyn 
was killed at Iconium by Kilidje Arslan. But 
subsequently it is related in detail how the Sultan, 
•during the whole of the siege of Antioch, had re- 
mained in that city, or was with Kerboga at Mosul, 
in order to strengthen the opposition against the 
'Christians . 27 It is manifest that the presence of 
the Sultan, as the chief enemy of the Christian 
pilgrims, was considered necessary everywhere; just 
as Godfrey, their best defender* was represented 
as fighting in spite of his wounds . 28 

Baldwin obtains dominion in Edessa; he so 
distinguishes himself, says Albert, that a brother 
58 iii. 54. ” iv. 2. s * iii. 31. 



i 



Digitized by Google 




216 



LITERATURE OF THE CRUSADES. 



of Prince Constantine, of the name of Taphnuz, 
gives him his daughter to wife. It is subsequently 
mentioned, evidently from some other source, that 
he took to wife the daughter of the deceased Prince 
of Edessa . 29 

The embassy of Kilidje Arslan to Kerboga again 
involves Albert in remarkable chronological contra- 
dictions. Bagi-Sijan sends the former, some time 
in March, to ask for succour . 30 Kerboga says : — 
“ Before six months are passed, I shall have extermi- 
nated these Christians from the face of the earth .” 31 
It is obvious that Albert follows some other au- 
thority when he subsequently says, that at the apt 
pointed day the Turkish army assembled ; 32 that it 
advanced, and in June arrived before Antioch. 

In his account of the siege of Jerusalem he again 
gives accounts that do not agree. This is evident 
from a circumstance otherwise unimportant. During 
the siege the Christians draw a line of posts over 
the Mount of Olives. A little further on he describes 
the Mount of Olives as open, and the besieged as 
having free passage over it, which is obstructed only 
after some long subsequent occurrence . 33 

A Flemish pirate named Guinimer, altogether a 

29 iv. 6. 

30 iii. 62. The fight in capite jejunii, in February ; then an- 
other fight, and then the embassy. 

51 iv. 7. 32 iv. 10. 83 v. 46 ; vi. 12. 



Digitized by Google 




ALBERT OF AIX. 



217 



secondary personage, is mentioned several times in 
Albert’s history. But even concerning him we have 
conflicting accounts. Guinimer takes Laodicea. In 
one place we are told that while the Christians be- 
siege Antioch, the Greeks take Guinimer prisoner, 
and only release him at Godfrey’s request. In ano- 
ther passage he was still ruling at Laodicea, when 
Antioch had become a Christian city, and delivered 
up Laodicea to Count Raymond of Toulouse. 34 

At the siege of Arsuf by Duke Godfrey, it is 
said that Gerhard D’Avesnes, who had fallen into 
the hands of the besieged, was tied to a mast, and 
thus exposed to the arrows of his co-religionists. 
Afterwards mention is made of the influence of the 
Christians in Ascalon : it was so great, says Albert, 
that the Emir, of his own accord, sent back to Je- 
rusalem the two brothers Lambert and Gerhard 
D’Avesnes ; — the very same whom we have seen tied 
to the mast. 35 

In the history of the Crusades of the year 
1101, cases of this sort occur so frequently, that I 
cannot venture to determine whether they are to 
be attributed to discrepancies in the original re- 
ports, or only to Albert’s carelessness. The dates 
also are full of contradictions. He says that 
the army of Anselm of Milan left Constantinople 
34 iii. 59 ; vi. 55. 35 vii. 2, 5. 



Digitized by Google 




218 



LITERATURE OF THE CRUSADES. 



on the 9th of June, and encountered the Turks for 
the first time bn the 23rd. 36 Immediately after- 
wards we find it stated that it marched for three 
weeks in perfect tranquillity. 37 It is related of 
the Count of Poitou that eight days after the 
reverse of the Count of Nevers, — that is, in the 
last days of August, — he reached the Bulgarian fron- 
tiers. 38 According to this he would have been in 
Constantinople towards the middle or the end of 
September; but in another place it is said that he 
spent five weeks in Constantinople, and then passed 
over into Asia at the approach of harvest-lime 39 
He is not more accurate in his topographi- 
cal, than in his chronological statements. Anselm 
marches, in the two or three weeks above mentioned, 
from Nicomedia to Ancras (which means Ancyra 40 ), 
then to Gargara (Gangra in Galatia, not far from 
Halys), after that many days “through Flagania;” at 
length Meraasch is mentioned, two days before the 
defeat, from which the fugitives escape to Synoplum. 

36 Lib. viii. : when Whitsuntide drew nigh (9th J une), they first 
negotiated for some time with the Emperor, they then departed. 
Cap. 8: they stormed Ancras on the day before St. John's day 
{23rd June). 37 Cap. 8, init. 

38 Cap. 31 : “Act® sunt h© strages” (of the Count of Nevers) 
“mense Augu9to.” C. 34: “ Modico dehinc intervallo, dierum 
scilicet octo, post hanc recentem stragem, Wilhelmus Comes 
terram Bulgarorum est ingress us.” 

29 c. 36. 40 As Anna Comnena shows, p. 331. 



Digitized by Google 




ALBERT OP ATX. 



219 



The latter is clearly Sinope. But what lies between 
Sinope and Gangra is altogether fabulous ; as the 
retreat takes place on the Pontus, there can be 
no question of Murasch on the Euphrates. It 
would not be worth while to. bestow more trouble 
on the point ; the last-mentioned place has pro- 
bably slipped into the narrative from some other 
authority ; in any case the whole scene is laid in a 
mythical region, like that which he describes as 
•covered for mile3 round, after the defeat, with gold 
an^-sftver. 

We have already mentioned Anselm as having 
reached Ankras in three weeks. The Count of Ne- 
pers enjoys an easier march thither, and reaches 
Ankras from Kibotus in two days; 41 and that no 
one may confound this with a second town of that 
name (and in fact there is such a place at about 
two days’ march distant), Albert expressly affirms 
its identity with the town occupied by Anselm. 

But the confusion is the greatest with regard to 
the army of Poitou, which marches from Nicomedia 
to Stankona (Iconium), thence to Finimina (Philo- 
meliutn), 42 then again to Becklei (Archalla), 43 in fact, 

41 Lib. viii. 27. 

42 A comparison with p. 253 clearly gives this interpretation. 
Alexius, it is there stated, went as far as Finimina in the sum- 
mer of 1098. In the Appendix incerti auctoris ad calc. Fad- 
Tvici, Philomelium is called Finiminum. Ausbert calls it Vinimis. 

43 This is the present Erkle, on the borders of the then Arme- 



Digitized by Google 




220 LITERATURE OF THE CRUSADES. 

in the most unaccountable manner, to all the points 
of the compass. It is absolutely impossible to make 
sense or connection out of this chaos of details. 

In his eleventh book, Albert is entirely wrong by 
one year, as any one may easily perceive. He places 
the taking of Tripolis in the year 11 08, 44 of Sidon 
in 1109, 45 and the attack of Baldwin on Ascalon in 
the year 11 10. 46 In the same manner he mentions as 
occurring in 1110, the attack of Maudud of Mosul, 
against Antioch, 47 which actually took place in the 
summer of 1111, as a reprisal upon Tancred for 
the capture of Atsareb on Shrove Tuesday in 11 1 1 . 48 
This action of Tancred’s is mentioned in another 
place by Albert, from some other authority, with its 
correct date. He arrives, by this means, at the 
most extraordinary result ; he inverts the sequence 
of these events, and makes Tancred attack Atsareb 
in revenge for the Turkish assault on Antioch. 49 

I think that this series of examples, taken from 

nian Cilicia. This is proved by comparing iii. 3, where there is 
a similar confusion. 

44 Cap. 1 : “ Eodem anno, quo Balduinus ab obsidione Sagitt® 
rediit.” This must be 1108. Cap. 3: “Eodem anno, rnense 
Martio,” etc. ; and so on to the fall of the town. 

45 Cap. 16 gives the year after the fall of Tripolis, which is 
right. 

46 Cap. 36. The connection of the narrative gives us the date. 

* Cap. 38. 

48 Kemaleddin, in Wilken, ii. 289; and Michaud, Bibl. iv. 28; 
also Fulcher, p. 422. 49 xi. 40. 



Digitized by Google 




ALBERT OF AIX. 



221 



various parts of Albert’s book, and nearly all of them 
touching more or less important events which we 
learn chiefly from him, will be quite sufficient to 
show his method in the composition of his work. 
He himself, and we may add, the authorities of 
which he is the exponent, afford but little warranty 
for any order, connection, or unity in his work. The 
history is a series of countless fragments, which are 
wholly unconnected, and agree neither as to time nor 
place. When you think that you seize upon some 
connection, it eludes your grasp. The various and 
changing figures appear, and vanish again ; and we 
are most certain to be led astray when they seem 
to be brought before us in the most distinct manner. 
If we select one particular fact out of the mass, and 
subject it to a critical examination, we shall at once 
perceive that the general character I have given is 
the true one. I have before alluded to the great 
detail, the endless particularity of his descriptions ; 
we soon perceive how similar they are to one another, 
how little they assist us in coming to a knowledge 
of the real facts. The march of the army is de* 
scribed ; how it advances through fruitful vales, and 
through trackless mountain passes ; the enemy first 
attack, then fly, their cities are taken and plundered, 
and the like ; but in what order the army marched, 
how long the campaigu lasted, with what object it 



Digitized by Google 




222 



LITERATURE OF THE CRUSADES. 



was undertaken ; on all these points we learn abso- 
lutely nothing, or if perchance something is said con- 
cerning them, it cannot be relied upon. The only 
example which now occurs to me, is at page 227 , 
where Adhemar de Puy orders the army to march 
upon Antioch ; one part was to advance to the at- 
tack, while the other was to protect the rear. He 
then proceeds to give a long list of the leaders of 
both : Frenchmen and Italians, Germans and Nor- 
mans, princes and knights, are so mixed together 
that we need not the testimony of other authorities, 
of which there is plenty, to induce us to disbelieve 
the whole. It is exactly the same with the descrip- 
tions of battles, sieges, or diplomatic negotiations ; 
there is no lack of praise of the various heroes ; the 
|arms gleam, the swords clash, the walls frown in 
awful magnificence but as to how the victory was 
actually obtained, what was the plan of the attack 
or of the defence, we are left entirely in the dark. 

I purpose here, more for the sake of example than 
of proof, to bring forward only a few cases : — Nicsea 
has been taken, and one should imagine that an his- 
torian of such an event, especially one who enters 
so much into detail as Albert, could have had no 
more important object than to narrate exactly all 
the negotiations with the Greeks, as to the position 
of the town, and the impression it made upon 



» 



Digitized by Google 




ALBERT OP AIX. 



223 



the Crusaders. In vain do we attempt to find 
even a mention of these matters ; but in lieu of 
them we are treated to the edifying history of a 
nun, who, after going through a variety of adven- 
tures, was rescued from the Saracens, but, after 
all, could not be induced to leave her heathen pa- 
ramour. 

We will now follow the army in its march as far 
as Dorylaeum. The authorities, which on this point 
are rare and conflicting, render any accurate cog- 
nizance of the route and halting-places difficult 
enough. We therefore place our hopes on Albert’s 
well-known amplitude of detail, and we fully ex- 
pect to find, by his assistance, an explanation of the 
names of the few places which are mentioned. He ' 
however describes with great prolixity how the army 
advanced for days between ravines and rocks, how 
it passed over a river by a bridge, and encamped 
in shady meadows. Not only are our expectations 
disappointed, but we soon learn that under all 
this sparkling indistinctness, we obtain no correct 
information whatever. If we wish to get from, 
original sources an idea of some of the most im- \ 
portant events of the war, such as the siege of An- \ 
tioch, for instance, we must entirely discard Albert 
as an authority. I have mentioned how the fall of 
Antioch was gradually effected by the erection of 



Digitized by Google 




224 



LITERA1URE OF THE CRUSADES. 



forts round the city : these important constructions 
are as nothing in Albert’s narrative, when compared 
with the chivalrous single combats and romantic ad- 
ventures which lead to no possible result. What is 
iworee still, and only appears later, is, that even as to 
/ these, Albert makes the grossest blunders in time 
' and place. I shall here again allude to Solyman’s 
embassy to Berkjarok and Kerboga. I have already 
mentioned it, but as giving an insight into this qua- 
lity of Albert’s book, it is worth further considera- 1 
tion. Solyman and his retinue advance towards 
Saraarcand, the capital of Khorassan. The Caliph, 
sits on his throne in all his splendour. The am- 
bassadors rend their clothes, and bewail the suffer- 
ings they endure from the Christians. The Caliph, 
in his infatuation, laughs, and utterly disbelieves 
the tale ; he ridicules Solyman, who justifies himself 
by producing Baji-Sijan’s petition. Kerboga, who 
holds the second place next the throne, then exclaims 
that in six months this Christian host shall be exter- 
minated, and summons his countless vassals to his 
aid. T will not reproach Albert for giving us no 
, satisfactory account of the state of the kingdom of 
the Seljukes, and the position of the other Emirs at 
I Antioch j although in many matters of detail he is 
| not ill informed about the East, and in this particular 
passage he mentions Armenian affairs, which we look 



Digitized by Google 




ALBERT OF AIX. 



225 



for in vain in other Western authors . 50 But when we 
consider that he has made Baji-Sijan and the Caliph 
speak of such an embassy as occurring some four 
months before, the whole tale appears only a splen- 
did scene, contradicted by previous facts ; for how 
could the Caliph, who had already been long ago 
informed by that embassy, have any doubt as to 
the power, nay even the presence, of the Crusaders ? 
As far as Albert is concerned, we may fairly conclude 
that as in the previous cases, he has carelessly or 
ignorantly admitted two different versions of the 
same occurrence. In regard to the statement itself, 
this picture of grim heathens in all their power, 
magnificence, and haughty insolence frequently 
occurs. It was then current over the whole world, 
and popular tradition gave birth to a number of si- 
milar representations. 

Let us now review the subject as far as we hav: 
come. In the first place, we have hardly any indif 
cations of Albert’s personal character ; he has thf 
merit of keeping his own impressions quite in th< 
background. What we can discover of the charac- ^ 
ter and tendency of our author has been already 
intimated; his leaning is rather against than for 
the miraculous and visible interposition of Heaven, 

50 Called Kogh Basil (Corrovasilius in Albert), and Constantin, 
(the son of Bupeus in Matthew Eretz). 

a 



Digitized by Google 




226 



LITERATURE OF THE CRUSADES. 



in order that he might give greater splendour and 
prominence to manifestations of human heroism. It 
is true that be begins with the glorious legend of 
Peter the Hermit, the heaven-sent apostle of the 
Crusades, but there is little else of the same kind 
in the whole compass of his history. The Holy 
Lance, which even in the East was the prolific 
source of many similar legends, is dismissed in a 
few lines . 61 This was clearly attributable to Albert, 
and not to those from whom he had the legend ; 
for it is impossible to conceive that the numerous 
wonders and revelations attached to it could have 
escaped his notice. It appears to me that many of 
his stories must be regarded as having originally 
fromed part of a collection of mystical traditions, 
from which he borrowed them. The fact, that he 
wholly puts in the background the influence of the 
Pope on the Crusades, is a sign of a similar feeling 
on his part. He is not more influenced by the 
hierarchical than the mystical tendency of his con- 
temporaries . 62 

His book contains a vast mass of reports taken 
from eye-witnesses, active partisans, and other con- 
temporaries. They are given genuine and unal- 
tered, nor is any attempt made to invest them with 
the character of historical authority. They bear 
51 iv. 43. “ i. 6. 



Digitized by Google 




ALBERT OF AIX. 



227 



only on the outward form of things, and on details 
in their utmost prolixity, with a complete disregard 
of the connection or distribution of his subject- 
matter. There is no attempt at generalizing. If 
there is any unity in the work, it is not to be 
sought in the authenticity of the facts, or in the 
logical mode of handling them. But in order to 
make a critical examination feasible, it will be ne- 
cessary to examine these events as given by other 
authorities, and thus to discover whether and how far 
they may be regarded as agreeing. Their similarity 
would be the best proof of the genuineness of the 
representations of Albert of Aix. We have seen 
that this author professes to rely chiefly upon 
oral statements of eye-witnesses ; and that though 
much written matter came into his hands, it was 
such as would be more likely to be derived from 
letters or conversation, than from testimony given 
with the knowledge that it was to be used for 
historical purposes. The contrast between oral and 
written tradition can only be considered as acci- 
dental. When we have to prove the internal agree- 
ment of testimony, we shall find it does not so 
much consist in the manner in which the tradition 
was handed down, as in the intellectual tendency 
of the men who represented those opinions. In 
many cases we think it can be proved that oral and 

Q 2 



Digitized by Google 




228 LITERATURE OF THE CRUSADES. 

written tradition have been, so to speak, welded 
together. This remark is in its place here, as it 
helps to explain the otherwise astonishing mass of 
such accounts. 

Guibert mentions Fulcher’s history only to ap- 
pend to it a severe and somewhat groundless cri- 
ticism. He says, “ Fulcherium qusedara scabro ser- 
mone fudisse comperimus .” 63 He proceeds in a 
subsequent passage : — “ Dicitur, in sui, ni fallor, 
opusculi referre principio,” etc. No one would sup- 
pose from this that he had the book before him, or 
that he had formed his judgment upon written do- 
cuments. It strikes one therefore as singular, that 
immediately afterwards he quotes nearly word for 
word from Fulcher the lengthy narrative of a miracle 
which clearly could not have rested on oral tradition. 

William of Tyre wrote the first half of his work 
entirely from extant authorities, viz. from the 
‘ Gesta,’ from Raymond, Fulcher, and Albert of Aix. 
The concordance even goes so far as to identity 
of words : it is so general and complete as to be 
obvious to the most superficial observer. Notwith- 
standing this, he says in his preface (where he had 
been previously speaking of another work derived 

53 Page 552. Fulcher’s book reaches to the year 1127 (in other 
editions to 1124). The passage in Guibert was written between 
the years 1108 and 1110. In this connection of the time there is 
a strong presumption in favour of the supposition in the text. 



Digitized by Google 




ALBERT OF AIX. 



229 



from Arab sources), “ In hac vero nullam aut 
Graecam aut Arabicam babentes predicant scrip- 
turam solis traditionibus instructi, exceptis paucis 
quae ipsi oculata fide conspeximus.” That we must 
give but little importance to the “ Graecam aut 
Arabicam,” is proved by another passage, in which 
he expresses himself still more clearly on the sub- 
ject of his authorities. 54 “Hactenus” (until the 
year 1142), “aliorum tantum, quibus prisci tem- 
poris plenior adhuc famulabitur memoria, colle- 
gimus relatione — et scripto mandavimus. Quae se- 
quuntur deinceps, partim nos ipsi fide conspeximus 
oculata, partim eorum, qui rebus gestis presentes 
interfuerunt, fide nobis patuit relatione.” It is 
clear that no one would speak of written works, 
some fifty or sixty years old, as they would of the 
narratives of those who still had a fresh impres- 
sion of what had occurred in old times. Indeed, 
apart from the contents of the book itself, subse- 
quent passages forbid such a supposition; for he 
says that he had spoken with some old men who 
had gone to Jerusalem with Godfrey. He also 
speaks in a totally different tone when he refers 
to written sources in matters of history. He made 
the proceedings of the Kings and Patriarchs of 
Jerusalem his particular study, and he says concern- 

54 Prsef. libri xvi. 



Digitized by Google 




230 



LITERATURE OF THE CRUSADES. 



ing them, 85 — “ Haec omnia etsi aliorum relatione 
comperta et etiam quorundam opera scripto man- 
data, presenti interseruimus narrationi.” Here he 
• places the “relatio” in direct opposition to the 
“ scriptum .” 56 

/ I see only one way to escape out of these contra- 
/ dictions. It is obvious that the narratives of Gui- 
/ bert and of William of Tyre were derived from the 
/ works of Fulcher and of others ; but at the same 
/ time I cannot bring myself to discredit entirely the 
positive assertions of the first-named authors. ^yThe 
conjecture seems to me reasonable, that these wri- 
tings were circulated sometimes in parts, some- 
times as a whole, — as fragments or extracts ; that 
narratives were framed out of them, were gra- 
dually altered by frequent repetition, and were 
handed down to posterity in greater or smaller por- 
tions, by word of mouth or in writing, without any 
acknowledgment of their original sources. Guibert 
might thus quote such reports with an “ut di- 

65 Lib. ix. c. 16. 

66 I do not mean by this to bind him to any strict terminology ; 
for this and many passages in his work should be carefully exa- 
mined where he mentions the ‘traditiones veterum,’ ix. 17 ; xz. 
40 ; xxi. 26, and other places ; meanwhile the passage quoted in 
the last shows that without something more precise we are not 
to think of direct written testimony. It is quite clear from the 
context that a similar phrase (xvii. 7) refers to contemporaneous 
events, and cannot therefore come into consideration here. 



Digitized by Google 




ALBERT OF AIX. 



231 



citur,” while William of Tyre might give them 
as from “ old reminiscences.” 57 It is easy to con- 
ceive, how such a process once introduced would 
favour the maintenance of, and the addition to, 
oral tradition. The genuine narratives were split 
up into fragments, and made to appear similar in 
outward appearance to the current rumours of the 
day ; and by this means it would not be difficult 
to melt the two into one. 

'"Thus much at least appears obvious, that after 
half a century, William of Tyre still found himself 
in the midst of living traditions, whence he drew 
copious and varied information We do not want 
this explanation for contemporary authors, as we 
have already distinctly acknowledged a large portion 
of them to be indebted to oral reports. Guibert 
and Baldrich say distinctly, that what they did not 
themselves see or copy from the ‘ Gesta,’ was told 
to them. Fulcher asserts the same as to the history 
of the three years from 1098 to 1100. The * Gesta 
Expugn. Hieros.’ and Orderic acknowledge it as 
to thjeir additions to Baldrich and Fulcher. We 

67 We can further quote here v. 21, “ Audivimus quod inter 
alios Dominus Flandrensis et Dominus Tancredus ascenderint 
as well as vi. 14, “clericus, ut dicitur,” etc. (the history of the Holy 
Lance). If these passages do not distinctly prove the general 
diffusion of the writings of the original authors, it still shows 
how deeply imbued William of Tyre was with the still current 
traditions. 



Digitized by Google 




232 



LITERATURE OF THE CRU8ADE8. 



have already said that this was probable in the cases 
of Fulco and Gilo and the monk Robert. Among 
all these Guibert is the only one who had authentic 
historical information, besides having access to the 
‘ Gesta.’ The interpolations of all others depend 
solely on the credibility of some tradition handed 
down to them in the manner I have explained. It 
is therefore not difficult, with their aid, to deter- 
mine the character of the authors from whom they 
quote. 

The first thing that appears is an evident ten- 
dency to details of a purely human and, if pos- 
sible, of a personal character. They have this in 
common with Albert, — that they omit all general 
considerations. Baldrich makes but one addition 
to the ‘ Gesta,’ relating to the battle with Kerboga : 
“ A refreshing dew fell during the morning, which 
wonderfully restored the troops .” 58 We have al- 
ready mentioned Orderic’s taste for anecdotes and 
episodes. Among those we have named above, he 
is the author who gives the most discrepant accounts. 
Guibert relates Baldwin’s rise in Edessa, specially 
quoting eye-witnesses, and describing at great length 
the ceremony of the adoption of Baldwin : how the 
actors in it stripped to their shirts, and embraced 
each other naked . 59 But the general position of 
“ Page 120. M Page 496. 



Digitized by Google 




ALBERT OF AIX. 



233 



Baldwin, that he was beloved, and the old prince 
hated, by the people of Edessa, is involved in utter 
confusion. Most of the additions to the ‘Gesta,’ 
in respect to the siege of Antioch, are equally ab- 
surd and improbable ; for instance, the princes work 
with their own hands at building a fort j 00 Tactikios 
wears a nose made of gold . 61 Bishop Adhemar 
causes the troops to be shaved, so as to distinguish , 
them from the Turks . 62 Wherever Fulcher quits 
the Gesta Expugn. Hieros. we meet with the same 
sort of fables.' Firuz, to meet with Bohemund, 
makes his way into the Christian camp by stealth,. 
— “ quasi aliquid empturus .” 63 Fulcher relates of 
Baldwin how he hewed down a Turk ; the ‘ Gesta ’ 
says that he pierced the Turk and his horse through 
with one stroke . 64 And so it goes on» We occa- 
sionally meet with a fact of importance in several 
of these authors, but it is always something which 
strikes their individual fancy. 

But in order to see clearly the richness of in- 
vention displayed in' these traditions, we must com- 
pare the descriptions of the same event given by 
various persons. In a number of cases we find, 
besides the correct account given by original au- 
thorities, another reading totally different, resting 

80 Page 499. 81 Page 501. 63 Page 561v 

68 Page 566. 84 Page 585. 



Digitized by Google 




234 



LITERATURE OF THE CRUSADES. 



solely on tradition. Albert furnishes many examples 
of this mode of proceeding. Sometimes the ver- 
sions are numerous. For instance, there are four 
versions of the accident that occured in hunting 
to Duke Godfrey ;** three, of the death of Roger of 
Barneville there are four incorrect accounts of 
the treachery of Firuz; 67 and at least as many 
unauthenticated of the death of Godfrey. 68 I could 
easily bring forward more cases of this sort, but I 
prefer to give some examples of a contrary proceed- 
ing, equally indispensable to a knowledge of these 
authorities. 

Ekkehard wrote, in the year 1100 or 1101, a 
narrative of the defeat of Gottschalk in Hungary, 
the incorrectness of which he discovered in 1106, 
and rejected without hesitation. But the same 
errors are found in detail in Albert’s narrative, al- 
though he wrote after 1121 ; so that in spite of 
its falsity, the tale was repeated twenty years after. 69 



85 Albert, iii. 4 ; Guibert, p. 637 ; William of Malmesbury, 
p. 144 ; Lupus Protosp. p. 47. 

08 Besides the correct statement in Raymond, p. 150 ; in Al- 
bert, p. 248 ; and the Hist. Bell. Sacr. c. 66. 

87 Fulcher, p. 391 ; Gesta Exped. Hieros. p. 666 ; Alb. iv. 15 ; 
William of Tyre, p. 705. 

88 William of Malmesbury, p. 144 ; Guibert, p. 548 ; Albert, 
vii. 18 ; Matth. Eretz. 

89 Albert, i. 25 ; Chronogr. Saxo, a.d. 1096 ; Ekkehard, c. 11 ; 
the double-dealing negotiations of Kalmani. 



Digitized by Google 




ALBERT OF AIX. 



235 



Albert gives an account of the battle of Dorylseum, 
which Gilo had heard in Paris some years before : 
Radulph, who wrote in Antioch after the year 
1130, had information which contradicted Albert’s 
account : “ Yet it is true,” he adds, “ the contrary is 
still very frequently related.” 70 It was indeed alto- 
gether groundless ; nevertheless it was spread abroad 
at that time in Germany and in France, as well as 
in Syria and in Palestine. Radulph has also an 
account of the well-known quarrel between Baldwin 
and Tancred in Tarsus, whicjh might have been 
corrected by reference to the ‘ Gesta ;’ 71 yet Albert 
brings this forward in his history, quoting (it is 
easy to see) from Lorraine authorities. 72 Such is 
the spirit of tradition ; it is bound by no rules ; 
sometimes it rejoices in an endless multiplication 
of incidents and narratives, — in crowding together 
figures, in changing forms; sometimes it seizes 
particular points, and obstinately retains them : 
they are spread far and wide, and, after many years, 
they re-appear in some spot far distant from their 
original source. No search is made into time, 
place, or fact. Here, various occurrences are 
blended together without scruple; there, one and 



70 Albert, ii. 38 ; Gilo, p. 216 ; Bad. c. 21 ; the accidental or 
intended division of the army. 

71 Bad. c. 36. 72 Lib. iii. 5 ; for more particulars see further. 



Digitized by Google 




236 LITERATURE OF THE CRUSADES. 

the same event is introduced in a new place, as if 
it had not occurred before. As an example of the 
former, we must read the account of Peter the 
Hermit in Guibert and in Fulco ; there we see 
the expedition of Walter, Peter, Volkmar and Gott- 
schalk, mixed together ; a fabulous whole is com- 
pounded out of the beginning of the one, the mid- 
dle of another, and the end of a third ; some of it 
is pure fabrication, some of it an echo of the tradi- 
tions found in Albert ; in a word, it has the effect 
of a wild, perplexed dream. The following example 
is of a different nature: — Bohemund’s enmity to 
the Emperor Alexius was notorious to his contempo- 
raries ; no one imagined that the Norman traversed 
the Greek Empire in the year 1097 with any peace- 
ful intent. There were reports of incitements sent 
by him to other princes to lhake war upon Alexius. 
Albert is perfectly aware of this, and relates that 
Duke Godfrey declined this invitation. 73 Orderic 
has the same fact, but he states that the princes to 
whom appeal was made were Duke Robert and 
Count Stephen. 74 

These remarks are sufficient to render obvious 
the great extent of the circle which we are con- 
templating. The essential point in Albert’s nar- 
rative, which is common to so many others, consists 
78 Albert, ii. 14. 74 Page 727. 



Digitized by Google 




ALBERT OP A IX. 



237 



in this. We cannot look on them as the account of ( 
one certain and known person, whose character and 
position enable us at once to recognize the value 
of his work : we must rather regard them all as 
portions of one great tradition, current throughout 
the whole of the West, the credibility of which) 
we must test at every step. By some accident,) 
a large mass of this tradition has come down to 
us, under the name of Albert. The unscrupulous 
manner in which Albert has adopted whatever was 
most strange and contradictory, precluded the op- 
portunity of selecting or recasting his materials ; 
as might have been expected from a single indus- 
trious author. We can only look to the contents of 
each individual fragment, and äsk ourselves, without 
reference to Albert’s share in the matter, how far 
the accounts of the authorities on whom he relies 
can be trusted. We must do the same with re- 
gard to all the other separate narratives, the cha- 
racter of which we have been at some pains to 
describe. We must try to discover how much 
truth there is in their statements, and how much is 
sheer invention. 

It is quite clear that we can depend but little 
upon their veracity. No one can deny that where 
three or four different versions of the same occur- 
rence are given, two or three of them must be 



Digitized by Google 




238 



LITERATURE OF THE CRUSADES. 



fabulous. With regard to the history of the First 
Crusade, the result of my inquiry is that Albert 
and all his companions seldom adhere to the truth ; 
but their reputation has hitherto been such, that I 
am bound, to bring forward some evidence as to 
the truth of my assertion, which I will do from 
the later portion of Albert’s book. For this pur- 
pose I will select some part of the history of 
Baldwin’s reign ; in which the divergence in par- 
ticulars will lead us immediately to positive contra- 
diction in generals. 

One well-known difference between Albert of 
Aix and William of Tyre lies in their accounts of 
the quarrel between Baldwin and the Patriarch 
Dagobert, which are totally at variance with each 
other. William, who professes to have made spe- 
cial inquiries into the subject, — and his diligence 
is quite obvious in this case, — clears the Patriarch 
of all blame. It is true, he says, that Dagobert 
had opposed Baldwin’s accession to the throne, but 
he had done so only because the Lorraine party 
had refused the Patriarch the accustomed feudal 
homage. At any rate, it was entirely owing to the 
slanders of his old opponent Arnulf, that an open 
rupture took place ; which, however, was peace- 
fully arranged before Christmas, 1100. Dagobert’s 
position remained undisputed, till Arnulf, by inces- 



Digitized by Google 




ALBERT OF AIX. 



239 



santly working on the clergy, forced Dagobert to 
escape into Antioch in 1103. 76 Albert gives an- 
other turn to the whole affair. He passes over in 
complete silence the suzerainty of the Patriarch 
over the crown, and thus deprives Dagobert’s con- 
duct towards Baldwin of any legitimate excuse. 
Hereupon Baldwin concerts his measures, after 
Tancred, the protector of Dagobert, had left the 
kingdom, and appeals to the Pope at Rome ; who 
sends, at his request, the Cardinal-Legate Maurice. 
According to Albert’s account, Maurice examines 
into the affair during the month of March, 1101, 
and pronounced Dagobert’s suspension. At Easter, 
Dagobert gives Baldwin a bribe of three hundred 
gold pieces to reinstate him, makes friends with 
the Legate, and the two waste the revenues of the 
kingdom in secret orgies. 76 

At page 131, Albert proceeds with his history. 
The king is in want of money, and comes, some 
time in August, 77 from Joppa to Jerusalem; he 
asks a certain sum of the Patriarch, who denies his 
ability to give it. Baldwin having received infor- 



75 William of Tyre, pp. 780, 790, 797. 76 Page 308. 

77 The date is not quite clear. He remained in Caesarea till 
the day of John the Baptist ; he then went to Joppa ; after three 
weeks he advances against the Saracens, waits some time for 
them, and then dismisses the army ; “ nec longo post hcec inter- 
vaUo,” he goes to Jerusalem, vii. 56-68. 



Digitized by Google 




240 LITERATURE OE THE CRUSADES. 

mation from Arnulf, surprises the two ecclesiastics 
in their , cups ; a violent scene ensues, when the Pa- 
triarch is forced to leave Jerusalem, goes to Joppa, 
and thence to Antioch to Tancred, in March, 1102. 
Baldwin remains with the Legate in Jerusalem, 
paying him high honour. In the beginning of Sep- 
tember, having received intelligence of hostile arma- 
ments, he assembles his army, and advances toward 
Joppa. 

At page 332, we find that after Baldwin had 
beaten the Saracens in July, 1102, he summons Tan- 
cred and Baldwin of Burg, in September, to assist 
him against a fresh attack. They come to Joppa, and 
Count William of Poitou with them. Dagobert ar- 
rives with them, and they agree to assist the King, 
but only on condition of a fresh inquiry into Dago- 
berts case. On this being conceded, they advance 
with him against Ascalon. Dagobert’s deposition 
was however confirmed anew, under the presidence 
of the Cardinal. 

Much as modern criticism has done fqr the his- 
tory of these times, it has hitherto attempted in 
vain to reconcile these contradictions. In most of 
the narratives, we find both accounts side by side, 
and the choice between the two is left to the reader. 
It frequently occurs that William of Tyre, though 
extolled for his unprejudiced description of these 



Digitized by Google 




ALBERT OF AIX. 



241 



events, and for his careful research, incurs suspi- 
cion ; while Albert’s copiousness of detail is amu- 
sing, and he is consequently subjected to a less 
rigorous examination. Fulcher appears to me to 
pass over this matter with intentional silence ; for 
which reason the information, that might have 
been gleaned from various notices in his diary, has 
been entirely disregarded. There is a notice of this 
sort to the effect, that in March, 1101, Tancred 
had gone from Jerusalem to Antioch. 78 How was 
it possible then for Baldwin, after Tancred’s depar- 
ture, to begin a quarrel with Dagobert, and ap- 
peal against him to Rome ; for the Pope to name 
a Legate; for the latter to reach Palestine, go 
through the inquiry, and pronounce Dagobert’s 
suspension ; and all this, before the end of the 
month of March ? Albert was forced to antedate 
the commencement of the quarrel; but even so, 
he cannot establish his statement ; since we learn, 
from a thoroughly impartial eye-witness, 79 that 
Maurice was actually in Syria before Baldwin set 
foot in Jerusalem; that in the year 1099, Mau- 
rice had been sent with a Genoese fleet to the 

78 Page 407. “ Eo tempore ” (he had spoken of the small 
population in the kingdom) “ contigit in Martio mense, Tancre- 
dum Cayphan oppidum sunm Balduino relinquere, Tiberiadem 
quoque, et Antiochiam ambulare.” 

79 Cafiaro, ap. Muratore, vi. 249. 

R 



Digitized by Google 




242 



LITERATURE OF THE CRUSADES. 



East. 80 The whole of the first part of the narra- 
tive therefore falls to the ground. 

Albert says that Baldwin took Caesarea on Whit- 
Sunday (9tb June), and stayed there till the 24th 
(the birthday of John the Baptist). Caesarea, how- 
ever, according to the testimony "of Fulcher, who 
was .present, fell on a Friday, the 7th of June, and 
Baldwin proceeded, immediately after its fall, to 
Bamla, where he remained four-and-twenty days, 
in expectation of a hostile attack ; as this did not 
take place, he returned to Joppa. 81 Fulcher then 
proceeds : — “ Cum autem postea auribus semper ad 
eos intentis per septuaginta dies quieti sustinuis- 
semus, intimatum est regi Balduino, adversaries 
nostros permoveri, et jam parati nos appetere ac- 
celerebant. Hoc audito fecit gentem suam congre- 
gari, de Hierosolyma, videlicet, Tyberiade quoque, 
Caesarea et Caipha.” 82 If we compare this with Al- 

80 He came in the autumn of 1100 with the Genoese to Laodi- 
cea ; and I should think with them to Jerusalem during Lent of 
1101. In Oct. 1100, Baldwin of Edessa had gone to Jerusalem 
by way of Laodicea. Maurice was then in Laodicea, and, as 
is clearly proved by Fulcher’s silence, did not go with the King. 
That he went by himself by land in mid- winter is not at all likely, 
considering the troubled state of those provinces. 

81 Fulcher, p. 410 (c. 25, 26). 

82 Fulcher’s chronology proves itself. The battle took place 
on the 7th September. If we reckon twenty-four days from the 
7th June, we come to the 1st July ; from that date to 7th Sep- 
tember are sixty-nine days. 



Digitized by Google 




ALBERT OF AIX. 



243 



bert’s account, we perceive how irrational Dagobert’s 
flight to, and sojourn at, Joppa, would be. His 
wish was to avoid Baldwin, whereas in the month 
pf September he would exactly meet with him, even 
according to Albert. I have no hesitation, after 
this, in disbelieving Baldwin’s presence at Jeru- 
salem in August, the scene at the feast, and all 
that followed. We cannot solve the contradic- 
tion in these two narratives, by supposing that 
Fulcher suppressed Baldwin’s departure and re- 
turn, from a desire not to touch upon ecclesias- 
tical matters. He expressly says that Baldwin’s 
armament took place, not from Jerusalem, but 
from Joppa ; with which the Queen’s presence in 
Joppa agrees. 83 She might very well be there if 
Baldwin remained two months ; but it would be 
impossible to account for her stay according to 
Albert’s version of the matter. Albert has exactly 
inverted the facts; he brings Baldwin to Jerusa- 
lem, and Dagobert escapes to Joppa ; whereas the 
former was at Joppa, and the latter remained, un- 
disturbed by any royal demands, at Jerusalem. 

A similar case, the mention of the Count of 
Poitou, gives us sotne insight into the credibility 
of the events of the year 1102. Fulcher has on 



83 Compare the letter to Tancred, which Fulcher and William 
of Tyre give verbatim. 



R 2 



Digitized by Google 




244 



LITERATURE OF THE CRUSADES. 



this subject this simple statement :®* — “ Cumprope 
Pascha esset, Hierusalem perrexerunt” (viz. William 
of Poitou, Stephen of Blois, and the other princes of 
the crusading army of 1101, who went from Joppa), 
“qui postquam cum Rege Balduino Pascha cele- 
brando pransissent* Joppen omnes regressi sunt. 
Tunc Comes Pictavensis navim ascendens et Fran- 
ciam remeans ä nobis discessit.” The rest of the 
princes fall shortly afterwards in a disastrous battle 
with the Turks. And this same Count of Poitou, 
who had sailed back to France at Easter, suddenly 
advances from Antioch in September, joins the 
other Crusaders before Ascalon, and disappears as 
suddenly as he had appeared. Yet neither Fulcher, 
the King’s chaplain, nor Radulf, Tancred’s com- 
panion, nor Matthias, Baldwin’s subject, mentions 
one word of this armament of Tancred, of Bald- 
win of Burg, or of William of Poitou. On the con- 
trary, Fulcher expressly says : 85 — “ Expleto bello ” 
(in July) “Rex Joppen reversus est. Postea quievit 
terra bellorum immunis, tempore sequenti autum- 
nal i atque hiemali.” Here again we cannot attri- 
bute Fulcher’s reticence to his wish to say nothing 
concerning Dagobert, as there is no question of I 
Dagobert, but of quite different matters. ! 

\ To sum up: we see that the statements ofWil- 
84 Page 414. 86 Page 416. I 



Digitized by Google 




ALBERT OF A1X. 



245 



liam of Tyre agree, both in details and essentials, 
with what we learn of the events of those times from 
other sources ; his dates are all confirmed, and he is 
never open to the slightest charge of contradiction 
or incongruity. With Albert the reverse is the 
case ; in attempting to get at any connected nar- 
rative, we invariably find that his representations 
are at variance with all others. With regard to 
places and dates, as we have them from the most 
undoubted sources, we can by no means accept his 
testimony. We cannot therefore believe the sum 
of his facts, or the character he gives of persons 
or events. On the contrary, we perceive that 
his facts are made to bear out a foregone con- 
clusion. The traditions upon which Albert’s his- 
tory rests celebrate Baldwin’s princely splendour ; 
and to support this view the numerous fictions are 
invented to which we have alluded. But this is not 
the place to pursue the subject further. 

Raymond of Toulouse laid siege to Tripolis from 
the Pilgrim Mount in 1101 or the beginning of 
1102. He took up strong positions in the neighbour- 
hood, and occupied the lesser Gibellum in .1102: 
not in 1104, as Albert says; for we possess docu- 
ments of the year 1103, by which Raymond made 
a gift of half the town, 86 and then died in 1105. 

86 Albert, ix. 26 ; “ Proximo dehinc anno.” Before that he had 



Digitized by Google 




246 



LITERATURE OF THE CRUSADES. 



The quarrel between his immediate successor, Wil- 
liam of Cerdagne, and his son Bertrand, threatened 
to destroy the fruits of his labours. The latter, says 
Albert , 87 appealed to Baldwin for assistance, promi- 
sing to do homage to the Crown in the event of re- 
ceiving succour. Baldwin gladly accepted the offer. 
At the same time Tancred, Baldwin of Edessa, and 
Joscelyn of Courtenay, were at strife ; Baldwin, in 
order to settle differences, summoned them all to 
meet him in the camp at Tripolis, where they ap- 
peared with splendid retinues. All the Frankish 
princes of Syria met together, in order that Bald- 
win might arbitrate between them. 

To collate and sift all the narratives touching on 
this point, would require a severe examination. It 
is sufficient for our purpose to call attention to 
two statements which are above suspicion, and 
completely illustrate the point at issue. Fulcher 
gives a tolerably detailed account of the quarrel 
between William of Cerdagne and Bertrand .. 88 He 
blames, them for quarrelling about the possession of 
the city, even before they had taken it. “ Ad nutum 

reported as 1103. Caffaro (p. 253) says indeed, “ Primo anno hujus 
compagnae,” a.d. 1104. ( But the connection gives the error and 
the correct year as 1102. The document of the 16th January, 
1103, is in the Hist, de Languedoc, ii., preuves, p. 360. The 
history itself indeed attempts to save Albert, but by a most 
forced construction. , 

87 xii. 9. k 88 Page 420. 



Digitized by Google 




ALBERT OF A1X. 



247 



Dei,” he adds, “ momenta transvolant et cogitationes 
hominum vanae subvertuntur. Et non fuit mora : 
postquam Rex Balduin us ad illam obsidionem ve- 
nit, causa deprecandi Januenses, ut eum juvarent eo 
anno ad capiendum Ascalonem et Beruthum, nec- 
non Sydonem, et ordiebatur concordiam fieri de 
duobus comitibus memoratis . . . interiit Gulielmus 
ille Jordanus.” Here we see a different reason for 
Baldwin’s presence ; he is not the highly honoured 
King, from whom the other princes expect ju- 
dicial decision on their rival claims, but a chieftain 
seeking assistance, who is incidentally called in to 
. act as a mediator. It may be said that these ne- 
gotiations, important and well-known as they Apere, 
might have escaped the notice of Fulcher ; but we 
would quote,* as settling the question, a statement 
of Matthias Eretz of Edessa. 89 This author, whose 
information on Armenian subjects is always good, 
(ill informed as he was on matters occurring in 
distant countries,) relates the Tripolis events with 
many variations; but in another place he states, 
that in the summer of 1109 the Count of Edessa 
and Joscelyn of Courtenay had made an unfortunate 
expedition to Kharran in Mesopotamia, which he 
describes in some detail. There is no longer there- 
fore any room for doubt ; and Matthias both ne- 
fi9 Notices et Extrait^ ix. 325. 



Digitized by Google 




248 



LITERATURE OF THE CRU8ADE8. 



gatively and affirmatively destroys all idea of the 
congress of princes spoken of by Albert. This is 
in fact simply a proof of the opinion which had 
been formed in the East, of the position, power, 
and character of King Baldwin. People could not, 
or would not, believe that he really had very little 
influence over the rest of the princes. They had no 
doubt that the Patriarch had succumbed to Bald- 
win’s energetic assertion of his rights. Albert’s 
lively imagination seized upon this idea, and dressed 
it out with a variety of anecdotes, the inaccuracy of 
which we have here attempted to prove. 

We have already stated that Baldwin was the # 
centre round which the most fabulous inventions 
were grouped. We shall see that the same may be 
said with still greater truth of his more famous 
brother, Godfrey. We have already quoted the in- 
troductory words in Albert’s history, — “Incipit 
liber primus expeditionis Hierosolymitanae urbis, 
ubi Ducis Godefridi inclyta gesta narrantur, cujus 
laböre et studio, Givitas Sancta sanctae Ecclesiae 
filiis est restituta.” This assertion will astonish any 
one who has paid the most cursory attention to the 
original sources ; as he will not be able to discover 
in them the slightest evidence that Godfrey bore 
the chief part in freeing the Holy Sepulchre. After 
this preface of Albert’s, we expect to find Godfrey 



Digitized by Google 




ALBERT OP AIX. 



249 



the leading spirit in the crusading army. But 
when we examine his work, we are astonished to 
discover no confirmation of the Duke’s fame. God- 
frey’s ability is proved by many facts ; but in the 
first half of the narrative he is not conspicuous 
above the other princes ; and as it proceeds, his 
name is frequently omitted altogether in the ac- 
count of the most important actions and discus- 
sions. Particular passages strike us in the course 
of the narrative from the sharp and insulated man- 
ner in which they stand out. Godfrey, who, even 
according to Albert’s representation, contributed 
little to the success of the undertaking, is all at 
once represented in strong terms as the head of 
the army, the most noble of the princes, the pillar 
and support of the enterprise. When he was ill, 
the whole Christian host was prostrate ; when God 
wished to raise it up, he permitted the Duke to 
recover. This is repeated in various places. But, as 
I have often remarked, it is vain to look to Albert for 
any connection between what has been said before 
and what follows ; we seek in vain for any cause 
of Godfrey’s preponderance. From an apparent 
equality with, or even inferiority to, other princes, 
the Duke suddenly emerges, for no reason what- 
ever, to this dazzling eminence. And this surpass- 
ing glory vanishes, while the words which announce 



Digitized by Google 




250 



LITERATURE OF THE CRUSADES. 



it still ring in our ears. Absolutely nothing comes 
of this solemnly proclaimed pre-eminence, save a 
few chivalrous hand-to-hand encounters, productive 
of the most insignificant results. 

The origin of Godfrey’s fame, for which worldly 
events are insufficient to account, is thoroughly 
mystical and superhuman. A command proceed- 
ing immediately from God places the Duke in the 
midst of the enterprise — a fact as miraculous as the 
dream of Peter the Hermit or the apparition of the 
saints at Dorylaeum. If it be once admitted that the 
Duke owes his exaltation to God’s command, there 
is no longer any question of a worldly nature, nor 
does anything depend upon his individual actions. 
Albert, with perfect simplicity, admits the miracu- 
lous into his narrative, without caring to observe 
how inconsistent it may be with temporal affairs. 
In this manner alone was it possible to transmit to 
posterity a true and lively picture of the ideas then 
prevalent. We shall soon see a clear, critical intel- 
lect engaged on these ideas, and shall have to mark 
the disturbing influence it exercised on them. 

The complete purport of this legend or romance 
cannot be gathered from Albert’s work, but it was 
he who first gave a fixed form and a uniform cha- 
racter to the tradition which we have described. 
We must review the whole circle of this tradition 



Digitized by Google 




ALBERT OF AIX. 



251 



to make its nature clear or comprehensible; this 
will give a sufficient insight into all parts of the 
legend. The individual elements are scattered 
and fragmentary, while portions are frequently 
illustrated by incidents which William of Tyre 
derives from older and long-lost authorities. But 
the common ground upon which these inventions 
have been based is perceptible, even after long 
years and in the remotest lands. Flitting and 
confused as are the outward and visible figures, 
the fundamental principle remains fixed and un- 
shaken under the most various influences. The 
poetical vigour of nations is as remarkable for its 
richness as for its permanency. We are transported 
into times when the world was young ; when reli- 
gion, poetry, and a community of spirit grew up 
in an unconscious but intimate connection. As yet 
there were no artists by profession, no works of art 
with fixed forms or clear unity of design ; but the 
imaginative impulse of thousands found expression 
in pictures full of life and variety, in the many- 
coloured expression of one simple idea. 

Nor is it Godfrey alone who inspires his admirers 
with such poetical images. There are many traces 
of a similar glorification of Provencal and Nor- 
man heroes, but none so complete and so full. I 
would trace the cause of this, not so much to the 



Digitized by Google 




252 LITERAT U EE OF THE CRUSADES. 

deficiency of the sources of our knowledge, as to 
the nature of the subject itself ; for Godfrey’s cha- 
racter and the position he acquired especially fa- 
voured the invention of such legends. But as I 
have before stated, neither Bohemund nor the two 
Roberts, nor Raymond, were without a halo of 
poetical glory. 

We have observed above, that Albert shows, in 
the whole tenor of his work, that his nature was 
essentially of the earth, earthy. He endeavours 
to paint in rich colours the splendour of chivalry ; 
he disposes in few words of the main and marvellous 
object of his work, the glorification of Godfrey; 
mystical as is its character, he presents it in the 
form of worldly poetical splendour. If we consi- 
der that he was only a collector of current fragmen- 
tary legends, that he omitted many wonderful nar- 
ratives, and that, in those which he used, he disco- 
vered a human stamp, we are compelled to look to 
some higher source for the origin of these legends. 

When the crusading army marched to the East, 
animated with religious enthusiasm, the Church 
had already made a great advance towards the 
subjugation of the world. It was still involved 
in violent contests ; especially when its ambitious 
tendencies encountered any attempts at refor- 
mation. Other and deeper thoughts may have 



Digitized by Google 




ALBERT OF AIX. 253 

influenced Gregory VIII. ; but most of the clergy 
considered themselves the restorers of a debased 
morality, and liberators of the Church from the 
bonds of the flesh. Every aspiration after faith 
and holiness of life took the form of asceticism ; 
monastic Orders of the strictest discipline arose; 
and the doctrine of works of mortification, came to 
high honour. The pleasant inspirations of art were 
dried up at their very sources. Poetry withered 
away, as its true soil — a vigorous and healthy ap- 
peal to the senses — was counted sinful. The his- 
tory of literature sbow3 the suspension which then 
prevailed, and how subsequently other causes gave 
rise to a new development of its power. But if 
there were few poets, the poetical element still 
existed ; on the first great impulse given to it, it 
manifested all its vigour. It seized upon the sub- 
ject of the Crusades, which had been in so great 
a degree the fruit of the zealous ascetical spirit we 
have spoken of. The outbreak of poetical feeling 
showed what force it still retained, even under the 
pressure of the opposing tendency. 

Nor was it long before, out of this wide circle 
of unconscious poets, some individuals arose who 
invested the subject with an artistic form, and 
brought it within the proper province of poetry. 
How far the work of Gregory Bechada belongs to 



^gitized by Google 




254 



LITERATURE OF THE CRUSADES. 



this category, it is impossible to tell from the 
few notices there are of him j 90 but the romance 
of ‘ Gandor of Douay/ and some others by un- 
known authors, indicate their origin more clearly . 91 
Of their contents, and their relation to our history 
and to other poems, I shall speak elsewhere ; I will 
here only remark that, in spite of greater freedom 
in their treatment of particulars, and a more decided 
mixture of religious colouring, these authors belong 
to the same school of tradition which has hitherto 
engaged our attention. 

90 Foncemagne’s opinion on this subject (Hist. Litt, de la 
France, t. xi., ayertiss. p. 34) appears to me forced and untenable. 
The text of Gauf. Vos. p. 296, by no means justifies us in re- 
ceiving a double emendation, even in the improved version of 
Foncemagne. 

91 Michaud {Bibi. des Croisades, p. 273,) gives excerpts. A no- 
tice of them is to be found in * Roquefort de la Poesie Fran^aise,’ 
p. 162, where he calls Gandor (after Fauchet P) only the continua- 
tor of the poem begun by Renar, or Renaus. 



Digitized by Google 




255 



CHAPTER III. 

W ILLIAM OF TYRE. 

While the West appropriated and developed the 
history of the Crusades in the manner we have de- 
scribed, a very remarkable man was engaged in Pa- / 
lestine with the praiseworthy object of givmg to * 
that kingdom a history of its past, and to Europe a " 
memorial for the future. He wrote with a strong 
feeling of patriotism, and at the same time under 
the sad impression that he could only find solace 
for present sorrow in the recollection of former 
happiness. The means at his disposal and his per- 
sonal character fitted him for the task. The strong 
and persistent energy with which he mastered his 
materials enabled him to produce one of the great- 
est historical works of the Middle Ages. 

William of Tyre was born in Palestine, but we 
have no information as to the plrfce of his birth or 



Digitized by Google 




256 



LITERATURE OF THE CRUSADES. 



his parentage. 1 He was educated in Europe, most 
x probably at Paris ; but this surmise is merely conjec- 
tural ; for he himself (our sole authority) only states 
that he quitted Syria about the year 1163, in order 
to pursue his studies. Pour years afterwards we 
find him an archdeacon of the Church of Tyre, a 
friend of King Amalric, and tutor to the subsequent 
I King Baldwin IV. Even at that time the King em- 
ployed him in the most important negotiations ; he 
went to Greece in 1168, to ratify .an offensive alli- 
ance with the Emperor Manuel against Egypt. Per- 
sonal affairs carried him to Rome in 1169. On his 
return, at the death of. the Bishop of Bethlehem, 
fhe was made Chancellor of the kingdom, and in 
I the year 1174 Archbishop of Tyre. 2 Prom that 
time, he was naturally considered one of the most 
important members of the aristocracy of the land ; 
he took an active part in all negotiations of any 
importance, and his influence was felt by all ranks 
throughout the kingdom. The time and place of 
his death are involved in mystery ; the informa- 
tion on this point given by Hugo Plagons is un- 
worthy of credit, and scarcely deserves mention. 3 

The idea of writing his history had occurred to 

1 Bongars (in prsef.) gives all needful particulars of his life. I 
only quote here what appears essential to a comprehension of his 
personal character. 

2 William of Tyre, xxi. 9. 8 Compare Wilken, iii. 2. 261. 



Digitized by Google 




WILLIAM OF TYRE. 



257 



William of Tyre in the year 1170. Besides his 
own wish, there was an additional reason in the 
command of King Amalric, at whose desire he j 
had already written a history of the Arabs since the \ 
time of Mahomet. For this latter work he em- 
ployed Greek and Arabic materials, above all the 
history of Saith, the Patriarch of Alexandria. Amal- 
ric also busied himself in procuring him materials, 
and doubtless much that was valuable in this book 
has been lost. It cannot be asserted that it would 
have been free from error. The work of William 
of Tyre which we do possess precludes such a sup- 
position. But that work shows a more complete 
and scientific knowledge of Saracenic life than any” 
of his contemporaries or co-religionists possessed. 
It appears that in the year 1182 he had nearly 
completed the collection of his materials ; at all 
events, he then began to put them into form ; and he 
mentions in several passages, in the first and nine- 
teenth books, the year we have given as the time 
when he wrote them. 4 In 1184 he had completed 
twenty-two books, and brought down his narra- 
tive to the autumn of the preceding year. He was 
then in doubt whether to continue to portray the in- 

4 i. 3 ; xix. 21. In accordance with xxi. 26, Bongars supposes 
that this part was already composed in 1180; but nothing is 
there stated, beyond the fact that in that year William of Tyre 
had deposited certain papers in the archives of that town. 

S 



Digitized by Google 




258 



LITERATURE OF THE CRUSADES. 



creasing miseries of those times, and determined to 
complete the history of the year 1184 in a twenty- 
third book. 5 But his purpose was not carried out ; 
the work that has come down to us breaks off with 
the first chapter of that book. 

The manner in which the author collected his 
materials appears to me similar to that already 
described. He wrote partly from information ob- 
tained from those who had still a vivid recollec- 
tion of the past, partly from his own observation 
I and the honest reports of eye-witnesses. It is an 
important consideration, that the materials of his 
first fifteen books are still, for the most part, ex- 
*tant in their original sources. Albert of Aix, Arch- 
I bishop Baldrich, Fulcher of Chartres, Raymond of 
I Agiles, and Chancellor Gauthier, supply him with 
; the materials for the First Crusade, and the reigns 
of Godfrey, Baldwin I., and Baldwin of Burg. We 
shall see further on what changes he introduced ; 
but, in general, the accuracy of the copy spares me 
the trouble of pointing out individual instances. 
Before passing, however, to the consideration of his 
own original contributions, I will notice a few doubt- 
ful points. 

6 Prof, i., and xxiii. In this lie says that he had divided the 
whole of his work into twenty-three books. He wrote his pre- 
face in 1184. The preface to his twenty-third book, in which he 
w as still undecided, must therefore have been written first. 



Digitized by Google 




WILLIAM OF TT RE. 



259 



Lib. i. cap. 8, a copious and detailed passage 
on the misery of Europe in the eleventh century, is 
taken from Fulcher (p. 381), with some rhetorical 
ornaments of his own added. I have no doubt that 
an account (cap. 13) of the contention between the 
Emperor and the Pope, as well as the description of 
France after the Council of Clermont (cap. 16), are 
to be traced to Fulcher (pp. 383-385). 

There is a notice of the imprisonment of Hugo 
the Great, interpolated from Fulcher (p. 384) into 
the narrative of Albert. I should also attribute the 
origin of cap. 16 to the same author. It is easier 
to trace to Fulcher the origin of the statements 
regarding Robert of Normandy (p. 205), and to 
Albert the accounts of the arrival of Tatikios and 
Peter the Hermit. 

Lib. iii. cap, 2. It is said that the pilgrims at 
first stormed Nicaea without forming in regular 
order. This is but a repetition of Albert’s state- 
ment, that the Crusaders on their arrival were 
not daunted by the appearance of the towers, but 
charged the enemy at several points, at full speed, 
with colours flying and couched lances. 

Lib. v. cap. 1-3. The battle before Antioch is 
compiled from Albert and Baldrich ; the beginning 
of cap. 1 is taken from Albert; the end of cap. 1, 
as well as cap. 2, from Baldrich ; and cap. 3 again 

s 2 



Digitized by Google 




260 



LITERATURE OP THE CRUSADES. 



from Albert. That the two accounts, composed un- 
der different circumstances, contradict one another 
does not seem to disturb our author. 

Lib. vi. cap. 14. The story of the Holy Lance is 
told as shortly as possible. Nevertheless the men- 
tion of the Apostle Andrew and other visions, shows 
that the narrative was taken, not from Albert, who 
is equally short, but from Raymond of Agiles. 

On the whole, Albert is the leading authority in 
these books up to the capture of Jerusalem. The 
battle of Ascalon is related from Raymond, and 
then, as far as the twelfth book, he chiefly follows 
Fulcher. The end of Prince Raymond of Antioch 
is taken from Gauthier, and the further the nar- 
rative advances, the more copious is the use made 
of unknown authorities. Occasionally we are de- 
ceived by an apparent appeal to eye-witnesses. 
According to the confident assertions of those who 
were present, — says he, speaking of a successful 
naval fight, — the sea was stained red with blood 
for some distance. But the whole narrative is only 
a copy of Fulcher, who, as far as we can learn, had 

never trusted himself on the sea. 6 

* 

Although the interest of these first books is not 
very great, our respect for William of Tyre in- 
creases when we examine the mode and the extent 
6 Fulcher, p. 434. William of Tyre, xii. 21. 



i 



Digitized by Google 




WILLIAM OF TYRE. 



261 



of his own researches. He has carried his inquiries 
in all directions; selecting with the greatest skill 
the original authorities for each separate fact, and 
eliciting with careful accuracy the substance of their 
statements. As he does not quote his authorities 
by name, it is difficult to distinguish them ; never- 
theless the few whom he does name give a favour- 
able impression of his method and capacity. We ob- 
serve that he made inquiries concerning Tancred’s 
proceedings in Tiberias itself, where that prince 
ruled for many years. Tancred’s administration of 
that town, he says, was so admirable that his me- 
mory was still cherished by the inhabitants . 7 He 
also sought information concerning Idumaea; he 
says that he was told such and such things by the 
older inhabitants of a castle that was to be built 
there, etc . 8 He received an account from Hugo 
Embricus, lord of Biblium, of the taking of that 
city by that prince’s grandfather. We believe his 
statement, although he makes a wrong application 
of it . 9 When King Amalric was separated from 
his wife Agnes, on account of their near consangui- 
nity, William of Tyre was in Europe, and was un- 

7 William of Tyre, ix. 13. 8 xx. 20. 

9 xi. 9. He confuses it with the capture of Gibellum by Ber- 
tram of Toulouse and William Embricus, concerning which the 
documents in the Hist, de Languedoc, ii. pr., p. 374, and CafFaro, 
p. 253, give further particulars. 



Digitized by Google 




262 



LITERATURE OF THE CRUSADES. 



able later to obtain anywhere precise knowledge of 
the relationship in which they stood to each other. 
After long inquiry he applies to the Abbess Ste- 
phanie of Santa Maria Major, herself a relation of 
the Queen . 10 Hugo of Caesarea, one of the first 
barons of the kingdom, supplies him with various 
details concerning his embassy to the Egyptian 
Caliphs, and his negotiations with Schirkuh, the 
uncle of Saladin ; very probably also as to certain 
treaties with Saladin himself, in whose favour Hugo 
constantly endeavoured to direct the policy of the 
rulers in Jerusalem . 11 When Amalric’s last enter- 
prise against Egypt failed, William of Tyre is un- 
able to conceal his astonishment. On his Return 
from Rome to Syria, he sought from all the barons, 
and then from the King himself, the causes of this 
failure . 12 

These examples show, how all the sources of in- 
\ formation then accessible were open to him, and 
i how little he neglected his opportunities. But the 
number of his various authorities is still more ap- 
parent, when he treats of doubtful or remarkable 
events ; and although he does not mention his ori- 
ginals by name, it is impossible not to recognize the 
care and accuracy of his inquiries. He continually 
assures us, that he had learned this or that fact from 
10 xix. 4. 11 xix. 17, 28. “ xx. 20. 



Digitized by Google 




WILLIAM OF TYRE. 



268 



persons whose veracity was above suspicion, — barons 
who were themselves present, or old men who had 
themselves borne a part , in the affairs. If he received y 
contradictory accounts, he gives both versions with 
strict impartiality ; and this throughout .his work, 
in great and small matters, and on every occasion. 
The examples, which I shall take without any special 
selection from among a host of similar cases, will 
bear out my assertion. 

The first army of the Crusaders was afflicted in 
Antioch with a dangerous epidemic, and William 
of Tyre gives various accounts of the causes of the 
disease. 13 The losses at Edessa were attributed 
by some relaters of the events to the Archbishop, 
while others acquitted him of all blame. 14. He 
had reports of the expedition of Louis and Conrad 
from eye-witnesses, who told him the numbers of 
the army, and gave him various opinions as to the 
relations subsisting between Louis and Raymond of 
Antioch. 16 He does not trust himself to speak with 
certainty of the corrupt practices which brought the 
siege of Damascus to such a fatal termination in 
1148 ; but he brings together many and very dis- 
crepant accounts. 16 He speaks in the same manner 
concerning the capture of Paneas in 1165, of the 
strength of the army with which Amalric waged 
13 vii. 1. 14 xri. 6. 15 xvi. 21, 27. r xvii. 7. 



Digitized by Google 




264 



LITERATURE OF THE CRUSADES. 



war in Egypt, and of the origin of the last rup- 
ture between Amalric and the Fatimites. 17 After 
the victory of Baldwin IV. on Mount Gisard, he 
says : “ I know not how many we lost and adds, 
“ Audivimus a quibusdam fide dignis, quod centum 
viderant loricas extrahi.” Concerning the strength 
of the enemy, he states that he had formed his 
opinion after careful itiquiry from the most trust- 
worthy sources. 18 At this period, as chancellor and 
metropolitan bishop, he took part in the most im- 
portant affairs, but even then he did not neglect to 
prosecute his inquiries. It was he who had to con- 
duct the odious negotiations in 1175 with Count 
Philip of Flanders. After quoting speeches and 
counter-statements, he adds, that he had obtained 
a clue to the motives of the Count, partly from 
various narratives, and partly from the Count him- 
self. 19 

We are thus introduced to as many authorities 
as Albert of Aix-la-Chapelle can produce. The 
latter has united in his narrative the rumours of the 
■> West ; William of Tyre lays before us a host of 
Syrian authorities. It remains now to determine 
where they agree and where they differ. At first 
sight the preference would appear to be on the side 
of William of Tyre. He moves in the highest ranks 

17 xix. 10, 24 ; xx. 5. 18 xxi. 22. 19 xxi. 14. 



Digitized by Google 




WILLIAM OP TYRE. 



265 



of the world which he describes ; he numbers among 
his authorities the most honourable names; the care' 
he takes to prove and sift his evidence is quite 
manifest. But as a favourable impression is apt to 
deceive, and praise requires proof, we will inquire 
whether he understood the right mode of using his 
carefully collected materials, and to what end he 
employed them. 

General Character of the Work. 

One circumstance which will strike even the most 
superficial reader, and must be mentioned herei 
is the undeniable merit of the style of William! . 
of Tyre. The language is naturally the Latin| ■ 
of the Middle Ages, mixed with Southern French '{ 
and Italian elements. But, together with the in- 
fluence of classical studies, we can trace a thorough 
command of this mixed language, and evidences of 
general cultivation. The clearness of his narrative 
also is deserving of praise, and he possesses the 
talent of selecting the most striking passages from 
those of inferior value. His pictures are remarkable 
for detail, without being overcharged ; his language 
is to the purpose and dignified ; his thoughts are 
thoroughly well expressed. The same treatment is 
maintained throughout with no apparent effort. The 
whole is a work cut, as it were, out of one block ; 



Digitized by Google 




266 



LITERATURE OF THE CRUSADES. 



we feel at once that William of Tyre displays the 

faculty, not of a chronicler, but of an historian ; 

otherwise he could not have attained such ripeness 

and evenness of stvle. 

» 

The more we examine the work in question, the 
more clearly we perceive the author’s mastery of his 
materials. He has a quick eye for grouping his ob- 
jects, so that he can class them according to their 
affinity. Before entering into any new subject, he 
completely disposes of the consequences of the first 
The subject of his history shows the value of this 
treatment. A feeling for order and clearness is the 
most important quality in an historian, who has to 
describe the complicated intercourse between four 
Christian and gver-varying Saracenic empires, to 
show where they acted singly or in alliance, where 
Greek and European elements are at work, and 
where several distinct autonomies pursue their vari- 
ous interests. On most occasions we must award the 
highest praise to William of Tyre. No complication 
of circumstances, however tangled, disturbs him; 
he finds the best way of unravelling it, without af- 
fecting the other portion. For instance, in his four- 
teenth book, he has to narrate the dissensions 
which originated in the arrival of the Emperor John 
at Antioch. The subject was an embarrassing one. 
The personal character of John, and of Prince Ray- 



Digitized by Google 




WILLIAM OF TYRE. 



267 



mond, — the political position of Antioch towards 
Constantinople, — the relation of Raymond to his 
own vassals, — all had to be considered. John had 
vast plans against Antioch, as well as against Nou- 
reddin. King Fulco and the Count of Tripolis 
shared the interests of Raymond, and notwithstand- 
ing this, it was the defeat of the two by Noureddin 
which immediately forwarded the views, of the Em- 
peror. William of Tyre explains all this with the 
fullest detail, and is so little embarrassed by the 
number of his subjects, that he goes out of his way 
to insert into his narrative the part which the king- 
dom of Jerusalem played in the matter. The whole 
is developed in so clear a manner, that even Wilken 
has closely followed William of Tyre in the dispo- 
sition of his subject. 

' The introduction of the work gives us a remark- 
able example of the same quality. I have already 
made favourable mention of the preface to the ‘Gesta 
Francorum.’ But the stamp is very different. In the 
latter work the mystical element of the First Crusade 
is strikingly expressed ; indeed, the great merit of 
the passage consists in its showing so clearly thef 
existence of the feelings which prompted that en- 
terprise. William of Tyre, as he was not an actor 
in the Crusades, but speaks only from an histori- 
cal point of view, embraces a far wider range. He 



Digitized by Google 




268 



LITERATURE OF THE CRUSADES. 



begins with Mahomet, the originator of the quarrel : 
he then enumerates three violent attacks on Chris- 
tianity, each of which called up important counter- 
effects, the last of which was the First Crusade : and 
so he comes to his subject. He clothes this subject 
with details, and developes his theme quietly and 
broadly. In most of the modern authors we find 
a more ornamented style and a greater abundance 
of materials, but they are inferior in the power of 
recognizing and appreciating essential points. 

On the other hand, it cannot be denied that this 
very attempt to separate his materials has led the 
Archbishop in many cases too far, and involved 
him in obvious errors or want of tact. We fre- 
quently notice, that to preserve the regularity he 
has prescribed for his work, he changes the chro- 
nology, or at any rate makes it incomprehensible. 
We learn from Fulcher, that during the captivity of 
Baldwin II., Eustace Grenier was named viceroy of 
the kingdom ; and that the Venetian fleet arrived 
shortly before Eustace’s death : whereupon William 
of Buris was made viceroy, and was present at a suc- 
cessful sea-fight. William of Tyre depends solely 
on the authority of Fulcher, but his great object 
was to tell the deeds of the Venetians in a con- 
secutive narrative. He therefore states the death of 
Eustace and the election of Buris.as his successor ; 



Digitized by Google 




WILLIAM OP TYRE. 



269 



after which he reports the arrival of the Venetians. 20 
The city of Paneas was betrayed in the year 1129 
by one of the tribe of the Assassins into the hands 
of the Christians; three years afterwards it was 
given as a fief to the Knight Rainer of Brus. Wil- 
liam of Tyre, who relates with great detail the war 
of Damascus which occurred in 1129, omits to 
mention the capture of Paneas until Rainer takes 
possession of it. No one would guess from his con- 
text that three years had intervened between the 
two events. 21 We might quote many similar in- 
stances, and many where, for the sake of the form 
of the narrative, the chronology, although indicated, 
is inverted. For us it is sufficient to have disco- 
vered his mode of proceeding, and that even facts 
are occasionally made to bend to it. 

That the chronology of William of Tyre is the x * 
weakest part of his book, has been proved in 
many passages by Wilken, who corrects his errors 
by appealing to Arabic authorities. 22 Frequently, 
however, the error is clearly the transcriber’s, in 
cases where William of Tyre marks the time by 
giving the date of the year and that of the reign 
of the ruling prince. There will always, however, 

20 Fulcher, p. 434. William of Tyre, xii. 20, 21. 

21 William of Tyre, xiv. 19. 

22 I will only mention Wilken, iii. 1, p. 239 j 2, pp. 4, 17, 139, ^ 
by way of example. 



Digitized by Google 




270 



LITERATURE OE THE CRUSADES. 



remain a considerable number of errors of which 
we cannot acquit him. He is not devoid of a feel- 
ing for accuracy, but he is not sufficiently careful 
iu minor details. But, what is most remarkable, 
we often find no dates at all, as for instance in the 
^ account of the reign of Amalric. Wilken proves 
here beyond a doubt, that without the aid of Ara- 
bic authorities, it would be impossible to restore the 
chronology by a reference to William of Tyre. 

We are however convinced that the defect we 
have indicated is rather an exception to, than a con- 
I sequence of, his general mode of proceeding. The 
accuracy, even in the more trifling details, which we 
should have expected from his industry, is con- 
firmed in the fullest manner by the Oriental autho- 
. rities. These latter are, generally speaking, ampler 
in detail and frequently full of anecdotes ; they care 
\ only for the single fact which engages them for the 
moment ; the utmost they do is sometimes to give 
a very general view, as in the instance of the reli- 
gious zeal of Noureddin or of Saladin . 23 William 
of Tyre, on the contrary, has always his subject 
fully in view. He frequently breaks off a digres- 
sion which would have led him too far; for 
brevity’s sake, he suppresses many details, and 

23 Reference to the “ excerpta ” in Reynaud will easily convince 
any one. 



Digitized by Google 




WILLIAM OP TIRE. 



271 



there is no question but that his views are much 
larger than any to be found in Kemaleddin or 
Abu Yali. We are therefore the more pleased at 
the agreement between these authors, which often 
appears in unimportant trifles, is seldom disturbed 
by patriotic or religious prejudices, and is even 
occasionally confirmed by their very discrepancies. 

We should have been surprised had William of 
Tyre received less uncertain accounts of the march 
of Saladin upon Mosul ; on the other hand, it is 
very surprising that, amidst some obvious errors, 
he should bring together so much that was true 
about the Egyptian Fatimites. Still more striking 
are some passages where, in contradiction to all 
European authorities, he gives a statement which 
is only to be found in Arabic or Syrian writers; vx 
e.g. that of the battle of Harran, in the reign of 
Baldwin I., which he describes in a manner similar 
to Kemaleddin, and quite differently from Radulph 
and Albert. The only native historian, Matthias * > 
Eretz, of Edessa, attests the justice of his choice . 24 

I should dwell longer on this point were I writ- 
ing a general history of the Crusades. But in this 

24 William of Tyre, x. 29. Radulf and Albert are directly at 
variance with him on the cause of the war. Both give a com- 
pletely false version of the defeat of the Armenians, and Albert 
makes Tancred carry on a war of revenge, which falls to the 
ground merely from its dates. 



Digitized by Google 




272 LITERATURE OF THE CRUSADES. 

monograph I must be content to indicate the fact, 
and refer for proofs to Wilken’s third volume, where 
they will be found in great number. It must be 
remembered that the history of William of Tyre is 
written with unity of design, and also that, with a 
few trifling exceptions, he has not anywhere had 
p<jy recourse to Arabic or Greek authorities. When 
the Emperor John was besieging Schaisar on the 
Orontes, he had to fight several important battles 
before the Franks arrived. William of Tyre does 
not mention this, and only makes the war be- 
gin on the arrival of the Frankish princes. 25 The 
facts therefore for which he had not the autho- 
rity of the Latins, were to him as if they did not 
exist. The fullness and truth of his account of 
Arabian affairs depend entirely on their close con- 
tact with the Christian powers. He tells us nothing 
new concerning the descent of Zenki, or of Nou- 
reddin, or of Schirkuh ; but he characterizes them 
admirably as soon as they come to close quarters 
with the Franks. Whenever he investigates matters 
which we can test by Arabic authorities, he so far 
Agrees with them, as we have before observed, as 
to leave no doubt of the accuracy of his narrative. 
y'A But we can always easily recognize the totally 
different origin of the accounts. It is impossible 
25 Wilken, ii. 632. 



Digitized by Google 




WILLIAM OP TYRE. 



273 



to think that a person of his experience should have 
had such religious pride as to despise learning some- 
thing from Arabic sources. He himself says, that.** 
for his history of the Arabs, he had consulted and 
used Arabic writings. It was clear therefore that 
for other reasons he rejected such authorities. The 
solution appears to be, a dislike to mix up with 
his own narrative elements so dissimilar. This 
would suppose no very high idea of his own cri- 
tical power ; but the very unskilfulness shows his 
power, and his wish to carry out his work dili- 
gently. This remark takes us back to the character 
of his work, which, in comparison with those be- 
fore alluded to, springs from a totally different soil. 

It represents a complete whole, marked by great 
unity of thought, ancf independence both in mate- 
rial and form. 

Character of William of Tyre. 

After the preface to which we have alluded, Wil- 
liam of Tyre follows' Fulcher in his report of the 
condition of the Holy Land. The manner in which 
he enlarges on the materials of his original is here 
seen clearly. Fulcher bewails the excesses of the 
robber chiefs, the desolation of fruitful provinces, 
the oppression of the poor and helpless. William of 
Tyre, on the other hand, from the same materials 

T 



Digitized by 



Google 




274 



LITERATURE OP THE CRUSADES. 



draws a picture of universal demoralization, arising 
not from mere rude lawlessness, but from positive 
wickedness . 26 Fulcher is oppressed and afflicted by 
the universal misery around him. To him the ad- 
vent of the Crusades is a Divine interposition, a mi- 
racle in the strictest sense of the word. William of 
Tyre asserts that, as matter of history, the Crusades 
really did produce some moral good ; but he as- 
signs to them a human instead of a miraculous 
origin, and attributes them to the general guidance 
of divine Providence. 

The train of thought which lay at the bottom of 
this different view of events is apparent through- 
out the book. The author believes in a living per- 
sonal God, but in all human matters feels the 
necessity of a temporal foundation ; whereas the 
author of the ‘ Gesta Francorum ’ immediately re- 
fers to some prophecy of the Bible. William of 
Tyre advances no step in his work until he has 
satisfied himself on all points of time and place. In 
relating the setting out of the first band of Cru- 
saders on their march, he takes occasion to give 
concise but excellent observations on the kingdom 
of Hungary. Before Godfrey reaches Constanti- 
nople, our author endeavours to give a correct view 
of the condition of the Greek empire, and after- 

* Fulcher, pp. 381, 386. — William of Tyro, i. 8, 16. 



Digitized by Google 




WILLIAM OP TYRE. 



275 



wards of the state of Dalmatia, Bulgaria, and Ser- 
via. He then enriches the narrative of the Crusade 
with a description of Constantinople, Nicsea, and 
Antioch. Edessa and Jerusalem are described, and 
the most important events in the history 9f those 
places are brought under review. Thus he pro- 
ceeds step by step ; and as he approaches his own 
times, his digressions become richer, more ample 
in detail, and more trustworthy. In his account of 
Amalric, he dwells at greater length on the con- 
dition of Egypt ; he gives whole treatises on the 
position and age of the Egyptian Babylon, on the 
origin of the Fatimite caliphate, on the number of 
the mouths of the Nile, the increase of the Delta, 
and the Indian traffic across the Isthmus of Suez . 37 
His researches go far back into antiquity; and 
wherever he finds differences of opinion, he does 
not rest until he has solved them. He invariably 
gains his object, which is to obtain a sure founda- 
tion for the facts he relates ; and, with the same 
view, he never omits to mention the death and 
succession of popes and of the Roman and 
Greek emperors; giving in most cases a short 
review of their reigns, and a description of their 
most remarkable qualities. He was not likely 
to pass over such subjects. He had seen how 
» xix. 14, 19, 22, 26. 

T 2 



Digitized by Google 




276 LITERATURE OF THE CRUSADES. 

> 

the Patriarchs of Jerusalem had maintained their 
rights, or had suffered injustice in Rome; the 
quarrel between Frederic I. and Alexander III. had 
been felt even in Christian Syria; he himself had 
negotiated important treaties with the Emperor 
Manuel, and had attempted to benefit his native 
country. These circumstances had not only facili- 
tated his task at the commencement, but were of 
great assistance to him in working out the plan 
of his history. He had got far beyond the ideas of 
the first Crusaders ; above all things he looked for 
logical connection and historical coherence. 

Arrived at this point, we shall proceed to insti- 
tute a comparison between William of Tyre and 
the earlier authorities, and shall then examine the 
method he has pursued in making use of his ma- 
terials. It is not difficult from this point to trace, 
in all directions, the contrast hitherto only indicated 
in particular instances, of his personal character 
and his intellectual activity. 

As we have before observed, we possess many 
narratives of the Crusades, some written by the 
actors themselves during the progress of the events, 
while others derive their origin and their wide- 
spread notoriety from the wonder of contempora- 
ries. A large army, enthusiastic beyond example, 
without unity, almost without leaders, and only 



Digitized by Google 




WILLIAM OF TYRE. 



277 



actuated by one common impulse, had recovered 
the Holy Sepulchre. They were in a foreign land ; 
the war was over, and yet everything resembling 
civil, social, or indeed any sort of government, 
was totally wanting. They ruled only the ground 
upon which they stood. The population was 
hostile ; he who chose to stay, had to trust solely 
to his own right-arm and his good sword. Un- 
der such circumstances, with feelings of entire 
sympathy, and hearts full of that enthusiasm which 
had armed Europe, were the first narratives of the 
Crusades composed. The West seized upon these 
manifold and vague traditions; the ideas which 
these deeds called up were not less lively in the 
breasts of the auditors ; each one selected only those KY 
descriptions which touched his own imagination, 
and if he found none such he invented them. 

The original sources told little that was logically 
connected ; at any rate, we can discover but little, 
and there is much to disbelieve in individual cases. 

The tradition of the legend has an original unity 
and a wide significance, but not of a kind to be 
of use to the historian of daily events, and of the 
laws deducible from those events. 

We will now return to William of Tyre. He 
was devoted to his country, which then repre- 
sented a political whole, if any country did. It 



Digitized by Google 




27S LITERATURE OF THE CRUSADES. 

is true that, chiefly owing to William of Tyre’s 
representations, a conviction has gained ground 
that the condition of the Christian possessions 
in Syria was hopelessly deteriorating; that reli- 
gious and patriotic sentiments had vanished ; and 
that even the old warlike spirit was no longer 
to be found. We always hear of the wicked- 
ness and weakness of those times, and are as- 
tonished that, considering the power of Noureddin 
and Saladin, the destruction of the Christians was 
so long delayed. I confess that I do not discover 
so much in William of Tyre’s expressions, (the 
Arabic authorities give a very different story,) nor 
can I quite agree in what is to be found in his 
work corroborating their views. In the first place, 
they were far superior in material power, as Wil- 
liam of Tyre often states, to the former generation. 
Under Baldwin IV. they were able to raise a force 
of more than twenty thousand men. William of Tyre 
says : “ We had an army more powerful than that 
which any kingdom has ever raised within the me- 
mory of man .” 28 As to the moral condition of the 
armies, avarice and immorality were on the in- 
crease ; many places may have been more frequently 
sold or betrayed, but I cannot quote any case from 
which a falling off of martial valour can be inferred. 
“ xxii. 27. 



Digitized by Google 




WILLIAM OF TYRE. 



279 



Frequent as were the defeats, they were nearly always 
caused by the imprudence of the leaders and want 
of discipline of the soldiers, never by cowardice or 
sheer inactivity on either side. It is true that the 
influence of the first kings had ceased ; they had, 
year by year, sent out their roving parties to pil- 
lage the country. But the real reason was, that 
they now formed a state among other states ; they 
no longer stood face to face with a reckless enemy 
with whom no law was to be kept. They had 
come to a tacit understanding with those who, 
although implacable enemies, were still regarded 
as men possessing equal rights with themselves. 
At any moment an armistice or a truce was 
possible; and the war, when it commenced, was 
carried on in regular form. In the internal policy 
of the kingdom, the corporations exhibit the same 
political life: they were numerous and regularly 
organized. It is true that frequently the interests 
of the public were sacrificed to those of the cor- 
poration. For example, the two great Orders of 
the Knights Templars and Hospitallers did great 
mischief by their pride and obstinacy. But in 
general, facts speak louder than the denial of his- 
torians, as to the existence of unity of purpose. It 
was at this period of decay that circumstances re- 
sulted, in the formation of that body of laws called 



Digitized by 



Google 




280 



LITERATURE OF THE CRUSADES. 



the Assizes of Jerusalem. The aristocracy had va- 
rious representatives whose abilities no one con- 
tested. The wealth and importance of the cities is 
abundantly proved by the taxation ordered in 
1182 ; 29 and examples of any, excepting those who 
belonged to the Orders, neglecting to comply with 
the requisitions of the State, are rare. From Guido’s 
time they cease to be so. On a general review of 
this state of things, we shall find many defects, but 
we shall reverse the usual judgment, that at this 
juncture the Hoblest attempts of individuals failed 
to act upon the depraved condition of the masses. 
That which was really wanting to the State during 
its whole existence was an able ruler, capable of 
giving a strong impulse to the desire for progress, — 
a prince such as Bohemund during the First Cru- 
sade. But even such a one, under the conditions 
in which he was placed, would scarcely have offered 
a lasting resistance to the attacks of Saladin. 

If this is acknowledged, and if it be further 
conceded that William of Tyre was thoroughly 
imbued with the views above indicated, we cannot 
fail to be struck with the contrast which he offers 
to his authorities for the First Crusade. William 
of Tyre was by nature calm and dignified, not sus- 
ceptible of those emotions which tend to excitement 
» xxii. 23. 



Digitized by Google 




WILLIAM OP TYBE. 



281 



or fanaticism. His excellence does riot display itself 
in brilliant actions or in striking words, but he wins 
our esteem by his quiet virtues. He exhibits self- 
possession rather than force ; he awakens our con- 
fidence, if not our admiration. As an historian he 
is conscious of the discordance of his authorities, 
without being able to conquer the difficulties they 
present; and as a statesman he fails to master 
public affairs, but he discerns and judges them in 
a manner which few of his contemporaries would 
have been capable of doing. He consistently la- 
mented Amalric’s covetous policy towards Egypt ; 30 
and he showed lively gratitude to the Emperor 
Manuel, his most powerful protector. But he 
never exercised any practical influence on politics, 
and never, in spite of all his efforts, succeeded in 
promoting the Greek interests. 31 We may remark 
that he never forgets, in the author, his position 
as Chancellor. He passes rapidly over the events 
of 1148, and is obviously reticent on later domestic 
affairs. He Gomplains bitterly how difficult it is 
to tell the truth without giving offence, and pro- A* 
moting fresh dissensions in the kingdom. But his 
caution has this merit : it produces an extreme 



30 Lib. xx. c. 11. 

81 See, for example, tbe negotiations he began with Philip of 
Flanders. 



Digitized by Google 




282 



LITERATURE OF THE CRUSADES. 



anxiety to injure no man. He constantly accom- 
panies his statements with the assertion that com- 
mon report stated so and so, but that he had not 
discovered anything certain on the point. Occa- 
sionally his disclaimer is almost comical : “ It is said 
that the King, as is reported, may have known such 
and such a thing;” and the like, frequently con- 
cerning the most unimportant matters. If we con- 
cede, what indeed is obvious, that this way of think- 
ing is directly at variance with the sentiments of the 
First Crusade, what are we to say of the influence 
that general literature exercised upon him? He 
quotes the Roman poets as frequently as the Bible ; 
he confirms his description of the miseries of 
those times by referring to Livy ; and he is deeply 
imbued with classical philosophy. It is important 
here to remark that he scarcely perceives the dis- 
tance that exists between himself and his authori- 
ties; between the times of Godfrey of Bouillon and 
of Amalric. In his own, as well as in former times, 
he sees the ordinary course of human affairs, — 
happiness and misery, heroism and weakness, 
rise and fall. In drawing comparisons, he does 
not hesitate, as we have before mentioned, to de- 
clare the reign of the first king of Jerusalem to be 
the happiest period, and one never likely to re- 
turn . 32 

82 Compare xxi. 7. In the ninth book he recognizes the dan- 



Digitized by Google 




WILLIAM OP TTRK. 



283 



This tendency, which has only been indicated in 
general, will become more evident when we trace 
its influence in the manner in which the materials 
are treated in detail. The feelings of most men are 
naturally expressed in the most marked manner 
when the object to be described has attained its 
culminating point. For instance, in the First Cru- 
sade, which was the product of religious and martial 
enthusiasm, the mind was fixed, on the one side, 
on the contemplation of heavenly things, and, when 
possible, on miraculous manifestations; on the 
other side, on the various displays of heroism, or (so 
prevalent in those times) those of the spirit of adven- 
ture. It is well known that towards the close of the 
eleventh century Europe was teeming with visions, 
dreams, and miracles. That there was an imme- 
diate intercourse with Heaven was the conviction of 
every one. This feeling coloured the whole mental 
existence of the pilgrims, whose character and modes 
of thinking were formed in a manner totally in- 
dependent of the hierarchical power of the Church. 
I have already mentioned to what an extent the con- 
temporary authorities were pervaded by this feeling, 
and have pointed out the traces of various other 

gerous position of Godfrey of Bouillon very clearly. But the 
personal picture that he draws of this prince, spite of all the 
author’s zeal for inquiry, keeps alive the old feeling of former 
times for that prince. 



Digitized by 



Google 

i M i i 



i 




284 LITERATURE OF THE CRUSADES. 

tendencies in William of Tyre. But apart from his 
secular knowledge and habits of thought, we can 
recognize even in his religious opinions a totally 
xj* different origin. He is full of the spirit which 
animated the Christian Powers in the East toward 
j the close of the twelfth century ; the interests of 
Christianity are still prominently put forward, but 
the mystical enthusiasm has vanished ; and, in lieu 
/ of the zealous asceticism which characterized that 
1 period, we perceive hierarchical tendencies. It is 
no longer the pilgrim or the mere ecclesiastic who 
writes, caring only -for ecstatic visions or peni- 
tential practices : we recognize the bishop, whose 
life has been passed in the bosom of a well- 
organized Church, and in the transaction of tem- 
l poral affairs of the most important nature. Albert 
■ says of Peter the Hermit, after he had fallen asleep, 
“In visu ei majestas Domini Jesu oblata est.” 
William of Tyre says, “ Visus est ei Jesus Christus 
quasi coram positus exstitisse.” 33 The difference 
in expression sounds trifling, but in it we see the 
contrast between a miraculous reality, and a pious 
but natural dream. In Albert’s account, Peter goes 
to the Pope, the Pope goes to Clermont, and on the 
8th of March, with wonderful rapidity, Walter the 
Penniless was with his thousands on the frontiers 
33 Albert, i. 2. William of Tyre, i. 11. 



Digitized by Google 




WILLIAM OF TYRE. 



285 



of Hungary. We perceive that Albert here recognizes 
ä miracle, — the immediate interference of Heaven. 

But even here William of Tyre finds a natural solu- 
tion, in which however a religious enthusiasm, some- 
what modified and conformed to reason, is still trace- K * 
able. He relates how Peter the Hermit visits all 
countries, stirring up men’s minds, and actively pro- 
mulgating the allocution of the Pope. In Albert’s 
narrative the matter ends there ; after Peter has ful- 
filled his mission, there is no need of any further 
mention of the issue. But William feels it neces- 
sary to have a more satisfactory conclusion, and 
states afterwards how the Surians, after the taking 
of Jerusalem, gave him, their deliverer, their warmest 
thanks . 34 As before mentioned, William of Tyre, 
in his account of the finding of the Holy Lance, 
follows Raymond of Agiles, who in this passage 
tells of infinite signs and wonders from heaven. 

The greater portion of these are wholly omitted by 
William of Tyre, whose account is, from quite dif- 
ferent reasons, almost as short as Albert’s. 86 ' He 
again follows Raymond in the narrative of the elec- 
tion of Godfrey as king. The account of an event 
of such importance may have appeared to him too 
short ; at any rate, he determined to amplify it by 
additional details. There is no question that on 
34 viii. 28. 85 Raimond, p. 179. — William of Tyre, ix. 2. 



Digitized by Google 




236 



LITERATURE OP THE CRUSADES. 



this point he had the richest choice of materials. 
There was scarcely another occurrence which had 
been so much amplified by enthusiastic tradition. 
Visions, miracles, all the glory of heaven and earth, 
had been here brought together by Albert and 
others. But all this touched him little ; an insigni- 
ficant anecdote, the chief point of which was the 
complaint of the servants at having to eat cold meat, 
was inserted with some satisfaction in lieu of these 
splendid wonders. It was sufficient for him that 
Godfrey’s religious fervour was excited by fine altar- 
pieces; he willingly omits all supernatural orna- 
ments. He comes later to Godfrey’s earlier history, 
and even here again he discards nearly all that is 
miraculous. 

The further he proceeds in his narrative, the more 
rare are the opportunities for displaying this dislike. 
"With scarcely any exception he remains on the 
firm ground of ordinary matters of fact. I only 
remember one passage where there is express men- 
tion of a miracle; but even here he brings for- 
ward the arguments against a solution by natural 
causes, in so circumstantial a manner as to induce 
us to suppose that he was not convinced himself. 
He does not exactly deny it, but he shows no en- 
thusiasm. He inserts the story because he had 
heard it, but he would have held the same view of 



Digitized by Google 




WILLIAM OP TYRE. 



287 



Divine Providence, had nothing of the sort come to 
his knowledge. 36 Occasionally expressions such as 
these occur : an individual misfortune, or the gene- 
ral deterioration of their position, was caused by 
the wrath of God at their sins. 87 Meanwhile it re- 7 
quires no great investigation to see how great is 
the contrast between such opinions and the belief 
in miracles entertained by his predecessors. In one 
place he examines into the causes of the decay of 
the state; 38 he gives three reasons: the first of 
which is, the anger of the Lord ; but he puts in 
the same class the weakness of the existing race 
of men, and the union of the formerly disunited 
Turkish kingdom. Naturally, and as befitted an 
orthodox Christian of those days, he is far from 
denying the general providence of God; but that 
God interferes in any other way except by the 
operation of natural causes, is, to him, rather a 
matter of history than of actual experience. In one 

36 The “Holy Cross puts out the fire of the steppes through 
which the army was marching. A white knight then leads the 
Christians through pathless mountains. It was distinctly ob- 
served that on their camping he had vanished, and was never 
seen more (xvi. 11, 12). It was the unlucky expedition of Bald- 
win III. against Bosra. It was said that the Franks had never 
suffered such misery in Syria, and stood so much in need of 
Divine assistance. Under these circumstances prodigies arose, 
as they did on a former occasion during the siege of Antioch by 
Kerboga. 

87 xx. 19 . 38 7 



Digitized by 

I 



Google 

i n M 




288 



LITERATURE OF THE CRUSADES. 



/ word, the ground of his religious views is, that he 
recognizes only one mystical fact ; namely, the ex- 
istence and the sensible action of the Church, in 
the hierarchical form it had then assumed. He 
dwells upon this development with the greatest 
enthusiasm ; first, so far as it concerned his own 
immediate sphere, but also with a view to the more 
important unity of Roman Christianity. On this 
point he had made the most accurate and original 
researches, in which he displays all the advantages 
of his historical skill. I have in a previous passage 
attempted to show, that from him alone true infor- 
mation is to be obtained of the fate of Dagobert, 
the first Patriarch. We have no doubt the same 
may be said of later doubtful events. I will only 
mention one example, — his account of the Patriarch 
Radulph of Antioch . 39 The amount of detail, the 
perspicuity and ease of his narrative, show clearly 
how much his mind was occupied with these topics. 
We are the more thankful to him, as without his 
account the important change in the state of men’s 
minds in Syria would have been almost unknown 
to us. 

When we turn to the temporal side of these 
events, we see a similar coincidence. Instead of 

p. 

adventures, we meet with campaigns; instead of 
38 xv. 12-17. 



Digitized by Google 




WILLIAM OP TYRE. 



289 



chivalrous single combats, we read of regularly con- 
stituted armies and kingdoms. The change runs 
through the whole book ; I will quote one instance, 
more with the object of bringing this change pro- 
minently to view, than for the sake of proof. The 
contest for Antioch was the culminating-point of 
the knightly exploits of the Crusaders of that day, 
and William of Tyre took, as the authority for his 
narrative, that very writer who had the greatest 
love for such subjects. Albert of Aix details the 
adventures with the utmost fullness. The knights 
surpass themselves ; the princes are covered with 
glory ; the feeble and unlucky succumb ; the strong 
attain to honour and wealth : and so it goes on 
in endless detail, without however the idea of any 
plan. It was the chief object of William of Tyre to 
arrange his work upon some system. In the first 
place he shows how little feeling he had for roman- xy 
tic heroism, as he omits a number of the anecdotes 
of Albert of Aix, with the remark that, considering 
the brevity which he aimed at, it was impossible for 
him otherwise to get through the endless materials. 
He connects together the thread of the narrative, 
which, with his knowledge of the other authorities, 
could not be difficult, and thus produces a whole, 
which, if we did not know its origin, might be 
. considered well arranged and rational enough. But 

u 



Digitized by Google 




290 



LITERATURE OF THE CRUSADES. 



with this order the whole freshness of the chival- 
rous spirit evaporated ; it died out with that free- 
dom from plan from which it drew its life and sus- 
tenance. It is still a question whether the Arch- 
bishop’s rational history can maintain its ground 
against a picture drawn from the original sources ; 
how far also these authorities represent a plan of 
proceedings, and whether they represent the plan 
which William of Tyre describes. 

The following remark seems not to be out of 
place here. William of Tyre gives several accounts 
of the number of fighting-men in the contending 
armies, differing from the authorities that have come 
down to us, and which he therefore obtained from 
other quarters . 40 In the ‘ Gesta Francorum,’ in 
Raymond and Albert, we likewise find other state- 
ments on the same subject. They sometimes agree 
with, sometimes vary from, those given by William 
of Tyre. Where they vary, it is from a difference 
of motive worth attention. In the original autho- 
rities the fact itself is treated as a matter of indif- 
ference, and the statements are mostly very loose. 
The interest to them arose from a far different con- 
sideration; namely, the power of the Lord, who 

40 On the whole of the first crusading army consult i. ii., extr. 
i. iv. 12, and also concerning the number of troops at Jerusalem 
and Ascalon. 



Digitized by Google 




WILLIAM OP TYRE. 



291 



gave the victory to the few over the many. As the 
power of the Lord was everything, it necessarily 
followed that the real number of fighting-men was 
quite unimportant. 41 William of Tyre, however, did 
not take this view of the matter : he desired, very 
naturally, to obtain a surer foundation for his 
facts. It is to be regretted that he has not given x* 
us more frequent and better-arranged statements. 
Some later passages raise doubts as to the correct- 
ness of the numbers in the first parts of his works. 

In the later portion he talks of a Turkish army of 
twenty thousand, or at most forty thousand, men ; 
and adds with emphasis, — “ Dicebatur a seniori- 
bus regni principibus, quod a primo Latinorum in 
Syriam introitu nunquam tantas vidissent hostium 
copias.” 42 These accounts are evidently more rea- 
sonable than the enormous numbers given in the 
earlier books. 

There is no question that the turn of William 
of Tyre’s mind has contributed materially to our 
knowledge, not only of ecclesiastical, but of tem- 
poral matters. The constitution of the kingdom, 
the subject to which we now allude, is not in- 

41 Fulcher, in the later portions of his work, gives this matter 
another turn, and complains of the smallness of their number, 
and how willingly they would have had larger armies. 

48 William of Tyre, xxii. 16 : here it is 20,000. xx. 21, where 
the same matter is mentioned, he gives 40,000 men. 

u 2 



Digitized by Google 




292 



LITERATURE OF THE CRUSADES. 



deed treated with the same interest and detail as 
the history of the Church. On the contrary, in a 
few passages only is anything directly relating to 
it mentioned. But the whole book, springing from 
a soil politically prepared for it, bears traces of 
its origin. It would be wrong to imagine that we 
could treat of the Assizes of Jerusalem in a com- 
prehensive manner without reference to William of 
Tyre. He does not often deviate from the original 
authorities, but he clothes their dry and meagre 
outlines with great variety of incident and interest- 
ing personal details. This however more properly 
applies to the history of the First Crusade. 

Narrative of the First Crusade. 

We have praised the talent displayed in the style 
of William of Tyre, in which there is a union of 
good taste, vigour, and lively perspicuity. We 
readily recognize these same merits in the original 
works giving descriptions of the First Crusade. 
But the comparison with his authorities renders 
a closer examination necessary. It is clear that 
he completely remoulds the form, if not the 
contents, of his originals. This deserves praise; 
for much coarseness, and many discrepancies and 
contradictions, vanish under a process which, out 
of such discordant materials, produces a complete 



Digitized by Google 




WILLIAM OF TYRE. 



203 



whole. On the other hand, we must confess 
that, together with what is objectionable, he de- 
stroys much that is significant, and frequently 
substitutes for what was a vivid picture a common- 
place narrative. He writes history with a skill 
and liveliness that carry his readers away; but 
his predecessors, with greater coarseness and less 
skill, have the art, although in another manner, 
of writing both vividly and dramatically. Albert 
of Aix thus relates the march of the priest Gott- 
schalk through Hungary : — “ Dum per aliquot dies 
nioram illuc [near Messburg] facerent et vagari cce- 
pissent ; Bavari vero et Suevi, gens animosa, et cae- 
teri fatui, modum potandi excederunt, pacem indic- 
tam violarunt, Ungaris vinum, hordeum, et caetera 
necessaria paulatim auferentes, ad ultimum oves 
et boves per agrum rapientes occiderunt, resistentes 
quoque et excutere volentes peremerunt, caeteraque 
plurima flagitia, quae omnia referre nequivimus, 
perpetrarunt, sicut gens rusticano more infulsa, in- 
disciplinata et indomita. Juvenem quendam Un- 
garum pro vilissima contentione palo per secreta 
naturae transfixerunt in foro plateae.” William of 
Tyre gives the following version of this passage : 
— “Alimentorum abutentes opulentia et ebrie- 
tati vacantes, ad inferendas enormes indigenis se 
contulerunt injurias : ita ut praedas exercerent, 



Digitized by Google 




294 



LITERATURE OF THE CRUSADES. 



venalia foris illata publicis violenter diriperent 
et 8tragera in popolo comraitterent, neglectis le- 
gibus hospitalitatis. Commiserunt gravia in locis 
quara plurimis, turpiaque nimis et relatione in- 
digna.” It is clear that the attempt to condense 
his predecessor’s narrative was not the sole aim 
of William of Tyre. In Albert’s account one 
image follows another, and one fact explains the 
other. William of Tyre, on the contrary, limits 
himself to a bare recital of the events, which 
he might have represented in equal detail. While 
Albert, after his fashion, boasts of the purple 
banners and the golden insignia, William of Tyre 
merely says, the army marched in great pomp from 
one place to another. At Dorylaeum, says Fulcher, 
was Bishop Adhemar with four other bishops, be- 
side many priests in white garments, who hum- 
bly besought God for victory. Many went to them 
for confession, and princes were in the heat of 
the fight. William of Tyre describes it thus : — 
“ Dominus vero Podiensis cum multis ejusdem of- 
ficii comministris populos admonent, hortantur prin- 
cipes, ne manus remittant, sed certi de victoria di- 
vinitus conferenda, interemtorum sanguinem ulcis- 
cantur, 'et de fidelium strage fidei hostes et nominis 
Christiani non patiantur diutius gloriari.” 

Here there is no abridgment; on the contraiy. 



Digitized by Google 




WILLIAM OF TYRE. 



295 



William of Tyre is more detailed than Fulcher, but 
rhetorical amplification takes the place of simple 
reality. We may remark inöidentally that the 
fact differs materially from that mentioned by 
Fulcher, and exactly as we should have expected 
from our previous observations. While Fulcher 
gives us a picture of the battle, in which confusion 
reigned, — the priests in anguish and terror on their 
knees, people coming to them in the midst of the 
turmoil for absolution, and the like, — William re- 
presents the clergy solemnly assembled, as it were, 
in order of battle, headed by their chief ; and in a 
becoming state of enthusiasm urging on the war- 
riors to do battle for the Lord. 

A comparison with any of his authorities gives 
similar results. Raymond of Agiles, who troubles 
himself little with artistic composition, at the 
close of his introduction begins his narrative thus : 
— “ So the Count of Toulouse and Bishop Adhe- 
mar marched through Slavonia and had many dif- 
ficulties to encounter in the way, especially frdm 
the winter season. Slavonia is a wild, pathless, 
and mountainous country. For the space of 
three weeks we saw neither bird nor beast.” He 
then observes how the wild inhabitants molested 
them, killing many stragglers, and easily evading 
pursuit by flying into the mountains. He adds, 



Digitized by Google 




296 



LITERATURE OF THE CRUSADES. 



“ I will not omit one glorious act of the Count;” 
and relates with some detail the success of an am- 
bush for the natives devised by Raymond. “ Above 
all,” says he, “ it is impossible to narrate the deeds 
then performed by the Count. We were forty days 
in Slavonia, when the fog was so dense that we 
could actually grasp and handle it. All this time 
the Count was not idle one moment ; he was the 
first to advance and the last to retreat, and re- 
mained armed day and night, until he had led the 
army through, without any serious loss.” Here we 
at once recognize the eye-witness, who conveys to 
us the impressions he himself felt. Rough as are 
his forms of speech, he transports us at once into 
his own position and his own feelings. We grope 
our way with him through the mist and over the 
mountain-passes, and exult over a general by whose 
skill and vigour the army was saved. 

Whilst this author presents the event itself, 
William of Tyre gives a history of it. He first 
relates the departure of the Count, and gives an 
account of his forces ; then passing to Slavonia, 
he collects all the topographical notices scattered 
through the work of Raymond of Agiles, into the 
framework, as it were, of a quiet description. The 
army reaches its destination after great difficulties, 
throughout which it was admirably protected by 



Digitized by Google 




WILLIAM OF TYKE. 



297 



the Count. William of Tyre ends without having 
omitted a single fact or description ; but likewise / 
without having succeeded in one instance in giving j 
the impression of his original. It must be admitted j 
that he exhibits the lively sympathy with his sub - 1 
ject in general which is produced by a, warm 
patriotism ; but in the single statements of these 
early events he shows more interest in the compo -j 
sition of his history than in the history itself. / 

This continues into the middle of the book. 

The account of the defeat of Raymond of An- 
tioch, in the year 1119, given by the Chancellor 
Gauthier and followed by William of Tyre, ex- 
hibits the same striving after historical skill, and 
the same want of simplicity of apprehension. There 
is no question that, with a feeling for method and 
clearness, William of Tyre omits much that is 
foreign to the matter; the arrangement and con- 
nection of the whole are much more distinct than 
in Gauthier. But in spite of these advantages his ^ y 
narrative has not the character of the original. His 
picture is correctly drawn, but its colouring is dull 
and differs from the original. His. ruling passion 
is unity of design. He reduces all the inequalities 
of the originals to one uniform measure. By these 
means a broad and harmonious whole is indeed 
obtained, but all appearance of real life is de- 



Digitized by Google 




298 



LITERATURE OF THE CRUSADES. 



stroyed, and an analysis of his materials is rendered 
impossible. 

We recognize the same method of proceeding on 
another subject. William of Tyre, in the first books 
of his history, quotes a number of letters, docu- 
ments, speeches, and treatises, copied, it would 
appear and has- been frequently believed, from 
authentic sources . 43 I believe them indeed to be 
all a pure invention of the Archbishop, unsupported 
by any earlier tradition. Such are, for instance, at 
the very beginning, the negotiations of Peter the 
Hermit with the Patriarch of Jerusalem. We do 
not find them in this form in any of the original 
authorities known to us. We can indeed trace 
their origin to Albert of Aix, although his narrative 
differs materially. I must maintain the same with 
regard to a thing which has been more generally 
accepted, the speech of Urban II. at Clermont . 44 
Frequently as this has been quoted as a genuine 
document, I neither see external evidence of its au- 
thenticity, nor do the contents appear consonant to 
the spirit of those times. In this elaborate docu- 
ment, full of elegance and learning, there is no 

43 On the strength of his assertions, the Hist. Litt, de la 
France, viii. 600, considers Godfrey as the author of particular 
letters to the French historians. Examples of such a use in this 
sense are to be frequently found. 

44 Lib. i. c. 15. 



Digitized by Google 




WILLIAM OF TYRE. 



299 



trace of the feeling dominant at that time, namely, 
boundless and extravagant fanaticism. In no way 
does it differ, either in thought or expression, from 
the treatment in the rest of William of Tyre’s 
book. This may be said of other matters, to which 
we shall have to allude. 

I pass over the speeches and letters inter- 
changed between Duke. Godfrey and King Kalma- 
ni, briefly to consider the more important nego- 
tiations with the Emperor Alexius. There is merely 
a reference to the mission to Godfrey, given word 
for word from Albert’s narrative; on the other 
hand, the requisition of Bohemund to make war 
upon Alexius, and Godfrey’s refusal, is told in 
extenso, and in William of Tyre’s most elaborate 
style . 45 But the conviction is forced upon us 
that we have before us an amplification of the let- 
ters given by Albert of Aix, exactly as we have in 
cap. xi. of the curt speeches of the Emperor to 
Godfrey . 48 The connection may appear more doubt- 
ful in the narrative of the embassy of the Emperor 
to Bohemond, as well as in that to the Count of 
Toulouse, which are not to be found in his autho- 
rities for those times, Baldrich 47 and Raymond of 
Toulouse . 48 I have no doubt that this also was a 

45 Lib. ii. c. 6, 10. — Albert, ii. 7, 14. 

46 Albert, c. 16. 47 Baldr. p. 93. 

48 Baymond, p. 140. — William of Tyre, ii. o. 13-16, 18. 



Digitized by Google 




800 



LITERATURE OF THE CRUSADES. 



pure invention of William of Tyre. The contents of 
the two letters are of the most general kind ; their 
form is precisely that used by the Archbishop, and 
not at all like the Greek, as we may see in various 
passages of Anna Comnena. Radulf proceeds in 
a similar manner : he likewise introduces in a direct 
speech the embassy to Bohemund, but does not at- 
tempt to conceal his own invention. 

A further example, still more characteristic of 
William of Tyre, is to be found in the negotia- 
tions about Nicaea. I must here premise, as well 
known, that Alexius with great skill forced the 
garrison of the town to a compromise, without any 
reference to the Crusaders, and took possession of 
the place, without allowing them to have any part 
in the capture. In William of Tyre’s narrative, 
Tatikios took possession of the town, which, it is 
said, the princes did not resent, as they would 
not otherwise have been able to remain. He 
lets this opinion escape in a letter addressed to 
Alexius, wherein the princes request the Emperor 
to send them a sufficient garrison, foreseeing that 
they would soon be forced to break up their quar- 
ters . 49 We now know for certain that they were 
exceedingly embittered by the loss of such a 
booty ; that they refused to hold intercourse with 
Lib. iii. c. 11. 



Digitized by Google 




WILLIAM OF TYRE. 



801 



the Emperor, and were only induced by urgent 
entreaty to open fresh negotiations. We know 
further that the Greek troops in Nicaea were quite 
numerous enough to defend the place, strong as it 
was, even against the Crusaders themselves. There 
could be no meaning therefore in the request for 
reinforcements. William of Tyre’s intention seems 
to me clear enough ; he neither wished to mix him- 
self up with the passionate and vague questions of 
that period, nor did he believe (at all events he had 
no wish to relate) the intrigues of the Emperor, the 
lust for plunder of the princes, nor to touch on 
the various negotiations that passed. He had in 
his mind the picture of two great and admirably 
constituted Powers, and he represents their ne- 
gotiations in the manner which seemed to him 
fitting. In a passage that follows immediately 
afterwards, it is stated, “ In pactorum serie quae 
inter eos inita fuerant, haec formula dicebatur in- 
terserta ; quod si aliquam de urbibus,” etc . 60 This 
is in fact simply a new version of Albert’s state- 
ment, that the princes had promised to restore 
the towns, lands, and villages ; 61 the decision as 
to the plunder is of course added. A similar 

50 Lib. iii. c. 12. 

61 “ Promiserunt enim juramento, nihil de regno imperatoris, 
non castra non civitates nisi de ejus voluntate seu dono retinere.” 
— Albert, ii. 28. 



Digitized by Google 




302 



LITERATURE OF THE CRUSADES. 



proceeding is obvious (lib. vi. c. 15) in the account 
of the embassy of Peter and Herluin to Kerboga. 
He adopts Fulcher’s account of the message with 
which the emissaries were entrusted, and Bal- 
dric’s for the negotiations with the heathen emir. 
In both cases everything rough and uncourtly is 
excluded ; they are made to discourse in the most 
diplomatic manner, and not with the wild zeal of 
lawless warriors fighting for religion’s sake. 63 And 
so it is in all cases. I consider none of these state- 
ments as really original, or indeed as having any 
claim to be reckoned so. The first that I find 
trustworthy is the letter of Dagobert to Bohe- 
mund, in which instance there is no reason to doubt 
the express statement of William of Tyre. 63 

I have purposely dwelt somewhat at length upon 
this point, partly on account of the general accep- 
tance which these representations have obtained, 
partly of the importance of the matter in forming 
a judgment on William of Tyre. Were the facts 
authentic, we must accept the Archbishop as an 
original authority, and a very important one. But 
now they serve admirably to define the position 
which he holds in relation to the original autho- 
rities. 

62 Fulcher, p. 393. Baldrich’s paraphrase is still stronger (p. 
119). The identity is too manifest to make any quotation neces- 
sary. William of Tyre, vi. 15. 

63 William of Tyre, x. 4. 



Digitized by Google 




WILLIAM OF TYRE. 



303 



We see how the general state of affairs, William’s 
own position and modes of thought, and the manner 
in which he acquired and dealt with his materials, 
are dependent on each other. Another point re- 
mains, the decision of which must determine the 
literary position of his history. Without an exami- 
nation of his critical method, our inquiry into the 
purpose and practical application of his history 
would be useless. 

We have already suggested, that William of Tyre 
abstained from incorporating Arabic narratives into 
his work, as resting on such totally different grounds 
from those of Christian writers. The discrepancy 
between his Christian authorities apparently did 
not strike him ; it is true he corrects occasional 
errors, but he never rises to a view of the whole. 
There are indeed traces of such an attempt, but 
it soon becomes evident that it is the result of 
an external influence. The second book contains 
the march of the separate bodies of troops through 
the Greek Empire. He first lays Albert of Aix 
under contribution, for the narrative of the march 
of the Lorrainers; he refers for Bohemund’s ad- 
vance to the ‘ Gesta Francorum ’ or to Baldrich ; for 
that of Raymond of Toulouse to Raymond of Agiles ; 
and lastly, he takes from Fulcher of Chartres his 
account of the march of the Northern French. 



Digitized by Google 




304 



LITERATURE OF THE CRUSADES. 



He thus always goes to the best authority — a 
countryman or a personal companion — for his ac- 
count of each Prince. It ought not to affect our 
judgment, that he also inserts from other quarters 
much that is erroneous, and for which there is 
no authority. 54. This is unavoidable from the na- 
ture of such traditions. But this circumstance is 
conclusive, that he differs widely from the unhis- 
torical Albert of Aix, and that he aims at preser- 
ving the historical value of his narrative, by divest- 
ing it of all legendary forms. 

If we remember his personal character, and how 
foreign to his sober and well-regulated mind were 
all miracles and adventures, all poetry, whether 
religious or secular, it will appear more surprising 
that he should place any reliance on Albert of Aix, 
than that he should alter his narrative. On the 
other hand, if his scepticism was so strong as to 
lead him to reject it, he could easily throw out its 
poetical elements, and give to the dry residuum an 
historical character. But after he had stripped the 
political and military parts of all adventure, and 
substituted hierarchical forms for mystical excite- 

64 Such are to be found atpp. 705, 708, 710 ; how Bohemund 
has some spies roasted ; Baji-Sijan suspects Firuz ; Tancred and 
Robert of Flanders storm Antioch ; how Raymond of Toulouse, 
even before the capture of the city, protests against Bohemund’s 
assumption of its government. 



Digitized by Google 




WILLIAM OK TYRE. 



805 



ment, there still remained traces of the legendary 
origin of his history, in the contradictions, internal 
and external, which it contains, and the fables which 
are at variance with reason and experience. If 
William of Tyre were freed from these objections, 
his work would be complete and his task fulfilled. 
But on comparing it with some of the passages 
quoted in our criticism of Albert of Aix, we per- 
ceive how little he kept this object in view. 

Albert places the peace between Godfrey and 
Alexius in January, 1097, and shortly afterwards 
mentions it as having been signed about Christ- 
mas, 1096. William of Tyre dismisses the last state- 
ment altogether, and confirms the first from other 
sources. In other respects he follows Albert word 
for word. 55 The latter describes the battle of Dory- 
laeum, with a great display of poetical but useless 
detail. The distrust inspired by such a mode of 
writing is confirmed by a comparison of the state- 
ment with the original authorities. William of Tyre 
uses them all indiscriminately. He omits all Al- 
bert’s poetical forms, and comments on the discre- 
pancies of his statements, without expressing any 
scepticism concerning the narrative as a whole. 
He omits whatever bears clear evidence of a fabu- 
lous origin,— whatever is in obvious contradiction 
56 William of Tyre, ii. 10-13. 

X 



Digitized by Google 




306 LITERATURE OF THE CRUSADES. 

to the original authorities, — and places side by side | 
two reports of the same occurrence, as if they 
related to different events . 66 What remains after 
this process he adds to the narrative of the original 
authorities, not perceiving that he has only saved a 
dead and worthless mass. 

Albert first leads Prince Sweyn of Denmark 
to Nicaea, then back again to Constantinople, and 
thence to his defeat by Solyman. William of Tyre 
at once copies the whole story, only altering one 
point,— the absurd journey back to Constantinople . 57 I 
Duke Godfrey, according to Albert, is wounded 
in a fight with a bear near Antiochetta, and is in 
consequence confined to his bed for many months. 
But immediately after, we find him engaged in 
fierce battles, leading the army, and, clad in armour 
and with flying banners, breaking the ranks of the 
heathen host. William of Tyre unhesitatingly copies 
the one occurrence from Albert, but he omits the 
other. Here, as in other places, the want of sense 
in the passage made him hesitate to admit it. But 
he had no doubt as to the general narrative, the 
whole of which was open to suspicion. 

He proceeds in this manner throughout the book. 

All that Albert tells, without rhyme or reason, of 

66 William of Tyre, iii. 13, 15. 

*1 Id., v. 20. 



Digitized by Google 




WILLIAM OF TYRE. 



807 



the Turkish affairs, William of Tyre weeds out, yet 
he cannot emancipate himself from the influence 
of these reports on other facts. We have before 
quoted similar proofs of his manner of dealing with 
the legend of Peter the Hermit ; how in the ac* 
count of the embassy to Kerboga he mixes fable 
and history, and endeavours to give to Albert’s 
narrative of the siege of Antioch an air of historical 
trnth. H& criticism is in the main conservative, 
but without any valid reason : out of two discre- 
pant accounts he endeavours to make one true one» 
by taking away here and adding there, until the 
angles are smoothed down and a flat but insipid 
polish is attained. William of Tyre was quite con- 
scious of this in his later books, but only when 
Albert’s deviations touched him on the tenderest 
point. He makes use of Albert in the manner I 
have described, until the foundation of the kingdom 
of Jerusalem. He then leaves him, and never refers 
to him again. He does not allude to the cause of 
this sudden mistrust, but I believe it is attributable 
to Albert’s account of the Patriarch Dagobert and 
Arnulf. We have shown the strongly-marked con- 
tradiction that appears between these two authors, 
and the passion with which William of Tyre devoted 
himself to that portion of his narrative. We cannot 
therefore wonder that he subsequently wholly re- 

x 2 



Digitized by Google 




308 LITERATURE OF THE CRUSADES. 

jected an authority which threatened to undermine 
his historical faith. 

It is to be regretted that he did not apply the 
conviction thus forced upon him to his treatment of 
the earlier part of his history. We hesitate not to 
assert, that it is solely owing to his work that the 
prestige of legends in this portion of history has 
endured for so many centuries. The distrust which 
must have arisen, had the original forms of the 
legends been preserved, vanished before the histori- 
cal air he imparted to them. The idea of the lea- 
dership of Godfrey of Bouillon, miraculous in its 
origin and in all its results, and terminated by a 
marvellous death, would not have satisfied men’s 
minds long. William of Tyre deals with the whole 
cycle of the traditions as he does with individual 
cases. He passes over in silence the divine interpo- 
sition, and the events in which it was manifested ; 
but he accepts all the glory ascribed to Godfrey of 
Bouillon, and creates the idea of his character which 
has remained in force even to this day. According 
to this idea, Godfrey was the leader of the Cru- 
sades neither by the express choice of man, nor by 
the miraculous dispensation of God ; but his wis- 
dom, strength, righteousness, and his other virtues, 
gradually raised him to the highest place, — a view 
which a sceptical age readily accepted. William of 



Digitized by Google 




WILLIAM OF TYBE. 



309 



Tyre was regarded as an original authority, and no 
one thought of disputing his claim to that charac- 
ter. His representation was taken to be the true 
one. The original legend, scattered far and 4 wide, 
and with no great name to guarantee its truth, fell 
into oblivion, or its splendours and its marvels only 
served to embellish and magnify the events that 
actually occurred. Men spoke of the strong en- 
thusiasm, of the passion for miracles of ’that age, 
in which embellishments to truth were natural 
enough. But no one imagined that these very em- 
bellishments were the real originals, and that what 
was supposed to be the truth was only a diluted 
reproduction of them. 

Unless I greatly err, the positive nature of Wil- 
liam of Tyre’s book, concerning the First Cru- 
sade, is characterized in the foregoing description. 
William of Tyre represents a phase which, in the 
literature of every nation, immediately succeeds 
the development of legendary tales : the distinc- 
tion between historical and poetical creations dis- 
appears; the writer attempts to unite the former 
with the latter. He does not perceive that the 
truth of the one and the poetry of the other are 
thus lost; he proceeds with his work with talent 
and vigour, and it bears the impress of his cha- 
racter. It is true that this view lowers his repu- 



Digitized by 



Google 

i 1 1 



ii 



310 LITERATURE OF THE CRUSADES. 

tation for trustworthiness : we divide his work into 
two equal portions, one of which is admirable ; the 
other, as concerns its contents, is totally valueless 
as an original authority. It was the more neces- 
sary to prove the unity of these two portions, from 
the personal character of the author. The position 
he has chosen as mediator between legend and 
history is the natural consequence of that charac- 
ter. HoW much he sacrificed to such a mode of 
treating his materials is evident enough, and every 
reader will doubtless resort, if he can, to the origi- 
nal sources. 



Digitized by Google 




311 



CHAPTER IV. 

EPOCHS OE A LATEK LITERATURE. 

Whether we investigate each single work, or 
take a general survey of the literature subse- 
quent to William of Tyre, two points have to be 
considered : first, those originals which at that pe- 
riod exercised a predominant influence ; and next, , 
the position of the writers with regard to the 
events which they were about to describe. It will 
suffice here to recognize and to attest the character 
and the turning-point of the different epochs. Our 
space will not allow us to enter into the subject 
with the fullness required by biographical or cri- 
tical examination. In fulfilling these requirements, 
the object appears to be attained, of assigning the 
just position, according to the materials, to later 
additions and emendations. The selection of the 
materials that have come down to us has been 



Digitized by Google 




312 



LITERATORE OF THE CROSADES. 



made with this view. Provided the results of the 
examples I have adduced are not weakened by some 
authority which I have overlooked, I am content 
not to have passed over any of the more impor- 
tant, or omitted any of the most striking points of 
the narratives. The great mass of monographs, 
which might have explained many peculiarities, 
have been left unnoticed. The same applies to all 
the histories of a purely national or patriotic ten- 
dency, such as almost every nation of Europe pos- 
sesses on the subject of the Crusades. Such an 
inquiry would require a special work, and would 
afford little available for our purpose. 

We shall perceive a similarity of proceeding 
in this province of history when treated as a 
whole, as when we examined the views of con- 
temporary authors. Among the latter I include the 
original authorities, the Legends, and William of 
Tyre. Even in the literature of a later period, the 
views contained in these three sources of informa- 
tion seemed for a time different ; without question, 
at the beginning, the influence of the original au- 
thorities preponderated ; which they owed to their 
greater circulation, if not to the talent of the wri- 
ters. The Legends, by blending poetry with his- 
tory, combine the attractions of both. William of 
Tyre was read, but it was only after the lapse of a 



Digitized by Google 




EPOCHS OP A LATER LITERATURE, 313 

long period that his account of these events became 
extensively known. Although, under these circum- 
stances, the views taken of persons and of events 
varied, still, on the whole, the judgment as to the 
general importance and the particular details of the 
Crusades remained fixed. The ecclesiastical point 
of view* predominated, and only on trifling points 
assumed a more chivalrous or mystical colouring. 
But in a second period, this state of opinion 
completely changed : William of Tyre becomes the 
exclusive authority. In process of time, the ori- 
ginal sources are more consulted, though but few 
notices from them are incorporated into the ground- 
work of the Archbishop’s narrative. The glory of 
Peter the Hermit and Godfrey of Bouillon, ascribed 
to them by William of Tyre, is celebrated in pro- 
portion as the ecclesiastical, poetical, or patriotic 
interest prevails. Even the negative philosophy of 
the eighteenth century leaves the facts untouched, 
however much it busied itself with the motives 
and the consequences of the Crusades. Lastly, the 
tendency of modern literature has been to restore 
them on all points to their old position. 



I will here mention — chiefly for the sake of 
the place where it was written — a short history 



Digitized by Google 




