TITLE: LATIN AND MUSLIM HISTORIOGRAPHY OF THE CRUSADES A COMPARATIVE STUDY OF WILLIAM OF TYRE AND ' IZZ AD DIN IBN AL ATHIR
IDENTIFIER: latinandmuslimhistoriographyofthecrusadesacomparativestudyofwilliamoftyreandizzaddinibnalathir
URL: https://archive.org/download/latinandmuslimhistoriographyofthecrusadesacomparativestudyofwilliamoftyreandizzaddinibnalathir/LATIN AND MUSLIM HISTORIOGRAPHY OF THE CRUSADES A COMPARATIVE STUDY OF WILLIAM OF TYRE AND 'IZZ AD-DIN IBN AL-ATHIR_djvu.txt

INFORMATION TO USERS 


While the most advanced technology has been used to 
photograph and reproduce this manuscript, the quality of 
the reproduction is heavily dependent upon the quality of 
the material submitted. For example: 

• Manuscript pages may have indistinct print. In such 
cases, the best available copy has been filmed. 

© Manuscripts may not always be complete. In such 
cases, a note will indicate that it is not possible to 
obtain missing pages. 

• Copyrighted material may have been removed from 
the manuscript. In such cases, a note will indicate the 
deletion. 

Oversize materials (e.g., maps, drawings, and charts) are 
photographed by sectioning the original, beginning at the 
upper left-hand comer and continuing from left to right in 
equal sections with small overlaps. Each oversize page is 
also filmed as one exposure and is available, for an 
additional charge, as a standard 35mm slide or as a 17”x 23” 
black and white photographic print. 

Most photographs reproduce acceptably on positive 
microfilm or microfiche but lack the clarity on xerographic 
copies made from the microfilm. For an additional charge, 
35mm slides of 6”x 9” black and white photographic prints 
are available for any photographs or illustrations that 
cannot be reproduced satisfactorily by xerography. 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 




Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 


Order Number 8725167 


Latin and Muslim historiography of the Crusades: A 
comparative study of William of Tyre and ’Izz ad-Din Ibn 
al-Athir 


Hammad, Mona Joma, Ph.D. 
University of Pennsylvania, 1987 


Copyright ©1987 by Hammad, Mona Joma. All rights reserved. 


UMI 

300 N. Zeeb Rd. 

Ann Arbor, MI 48106 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 





PLEASE NOTE: 


In all cases this material has been filmed in the best possible way from the available copy. 
Problems encountered with this document have been identified here with a check mark V . 

1. Glossy photographs or pages_ 

2. Colored illustrations, paper or print_ 

3. Photographs with dark background_ 

4. Illustrations are poor copy_ 

5. Pages with black marks, not original copy_ 

6. Print shows through as there is text on both sides of page_ 

7. Indistinct, broken or small print on several pages _ s 

8. Print exceeds margin requirements_ 

9. Tightly bound copy with print lost in spine_ 

10. Computer printout pages with indistinct print_ 

11. Page(s)_lacking when material received, and not available from school or 

author. 

12. Page(s)_seem to be missing in numbering only as text follows. 

13. Two pages numbered_. Text follows. 

14. Curling and wrinkled pages_ 

15. Dissertation contains pages with print at a slant, filmed as received iS 

16. Other_ 


University 

Microfilms 

International 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 






Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 



LATIN AND MUSLIM HISTORIOGRAPHY 
OF THE CRUSADES: 

A COMPARATIVE STUDY OF WILLIAM OF TYRE 
AND ’IZZ AD-DIN IBN AL-ATHIR 

Mona Hanunad 


A DISSERTATION 
in 

History 


Presented to the Graduate Faculties of the University of 
Pennsylvania in partial Fulfillment of the Requirements 
for the Degree of Doctor of Philosophy. 



1987 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 



COPYRIGHT 
Mona Hanunad 
1987 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 




To 

My father and my sons 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 




Acknowledgement 


I wish to express my gratitude and indebtness to 
Professor Edward Peters, who supervised this work and was 
always ready with help and guidance. I am also grateful to 
professor George Makdisi for his unfailing help and support. 
It is said that writing is a solitary work, that was not the 
case here. All what I achieved was with the help and support 
of my husband, without whom this work would not have been 
written at all. I want also to record it here; I will always 
remember those bitter moments of dispair, when he never 
stopped to be, as he usually is, an endless source of en¬ 
couragement and aid through all the difficulties, and to him 
I owe my present success. 


iv 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 




Abstract 


Latin and Muslim Historiography of the Crusades: 

A Comparative Study of William of Tyre and 
’Izz ad-Din Ibn al-Athir 

Mona Hammad 

Professor Edward Peters 

The First Crusade produced more historical material 
than any other event in the early Middle Ages. Since the 
participants of the Crusade were proud of their achievements 
they wanted to preserve the memory of their deeds. The ex¬ 
periences and the ideas narrated by eyewitnesses were later 
enchanced by Latin historians in the West. 

In the Muslim world the events that took place in the 
late eleventh century (1095-1099) did not have the same 
significance or effects which they had on Europe. Muslims 
viewed the arrinal of the Crusaders as nay other invasion of 
Islamic territories. Moreover, they did not realized the 
distinct character of the Crusade. Thus, the Latin invasion 
of the East was treated by contemporary Muslim historians as 
a part of the general history of Syria and the Muslim East. 
This tendency is illustrated in the only Muslim source of 
the First Crusade that has come down to us: The Damascus 
Chronicle of Ibn al-Qalanisi. Latin attitude toward Muslims 
was represented by William of Tyre (1130-1185), who is re- 

v 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 



garded as the best historian of the Crusades. Although Wil¬ 
liam was a native of Jerusalem and was well acquainted with 
the Arabic language, as well as Islamic culture, he display¬ 
ed the same prejudices and misconceptions of the West toward 
Islam. The qualities which distinguished him as a master 
historian, were similar to those displayed by a contemporary 
Muslim historian, 'Izz ad-Din Ibn al-Athir (1160-1232) in 
his work The Perfect History ( A1-Kamil fit-Tarikh ). The 
comparison between both historians reveal astinishing simi¬ 
larities in their methodology and their style. The thesis of 
this study is that remarkable consistency and conformity 
exixt between the two works: Historia Rerum in Partibus 
Transmarinis Gestarum of William of Tyre, and A1-Kamil fit- 
Tarikh of Ibn al-Athir. The analysis of the same events that 
were recorded in both histories led to the discovery of new 
facts regarding the relation between the Latin Christians in 
the Holy Land and their Muslim neighbors in the twelfth 
century. 


vi 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 



CONTENTS 


Introduction 1 

Chapter 1. Latin Historiography During the 

Period of The First Crusade 6 

Chapter 2. Muslim Historiography During the 

Period of the First Crusade 49 

Chapter 3. William of Tyre 80 

Chapter 4. Ibn Al-Athir 116 

Chapter 5. William of Tyre and Ibn al-Athir: 

A Comparative Study 145 

Bibliography 177 


vii 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 




1 


Introduction 

The First Crusade Produced more historical material 
than any other event in the early Middle Ages. Since the 
participants of the Crusade were proud of their achieve¬ 
ments , they wanted to preserve the memory of their deeds. 
The ideas and experiences narrated by eyewitnesses, were 
later enhanced by Latin historians in the West. 

In the Muslim World the events that took place in the 
late eleventh century (1095-1099) did not have the same 
significance or effects, which they had on Europe. Muslims 
viewed the coming of the First Crusaders as any other in¬ 
vasion of Islamic territories. Moreover, they did not real¬ 
ize the distinct character of the Crusade. Thus, the Latin 
invasion of the East was treated by contemporary Muslim his¬ 
torians as a part of the general history of Syria and the 
Muslim East. Even after the establishemnt of the Latin prin¬ 
cipalities in the East, and the subsequent contacts between 
both Mulsims and Franks, the Muslims made no attempt to 
understand the culture, institutions, or the origin of the 
Crusaders. This tendency is illustrated in the only Mulsim 
source of the First Crusade that has come down to us: Dhayl 
Tarikh Dimasho of Ibn al-Qalanisi. This Damascene historian 
presents the first Muslim reaction to the coming of the 
Crusaders and reflects the ideas and feelings of both the 
rulers of that time and the Muslims in Syria. 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 




2 


After the establishment of the Latin Kingdom of Jeru¬ 
salem a new generation of Frankish settlers emerged and 
became natives of the area. William of Tyre (1130-1185), who 
is regarded as the best historian of the Crusades was among 
them. In his history of the crusades: Historia Rerum in 
Partibus Transmarinis Gestarum . he represents the attitude 
of this Latin generation towards Muslims. Although he was a 
native of Jerusalem and was well acquainted with Arabic 
language as well as Islamic culture, he displayed the same 
prejudices and misconceptions of the West toward Islam. The 
qualities which distinguished him as a master historian were 
similar to those displayed by a contemporary Muslim histor¬ 
ian: 'Izz ad-Din Ibn al-Athir (1160-1232). The style and 
methodology of both historians are remarkably similar. While 
Ibn al-athir, like most Muslim historians, incorporated the 
battles and alliances between Muslims and Crusaders into his 
universal history, A1-Kamil fi al-Tarikh . William’s history 
has the kingdom of Jerusalem as its central theme. The anal¬ 
ysis of the similarities and differences between these two 
historians, and how they reflect the attitudes and ideas of 
the Latin settlers in the East and their Muslim neighbours 
is the main subject of this work. 

This study consists of two parts: Chapters one and 
two, which compose part one, discuss the Latin and Muslim 
historiography of the First Crusade. Chapter one examines 
different types of the historical literature of the First 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 



3 


Crusade, concentrating mainly on the eye-witnesses' accounts 
and second hand sources of the same period. This chapter 
also deals with the main themes, characteristics, emotions, 
ideas, prejudices and objectivities of the narratives and 
analyzes the methodology and style of their authors. Chapter 
two discusses the Muslim historiography of the first Cru¬ 
sade, with special emphasis on Ibn al-Qalanisi’s Chronicle 
of Damascus , revealing similarities as well as differences 
between Muslim and Christian chronicles of that period. The 
second part of this work is a comparative study of William 
of Tyre and Ibn al-Athir. It is composed of two chapters: 
three and four. Chapter three investigates and analyzes the 
methodology, style, and the goals of Willaim of Tyre. In 
this chapter I have concentrated on his accounts regarding 
the relation between Muslims and Crusaders in Syria, Pales¬ 
tine and Egypt in the twelfth century. It is astonishing to 
note the scope of William's knowledge of Muslim affairs, and 
his appreciation of Muslim civilization on one hand, and his 
hatred and contempt to the religion of Islam and its founder 
on the other. Chapter four examines the methodology of Ibn 
al-athir and analyzes his accounts on the Crusades. Chapter 
five is an analytical comparative study of William’s and Ibn 
al-Athir’s historical accounts of the Crusades. The thesis 
of this study is that remarkable consistency and conformity 
exist between the two works. Almost every event that took 
place between Muslims and Crusaders was reported in each 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 



narrative. Ibn al-Athir’s accounts were generally breif and 
less detailed than William’s. The similarities between both 
histories are not only in substance, but also in details. In 
several accasions, however, the details of certain events 
were recorded differently in each work. In this chapter, 
some major events, such as "the capture of Antioch" were 
dealt with as reported by both historians. Besides the fact 
that I have explained the reason for conflict between their 
accounts, I have also found that these conflicts are of 
great benefit for the elucidation of other aspects of simi¬ 
larities and differences between the opposing cultures: 
Christian and Muslim. The analysis of the same events that 
were recorded in both works led to the discovery of new 
facts regarding the relation between the Christians in the 
Holy Land and their Muslim neighbors. 

Most of the scholarship of the Crusades is concerned 
with the study of the movement with all its aspects from a 
predominantly western point of view. There are however few 
works that have dealt with Islamic history during the period 
of the Crusades and especially the cultural relation between 
Muslims and Latins in the East, by studying and comparing 
Arabic and Latin sources of the Crusades, it is possible to 
acquire a new perspective that sheds light on the social,- 
cultural, and intellectual history of Muslims, as well as 
Latins. The comparative study of Muslim and Latin histori¬ 
ography of the period of the First Crusade in general, and 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 



5 


the study of William of Tyre and Ibn al-Athir in particular, 
contribute to the understanding of the nature of the rela¬ 
tions between the Latin principalities in the East and the 
Muslim states in the twelfth century. 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 



6 


Chapter One 

LATIN HISTORIOGRAPY DURING 
THE PERIOD OF THE FIRST CRUSADE 
Pope Urban's appeal at Clermont was the culmi-nation 
of a long process of justifying war that had started in thie 
early Middle Ages. Christians were originally hostile to 
war and considered it to be against the teaching of Christ 
(1). St. Augustine’s idea of "just war" which legitimized 
war under certain strict conditions was reluctantly accepted 
by early Christians (2). In the City of God . St. Augustine 
distinguished between the evil war and the just war. He 
defined the causes that justify war as self-defence, injus¬ 
tice, and recovery of stolen property (3). At first the 
"just war" was not a war of religion, but a moral war. Later 
as a response to the Donatist schism, Augustine spoke of 
the "holy war" as a "war sanctioned by God" in which its 
participants were servants of God (4). What specified a war 
as "holy" was the fact that the Church of a Christian state 
was involved by employing force to preserve its unity (5). 
The use of force as a tool for converting the pagans to 
Christianity was encouraged by Pope Gregory I (590-604) (6). 

After the conversion of the Germanic people to Chris¬ 
tianity, to whom war was a way of life, the Church had to 
set a penance upon any killing of other people. However, the 
Germanic tradition which considered war as an expression of 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 



7 


heroism, influenced the development of the ecclesiastical 
morality of war. German ethics of heroism were assimilated 
into Christianity, which later influenced the mentality of 
the Crusaders (7). 

The development of Christian knighthood and holy war 
was introduced and pursued through the Christianization of 
the state in the West. The strong Christian rulers like 
Pippin, caused the Papacy to seek alliance with him (8). The 
king, thus began to assume the rule of protector of the 
Church. This idea developed further under Charlemagne, who 
fought against the pagans in Saxony and the Muslims in Spain 
in behalf of the Church (9). 

Along with the development of the idea of the Chris¬ 
tian king, came the concept of the Christian knight, which 
was manifested through the liturgical service for his dedi¬ 
cation (10). The transformation of the image of the Chris¬ 
tian knight to that of the Crusader was influenced by the 
practice of going in a pilgrimage to the Holy Land. Many 
pilgrims held arms to defend themselves in their long jour¬ 
ney. This idea was included in the justification of carrying 
arms to free the Holy Land and free pilgrims from Muslims’ 
harassment (11). 

The idea of fighting on behalf of the Church was fur¬ 
ther enhanced through the policy of the reforming Popes of 
the later eleventh century, beginning with Leo IX (1049- 
1054) (12). The Papacy advocated that Christian states 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 




should cease fighting against each other, and direct their 
efforts against the infidel outside and against the heretics 
and other enemies within (13). Therefore, the duty of the 
Christian knight was to fight against all the enemies of the 
Church. Thus, in 1066, William the Conquerer invade England 
with the banner and blessingf of the Papacy (14). Pope Leo 
IX raised an army to campaign against the Normans in South¬ 
ern Italy, and after his defeat he fostered the cult of 
martyrdom of those who 'had fallen in battle. The partici¬ 
pants had been summond to a war which he stressed was 
defensive, led under Papal banner, and they were offered re¬ 
mission of penance and absolution from their sins (15). 
Thus, the refoming Papacy from the middle of the eleventh 
century played a major part in shaping and defining the 
conception of Crusade. The ideas about the rule of the 
Christian king, the Christian knight and the Christian pil¬ 
grim were fused together. 

The Popes also began to be involved in the fight 
against the Muslims in Spain. Pope Alexander II (1061-73) 
granted an indulgence for all the participants in the ex¬ 
pedition against Barbastro in Spain in 1064. A large number 
of ordinary men fired with religious zeal took part in this 
expedition, and were given the right to bear a vexillum 
sancti Petri . a banner of St. Peter, which was a mark of 
Papal approval of a military venture (16). After the Span¬ 
ish expedition against the Muslims, the notion of the Holy 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 



War against the infidel began to gain popularity among the 
Popes and the laity. Pope Gregory VII ( 1073-85 ) reacted to 
the news of Turkish advances in Asia Minor after the defeat 
of the Byzantines at Manzikert in 1071 by calling upon all 
those who wished to protect the Christian faith to place 
themselves in the service of the vicar of St. Peter, and 
give their life to liberate their brothers in the East (17). 
Also, those who would take part in this expedition might go 
on to rescue the Holy Sepulchre in Jerusalem. Gregory’s at¬ 
tempt to help the Eastern Church in face of Seljuk attack 
proved to be fruitless (18). The Popes continued to encour¬ 
age other enterprises against Muslims, such as the efforts 
of southern Italy to reconquer Sicily. In 1087 a naval expe¬ 
dition was organized jointly by Pisa, Genoa, Rome and Amal¬ 
fi, against Tunisia, and it too was given a banner of the 
Pope (19). 

Pope Urban II ( 1088-1099 ) built upon Gregory’s 
work. In the council of Clermont in 1095 he took the novel 
step of associating his own summons to a military enterprise 
with the idea of a pilgrimage. He had no doubt that war 
against the Muslims in the East would be just. He had al¬ 
ready supported wars against Muslims in Spain and Sicily 
(20). At Clermont, Urban appealed for military support for 
the Byzantines and the liberation of Jerusalem from the 
Muslims. While preaching the Crusade, Urban combined the 
idea of the Palestine pilgrimage with that of the Holy War. 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 




10 


He implemented his plans for the recovery of the Holy Land 
not by an appeal limited to the fighting men. of Europe, but 
by stirring up the latent pilgrim enthusiasm which pervaded 
all classes, raising it to an unprecedented pitch, and di¬ 
recting it into new, more warlike channels (21). He gave 
unity to the undertaking of the Crusade by formulating de¬ 
finite and precise aims. The primary objective of the Cru¬ 
sade was to aid the Byzantines against the growing threat of 
the Seljuk Muslims. The second aim was to liberate Jerusalem 
from the Muslims, and this was utilized by Pope Urban be¬ 
cause of its universal appeal. After the success of the 
First Crusade, however, Jerusalem became the central theme 
of the Crusade(22). Pope Urban’s speech at Clermont offered 
to Christian society, which was divisive, local, and partic¬ 
ularistic, a common goal to which the people who were pre¬ 
sent responded eagerly and shouted as a single voice "Deus 
vult" when he had finished his appeal (23). There was an 
upsurge of combative religious spirit in Europe after Ur¬ 
ban’s speech among people of all classes. A strange mixture 
of priests and laymen, women, children, false prophets and 
simple-minded believers went on the Crusade. Many of them 
were unarmed and expected to overcome the enemy by the di¬ 
rect intervention of God, rather than by the use of weapons 
(24). They were motivated by many reasons. Some marched for 
religious fervor, some left to escape the monotony of their 
daily existence (25). 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 




11 

Since medieval Latin had no special noun for a Cru¬ 
sade up to the thirteenth century, when such words as crux . 
crusatu . and cruseria come gradually into use, writers used 
nouns as iter . expeditio . and above all, peregrinatio to 
describe the expedition to Jerusalem (26). 

The Call for the Crusade inspired in much of Europe 
feelings of unity and religious zeal. The Holy War seized on 
many people’s imagination and called into being a vast lit¬ 
erature of song and history. The First Crusade was the first 
historical event which engaged the attention of all nations 
and of all classes of society in Europe (27). Before the 
undertaking of the Crusade at the end of the eleventh centu¬ 
ry, historiography had been almost wholly in the form of 
annals, chronicles, universal histories, and biographies, 
the viewpoint of which was narrow and its interest was pre¬ 
dominantly local. The Crusade widened the historical horizon 
of Europe, and this was marked in the historiography of that 
time. Europe began to be self conscious; "it had common 
interests and common foes, and above all the petty feuds of 
its princes loomed a higher ideal that of Christendom in 
conflict with Islam.(28). 

Since the Crusaders represented people of all class¬ 
es, of all ages, and of both sexes who were drawn from prac¬ 
tically all parts of Christian Europe, there was a great 
interest of local communities in the news coming from the 
East. 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 




12 


The new historiography of the Crusade did not 
emerge all at once. The experiences of the Crusaders made a 
most profound and lively impression on Europe. They took 
hold of the popular imagination of the time and stirred it 
into eager creative activity. This widening of the imagina¬ 
tion by way of naive interpretation and invention, informed 
the ignorance, satisfied the pride, and appeased the curi¬ 
osity of the West. The violence in the eleventh century, 
often bred heroic narrative which at this time began to be 
expressed in the Chansons de geste (29). The Chansons 

reflected the popular feelings, which represented the 
new spirit of vigorous and brutal anti-Saracen religious 
ethnocentrism. All these elements were manifested in the 

Chansons de _ Roland , which was recited all over Europe. The 

distinct features which characterize the Chansons are: the 
role of Charlemagne as a great and good emperor presiding 
over a golden age; a concern with war and martial virtues of 
bravery, honor and fidelity; and the Christian heroism in 
battle for the faith against the infidels (30). 

The vernacular epic poetry of the age was influenced 
by the experiences of the participants of the First Crusade. 

Reports were exaggerated and were formulated in a romantic 
composition which was fashioned after the Chansons de geste . 
Within a few years it had woven about the Crusade and its 
leaders so thick a web of story, legend and romance that 
their true history was completely obscured (31). This epic 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 



13 


poetry which is as important for its literary interest than 
for its historical influence, represents an element in the 
historiography of the First Crusade. Within few years of the 
end of the First Crusade, the heroic deeds of the Crusaders 
were recited in Europe, and several poems like the Chansons 
d*Antioche were regarded as the real history of the Crusade 
(32). 

The First Crusade produced more historical material 
than any other event of the early Middle Ages. The material 
consists of official reports, individual chronicles, and 
private communications (letters). Many contemporary accounts 
were written by eye-witnesses. All these were amplified in 
the twelfth century after the establishment of the Crusading 
states in the East by writers in Western Europe, who drew 
their statements from the eye-witnesses accounts (33). 

Since Europe was eager for news from the East, the 
Crusaders sent letters to inform their families and relativ¬ 
es about the progress of their journey. The churchmen upon 
receiving these letters copied them and quickly passed the 
information to the anxious relatives. These letters were re¬ 
garded as common property, even when they were addressed to 
certain individuals, and their contents were widely cir¬ 
culated (34). 

Even though very little contemporary correspondence 
has survived, there exist many letters which provide the 
historian with a unique and highly valuable source for the 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 



14 


history of the First Crusade. There are two letters, to and 
from Pope Urban II and Paschal II; many appeals from the 
clergy in the East; and five letters from the leaders of the 
Crusade, describing their struggle and victories over the 
Turks. Other letters of Stephen of Blois and Anselm of Ribe- 
mont are more of a personal nature. Stephen wrote three let¬ 
ters home to his wife relating to her his individual en¬ 
counter with the Emperor Alexius in Constantinople and the 
details of the Crusaders’ march through Asia Minor and their 
triumph over the Turks (35). Anselm wrote his two letters 
from Antioch and sent them to his superior, Manasses, Arch¬ 
bishop of Rheims, informing him about the siege and capture 
of Nicaea and Antioch. These letters constitute the most 
important source of our knowledge of the events they relate. 
They reflect the personal and collective feelings and emo¬ 
tions of the participants of the First Crusade while on 
their journey to the Holy Land. 

The interest of Europe in the events of the First 
Crusade could not be satisfied with letters alone. The Cru¬ 
saders were proud of their achievements and they wanted to 
preserve the memory of their deeds. Another purpose that 
contributed to the writing of the chronicles of the First 
Crusade was propaganda. The continued need of both money and 
men from the west to maintain the gains of the Christians in 
the East, provoked the composition of the narratives (36). 

Latin accounts of the First Crusade fall into two 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 




15 


main groups: The first includes men who were eye-witnesses 
to the events; the second group consists of commentators who 
wrote from hearsay, and based their information on the eye¬ 
witness’ accounts, especially the Gesta Francorum . These 
historians lived in Western Europe and had no first hand 
knowledge of the East (37). 

The most important eye-witness account of the First 
Crusade is the Gesta Francorum (38). Its anonymous author 
was one of Bohemond’s followers, who accompanied him from 
the siege of Amalfi to the capture of Antioch. From there, 
he went to Jerusalem under the leadership of Raymond of 
St. Gilles (39). His work has something of the nature of a 
diary, giving evidence of having been composed, not all at 
once, but in sections, at various times during the progress 
of the Crusade. It ends with the story of the battle of 
Ascalon in 1099. It is thought to have been written before 
the end of 1101 (40). The author- was a simple knight who 
faithfully reflected the varying temper and mood of the 
Crusaders. He had no intention of giving a connected narra¬ 
tive of the Crusade, but to describe what he himself saw. As 
a layman and a soldier, the author represents the view of 
those who were participating in the Crusade. He attributes 
the Crusade to Divine inspiration and in many passages calls 
God himself its true leader and protector (41). He describes 
the difficulties and hardships the Crusaders had encounter¬ 
ed. He repeatedly indicates that they endured famine, 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 



plagues, and the onslaught of their enemy, the Muslim, for 
the sake of Christ and the Holy sepulchre. Unlike the other 
chronicles of the First Crusade, the author of the Gesta 


16 


does not discuss in detail the atrocities committed by the 
Crusaders against the Muslims (42). His accounts of battles 
and massacres are given in straight-forward way, with no 
attempt to glorify the horrible details of such a subject. 
He believed, however, that the Turks were unjustly holding 
the V ;ly Sepulchre, and that it was desirable that as many 
as possible of them should be killed (43). 

The author of the Gesta considered his work to be 
primarily a tale of heroic deeds and not a scholar’s chro¬ 
nicle. His creed was the verse of the Song of Roland : 
"Christians are right and pagans are wrong". He invents 
imaginative and fictitious dialogues and puts them in the 
mouths of Muslim leaders. These imaginative passages could 
be considered as the product of gossip and rumors in the 
Crusaders’ camp (44). 

The Gesta was widely circulated in Europe and almost 
every other history of the First Crusade is based either 
directly or indirectly upon it (45). A few years later the 
Gesta was rewritten almost word by word by a Poitevin 
priest, himself a crusader, called Peter Tudebode. He added 
few passages from Raymond of Aguilers’ work, and some per¬ 
sonal remarks and observations (46). 

The second contemporary account of the First Crusade 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 



17 


was written by a priest, Raymond of Aguilers, who went on 
the Crusade as a chaplain of Raymond of Toulouse. He started 
writing his history during the siege of Antioch and finished 
at the end of 1162. His motive for writing the history, as 
he relates, was to allay criticism of the Crusade as well as 
to show the glory and justice of God’s ways (47). A large 
part of his work is concentrated on the defence of the au¬ 
thenticity of the Holy Lance which was supposedly found by 
Peter Bartholomew in Antioch. The rest of his book is de¬ 
voted to the parts played by Count Raymond of Toulouse, 
Bishop Adhemar, and the Provencal host in the Crusade. He 
complied his work by using his own notes, personal experi¬ 
ence and other available accounts. Raymond states his facts 
simply in a straight-forward manner and he relates his feel¬ 
ings and his prejudices. Even though his facts are sometimes 
questionable, he was honest in admitting his shortcomings 

(48) . He was thoroughly enthusiastic for the Crusaders’ 
cause, and he was an apologist for God, the Count of Tou¬ 
louse and the "Christian Militia". His narrative contains 
many violent descriptions of the war, and he even expressed 
delight in describing a massacre of the Turkish troops 

(49) . His history also contains hagiographical materials, 
especially in relating the story of the Holy Lance (50). His 
statements display an extravagant belief in miracles, and a 
fierce hatred of all who were opposed to him or to the Cru¬ 
saders, especially the Byzantines (51). The value of Ray- 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 



mond’s work is impaired by his zealous passion and the in¬ 
sertion of legendary material. These defects, however, re¬ 
present the real attitudes and feelings of the majority of 


18 


the Crusaders. His history is considered by many as the 
most valuable of all the accounts of the First Crusade in 
regard to the sociological aspects of the Crusade (52). 

The third contemporary account of the First Crusade 
is that of Fulcher of Chartres. He was born at Chartres in 
1059. He joined the army of Stephen of Blois until October 
1097, when he became the Chaplain of Baldwin. He marched 
with the Crusading army to Nicaea and through Anatolia. 
Before reaching Antioch, Fulcher left the main host and 
accompanied Baldwin to Edessa (53). As a result, he was 
present neither at the siege of Antioch, nor at that of 
Jerusalem. Therefore, he could not be regarded as an eye¬ 
witness, and his narrative is not so valuable as the ones 
cited earlier in relation to these events. He remained in 
Edessa as long as Baldwin did and took part in his expedi¬ 
tions. Thus, Fulcher’s narrative is considered the principal 
source for the career of Baldwin in the Euphrates Valley and 
in Edessa. When Baldwin was chosen to reign over the Latin 
Kingdom upon the death of his brother Godfrey, Fulcher ac¬ 
companied him to Jerusalem where he remained until the time 
of his death in 1127/1128 (54). Fulcher wrote his Historia 
Hierosolymitana . as he states in the prologue, to tell about 
the journey of the Crusaders, of their victories that were 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 


19 


achieved with the help of God (55). He wanted to recount the 
deeds of those fighting for God in order to inspire "the 
worldly" to leave parents, wives, and wealth and embrace 
God, even if it means the blessed death of martyrdom (56). 
He adds that he was moved by a former friend, who asked him 
to write the deeds of the Franks, which he compares to the 
wars of the Israelites and the Maccabees (57). Later, Ful¬ 
cher’s purpose was not only to call for more men to fight 
for God in the Holy Land, but also to persuade some of them 
to remain as permanent residents to strengthen the newly 
founded kingdom around Jerusalem. In a celebrated passage 
written after the capture of Tyre in 1124, and somewhat 
contradictory in tone to the prologue, he relates how easy 
it was for Westerners to become accustomed to the East, to 
forget old homes and old ties, and to learn the idiom of the 
Holy Land, and to acquire homes, families, and ever riches 
(58). 

Unlike the author of the Gesta . and Raymond of Agui- 
lers, Fulcher did not stop his chronicle with the end of the 
First Crusade. He continued to record the events of the 
early thirty years of the establishment of the Latin king¬ 
dom. Therefore, his chronicle is the best source of informa¬ 
tion for this period. He wrote his History in three install¬ 
ments; in 1101, 1106, and 1127-8 (59). His narrative in¬ 
cludes the earliest account of the council of Clermont and 
its antecedents. In the later part of his work, which is 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 



20 


centered on the affairs of Jerusalem, Fulcher often touches 
upon the kingdom's relation with the Muslim rulers of Damas¬ 
cus, Aleppo, Mosul, and with the Fatimid Caliphate in Cairo. 
In many passages he displays a strong interest in nature and 
geography.He describes strange plants, animals, and natural 
phenomena. The sources of information used by Fulcher were 
the knowledge that he gained as an eye witness, participant, 
and from written sources. Fulcher was better trained and 
educated than either the author of the Gesta or Raymond of 
Aguilers. His narrative was free from bias or partisanship. 
It is only in the later part of his book that he displays 
any animosity against the Byzantines (60). He was interested 
mainly in describing events as they ocurred, and portraying 
the Crusaders as pilgrims who were fighting for God and in 
return were rewarded martyrdom. He was attentive to reli¬ 
gious devotion but never took part in the fighting. As did 
most of the Crusaders, Fulcher believed in miracles, but he 
does not recount as many as, for instance, Raymond d’Agu¬ 
ilers (61). In general, he seems to use miracle as a synonym 
for something wonderful or even strange (62). He had felt no 
aversion to brutality and at times rejoiced in the Chris¬ 
tians who met martyrdom, except for that passage, when he 
recorded what he had seen after a battle in which Christians 
suffered terribly. 

Fulcher’s work was very popular in Europe and was 
widely read and copied. Many contemporaries and subsequent 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 




21 


writers of the Crusades drew heavily upon his narrative. 

Ekkehard of Aura and Ralph of Caen are contemporary 
historians of the Crusade who visited the East, but were 
not eye-witnesses to the events of the First Crusade. Ekke¬ 
hard, who is regarded as one of the greatest of the German, 
historians of the Middle Ages (63), wrote a brief history of 
the Crusade. He was known as the abbot of the little monas¬ 
tery of Urach on the upper Main River (64). He came to Jeru¬ 
salem with the German Crusaders of 1101, where he found a 
copy of the Gesta . Upon his return to Germany in 1115, he 

composed a work entitled Hierosolymita. _ de Onpressione, 

Liberatione ac Restauratione Sanctae Hierosolymitanae Eccle- 
siae (65). His narrative was based on the Gesta and informa¬ 
tion taken directly from eye-witnesses and participants of 
the Crusade. The later part of his work from chapter XXII, 
is entirely original and very valuable. The value of his 
work, as an original source, depends mainly on his eyewit¬ 
ness account of the Crusade of 1101, and his brief account 
concerning the Peasants’ Crusade, of which no direct source 

A 

has come down to us (66). 

Ralf of Caen (born in 1080) joined the army assembled 
by Bohemond in 1107. He reached Syria in 1108, and attached 
himself to Tancred at Antioch. After Tancred’s death in 
1113, he wrote his work, the Gesta Tancredi . based on infor¬ 
mation taken from Tancred himself and from already published 
sources (67). Even though Ralf was not actually present 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 



22 


during the Crusade, he is considered as an original source, 
since he described what immediately preceded and followed 
the First Crusade (68). During the first five years of his 
relationship with Tancred, Half learned much about the 
First Crusade especially of Tancred’s view of events. His 
work, on the whole, is a panegyric of the life of Tancred, 
and is very hostile to the Byzantine emperor Alexius and to 
Count Raymond of Tolouse (69). 

Albert of Aix (Aachen), who never visited the East, 
nevertheless, composed in 1130 a history of the First Cru¬ 
sade and the Latin kingdom of Jerusalem down to the year 
1120. He collected his information from returning pilgrims 
and Crusaders. His history is a laudation of the bravery and 
achievements of the Lorrainers in the East and a panegyric 
of Godfrey of Bouillon (70). He gives the fullest account of 
the First Crusade, and provides us with the only detailed 
account of the march of the Crusaders through Asia Minor and 
northern Syria. Albert also incorporated in his work much 
material more suited to romance and epic poetry than history 
(71). Until the middle of the nineteenth century, Albert was 
regarded as the most authoritative source for the history of 
the First Crusade, and historians such as William of Tyre 
derived much of their information on the First Crusade from 
him. But, since Von Sybel’s destructive criticism, there has 
been a continuous controversy regarding the value of the in¬ 
formation given by Albert (72). Recently scholars began to 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 




credit his work and consider it as indispensable for the 
history of the First Crusade (73). 


23 


After the end of the First Crusade, the interest of 
Europe in the story of the Crusaders remained alive. The 
eye-witness accounts of the First Crusade which had been 
very popular in the West were rewritten, and the ideas, 
formed by the experiences of witnesses during the expedi¬ 
tion, were transformed and received further shape and gloss 
by later historians (74). These historians, writing after 
the end of the First Crusade, based their works on the 
Gesta . Their aim was to refine the crude and literary style 
of the eye-witness narrative. The best known second genera¬ 
tion writers of the First Crusade are: Robert the Monk, 
Guibert of Nogent, and Baldric of Bourgueil. They were all 
Benedictine monks from northern France, and they had not 
taken part in the Crusade or even visited the East (75). 
They all used the Gesta as their main source for the history 
of the expedition, and they also added some original infor¬ 
mation gathered from participants. Robert the Monk (of St. 
Remy of Rheims) was present at the Council of Clermont and 
thus his account was original. His work, Historia Hieroso- 
lymitana . begins with the Council of Clermont and extends to 
the battle of Ascalon (76). Robert wrote this narrative 
because he believed that the expedition of the Crusaders is 
worthy of admiration since it is the work of God. His His¬ 
toria Hierosolymitana . which was written before 1122, was 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 



very popular in Europe and was regarded as the oldest com¬ 
plete history of the First Crusade (77). 


24 


Guibert of Nogent, born in 1053 near Beauvais, was 
considered one of the leading scholars of his time. He want¬ 
ed to write about the First Crusade in order to present it 
to a more cultivated readers, mainly to the clergy. He com¬ 
posed his book between 1108 and 1112 and called it the Gesta 
Dei Per Francos (78). He based his work on the Gesta and 
Fulcher of Chartres and added a lot of original material 
drawn from eye-witnesses, and his own information about the 
Crusade leaders from France. Guiert was highly educated and 
is regarded as the "theologian" of the Crusade (79). He was 
impressed with the depth and breadth of the movement of the 
First Crusade, and deeply affected by the large partici¬ 
pation of the Franks in the expedition. He made God as the 
author of the Crusade, which took its place in the sequence 
of sacred history. 

Baldric of Bourgueil, (1046-1130), was abbot of Bour- 
gueil and attended the council of Clermont. He was a learned 
and sophisticated writer who undertook the task of rewriting 
the Gesta in order to put it in a good literary style. He 
wrote the Historia Hierosolymitana after 1107 in four books, 
which cover the events of the First Crusade until the cap¬ 
ture of Jerusalem (80). His history is generally exact and 
trustworthy in his use of the Gesta . There are few addi¬ 
tions, taken from oral testimonies, such as those on the 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 



25 


Breton contingent, and his opinion and views concerning some 
events (81). In general, his work is criticized as being 
merely a recomposition of the Gesta . 


Robert, Guibert, and Baldric all wanted to rewrite 
the Gesta to present it in better language and literary 
form. What motivated them to write about the First Crusade 
is that they believed the subject deserved proper literary 
treatment (82). They did not add much to the Gesta . but they 
gave the crude and unclear ideas of the Crusaders a more 
coherent, and sophisticated expression (83). 

The eye-witness’s accounts of the First Crusade pro¬ 
vide us with full descriptions of the activities of the 
Crusaders and their reflection on their experience. The 
authors were interpreters as well as reporters of the events 
of the First Crusade. Even though these narratives were com¬ 
posed while the Crusade in the East was taking place and 
were concerned with what happened during the expedition, 
they present the ideas of the Crusaders and their conception 
of the Crusade as Christ’s own war. The experiences of the 
participants of the Crusade formed expressions of a coherent 
movement guided by God, to liberate the Holy Sepulcher. The 
course of events gradually assumed a distinctive pattern in 
the eyes of those who took part in them (84). 

The massive response to the Crusade, the continuous 
success of the crusading army against many odds, the un¬ 
pleasant experience of famine, despair and desertion by some 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 




26 


of the Crusaders, and the subsequent triumphs and victories 
that resulted in the capture of Jerusalem. All these factors 
together with the forces which had shaped Pope Urban’s ap¬ 
peal at Clermont produced that unique concept of the Crusade 
(85). 

The eye-witness accounts of the first Crusade show 
the astonishment expressed by the Crusaders at their own 
achievements, and for them the Crusade was a miraculous 
event (86). They expressed the Crusaders’ sense of wonder 
and feelings of amazement at the magnitude of their success. 
Fulcher of Chartres portrays these feelings in this state¬ 
ment; "Who will not marvel how are a few people in the midst 
of the lands of our enemies, were able, not only to resist 
but even to survive" (87). 

The writers of the First Crusade believed that they 
were taking part in a "blessed and most holy" expedition 
fought for God, on whose behalf the conquests were made. 
When they fought, they were under divine leadership; they 
were aided by the mighty arm of God against His enemies the 
Muslims (88). The author of the Gesta imagined Kerbogha ’s 
mother telling him: 

"The God of the Christians fights for them every 
day, and keeps them day and night under his protec¬ 
tion and watches over them as a shepherd watches 
over his flock, and suffers no people to hurt or vex 
them, and if any one wishes to fight them, this same 
god of theirs will smite them..." (89). 

Fulcher of Chartres, who was present at the Council of Cler¬ 
mont, represents, in his version of Urban’s speech, the Cru- 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 




27 


sade as a divine war and the Crusaders as soldiers of Christ 
(90). 

For the chroniclers of the First Crusade there was no 
formal ending of the Crusade. The accounts of Fulcher, Ralph 
of Caen, and Albert of Aix pursue the campaign beyond 1099. 
The Gesta and Raymond of Aguilers recognized the legitimate 
completion of the Iter , in contrast to the premature depar¬ 
ture of some Crusaders such as Stephen of Blois, and the 
fact that their stories end at this point gave the sense of 
’•journey’s’* end to their readers (91). The author of the 
Gesta perceives the Crusade as a sanctified war in which aid 
and victory are attributed to God. 

The purpose of most of the first-hand accounts of the 
First Crusade was to record the success and failure of the 
Crusaders and the lessons that could be drawn from such 
experience. 

The narratives of the First Crusade begin with Pope 
Urban’s sermon at Clermont in 1095. When quoting Pope Urban, 
chroniclers put into the mouth of their characters such dis¬ 
courses as they themselves thought to be appropriate (92). 
Almost all the chroniclers, except for Fulcher, represent 
the Pope as making much of the call to liberate the holy 
city of Jerusalem from the infidels. 

The whole picture of the Crusade as a coherent pheno¬ 
menon, with the liberation of Jerusalem as its centerpiece, 
gradually developed in the accounts of the commentators of 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 




28 


■the Crusade, who wrote in the West after the end of the 
Crusade. They saw the pattern of events as a whole, and the 
deliverance of the Holy places was their central theme (93). 
To Baldric and Ekkehard the objective of the Crusade was the 
liberation of the promised land (94). Albert began his ac¬ 
count with Christ appearing in a dream to Peter the Her¬ 
mit at the Holy Sepulcher, urging him and the faithful to 
cleanse the Holy Places of Jerusalem from the hands of the 
pagans (95). Guibert of Nogent and Robert of Rheims strongly 
emphasized Jerusalem as the main goal of the Crusade. All 
historians placed the Crusade in the context of providential 
history and compared it to the creation and the redemption 
of mankind on the Cross. They regarded the Crusade as the 
literal fulfillment of certain prophecies in the Bible. They 
associated the experiences of the Crusaders with those of 
the Maccabees and the Israelites. Like the Makabees the 
Crusaders fought for Jerusalem, and were granted martyrdom 
(96). 

The story of the Crusade told by Robert, Baldric, and 
Guibert relates the miraculous demonstration of divine power 
that inspired and guided the Crusaders throughout their 
journey, they regarded the Crusading army as a temporary 
monastery on the move which had adopted voluntary exile for 
the love of God, and as united in brotherhood (97). Their 
view of the Crusade was that of an ideal one. They did not 
omit completely the bad aspects of the Crusade (famine, suf- 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 



29 


ferings, and death), but they did not dwell on them. The 
coherent and complex picture of the Crusade, drawn by these 
historians, shows the miraculous nature of the Crusade and 
puts it into the context of providential history (98). 

There are many common features among the Chronicles 
of the First Crusade. The concept of martyrdom is one of 
them. The Crusaders believed that those killed for the love 
of Christ were martyrs who died "a blessed death" (99). The 
author of the Gesta expresses this notion in the following 
phrase: 

"Our men suffered martyrdom there and gave up their 
blessed souls to God with joy and gladness, and many 
of the poor starved to death for the Name of Christ. 
All these entered Heaven in triumph, wearing the rope 
martyrdom which they have received, saying with one 
voice, ’Avenge, 0 Lord, our blood which was shed for 
thee, for thou art blessed and worthy of praise for 
ever and ever,..." (100). 

It was a common place among the writers, that the 
sufferings and failures of the Crusaders were punishment for 
their sins, especially where they disobeyed the wishes of 
the Lord, the penalties were imposed to purify the Crusad¬ 
ers’ souls and to prepare them for salvation (101). 

The eye-witness narratives of the First Crusade are 
full of miracles that had been witnessed by the Crusaders. 
The sense of divine support was constantly with the army, 
and miracles always appear when the Crusaders were in des¬ 
pair and their morale was very low, (for instance, like the 
episode of the Holy Lance) (102). The growing conviction of 
the Crusaders that they were acting in a supernatural con- 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 




30 


text was indicated in many incidents that had occurred dur¬ 
ing the expedition. All the contemporary accounts were in¬ 
terested in heavenly potents, especially, comets and eclips¬ 
es . The chroniclers recorded the incident when a comet was 
seen with a tail shaped like a sword. They also included 
other supernatural events like the day when the heavens 
gloowed red and there appeared a great light in the form of 
a cross, and the witnessing of an aurora, which was so great 
that it had been seen in Europe as well as in Antioch (103). 
These supernatural and natural occurrences were interpreted 
as signs of Crusader’s victory, sent providentially by God 
(104). 

Historians of the First Crusade had a tendency to 
exaggerate and give pictorial numbers, especially in relat¬ 
ing the number of the dead among the enemy, with a parallel 
tendency of minimizing the losses of Christians in battles. 
The numbers used by historians to estimate the size of the 
Christian army, or the Muslim army are figures of speech, 
aimed at giving the impressions of very large numbers. Medi¬ 
eval historians had little experience in dealing with large 
numbers, therefore, when the contemporary historians of the 
Crusade witnessed the massive response to Urban’s plea, and 
the vast crouds that constituted the Crusading army, they 
were astonished. For it was the first time that such huge 
armies had been assembled, and there was no recognized means 
of estimating the size of the army (105). When describing 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 



31 


■the number of the enemy forces, the chroniclers used their 
imagination, and always tried -to maintain an exaggerated 
large number in contrast with the small number of the Chris¬ 
tian army. The purpose of this deception is to enhance the 
glory of the Crusaders’ victory and to prove the miraculous 
nature of the Crusade (106). Fulcher of Chartres, alone, 
among the other writers recognized and criticized this prac¬ 
tice. He wrote: 

"The truth regarding the number of dead or wounded 
in this or any other battle cannot be determined 
since large numbers can only be estimated. Often 
when different sorts of writers speak falsely the 
cause of such falsity is really adulation. They try 
to heap up praise of the victorious men of their 
country and to extol the power of their land for the 
benefit of present and future generation. Hence it is 
very plain that such is the shamelessness of lying 
that they will exaggerate the number of the enemy 
slain and minimize or omit entirely the losses of 
their friends". (107) 

The chroniclers considered dates and time as having 
supernatural significance. The year was of little account as 
a basis for calculating time. In the Gesta . the year is men¬ 
tioned only once, and Raymond of Aguilers, rarely uses it.- 
Fulcher employs the year as an ornament, not as a measure of 
time (108), and this is why his chronology of the Crusade is 
confusing. The main standard of time was the liturgical cal¬ 
endar of the Church, and the time of day is usually express¬ 
ed by means of the canonical hours (109). 

The contemporary accounts of the First Crusade were 
written in a simple and "rustic" style by men who were not 
highly educated. In their chronicles they used proverbs and 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 



32 


quotations from classical authors and especially from the 
Bible. Almost all the writers indulge in producing imaginary 
dialogues or speeches, especially, when discussing the 
events in the Muslim camp, and they put in the mouths of 
their characters what the authors’ imagination lead them 
to. The best example of that is the dialogue written by the 
author of the Gesta . that supposedly took place between 
Kerbugha and his mother(HO). Nevertheless, the value of the 
Crusaders’ accounts rest mainly on the vivid description of 
the event, and the realism with which they expressed the 
spirit of Crusading. 

The eye-witness accounts of the First Crusade in¬ 
dicate the international character of the Crusade and pre¬ 
sent a fairly full description of European society. They 
portray a picture of society in which the relationship of 
all classes, ecclesiastical and lay, is presented in its 
intimate aspects (111). Their descriptions are full and re¬ 
flect the social, economical, religious, military, and cul¬ 
tural life in Europe and the East in the late eleventh and 
early twelfth century. The authors were neither sophisti¬ 
cated, nor highly trained in their art, but they provide us 
with valuable material concerning the feelings, actions, and 
beliefs of the Crusaders. 

At the time of the first Crusade, very little was 
known to Europeans about the Muslims and their religion. For 
them, Islam was only one of a large number of enemies 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 



33 


threatening Christendom, and they made no attempt to dis¬ 
tinguish the primitive idolatries of Northmen, Slavs, and 
Magyars from the monotheism of Islam, or the Manichaean 
heresy from that of Muhammad (112). The name of the Prophet 
Muhammad never appeared in any European source before 1100. 
The writers of western Europe, however, tried to explain the 
place of the Saracens in the general scheme of world history 
by employing the Bible. They identified the Muslims as the 
sons of the "wicked" Ishmael, descendants of Hagar, the 
Egyptian wife of Abraham, and were held to be the Saracens 
(113). 

In Spain, the Christian writers explained Islam in 
the context of Apocalypse. Paul Alvarus and Eulogius, who 
lived in the middle of the ninth century, believed that the 
role of Islam was a preparation for the final appearance of 
Anti-Christ and they found in the Bible the evidence they 
needed (114). 

In 1095, at the council of Clermont, Pope Urban port¬ 
rayed the Turks as a menace to Christendom, who devastated 
the kingdom of God, killing the Christians and destroying 
their Churches (115). The faithful, who answered Urban’s 
plea, believed that Muslims are the enemies of God, there¬ 
fore, they should be destroyed. The Saracens were described 
as barbarians, "pagans", "gentiles", and infidels. 

The Chroniclers of the First Crusade who reflect 
these ideas did not use the word "Muslims" in their narra- 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 



34 


tives. Instead, they grouped them as Saracens, Turks, Arabs, 
Agulani, without attempting to distinguish the differences 
among them. In fact, the author of the Gesta uses all these 
groups in one sentence, without recognizing the contradic¬ 
tion related to his statement: 

“As soon as our knights charged, the Turks, Arabs, 
Saracens, Agulani and all the rest of the barbar¬ 
ians took to their heels and fled" (116). 

All the chroniclers show an ignorance of Islamic 
social, political and cultural life. This ignorance came 
from the indifference to and contempt of the enemy. The only 
time the Christians met Muslims was on the battlefield. 
Therefore, the first impression the Crusaders had of the 
Turks was that they were a valiant and courageous people. 
Almost all the eye-witness accounts praise the fighting 
qualities of the Turks. The author of the Gesta admired so 
much the courage of the Turks, that he wished they would 
have been Christians. He voices these feelings in the fol¬ 
lowing: 


“What man, however experienced and learned, would 
dare to rite of the skill and prowess and courage 
of the Turks, who thought that they would strike 
terror into the Franks, by the menace of their ar¬ 
rows. They have a saying that they are of common 
stock with the Franks, and that no men, except the 
Franks and them selves, are naturally born to be 
knights. If they had stood firm in the faith of 
christ, you could not find stronger or braver or 
more skilful soldiers: and yet they were beaten by 
our men (117). 

The admiration of the Turks was only for their fight¬ 
ing qualities. The general rule among the Crusaders was in- 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 



35 


tolerance. The language of the sources is filled with hate 
and contempt. The Muslims were enemies of God, Christ, and 
Christianity. They were cruel and pitiless and should be 
killed. The chroniclers record the killings and massacres of 
the Muslims with pride and joy. In contrast, the atrocities 
committed by the Crusaders against local Christians during 
the march in Hungary and Byzantium were condemned (118). The 
massacre of Muslims and Jews, after the capture of Jerusalem 
was complacently described by the eye-witnesses without com¬ 
ment. The scene was so horrible and struck the authors so 
forcibly (119) that some of them made an effort to interpret 
and justify such actions. Albert of Aix justified the mas¬ 
sacre as a military necessity (120). 

The historians of the First Crusade, with their pre¬ 
judices, showed an extreme ignorance about the religious 
beliefs of the Muslims. They all assumed that they were 
polytheists, and they referred to them in many instances as 
evoking the "names of their gods". The author of the Gesta 
represents Kerbougha as swearing by "Muhammad and by all the 
names of our gods". He also presents al-Fadil, the Egyptian 
leader, at the battle of Ascalon, as "calling upon the spi¬ 
rit of the gods, and swearing by Muhammad and by the glory 
of gods" (121). The Latin writers also assumed that the 
Muslims worshipped many gods and idols. Fulcher mentions 
that the Muslims had an idol set up in the name of Muhammad 
in Qubbat al-Sakhrah in Jerusalem. Although, none of the 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 




36 


writers claimed to have found any idol when the Christians 
captured Jerusalem and entered the Mosque, they were not 
deterred from inventing them (122). The literary impetus of 
these ideas came from the "Chansons de geste", especially, 
the Chanson de Roland (123). 


The chroniclers of the First Crusade believed that 
the Muslims, like Christians, have their distinctivly dif¬ 
ferent temporal and spiritual authority. They call the Ca¬ 
liphs as the "Popes" of the Muslims, and the Sultans are 
their kings. In many instances, the author of the Gesta 
refers to the Caliph as the Pope. He imagined Kerbougha 
starting his letter to the Caliph with these words: 

"To the Caliph our Pope, (Nostro Apostolico), and 
the Lord Sultan our king, that most valiant war 
rior, and to all the most gallant knights of Kho- 
rasan, greeting and boundless honor! Enjoy your¬ 
selves, rejoicing with one accord, and fill your 
bellies, and let commands and injunctions be sent 
throughout the whole country that all men shall give 
themselves up to wantonness and lust, and take their 
pleasure in getting many sons who shall fight bravely 
against the Christians and defeat them". (124) 

The Caliph granted permission to Kerbougha to go and 

kill all the Christians: 

"... Since Karbuqa had with him a great army of Turks 
whom he had been assembling for a long time, and had 
been given leave by the khalif (who is the pope of 
the Turks) to kill Christians, he set out...".(125) 

The Mosques, in which the Muslim worshiped, were 
called the "devil’s chapels" by the Crusaders. Around the 
Mosques, the Muslims buried their dead with their proper¬ 
ties, including clothes, money, and weapons (126). The Mus- 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 



37 


lims were portrayed as experts in astrology. In the Qesta . 
Kerbougha *s mother was presented as a woman who studied the 
planets and the twelve signs of the Zodiac and all kinds of 
omen. She tried to warn her son not to fight the Christians, 
because they are "protected by God". She also seems to be an 
expert in the Christian faith and other religions. She knew 
that the Crusaders' conquest of Syria was foretold in the 
Qur’an as well as in the Bible, and this was confirmed by 
her astrological calculations (127). Raymond believed that 
the two Muslim women who were with their children on the 
walls of Jerusalem were witches (mulieres carminantes) cast¬ 
ing evil eyes on one of the Christian petraries (128). 

All the sources have vague and confused ideas about 
Islamic chronology, history, even oriental names. The writ¬ 
ers had a lot of trouble recognizing the names of the Muslim 
leaders. Many appear in obscure forms. For instance, the 
name of the Turkish leader of Antioch, which is Yagi-Siyan , 
appears in the accounts with Latin endings as Aoxianus, Cas- 
sianus , Casnian-us . and even G racianus (129). The Latin 
chroniclers always refer to the Muslims as coming from Cora- 
zan . Khorasan, where their Prophet came from, and their 
Caliph "Pope" lives (130). Egypt was referred to as "Babyl¬ 
on" the ancient Memphis. The authors, also, did not know the 
date of the rise of Islam (131), and they neglected the fact 
that Palestine had been in the possession of Islam since the 
seventh century. The centuries of Muslim habitation were 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 




38 


forgotten, being part neither of classical nor of sacred 
history (132). 

The Crusade historians show little understanding of 
Islamic politics. They did not acknowledge the divisions and 
struggle between the Arab and Turkish rulers of the per¬ 
iod. They attributed their remarkable achievements to divine 
providence, not to the weakness of the enemy. They also did 
not distinguish the differences between the Sunnite and 
Shi’ite Muslims (133). Raymond, however, seems to realize 
that the Fatimids of Egypt were different from the Turks in 
regard to religion. He mentions that the envoys of the king 
of Egypt (Babylon) al-Afdal, agreed to cooperate with the 
Crusaders against the Turks. He continues to say that the 
Turks promised that if the king of Babylon would ally with 
them against the Christians they would worship "Ali, kinsman 
of Muhammad whom he worshipped" (134). 

The chroniclers of the First Crusade, represent the 
Muslims’ view of the Crusaders as that of respect and fear. 
The author of the Gesta presents the Sultan of Nicaea after 
his defeat warning the Arabs of the Franks as follows: 

"I saw such an innumerable army of their men that if 
you or anyone else had seen them, you would have 
thought that all the mountains and hills and valleys 
and all the plains were full of them. So when we saw 
them we were terribly afraid and took to flight at 
once, barley escaping from their hands, and that is 
why we are still terror-stricken". (135) 

In another passage, Kerbougha ’s mother warns her son 

not to fight the Christians because "Their God fights for 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 



39 


them every day, and keeps them day and night under his pro¬ 
tection, and watches over them as shepherd watches over his 
flock" (136). In the same passage Kerbougha is portrayed as 
naive and ignorant. He asks his mother "stupid" questions, 
such as whether Bohemond and Tancred are the gods of the 
Franks and whether they eat "two thousand cows and four 
thousand pigs at a single meal?" (137). The purpose of such 
exaggeration was to glorify the victories of the Franks and 
to emphasize the miraculous nature of the Crusade. 

Among the Latin historians of the Crusade, Guibert of 
Nogent was the only one who attempted to give theological 
explanation of Islam. He regarded Islam as an extreme form 
of Christian heresy, derived mainly from Arianism. He called 
Muslims "perfidi" rather than "pagani" implying that they 
were traitors to the Christian faith who rejected the re- 
vealation. He blames the "wicked Greek Orthodox priests" for 
this (138). He was the first historian to produce a biog¬ 
raphy of the Prophet Muhammad in the West out side Spain. 
His brief account of the life of Muhammad, whom he calls 
“Mathomus" was based on information collected from returned 
pilgrims. He admitted that he had never seen a written ac¬ 
count of Muhammad’s life, but he believed that since "Matho¬ 
mus" had caused so much harm, it did not matter whether the 
things he said about him were true or false (139). Muhammad 
according to Guibert was a heresiarch who believed in the 
father alone, disregarding the Holy Ghost and relegating the 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 



40 


Son to a position of mere humanity. He mentions that Muham¬ 
mad wanted to prove the divine origin of the Qur’an, so he 
bound the book to the horn of a certain tamed cow. His fol¬ 
lowers were persuaded that he received it from an angel and 
accepted the Qur’an as the Law of God. People followed Mu¬ 
hammad because he allowed them to commit all kinds of vices 
without punishment (140). While Muhammad was suffering an 
attack of epilepsy, he was torn to pieces and devoured by 
pigs, so that nothing was left of him except his head. This, 
according to Guibert, explains why the Muslims have ever 
since that day entirely refused to eat any pork (141). 

Unlike Fulcher, Raymond and the author of the Gesta . 
Guibert considered the Turks as having no courage and valor. 
They are so cowardly that they do not "venture upon close 
fight". When they succeeded in their attack Guibert attrib¬ 
utes that to "fortune" rather than courage (142). This atti¬ 
tude could be related to the fact that Guibert had not en¬ 
countered the Turks on the battlefield, as did Fulcher, 
Raymond and the author of the Gesta . 

The attitude of the Latin historians of the First 
Crusade towards the Muslims and their religion demonstrates 
the Christians’ sharp awareness of the scope, but not the 
details, of the differences between Islam and Christianity. 
The events of the First Crusade did not increase knowledge 
about Islam. On the contrary, the Crusaders saw and under¬ 
stood extremely little of the religion and culture of Is- 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 



41 


lam. The accounts of the Latin historians were dominated by 
misunderstanding and prejudices against Muslims. The remark¬ 
able success of the Crusaders generated feelings of indif¬ 
ference and contempt for the Muslims and their religion. On 
the other hand, the historians of the First Crusade made the 
Muslims, their religion, and its founder, for the first time 
familiar concepts in the West. 

* * * 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 



42 


NOTES: 

1) Carl Erdmann, The Origin of The Idea of the Crusade , 

M. Baldwin and W. Goffart (trans.), Princeton 1977), p.4. 

2) Edward Peters, The First Crusade. The Chronicle of 
Fulcher of Charters and other Source Materials , (Philade1- 
phia 1971), p.XV. 

3) Erdmann, Origin of The Crusade , pp. 7-9. 

4) Ibid, p. 9. 

5) Ibid, p. 10. 

6) Ibid, p. 11. 

7) Ibid, p. 20. 

8) Ibid, pp. 22-3. 

9) Ibid, p. 24. 

10) Ibid, pp. 57-61. 

11) Peters, The First Crusade , p. XV. 

12) Erdmann, The Origin of The Idea of The Crusade , 

P. 133. 

13) Ibid, p. 154. 

14) Ibid, pp. 219-21. 

15) J. Riley-Smith, The First Crusade and _ the Idea of 

Crusading . (London 1986), p. 5. 

16) Riley-Smith, The First Crusade and ... . p.6. 

17) H.E.J. Cowdrey, "Pope Urban II's Preaching of the 
First Crusade", History . 55 (1970), p.179.; Riley-Smith, The 
First Crusade and ... , p.7. 

18) Cowdrey, "Pope Urban II’s Preaching ...", p.178. 

19) Erdman, Origins of ... . p.137. 

20) Riley-Smith, The First Crusade and _. ., , p.17. 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 



43 


21) Walter Porges, "The Clergy, The Poor, and The Non- 

Combatants On The First Crusade", Speculum , vol. XXI (1946), 
P.l. 

22) Duncalf, "The Pope’s Plan For The First Crusade", in 
The Crusades and other Historical Essays : Presented to Dana 
Munro. (NY 1928), P.45. 

23) Edward Peters, The First Crusade: The Chronicle of 
Fulcher of Charters and Other Source Materials , (Phi1ade1- 
phia 1971) p. XIX. 

24) Porges, “The Clergy, The Poor and The Non-Combatants 

p. 21. 

25) John L. La Monte, Crusade and Jihad", in The Arab 
Heritage . Nabih Faris (ed.) (Princeton 1946), p.162. 

26) Cowdrey, "Pope Urban II’s Preaching p.179. 

27) A. Krey, The First Crusade: The Account of Eye- 
-Witness and Participants . (Gloucester Mass. 1958), p.l. 

28) J. Westfall Thompson, A History of Historical 
Writing , vol. I, (New York 1942), p. 310. 

29) Riley-Smith, The First Crusade and ... . p.9. 

30) Ibid., p.10. 

31) Oliver J. Thatcher, "Critical work of the Latin Sour¬ 
ces of the First Crusade", (Annual report of the American 
Historical Association), (1900), p.505. 

32) Thompson, History of Historical Writing , vol. I, p. 
316. 

33) Von Sybel, History and Literature of the Crusades . 

D.Gordon (ed.), (London 1861), p.131. 

34) A. Krey, The First Crusade .... p.5. 

35) Ibid., pp. 100-1, 107-9, 131-2, 155-7. 

36) Ibid., pp. 106-7, 129, 157, 189-91. 

37) Riley-Smith, The First Crusade . p. 135. 

38) Gesta Francorum et Aliurum Hierosolimitanorum . Rosa¬ 
lind Hill (ed. and trans.), (London 1962), pp. 12-13. 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 




39) A. Krey, The First Crusade , p.7. 


40) 0. Thatcher, Latin Sources of The First Crusade . 

P.502. 

41) Gesta Francorum . p. 4, 20-1. 

42) Ibid., pp. 41, 80, 85, 91-2. 

43) Ibid., pp. 15. 

44) Ibid., pp. 16, 49-51, 53, 67. 

45) A. Krey, The First Crusade .... p.8. 

* 46) Peter Tudebode, Historia de Hierosolymitano 

Itinere . J.H. Hill and L.L.Hill (trans.), (Philadelphia 
1974), p.16. 

47) Raymond D’ Aguilers, Historia Francorum Qui 
Cenerunt Iherusa lem. J. Hill & L. Hill (trans.), (Philadel¬ 
phia 1968), p.5. 

48) Raymond, Historia Francorum , p.8. 

49) Raymond, Historia Francorum . p. 43. 

50) Ibid., pp. 51-8. 

51) Steve Runciman, A History of the Crusades , vol. I. 
(Cambridge 1952), p.328. 

52) A. Krey, The First Crusade , p.9. 

53) Dana Munro, "A Crusader", Speculum , vol. VII 
(1932), p.327. 

54) A. Krey, The First Crusade , p. 9. 

55) Fulcher of Chartres, Historia Hierosolymitana 1095- 

1127 . H. Hagenmeyer (ed. ) (heidelberg 1913); Frances Rita 
Rayn (trans.), Harold Fink (ed.), A History of _ The Expedi¬ 

t ion to Jerusalem . (Knoxville 1969), p.12. 

56) Fulcher, Historia Hierosolymitana . p.58. 

57) Ibid., p. 58. 

58) Fulcher, Historia Hierosolymitana . p.271. 

59) Runciman, History of the Crusade , vol. I, p.329. 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 



60) A. Krey, The First Crusade . p.10. 

61) Munro, “A Crusader", p. 330. 


62) Fulcher, Historia Hierosolymitana . p. 159. 

63) A. Krey, The First Crusade . p.Il. 

64) 0. Thatcher, Latin Sources of the First Crusade , p. 
503. 

65) Ekkhard Abbatis Uraugiensis, Hierosolymitam . in R.H.C. 
Hist. Occ., vol. V, pp.11-40. 

66) A. Krey, The First Crusade , p.ll. 

67) V, Sybel, History and. Literature_of the Crusade , p. 
192. 

68) S. Runciman, A History of the Crusades , vol., 

P.331. 

69) Radulfo Cadomensi, Gesta Tancredi in expeditione 
Hierosolymitana . in R.H.C. Hist. Occ., vol. Ill, pp. 595- 
716. 

70) Thompson, Historical writing , p.314. 

71) Alberti Aquensis, Liber Christianas expeditionis 
proereptione. emundatione. restitutions Sanctae Hierosolymi- 
tanae, in R.H.C. Hist. Occ., vol. IV, pp. 271-689. 

72) V. Sybel, History and Literature of the Crusade . p. 
227. 

73) Andre Beaumont JR., "Albert of Aachen and The 
Country Edessa". In The Crusades and other Historical 
Essays . Presented to Dana Munro, Paetow (ed.). (NY 1928), 
p.101-102, 138;. S.Runciman, A History of the Crusade s, vol. 
I, p. 331. 

74) E. 0. Blake, "The Formation of the Crusade Idea". 
Journal of Ecclesiastical History , vol. XXI, 1970, p.12. 

75) Riley-Smith, The First Crusade , p.135. 

76) Roberti Monachi, Historia Hierosolimitana . in 
R.H.C. Hist. Occ., vol. 3, pp.719-882. 

77) C. Cahen, La Syrie Du Nord a l’epoque des Croisad 
es . (Paris 1940), p.10. 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 



46 


78) Guibert, De Nogent, Gesta Dei Per Francos , in 
R.H.C. Hist. Occ., vol. IV., p.113-221. 

79) K. Setton, A History of the Crusades , vol. I. (Phi¬ 
ladelphia 1969), p.220. 

80) Baldrici, Episcopi Dolensis, Historia Jerosoliroi- 
tana . in R.H.C. Hist. Occ., vol. V. p. 1-111. 

81) V. Sybel, The History and literature of the First 
Crusade , p. 169. 

82) Riley-Smith, The First Crusade... . p. 138. 

83) Ibid., p. 152. 

84) Blake, "The Formation of the Crusade Idea", p.20. 

85) Ibid., p.21. 

86) Riley-Smith, The First Crusade , p.139. 

87) Fulcher, p.57, 76. 

88) Ibid., p.58; Raymond, D’Aguilers, p.15, 82, 113; Ges¬ 

ta . p.17, 20-22, 34; Riley-Smith, The First Crusade , p.99. 

89) Gesta . pp.53-54. 

90) Fulcher, pp. 66-67. 

91) Blake, "The Formation...", p.2I. 

92) Cowdrey, "Pope Urban’s Preaching", p.177. 

93) Blake, "The Formation...", p.13. 

94) Baldric, p.ll; Ekkehard, p.11-12. 

95) Albert of Aix, p.271. 

96) Guibert of Nogent, p.123; Robert of Rhaims, 
p. 727-8. 

97) Riley-Smith, The First Crusade , p.154. 

98) Ibid., p.152. 

99) Fulcher, p.58, 179. 

100) Gesta . p. 17, 40. 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 



101) Fulcher, p.85, 95; Gesta . pp. 34, 58, 74; Raymond, 
p. 36. 

102) Gesta, p. 62, 66; Raymond, pp. 52-58; Fulcher, p.23, 
99-101. 

103) Fulcher, p. 84, 203-5; Raymond, p. 36,60,95; Gesta . 
62. 

104) Riley-Smith, The First Crusade , p.330. 

105) Krey, The First Crusade , p.16; Runciman, A History of 
the Crusade , vol. I, p.336. 

106) Raymond, p. 31, 39; Krey, The First Crusade , p.17. 

107) Fulcher, p.280. 

108) Gesta . p.9,11,36; Raymond, p. 48, 75; Fulcher, 

p. 61, 71, 95, 113; Riley-Smith, the First Crusade , p.45. 

109) Gesta . p. 11, 21, 38; Raymond, p. 128; Fulcher, p. 

84; Krey, p.16. 

110) Fulcher, p.65, 69; Gesta . p. 50-3; Raymond, 

p. 60-1. 

111) Krey, The First Crusade , p.3. 

112) R.W.Southern, Western View of Islam in the Middle 
Ages, (Cambridge, Mass. 1962), p.15. 

113) Ibid., p.17. 

114) C. Cahen, O rien t et Occid e nt au Temps des Croisad- 
es ■ (Paris 1983), p.44.; Southern, Western View... . p.22. 

115) Fulcher, P.66. 

116) Gesta . p.20. 

117) Ibid., p. 21. 

118) Norman Daniel, The Arabs and Medieval Europe . 

(London 1975) p.134; Fulcher, p.30. 

119) Ibid., p.135. 

120) Albert of Aix, p. 271. 

121) Gesta . p.52, 96. 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 





48 


122) Fulcher, p. 118. 

123) Norman Daniel, Islam and the West*- the Making of an 
Image . (Edinburgh 1961), p.311. 

124) Gesta, p.52. 

125) R. Hill, "The Christian View of the Muslims at the 
Time of the First Crusade", in The Eastern Mediterranean 
Lands in the Period of the Crusades , P.M.Holt (ed.), (War¬ 
minster, England 1977), p.5; Gesta . p.49. 

126) Gesta . p. 42. 

127) Ibid., pp. 53-5. 

128) Raymond, p. 149. 

129) Fulcher, p. 93,99; Raymond, p. 42; Gesta . 
p. 47,50,61,76. 

130) Gesta . p. 39; Raymond, p. 39. 

131) Fulcher, p. 125; Raymond, p. 40; Gesta . p. 37. 

132) N. Daniel, The Arabs and Medieval Europe , p. 118. 

133) Ibid., p. 120. 

134) Raymond, p. 89. 

135) Gesta . p. 22. 

136) Ibid., p. 54. 

137) Ibid., p. 56. 

138) D. Munro, "The Western Attitude Toward Islam during 
the Period of the Crusade", Speculum .(1931). p. 533; R. 

Hill, "Christian view ...", p.4. 

139) Guibert, pp. 127-8; Munro, "Western Attitude", p.534. 

140) Guibert, p. 129. 

141) Ibid., p. 130. 

142) Ibid., p. 133. 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 





49 


Chapter Two 

MUSLIM HISTORIOGRAPHY 
DURING THE PERIOD OF THE FIRST CRUSADE 

At the time of the First Crusade, the political situ¬ 
ation in the Near East was dominated by chaos, anarchy and 
confusion. There were many factions fighting against each 
other. The Abbasid Caliphate in Baghdad was in conflict with 
the Fatimid Caliphate in Egypt. The local Arab princes in 
Syria were struggling against the Turkish Amirs. Early in 
the eleventh century, the Seljuk Turks, who had migrated 
from western Asia, established a strong empire that included 
Persia, Khurasan, Iraq, Armenia, and Anatolia (1). The 
Seljuks adhered to Orthodox Islam, and set themselves up as 
champions of the Sunni Abbasid Caliphs. The Fatimids, who 
were Shi’ites, established their power in Egypt in 969, and 
extended their control to Syria from 1038 to 1058 (2). At 
the end of the eleventh century, the Fatimids' rule in 
Syria began to decline. Tyre, Trippoli and Aleppo were lost 
to local rulers. Damascus and Jerusalem fell into the hands 
of the Turkmen generals. The local Arab tribes in Syria and 
Mesopotamia created small principalities that were engaged 
in endless fighting among themselves. The tribe of Kilab 
established the principality of Aleppo in 1066, and in 1079 
they lost it to their rivals the 'Uoalids (3). In 1081 'Ali 
Ibn Munqidh founded and independent principality at Shayzar 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 



50 


which he bought from its Christian bishop (4). The imminent 
threat to these independent principalities came from the 
Seljuks and the Fatimids. The Seljuk army appeared in Syria 
in 1070. Tutush . the brother of Malikshah . the successor of 
Alp Arslan , captured Damascus and Palestine from the Fati¬ 
mids in 1077, and Aleppo in 1082 (5). The Seljuk leaders 
soon began to fight against each other. In 1084, the Seljuk 
Sultan Sulayman Ibn Qutulmish . led his army through northern 
Syria and captured Antioch (6). Subsequently, a conflict 
broke out between Sulayman and Tutush in regard to Aleppo. 
Sulayman was killed and Tutush captured Aleppo (7). Malik¬ 
shah Proclaimed war against his brother Tutush . and later he 
conquered Aleppo, Antioch and Eddessa. Malikshah granted 
those cities as fiefs to his Turkish generals, and Aleppo 
was handed over to Aq-Sunaur . the father of Zengi. After the 
death of Malikshah in 1092, Tutush resumed his efforts to 
occupy Syria. He was proclaimed Sultan in 1094, after he had 
defeated the forces of Aleppo, Edessa, and Mosul (8). In 
1095, Barkyaruq . Malikshah ’s successor, defeated and killed 
Tutush at the battle of Rayy (9). By The end of the eleventh 
century, almost all the cities of Syria were ruled by Turk¬ 
ish generals who were vassals to the Seljuk Sultan. After 
1092, however, the power of the Sultan was declining, and 
the generals as well as the amirs were engaged in a contin¬ 
uous warfare. As a direct result of the weakness of the 
Seljuk Sultan, the principalities in Syria began to acquire 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 



51 


more independence (10). the institution of "Atabegate", 
which was created by the seljuks, and was firmly established 
in their principalities gained more power and independence 
at the expense of the declining central government. The 
Atabek (tutor) was given the responsibility of educating and 
training the Turkish princes. In Syria the Atabeks . who were 
usually generals, gradually began to take charge of the 
government (11). In Aleppo, Janah al-Dawlah . the atabek of 
Ridwan was controlling the later’s territories and in Damas¬ 
cus, Tughtukin . the atabek of Duqaq . was the real governor 
of the city. 

Before the advent of the Crusaders, the rulers of the 
Syrian principalities continued to be occupied by the end¬ 
less series of local conflicts. Yaghi Sivan . the governer of 
Antioch, was in conflict with Ridwan . the ruler of Aleppo. 
In 1096, Ridwan attacked the territories of Yaghi Sivan . 
Duqaq and al-Ghazi . governer of Jerusalem went to the assis¬ 
tance of Yaghi Sivan . in the mean time, Ridwan took advant¬ 
age of their absence and laid seige to Damascus (12). In 
1097, Yaghi Siyan . Ridwan . and Sukman joined forces to laun¬ 
ch an attack on Hims and Damascus. While the allies were 
advancing towards Shayzar, they received the news of the 
arrival of the Crusaders’ armies on the northern borders of 
Syria (13). The leaders reacted in fear and confusion, and 
instead of facing the enemy as a united force, every one 
returned to his principality to protect it from the new 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 



52 


invaders. At first, the amirs of Syria and Mesopotamia did 
not realize the magnitude of the threat posed by the Crusad¬ 
ers. Moreover, they rejoiced in the defeat of their north¬ 
ern rivals and made no attempt to assist them. When the 
Christian army laid seige to Antioch, Yaehi Sivan sent mes¬ 
sengers to the Muslim rulers asking for help, and the only 
assistance he received was from the amir of Mosul (14). 
While the Crusaders were surrounding Antioch, ambassadors of 
the Fatimid Caliph met with the Christian leaders and pro¬ 
posed an alliance with the Franks against their common enemy 
the Seljuks (15). After the Christian forces had captured 
Antioch, the local amirs of northern Syria were willing to 
pay tribute to the invaders and allow them to pass through 
their territories peacefully (16). 

By and large, the Muslims’ reaction to the new wave 
of invasion from the Latin West was no more than ordinary 
apprehension. The Muslims did not understand the specific 
nature of the Crusade. They recognized that these newcomers 
are Christians and referred to them by the plain ethnical 
term "Firanjah" (Franks), which distinguishes them from the 
, Christian Greeks; "Rum" (17). The Muslims, however, noticed 
the religious zeal of the Crusaders, and came to regard them 
as the equivalent of the Byzantines whose Christian inspired 
attacks against the Muslims, and later counter attacks, 
they had been dealing with for more than two centuries. 

The Muslims of Egypt, Iraq, Syria, and Persia, for 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 



53 


more than a century before the coming of the Crusade, had 
been accustomed to the existence of Christian principalities 
in Antioch and Mesopotamia, and even of intermittent Christ 
ian protectorates over Aleppo and parts of inner Syria. The 
Christian states were part of the political framework of 
Syria. The religious aspect of the struggle had no prominent 
place in the minds of the inhabitants. Muslims and Chris¬ 
tians intermingled peacefully with one another, especially 
after the massive immigration of Armenians into northern 
Syria. Muslims ruled over Christians, and Christians over 
Muslims without interference from either side (18). Even 
after the Sel.iuks had recovered many Christian principali¬ 
ties, they brought no fundamental change to the status of 
the local Christians or to the treatments of western pil¬ 
grims (19). The Muslims, therefore, could never perceive or 
understand the specific motivation of the Crusaders, however 
sincere it was. 

The merciless struggle among the Muslim princes pre¬ 
vented the existence of a united force to face the Frankish 
threat. The early Muslim offensive against the Crusaders 
could not be described as "counter-crusade". Indeed, every 
war against non-Muslims has been called iihad (Holy war). At 
the time of the first Crusade, this term had nothing but its 
theoretical concept. The rauslim sources of the First Crusade 
mention repeatedly the need to wage .jihad against the 
Franks. In reality, religious zeal, which characterized the 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 



Crusade, was the last thing in the minds of the Muslim rul¬ 
ers. The Muslim amirs of Syria found it less dangerous to 


54 


come to terms with the Franks than to fight them. Muslim 
public opinion, however, was angered by the disgraceful 
defeats suffered at the hands of the Crusaders, and by the 
lack of serious attempts by the Muslim princes and the Bal¬ 
iuk sultan to combat the Franks. Pious Muslims volunteered 
to participate in the Holy war, and many of them went to 
Baghdad asking for help (20). 

The disintegration of the Seljuk empire and the fac¬ 
tional fighting among the Syrian princes prevented the de¬ 
velopment of Muslim counter-attack against the Crusaders. 
The Muslim communities of Syria and Palestine were frustra¬ 
ted by the indifference of the whole Muslim population to¬ 
wards the threat of the Latin invaders and by their failure 
to obtain any significant aid from Baghdad to repulse the 
Crusaders from their lands (21). 

The specific nature of the Crusade as a religious 
movement in which men of all classes and ranks were driven 
by a holy cause to liberate the Christian lands from the 
enemies of God, had no parallel amongst the Muslims in the 
eleventh century. The fanatical character of the Crusaders, 
however, stirred the religious feelings of the Muslims, and 
the call for .jihad acquired strong momentum in Syria and 
Egypt. Local princes of Syria and Palestine, especially 
those who were directly threatened by the Crusaders, like 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 



55 


Ibn ’Ammar . the ruler of Tripoli, began to recognize the 
magnitude of the Christian threat, and tried to solicit 
assistance from the Seljuk Sultan at Baghdad in order to 
halt the frankish conquests (22). Tughtukin, Atabek of Da¬ 
mascus assumed the rule of the Muslim leader who would unite 
the Muslim forces and wage the Holy War against the Crusad¬ 
ers. At the beginning of the twelfth century, the Muslim 
resistance movement began to develop under the leadership of 
Tughtukin. The ruler of Damascus, launched many poorly or¬ 
ganized expeditions against the Crusaders’ states, and as a 
result no significant victory was achieved. Truces and alli¬ 
ances between Muslims and Crusaders were not infrequent. 
Tughtukin and Baldwin, king of Jerusalem, exchanged corres¬ 
pondences and negotiations concerning their territories and 
to establish peaceful relations (23). These treaties, how¬ 
ever, were arranged mainly to be temporary, just until each 
party is in better position to fight. They were easily brok¬ 
en from either side, and little respect was given to the 
terms of the armistices. The attempts made by Tughtukin to 
organize a strong united Muslim army to retaliate against 
the intrusions of the Crusaders proved to be fruitless. The 
real Muslim counter-offensive against the Latin states 
began with the rise of the house of Zengi in Mosul during 
the twelfth century. Imad ad-Din Zenki started the offensive 
against the Crusaders’ principalities in northern Syria 
which resulted in recovering the Latin principality of 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 



56 


Edessa (al-Ruha) in 539 / 1144 (24). Nur ad-Din . Zengi’s 
son, continued the struggle to unite the Muslims, and pro¬ 
claimed jihad against the infidels. Nur ad-Din succeeded in 


uniting Aleppo and Damascus, and in bringing enthusiasm and 
religious zeal into the fight against the Christians (25). 
Saladin followed the steps of Nur ad-Din . and finally in 
1187 succeeded in avenging the humiliation of the First 
Crusade by recovering Jerusalem from the Crusaders (26). 

There is no Muslim literature on the First Crusade 
that is comparable to the Latin historiography of that peri¬ 
od. The Crusader invasion of Muslim territories has never 
been a special and distinct single subject to Muslim histo¬ 
rians (27). The wars with the Crusaders were incorporated 
into the chronicles and annals which recorded the events 
that took place all over the Muslim world. The invasion of 
the Crusaders were, by no means, different from the wars 
with the Byzantines. They were, indeed, major wars and as 
such loom large in the Muslim chronicles, but they never had 
the significance which the Latin writers bestowed upon them 
(28). The reason for the Muslims indifference towards the 
Crusades could be attributed to the fact that the Crusaders’ 
conquests only affected small territories of the Muslim 
world: mainly Syria and Palestine, and it did not affect any 
of the large Muslim centers like Damascus or Cairo. Further¬ 
more, the Muslims had feelings of contempt towards the Latin 
Christians, whom they regarded as barbarians, uncivilized, 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 



57 


possessing no virtue but courage (29). The arrival of the 
Franks was regarded in the same manner as famine, plagues, 
or earthquakes, and was accepted as a scourge of God. The 
only response to their attacks was to wage a Holy War again¬ 
st them. 

The Muslim historians of the Crusade made no attempt 
to understand the specific character of the Crusaders’ in¬ 
vasion. The feelings of cultural superiority deterred them 
from discussing or explaining the origins, institutions, 
customs or traditions of the Crusaders. The term al-Hurub 
al-Salibiyyah . used by modern Arab writers to designate the 
Crusades was unknown to Medieval Muslim historians (30). 

Muslim historiography of the Crusades did not treat 
the Crusade as a historical phenomenon, that should be 
placed within the framework of general periodization of 
history (31). The events that occurred in Syria, Egypt and 
Mesopotamia between the end of the eleventh century and the 
end of the thirteenth century, however important they were, 
could only be treated as a minor subject in a general his¬ 
tory. 

For the later period of the Crusades, there are nume¬ 
rous Arabic sources that provide us with critical informa¬ 
tion on the relations between the Muslims and the Crusaders 
in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries. 

Muslim literature on the First Crusade, however, is 
very scarce. In the Muslim world there existed little if any 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 




58 


official charters or documents, concerning the events of the 
First Crusade, in contrast to the Christian world, which 
preserved many documents from that period (32). The great 
encyclopedias and the geographical histories barely mention 
the events of those years. There are, nontheless, few eye¬ 
witness’ accounts of the events that took place in northern 
Syria at the end of the eleventh century, but unfortunately, 
non has come down to us. The only evidence of the existence 
of such histories is the few short extracts that were in¬ 
cluded in later chronicles. The works of Ibn al-Athir (dis¬ 
cussed in chapter IV) and Kamal ad-Din Ibn _ al-'Adim contain 

many brief quotations of earlier sources. Ibn al-’Adim (born 
in Aleppo 588/1192 and died in Cairo 660/1262) was the his¬ 
torian of his native city. He wrote a biographical history 
called Bughyat at-Talab fi Tarikh Hala b. and wrote a history 
of Aleppo based on it entitled Zubdat al-Halab fi Tarikh 

Halab . In his work Bughyat _ at-Talab . I bn al-’Adim utilized 

some earlier sources of the period of the First Crusade and 
cited the names of authors, one of whom was Hamdan Ibn ’Abd 
aI-Rahim , (born in 463/1071 at Ma’aratha in northern Syria) 
(34). He wrote a history of the Frankish invasion and its 
results on northern Syria entitled Sirat al-Firan.iah al- 
Khariiin ila bilad al-Islam . of which only a few pages have 
survived. The fact that he was an eye-witness to the events 
of the First Crusade, and was in a position to reflect the 
Muslims’ reaction to the Crusade compel us to regret the 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 





59 


loss of such a source (35). 

Ibn Zourayo al-Ma'arri is another historian of the 
early period of the Crusade. He was born in 442/1051, at 
Ma’arat al-Nu'man . where he witnessed the advance of the 
Crusaders in the invasion of the Frankish armies. Few extra¬ 
cts of his work have survived, and were quoted and cited by 
Ibn al-’Adim (36). 

The last source of the First Crusade that is known to 
us was written by Muhammad al-’Azimi al-Halabi . He was born 
(483/1090 - 556/ 1161) to the prominent family of al-Tunu- 
khi at Aleppo. His work appears to be the most important for 
the history of northern Syria during the period of the First 
Crusade. He wrote his history in 538/ 1143 - 1144 for Zengi. 
Many citations of his work are given by Ibn al-’Adim , which 
are slightly larger than the previous extracts (37). 

The only Muslim contemporary history of the First 
Crusade that has come down to us in its complete form is 

that of Abu Ya’la Hamza Ibn Asad al-Tamimi _ Ibn al-Qalanisi 

(born in 465/1073 - 555/1160 at Damascus). He studied liter¬ 
ature, theology and law, and subsequently became involved in 
public service. He was a secretary in the chancery (Diwan 
al-Rasa’il ), and twice he assumed the office of rais . or 
mayor of Damascus, which is the highest civil office (38). 
When the Crusaders reached Syria in the late eleventh cent¬ 
ury Ibn al--Qalanisi was a young man, but he did not parti¬ 
cipate in any encounter against the Frankish armies. He re- 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 




60 


corded the events of the Crusade and its impact on Damascus. 
His work, Dhayl Tarikh Dimashg . was intended to be a con¬ 
tinuation of an earlier chronicle of Hilal al-Sabi . which 


was interrupted by the death of the latter in 448/1056 
(39). 

While the history of Hilal was universal in its scope, Ibn 
al-Qalanisi *s work was centered on the city of Damascus and 
its rulers, the work of Ibn al-Qalanisi covers a period of a 
hundred and seven years, 448/1056 - 555/1160. The chronicle, 
however, begins eighty five years earlier in 363/973 with 
extracts from the history of Hilal al-Sabi (40). the chron¬ 
icle of Ibn al-Qalanisi is mainly concerned with Damascus, 
and Syria, with occasional references to events that took 
place in Egypt and Baghdad. In composing his chronicle, Ibn 
al-Qalanisi . like all Muslim historians before him, adhered 
strictly to the chronological order of which the unit is the 
year. Under the heading of each year, Ibn al-Qalanisi re¬ 
corded the events according to the date of their happening. 
Since Ibn al-Qalanisi was in a position that enabled him to 
gain access to documents and official charters, it is very 
probable that he utilised such material in his chronicle. 
Ibn al-Qalanisi . however, does not quote any document. Be¬ 
sides, he undoubtedly used information derived from oral and 
written reports of eye-witnesses (42). Notwithstanding, no 
authority is cited by name in Ibn al-Qalanisi *s chronicle 
except of Khatib al-Baghdadi whom he quoted for the revolt 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 



61 


of al-Basasiri at Baghdad (43). Most of Ibn al- -Qalanisi ’s 
material which he started to write before 535/1140 - 1141 

was revised afterwards. The evidence of such revision is 
indicated by the frequent use of the present tense by the 
author in the later sections (44). The utilization of offi¬ 
cial documents by Ibn al-Qalanisi . gives his work a good 
measure of accuracy. Ibn al-Qalanisi explains his method of 
compilation in the following: 

"I have completed the narrative of events set forth 
in this chronicle, and I have arranged them in order 
and taken precautions against error and rashness of 
judgment careless slips in the material which I have 
transcribed from the mouths of trustworthy persons, 
and have transmitted after exerting myself to make 
the fullest investigations so as to verify them down 
to this blessed year 546. Since the year 535 and down 
to this point I had been engaged with matters which 
distracted my mind from making the fullest enquiries 
into those current events which required to be set 
down in this book, and from seeking out the truth 
concerning them and all the attendant circumstances. 
Consequently I left a blank space after the events of 
each year in order to insert there in those narra¬ 
tives and events the truth of which was ascertained". 
(45) 

During the period of the Crusades, Muslim historio¬ 
graphy assumed many different forms. The most common type 
was the universal history. In addition, there were biog¬ 
raphical works such as Tarikh Dimasho of Ibn ’Asakir and 

Bughyat al-Talab of Kamal _a d-Din . During the eleventh and 

the twelfth centuries local history was favored by the ma¬ 
jority of the historians. The reason for this tendency was 
related to the fragmentation of the political life especial¬ 
ly in Syria and Mesopotamia. For a long time, there had been 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 



62 


numerous autonomous amirs ruling large and small cities, who 
were in constant conflict among themselves. As each prin¬ 
cipality had often to defend itself against neighboring 
aggressions, there developed a regional consciousness, and 
consequently each city had its own historian (46). 

The work of Ibn al-Qalanisi is a sample of this form 
of Muslim historiography. His narrative reflects this common 
attitude in Syria during the twelfth century. His municipal 
patriotism always led him to praise and glorify the rulers 
of Damascus, mainly Tughtukin and his son Buri . 

Ibn al-Qalanisi *s bias towards Tughtukin’s dynasty made him 
disapprove the conduct of the Zenaids when he saw finally 
triumph with Nur ad-Din at Damascus (47). The fact that Ibn 
al-Qalanisi 's chronicle was centered on Damascus and its 
rulers, limits the scope of his work, and the views expres¬ 
sed in it. 

The Crusade is one element in the chronicle of I bn 

al-Qalanisi . although an element of great importance. The 

coming of the Crusaders is mentioned as one event among many 

that took place during the year 490-1017: 

"In this year there began to arrive a succession of 
reports that the armies of the Franks had appeared 
from the direction of the sea of Constantinople with 
forces not to be reckoned for multitude. As these 
reports followed one upon the other, and spread 
from mouth to mouth far and wide, the people grew 
anxious and disturbed in mind". (48) 

In the preceding paragraph, Ibn al-Qalanisi pres¬ 
ents the first reaction of the Muslims to the invading 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 




63 


forces of the Crusaders. At the beginning it was fear and 
panic, but later, the Seljuk Sultan of Anatolia Sulayman Ibn 
Qutulmish . gathered his army and made preparations to face 
the conquerors. Ibn al-Qalanisi describes the Sultan’s ef¬ 
forts as carrying out the obligation of ,iihad (Holy War). 
The progress of the Crusaders and their onslaught on Muslim 
territories are mentioned briefly by Ibn al-Qalanisi . Never¬ 
theless, in narrating the events of each year, the conflict 
and wars with the Crusaders were recorded. Surprisingly, 
most of these accounts are usually similar to those recorded 
by the Latin chroniclers of the First Crusade. For in¬ 
stance, Ibn al-Qalanisi m entions the agreement between the 
Franks and the Byzantine emperor Alexius, when the leaders 
of the Crusaders consented to hand over the cities that they 
would capture to the Byzantines, especially Antioch, in 
return, they would provide aid for the Crusaders’ army (49). 

Ibn al-Qalanisi acknowledges the weakness of the 
Muslims in facing the threat of the Crusaders. He believed 
that the disagreement among the Muslim leaders was the main 
cause for the success of the Crusaders. He painfully relates 
the Muslims’ defeat at Antioch: 

"They besieged the Franks until their supplies of 
food were exhausted, but thereafter the Franks, 
though they were in the extremity of weakness ad¬ 
vanced in battle order against the armies of Islam, 
which were at the height of strength and numbers, 
and broke the ranks of the Muslims and scattered 
their multitudes“.(50) 

He continues to state that the leaders of the Muslim armies 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 




fled while the soldiers, who were mainly volunteers and 
Mu.iahidin for the sake of Allah and the protection of the 


64 


Muslims, faced the Franks and lost their lives. By stating 
such a fact, it seems as if Ibn al-Qalanisi blames the Mus¬ 
lim leaders for this defeat. In another passage, Ibn al- 
Qalanisi describes the anger and frustrations of the Muslims 
with the efforts made by their leaders to combat the Crusad¬ 
ers. The Muslim public demanded substantial military action 
by the Seljuk sultan and the Abbasid Caliph, who usually, 
promised to provide and had failed to carry out their pro¬ 
mises. Ibn al-Qalanisi describes in a moving passage the 
pleas of the people of Aleppo represented by a group of 
Sufis, theologians, merchants led by a certain Hashimite 
Sharif, who went to Baghdad asking for help. They passion¬ 
ately presented themselves at the Mosque of the Sultan and 
appealed for assistance. They drove the preacher from the 
pulpit and broke it into pieces, clamoring and weeping for 
the disaster that had befallen Islam with the arrival of the 
Franks, the slaughter of men and enslavement of women and 
children. They made such a commotion that the people could 
not perform their prayers. The attendants and the imam , in 
order to quiet them, promised on behalf of the Sultan to 
dispatch armies to help them fight the infidels (51). The 
envoys of Aleppo continued to press for actions rather than 
promises. Thus, they came back the following Friday, but 
this time the Caliph was angered by their cries and pleas, 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 



67 


because during that time there was a joyous occasion cele¬ 
brating his wedding to the Sultan’s sister. The Caliph was 
so disturbed that he wanted to arrest and punish them se¬ 
verely (52). 

Ibn al-Qalanisi dedicates a large part of his chroni¬ 
cle to recording the development of the Muslims resistance 
movement led by Tughtukin . From 498/1104 to 522/1128, Tugh- 
tuki n was trying to unite the Muslims in order to launch an 
offensive war against the Latin principalities in Palestine 
(53). Tughtukin was portrayed by Ibn al-Qalanisi as a pious 
Muslim who had devoted his entire life to fighting the ene¬ 
mies of God. Ibn al-Qalanisi recorded all the battles and 
skirmishes between Tughtukin and the Crusaders. The alli¬ 
ances and truces between the two, also, were mentioned in 
details. The Crusaders were always presented as the ones 
asking for the truce, and usually they violated the peace 
and did not comply with the terms of the armistices (54). 
Tughtukin usually appears as the champion of Islam who was 
dedicated to the Holy war only, and not for any other self¬ 
ish reasons. Ibn al-Qalanisi relates the story when Tugh¬ 
tukin rendered assistance to the inhabitants of Tyre against 
the assaults of the Franks in 505/1111, where the Muslims 
succeeded in defeating the Crusaders’ army. The people of 
Tyre failed to fulfil their promise to hand over their city 
to T ughtukin , who upon hearing this simply replied: "What I 
have done, I have done only for the sake of Allah and the 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 






68 


Muslims, not out of desire for wealth or kingdom". The 
people were very happy and they showered their thanks upon 
him for his noble action and he promised that in a similar 
situation he would hasten to the city and do his utmost to 
assist them (55). 

The accounts of Ibn al-Qalanisi contain very little 
information about the internal affairs of the Latin states, 
with whom the Muslims fought constantly. While his narrative 
reports in detail the smallest skirmishes between Muslim and 
Christian troops, Ibn al-Qalanisi shows no interest in 
discussing the origin of the Crusaders, or where did they 
come from. 

Unlike the Crusaders, who knew virtually nothing 
about Islam, the Muslims had been dealing with Christians 
for a long time and understood Christianity in the light of 
the Qur’an. The Christians are Dhimmis ; the people of the 
Book; and they are a protected minority within Islamic soci¬ 
ety. The Muslims, on the other hand, did not understand the 
differences between eastern Orthodox Christianity and the 
Christianity of the Latin West. Ibn al-Qalanisi . however, 
refers in few instances to the Crusaders as polytheists and 
infidels (56). This identification could be related to the 
fact that the Muslims observed the Franks bowing on their 
knees to the "True Cross", and considered this idolatry. 

Like the Crusaders, the Muslims admired the 
courage and fighting skills of their enemy. Ibn al-Qalanisi 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 



69 


respected the shrewdness and leadership of Baldwin, the king 

of Jerusalem. When reporting the later’s death, in 526/1131 

1132, Ibn al-Qalanisi describes him in the following: 

"In this year the news arrived from the quarter of 
the Franks of the death at ’Akka (Acre) of Baghdawin 
ar-Ruvaiis (Baldwin the little leader), king of the 
Franks and lord of Jerusalem. He was an old man whom 
time had worn down; rich in experience and inured to 
every trial and hardship of life. Several times he 
had been imprisoned by the Muslims, in war and in 
peace, but his famous stratagems and skillful manoeu- 
vering had got him out. At his death he was succeeded 
by a man who lacked his good sense and kingship, and 
Baldwin’s death caused trouble and disturbance among 
the Franks". (57) 

The Chronicle of Ibn al-Qalanisi shares many features 
with the Latin narratives of the First Crusade. The inter¬ 
est of both the Latin and Muslim historians was to 
record their own side of the story and write about thair 
heroes. The concept of martyrdom was very strong among the 
Muslims. Those, who died while fighting the enemy were re¬ 
garded as martyrs, and their place is in Heaven. Divine in¬ 
tervention is recorded in many instances by I bn al-Qala- 
nisi . The appearance of angels and holy men during the bat¬ 
tle in order to help the Muslims defeat their enemy, remind 
us of the angels and the other manifestations of divine 
intervention recorded by the Latin historians (58). Ibn al- 
Qalanisi relates an incident when the Muslim forces defeated 
the Crusaders in 513/1119 near Antioch, and a strong Frank¬ 
ish prisoner was captured by a very ill and weak Muslim. 
When he was asked about this he said; "By God, this man did 
not capture me, he is not my conqueror; the man who captured 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 



70 

me was a great man, greater and stronger than I, and he 
Handed me over to this fellow. He wore a green robe and rode 
a green horse (59). 

The tendency to exaggerate numbers was also a common 
practice among Muslim historians. The number of the enemy 
forces was always very large, while the number of the Mus¬ 
lims was small. The reason for this tendency was to enhance 
and glorify the Muslims’ victory. In spite of the fact that 
Ibn al-Qalanis i showed some objectivity regarding the num¬ 
bers of the Muslim army at the siege of Antioch, he usually 
gives exaggerated and rounded pictorial numbers. When re¬ 
porting the Muslims’ victory at Antioch in 513/1119, Ibn 

al--Qalani si and Ibn _ al-’Adim mention that the Crusaders 

lost about 1500 men in battle, while the Muslims lost only 
twenty men (60). 

Like the Latin historians, Ibn al-Qalanisi reported 
the appearance of natural phenomena, but he did not attach 
any significance to them, for example, regarding them as 
signs of victory as the Latin historians did (61). 

The method of relating the events of each year in a 
chronological order used by Ibn al-Qalanisi and most of med¬ 
ieval Arab historians, despite of its chronological advan¬ 
tages, creates and perpetuates chronological error. Every 
event which the historian records must be put under some 
year and inevitably there are cases where the evidence is 
insufficient, and the wrong year is chosen (62). Besides, 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 




71 


strict adherence to the method is often sacrificed to avoid 
the breaking of a narrative at an inconvenient point. Some¬ 
times there is a confusion regarding the events that took 
place. Other sources frequently relate the same event under 
different but successive years (63). 

By and large, the Muslim sources of the First Crusade 
display a quite high * level of truthfulness, regardless of 
their religious zeal and the laudatory and courtly spirit 
which inspired them. Ib n al-Qalanisi did not conceal the 
weakness of the Muslims and their disagreements which allow¬ 
ed the Crusaders to enter Syria (64). The coming of the 
Crusaders was regarded by Ibn al-Qalanisi as a famine, 
earthquake or epidemic and were accepted as a scourge of God 
(65). 

The accounts of Ibn al-Qalanisi are generally accu¬ 
rate. A remarkable feature of his narrative is the uneven¬ 
ness of style, usually simple and uncomplicated (66). The 
objectivity and the accuracy of the accounts of Ibn al-Qala¬ 
nisi make his chronicle a basic source of the First Crusade 
that should be used along with the Latin sources. According 
to Gibb, Ibn al-Qalanisi 1 s "work makes it possible to trace 
for the first time the hardening of Muslim feelings against 
the Crusaders and the stages by which the mutual jealousies 
at the Muslim princes were overborne by the rising temper of 
the people, which came to expression in the reign of Nur 
ad-Di n and culminated in the great (revanche) under Saladin" 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 






72 


(67). The value of the Damascus chronicle for the history of 
the early period of the Crusade is illustrated in the fact 
that it was one of the primary sources of all subsequent 
Muslim historians. It was extensively quoted by Sibt Ibn 
al-Jawzi . Ibn _ al -A thir , and Abu Shama . as well as by numer¬ 
ous later authors (68). 

Muslim historiography of the later Crusades is gene¬ 
rally more abundant than Latin historiography. The literary 
and cultural production of the Muslim world was more plen¬ 
tiful than in Europe. Yey in the many histories written by 
Muslims in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries, the Crusad¬ 
es continued to be treated as minor subject. Muslim histor¬ 
ians in their general histories viewed the history of the 
Latin states as a part of the general history of Syria and 
Palestine. Their only interest, however, was in the military 
and political relation between the Muslim leaders and the 
Crusaders. Muslim writers continued to ignore the customs, 
institutions, law, and economics of their neighbors, the 
Crusaders. The feelings of cultural superiority contributed 
to the Muslims’ lack of interest in the religious or social 
life of the infidels, except to relate the example when they 
did homage to the superior civilization of the Muslims, by 
learning their language and initiating themselves into their 
culture (69). 

The only exceptions are the works of Usamah Ibn al- 
Munchidh and Ibn Jubayr . Usamah,(488/1095-584/1188), in the 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 





memoirs which he wrote towards the close of his life, while 
living at the court of his friend and patron Saladin. The 
work of Usamah called Kitab al-’Itibar contains much valu¬ 


73 


able material relating to the early period of the Crusades 
and the establishment of the Crusading states (70). 

Since Usamah lived in Shayzar . which was neighboring 
the Crusader principality of Antioch, he frequently visited 
and came into contact with different classes of the Franks. 
He classified all of them under the name Firan.iah . and usu¬ 
ally when mentioning them, he used the phrase (may Allah 
curse them) (71). In al-*Itiba r. Usamah included many in¬ 
stances that illustrate frequent friendly intercources be¬ 
tween Franks and Muslims (72). He, in many occasions, ex¬ 
pressed admiration of the courage of the Franks. Moreover, 
he noticed that there was a great difference between the 
Franks who had become natives of that region, and those who 
came recently from the West. He acknowledges that the former 
were greatly superior th those who have more recently joined 
them. He relates many incidents that show the extent to 
which the native Franks were influenced by the habits and 
customs of Muslims. On the other hand, he describes the 
recent Franks as harsh and inhuman, compared to those who 
have established themselves in the East. Usamah . however, 
was stunned by the moral begavior of the Franks (73). After 
observing the social relations between Frankish men and 
women, he reached the conclusion that the Franks had neither 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 



74 


the feelings of honor nor the nature of jealousy (74). 

The value of Usamah ’s work consists of the fact that 
it sheds the light on some aspects of the cultural and soci¬ 
al relations between the Muslims and the Crusaders. His 
first-hand accounts present in an unprejudice point of view 
the Latin customs, ideas and way of life. 

Ibn Jubayr (540/1145 - 614/1217) visited Acre and 
Tyre while under Frankish rule aad gave first-hand descrip¬ 
tions of the social and economical situations of the local 
Muslim inhabitants of those cities. He relates how Muslim 
merchants were treated well in the Christian cities, and 
that custom duties and other taxes imposed on them were not 
heavy (75). He also states that in Tyre, Muslim inhabitants 
enjoyed some freedom in practicing their religion. They were 
allowed to have at least one Mosque in Acre and Tyre (76). 
He, however, mentions that the Prophet Muhammad was cursed 
by the lower classes, and records that Muslims were kept 
isolated from Christians on board of vessels (77). Although 
Ibn Jubayr praised the justice and convenience with which 
all matters pertaining to commerce were administered in 
Christian sea-ports, he did not execuse himself from visit¬ 
ing the Christian cities. He says: "There can be no execuse 
in the eyes of God for a Muslim to stay in an infidel land, 
even when passing through it". He then advises no one to 
come to their land: "be ware, be ware of entering their 
land", and finally he asks God forgivness for committing 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 




75 


this sin (78). 

The Muslims’ feeling of contempt towards the Cru¬ 
saders was the dominant feature of Muslim historiography of 
the Crusades. Even Usamah’s work which is regarded as an 
important source because it proves the existence of friendly 
relations between Muslims and Christians could only praise 
the fighting skills of the Crusaders. He summarises his 
opinion of the Franks as follow: 

"Who even has become acquainted with the Franks can 
do nothing but glorify and praise Allah for he has 
seen in them beasts who are superior in courage and 
fighting but in no thing else, just as animals are 
superior in strength and ferocity".(79) 

* * * 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 



76 


NOTES: 

1 - Claude Cahen, "The Turkish Invasion: The Selchukids", 
in A History of The Crusades , vol. I, Setton, K.M., gen. ed. 
(Madison, University of Wisconsin Press 1969), pp. 135- 
177. 

2 - A.H.R.Gibb, "The Caliphate and The Arab States", in A 
History of the Crusades , vol. I, Setton, K.M., gen. 

ed., (Madison 1969), p.85. 

3 - H. A. R. Gibb, The Damascus Chromicle of _ The Crusad¬ 

es , (London 1963), pp. 20-2. 

4 - Ibn al-Qalanisi, Dhavl Tarikh Dimashoh . (Leyden 
1908), p.113. 

5 - Ibid, p.114-5. 

6 - Ibid, p.117. 

7 - Ibid, p.119. 

8 - Ibid, p.121-7. 

9 - Ibid, p.128-30. 

10- Gibb, T he Damascus Chronicle , p.22. 

11- Ibid, p.24. 

12- Dhayl . p.130. 

13- Gibb, The Damascus Chrinicle , p.31. 

14- Dhayl . p.134. 

15- Gesta . p.37. Raymond, p.40-1. 

16- Dhavl . p.167. 

17- Claude Cahen, "Crusades, Encyclopedia of Islam . 
p.64. 

18- H. A. R. Gibb, "Notes on Arabic Materials for the 
History of the Crusades", Bulletin of the School of Oriental 
Studies . vol. VIII, (1935) p.740. 

19- C. Cahen, "Crusades...", p.64. 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 



77 


20- Dhavl . p.173. 

21- Ibid, p.139, 150, 156; Ibn al-Athir, Al-Kamil fi al- 
-Tarikh . vol. X, pp. 284-6. 

22- Dhayl, pp.160-2. 

23- Ibid, p.142, 156, 164-5, 171; al-Kamil . vol. X, pp. 
467-8. 

24- Dhayl . pp.279-82; The Damascus Chronicle, p.265; al- 
-Kamil . vol. XI, pp.64-66. 

25- Dhayl . pp.32-4; al-Kamil . vol. XI, p.264. 

26- Bala’ al-Din Ibn Shaddad, Sirat Salah ad-Din . 

(Cairo 1964), p.75; ’ Imad ad-Din al-Isfahan!, a l-Fath al- 

Qusi _ fi al-Fath al-Qudisi , (Cairo 1965), p.29; al-Kamil , 

Vol. XI, pp.361-6. 

27- F. Gabrieli, "The Arabic Historiography of the 

Crusades", in Historians of the Middle _ East . B.Lewis and 

P.M.Holt (eds.), (London 1962), p.99. 

28- J. La Monte "Crusades and Jihad", p.162. 

29- Usamah Ibn al-Munqidh, Kitab al-’Itibar . P. Hitti 
(ed.), (Princeton 1930), p.48. 

30- C. Cahen, "Crusades", p.64. 

31- F. Gabrieli, Arab Historians of the Crusades . E. 
Costello (Trans.), (Los Angeles 1969), p.XIV. 

32- C. Cahen, La Syrie du Nord . p.34. 

33- Runciman, A History of the Crusades , vol. I, p.334. 

34- C. Cahen, La_ Syri e_du_Nord, p.62; Gabrieli, Arab 

Historians , p.28. 

35- Kamal al-Din Ibn al-’Adim, Buehvat al-Talab fi Tarikh 
Halab , Sami Dahan (ed.) (Damascus 1954); Zubdat al-Halab fi 
Tarikh Halab . Sami Dahan (ed.) (Damascus 1951). 

36- Ibn al-’Adim, Bughyat al-Talab . vol. Ill, p.129, 238; 
C. Cahen, La Syria du Nord . pp.40-1. 

37- C. Cahen, La Syria... . p.42-3; Ibn al-’Adim, 

Bughyat al-Talab... . vol. IV, p.132. 

38- Gibb, The Damascus Chromicle . pp.8-10. 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 





78 


39- Ibn Khillikan, Wafayat al-A*van , (Cairo 1942), vol. 
VI, p.144. 

40- M. Hilmy Ahmad, "some Notes on Arabic Historiography 
during the Zengid and Ayyubid Periods (521/1127- 648/1250)", 
in Historians of the Middle east . B.Lewis and P.M. Holt 
(eds.), (London 1962), p.84. 

41- Ibid, p.85. 

42- Gibb, The Damascus Chronicle , p.4. 

43- Dhayl , pp.87-9. 

44- Gibb, The Damascus Chronicle , p.10; Hilmy, "Some 
notes...", p.85. 

45- Ibid, p.10; Dhayl . p.238. 

46- Hilmy, "Some Notes p.82; C.Cahen, Intro¬ 
duction a l’Histoire du _ Monde Musulman Medieval , VII-XV, 

(Paris 1982), p.146. 

47- Gabrieli, Arabic Historiography , p.102. 

48- Ibid, p.134; The Damascus Chronicle , p.41. 

49- Ibid, p.43; Gesta, p.42; Fulcher, p.79. 

50- The Damascus Chronicle , p.46; Dhayl . p.136. 

51- Ibid, p.173; The Damascus Chronicle , pp.111-2. 

52- Dhavl . p.173. 

53- The Damascus Chronicle , pp.66-182; Zubdat al-Halab . 
P.162. 

54- Dhavl . p.142, 151, 156, 164-5, 174. 

55- Ibid, p.181. 

56- Ibid, p.128. 

57- Dhavl . p.233; The Damascus Chronicle , p.208; 

Gabrieli, Arab Historians , p.40. 

58- Dhayl . p.200-1. 

59- Ibid, p.200; Zubdat al-Halab . vol. II, p.187-190. 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 



79 


60- Ibid, p.90; Dhavl . p.201. 

61- Ibid, 242. 

62- (For instance, the year in which Ibn al-qalanisi 
recorded the death of Baldwin. He mentioned that the later 
died in 525/1131, but in fact Baldwin’s death occurred in 
August 526/1132); The Damascus Chronicle , p.208. 

63- Stevenson, The Crusaders in the East , p.356. 

64- Gabrieli, "Arabic Historiography", p.65. 

65- D hayl , p.99. 

66- Gabrieli, Arab Historians , p.26. 

67- The Damascus Chronicle , p.ll. 

68- Ibid, p.16. 

69- Gabrieli, "Arabic Historiography", p.107. 

70- Usamah, Kitab al-’Itibar . p.10. 

71- Ibid, p.160-3. 

72- Ibid, pp. 136-141. 

73- Ibid, p. 163. 

74- Ibid, p. 161. 

75- Ibn Jubyr, The Travels of Ibn Jubvr . R. J. Broadhurt 
(trans.), (London 1952), p. 315. 

76- Ibid, pp. 319-21. 

77- Ibid, p. 327. 

78- Ibid, pp. 321-2. 

79- Al-’Itibar . p. 161. 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 



80 


Chapter Three 
WILLIAM OF TYRE 

After the establishment of the Latin kingdom of 
Jerusalem and other Christian principalities in the East, a 
new generation of Frankish settlers emerged and became nat¬ 
ives of that area. William of Tyre, who is regarded as the 
best historian of the Crusades, and one of the master his¬ 
torian of the Middle Ages was one of them (1). 

William was born in Jerusalem in 1130. He went to the 
West in 1145 where he spent sixteen years studying arts and 
theology at Paris, and Civil law at Bologna for another four 
years (1161-5) (2). He visited the Papal curia at least 
twice in 1169 and 1178. In 1168 he went to Constantinople to 
ratify an offensive alliance with emperor Manuel against 
Egypt. He was made archdeacon in 1167. In 1170 king Amaury 
assigned him as a tutor for his son Baldwin IV, in 1174 he 
became chancellor of the kingdom and in 1175 was made arch¬ 
bishop of Tyre (3). His life long ambition was to become the 
patriarch of Jerusalem, but when the vacancy occurred, he 
had lost his influence at the court, and he was disappoint¬ 
ed. William remained archbishop of Tyre until his death in 
1184/1185 (4). King Amaury, who was a good friend of Wil¬ 
liam, commissioned the latter to write a history of the 
Latin kingdom beginning with the Council of Clermont, a 
history of the king’s achievements and a history of the 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 



81 


Oriental princes (5). King Amaury was fascinated by Islamic 

civilization. He provided William, who knew Arabic very 

well, with Arabic sources, probably some from the private 

library of Usamah Ibn al-Munquidh which king Baldwin III had 

confiscated in a shipwreck near Acre in 1154 (6). William 

only mentions Said Ibn Batri q as his principal source for 

the Historia Oeientalium Principum - - 

"Moreover, at the order of the king who himself fur¬ 
nished the necessary Arabic documents, we have also 
written another history. As the principal source for 
this we have used the work of the venerable patriarch 
of Alexandria, Seith (Said) son of Patricius. This 
history begins from the time of the false prophet 
Muhammad and extends through five hundred and seventy 
years, even to the present year, which is the 1184th 
of the incarnation of the Lord".(7) 

Said Ibn Batrio (887-940), or Eutychios the Melchite, 
wrote his universal history Nazm al-Jawhar (Chaplet of 
Pearls), or annals from the creation to 938 in Arabic, and 
was continued by Yahya Ibn Said of Antioch, down to 1027. 
Thus, Willaim must have utilized other Arabic sources since 
he carried his history to 1184 (8). The Gesta Orientalium . 

however, is lost, but a few extracts are included in Wil¬ 
liam’s other book, the Histori a Rerum in Partibus Trans - 

marinis Gestaru m. and in other accounts of thirteenth cen¬ 
tury historians such as Jacques de vitry. 

William’s other major work, the Historia Rerum.... 
is the first systematic and comprehensive history of the 
Latin settlement in the East. The Latin kingdom of Jerusalem 
was the central theme of his book. The narrative starts with 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 




82 


an introduction describing the rise of Muhammad - the orig¬ 
inator of the struggle between Muslim and Christians, and 
the subsequent loss of Jerusalem to the Muslims in 614. Then 
he gives a brief general account on the situation of Chris¬ 
tians in the East before and at the time of the First Cru¬ 
sade ."He describes the sufferings which the Christians in 
the Holy land and the pilgrims had to endure under the harsh 
rule of the Muslims (9). Then he presents a detailed account 
of the First Crusade, with special emphasis on the part 
taken by Godfrey of Bouillon. Therefore, William of Tyre 
established the idea that the Crusade began with the rise of 
Muhammad and the struggle between Islam and Christendom was 
manifested during the early conquests of the Muslims in the 
seventh century (10). The rest of William’s narrative deals 
with the history of the crusaders in the East, concentrating 
mainly on the kingdom of Jerusalem and its relations with 
the neighboring Muslims, Latins, and Byzantines. The history 
of Jerusalem was carried down to 1184. It was continued in 
the vernacular, in several phases, until it finally reached 
1227 (11). 

William was a historian who loved his country. In the 

prologue he relates that the reason which urged him to write 

his history was an "insistent" love of his country. 

"... She spurs men on, I repeat, and with that au¬ 
thority which belongs to her imperiously commands 
that those things which have been accomplished by 
her during the course of almost a century be not 
buried in silence and allowed to fall into undeserved 
oblivion. On the contrary, she bids me preserve them 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 



83 


for the benefit of posterity by the diligent use of 
my pen.” (12) 

In the prologue, which was written in 1184, william 

describes the plan of his work: 

"The whole work has been divided into twenty three 
books and each of these into a certain number of 
chapters, that the reader may more easily fond what¬ 
ever he seeks in the different parts of the narra¬ 
tive. It is~ our intention, if life be granted us, to 
add from time to time to what has already been writ¬ 
ten those events of our own era which the vicissi¬ 
tudes of the future may bring forth, and to increase 
the number of books as the amount of subject matter 
may warrant." (13) 

In the preface to book xxiii, written in 1182, Wil¬ 
liam, however, was in doubt whether to continue to portray 
the miseries of those times. The course of events in the 
early 1180’s were very distressful for William. When the 
hostile party led by Agnes (king Baldwin IV’s mother) and 
Guy de Lusignan, her daughter’s husband, took control of the 
court, they were opposed by the established nobility of the 
kingdom, including William. When the opportunity came for 
William in 1180 to achieve his ultimate ambition to become 
the Patriarch of Jerusalem, because of the influence of 
Agnes, Heraclius was made Patriarch instead. Subsequently, 
William was very disappointed and his influence on the court 
virtually disappeared (14). The kingdom of Jerusalem was 
also threatened by the organized and united forces of the 
Muslims under the leadership of Saladin, while the Crusaders 
were on the verge of civil war. All these factors disturbed 
William, and caused him to stop recording what he considered 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 



84 


so disgraceful and shameful a series of blunders. In a very- 
moving and painful passage, he explains the reasons that led 
him to abandon writing: 

"Wearied by the sad disasters which occurring at 
the kingdom so frequently, we had resolved to abandon 
the pen and commit to the silence of the tomb the 
chronicle of events which we had undertaken to write 
for posterity. For there is no one who is not reluc¬ 
tant to recount the failings of his country and to 
bring forth into the light the faults of his own 
people... Now every source of glorious renown is 
taken from us and the only subjects that present 
themselves are the disasters of a sorrowing country 
and its manifold misfortunes, themes which can serve 
only to draw forth lamentations and tears". (15) 

Then William continues to write that he lacks the courage to 
continue. The reason is that, "in the acts of our princes 
there is nothing which seems to a wise man worthy of being 
committed to the treasure house of memory, nothing which can 
contribute refreshment to the reader or confer honor upon 
the writer" (16). Later, William acknowledges that some of 
his friends tried to convince him to continue his task. They 
reminded him of the chroniclers of the past, who recorded 
events without partiality adverse as well as auspicious hap¬ 
pening. "For by narrating successful achievements, they hope 
to inspire posterity with courage, while by furnishing exam¬ 
ples of misfortunes patiently endured they may render later 
generations more cautious under similar conditions". (17) 
In 1183 when Raymond of Tripoli (whom William supported) 
became regent of the kingdom, William became more optimistic 
about the future of the kingdom and the situation was hope¬ 
ful enough for him to feel justified in resuming his writing 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 



85 


(18). When William decided to continue his work, he wrote 
the prologue in 1184 in which he relates his intention to 
add information as events dictated. But his purpose was not 
carried out. The twenty third book ended abruptly with the 
choice of Raymond as regent being the last entry (19). 

One of the unique qualities of William as a historian 
is his critical method of using the sources and acquiring 
his information. Mainly, his information was obtained from 
reliable eye-witnesses accounts, from people who still had 
vivid recollection of the past, and from his own observa¬ 
tion. In book sixteen, William mentions that he derived the 
information for the earlier history of the Crusades from 
accounts of eye-witnesses. He acknowledges that it was dif¬ 
ficult to obtain reliable material and correct chronology 
and succession of events (20). 

The material for the first fifteen books was based on 
the histories of Albert of Aix, Baldric, Fulcher. Raymond, 
and the Gesta . On the whole, Albert is the leading authority 
in these books up to the capture of Jerusalem. The battle of 
Ascalon is related from Raymond and after that he mainly 
follows Fulcher (21). For the events of his own time, Wil¬ 
liam depended on his own recollection and the testimonies of 
trustworthy eye-witnesses always, if possible, getting more 
than one account of an event or transaction. (22) 

Throughout his book, William displayed critical at¬ 
titude towards his sources of information, whether written 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 




86 


or oral, whether recent or old. In the following statement 
William explains his method of gathering information; "After 
carefully investigating this matter and making repeated in¬ 
quiries, we have at last arrived at the facts underlying the 
affair" (23). When William utilized written sources, he 
first studied and compared them, and employed the best 
sources for certain events. He also drew his own conclusion 
by comparing several accounts. If there was a conflict among 
the sources regarding certain events, William would state 
his own opinion and present the different statements. He, 
however, doesn’t quote his authorities by name. Sometimes, 
William would reject or correct certain statements of the 
early historians of the Crusades. He realized that he had a 
more accurate knowledge of the geography and history of the 
East, as well as a fuller acquaintance with later develop¬ 
ments (24). The Historia Rerum... is full of examples that 
illustrate William’s critical ability in obtaining his in¬ 
formation. When describing the geography of the city of 
Jerusalem, he criticized the statement of Solinus "that 
Judea is famous for its waters". William tried to find an 
explanation for this statement, and concluded that Solinus 
either did not tell the truth about the matter or that the 
face of the earth became changed later (25). Sometimes Wil¬ 
liam would make inquiries about certain events. For in¬ 
stance, he sought information concerning Idumea; he says 
that he was told by older inhabitants of a castle that was 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 



87 


■to be built there (26). When king Amaury was separated from 
his wife Agnes, on account of their near consanguinity, 
William was in the West, and was unable to obtain reliable 
and precise information of the relationship in which they 
stood to each other. He found that his best source is the 
Abbess Stephania of Santa Maria Major, a relative of the 
queen. He, therefore, interviewed her and presented the 
facts as she stated them (27). After the Egyptian campaign 
of king Amaury in 1168, William collected his information of 
the events by interviewing the leaders and participants of 
the campaign. Hugh of Caesarea provided William with con¬ 
siderable details regarding his embassy to the Fatimid Ca¬ 
liph, and his negotiation with Shirkuh, Saladin’s uncle. Be¬ 
fore relating the details of the embassy, William presented 
a vivid description of the Caliph’s palace which he believed 
would be interesting for his readers. These information as 
William states were taken from "the trustworthy accounts of 
those who visited that great prince".(28) While William was 
absent in the West, king Amaury in 1169 launched another 
expedition against Egypt. This campaign, however, ended in 
failure and William was unable to conceal his astonishment 
or its results. Upon his return, he sought to make an "in¬ 
quiry of the king and some of the important men of the 
realm", to find the reasons for such disastrous results 
(29). 

All these examples illustrate the availability of 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 



88 


information for William, who usually had access to these and 
who made the most of his opportunities. He always tried to 
discover the truth of the matter when he had one source, and 
when some facts were questionable, he would still present 
his doubts regarding the credibility of such events (30). He 
continuously assures his readers that he learnt certain 
facts from individuals whose veracity was above suspicion. 
When William was confronted with contradictory accounts, he 
presented both versions with strict impartiality (31). An 
example of this is illustrated in his accounts of the ex¬ 
pedition of Louis and Conrad from the eye-witnesses, who 
told him the number of the army of the emperor about seventy 
thousand knights, and in the army of the king of France was 
estimated about seventy thousand and gave him various opin¬ 
ions concerning the relations between Louis and Raymond of 
Antioch (32). After the Crusaders’ army led by Conrad and 
Louis fail 

ed in capturing Damascus in 1148, William chose to present 
various opinions as to the reason for this disastrous de¬ 
feat. Thus he interviewed trustworthy eye-witnesses and 
"endeavored to learn the reason for this great wrong: who 
were the instigators of such treachery, and how so detest¬ 
able a crime could have been carried through" (33). Wil¬ 
liam’s history is full of examples that display his sense of 
responsibility when using his sources and reporting the 
information. He always tried to be objective if he felt that 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 



89 


he could not reach his own conclusion about certain matters, 
or he was not able to ascertain the truth, he would state 
that to his readers. When Saladin invaded the kingdom in 
1183, and the Christian army failed to stop him, William was 
disgusted by the lack of effort on the part of the Crusad¬ 
ers’ leaders to fight the enemy. He, however, presents dif¬ 
ferent opinions to justify this incident. He writes: 

“We have stated these reasons as the varying senti¬ 
ments of many people, but we assert nothing positive¬ 
ly, for we have not fully ascertained the truth of 
the matter".(34) 

William presented his material in a refined language 
and dignified style, surpassing all other Latin writers of 
his time. He was influenced by classical writers like Livy 
Ovid, Virgil, and Cicero, and his book is full of quotations 
from Roman poets, as well as from the Bible (35). William 
possessed the talent of expressing his thoughts thoroughly 
and the ability to group his subjects, and class them ac¬ 
cording to their affinity. He usually handles his material 
coherently. When relating an event, he is not satisfied with 
reporting it only, but he searches for reasons and explana¬ 
tions, and relates the causes and effects of certain events. 
Before entering into any new subject, he completely disposes 
of the consequences of the first (36). His style, in gener¬ 
al, shows consistency and evenness. 

Like the Latin historians of the First Crusade, Wil¬ 
liam’s work includes legendary material. Nevertheless he did 
not emphasize the importance of miracles or Divine Provi- 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 



90 


dence. The concept of sin and divine retribution is a common 
theme throughout the narrative. Failures, and defeats in 
battles were interpreted as punishment from God for the sins 
committed by the Christians. In the later parts, however, 
william appears to include the motives behind the failure; 
the circumstances surrounding the events; the poor choices 
of policy by the leaders and other controllable factors, as 
explanation for failures and defeats (37). Miracles were 
also included in William’s history, especially in the earli¬ 
er parts. The personality of Godfrey of Bouillon, for exam¬ 
ple, was treated by William in a legendary form. He portray¬ 
ed Godfrey as the leader of the Crusaders and ascribed to 
him many virtues; like wisdom, strength, righteousness. And 
subsequently accepted many legends that enhanced and glorif¬ 
ied the character of Godfrey (38). William included the 
story of the discovery of the Holy Lance by Peter Bartholo¬ 
mew at Antioch briefly and without any comment. His accounts 
also include stories about heavenly portents. When the Cru¬ 
saders were besieging Antioch, William relates the following 
incident: 

"gentle dew fell upon the Christian army from heav¬ 
ens. It descended so sweetly upon our people that it 
seemed as if the Lord Himself were shedding His bene¬ 
diction and favor upon them. Whoever come under the 
influence of that heaven-sent rain experienced such 
fullness of joy, both of body and soul, and complete 
restoration of strength that it was as if he had 
endured no hardship nor trouble during the whole 
pilgrimage"(39). 

In the later parts of William’s works, however, the legen- 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 



91 


dary material gradually becomes noticeably scarce, mainly 
because William’s qualities as a historian matured and deve¬ 
loped to a such degree that he was able to draw the line 
between fact and fable (40). The major defect of William’s 
history is his handling of chronology. The attempt made by 
William to separate his material and present it coherently, 
led him to commit many chronological errors. In order to 
preserve the regularity in his work, he changed the chrono¬ 
logy, or at least made it incomprehensible (41). When trac¬ 
ing the sequence of events within a certain topic he was 
vague. For example, when Banyas was given to the Christians 
by the Assasins in 1129, William relates in detail the war 
of Damascus which took place in 1129, and he neglects men¬ 
tioning the capture of Banyas until Revier de Brus took it 
as a fief in 1132 (42). When comparing William’s chronology 
with Arabic sources of this period, mainly Ibn al—Qalanisi, 
we find many chronological errors in various passages. An 
example would be the date of the capture of Tyre which Wil¬ 
liam relates as June 29 in the year 1124. While Ibn al-Qala- 
nisi mentions it as July 7, 1124 (43). Sometimes William 
does not mention dates at all, as in the account of king 
Amaury. The dates given for the reign of Baldwin I, Baldwin 
II, Fulk, Baldwin III, Amaury and Baldwin IV, are in terms 
of the years of the Christian era or of the regnal years of 
the kings, or are decided by referring to the sequence of 
events (44). All three forms frequently are conflicting. 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 



92 


William also frequently used the Muslim chronology without 
designation and usually conflicting the Christian era. For 
Instance, when William relates the period of time during 
which the Christians in the Holy land endured the yoke of 
servitude, he used the Muslim calendar, he writes; "During 
four hundred and ninety years it endured the yoke of unde¬ 
served bondage and continual hardship"(45). In the prologue, 
while William relates the composing of his work, Gesta Ori¬ 
ental ium . he mentions that "this history begins from the 
time of the false prophet Muhammad and extends through five 
hundred and seventy years, even to the present year, which 
is the 1184th of the Incarnation of the Lord". The Muslim 
count of years which as stated by William in 570 is not the 
equivalent of the Christian year 1184. The year 570 A.H. 
extended from August 1, 1174 to July 21, 1175 (46). The use 
of Arabic sources to understand and analyze the chronology 
of william is very important. The defects and faults of 
William’s work do not diminish its value. It is regarded as 
the best history of the Crusades, and its value as a primary 
source for the First Crusade and the history of the Latin 
kingdom to 1184 is well known. He enriched the accounts of 
the First Crusade with descriptions of Constantinople, Ni- 
caea and Antioch, Edessa, and Jerusalem, while the histories 
of those places were also mentioned. When dealing with his 
own times, his material is richer and more ample in detail, 
and more trustworthy (47). His narrative includes substan- 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 



93 


tial body of information ranging from geographical facts to 
architecture, art, music, commerce, religion, and politics. 
Military expeditions and diplomatic exchanges, however, 
constitute a considerable part of his narrative. 

Like all the Latin chroniclers of the first Crusade, 
William displayed an attitude towards the religion of Islam 
and its founder of hatred and contempt. But, in contrast to 
the other Latin authors he, throughout his work displayed 
a scientific and comprehensive knowledge of Muslim life and 
culture. Above all, he knew Arabic very well. His explana¬ 
tion of Arabic terms in many passages of his work illus¬ 
trates his familiarity with the language. The conventional 
prejudices and misconception of the West against Islam were 
accepted by william, who, regardless of his familiarity with 
Muslims, considered Islam as a false religion. For him, 
Muhammad was a son of satan, a false prophet, a destroyer, 
who employed sword and violence, instead of preaching and 
exhortation, to compel the people to embrace his poisonous 
doctrine (48). The fact that William derived his information 
on Islam and its history from Said Ibn Batriq did not affect 
his bias and prejudice towards Islam. Said’s chronicle does 
not display these same ideas about Islam. Indeed, Said’s 
chronicle appears to be more or less like any other Muslim 
chronicle on the history of Islam. His views of Islam are 
relatively impartial. When relating some events concerning 
the caliphate of Abu Bakr . he presents the later as an ideal 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 





94 


ruler who instructed his officers when leaving on an expedi¬ 
tion to the north not to kill elders or children or women, 
not to cut or burn trees, neither destroy inhabited nor ruin 
houses, even not to kill animals. Said also mentions the 
alternative the Muslims presented to non-Muslims; either to 
enter Islam or to preserve their faith as people of the Book 
in Muslim society (49). 

William started his history with a brief introduction 
of the rise of Muhammad, and the subsequent Muslim conquests 
during the seventh century which resulted in the fall of 
Jerusalem. He attributed the Muslims’ success in conquering 
Syria and Palestine during the Caliphate of Omar to the fact 
that these places were destroyed by the Persians and were 
abandoned. He also relates that the Muslims after conquering 
Jerusalem allowed Christians to rebuild their churches, to 
have their own bishop and to follow religion without res¬ 
traint (50). Then, William proceeds to describe the suffer¬ 
ings of the Christians in the Holy Land during the centuries 
of Muslims’ occupation. The Christians were under servitude 
and hardship during the rule of Muslim princes. According to 
William, the situation of the Christians generally depended 
on the character of each ruler. But it was during the reign 
of the "praise worthy" Harun al-Rashid the conquered Chris¬ 
tians enjoyed peace. The courtesy of Harun towards the 
Christians was the result of the good relations that existed 
between Harun and Charlemagne (51). The condition of the 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 




Christians in the Holy Land, as William states, was intoler¬ 
able during the reign of the Fatimid Caliph al-Hakam . who 


95 


ordered the destruction of the church of the Holy Resurrec¬ 
tion. The "faithful" were burdened by enormous tribute and 
taxes. They were prevented from practicing their religious 
rites, and were tortured and punished for no reason. At 
the end of the eleventh century, when the Seliuks gained 
control of the Holy Land the faithful continued to suffer 
opression and the pilgrims were constantly mistreated (52). 
Thus, when the army of the Crusaders liberated Jerusalem in 
1099, and all the Muslim inhabitants of the city were kill¬ 
ed, William believed that they recieved their just punish¬ 
ment. When he narrates the massacre of Jerusalem, he ex¬ 
presses the terror of such an incident: "so terrible that 
the shedding of blood that even the victors experienced 
sensations of horror and loathing". He, however, sought some 
justification and argued that the massacre was the righteous 
judgment of God because of the profanation of the sanctuary 
of the Lord by the Muslims superstitious rites, which caused 
the place to be alien to the faithful people, therefore they 
"should expiate their sin by death, by pouring out their own 
blood, purify the sacred precincts".(53) 

It is very interesting to note that William presented 
the views and reactions of the Muslims to the invasion of 
the Crusaders. In an imaginary dialogue, he relates how the 
First Crusaders must have looked to the Fatimid rulers of 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 



96 


the day in Egypt: "The Egyptian prince a most powerful lord 
among the oriental people, summoned his military forces from 
all the lands under his sway and had assembled an immense 
host. For he was angry that a "barbarous" people from the 
remotest regions of the world had invaded his kingdom and 
taken by force a province that had been subject to him” 

(54) . In another place, William relates the reaction of the 
Muslims, Turks, Egyptians, Arabs who came together and unit¬ 
ed their forces to face the Crusaders. According to him, 
they preferred to put aside their differences in order not 
to experience the harsh and cruel swords of the barbarians 

(55) . 

In his accounts of the First Crusade, William added 
some information concerning the Muslims reaction to the Cru¬ 
sade and their efforts to face the later’s threat. When 
relating the siege of Antioch by the Crusaders, he gives an 
account similar to that of Ibn al-Qalanisi . The reaction of 
Yaghi Sivan . the governor of Antioch, to the coming of the 
Crusaders was presented by William exactly as Ibn al-Qala¬ 
nis i did. William states that when Yaghi Siyan learned that 
a great army under Christian leaders was on the way, he sent 
out repeated messages, both by letter and the spoken word to 
all the princes of the entire East begging for aid. "Above 
all, he besought the help of the Caliph of Baghdad and of 
the illustrious Sultan of Persia, more powerful than all the 
rest" (56). Unlike the accounts of Ibn al-Qalanisi . who 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 



97 


blamed the disunity and internal struggle among the Muslims 
for the success of the Crusaders, William seems to emphasize 
that the Muslims reacted to the invasion of the Latins at 
the time of the First Crusade by uniting and organizing 
their forces. This tendency of presenting the Muslims as a 
formidable enemy to the First Crusaders, which was very 
common in the Latin chronicles of the First Crusade, was 
also acknowledged by William, in order to show the miracu¬ 
lous success of the Crusaders and the divine intervention on 
their behalf. 

William employed his knowledge of Muslim culture and 
politics and used it to supplement some accounts of the 
First Crusade. For instance, when narrating the episode of 
the Egyptian envoys to the Christian leaders, during the 
siege of Antioch, William added some information to the eye- 
-witness account of that event. First he mentioned the dif¬ 
ferences of dogmas between the Egyptians and the "Orientals" 
(Seljuks) and he explained that the Egyptians were happy at 
the losses of the Seljuks and regarded their defeat as a 
gain for them. He then states that the reason for this 

embassy was the "... deep and inveterate enmity had existed 
between the Orientals and the Egyptians, arising 
out of differences in their religious beliefs and 
their opposite dogmas. This hatred has persisted 
without interruption to the present day. Thus these 
two kingdoms, often at war with each other, were in 
constant rivalry, each striving to extend its own 
boundaries and to reduce the limits of the other" 
(57). 

William's superior knowledge of Muslim history, cul- 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 



98 


ture, and politics is displayed throughout his history. In 
book one: chapter four, he explained in detail the differe¬ 
nce between the Sunnis and the Shiites. He acknowledged that 
the Egyptians adopted the doctrine of Shiism, which accord¬ 
ing to him “inclines more towards Christianity", and the 
Seljuks (Persians) who followed the orthodox Muslims were 
called Sunnites (58). In another place, William attempted to 
explain the origin of Shiism and Sunnism. However, he pre¬ 
sents a confusing picture regarding the origin of Shiism. He 
relates that Ali, the Prophet’s cousin, did not appreciate 
the title as successor of his cousin. He wanted to be called 
a prophet, one who was greater than Muhammad himself. Ali 
therefore reviled Muhammad and spread among people a story 
relating that the angel Gabriel, the “propounder of the 
Law", had actually been sent to Ali from on high, but by 
mistake had conferred the supreme honor on Muhammad. For 
this fault, the angel had been severely blamed by the Lord. 
Thus schism developed among the people; some followed Ali 
and supported his claims, and these were called Shiites, 
while others maintained that Muhammad is the greater Prophet 
and were called Sunnites (59). 

William also described, in detail, the titles of the 
Fatimid rulers, and the origin of the word Caliph , and the 
difference between the Abbasid and the Fatimid caliphs. He 
mentions that his sources of information were "old histo¬ 
ries" and the "trustworthy accounts of many persons". Then 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 



99 


he continues to say that the prince of Egypt is known by two 
names, "he is called the Caliph (Calipha), which being in¬ 
terpreted as the successor or heir, because he occupies the 
place of their supreme Prophet and holds the succession by 
hereditary right. He is also called Mulene (Mawlana), which 
means our lord. The origin of the second name seems to date 
from the days of the Pharaoh" (60). In the next chapter, 
William discussed the origin and rise of the Fatimids and 
the establishment of their empire in Egypt, which was ruled 
by a Caliph who became a rival to the Abbasid Caliph (61). 
William illustrated in these passages his wide knowledge of 
Muslim history. His accounts are remarkably accurate and 
agree more or less with other Muslim narratives. His expla¬ 
nation of the meaning and origin of the word caliph is al¬ 
most identical with its definition in Muslim writings. 

In book one, William discussed in detail the origins 
of the Seljuk Turks, their social and economical life and 
their conquests. Like other Latin historians of the First 
Crusade, he praised and acknowledged their valor and fight¬ 
ing skills. He referred to them as coming from the north, 
and as being “a rude people" (nomads), who were moving from 
one place to another in search of pasture for their animals. 
The tribe is the social unit, headed by an older man whose 
decisions were respected by all. A group of these Turkish 
nomads entered Persia, where they settled for a short peri¬ 
od, during which they increased in number. After they left 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 



100 


Persia, in the middle of the eleventh century, their power 
was os great that within a short time they were able to 
conquer all of the "Oriental kingdom" (62). 

When William writes about his own times his interest 
in Muslim affairs is prevalent throughout his work. He was 
mainly interested in contemporary inter-Muslim politics and 
its consequences regarding the Latin kingdom of Jerusalem. 
He believed in order to ensure the survival of the Latins in 
the Holy Land, the Christians’ need to understand the poli¬ 
tical situation of their neighbors, and employ it to their 
advantage. He realised the fact that the Muslim power lays 
in their unity, therefore, it was in the best interest of 
the Latin kingdom to keep them disunited. Hence, William 
encouraged the alliances with Muslims against other Muslims. 
He, however criticised and objected alliances with Muslims 
against other Christians. For example, when Joscelin count 
of Edessa, made an alliance with the Muslims against Bohe- 
mond II of Antioch in 1127, William considered that a hate¬ 
ful act in “the eyes of God", far contrary to honorable 
custom and laws of our times, Joscelin called to his aid 
bands of infidel Turks, an act which established a vicious 
precedent for his descendants” (63). On the other hand, when 
Zengi besieged Damascus in 1137, and the Damascenes appealed 
to the Christians for aid. William thought it was good pol¬ 
icy when king Fulk decided to join forces with the Muslims. 
He regarded the alliance as worthwhile since the Muslims 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 



101 


fulfilled their part of the bargain and helped the Crusaders 
to capture Banyas (64). The Muslims as William relates, 
preferred to restore Banyas (which was taken by Zengi) to 
the Christians "whose favor they enjoyed, rather than see it 
held by an enemy whom they greatly feared and distrusted" 
(65). He describes the seige of Banyas by the Muslims and 
Christians as follows: 

"Then, might have witnessed a strange and novel sight: 
a hostile people encouraging an enemy to the fier¬ 
iest warfare and, as ally actually in arms for the 
destruction of a common foe. Nor could it be readily 
discerned which of the allied armies battled the more 
valiantly against the common adversary or urged on 
the attack the more bitterly or preserved the longer 
in the burden of battle. Christians and Damascenes 
were equal in courage and united in purpose. Although 
in training and the practice of arms they were indeed 
unlike, yet in the desire to inflict injury upon the 
enemy one race did not yield to the other".(66) 

When Anar , governor of Damascus, proposed a treaty with king 
Baldwin, and in return, the city of Bostrum would be given 
to the Christians, William praised this agreement, since it 
would increase the kingdom of Christians and thus it "would 
be most acceptable to God" (67). While William praised and 
regarded Anar as a friend of the Christians, he, however, 
questioned his motives in gaining the favor of the Crusad¬ 
ers. He is not sure, whether Anar’s action came from the 
heart and sincerity of purpose or was forced upon him by 
necessity. Not only did William encourage and support con¬ 
ducting treaties and alliances with Muslims, but he also 
expected the Christian leaders to respect and abide by the 
terms of such agreements. When king Baldwin in 1157 made an 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 




102 


attack on the Muslim nomads in the forest of Banyas in de¬ 
fiance of a treaty which he had previously made with them, 
William criticized this action. He states his opinion as 
follows: 


"This deed brought no glorious or laudable renown to 
our people, for they have violated a treaty of peace 
and had maltreated, as they would, an unsuspecting 
people - men who had,relied upon the good faith- of 
the king and who had, moreover, no means of resist¬ 
ing. But the Lord, the God of vengeance. He who 
brings just retribution on sinners, did not suffer 
us to enjoy the rewards of our sin long; indeed He 
soon made plain that, even with infidels faith must 
be kept. As punishment for that crime, He took venge¬ 
ance upon us to our undoing and, for our many sins, 
He doubled our punishment and brought confusion upon 
us..." (68). 

Hence, William strongly believed that it was a moral and 
religious duty to keep the faith even with Muslims. The 
breach of an alliance is regarded by William as a sin pun¬ 
ishable by God. When Baldwin returned from his attack on 
Banyas, his army fell into an ambush set by N ur ad-Din . 
around the river of Jordan, and the Christians were defeat¬ 
ed. William interpreted this defeat as a punishment from God 
for "the Lord rendered to us the fruits of our evil doing; 
and we, who in scorn of the laws of humanity had wrongfully 
oppressed the innocent and those who relied on our good 
faith" (69). William’s strong regard for the sanctity of 
treaties made him criticize king Amaury’s attack on Egypt in 
1168, because of his violation of the terms of the treaty 
made with the Egyptians in 1167. William presented the views 
of those who opposed this expedition and considered the 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 




103 


breach of the alliance as "unjust and contrary to divine 
law". The failure of the campaign is viewed by William as 
punishment from God for breaking the oath (70). 

William also believed that it was important that the 
Greeks and the Latins should be united as one force against 
the Muslims to save the Latin kingdom. When emperor Manuel 
(1143-80) proposed an alliance with the Crusaders against 
Egypt in 1167, William welcomed the proposal and agreed to 
be king Amaury's ambassador to Constantinople to conclude a 
treaty with the Greeks. Although William made many unfavor¬ 
able remarks about the Greek race and referred to them in 
many places of his book as treacherous and deceitful people, 
who hated the Latin race, he wanted to convince his fellow 
Latins that though they might not like the Greeks they could 
not afford to be enemies (71). 

While reading William's accounts concerning Muslim 
affairs, one can sense his admiration and appreciation for 
some aspects of Islamic civilization. He described the king¬ 
dom of the Egyptians as the kingdom "which surpass all other 
kingdoms of the east and south, not alone in strength and 
riches, but also in worldly wisdom" (72). When he recorded 
the events of the Egyptian campaign of 1167, he included a 
description of the court ceremonial at Cairo and of the com¬ 
mercial interests and importance of Alexandria. In his desc¬ 
ription of Cairo, he mentions that it is called Misr in 
Arabic and is the finest place in the country, a "noble and 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 



104 


outstanding metropolis". He relates the history of the 
founding of the city, and acknowledges that it was built by 
Johar in 358 (968-969 A.D). He realized that ancient Babylon 
was somewhere different, and is not clear how the name came 
to be applied to the Cairo site (73). William interviewed 
Hugh of Caesarea who was sent as ambassador to the Fatimid 
Caliph, and described in detail the royal palace, and show¬ 
ed its wonder, its state of magnificence, and the vastness 
of wealth and variety of glory. William mentions that the 
reason which compelled him to describe the palace is that 
"the palace is unique and after a fashion quite unfamiliar 
to our world".(74) 

William, when referring to Muslim leaders who came 
into contact with the Franks, characterizes them with admi¬ 
ration. He acknowledges that some of these had commendable 
moral standards and ideals. When Zengi released the Chris¬ 
tian captives during the seige of Montferrand in 1137, and 
allowed the king to leave the place freely and peacefully 
and return to their own country, William described the 
astonishment of the Christians, to see "such humanity could 
exist in a man so cruel" (75). William thought favorably of 
Nur ad-Din and described him as "a wise and prudent man and, 
according to the superstitious traditions of his people, one 
who feared God" (76). When Nur ad-Din died in 1174, William 
praised him and referred to him as a "just prince, valiant 
and wise, and, according to the traditions of his race, a 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 




105 


religious man" (77). In another description of Shirkuh, 
Saladin’s uncle, William praised him because he was "an 
energetic warrior, eager for glory and of wide experience in 
military affairs, generous far beyond the resources of his 
patrimony..." (78). William’s opinion of Saladin, whom he 
recognized as the most formidable enemy of the Christians, 
is not favorable compared to the others. Saladin is always 
portrayed as a selfish arrogant man, driven by selfish rea¬ 
sons, and who usually achieves victory by either treachery 
and bribe or by killing his opponents. William records an 
incident when Saladin bribed the nobles of the city of Mosul 
and won their allegiance and then ordered a deadly potion to 
be given to the prince of the city (79). He described Sala¬ 
din as "always active and vigilant, desired with his own 
heart to increase the glory of his name and expand the limi- 
ts of his kingdom. Eager to achieve still greater victories 
and scoring the strength of the Christians as nothing, he 
resolved to advance toward the east" (80). In another place 
he referred to Saladin as "a man of tireless energy who ever 
acted the role of a vigorous leader in every thing". (81) 

The admiration and praise by William of Muslim lead¬ 
ers did not mean that his views of Islam as a religion and 
its Prophet have been changed. His prejudice and bias again¬ 
st Islam were still very strong. He despised and rejected 
the teaching of the Prophet, and always referred to him as 
the destroyer, seducer, and son of satan. He writes: 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 



106 


"In the time of the Roman Emperor Heraclius, accord¬ 
ing to ancient historians and Oriental tradition, the 
pernicious doctrines of Muhammad had gained a firm 
foothold in the Orient. This first born son of Satan 
falsely declared that he was a prophet sent from God 
and there by led astray the lands of the East, espe¬ 
cially Arabia. The poisonous seed which he sowed so 
permeated the provinces that his successors employed 
sword and violence, instead of preaching and exhor¬ 
tation, to compel the people, however reluctant, to 
embrace the erroneous tenets of the prophet" (82). 

When he came into contact with contemporary Muslims, he 
looked upon them as enemies, and at the same time neighbors 
of Christians, with whom they had to live in war and peace. 
He is concerned with maintaining the existence of the Latin 
kingdom but he did not encourage shedding the blood of Mus¬ 
lims needlessly. He even regarded the alliance with Muslims 
as something sacred and should not be broken. 

It is a hard task to prove that William had used any 
Arabic sources besides Said Ibn Batriq as long as he cites 
him only when writing about Muslim history. But Said’s his¬ 
tory ends with the year 937, while William’s work extends to 
1184. It is quite clear from passages dealing with Muslim 
history that he must have drawn some of his information from 
oral sources and some from inscriptions on buildings. He 
also mentions, reluctantly, that he derived his information 
about the Egyptian campaign of king Amaury by interviewing 
eye-witnesses. The fullness and truth of his accounts of 
Muslim affairs lead us to believe that he depended, more 
than he admitted, on oral or written Muslim sources. It is 
hard to believe that a man of his position as archbishop of 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 



107 


Tyre should have had such religious pride to admit learning 
something from Arabic sources. This, however, does not mean 
that he was not influenced by Arabic literature. Since he 
had access to Arabic sources, and to learned Arabs in the 
Latin kingdom, he must have had some acquaintance with Ara¬ 
bic literature. In his history there are many passages de¬ 
note his knowledge and use of Muslim sources. In book six 
William narrates the following story about Godfrey when he 
had been visited by Muslim chiefs from the surrounding coun¬ 
try: . 


"The purpose of their coming was, I suppose, rath er 
to investigate our strength and numbers and to obtain 
more accurate information about our condition than to 
bring presents to the duke. When these men arrived at 
the Christian camp, they at once demanded to be led 
before the duke. Being introduced into his presence, 
they presented the gifts which they had brought with 
them. Now the duke was a humble minded man, who ut¬ 
terly declined the pomp of this world. He was sitting 
on a strawfilled sack which had been placed on the on 
the ground, awaiting the return of his men whom he 
had sent on a foraging quest. At sight of him sitting 
thus, the chiefs were struck dumb with amazement. 
"Why," they inquired, "did so great a prince and so 
admirable a lord, who, coming out of the West, had 
shaken the entire Orient and seized a mighty kingdom 
with a string hand, sit thus ingloriously? Why was he 
not surrounded by tapestries and silken stuffs and 
attended by a throng of armed satellites, so as to 
present a formidable appearance to those who appro¬ 
ached him?" (83). 

For anyone who is familiar with the history of the Muslim 
caliph Umar Ib n al-Khattab . this story is very similar to an 
anecdote concerning Umar . The Muslim story relates an inci¬ 
dent when Umar was sleeping on the ground under the sun with 
no one around him, a group of Byzantine envoys appeared 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 



108 


before him. The Christian messengers could not believe that 
this was the Muslim caliph the most powerful ruler of the 
world, sleeping on a stone pillow, when he could have all 
the riches and luxury he wanted. In the many passages con¬ 
cerning Muslim history, William displayed his deep under¬ 
standing of Muslim culture and Muslim society. In his ac¬ 
counts on the origins of the Fatimid empire, the nature of 
the sect of the Assasins, and on the differences between the 
Sunnites and the Shiites he showed that he had a more com¬ 
plete knowledge of Islam than any of his contemporaries or 
co-religionists possessed. 

The rapidly increasing power of Saladin was causing 
the Latin kingdom its greatest challenge; and none saw more 
clearly than William the dangers that threatened the Latin 
Christians, or strove more untiringly to prepare for the 
struggle which was inevitably to come. In book twenty one, 
chapter seven, William tried to explain the reasons which 
allowed the enemy to be more powerful than the Christians. 
The first reason for the decline of the Crusades' power as 
presented by William is that the current generation, in 
contrast to the earlier Crusaders who were inferior in num¬ 
bers and forces but were able to defeat the enemy because 
they were religious men who feared God, "In their places a 
wicked generation has grown up, sinful sons, falsifiers of 
the Christian faith, ... because of these sins, the Lord 
justly withdrew his favor. Such are the men of the present 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 



109 


age, especially those dwelling in the East" (84). The second 
reason is that whereas the earlier Crusaders who came to the 
East and were inspired by "divine zeal and a flame with 
spiritual enthusiasm for the faith were accustomed to mili¬ 
tary discipline, the people of the East, through long-con¬ 
tinued peace had become enervated. They were unused to the 
art of war, unfamiliar with the rules of battle, and gloried 
in their state of inactivity" (85). The third reason is re¬ 
lated to the fact that while in the time of the First Cru¬ 
sade the Muslims were disunited "almost every city had its 
own ruler". The Muslim rulers were "rarely actuated by the 
same motives, but in fact, very often by those directly 
opposite. But now, since God has so willed it, all the king¬ 
doms adjacent to us have been brought under the power of one 
man". Then William describes the steady progress of Muslim 
unity from Zengi and Nur ad-Din to Saladin. To face the 
threat of the united Muslim forces, William suggests that 
the Crusaders should make every possible effort to oppose 
this "magnificent man (Saladin) in his swift progress 
through successive triumphs to the highest pinnacle of his 
ambition. ...As he became more and more powerful, he might 
prove to be a most formidable adversary to us" (86). This 
analysis of the causes for the decline of the Latin kingdom 
and the change in the relation of the Crusaders and their 
Muslim enemy between the First and Third Crusades reveals 
William’s remarkable ability as a historian and illustrate 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 



110 


his deep understanding of contemporary Muslim politics. 

At the end of his work, William envisioned the deter¬ 
ioration of the Christian nation because of the failure of 
later generations. He endeavoured to explain how his country 
could be saved, and to persuade men from the West to come 
and save it (87). To him, the Latin kingdom was not primari¬ 
ly a Frankish colony, but the Holy Land, which should be 
rescued from an imminent danger. His purpose in writing was 
to tell the story of a nation that established itself in the 

r 

name of God and fought to protect and maintain the Holy 
places of Christianity. 

It is not a coincidence that William is acknowledged 
as one of the best historians of the Middle Ages. He was the 
only historian in the Christian or Muslim world who combin¬ 
ed, along with his western education, his knowledge of Ara¬ 
bic culture, and his experience of living in an eastern 
environment to produce a monumental historical work which is 
regarded as the best source on the early period of the Cru¬ 
sades . 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 



Ill 


NOTES: 

1 - A. Krey, "William of Tyre: The Making ox An History in 
The Middle Ages", Speculum , vol. XVI, (1941), p. 149. 

2 - R.B.C.Huygens, ’Guillaume de Tyr etudiant. Un 
Chapitre (XIX, 12) de son "Histoire" retrouve’, Latomus . XXI 
(1962) pp.822-4. 

3 - William of Tyre, A_ History of Deeds Done _ Beyond the 

Sea , vol. I, A.E.Babcock and A.C.Krey (trans.), (NY, 1943) 
P. 4, 17. 

4 - William of Tyre, Historia Rerum In Partibus Trans- 
marinis Gestarum , in R.H.C.Hist. Occ., vol.I, (XXI,9). 

5 - W.T. (Krey and Babcock), vol. I, p.15. 

6 - Ibid, p.16. Usamah, A1-’ Itibar , p.61. 

7 - W.T. (Krey and Babcock), prologue, p.56; W.T. (R. 
H.C.), Prologue, p.5. 

8 - History of Said Ibn Batriq., in Corpus Scriptorum 
Christianorum Orientalium . Tomus 6,7 (Beirut 1908) pp.1-88. 

9 - W.T. (Krey and Babcock) I. 5, p.66. W.T. (R.H.C), I. 
V, p.17. 

10 - A. Atiya, "The Crusades: Old Ideas and New Concep¬ 
tions", Cashiers D’histoire _ Mondiale . vol. II, (1954-55) 

p.471. 

11- M.R.Morgan, The Chronicle of Ernoul and the Continu¬ 
ations of William of Tyre , (Oxford 1973) p.9. 

12- W.T. (Krey and Babcock), I, p.55; W.T. (R.H.C.) pro¬ 
logue, pp. 1-6. 

13- Ibid, p.5; W.T. (Krey and Babcock) I. p.58. 

14- Ibid, p.17. 

15- W.T. (Krey and Babcock) XXIII, I, p.505; W.T. (R.H.C.) 
XXIII, p.1132. 

16- Ibid, p.1133; W.T. (Krey and Babcock) XXIII, I, p.55. 

17- Ibid, p.506; W.T. (R.H.C.) XXIII, I, p.1133. 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 




112 

18- A. Krey, “The Making of an Historian.., p.160. 

19- W.T. (Krey and Babcock) p.25. 

20- Ibid, XVI, I, p.136. 

21- V. Sybel, History and Literature of the First Crusade . 
p.258. 

22- W.T. (Krey and Babcock) XVI, I, p.136; W.T. (R.H. 

C.) XVI, I, p.88. 

23- Ibid, X, XVII, p. 422; W.T. (Krey and Babcock) X, 17, 
p.409. 

24- Ibid, pp. 29-30. 

25- Ibid, VIII, 4, p.374. 

26- W.T. (Krey and Babcock), XX, 19, p.373; W.T.(R. 

H.C.), XX, XX, p.975-6. 

27- Ibid, XIX, p.888-9; W.T. (Krey and Babcock), XIX, 4, 
p.301. 

28- Ibid, XIX, 18, p.319; W.T.(H.R.C.), XIX, p.410. 

29- W.T. (Krey and Babcock), XX, 17, p.369; W.T. (R.H. 

C.) XX, XVII, p.970. 

30- W.T. (Krey and Babcock), VII, II, p.314. 

31- V. Sybel, History and Literature... . p. 260. 

32- W.T. (Krey and Babcock), XVI, 19,20, pp. 165-8; W.T. 
(R.H.C.), XVI, p. 736. 

33- Ibid, p.737; W.T. (Krey and Babcock), XVII, 7, p. 
1935. 

34- Ibid, XXII, 27, p.498. 

35- Ibid, Prologue, p. 54, XIX, 10, p. 309, XXIII, 1, 
p. 504-5. 

36- V. Sybel, History and Literature... , p.265. 

37- A. Krey, "The Making of a Historian...", p.163. 

38- V. Sybel, History and Literature... . p.309. 

39- W.T. (Krey and Babcock), VI, 19, p.289. 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 




113 


40- Ibid, p.31; Morgan, The Chronicle of Ernoul... . 
p.171. 

41- V. Sybel, History and Literature... . p.268. 

42- W.T.(Krey and Babcock), XIV,19, pp.76-7. 

43- Ibid, XIII, 14, p.21; The Damascus C hronicle , p. 72. 

44- Stevenson, The Crusaders in the East , p.361. 

45- W.T. (Krey and Babcock), I, 3, p.63. 

46- Ibid, I, 56, note 10. 

47- V. Sybel, History and Literature... . p.275. 

48- W.T. (Krey and Babcock), I, 1, p. 60. 

49- History of Said Ibn Batriq . pp.9-11. 

50- W.T. (Krey and Babcock), I, 2, p.62; W.T.(R.H.C.), I, 

11, pp. 11-12. 

51- Ibid, I, 3, p.13; W.T. (Krey and Babcock), 1,3, p.64. 

52- Ibid, I, 5, p.66-71. 

53- W.T. (Krey and Babcock), VIII, 20, p.371-3; W.T. (R. 
H.C.), VIII, XX, P.507. 

54- Ibid, IX,X,p.377; W.T.(Krey and Babcock), IX, 10, 
P.393. 

55- Ibid, X, 10, p.394. 

56- W.T.(Krey and Babcock), IV, 11, p.203; W.T.(R.H. 

C.), IV, XI, pp. 169-70; Ibn al-Qalanisi, Dhayl . p.134. 

57- W.T.(Krey and Babcock), IV, 24, pp. 223-4; W.T. 

(R.H.C.), IV, XXIV, p.191. 

58- Ibid, I, IV, pl5-6; W.T.(Krey and Babcock), I, 4, 
p. 65. 

59- Ibid, XIX, 21, p. 323; W.T.(R.H.C.), XIX, XXI, 
p.915. 

60- Ibid, XIX, XX, p. 914; W.T.(Krey and Babcock), XIX, 

20, p. 322. 

61- Ibid, XIX, 21, p. 324-5; W.T.(R.H.C.), XIX,XXI, p.915. 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 



114 


62- W.T.(Krey and Babcock), I, 7, p.73-4; W.T.(R.H.C.), I, 
VII, 21. 

63- Ibid, XIII, p.590; W.T.(Krey and Babcock), XIII, 22, 
p. 34. 

64- Ibid, XV, 7, p. 105; W.T.(R.H.C.), XV, 668. 

65- W.T.(Krey and Babcock), XV, 9, p.108; W.T.(R.H.C.), 
XV, p.671. 

66- Ibid, XVI, p. 714; W.T.(Krey and Babcock), XVI, 7, 
p.147. 

67- Ibid, XVI, 8, p.148; W.T.(R.H.C.), XVI, p.715. 

68- W.T.(Krey and Babcock), XVIII, 14, p.256i W.T. 

(R.H.C. ),. XVIII, p. 842. 

69- Ibid, XVIII, p. 843; W.T.(Krey and Babcock), XVIII, 
14, p.261. 

70- Ibid, XX, 5, p. 351; W.T.(R.H.C.), XX, p.949. 

71- W.T. (Krey and Babcock), II, 20, p. 147; W.T. 

(R.H.C.), II, p.101,5; Davis, "William of Tyre", pp.70-1. 

72- W.T.(Krey and Babcock), X, 19, p.409; W.T.(R.H.C.), X, 
p.428. 

73- Ibid, XIX, p.905-7; W.T.(Krey and Babcock) XIX, 15, 
p.316. 

74- Ibid, XIX, 18, p.319; W.T.(R.H.C.), XIX, p.910. 

75- Ibid, XIV, p. 650; W.T.(Krey and Babcock), XIV, 29,p. 
91. 

76- Ibid, XVI, 7, p. 146; W.T.(R.H.C.), XVI, p. 714. 

77- Ibid, XX, 1, p.1000; W.T. (Krey and Babcock), XX, 31, 
p.394. 

78- Ibid, XIX, 5, p.303; W.T.(R.H.C.), XIX, p.891. 

79- Ibid, XXII, p.1101; W.T. (Krey and Babcock), XXII, 19, 
p.48. 

80- Ibid, XXII, 19, p.47; W.T.(R.H.C.), XXII, p.1102. 

81- Ibid, XXII, p.1113-5; W.T.(Krey and Babcock) XXII, 24, 
p.489. 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 



82- Ibid, I, 1, p.60. 

83- Ibid, V, 20, p. 410. 


115 


84- W.T.(Krey and Babcock), XXI, 7, p.406; W.T. 

(R.H.C.), XXI, p.1015. 

85- Ibid, XXI, p. 1016; W.T.(Krey and Babcock), XXI, 7, 
p.407. 

86- Ibid, XXI, 7, p.408; W.T.(R.H.C.), XXI, p.1017. 

87- A. Krey, "The Making of an Historian...", p.158; 

A. Davis, "William of Tyre...", p.74. 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 



116 


Chapter Four 
IBN AL-ATHIR 

All Ibn Muhammad ’Izz al-din abu al-Hasan Ibn al- 
Athir, born in A.H. 555/1160, in the town of Jaairat Ibn 
Omar on the Tigris, and died in 630/1232 in Mosul (1). He 
was one of three famous brothers. The elder is Majid al-Din, 
544-606 / 1149-1210, dedicated his life to studying the 
Qur’an, Hadith and Grammar. The younger brother Diya’ al- 
Din, 558-637 / 1163-1239, had several literary works, the 
most famous among which is the book known as ai-Mathal as- 
Sa’ir fi Adab al-Katib wash-Sha*ir (2). 

Ibn al-Athir recieved his elementary education at 
Jazirat Ibn ’Umar, and when he was twenty four years old he 
went to Mosul to pursue his studies (3). He spent most of 
his life travelling between Damascus, Mosul, Baghdad, Mecca, 
and Halab, where he studied with the leading scholars of 
each town. Thus, Ibn al-Athir acquired a wide field of know¬ 
ledge ranging from history, genealogy, grammar, tradition 
(hadith), mathematics, and religion. He spent the last two 
years of his life studying tradition at Mosul (4). 

Ibn al-Athir wrote several books, two of them, ’Usd 
al-Ghaba and Al-Lubab . are biographical dictionaries of the 
Prophet’s companions. Al-Lubab . however, is a recension of 
the work of Al-Sam’ani (d. 562/1167) called Kitab al-Ansab . 
Ibn al-Athir summarized this work, made some corrections, 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 



117 


and added valuable information. The second work, ’Psd al- 
Ghaba is a recomposition of an earlier work, which he thoro¬ 
ughly studied and then reproduced in one book omitting re¬ 
petitions and the long chains of isnad (reference). Yet he 
devoted a chapter to a detailed summary of these isnad 
chains, and pointed out that his aim was to avoid repeti¬ 
tion. The biographies included in this book were strictly 
arranged in alphabetical order. Ibn al-Athir’s purpose of 
writing such a book was to collect in one large book all the 
materials concerning the biographies of the Prophet’s com¬ 
panions (5). 

The works which gained Ibn al-Athir his fame as a 
historian are his two historical books; al-Bahir fi Tarikh 
ad-Dawlah al-Atabikiyah . and al-Kamil fil-Tarikh . Al-Bahir 
is a panegyric history of the Zengid dynasty of Mosul. It 
starts with the rule of Aasunour . Zengi’s father, from 477/ 
1084, and ends with the rule of al-Qahir Mas’ud in 607/1210. 
In this work, Ibn al-Athir included information regarding 
Zengi’s earlier life, his rise to power and especially his 
campaigns against the Crusaders. He also added some useful 
data concerning the private and public life of Nur ad-Din 
(6). Thus, al-Bahir is considered an important source for 
the history of Muslim counter attacks against the Crusaders’ 
principalities in Syria and Palestine. 

The most famous work of Ibn al-Athir is his universal 
history al-Kamil fil-Tarikh . which takes its start from the 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 




118 


beginning of the creation and ends with the year 628/ 
1230. In the introduction to al-Kamil . Ibn al-Athir states 
that as a young man he was interested in reading history 
books and in studying and analyzing the events and their 
causes, so that he could learn lessons from the experiences 
of past generations (7). He also relates in the introduc¬ 
tion, that the reason which made him write such a work is 
the fact that the historical books of his predecessors were, 
in general, inadequate: "Some dealing with the East others 
with the West. Facts were covered in many of these books 
through their repetition, ornate style, or through long 
chains of isnad to be cited, and many important events had 
been intentionally passed or omitted because of prejudice" 
(8). Therefore, he decided to write a comprehensive history 
which would avoid the shortcomings of such histories. Thus, 
al-Kamil was planned to include a great amount of historical 
information dealing with all parts of the Muslim world in 
chronological order. The year is the unit of this chrono¬ 
logical record and the events are classified as their hap¬ 
penings within each year. Ibn al-Athir, however, attempted 
to defy this method by treating certain important events 
that occurred over many years, as a continued sequence. For 
each year he mentions the most important event that took 
place, and for less important events he groups them along 
with the biographies of important individuals and unusual 
happenings and miscellaneous under a minor division. Ibn al- 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 



119 


Athir, also, tried to make a balance in recording events 
from the western and eastern parts of the Muslim world (9). 

Since al-Kamil was designed to be a universal his¬ 
tory, it followed the common historical method practiced by 
Muslim historians, starting with the creation of the world. 
The first volume of al-Kamil deals with pre-Islamic history, 
beginning with the creation of the universe, followed by 
Bib-lical history, which includes stories like Constantine’s 
conversion to Christianity, the establishment of Constan¬ 
tinople, and the history of pre-Islamic Arabia. The second 
volume records the life of the Prophet Muhammad and the 
caliphate of Abu Bakr and of * Umar . The third volume deals 
with the caliphate of ’Uthman and Ali, and the Muslims’ 
conquests in the east and the west. In the fourth volume the 
history of the Ummayads is narrated, and in the fifth, Ibn 
al-Athir records the end of the Ummayads and the beginning 
of the Abbasid dynasty, the sixth volume is concerned with 
the Golden age of the Abbasid caliphate, while the seventh 
deals with its decline. In the eighth volume he mentions the 
Byzantine advance toward the east, and its consequences on 
the Muslims in Syria. He also records the establishment of 
the Fatimid caliphate in Egypt. The ninth volume deals with 
the Seljuks and their control over the Abbasid caliphs. The 
last three volumes of al-Kamil are the most important since 
the author was either an eye-witness or had first hand know¬ 
ledge of some of the events. Their importance also lies in 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 




120 


the fact that they cover the history of the Crusades from 
1099 to 1230. 

For the period 477/1084-607/1210, Ibn al-Athir gives 
two records, one in al-Kamil, and the other in al-Bahir 
which covers only these hundred and thirty years. There is a 
great similarity in the recording of the events of this 
period in the two works. There are, however, some marked 
differences in the sequence of events in the actual text or 
in the parts added in the two works in recording a certain 
event (10). Al-Bahir also included some additional informa¬ 
tion concerning Zengj and Nur ad-Din that were not mentioned 
in al-Kamil . Ibn al-Athir compiled al-Kamil before al-Bahir . 
yet he did not publish it until after the year 619/1222, 
about eleven years after the publication of al-Bahir . The 
reason as related by Ibn al-Athir, was that al-Kamil was a 
master work, therefore, it required more time for revision 
before publication. In the introduction to al-Kamil Ibn al- 
Athir mentions that he put aside this work for a long per¬ 
iod, while at the request of his friends and students he 
gave lectures on it for a short time. Then he recieved a 
command from al-Malik al-Rahim Badr ad-Din Lu'lu* . "whose 
orders could not be disobeyed to publish the book". Thus Ibn 
al-Athir decided to finish revising his work and have it 
ready for publication (11). 

Ibn al-Athir is often criticized for not naming his 
sources. He, yet, mentions in many places the names of some 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 



121 


of his sources. For the first three centuries of Muslim his¬ 
tory, Ibn al-Athir mention that he drew his information 
mainly upon the work of al-Tabari (12). For more recent 
times, he used local sources in relating the history of each 
region. For the history of Iraq he depended on Ibn al-Jawzi 
and al-Hamathni (13), and for the history of the western 
part of the Muslim world, North Africa, and Spain, he used 
the work of Ibn Shaddad al-Sunhai . For the history of Syria 
and Mesopotamia he utilized the works of Ibn 1 Asakir and al- 
-’Azimi . and drew upon Ibn al-Qalanisi . ’Imad ad-Din and Ibn 
Shaddad for the events of the twelfth century A.D (14). Ibn 
al-Athir also used oral sources. He mentions in many occa¬ 
sions that he derived his information from trustworthy eye¬ 
witnesses. The chief oral source which he repeatedly re¬ 
ferred to especially in al-Bahir is his father, who, he 
says, acquainted him with most of the facts relating to 
Zengi’s life. He mentions him in phrases such as "my f-ather 
told me...". He, however acknowledges that he could not 
recount all that his father had told him, because he wrote 
from memory after his father’s death (15). Besides his fa¬ 
ther, Ibn al-Athir referred to many oral sources but without 
naming them. He usually relates that he was informed of 
certain fact by for example, "the most competent genealo¬ 
gist of his time", or "a trustworthy person told me ...", or 
"I was told by a man who is learned in histories of genealo¬ 
gies, and he is the one who has the greatest knowledge of 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 



122 


that, that..." (16). Ibn al-Athir, also, utilized many writ¬ 
ten sources, yet he did not name these books or their au¬ 
thors. In many instances he acknowledges that he found cer¬ 
tain information written in the books of history, or that he 
derived his information from a "certain historian..." (17). 
Moreover he used official documents in his chronicle. He 
mentions that he read some of the official correspondence of 
al-Qadi al-Fadil . the visier of Saladin, and he also relates 
that he once saw a letter in Saladin's own hand writing 
giving details of the defeat at Ramla in 573/1177 (18). 

In the introduction to al-Kamil . Ibn al-Athir des¬ 
cribes the method of using his sources; "I composed the most 
complete account of each event and I added to it other in¬ 
formations that were related by different versions of the 
same event" (19). Thus, Ibn al-Athir made it his practice to 
read the sources, compare them, set the events in different 
order and reproduce them. His attitude towards the sources 
was to use only trustworthy accounts, to study and compare 
the different versions of an event and to present the most 
accurate version in his own style. When conflict occurs 
among the sources regarding certain events, he would present 
the conflicting accounts. For example, when he relates the 
capture of Damascus by Tutush, he mentions that Ibn al- 
Hamathani recorded that this event occurred the year 471/ 
1078 while Ibn 'Asakir in his History of Damascus cited this 
event as taking place in the year 472/1079 (20). Sometimes, 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 




123 


Ibn al-Athir questioned the credibility of certain events 
recorded in his sources. If he believed that some of the 
material is legendary, he would not incorporate it in his 
work. When he recorded al Tabari *s accounts on the creation 
of the sun and the moon, he mentioned that he could not con¬ 
tinue writing because this information is legendary and is 
against logic (21). Unlike many of his sources such as Ibn 
l Asakir and al-Tabari . Ibn al-Athir when narrating the 
events omitted the chain of isnad . and presented one account 
of each event. 

In the last three volumes of al-Kamil . which covers 
the history of the Crusades, Ibn al-Athir’s historical 
treatment becomes more detailed. For his period, the mate¬ 
rial collected is abundant and his statements are balanced. 
He was the only one among his contemporaries to incorporate 
the movement of the Crusades in the great antagonism between 
Christianity and Islam. Before recording the arrival of the 
First Crusaders, Ibn al-Athir narrates in detail the polit¬ 
ical situation in Syria and the struggle between the Muslims 
and the Franks in Spain. Thus, when the Crusaders arrived in 
Syria, he connected this campaign to the Christian uprising 
against Islam, beginning with the reconquest of Spain and 
the Norman invasion of Sicily, and considered this as an 
organizsed movement directed against the Muslims in the East 
and West (22). This organized movement, according to Ibn al- 
Athir began in the year 478/1085-8, when the Franks invaded 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 




124 


Toledo, Tulaytila and other parts of Muslim territories in 
Spain. After they captured Sicily in 484/1091, the Franks 
made preparation to invade north Africa, but instead they 
decided to direct their expedition against the Muslims in 
the East. Ibn al-Athir’s explanation of the origin of the 
First Crusade is related as follows: "After Roger the Frank 
had conquered Sicily, Baldwin, the king of the Franks, and a 
kinsman of Roger, assembled a great army and sent words to 
Roger saying: "I have assembled a great army and now I am on 
my way to you to use your bases for the conquest of the Af¬ 
rican coast"(23). Roger objected to this idea since the 
Crusaders’ army would need supply and provisions and rein¬ 
forcement from his own troops. In addition, if the "Franks 
succeed in conquering this territory, they will take it over 
and will need provision from Sicily", and this will cost 
Roger his annual profit from the harvest. On the other hand, 
if they fail they would be an embarrassment to Roger. There¬ 
fore, he advised the messenger of Baldwin to direct the 
Crusaders’ army against the Muslims in the East and to lib¬ 
erate Jerusalem from their rule and, subsequently win a 
great honor (24). Ibn al-Athir, also, cites another reason 
for the invasion of the Crusaders. He accuses the Fatimids 
of Egypt of inviting the Franks to invade Syria in order to 
stop the Seljuks’ advance in Syria and Mesopotamia and to 
prevent them from attacking Egypt (25). Then Ibn al-Athir 
turns to describe the march of the Franks eastward, and 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 



125 


their arrival at Constantinople. He relates that the Byzan¬ 
tine emperor refused them permission to pass through his 
domains unless they agree to turn over Antioch to him after 
capturing it from the Muslims. He says: 

"The real intention of the emperor was to in¬ 
cite them to attack the Muslims, because he believed 
that the powerful Turks in Asia Minor would exter¬ 
minate all of them. They accepted his conditions and 
in 490/1097 they crossed the straits at Constanti¬ 
nople" (26). 

He then continues to describe the advance of the Crusaders 
towards northern Syria, and their subsequent success in 
conquering Antioch, Jerusalem and the establishment of Latin 
principalities in Syria and Palestine (27). Like Ibn al- 
Qalanisi, Ibn al-Athir relates the Muslims' reaction to the 
invasion of the Franks and the panic and confusion among 
Muslim leaders. The Muslim princes of Syria were reluctant 
to aid Yaghi Sivan . governor of Antioch in combating the 
Crusaders. Ibn al-Athir mentions that the Frankish leaders 
had some knowledge of the political situation in Syria and 
about the friction and fighting among the Muslim rulers. 
Therefore, they sent messengers to the amirs of Aleppo and 
Damascus informing them that they only intend to take the 
territories that were held by the Byzantines in the past, 
and that they had no desire to attack their domains, in 
order to discourage them from sending aid to Yaghi Sivan 
(28). The accounts given by Ibn al-Athir of the fall of 
Antioch and Jerusalem are generally accurate and agree with 
the accounts of Ibn al-Qalanisi and William of Tyre. He 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 



126 


gives many details concerning these events. He even records 

the episode of the discovery of the Lance by the Crusaders 

at Antioch. The story mentioned by him is similar to the one 

reported by the chroniclers of the First Crusade and William 

of Tyre. He, however, regards this story as a legend and 

describes how Peter Bartholomew hid the Lance and deceived 

every one. The story is related by Ibn al-Athir as follow: 

"Among the Christian leaders, there was a cunning 
priest, who had a great influence over them, pro¬ 
claimed that the Messiah had a lance buried in the 
Qusyan, a great building in Antioch; He told the 
leaders that if they find it they will be victori¬ 
ous, and if they fail they will surely be destroy¬ 
ed. This man, how ever, buried a lance in a certain 
place, and concealed all traces of it. Then he asked 
the Crusaders to fast and repent for three days. 
On the fourth day he led the leaders and common 
people to the spot, and after digging the lance was 
discovered, and the priest cried 'Rejoice! for vic¬ 
tory is secure’”.(29) 

After the fall of Jerusalem and the massacre of thou¬ 
sands of "learned and pious Muslims" in the Holy City, the 
people of Syria were outraged and angered by the lack of 
effort on the part of the Muslim leaders to stop the on¬ 
slaught of the Crusaders (30). Ibn al-Athir describes the 
miseries and sufferings of the Syrian refugees who went to 
Baghdad to ask for help; "They went to the Caliph’s mosque 
and begged for help, weeping, so that their hearers wept 
with them as they described the sufferings of the Muslims in 
the Holy City: the men killed, the women and children taken 
prisoners, the homes pillaged" (31). Like ibn al-Qalanisi, 
Ibn al-Athir blames the Muslim rulers for the Crusaders’ 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 



127 


victories and the humiliating defeat of the Muslims in Syria 
and Palestine. He writes: "While the Franks were conquering 
and settling in a part of the territories of Islam, the 
rulers and amirs of Islam were fighting among themselves 
causing discord and disunity among their people and weaken¬ 
ing their power to combat the enemy". (32) 

Ibn al-Athir gives detailed accounts regarding the 
Muslim counter attack against the Crusaders. Since he was a 
passionate partisan of the Zengid dynasty, he portrayed Imad 
ad-Din Zengi, the founder of the dynasty, as a leader who 
dedicated his life to waging ,iihad against the enemies of 
Islam and whose ultimate goal was to liberate Jerusalem. 
Unlike Ibn al-Qalanisi, who presented Tughtukin as the first 
Muslim ruler who attempted to unite the Muslims and combat 
the Crusaders, Ibn al-Athir believed that the Muslim resis¬ 
tance movement against the Franks started with Zengi. His 
accounts on the life of Zengi gives the impression that 
.iihad occupied a great place in Zengi’s career. He cites in 
detail every expedition against the Franks, and emphasize 
every victory over them (33). His campaigns against other 
Muslims were interpreted by Ibn al-Athir as an attempt by 
Zengi to unite the Muslims under his rule, in order to face 
the Frankish threat and prevent the Crusaders from conquer¬ 
ing all of Syria. It was "God’s will that Zengi rose to 
power so that he would rescue the Muslims from the imminent 
danger of the Franks" (34). When Zengi succeeded in captur- 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 




128 


ing many towns from the Franks including Ba’rin, Ma’rra and 

Kafartab, the inhabitants were presented by Ibn al-Athir as 

being thankful and glad to be rescued by Zengi from misery 

and constant pillaging and slaughter (35). The most glorious 

victory in the Atabek’s campaigns against the Crusaders 

according to Ibn al-Athir, was the recovery of Edessa from 

the Franks in 539/1144 (36). After describing this event in 

details, he relates the following incident to illustrate the 

importance of this victory. 

"In Sicily, there was a pious learned Muslim whom 
the king (Roger) held in great respect, relying on 
his advice rather than that of his own priests and 
monks; so much so that the people used to say that 
the king was really a Muslim. Once the king sent a 
naval expedition that ravaged Tripoli in North Af¬ 
rica, later when he was informed of the Chris tian’s 
victory he asked his wise Muslim companion, "what 
use is Muhammad now to his land and his people?". The 
Muslim replied: “He was not there. He was at Edessa 
which the Muslims have just cap tured". The Franks 
laughed, but the king said: "Do not laugh, for by God 
this man is incapable of speaking anything but the 
truth". A few days later the news arrived of the fall 
of Edessa" (37). 

Ibn al-Athir, also, cites another anecdote concerning the 
magnitude of the fall of Edessa. He relates that a holy man 
saw the dead Zengi in a dream and asked him, "How has God 
treated you?", Zengi answered, "God has pardoned me because 
I liberated Edessa" (38). 

When Zengi was assassinated in 541/1146 by a group of 
his courtiers, William of Tyre and Ibn al-Qalanisi mention 
that he was killed while being drunk, Ibn al-Athir, on the 
other hand neglects this detail. In fact, he bestowed upon 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 



129 


him the title shaheed "martyr", which implies that he was 
killed for the cause of Allah, and describes him as a pious. 
God-fearing man. Furthermore, he emphasized that Zengi was a 
just ruler and under his rule the strong dared not harm the 
weak and that he always defended the civilian population 
from intimidation and extortion by his troops (39). 

Nur ad-Din . Zengi *s son was treated the same by Ibn 
al-Athir. He was portrayed as the champion of Islam, who 
spent his whole life fighting the infidels. His campaign and 
wars with the Latins in the Holy land were reported in de¬ 
tail. Nur ad-Din . however, accomplished more victories over 
the Crusaders than his father. He was very popular with the 
Muslim public and with the *ulama as well as with the sufis . 
because he was sincere and successful in organizing and 
uniting the Muslims in Syria against the Franks. Another 
reason for his popularity was his propagation of orthodoxy 
by the foundation and endowment of religious institutions 
(mosques, madrasas, oratories, sufi convents, etc.), (40). 
Ibn al-Athir describes him as a brave, pious, just, and God¬ 
fearing, besides he compares him with the Rightly guided 
Caliphs. Among his virtues were austerity, humility and 
knowledge of theology and Muslim law (41). 

The chief defect of Ibn al-Athir as a historian is 
his bias and hostility against Saladin. His strong partia¬ 
lity for the house of Zengi influenced his judgement regard¬ 
ing Saladin in particular and the Ayyubids in general (42). 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 




130 


This attitude was criticized by medieval Muslim historians 
as well as by modern scholars. Abu Shama 599/1203, the auth¬ 
or of Kitab al-Rawdatayn refrained from using Ibn al-Athir’s 
works when writing on Saladin (43). Recently, Hamilton Gibb 
has established that Ibn al-Athir could not be considered as 
a primary source for the early history of the Crusades and 
especially for the life of Saladin. He also concluded that 
Ibn al-Athir’s accounts of the life of Saladin were taken 
directly from the works of Saladin’s secretary ’Imad ad-Din 
and rewritten with an occasional twist or admixture of fic¬ 
tion (44). Moreover, he shortened and paraphrased ’Imad ad- 
Din ’ s narratives and rearranged them in order to portray 
Saladin as an ambitious ruler, who used his military talents 
to satisfy his dynastic goals and to build up a vast empire 
(45). 

Ibn al-Athir’s hostility against Saladin started with 
the latter’s accession to power in Egypt which resulted in a 
continuous conflict between Nur ad-Din and Saladin. When the 
first decided to send Shirkuh in 564/1168 in an expedition 
to Egypt, and asked Saladin to join the forces of Shirkuh, 
Saladin reluctantly accepted to go (46). When Saladin suc¬ 
ceeded in establishing his rule in Egypt, Nur ad-Din asked 
him to join in the fighting against the Crusaders (47). 
Saladin’s failure to do so, made Ibn al-Athir accuses him of 
thwarting Nur ad-Din’s plans for the Holy war, and of being 
reluctant to fight the Franks as he should. He interprets 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 




131 


Saladin’s reluctance to join forces with Nur ad-Din, that 
the former was fearful of Nur ad-Din and of "finding him¬ 
self face to face with his lord, and that weakened Saladin’s 
enthusiasm, and made him content to have the Franks as a 
bulwark between them”. (48) 

Ibn al-Athir’s bias against Saladin, however, was not 
always maintained. In many occasions he describes him pru¬ 
dent, shrewd, and good-hearted man (49). After the great 
victories of Saladin over the Crusaders and especially after 
the liberation of Jerusalem, Ibn al-Athir remarks about the 
champion of Islam were admiring and laudatory. After des¬ 
cribing the capture of Jerusalem in 583/1187, Ibn al-Athir 
says:"This noble act of conquest was achieved after ’Umar 
Ibn al-Khattab . by no one but Saladin, and that is a suffi¬ 
cient title to glory and honor" (50). When Saladin died in 
589/1193 Ibn al-Athir eulogized him, and the descriptions he 
attributed to Saladin were not far different from those of 
Zengi and Nur ad-Din . He recounts him in the following: 

"Saladin, may God have mercy on him, was generous, 
merciful, humble, patient, never counts his 
friends’ mistakes, and in case he hears what does¬ 
n’t pleases him, he simply disregards it and never 
changes his treatment to any as a result. ...He was 
a pleasant companion, affectionate and shrewd. He was 
so generous that when he died he left only one Trrian 
dinar and forty Nasirite dirhams (drachmas). ... He 
treats all his guests with honor. He showed extra¬ 
ordinary hospitality to the poor and the sufis. Very 
few men are like him. His zeal and dedication to the 
holy war were proven by his great victories against 
the infidels". (51) 

Although Ibn al-Athir was the only one among his 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 



132 


Muslim contemporaries who attempted to explain the origin of 
the First Crusade, he as well as Ibn al-Qalanisi treated the 
wars with the Crusades as a minor subject in a more general 
history. His explanation of the coming of the First Crusad¬ 
ers was full of anecdotal details that have no historical 
validity. He acknowledges the fact that this invasion by the 
Crusaders is a part of a three pronged attack of the Chris¬ 
tian world against Islam: in Spain, in Sicily, and in the 
heartland of Islam (52). But beyond that he did not make any 
attempt to understand the distinct character of the Crusades 
or perceived what distinguished them from the other wars 
between Christians and Muslims. While his accounts cover in 
detail the battles, and alliances between Muslims and Cru¬ 
saders, they include very few remarks regarding the social 
and economical life of the Franks. In one place he describes 
the position of the Patriarch among the Latins saying: “He 
among the Franks, has the same status as that of the I mam 
among the Muslims. He mediates between opposing parties, and 
every one respects his decisions and obeys his orders" (53). 
In another place he mentions that the Patriarch carried 
greater authority than the king himself (54). When the Fran¬ 
ks came into contact with the Muslims they were presented as 
being courteous and generous. When the forces of Radwan of 
Aleppo and Tancred of Antioch, defeated the armies of Jawali 
of Mosul and Baldwin of Edessa in 502/1108, Ibn al-Athir 
relates that the defeated Muslims sought refuge with Baldwin 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 



133 


and Joscelin who fled to Tall Bashir . The Muslims were well- 
treated: "the wounded were cared for, the naked clothed, and 
all were led safely to their homes" (55). Ibn al-Athir, also 
mentions an incident when Tughtukin was defeated in 502/1108 
b y the Crusaders near Tripoli the king of Jerusalem sent 
him a message saying that he would not violate the four-year 
treaty concluded with him and that he would not take advant¬ 
age of his defeat (56). Like Ibn al-Oalanisi . Ibn al-Athir 
describes the Franks as brave and courageous people. When 
Saladin was besieging Jerusalem in 583/1187, he narrates how 
the Crusaders fought bravely to defend the city. When an 
envoy of the Crusaders met with Saladin he asked him for 
safe-conduct out of the city but Saladin refused their re¬ 
quest saying, "We shall deal with you just as you dealt with 
the inhabitants of Jerusalem when you took it in 492/1099, 
with murder and enslavement". After that, Balian Ibn Barzan, 
ruler of Ramlah asked Saladin for mercy but the latter still 
refused to grant his appeal. Finally despaired of this ap¬ 
proach Balian said: 

"Know, 0 Sultan, that there are very many of us in 
this city, God alone knows how many. At the moment 
we are fighting half-heartedly in the hope of saving 
our lives, hoping to be spared by you as you have 
spared others; this is because of our horror of death 
and our love of life. But if we see that death is 
inevitable, then by God we shall kill our children 
and our wives, burn our possessions, so as not to 
leave you with a dinar or a drachma or a single man 
or woman to enslave. When this is done, we shall pull 
down the Sanctuary of the Rock and the Masjid al-Aqsa 
and the other sacred places, slaughtering the Muslim 
prisoners we hold 5,000 of them and killing every 
horse and animal we possess. Then we shall come out 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 



134 


to fight you like men fighting for their lives, when 
each man, before he falls dead, kills his equals; we 
shall die with honor, or win a noble victory!" (57). 

Saladin then decided to allow the Franks to leave Jerusalem 

peacefully (58). The Crusaders were also presented as being 

interested in Muslim affairs. When Aosunqur was killed in 

520/1126 in Mosul, Bohemond of Antioch recieved the news 

before Aqsunqur 's son. In this respect Ibn al-Athir writes; 

"It is astonishing to know that the ruler ofAntioch 
sent a message to Izz ad-Din Ibn al-Bursuqui inform¬ 
ing him of the death of his father. The Franks knew 
of Aqsunqur’s death before his son, which demonst¬ 
rates to which degree the Crusaderswere interested in 
monitoring Muslims’ affairs" (59). 

On the other hand, Ibn al-Athir’s accounts display a wide 
range of knowledge and interest in the political situation 
of the Latin kingdom. He gives detailed information regard¬ 
ing the struggle between the opposing parties in the Latin 
kingdom (1180/87), which corresponds more or less with the 
accounts given by William of Tyre. He relates the events 
which led Guy de lusignan to power and the subsequent con¬ 
flict which arose between him and the established nobility 
of the kingdom. He explains that after the death of Baldwin 
IV in 1185, Kaymond of Tripoli whom "the Franks had no one 
braver or shrewder than he", was assigned as regent to the 
small king Baldwin V who later died in 1186. The kingdom 
passed to his mother Sibylla who married Guy de Lusignan and 
handed over the royal authority to him. The action of Sibyl¬ 
la displeased count Raymond, who was stripped of his autho¬ 
rity in the kingdom (60). Raymond contacted Saladin and es- 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 



135 


tablished a cordial relationship with him and asked him for 
help in achieving his ambition to rule the Franks. Saladin, 
happily agreed to provide every assistance and to help him 
carry out his plans. The Franks disapproval of Raymond’s 
relation with Saladin and this caused discord and disunity 
among them, and “that was one of the chief reasons why their 
towns were reconquered and Jerusalem fell to the Muslims". 
(61) 

When referring to Christian leaders, Ibn al-Athir 
complements them, and ascribes to them many virtues. He 
praised Joscelin as valiant and wise prince. When he was im¬ 
prisoned by Nur ad-Din in 546/1157, Ibn al-Athir considered 
this as a major victory, since Joscelin was a presumptuous 
devil and a formidable persecutor who inflicted too much 
sufferings upon the Muslim, and all Christians were saddened 
by his fate (62). Also, Ibn al-Athir praised king Amaury 
when he died in 570/1174, and described him as valiant and 
the most astute leader among the Franks (63). 

Ibn al-Athir’s methodology and style are, by and 
large, similar to those displayed by William of Tyre, Like 
all Latin historians of the Crusade, legendary material was 
included in his works. Tales of portents, prodigies, and 
omens, and natural disasters, such as floods, storms and 
earthquakes were recorded very often (64). But unlike the 
Latin historians, these supernatural occurrences were not 
employed to describe battles with the Crusaders. The Latin 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 


136 


historians^when describing a Christians’ victory of defeat- 
related miracles, and heavenly portents as signs from God to 
emphasize the religious and holy character of the Crusade. 
Ibn al-Athir, on the other hand includes these happenings in 
every year’s miscellaneous section without attaching to them 
any significance (65). He also doesn’t cite sin as a reason 
for Muslim defeats, but usually attributes defeats to the 
discord and disunity among the Muslims. Thus defeats were 
not interpreted as punishment from God because of the sins 
committed by the faithful. It was the will of God that caus¬ 
ed the Muslims to win or lose a war (66). In general, events 
were explained as manifestation of divine will. Divine pro¬ 
vidence is considered the reason for the out come of many 
events: "when God wills something, there is no gainsaying 
it" (67). Ibn al-Athir attempted to relate the causes and 

effects of certain events. For instance, he attempted to 
explain why the desire and ambition of the founders of dy¬ 
nasties to be succeeded by their own offsprings, usually are 
not fulfilled. He mentions cases from the Islamic history 
where the founder of a dynasty strives to deliver the au¬ 
thority to his own descendants, but the transfer of power 
usually goes from his line to an indirect branch of the fa¬ 
mily. The main reason " sabab 11 according to Ibn al-Athir is 
the fact that the founder seizes the power forcefully from 
others and commits atrocities against them, therefore God 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 



137 


deprives his begats from maintaining it (68). 

Ibn al-Athir like Latin and Muslim historians in¬ 
cludes anecdotal details in his accounts and presents a 
situation in terms of imaginary conversations or statements 
by the person concerned. For example, when Muwdud of Mosul 
was killed in Damascus in 507/1173, Ibn al-Athir, presents 
king Baldwin I as sending a letter to Tughtukin written in 
rhymed Arabic prose. The letter is recorded as follows: "A 
nation which has slain its support, on its festival day, in 
the house of the Being who it worships, justifies God in 
exterminating it" (70). Ibn al Athir, also, like Muslim and 
Latin historians had a tendency to exaggerate and give round 
pictorial numbers. When he relates the battle that took 
place in 495/1102 between Raymond of St. Gilles and Qilj 
Arslan, he mentions that the number of the Frankish soldiers 
was 100,000as opposed to "few Muslim, who were able to de¬ 
feat these large forces" (71). In another passage, he chal¬ 
lenges some exaggerated figures given by ’Imad ad-Din for 
the Zengid forces that were defeated by Saladin and explains 
the reason for this exaggeration. He writes: 

" ’Imad ad-Din mentions that the army of Saif ad- 
Din was twenty thousand, and this is not true. The 
true number of the soldiers was about six thousand, 
for I personally saw the official document regarding 
this battle, which was written by my brother Majid 

ad-Din . *Imad _ ad-Din therefor, in tended by exag 

gerating the number to glorify Saladin’s victory" 
(72). 

The style of Ibn al-Athir is generally clear, simple, 
and direct. In al-Kamil, he adopted the style of the his- 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 




138 


torian who is more concerned with the historical material 
than with effective and artistic language, whereas in al- 
Bahir his style is more of that of litterateur (adib) (73). 
He cared about the presentation of his material, and attemp¬ 
ted to make it lively and varied. Thus, he frequently uses 
anecdotal material to enliven the narrative with picturesque 
or dramatic incidents, and to provide opportunities for com¬ 
ment and moralizing (74). He quotes Qur’an to underline his 
meaning and to encapsulate the moral message (75). He also 
quotes poetry and uses proverbial expressions (76). 

In the introduction to a1-Kamil . Ibn al-Athir pre¬ 
sents his views of history and defends its usefulness. Like 
all medieval historians, he views history as a discipline 
that provides moral lessons for mankind and especially for 
rulers. He criticized the ideas of the ’Ulama of his time 
who "scorned history since it was merely stories and anec¬ 
dotes". He found it necessary to defend the discipline of 
history by pointing out its benefits "in this life and the 
life after" (77). 

"Human beings like to remain alive and prefer to be 
among the living. Reading about previous generations 
is like being there with them, and knowing events is 
like being present when they took place. Further¬ 
more, kings and rulers may find the biographies of 
oppressors and tyrants treatedin books which circu¬ 
late among the people and which are transmitted 
from generation to generation. They look at the ill 
fame and disgrace that were the consequences of oppr¬ 
ession and tyranny, the resulting destruction of 
countries and human lives, the financial loss and 
the general corruption. Therefore, they come to dis¬ 
approve of and avoid practices of oppression and in¬ 
justice. Like wise, they may see the biographies of 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 



139 


just rulers and how they were highly regarded by 
their subjects. Thus, they will try to follow this 
example" (78). "Moreover, history gives man experi¬ 
ence and knowledge of events and their outcome. It 
also teaches him that nothing can happen to him which 
didn’t happen before. He also could develop a good 
character and patience and scorn this mortal world 
with all its good and promises and disturbing evils" 
(79). 

At the end of his life, Ibn al-Athir witnessed the 
invasion and destruction of the Mongols, and the threat of 
the forces of the fifth Crusade to the land of Egypt. When 
recording the coming of the Mongols he blames the Muslim 
leaders especially the Caliph al-Nasir for inviting the Mon¬ 
gols to weaken the rule of Khawarizm Shah Muhammad (80). In 
the later sections of al-Kamil . Ibn al-Athir, like William, 
attributes the weakness of the Muslims to the ineffective¬ 
ness and demoralization of the Muslim leaders. He writes: 
"Among the rulers of Islam we see not one who desires to 
wage jihad or aid the religion. Each one devotes himself to 
his past time and amusements and to suppressing his people" 
(81). 

Like William, Ibn al-Athir’s views of his world at 
the end of his life were pessimistic. He expresses his sad¬ 
ness and frustration for the events threatening the Muslim 
world, and for the incapacity of Muslim leaders to save it. 
He saw the enemies surrounding the Muslims and was uncertain 
about the future. Like William who envisioned the dangers 
threatening the Latin kingdom and did not live to witness 
his prophecy coming true, Ibn al-Athir did not live to see 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 



140 


"the end of the Abbassid Caliphate and the sack of Baghdad by 
Hulagu in 1258 (82). 

The wealth of material collected in al-Kamil which 
covers the whole Muslim world and the attempt made by its 
author Ibn al-Athir to relate the events in a coherent and 
intelligent way and his critical use of the sources give his 
work the distinction of being the best historical work of 
the twelfth and thirteenth centuries. His accounts of the 
relation between the Muslims and the Crusaders are rich and 
factual. Regardless of his bias and prejudices against Sala- 
din, his work - al-Kamil fil-Tarikh remains a source of 
primary importance for the history of the Crusades. 

* * * 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 



141 


NOTES: 

1 - Ibn Khillikan, Wafayat al-A’van . vol. 3, p.35. 

2 - Ibid, vol. 3, p. 557. 

3 - Ibn al-athir, Al-Bahir fi Tarikh ad-Dawlah al- 
Atabekyya . A. Tulaymat (ed.), (Cairo 1962) p.10. 

4 - Ibid, p.12. 

5 - Ibn al-Athir, al-Kamil fi al-Tarikh . (Beirut 1965). 
vol. I, p. 11; Hilmy, A., "Some notes on Arabic Historio¬ 
graphy", p.88. 

6 - Al-Bahir . p. 18. 

7 - Al-Kamil . p. 2. 

8 - Ibid, vol. I, p. 4. 

9 - Ibid, vol. I, pp. 2-3; Hilmy, A., "Some notes...", pp. 

88-9; F. Rosenthal, A_ History of Muslim Historiography . 

(Leiden, 1968) p. 147. 

10- Hilmy, A., "Some notes...", p. 89. 

11- Al-Kamil . vol. I, pp. 4-5; Hilmy, "Some notes...", p. 
89. 

12- Ibid, vol. I, p. 3. 

13- Ibid, vol. V, p. 111. 

14- Cahen, C., La Svrie du Nord . p. 50. 

15- Al-Kamil . vol. XI, pp. 44, 110-111, 309, 356; Al- 

Bahir . p. 3. 

16- Al-Kamil . vol. XI, p. 100; Hilmy, "Some notes...", 
p. 89. 

17- Ibid, vol. XI, p. 178; D.S.Richards, "Ibn al-Athir and 
the later parts of the Kamil: A Study fo Aims and 

Methods", in Medieval Historical Writing in The Christian 
and Islamic Worlds . D.O.Morgan (ed.), (London 1982), p. 88. 

18- Ibid, vol. XI, p. 429, 443. 

19- Ibid, vol. XI, p. 3. 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 



20- Ibid, vol. X, p. 111. 

21- Ibid, vol. I, p. 14. 

22- Ibid, vol. X, p. 142, 151. 


142 


23- Ibid, 
Crusades, p, 

vol 
. 31 

. x, 

p. 272; Babrieli, Arab Historians of the 

24- 

Ibid, 

P- 

34; 

Al-Kamil. vol. X. d. 273. 

25- 

Ibid, 

vol 

. x, 

p. 273. 

26- 

Ibid, 

vol 

. x, 

p. 274. 

27- 

Ibid, 

vol 

. X, 

PP. 275-78. 

28- 

Ibid, 

vol 

. x, 

p. 275. 

29- 

p. 8. 

Ibid, 

vol 

. X, 

p. 277; Gabrieli. Arab Historians. 

30- 

Al-Kamil. 

vol 

. X, p. 284. 

31- 

Ibid, 

vol 

. x, 

p. 285-8; Cabrieli. Arab Historians. 


p. 11. 

32- Ibid, p. 18; A1-Kamil . vol. X, p. 373. 

33- Ibid, vol. XI, pp. 51-2, 98-100. 

34- Ibid, vol. X, p. 651. 

35- Ibid, vol. XI, pp. 51-2. 

36- Ibid, vol. XI, pp. 98-9. 

37- Ibid, vol. XI, p. 100; Gabrieli, Arab Historians , 
p. 53. 

38- Ibid, p. 53; Al-Kamil . vol. XI, p. 100. 

39- Ibid, vol. XI, p. Ill; Gabrieli, Arab Historians , 
p. 54. 

40- Gibb, "The achievement of Saladin", in Studies in 
Islamic History . Yusuf Ibish (ed.), (Beirut 1974) p. 162. 

41- Al-Kamil . vol. XI, pp. 401-5; Gabrieli, Arab Histor¬ 
ians . p. 72. 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 



143 


42- F. Gabrieli, "Arabic Historiography of the Cru¬ 
sades", p. 104. 

43- Abu Shama, Al-Rawdatayn fi Akhbar al-Dawlatavn . H. 
Ahmad (ed.), (Cairo 1956); Hilmy, "Some notes...", p. 90. 

44- H. Gibb, "The achievement of Saladin", p. 159. 

45- H. Gibb, "Arabic Sources for the life of Saladin", 
Speculum . XXV, (1950), p. 66. 

46- A1-Kamil , vol. XI, p. 338. 

47- Ibid, vol. XI, pp. 340, 371, 392-3. 

48- Ibid, vol. X, pp. 402-4; Gabrieli, Arab Historians , 
p. 69. 

49- A1-Kamil . vol. XI, p. 533. 

50- Ibid, vol. XI, 553; Gabrieli, Arab Historians , p. 146. 

51- A1-Kamil . vol. XII, pp. 95-7. 

52- Ibid, vol. X, pp. 272-3; Rosenthal, Mualim Historio¬ 
graphy , p. 147. 

53- A1-Kamil , vol. X, p. 461. 

54- Ibid, vol. X, p. 546; Gabrieli, Arab Historians . p. 
139. 

55- Ibid, p. 23; Al-Kamil . vol. X, p. 466. 

56- Ibid, vol. X, p\ 469. 

57- Ibid, vol. XI, pp. 458-9; Gabrieli, Arab Historians . 
PP 141-2. 

58- Al-Kamil . vol. XI, p. 550. 

59- Ibid, vol. X, p. 635. 

60- Ibid, vol. XI, p. 526; Gabrieli, Arab Historians . 

P. 114. 

61- Ibid, vol. XI, p. 527. 

62- Al-Kamil . vol. XI, pp. 154-5. 

63- Ibid, vol. XI, p. 419. 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 


144 


64- Richards, "Ibn al-Athir", p. 87; A1-Kamil . vol. X, p. 
471. 

65- Ibid, vol. XI, 175. 

66- Ibid, vol. XI, p. 9. 

67- Ibid, vol. X, p. 412; Richards, "Ibn al-Athir", 
p. 89. 

68- Al-Kamil . vol. XI, pp. 344-5. 

69- Ibid, vol. XI, p. 195, 197, 235, 335. 

70- Ibid, vol. X, p. 497; Gibb, "Notes on the History of 
the Early Crusades", p.751. 

71- Al-Kamil . vol. X, pp. 343-4; Gabrieli, Arab Histor¬ 
ians . p. 14. 

72- Al-Kamil . vol. X, p. 429. 

73- Al-Bahir . introduction, p. 18; Richards, "Ibn al- 
Athir", p. 91. 

74- Ibid, p. 89; Gibb, "Notes on Arabic Historiography", 
p. 750. 

75- Al-Kamil . vol. XI, pp. 338-41. 

76- Ibid, vol. XI, p. 132. 

77- Ibid, vol. I, p. 6. 

78- Ibid, vol. I, p. 7; Rosenthal, Muslim Historiography , 
p. 299. 

79- Ibid, p. 300; Hilmy, "Some notes", p. 81; Al-Kamil . 
vol. I, p. 8. 

80- Ibid, vol. XII, p. 501. 

81- Ibid, vol. XII, p. 497; Richards, "Ibn al-Athir", 
p. 97. 

82- Ibid, p. 98. 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 



145 


Chapter Five 

William of Tyre and Ibn Al-Athir : 

A comparative Study 

When reading William’s history and Ibn al-Athir’s 
accounts on the history of the Crusades, one is compelled to 
note the consistency and similarity that exist between the 
two works. While William composed a unified and coherent 
work that has as its main theme - the history of the Latin 
kingdom of Jerusalem down to the year 1184, the history of 
the Crusades in Ibn al-Athir’s chronicle is a minor subject 
in a more general history. Ibn al-Athir’s work al-Kamil was 
designed to be a universal history that begins with the 
creation and records events that took place all over the 
Muslim world with no emphasis on any particular area. Not¬ 
withstanding the different forms of the two chronicles, 
their accounts regarding the early history of the Crusades 
are very similar, though Ibn al-Athir’s narratives are 
usually less detailed than William’s. 

The history of the First Crusade in William’s work 
begins with the council of Clermont in 1095. Ibn al-Athir, 
however, relates the coming of the First Crusaders when they 
arrived at Antioch 490/1097. He gives a brief account of the 
siege and fall of the city in 1098. The information related 
regarding these events is similar to that narrated by wil¬ 
liam; the siege took nine months, during which the Franks 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 



146 


suffered starvation and death. The fall of Antioch is blamed 
on Rosba (firuz), who in return for money and land, aided 
the Franks and allowed them to come over the towers (1). 
William on the other side, describes Firuz as a faithful 
Christian, who offered his service for no material gain, 
except to free his former land (Antioch) from "these unclean 
dogs" (Muslims) under whose rule the local Christians were 
oppressed, and to allow the Latins who "worship God" to rule 
the city so that everyone can "enjoy the society of the 
blessed Saints forever" (2). When Antioch was captured by 
the Crusaders, Ibn al-Athir relates that Yaghi Siyan its 
governor, fell off his horse while fleeing the city, when an 
Armenian noticed this and killed him (3). William on the 
other hand mentions that, while Yaghi Siyan was wondering 
alone, a group of Armenians saw him, threw him to the ground 
and killed him (4). After the fall of Antioch, the Muslims 
organized an army led by Kerbugha that laid siege to the 
city. Subsequently, the Muslims and the Crusaders engaged in 
a battle that resulted in the defeat of the latter. Ibn al- 
athir gives a brief account of this event and sees Kerbu¬ 
gha *s arrogance and ill-treatment of his troops as the 
reason for the Muslims’ defeat (5). Moreover, he rebukes 
Kerbugha for not listening to the advice of his aides to 
fight the Franks while they were leaving the city from dif¬ 
ferent gates; for they would be scattered and could not 
fight effectively. Kerbugha refused this suggestion and 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 




147 


insisted on fighting the Christians when all of them got out 
of the city (6). William describes the battle in detail and 
relates, contrary to the account of Ibn al-Athir, that Ker- 
bugha instructed his troops to fight the Franks as soon as 
they started leaving the city (7). He also mentions that 
Qil.i Arslan was the commander of the Muslim army (8). This 
detail, which is not included in al-Kamil, is not accurate, 
since Qil.i Arslan during that period was campaigning in Asia 
Minor (9). 

The first time Ibn al-Athir used the phrase "May 
Allah curse them" (the Crusaders), was after the capture of 
Jerusalem in 1099. He narrates the event briefly, concen¬ 
trating mainly on the atrocities committed by the Franks 
against the inhabitants of the city (10). William regards 
the fall of Jerusalem as the end of the pilgrimage and gives 
a detailed account that contains legendary material. He 
starts by describing the geography of Jerusalem, and relates 
its history. The siege and subsequent fall of the city are 
narrated in detail, including the massacre of the local 
citizens (11). 

Although, William in his analysis of the causes for 
the decline of the Latin kingdom, recognizes that among the 
reasons for the success of the First Crusade was the dis¬ 
unity and discord that existed amongst the Muslims at that 
time (12), he usually argues that the Muslims reacted to the 
threat of the First Crusaders by uniting and organizing 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 




148 


their forces (13). After the capture of Jerusalem, the Egyp¬ 
tians launched an expedition against the newly established 
kingdom. Ibn al-Athir mentions that the Muslims were sur¬ 
prised by a sudden attack from the Franks and were defeated 
(14). According to him it was divine providence that won the 
Christians victory; "For their belief in Him, He usually 
grants them victory even agaist a large enemy" (15). This 
event is described in detail by William, who states that the 
Muslim armies were "countless", composed of Egyptians, 
Turks, and Arabs, and yet they were defeated. The tendency 
to present the Muslims as a mighty foe, and to exaggerate 
their numbers, is employed by William to emphasize the mira¬ 
culous nature of the Crusade. 

One of the main differences, between the histories of 
William and Ibn al-Athir, is that whereas the former in¬ 
terprets every defeat suffered by the Christians as a puni¬ 
shment from God because of their sins, Ibn al-Athir never 
cites sin as a reason for the Muslims' defeat. After the 
establishment of the Latin kingdom, the Crusaders suffered 
their first major defeat in 497/1104. William describes how 
Tancred of Antioch, Baldwin of Edessa, and Joscelin agreed 
to cross the Euphrates in 1104 and besiege the city of Har- 
ran in Mesopotamia. After describing the geography and nar¬ 
rating the history of the city, he explains the plan design¬ 
ed by the leaders to capture the city; they intended to 
force the inhabitants to surrender by depriving them from 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 


149 


food supplies and subsequently leaveing them to suffer fam¬ 
ine and starvation. Indeed, the citizens agreed to surrender 
the city, but the Christians lost it while arguing about who 
should rule it: "when all is ready, it is hazardous to de¬ 
lay" (16). Meanwhile, the Muslims arrived at the city with 
an "army of Turks so numerous and formidable that the Chris¬ 
tians began to doubt whether it would be possible to save 
even their lives". Then William turns to discuss the Mus¬ 
lims’ plan to free the city and the preparations for battle 
made by the Christian army. The Crusaders were defeated be¬ 
cause "the favor of God was lacking" (17). William displays 
his disgust at the Christian soldiers as well as leaders for 
they "turned their backs on the foe in disgraceful flight 
abandoning their camp with all it contained, and thought 
only of seeking safety, which, alas, was nowhere to be 
found" (18). Baldwin "punished because of his sins" and 
Joscelin, his kinsman, were taken prisoner and "carried of 
in chains to a far distant part of the enemy’s land" (19). 
The significance of this battle is indicated by William; 

"Never during the rule of the Latins in the East, 
whether before or after this event, do we read of 
abattle so disastrous as this one, which resulted 
in so terrible a massacre of brave men and so dis¬ 
graceful a flight of the people of our race" (20). 

In Ibn al-Athir’s version of that same event, he records 

that in 497/1104 Suomanan and Chekremish decided to join 

forces to fight the Franks at Harran . which was besieged by 

the Christians. "Each declared that he offered himself to 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 


150 


God and sought a reward in heaven alone" (21). Suoman had 
seven thousand Turcomen and Chekermish three thousand caval¬ 
ry, and together they encountered the enemy on the bank of 
Balikh river, where a battle took place. The Muslims’ plan 
was to pretend that they were retreating, and then turn on 
the Franks, who were pursuing them, so they killed many and 
captured much booty (22). Bohemond and Tancred were sepa¬ 
rated from the main army and hid behind a hill from which 
they were to fall on the Muslims from the rear at the height 
of the battle. When they emerged they found the Christians 
fleeing and their land being pillaged, so they decided to 
wait until it was dark and then retreated. The Muslims pur¬ 
sued them and killed twelve thousand. Baldwin of Edessa was 
captured by Chekermish . who took him to Mosul where he fixed 
his ransom at thirty five thousand dinars and a hundred and 
sixty Muslim prisoners (23). 

It was a common political practice in Syria in the 
eleventh and early twelfth centuries to conclude truces and 
alliances' between Muslim states against Christians on one 
hand, and between Muslims and Christians against other Mus¬ 
lims or Christians on the other Thus when Ibn al-Athir re¬ 
lates an alliance or a truce that was concluded between Mus¬ 
lims and Franks, he usually does not condone or condemn such 
a practice. Unlike William, who in the beginning did not 
approve of such alliances but later accepted them, especial¬ 
ly if they benefited the Christians, Ibn al-Athir records 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 




151 


these episodes without attaching any importance to them. 
When Baldwin and Joscelin were released by Jawali of Mosul 
in 501/1108, he mentions that the later freed them in return 
for an enormous sums of money, and for a promise from Bald¬ 
win to help Jawali when requested (24). Baldwin, after being 
released, went to Tancred of Antioch and demanded the resto¬ 
ration of Edessa to himself. When Tancred refused to accede 
to his demand, he united his forces with Joscelin at Tall 
Bashir . Meanwhile, Tancred prepared to launch an attack 
against Baldwin before he had the opportunity to organize 
his army and collect reinforcement. Before Jawali could come 
to his aid. Baldwin and Joscelin made a series of raids on 
Tancred’s territory with the help of Muslim and Armenian 
troops. Tancred sent to the Patriarch of Edessa, "whose 
status, like that of the Imam among the Muslims, commanded 
everyone’s obedience", asking him to mediate between Baldwin 
and himself. The Patriarch succeeded in resolving the issue, 
and consequently Tancred restored the city to Baldwin (25). 
While William gives an account similar to that of Ibn al- 
Athir, he does not mention that Jawali had released Baldwin 
and Joscelin. According to him, the Christian leaders killed 
the guards and escaped at night, travelling over devious 
paths, until they reached their own land (26). The omission 
of such a detail could be ascribed to the fact that during 
the early period of the Crusade allying with Muslims was 
considered to be against the ideals of the Crusade and was 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 




152 


regarded as a shameful act. When joscelin of Edessa in 1127 
made an alliance with the Muslims against Bohemond II of 
Antioch, William considered this as "a hateful act in the 
eyes of God*' since it is contrary to the “honorable custom 
and laws of our time, an act which established a vicious 
precedent for his descendants" (27). Thus, William believes 
that the first time a Christian leader made an alliance with 
Muslims was in the year 1127. While Ibn al-Athir, relates 
that in 1104 Baldwin sent aid to Jawali . whenever he re¬ 
quested (28). Moreover, Ibn al-Athir records that in 502/ 
1109, Tancred of Antioch and Ridwan of Aleppo joined forces 
against Jawali of Mosul and Baldwin of Edessa (29). Tancred 
had one thousand and five hundred of his own cavalry and six 
hundred from Ridwan. When the battle had started Baldwin and 
Joscelin were in the center, where they fought against the 
other Franks from Antioch. After some violent fighting, the 
forces of Jawali and Baldwin were defeated and forced to 
retreat to Tall Bashir. There, many Muslims sought refuge 
with Baldwin and Joscelin and were treated kindly by them: 
“The wounded were cared for, the naked clothed, and all sent 
on their way home" (30). This event is not recorded in Wil¬ 
liam’s history. 

It is noteworthy, that the Muslims were alert to and 
concerned with the Latin affairs. This interest is illus¬ 
trated in the reports included in Ibn al-Athir’s narrative 
regarding the events taking place in the Christian princi- 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 




153 


palities. For example, Ibn al-Athir gives an identical ac¬ 
count to that of William concerning the death of king Bald¬ 
win in 512/1118. He relates that the king died of a wound 
while swimming in the Nile. He went to Jerusalem where he 
assigned his brother Baldwin of Edessa, who was visiting the 
city as his designated successor (31). 

The Muslim counter-attack against the Crusader states 
began to be more effective and more damaging to the Crusad¬ 
ers at the early half of the twelfth century. In 513/ 
1119, al-Ghazi of Aleppo gathered a large army of twenty 
thousand and marched against the Frankish territories around 
Antioch. Ibn al-Athir reports that the Christians reacted by 
assembling an army of three thousand knights and nine thou¬ 
sand cavalry and encamped near Atharib. Subsequently a bat¬ 
tle took place, and the Franks were defeated and their lead¬ 
er Roger (Serjal) of Antioch was killed and the Muslims 
reconquered Atharib (32). William gives a more elaborate and 
detailed account of this event. He states the number of the 
Christian knights was seven hundred and the infantry three 
thousand (less than the numbers given by Ibn al-Athir), and 
mentions that the number of the Muslims was sixty thousand, 
which is undoubtedly extravagant (33). The defeat of the 
Christian forces was blamed on an incident that took place 
during the battle: "A terrible whirlwind came forth out of 
the north. As it writhed along it swept with it such clouds 
of dust that the men of both sides were blinded and could 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 




154 


not fight. Because of this unlucky occurrence the enemy won 
the victory” (34). Moreover, the defeat is interpreted as a 
punishment from God for the sins committed by the Chris¬ 
tians: "because of our sins, scarcely a man of the many 
thousands who had followed their lord that day escaped to 
tell the story. On the other hand, few or none of the foe 
were slain” (35). 

The fall of Tyre to the Crusaders in 1124, a strat¬ 
egic and very important city, was a major loss to the Mus¬ 
lims. Regarding this event, Ibn al-Athir gives a brief yet 
coherent account that is similar to that given by William. 
He states that after a long siege (three months) the city 
surrendered peacefully and its inhabitants were allowed to 
leave with their possessions. He also acknowledges that this 
was a disastrous defeat for the Muslims not only because of 
the city’s strategic location, but also because it is a 
fortified place: "May Allah return it to Islam" (36). While 
Ibn al-Athir regards that the fall of Tyre was a great loss 
to the Muslims, he does not ascribe this defeat to divine 
providence or considers it punishment for Muslims’ sins. 
William on the other hand, presents an elaborate account of 
the siege and subsequent capture of Tyre. He, however, sta¬ 
rts by relating the city’s history and then gives detailed 
description of its geography and strategic importance for 
the Latins. Thus when the city was conquered, William stat¬ 
es; "it was an achievement worthy of remembrance".(37) 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 



155 


The Muslims’ counter attack against the Crusaders 
under the leadership of Zengi was underlined and recorded in 
detail by Ibn al-Athir. His zealous partiality to the Zengid 
dynasty caused him to present Zengi as the first Muslim 
ruler who devoted his life to waging .jihad against the in¬ 
fidels. The first major victory achieved by Zengi, against 
the Franks, was the capture of Ba’rin (Montferrand). In 
531/1137, while Zengi was besieging the fortress of Ba*rin . 
the Franks gathered their forces and marched to lift the 
siege. Subsequently, a battle took place and resulted in the 
rout of the Franks. The leader of the Franks, king Fulk and 
his barons, retreated inside the fort of Ba’rin . which the 
Muslims were besieging. Zengi surrounded the place and con¬ 
trolled the movement of the Franks. Moreover, he cut off all 
means of communication between the besieged and the Franks 
outside. Upon hearing of the fate of the Christians inside 
the fort, the priests and monks travelled across the Byzan¬ 
tine empire, the countries of the Franks and the neighboring 
Christian principalities, asking for volunteers to raise 
armies in order to fight the Muslims, while warning them if 
"Zengi took Ba’rin and the Franks inside it he would overrun 
all their lands in no time, for there would be no one to 
defend them". Furthermore, they declared that the Muslims 
had but one ambition: "to march on Jerusalem" (38). There¬ 
fore, the Franks led by the Byzantine emperor mustered their 
troops and advanced toward Syria. Meanwhile, the Franks 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 


156 


inside the fortress exhausted by starvation, not knowing 
that relief forces were on the way, decided to surrender to 
Zengi (39). The Franks could not believe that any one could 
put them on the defensive and were expecting to take over 
the whole of Syria themselves. But Zengi, with his constant 
attack, prevented them from achieving their goal. Ibn al- 
Athir’s presentation of Zengi as a mighty enemy of the 
Franks, and a leader who was striving to inflict harm upon 
the Crusaders is not an exaggeration. William, in his ac¬ 
count regarding the siege of Ba’rin . for the first time 
describes a Muslim ruler (Zengi) as a "very wicked man and 
most cruel persecutor of the Christians" (40). 

The increasing threat of Zengi to the Crusaders as 
well as to other Muslim rulers in Syria, forced the two to 
join forces together and to fight against their common ene¬ 
my. In 534/1139-40 when Zengi launched an attack on Damas¬ 
cus, intending to capture it, William states that Anar its 
governor, dispatched envoys to the king of Jerusalem begging 
for his aid against a "cruel enemy" equally dangerous to 
both kingdoms. The Christian king agreed to help Anar since 
the latter promised to pay the expenses of the campaign. He 
also guaranteed to hand over the city of Banyas to the Cru¬ 
saders as soon as Zengi’s forces were driven from Damascus 
(41). When Zengi heard of the approach of the Frankish army 
he hastily withdrew from the land of Damascus. Anar kept his 
promise, and marched with the Crusaders to Banyas to restore 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 



157 


it to the Christians "whose favor he enjoyed, rather than 
see it held by an enemy (Zengi), whom he greatly feared and 
distrusted" (42). The allied forces laid siege to the city 
and attacked its inhabitants. William, who earlier had cri¬ 
ticized the policy of making alliances with Muslims, con¬ 
sidered this alliance between the Christians and the Damas¬ 
cenes as a good policy, since it benefitted the Crusaders by 
restoring Banyas to them (43). Furthermore, he describes how 
astonishing it was to witness such a novel sight, "a hostile 
people encouraging an enemy to the fiercest warfare and as 
an ally, actually, in arms for the destruction of a common 
foe... Christians and Damascenes were equal in courage and 
united in purpose" (44). Ibn al-Athir’s version of this 
event, though brief, accords with that narrated by William. 
He mentions the agreement concluded between Anar and the 
Frankish king concerning Banyas. According to him, the 
Franks agreed to help Anar, because they believed that Zengi 
was a greater menace to them, and they could not afford to 
let him capture Damascus (45). Unlike William, Ibn al-Athir 
records the alliance between the Crusaders and Anar without 
ascribing to it any significance. 

Zengi was not the only one trying to capture Damas¬ 
cus. After the establishment of the Latin kingdom in Jeru¬ 
salem, the Latin kings launched many campaigns to capture 
the city because of its strategic importance and strong for¬ 
tifications. In 543/1148 the armies of the Second Crusade 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 



158 


led by the German emperor Conrad and the French king Louis, 
along with the Frankish armies laid siege to the city, but 
this campaign, according to William, was destined to failure 
from its start, because "the forces departed (from Europe) 
under unlucky auspices, however, and with sinister omens. 
For they started on the way in a manner contrary to the will 
of an angry God, and, in punishment for the sins of man, 
they accomplished nothing pleasing to Him" (47). When West¬ 
ern leaders decided to besiege Damascus, it seemed certain 
to William that, "if divine power was propitious, the city 
would soon be taken by the Christians. But He judged other¬ 
wise" (48). William here does not cite sins and divine pro¬ 
vidence as the only reason for the Christians’ failure in 
capturing the city. He attributes the defeat to the cupidity 
and avarice of some of the Christians, who accepted bribes 
from the Damascenes in return for persuading the leaders to 
change their position and besiege the city from the opposite 
side. The Christian leaders soon realized that this side was 
far from food and water supplies and that "treachery had 
been at work" (49). Ibn al-Athir does not mention such a 
shift in the Christian camp. His narratives of the event 
indicates that the Franks remained in the same area until 
they abandoned the siege (50). He ascribes the retreat of 
the Franks to the fact that Anar, governor of Damascus, 
asked Saif ad-Din of Mosul to provide him with aid and re¬ 
inforcement to combat the Christians, and in return he would 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 



159 


hand Damascus over to him. Moreover, he sent threatening 
message to the Franks urging them to break off the siege. To 
the westerner franks he sent another message warning them 
that the king of the East (Saif ad-din) had arrived and "if 
you do not retreat I shall hand the city over to him, and 
then by God you will repent" (51). He also sent a message to 
the Syrian Franks asking them "what reason have you for sup¬ 
porting these people (European Franks) against us when you 
know that if they take the city they will seize your posses¬ 
sions on the coast. I warn you that if I feel that I am los¬ 
ing the battle I shall hand the city over to Saif ad-Din, 
and you may be sure that if he becomes ruler of Damascus you 
will not be allowed to keep a foothold in Syria" (52). Ibn 
al-Qalanisi who was inside the city during the siege and is 
considered the best authority on this incident, relates that 
the Crusaders were forced to lift the siege when reinforce¬ 
ment from Turcoman troops arrived and surrounded the Franks, 
breaking down their defence (53). Thus Ibn al-Athir’s expla¬ 
nation of the failure of the Crusaders is anecdotal and had 
no basis. His presentation of Saif ad-Din Zengi’s son as a 
powerful ruler, whom the Franks dreaded, illustrates his 
tendency to glorify and exalt the Zengid dynasty. 

Though ibn al-Athir used the chronological method in 
arranging his accounts, he often records many events that 
occurred over several years coherently and perpetually from 
the beginning to the end without interruption. Surprisingly, 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 



160 


William, whose work appears to be coherent and uniformed, 
does not follow Ibn al-Athir in practicing this method. In 
many instances, he starts to narrate the event, then inter¬ 
rupts it to record another incident that took place at the 
same time and after that resumes his account. Throughout 
William’s work, the chronological method is employed in re¬ 
cording many events. The difference is that whereas Ibn al- 
Athir arranges the events according to the year of their 
accurance and the year appears at the beginning of each 
account, William arranges his accounts chronologically but 
does not put them under such heading. For example, in book 
twenty, chapter three, he writes "scarcely anything worthy 
of note occurred in the kingdom during this year" (54). In 
the account concerning Shirkuh’s expedition against Egypt 
and the alliance between the Latin king of Jerusalem and the 
Egyptians in 559/ 1163-4, William starts his narrative by 
describing the conflict between the vizir Dirgham, and his 
rival Shawar . He then relates that shawar was driven out of 
Egypt and went to Nur ad-Din asking for aid to drive out his 
rival and obtain control of the kingdom. He promised in 
return to give Nur ad-Din one third of the country’s revenue 
and to allow Shirkuh to remain in Egypt as Nur ad-Din's 
deputy, the latter, however, reluctantly agreed to send 
Shirkuh who was "an able and energetic warrior eager for 
glory and of wide experience in military affairs" (55). 
Meanwhile Dirgham appealed to king Amaury for assistance and 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 



161 


in return he promised to pay large tributes and to give 
hostages as a guarantee (56). William then interrupts the 
narrative to relate the death of Peter, archbishop of Tyre 
and the appointment of Frederick, bishop of Acre as his 
successor. He writes, "About the same time, on March 1, in 
the second year of king Amaury’s reign, Peter,... arch¬ 
bishop of Tyre went the way of flesh" (57). After that he 
resumes relating the situation in Egypt. When Shirkuh de¬ 
feated Dirgham and entered Cairo, Shawar violated his agree¬ 
ment with Nur ad-Din and contacted the Franks asking for 
their assistance in driving Shirkuh from Egypt (58). Ibn 
al-Athir relates that the Franks agreed to aid Shawar be¬ 
cause they were afraid that if Nur ad-Din took Egypt, he 
would be a great threat to them (59). The Frankish and Egyp¬ 
tian forces besieged Shirkuh in the city of Balbis, where he 
was forced to surrender and ultimately leave Egypt (60). Ibn 
al-Athir who gives a complete and comprehensive account, 
nearly identical to William’s regarding this event, but he 
does not stop here. He continues to relate that the Franks 
upon hearing the news of Nur ad-Din’s campaigns in Syria and 
his capture of the Crusaders’ fortress of Harim decided to 
lift the siege of Balbis . where Shirkuh was and allow him to 
leave so that they could return to their land and protect it 
from Nur ad-Din (61). William, on the other hand, describes 
Nur ad-Din’s activity in Syria separately. Nur ad-Din’s 
constant attacks on the Christian principalities alarmed the 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 



162 


Crusaders and in order to combat the new threat, they organ¬ 
ized an army led by Bohemond III of Antioch, Raymond count 
of Tripoli, Colman governor of Cilicia, and Thoros (an Arme¬ 
nian prince), and they marched toward the fortress while Nur 
ad-Din was besieging Harim in 559/1163 (62). They subse¬ 
quently forced Nur ad-Din to abandon the siege. However, 
they were not content with that alone. They pursued the 
Muslims who rallied their forces and turned upon them. A 
battle took place and the Christians were defeated (63). 
William for the first time does not cite sins and divine 
will as the reason for the Crusaders’ defeat. Instead, he 
blames the poor judgment of the Christian leaders for their 
decision to pursue the Muslims. Moreover, he criticize the 
Christian army for not fighting bravely, saying: 

"None called to mind his former valor, no one re¬ 
membering his own prestige and that of his fathers 
strove to overt disaster or to fight for the 
defense of the liberty and glory of his ancestors. 
Regardless of honor, all threw down their arms pre¬ 
cipitately and ignominiously begged for life, which 
would have been better expended in fighting manfully 
for the fatherland as an example for posterity." (64) 

He also denounced the Christian leaders, who in the hope of 
saving their lives at the cost of "shame and reproach", sur¬ 
rendered to the Muslims. They were "chained like the lowest 
slaves and led ignominiously to Aleppo, where they were cast 
into prison and became the sport of the infidels" (65). The 
result of this humiliating defeat of the Crusaders, accord¬ 
ing to William, was that "Nur ad-Din had become so arrogant 
that he decided to besiege the city of Banyas" (66). Subse- 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 



163 


quently, the city was forced to surrender, and Nur ad-Din 
allowed its inhabitants to leave unmolested with all their 
possessions (67). Ibn al-Athir celebrates this victory and 
relates an anecdote in which, for the first time, he com¬ 
ments on the subject of alliances between Muslims and Fran¬ 
ks. He states that when the city was taken, the son of Anar, 
who handed Banyas over to the Franks in 534/1140, was among 
Nur ad-Din’s troops. Nur ad-Din said to him: "For the Mus¬ 
lims this victory brings one joy, but for you the joy is 
double". Then Anar’s son asked: "How could that be?" Nur ad- 
Din replied: "Because today God has saved the skin of your 
father from Hell’s flames" (68). 

Anecdotes and imaginary dialogues were employed both 
by Ibn al-Athir and William. For instance, when Shirkuh 
decided in 562/ 1166 to launch another campaign against 
Egypt, William relates that he first went to Baghdad to ask 
the Caliph for aid and assistance in conquering Egypt. He 
displayed to him the immense wealth of the country and the 
ignorance of its people in the art of war. Furthermore, he 
argued that if he succeeded in capturing Egypt, he would get 
rid of the Caliph’s rival, the Fatimid Caliph. Hence, the 
Caliph decided to help Shirkuh so he wrote to all "the 
princes, who accepted his false doctrine and commanded them 
strictly to muster their forces and follow Shirkuh " (69). 
This story, which is not mentioned by Ibn al-Athir, appears 
to be legendary with no historical validation. The Abbasid 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 



164 


Caliph in the twelfth century had no real authority over any 
Muslim prince or ruler. Ibn al-Athir, on the other hand, 
relates that Shirkuh had always desired to go back to Egypt; 
therefore, he persuaded Nur ad-din to send him there with 
two thousand knights among whom was Saladin (70). Shirkuh . 
how-ever, did not succeed and was forced by the allied for¬ 
ces of the Franks and the Egyptians to go back to Damascus 
(71). In 564/1168 Shirkuh for the third time launched an 
expedition against Egypt, the purpose of which, according to 
Ibn al-Athir, was to prevent the Franks from conquering 
Egypt, which was in such state of weakness and was very easy 
to capture. Meanwhile, king Amaury violating the treaty with 
the Egyptians, led his army toward Egypt. Al-’Adid, the 
Fatimid Caliph, according to Ibn al-Athir dispatched envoys 
to Nur ad-Din asking for aid in combating the Franks. The 
Crusaders in the meantime, captured Balbis, killing its 
citizens and pillaging the land. Ibn al-Athir relates that 
these atrocities committed by the Franks made the Egyptians 
refrain from any thought of handing the country over to 
them. Therefore, when the Franks besieged Cairo the citizens 
fought bravely so they would not face the same fate of the 
people of Balbis (72). In his account of this expedition, 
William rebukes and criticizes Amaury for violating the 
alliance with the Egyptians. He regards this action as "un¬ 
just and contrary to divine law", so the Lord punished the 
Crusaders for breaching oath by withdrawing "His favor" from 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 



165 


them (73). The campaign therefore was a complete failure. 

Compared to William, Ibn al-Athir’s accounts of Sala¬ 
din’s expeditions and campaigns against the Crusader states, 
from 566/1170 to 580/1184, are considerably brief and less 
detailed. Because of his biased attitude toward Saladin, he 
did not attempt to emphasize this part of Saladin’s career, 
while the latter’s campaigns against other Muslims were 
highlighted and reported in detail (74). Surprisingly, both 
historians have the same opinion of Saladin. When Saladin 
captured Damascus in 570/ 1174, William relates that the 
uncle of Nur ad-Din’s son (Qutb ad-Din), "a very great 
prince ... one of the most powerful among the Orientals of 
the Parthian race", hastened to the aid of his nephew. Then 
he presents Saladin as a traitor and an ungrateful man, who 
in "defiance of the laws of humanity, wholly regardless of 
his lowly condition, and ungrateful for the benefits that 
had been showered upon him by the father of that boy king 
(Nur ad-Din) had risen against his rightful lord" (75). Ibn 
al-Athir, strikingly, describes Saladin in a similar story, 
as a traitor and a tyrant who despite all the favors and the 
benefits granted to him by his lord Nur ad-Din, was ungrate¬ 
ful and expressed his ingratitude by usurping the terri¬ 
tories of the latter’s successor, twelve years old son al- 
Saleh. When Saladin was besieging Aleppo in 570/1174, Ibn 
al-Athir relates that al-Saleh gathered the people of Aleppo 
around him and reminded them of his father’s courtesy and 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 


166 


affability toward them. Furthermore, he told them how Sala¬ 
din "this tyrant who is ungrateful to my father is threaten¬ 
ing me, your orphan and striving to take over my realm fear¬ 
ing neither God nor His people" (76). After Saladin’s acces¬ 
sion to power in Egypt, Ibn al-Athir, throughout his narra¬ 
tive presented him as an ambitious, selfish man, who employ¬ 
ed his military skills to satisfy his dynastic goals by 
building up a vast empire. When Shirkuh was planing to 
organize a campaign against Egypt in 564/1168 Saladin re¬ 
luctantly accepted Nur ad-Din’s request to join Shirkuh . Ibn 
al-Athir quotes the Qur’an to illustrate the paradox of this 
situation. He writes: "It is mentioned in the Qur’an that 
(it is possible that ye may dislike a thing which is good 
for you, and that ye may desire something that is evil for 
you, for only Allah truly knows) (77), Nur ad-Din encouraged 
Saladin to go to Egypt, and that resulted in the loss of his 
kingdom, while Saladin hated to depart even though this 
departure was the beginning of his glory and the commence¬ 
ment of his rule” (78). He also portrays Saladin as a ruler 
who used the war against the Crusaders as an excuse to oc¬ 
cupy Muslim principalities in Syria and Mesopotamia. When, 
in 569/1173, the Franks besieged Banyas, the ruler of Damas¬ 
cus did not fight them, but instead, he convinced them to 
abandon the siege in return for a fixed sum of money. When 
Saladin heard of that, he was very angry and rebuked the 
Damascene princes for their action, and offered to go to 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 



167 


Syria and fight the Franks himself. Ibn al-Athir mentions 
that Saladin’s main intention was not to combat the Franks 
but to invade and capture the land of Syria (79). William, 
like Ibn al-Athir, views Saladin as a great menace to the 
Christians, a wwrrior who was "always active and vigilant, 
desired with his whole heart to increase the glory of his 
name and expand the limits of his kingdom" (80). 

One of the most astonishing similarities between Wil¬ 
liam and Ibn al-Athir is their view of the ideal ruler. 
Both, when relating the death of a ruler or his accession to 
power, begin by describing his physical appearance. In his 
eulogy of Zengi, Ibn al-Athir describes him as "a handsome 
man, with a swarthy complexion, fine eyes, and hair that was 
beginning to go gray" (81). He also describes Nur ad-Din as 
a "tall swarthy man with a beard but no .loustache, a fine 
forehead and a pleasant appearance enhanced by beautiful 
melting eyes" (82). When Godfrey died in 1100, and his bro¬ 
ther Baldwin was designated as his successor William relates 
his physical characteristics: 

"He is said to have been very tall and much larger 
than his brother... He was of rather light complex 
ion, with dark-brown hair and beard. His nose was 
aquiline and his upper lip somewhat prominent, the 
lower jaw slightly receded, although not so much 
that it could be considered as a defect" (83). 

In his account of Amaury, whom he personally knew, William 

describes his physical appearance as follows: 

"He was of goodly height, taller than many although 
shorter than those of maximum stature. His features 
were comely, and his bearing plainly proclaimed even 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 




168 


to strangers the dignity of a prince to whom reve¬ 
rence was due. He had sparkling eyes of medium size; 
his nose was becomingly aquiline; his hair was blond 
and grew back somewhat from his forehead. A comely 
and very full beard covered his cheeks and chin" 
(84). 

Unlike Ibn al-Athir, whose partiality to the house of Zengi 
influenced his judgement, William did not allow himself to 
be a partisan of any ruler. His stern impartiality made him 
judge each king without reservation. In describing the Latin 
kings he relates their virtues and their defects. Even in 
his portrayal of Baldwin III, whom he regards as an ideal 
ruler, he acknowledges that, like any human being, Baldwin 
had comitted many sins. "In the pernicious game of chance 
and dice he indulged more than befitted royal majesty. In 
pursuit of desires of the flesh also, he is said to have 
dishonored the marriage ties of others" (85). The qualities 
that William and Ibn al-Athir use to measure the rulers, are 
prowess, courtesy, generosity, both of money and spirit, 
morality, and justice. Ibn al-Athir, however, emphasizes the 
idea that the ideal Muslim ruler is that who aspires to the 
Islamic law (Shari’a), honors its interpreters, the ’Ulama, 
and dedicates his life to fighting the enemies of Islam 
(86). In his picture of Nur ad-Din he acknowledges that Nur 
ad-Din was a just, wise, and brave ruler who had many vir¬ 
tues, among which are austerity, piety and knowledge of 
theology as well as Muslim law (87). When describing the 
virtues of Zengi, Ibn al-Athir emphasizes the justice and 
generosity of this ruler. He praises him for his unfailing 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 




169 


defence of the civilian population and his clemency in deal¬ 
ing with his subjects (88). In his description of Baldwin 
III, whom William has idealized, he presents his own ideas 
of qualities and virtues that are supposed to be in a Chris¬ 
tian king. After relating Baldwin’s natural presence and 
dignity, he shows how he easily surpassed all other princes 
of the realm in the grace of his person and equally in the 
liveliness of his mind and his expression (89). 

"He had unusually keen intellect and was gifted by 
nature with the rare advantage of eloquent speech. 
He was extremely affable and tender-hearted, and 
was not desirous of the money of others.... - He en¬ 
dured hardship with patience..., and displayed a 
great wisdom and foresight in the uncertain issue of 
war". (90) 

When describing the character of king Amaury, William refers 
to him as "a man of prudence and discretion, will versed in 
customary law by which the kingdom was governed" (91). 

These common standards by which both Ibn al-Athir and 
William used to judge the character of Muslim and Christian 
rulers illustrates one aspect of the similarities that ex¬ 
isted between these two historians in particular, and Muslim 
and Christian societies of the twelfth century in general. 
Ibn al-Athir and William of Tyre, each represents a culture 
and civilization, that shared many similarities and dif¬ 
ferences. Even though both societies were divided by rel¬ 
igion, law, language, and the awareness of their different 
origins, they shared many common features. They were too 
alike in their differences and too different in their resem- 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 



170 


blance (92). Each believes in a single God, Prophet, and 
Holy scripture. These beliefs, however, were the causes of 
hostilities and misapprehension. The Christians in 1095 were 
inspired by the idea of the Crusade to liberate the Holy 
land from the filthy hands of the infidels, for the sake of 
God. They believed that they were fighting a holy war; who 
ever was killed in it would be a martyr. The Muslims, on the 
other hand, viewed the Crusaders, at the beginning, as they 
would any other wave of invasion against Muslim lands, but 
subsequently, as a reaction to the ideals of the Crusade, 
they revived their religious consciousness and ideals by 
launching a holy war against the enemies of God, and urged 
self-sacrifice in return for the reward of martyrdom. Al¬ 
though These two enemies had frequent friendly relations, 
they continued to be consumed by prejudices and hatred. The 
Christians viewed the Muslims as infidels and devil-worship¬ 
pers and the Muslims, though realizing that +he Franks were 
people of the Book, showed no interest in understanding 
their customs or institutions. They referred to them as a 
brave barbaric people with no morals. After two centuries of 
living side by side, these deeply rooted misconceptions and 
prejudices remained very strong and lasted until the end of 
the Crusades itself. Through the centuries, the western 
image of Islam was very distorted, and on the other hand 
Muslims continued to perceive European with suspicion. Yet, 
the effects of the Crusades were more negative than positive 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 




171 


on both sides. It resulted in a deep wound of distrust be¬ 
tween two vivid and dynamic cultures. Even the European 
colonial movement of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries 
in the Near East was regarded by Arabs and Muslims as a 
continuation of the Crusades. Still today many interpret and 
explain the course of events in the Near East in the light 
of the idea "history repeats itself ”, and the assumption 
that an European presence in Islamic territory is a revival 
of the Crusade movement. It is not the judgement, but the 
fact that the Crusades still cast their shadow on the rela¬ 
tions between the same people in the twentieth century, 
indicates how enduring the legacy of Ibn al-Athir and Wil¬ 
liam of Tyre has been. 

* * * 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 




172 


NOTES: 

1 - Al-Kamil . X, pp. 274-5. 

2 - W.T., (Babcock and Krey), V, 11, p. 242; W.T., 

(R.H.C.), V, XI, p. 208. 

3 - Al-Kamil . X, p. 275. 

4 - W.T. (Babcock and Krey), V, 23, p. 259; W.T. 

(R.H.C.), V, XXIII, p. 252. 

5 - Al-Kamil . X, p. 277. 

6 - Ibid, X, p. 277. 

7 - W.T. (Babcock and Krey), IV, 18, p. 288; W.T. 

(R.H.C.), IV, XVIII, p. 182. 

8 - W.T. (Babcock and Krey), VI, 20, p. 291; W.T. 

(R.H.C.), VI, XX, p. 268. 

9 - Al-Kamil . X, p. 274. 

10- Ibid, X, p. 283. 

11- W.T. (Babcock and Krey), VIII, pp. 338-78; W.T. 

(R.H.C.), VIII, pp. 320-62. 

12- W.T. (Babcock and Krey), XXI, 7, p. 408, W.T. 

(R.H.C.), XXI, p. 1017. 

13- Ibid, IX, X, p. 377; W.T. (Babcock and Krey), IV, 18, 
p. 288; IX, 10, p. 394. 

14- Al-Kamil . X, p. 286. 

15- W.T. (Babcock and Krey), IX, 12, p. 393-7; W.T. 
(R.H.C.), IX, XII, pp. 380-2. 

16- Ibid, X, XXIX, XXX, pp. 443-7; W.T. (B.K.), X. 29, 

30, pp. 458-68. 

17- Ibid, X, 30, p. 459; W.T. (R.H.C.), X, XXX, p. 446. 

18- Ibid, X, XXX, p. 447; W.T. (B.K.), X, 30, p. 459. 

19- Ibid, X, 30, p. 459; W.T. (R.H.C.), X, XXX, p. 447. 

20- W.T. (B.K.), X, 30, pp. 459; W.T. (R.H.C.), X,XXX, p. 
447. 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 



173 


21- A1-Kamil . X, p. 373; Gabrieli, Arab Historians... . p. 
18. 

22- Ibid, p. 19; A1-Kamil . X, p. 374. 

23- Ibid, p. 375. 

24- Ibid, X, p. 461; Gabrieli, Arab Historians... . 

p. 21. 

25- Ibid, p. 22; A1-Kamil . X, p. 462. 

26- W.T. (B.K.), I, 8, p. 474; W.T. (R.H.C.), XI, VIII, 
p.465. 

27- Ibid, XIII, XXII, p. 590; W.T. (B.K.), XIII, 22, 
p. 34. 

28- A1-Kamil . X, p. 461. 

29- Ibid, X. pp. 464-5. 

30- Ibid, X, p. 466; Gabrieli, A rab Historians... . 
p. 23. 

31- Al-Kamil . X, p. 543; W.T. (K.B.), XI, 31, XII, 2; W.T. 
(R.H.C.), XI, XXXI, XII, II. 

32- Al-Kamil . X, p. 555. 


33- 

W.T. 

(B.K. 

), XII, 

9, 

p. 528 

; W.T. 

(R.H.C. 

), XII, IX 

523. 








34- 

Ibid, 

XII, 

IX, p. 

524 

; W.T. 

(B.K.) 

, XII, 

9, p. 530. 

35- 

Ibid, 

XII, 

9, p. 

530; 

W.T. 

(R.H.C. 

), XII, 

IX, 


p.534. 

36- Al-Kamil . X, p. 620-2. 

37- W.T.(B.k-), XIII, II, 16, 14, 21. 

38- Al-Kamil . XI, p. 51; Gabrieli, Arab Historians... . 
p. 42. 

39- Ibid, p. 43; Al-Kamil . XI, p. 52. 

40- W.T.(B.K.), XIV, 25, p. 85; W.T.(R.H.C.), XIV, XXIV, 
p. 641. 

41- Ibid, XV, p. 668; W.T.(B.K.), XV, 7, pp. 105-6. 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 



174 


42- Ibid, XV, 7, p. 105-6; W.T.(R.H.C.), XV, VII, 
p. 615. 


43- Ibid, XV, p. 618; W.T.(B.K.). XV, 7, p. 106. 

44- Ibid, XV, 19, p. 108; W.T.(R.H.C.), XV, IX, p. 619. 

45- A1-Kamil . XI, p. 47. 

46- W.T.(B.K.), XVII, 2, p. 186; W.T.(R.H.C.), XVII, II, 
p. 760. 

47- Ibid, XVI, p. 736; W.T.(B.K.), XVI, 19, p. 165. 

48- Ibid, XVII, 5, p. 140; W.T.(R.H.C.), VII, V, p. 765. 

49- Ibid, XVII, V, p. 766; W.T.(B.K.), XVII, 5, p. 191. 

50- Al-Katnil . XI, p. 129. 

51- Ibid, XI, p. 130. 

52- Ibid, XI, 131; Gabrieli, Arab Historians... . p. 61. 

53- Ibn al-Qalanisi, Dhayl... . pp. 270-300. 


54- W.T.(B.K.), XX, 3, p. 346; W.T.(R.H.C.), XX, III, 
p. 944. 


55- 

Ibid, 

XIX, 

V, 

P. 

890; 

W.T.(B.K.), 

XIX, 5, p. 303. 

56- 

Ibid, 

XIX, 

5, 

P- 

304; 

W.T.(R.H.C. 

), XIX, V, p. 891 

57- 

Ibid, 

XIX, 

VI 

, P- 

892 

; W.T.(B.K.) 

, XIX, 6, p. 304. 

58- 

Ibid, 

XIX, 

7, 

P. 

365; 

W.T.(R.H.C. 

), XIX, VII, 


p. 893. 


59- A1-Kamil . XI, pp. 298-90. 

60- W.T.(B.K.), XIX, 7, p.305; W.T.(R.H.C.), XIX, VII, 
p. 893. 


61- A1-Kamil . XI, p. 300. 

62- W.T.(B.K.), XIX, 9, p. 307; W.T.(R.H.C.), XIX, IX, p. 
896. 

63- Ibid, XIX, IX, p. 897; W.T.(B.K.), XIX, 9. 

64- Ibid, XIX, 9, pp. 307-8; W. T. (R. H. C. ), XIX, IX, 
p. 897. 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 



175 


65- Ibid, XIX, IX, p. 897; W.T.(B.K.), XIX, 9, p. 308. 

66- Ibid, XIX, 10, p. 309; W.T.(R.H.C.), XIX, X, p. 898. 


67- 

Ibid, XIX 

, x, 

P. 

899; W.T.(B.K. 

), 

XIX, 

10, p. 

310. 

68- 

A1-Kamil. 

XI, 

P- 

305. 





69- 

W.T.(B.K. 

), XIX, 

13, pp. 313-4; 

W. 

T. (R. 

H.C.), 

XIX, 

XII, 

p. 903. 








70- 

Al-Kamil. 

XI, 

P- 

326. 





71- 

Ibid, XI, 

P- 

327. 






72- 

Ibid, XI, 

P. 

336. 







73- W.T.(B.K.), XX, 5, p. 350; W.T.(R.H.C.), XX, V, 

P. 948. 

74- A1-Kamil . XI, pp. 365, 415, 418-20, 429-31, 450, 478- 

9. 

75- W.T.(B.K.), XXI, 8, p. 408; W.T.(R.H.C.), XXI, VIII, 
p. 1017. 

76- A1-Kamil . XI, p. 418. 

77- Qur * an . 2, 216. 

78- A1-Kamil . XI, p. 338. 

79- Ibid, XI, p. 408. 

80- W.T.(B.K.), XXII, 19, p. 480; W.T.(R.H.C.), XXII, XIX, 

p. 1101. 

81- A1-Kamil . XI, pp. 111-2; Gabrieli, Arab His¬ 
torians ... , p. 53. 

82- Ibid, p. 70; A1-Kamil . XI, p. 403. 

83- W.T.(B.K.), X, 2, p. 416; W.T.(R.H.C.), X,II, 
p. 366. 

84- Ibid, XIX, II, p. 887; W.T.(R.H.C.), XIX, 3, p.298. 

85- Ibid, XVI, 2, 3, pp, 137-9; W.T.(R.H.C.), XVI, II, 

III, pp. 507-7. 

86- Richards, "Ibn al-Athir", p. 85. 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 



176 


87- A1-Kamil . XI, p. 404. 

88- Ibid, XI, 111-2. 

89- W.T.(B.K-), XVI, 2, p. 137; W.T.(R.H.C.), XVI, II, p. 
705; Daniel, The Arabs and Medieval Europe . p. 179. 

90- W.T.(B.K.), XVI, 3, p. 131; W.T.(R.H.C.), XVI, III, p. 
707. 

91- Ibid, XIX, II, p. 706; W.T.(B.K.), XIX, 2, 
pp. 296-8. 

92- Daniel, The Arabs and Medieval Europe , p. 325. 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 



177 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Primary Sources: 


Abu Shama, Al-Rawdatyn Fi Akhbar al-Dawlatyn . M. Ahamad 
(ed.), (Cairo 1956). 

Ibn al-’Adim, Kamal al-Din, Zubdat al-Halab Fi Tarikh Halab . 
3 vols., Sami Dahan (ed.), (Damascus 1954). 

Ibn al-Athir, ’Izz ad-Din, Al-Kamil Fi al-Tarikh . 12 vols., 
(Beirut 1965). 

-> Al-Bahir Fi Tarikh ad-Dawlah al-Atabikyya , A. 

Tulaymat (ed.), (Cairo 1962). 

Albertus Aquenisis, "Liber Christianae expeditionis pro 
ereptione, emundatione, restitutions Sanctae Hieroso 
lymitanae," in Recueil des Historiens des Croisades : 
Historians Occidentaux, vol. Ill, (2nd edition), 

(England 1969). 

Ibn al-Djawzi, Al-Muntazam . ed. Hyderabad, 5 vols. 

Sibt Ibn al-Djawzi, Mir’at al-Zaman . ed Hyderabad. 

Baldrici, Epescopi Dolensis, "Historia Jerosolimitana", in 
R.H.C. . Hist. Occ., vol. V. 

Fulcher of Chartres, A History of the Expedition to Jeru¬ 
salem . Frances Rita Rayn (tr.), Harold Fink (ed.), 
(Knoxville 1969). 

Gesta Francorm et Aliurm Hisrosolimitanorum . Rosalind Hill 
(ed. and tr.), (London 1962). 

Guibert De Nogent, "Gesta Dei Per Francos", in R.H.C. . Hist. 
Occ. vol. IV. 

’Imad ad-Din Al-Isfahani, Al-Fath al-Qussi fi al-Fath al- 

_ Qudsi . (Cairo 1965). 

Ibn Jubyr, The travels of Ibn Jubyr . R.J.Broadhurt (tr.), 
(London 1952). 

Ibn Khillikan, Wafavat al-’Avan . (Cairo 1948). 

Ibn al-Qalanisi, Dhayl Tarikh Dimashq , (Beirut 1908). 

Ibn Shaddad, Baha’ ad-Din, Sirat Salah ad-Din . (Cairo 1964). 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 





178 


Ibn Batriq, Said, Annals, in Corpus Scriptorum Christianorum 
Orientalium . vol. I. (Beirut 1908). 

Raymond D’Aguilers, Historia Francorum Qui Ceperunt Iheru- 
salim . J.H.Hill and L.L.Hill (trs.), (Philadelphia 
1968). 

Radulfo Cadomensi, "Gesta Tancredi in expeditions Hieroso- 
lymitana”, in R.H.C. . Hist. Occ., vol. III. 

Roberi Monachi, "Historia Hierosolimitana", in R.H.C. . Hist. 
Occ., vol. III. 

Tudebode, Peter, Historia de Hierosolymitano Itinere . J.H. 
Hill and L.L.Hill (trs.), (Philadelphia 1974). 

Usamah Ibn Munqidh, Kitab al-'Itibar . (Beirut 1964). 

Ibn Wasil, Mufarri.i al-Kurub fi Akhbar Bani Ayyub . (Cairo 
1953). 

Willelmus Tyrensis, "Archiepiscopus, Historia Rerum in Par- 

tibus Transmarinis Gestarum", in R.H.C. . Hist. Occ., 
vol. I. 

William of Tyre, A History of Deeds Done Beyond the Seas . 

E.A.Babcock and A.C.Krey (trs.), (New York 1943). 


Secondary Sources 

Ashtor, E, A Social and Economic History of the Near East 
in the Middle Ages . (London 1972). 

Atiya, Aziz, "The Crusades, Old ideas and New Conceptions", 
Cashiers D’histoire Mondiale , vol. II., (1954-5). 

- , The Crusade, Historiography and Bibliography . 

(Bloomington, Indiana 1962). 

Baker, Derek (ed.), Relation between East and West in the 
Middle Ages . (Edinburgh 1973) 

Beaumont, A.A.Jr., "Albert of Aachen and the County of 
Edessa", The Crusades and other Historical Essay s. 

(New York 1928). 

Benvinist, M., The Crusaders in the Holy Land . (Jerusalem 
1970). 

Brundage, James A., "Adhemar of Puy: The Bishop and his 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 




179 


critics", Speculum . 34, (1959). 

Blake, E. O., "The Formation of The Crusade Idea", Journal 
of Ecclesiastical History . Vol. XXI, (1970). 

Brundage, James A., "Recent Crusade Historiography: Some 
Observations and suggestions", Catholic Historical 
Review . 49, (1964). 

- , The Crusades: Motives and Achievements . (Lexington, 

Mass., 1964). 

- , "Prostitution, Miscesenation and Sexual Purity in 

The First Crusade", Crusade and Settlement . Edury 
(ed.), (Cardiff 1985). 

- , "Fulcher of Chartres", Catholic Encyclopedia , vol. 

217, (19.67). 

- , Medieval Canon Law and The Crusader . (1969). 

- , "The Army of the First Crusade and the Crusade Vow", 

Medieval Studies . 33, (1971). 

Byrne, E.H., "The Genoese Colonies in Syria", The Crusades 
and other Historical Essays . (New York 1928). 

- , "Genoese Trade With Syria in the Twelfth Century", 

American Historical Review . XXV, (1919-1920). 

Cahen, Claude, La Syrie du Nord a l'epooue des Croisades . 
(Paris 1940). 

- , Introduction a l'histoire du monde Musulman 

Medieval . (Paris 1983). 

- , Orient et Occident au temps des Croisades . (Paris 

1983). 

Chaurand, J., "La Conception de l’Histoire de Cuibert de 
Nogent", Cahiers de Civilisation Medievale . 8, (1965). 

Constable, G., "The Second Crusade as seen by Contempor- 
arians", Traditio . IX, (1953). 

Cowdrey, H.E.J., "Pope Urban's Preaching of the First 
Crusade", History . 55, (1970). 

- , "Cluny and the First Crusade", Revue Benedictine . 

LXXXIII (1973). 

- , "Martyrdom in the First Crusade", Crusade and 

Settlement . P.Edbury (ed.), (Cardiff 1985). 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 













180 


- , "Pope Gregory VII’s "Crusading" plans of 1074", 

Outremer . B. Kedar, H.E. Mayer, R.C. Smail (eds.), 
(Jerusalem 1982). 

Daniel, Norman, Islam and The West . (Edinburgh 1958). 

- > The Arabs and Medieval Europe . (London 1975). 

Davis, R.H., "William of Tyre”, Relations between East and 
West in The Middle Ages , D.Baker (ed.), (Edingurgh 

1973). 

Dawes, E., (Tr.), The Alexiad of the Princess Anna Comnena , 
(London 1928). 

Dolan, John P., "Medieval Christian Tolerance and the Muslim 
World", The Muslim World . LI, (1961). 

Duncalf, F., "The Peasants’ Crusade", American Historical 
Review . XXVI, (London 1920-1921). 

- , and A. Krey, Parallel Source Problems in Medieval 

History . (London 1912). 

Edbury, Peter W. (ed.), Crusade and Settlement . (Cardiff 
1985). 

Ehrenkreutz, A.s., Saladin . (New York 1972). 

Elisseeff, N., Nur ad-Din . 3 vols. (Damascus 1967). 

Erdman, Carl, The Origin of The Crusades . M. Baldwin (tr.), 

(Princeton 1977). 

Gabrieli, francesco (ed. and tr.), Arab Historians of the 
Crusades . E.J. Castello (tr.), (Berkely 1969). 

Gibb, H.A.R., "The Achievement of Saladin", Studies in 
Islamic History . Y. Ibish, (ed.), (Beirut 1974). 

- , The Damascus Chronicle of The Crusades . (London 

1932). 


- , "Notes on the Arabic Materials for the Crusades", 

Bulletin of The School of Oriental Studies . vol., VII, 


(1935). 


- , "Arab Sources for The Life of Saladin", Speculum . 

XXV (1950). 

Gibbon, E, The History of The Decline and Fall of the Roman 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 









181 


Empire , Bury (ed.), (London 1896-1900). 

Gilchrist, J.T., "The Erdmann Thesis and the Canon Law, 
1083-1141", Crusade and settlement . P.W.Edbury (ed.), 
(1985). 

Goitein, S.d., "Contemporary Letters on the Capture of Jeru¬ 
salem by the Crusaders", J.O.J.S . 3, (1952). 

- , "Geniza Sources for the Crusader Period: A Survey", 

Qutermer . B.Z.Kedar; H.E.Mayer, and R.C.Smail, (1982). 

Hagenmeyer, H, Chronologie de La premiere Croisade . (R.0.0.) 
VI-VIII, (1898-1901). 

Harold, Fink, "The Role of Damascus in The History of The 
Crusades", Muslim World . XLIX, (1959). 

Hanzinsk, Jerzy, "On alleged attempts at converting the 
assassins to Christianity in the light of William of 
Tyre’s account", Folia Oientalia . XV (1974). 

Hill, J.H., and Hill, L.L., "Contemporary Accounts and the 
Later Reputation of Adheman, Bishop of Puy", Medievalia 

_ et Humanistica . 9, (1955). 

- , Raymond IV de Saint-gilles 1041-1145 . (Toulouse 

1959). 

Hitti, P.K. (tr.), An Arab-Svrian Gentleman and Warrior in 
the Period of the Crusades . (New York 1929). 

Holt, P.M. (ed.), The eastern Mediterranean Lands in the 
Period of The Crusades . (Warminster, England 1977). 

Huggens, R.B.C., "Guilume de Tyr etudiant: Un Chapitre, 
(XIX, 12) de son "Histoire" retrouve", Latomus . XXI, 

(1962). 

Humphreys, Stephen, Rrom Saladin to the Mongols . (New York 
1977). 

Joranson, E., "The Alleged Frankish Protectorate in Pales¬ 
tine", American Historical review . XXXII (1926-1927). 

- , "The Great German Pilgrimage of 1064-1065", The 

Crusades and Other Historical essays . (New York 1928). 

Krey, august, The First Crusade; the Accounts of Eye-Witness 
a nd Participants . (Gloucester, Mass., 1958). 

- , "William of Tyre; The Making of an Historian in the 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 






182 


Middle Ages", Speculum , vol., XVI, (1941). 

- , "A Neglected Passage in the Gesta", The Crusades and 

Other Historical Essays . (New York 1928). 

King, E.J., The Knights Hospitallers in the Holy Land . 
(London 1931). 

La Monte, John, Crusade and Jihad, in The Arab Heritage . 
Nabib Faris (ed.), (Princeton 1946). 

- , Feudal Monarchy in the Latin Kingdom of 

Jerusalem . (Cambridge, Mass. 1932). 

- , “Some Problems in Crusading Historiography", 

Speculum . XV, (1940). 

Lewis, Bernard (ed.), Historians of the Middle East . (London 
1962). 

Margoliouth, D.S., Lectures On Arabic Historians . (New York 
1029). 

Morgan, D.O. (ed.), Medieval Historical Writing in the 
Christian and Islamic Workds . (London 1986). 

Morgan, M.R., The Chronicle of Ernoul and The Continuations 
of William of Tyre . (Oxford 1973). 

Munro, Dana, "A Crusader", Speculum . VII, (1932). 

- , The Kingdom of The Crusaders . (London 1935). 

- , "Did the Emperor Alexius I ask for Aid at the 

Council of Piaceza", American Historical Review . XXVII 
(1922). 

- , "The Speach of Pope Urban II at Clermont", American 

Historical Review . XI, (1906). 

- and others, Essays on the Crusades . (Burlington, Vt. 

1903). 

Paetow, Louis (ed.), The Crusades and Othe Historical 
Essays . (New York 1928). 

Prawer, Josuah, The Latin Kingdom of Jerusalem , (london 
1972). 

Peters, Edward, The First Crusade: The Chronicle of Fulcher 

of _ Chartres and Other Source Materials , (Phi1adelphis 

1971). 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 









183 


Porges, Walter, "The Clergy, The Poor, and the Non- 
Combatants on the First Crusade", Speculum , vol. XXI, 
(1946). 

Purcell, Maureen, Papal Crusading Policy . (Leiden 1975). 

Richard.D.S., "Ibn al-Athir and the Later Parts of the 
Kamil : A Study of Aims and Methods", Medieval His¬ 
torical Writing in the Christian and Islamic Worlds . D. 
0.Morgan (ed.), (London 1980). 

Richard, Jean, "Fulcher of Chartres", Encyclopedia 
Britanica . X, (1966). 

- , "An Account Oh The Battle Of Hattin", Speculum . 

(1952). 

Riley-Smith, Jonathan, The Feudal Nobility and The Kingdom 
of Jerusalem . (London 1973). 

- , "Crusading as an Act of Love", History . 65, (1980). 

- , What were the Crusaders . (London 1977). 

- , The First Crusade and the idea of Crusading . (London 

1986). 


- , "The Motives of the earliest Crusaders and the 

settlement of Latin Palestine 1095-1100", English 
Historical Review . 98, (1983). 

- , The Crusades: Idea and Reality. 1095-1274 . (1981). 

Rosenthal, f., A History of Muslim Historiography . (Leiden 
1968). 

Runciman, Steven, A History of the Crusades . 3 vols., (Camb¬ 
ridge 1951-52-53). 

Saunders, J.J., aspects of the Crusades . (Canterbury, New 
Zealand, 1962). 

Sauvaget, Jean, Introduction to the History of the Muslim 
East . (London 1965). 

Semaan, Khalil (ed.), Islam and the Medieval We st. (New York 
1980). 

Setton, K.M. (ed.), A History of the Crusades . (4 vols.), 
(Madison Wis. 1955-1978). 

Smail, R.C., The Crusaders . 1973. 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 









184 


- , Crusading Warfare (1097-1193) . (Cambridge, 1956). 

- , B.Z. Kedar, H.E. Mayer, (eds.), Outermer . (Jerusalem 

1982). 

Southern, R.W., Western views of Islam in the Middle Ages . 
(Harvard 1961). 

Stevenson, W.B., The Crusaders in the East . (Beirut 1968). 

Sybel, Von, History and Literature of the Crusades , D. Gor¬ 
don (ed.), (London 1861). 

Thatcher, Oliver J., "Critical Work on the Latin Sources of 
the First Crusade", Anual Report of the American 
Historical association , (1900). 

Thompson, J. Westfall, A History of Historical Writing . 

(2 vols.), (New York 1942). 

Throop, P.A., Criticism of the Crusade . (Amsterdam 1940). 

Ward, B., Miracles and the Medieval Mind . (1982). 

Wilkinson, John, Jerusalem Pilgrims before the Crusaders . 
(Warminster, England 1977). 


Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 






