TITLE: The Social Structure of the First Crusade
IDENTIFIER: oapen-20.500.12657-31507
URL: https://archive.org/download/oapen-20.500.12657-31507/627430_djvu.txt

The Social Structure 
of the First Crusade 


Conor Kostick 


a H L 


BRILL 


ri 


1 N 


DITERR 


T H E 


The Social Structure of the First Crusade 


The Medieval Mediterranean 


Peoples, Economies and Cultures, 400-1500 


Managing Editor 
Hugh Kennedy 
SOAS, London 


Editors 
Paul Magdalino, St. Andrews 
David Abulafia, Cambridge 
Benjamin Arbel, Tel Aviv 
Larry J. Simon, Western Michigan University 
Olivia Remie Constable, Notre Dame 


VOLUME 76 


The Social Structure 
of the First Crusade 


By 
Conor Kostick 


LEIDEN * BOSTON 
2008 


BRILL This is an open access title distributed under the terms of the cc-By-Nc License, 
OPEN which permits any non-commercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any 


medium, provided the original author(s) and source are credited. 


An electronic version of this book is freely available, thanks to the support of libraries 
H working with Knowledge Unlatched. More information about the initiative can be 
found at www.knowledgeunlatched.org. 
Cover illustration: “Dieu le veule—Peter The Hermit preaching the First Crusade” by 
James Archer (1823-1904) 
© Photograph by K. Ross Hookway 


Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 


Kostick, Conor, 1964— 

The social structure of the First Crusade / by Conor Kostick. 

p. cm. — (The Medieval Mediterranean ; 76) 

Includes bibliographical references and index. 

ISBN 978—90—04—16665-—3 (hardback : alk. paper) 1. Crusades—First, 1096-1099. 
2. Civilization, Medieval. 3. Social classes —Europe—History—To 1500. I. Title. 

D161.2.K67 2008 

956’.014—dce22 


2008009738 


ISSN 0928-5520 
ISBN 978 90 04 16665 3 


Copyright 2008 by Koninklijke Brill Nv, Leiden, The Netherlands. 

This work is published by Koninklijke Brill Nv. Koninklijke Brill Nv incorporates the imprints 
Brill, Brill Hes & De Graaf, Brill Nijhoff, Brill Rodopi and Hotei Publishing. 

Koninklijke Brill Nv reserves the right to protect the publication against unauthorized use and to 
authorize dissemination by means of offprints, legitimate photocopies, microform editions, 
reprints, translations, and secondary information sources, such as abstracting and indexing 
services including databases. Requests for commercial re-use, use of parts of the publication, 
and/or translations must be addressed to Koninklijke Brill nv. 


This book is printed on acid-free paper and produced in a sustainable manner. 


In Memoriam 


Anne Walsh 


CONTENTS 


Acknowledgements y.scss:icsepeactensaptcedattasdedayeaneceadanecaadz aul aveneadiaseness 
ADbreviations:. .c.2:0s0sc2ttcaendtd oritis ieli da a a 


Introduction. sicsiteteidetenats ques n aE 
Chapter One: The Eyewitnesses 1... ce ceeceeseesteceeceeeeeeeeeeeeeneeeaaes 
Chapter ‘Two: The Early Historians sniisinissniciirscirsenirc 
Chapter ‘Three: Pauperes and the First Crusade: From the 
Preaching of the Crusade to the Rise of the Visionaries ....... 
Chapter Four: Pauperes and the First Crusade: From Antioch to 
Jerusalem, sii.2ccnicaniien nc anedsaiidendvanen inn an tained 
Chapter Five: Milites: Knights or Simply Mounted Warriors? 
Chapter Six: Juvenes: The Glory-Seeking Knights of the 
CyUSAGe:: scisadieetisdiediiceiel coeeiin delaniigeariedi attendee 
Chapter Seven: Principes and the Crusading Nobility 0.0... 
Chapter Eight: The Leadership of the First Crusade ow... 
Chapter Nine: Women and the First Crusade: Prostitutes or 
Prlorims?  ssssisceatebecivediestaniestieeeanleeieagtt E a EEE EEES 
Conclusion: ates ec detec EE A cca e cece races atte ents 


DESTE LEa. SE P E E EE EE E E E E A alenvecnisniaaess 


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 


A number of medieval historians were kind enough to share their 
thoughts on certain points featured in this book and for their com- 
munications I would like to thank Anne Duggan, S. B. Edgington, 
John France, Bernard Hamilton, Natasha Hodgson, A. V. Murray and 
Leena Roos. Sini Kangas was particularly supportive and brought her 
extensive knowledge of the First Crusade to bear on the early drafts 
of some of the chapters. 

The formulations in this book have benefited greatly from their hav- 
ing been discussed with my colleagues at Trinity College Dublin; my 
thanks are due to Terry Barry, Léan Ni Chléirigh, Peter Crooks, Séan 
Duffy, David Green, Katherine Simms and all those who attended the 
seminars at which some of the ideas in this book were first presented. 
Most heartfelt thanks are especially due to Christine Meek, whose 
extensive bibliographical knowledge was extremely helpful and who 
was very generous with her time. 

It has been a great pleasure to work with such efficient, friendly and 
supportive librarians as Anne Walsh and Mary Higgins at the Library 
of ‘Trinity College Dublin. Alas, since I wrote the preceding sentence 
Anne passed away: this book is dedicated to her memory. 

Much of the research for this book was conducted while I was a 
post-graduate scholar of the Irish Research Council for the Humanities 
and the Social Sciences and I am very grateful for their assistance. 

I was fortunate in growing up in a household where medieval history 
was frequently a topic for discussion, a topic informed by my father’s 
extensive and scholarly book collection, much of which has stealthily 
been transferred over the years to my own bookshelves. ‘The impact on 
this book of conversations with my father, Gerry Kostick, and especially 
my brother, Gavin Kostick, has been considerable. 

Two other non-medievalists who I am keen to acknowledge here for 
their moral and intellectual support are my old comrade Andy Wilson 
and my partner Aoife Kearney. 

Finally, I turn to I. S. Robinson. If I were to do justice to the kind- 
ness, intellect, erudition and generosity of my former supervisor this 
acknowledgement would both embarrass him and sound distinctly like 
this was a work of medieval hagiography. I therefore confine myself to 
saying that no scholar could have wanted for a better mentor. 


MGH SS 


RHC Oc. 


ABBREVIATIONS 


Albert of Aachen, Historia Therosolimitana, ed. S. B. Edgington 
(Oxford, 2007). 

Anna Comnena, The Alexiad, trans. E. R. A. Sewter (Middle- 
sex, 1979). 

Baldric of Dol, Historia Hierosolymitana, RHC Oc. 4, 1—111. 
La Chanson d@’Antwoche, ed. S. Duparc-Quioc, 2 (Paris, 1977). 
Corpus Christianorum, Continuatio Mediaevals. 

Ekkehard of Aura, ‘Chronica’, Frutolfs und Ekkehards Chrontken 
und die Anonyme Kaiserchrontk, ed. E-J. Schmale and I. Schmale- 
Ott (Darmstadt, 1972). 

Fulcher of Chartres, Historia Mierosolymitana (1095-1127), 
ed. H. Hagenmeyer (Heidelberg, 1913). 

Gesta Francorum et aliorum HMterosolimitanorum, ed. R. Hill 
(London, 1962). 

Guibert of Nogent, Gesta Dei per Francos, ed. R. B. C. 
Huygens, CC LXXVIIa, (Turnhout, 1996). 

Gilo of Paris and a second, anonymous author, Historia Vie 
Hierosolimtane, ed. C. W. Grocock and J. E. Siberry (Oxford, 
1997). 

Monte Cassino Chronicle (Historia Peregrinorum euntium Jerusolymam), 
RHC Oc. 3, 167-229. 

Monumenta Germaniae Historica Scriptores, Scriptores in Folio, 32 
(1826-1934). 

Orderic Vitalis, The Ecclesiastical History, ed. and trans. 
M. Chibnall, 6 (Oxford, 1969-79). 

J. P. Migne ed., Patrologiae cursus completus. Series Latina 
(1844—66). 

Peter Tudebode, Historia de Hierosolymitano Itinere, ed. J. H. 
Hill and L. L. Hill (Paris, 1977). 

Raymond of Aguilers, Historia Francorum qui ceperunt Iherusalem, 
ed. John France (unpublished PhD. thesis: University of 
Nottingham, 1967). 

Ralf of Caen, Gesta Tancredi, RHC Oc. 3, 587-716. 

Recueil des historiens des croisades, Historiens occidentaux 1—5 
(Académie des inscriptions et belles-lettres: Paris 1841—95). 


xii 


ABBREVIATIONS 


Robert the Monk, Historia Iherosolimitana, RHC Oc. 3, 717— 
882. 

William of ‘Tyre, Chronicon, ed. R. B. C. Huygens, CC 63 
(Turnhout, 1986). 


INTRODUCTION 


In 1096, tens of thousands of people of all backgrounds left their 
homes in Europe to march to Jerusalem and capture it for Christianity. 
Among them were many thousands of knights. These professional 
warriors lived for the chase; if they were not at war they were at the 
hunt and the horse that they rode not only gave them military prow- 
ess but a social status that was significantly more prestigious than the 
lowly footsoldiers who were marching in great bands, stave in hand, 
unstrung bows over their shoulder. 

Even greater throngs of more lowly non-combatants tried to keep 
pace with those trained for war. Farmers sold their lands and tools, 
except for a plough and a few animals. Hitching a cart to their oxen, 
they placed their remaining possessions in the vehicle, put their chil- 
dren on top and set out determinedly for the Holy Land. Serfs too, 
with little more than a few coins, dependent upon charity, the bounty 
of God, ran from the prospect of lifelong toil for their social superiors 
and, arming themselves with crude weapons, obtained freedom in 
the ranks of the army of God. Among the crowds were women, also 
present in their thousands. The presence of so many women dismayed 
the senior clergy, but popular preachers distributed alms to them, so 
that they could find husbands and protectors. Some women, though, 
had the temerity to dress as men and cast off the role that had been 
assigned them from birth. 

As the great armies snaked their way along the old Roman roads, 
elderly men, monks, nuns, artisans and peasants joined the expedition. 
The poor escorted the princes and the glittering knights, who in turn 
felt some responsibility for the protection of the defenceless. And they 
died in great numbers. Ships full of pilgrims sank in the Adriatic. 
Strageglers left trails of dead across hundreds of miles, especially once 
the pilgrim armies were south-east of the Alps and could no longer 
count on the sympathy of Latin Christian towns. Once in Muslim ter- 
ritory, enormous numbers of non-combatants died, both by the sword 
and from the hardship of desert, mountain and disease. 

It was an extraordinary, unprecedented, moment in human history; 
one whose repercussions are still with us, like the distant ripples of a 
once powerful tidal wave. What did they think they were doing? Is it 


This is an open access chapter distributed under the terms of the CC-BY-NC License. 


2 INTRODUCTION 


possible to draw close enough to these people that we can have some 
understanding of their actions, their motives, their hopes? Was it all, 
like Edward Gibbon believed, a monumental act of folly? Did their 
shared goal mean that they had a common understanding of what they 
were doing: the lord of four castles from France, with the servant from 
Germany? The aristocratic lady, a descendent of Charlemagne, with 
her cook? How did they organise themselves? Did the expedition always 
follow a course set by the princes? What happened when people of 
that era were thrown together in the face of annihilation, but with the 
prospect of eternal salvation in their grasp? Did they maintain the social 
norms they were accustomed to? Or did propriety break down? 

These are hard questions to answer for an enterprise that took place 
nearly a thousand years ago. ‘Thus, even though the extraordinary nature 
of the First Crusade has attracted an immense amount of investigation 
and attention, both of a popular and academic nature, there is still 
much to be said, and much that will never be known. Even to approach 
tentative answers to such issues requires that a more fundamental set of 
questions be examined. When, for example, the sources talk of ‘knights’, 
what do they mean? When they refer to the ‘poor’, who, exactly, are 
they talking about? Like an astronomer who finds they need to master 
particle physics to explain celestial phenomena, the historian who wishes 
to discuss social dynamics has to involve themselves in the minutiae of 
contemporary language. 

The contemporary accounts of the First Crusade, by eyewitnesses 
and those alive at the time, provide answers to the questions above, 
providing it is understood what they mean when they employ terms like 
milites, pauperes, minores or iwvenes. What such terms meant at the time 
of the First Crusade is not, however, particularly well understood. In 
part this is because of the intrinsic obscurity of the subject, but it is 
also because none of the great social historians of the medieval period 
devoted a major study to the crusades. Instead, figures like Georges 
Duby, Rodney Hilton, Abram Leon, and Perry Anderson have left 
fragments of analysis: throwaway remarks, often rich in potential, 
but not elaborated. This has been a loss not just to those interested 
in questions concerning social structure, but also to the study of the 
crusades in general. 

Even very basic features of the First Crusade, such as its social 
composition, have yet to be rigorously analysed. It is surprising to find 
very eminent crusading historians, sure-footed on their own terrain, 
stumbling as soon as they discuss the social structure of the movement. 


INTRODUCTION 3 


Jonathan Riley-Smith, for example, when he turned to the subject, 
argued that the Christian forces of the First Crusade ‘can be divided 
into three classes, the principes or maiores, the minores or mediocres and the 
plebs or populus.’' He defined minores as the ‘great lords, castellans and 
petty knights’ beneath the ranks of the senior princes and repeatedly 
utilised the term minores for a sustained investigation of those of the 
nobility on the First Crusade who were just below the level of the 
senior princes. 

This portrayal of the social structure of the First Crusade is rather 
eccentric in its definitions. In particular, none of the crusading sources 
uses minores in the manner described by Riley-Smith. In fact, in the early 
crusading sources the term minores is typically used to indicate common- 
ers, often by coupling the term with maiores to indicate the entirety of 
society, the great and the small.* Nor do the other terms used to dissect 
the social structure of the First Crusade by Riley-Smith fit his purpose. 
Mediocres has a limited and specialised use in the sources, not for those 
knights below the rank of the senior princes but, depending on context, 
for either footsoldiers or for the lowest social orders.’ Principes and maiores 
very often were not synonymous, with the former usually a very narrow 
elite within the broader grouping of nobles encompassed by mazores.* 
Furthermore, plebs and populus were used, in the main, to indicate the 
entire body of Christian forces, not a subgroup unless qualified by an 
appropriate adjective. If Riley-Smith’s intention was to indicate the 
lower social orders by these terms, then more appropriate would have 
been vulgus, pauperes, egeni, or minores, to mention only the more frequently 
used contemporary terms. Again, the extremely prominent historian of 
medieval Germany, Karl Leyser, in discussing the question of supplies 
and the First Crusade, conflated the pauperes, the poor, with the very 
different social group, the pedites, the footsoldiers.” 

A detailed analysis of the structure of First Crusade from a social 
perspective has, therefore, something of value to offer those studying 


! Riley-Smith, The First Crusade and the Idea of Crusading (Philadelphia, 1986), p. 74. 

? For example GF 35, 74, 44, 53, 75; FC Lv.11 (152), I.xvi.l (225), Lxxv.3 (267); 
AA 226, 268 503-4; BD 42. 

3 For example RM 742; GN 102, 153, 201, 262, 313. 

* See below pp. 219-241. 

° Karl Leyser, ‘Money and Supplies on the First Crusade,’ in T. Reuter ed., Com- 
munications and Power in Medieval Europe: the Gregorian Revolution and beyond 
(London, 1994), pp. 77-96, here p. 93. 


4 INTRODUCTION 


the subject from a variety of points of view, as well as to those readers 
simply interested in deepening their understanding of the crusade. ‘The 
ambition of this book is to supply the groundwork that in so many 
other areas of history is taken for granted, even by those who would 
not focus their work on social dynamics. In other words, to achieve as 
much clarity as possible as to which social groupings were present on 
the Crusade, in what proportions, and with what structural tensions 
between them. 

This book has not been written to address the question of ‘motivation’ 
of the crusaders. But as a secondary consequence of striving to achieve 
clarity on the issue of social structure, it does have something to offer 
on that issue and the matter is discussed further in the conclusion. 


A certain methodology arises from the nature of the subject matter. 
Once the question has been posed, ‘what was the social structure of 
the First Crusade?’, the basic approach suggests itself. The sources for 
the First Crusade have to be dissected and the material poured over 
with respect to their evidence concerning the full range of the social 
orders present on the crusade. The accumulated evidence then has to 
be reassembled, prosopographically, to provide as coherent and accurate 
account as possible of the social groupings under examination. While 
it is possible to gather a fairly wide annalistic body of evidence for the 
extent of plagues and famines around the time of the preaching of 
the First Crusade and use this to supplement the discussion, especially 
with regard to pauperes,’ the foundations of the study therefore have to 
rest on a close reading and understanding of the sociological outlook 
of the longer sources. 

With regard to sources, something of a constraint is forced upon 
the historian who wishes to examine the social dynamics of the First 
Crusade. ‘There needs to be sufficient material in the source to provide 
an understand the sociological perspective of the author. In what man- 
ner are the key terms being used? How fixed are they? Do they echo 
classical or biblical language? To what extent can they be trusted as 
labels for specific social classes? Shorter chronicles, letters and char- 
ters are unsuited to an analysis of their philosophical and theological 
standpoint. Verse sources present the problem that their vocabulary is 
constantly subordinated to metre. Therefore the more substantial early 


ê See below pp. 100-105. 


INTRODUCTION 5 


narrative histories of the First Crusade form the core subject matter 
of this study. 

The first two chapters of this book examine the work of eight 
medieval historians, either participants on the First Crusade, or near 
contemporaries. For the reader wishing to rush ahead to the narrative 
of events or the discoveries here with regard to the social status of those 
present on the crusade, these opening chapters will seem rather slow. 
But quite apart from the indispensability of treating the sources with 
respect, there is something intrinsically interesting about deepening our 
understanding of the outlook of those who provided the accounts from 
which we gain an insight into the past. This book is as much a study 
of the sociology of these eight medieval writers as it is an account of 
the social structure of the expedition itself. 

The accounts studied in depth here are first of all those of the four 
eyewitness: the anonymously authored Gesta Francorum; Peter ‘Tudebode’s 
variant of the same; Raymond of Aguilers’s Historia Francorum and 
Fulcher of Chartres’s Historia Mierosolymitana. In Chapter ‘Two, four more 
histories are examined, all written in the decade following the capture 
of Jerusalem. There exist three histories written around 1108 that are 
similar to one another, in that they are all the work of northern French 
monks and are all reworkings of the Gesta Francorum. Distinctly differ- 
ent from these works is Albert of Aachen’s extremely well informed 
Historia Lherosolimitana, a history rich in social content and unique in 
perspective. 

Modern historians have tended to neglect the three French works: 
the Historia Mierosolymitana of Baldric of Dol; the Historia Lherosolimitana 
of Robert the Monk; and (to a lesser extent) the Gesta Dei per Francos 
of Guibert of Nogent. This is because the texts of the eyewitnesses 
have to be preferred over the later works, especially given that as they 
rewrote the story of the First Crusade, these monks sometimes distorted 
historical information in order to provide edifying examples for their 
readers. But for the social historian such reworkings are something 
of a treasure trove, for, at the very least, they indicate how a French 
monk of the time understood the Gesta Francorum. To take one of very 
many examples, the crusading army at Antioch won a victory against a 
sortie from the city, 6 March 1098, soon after which the Gesta Francorum 
reported that ‘our men’ went to where the citizens had buried their 
dead, dug them up and cut their heads off’ Robert the Monk’s version 


’ GF 42. 


6 INTRODUCTION 


of this incident, instead of using the vague term nostri, specified it was 
the tuvenes of the Christian army who did this.* When these monastic 
historians enriched their text with such details, it cannot necessarily 
be invoked as evidence for what actually happened, especially if the 
amendments disagree with the eyewitness, but such alterations do pro- 
vide powerful evidence for how near contemporaries understood the 
social content of their fons formalis. 

These eight works provide, therefore, the bulk of the material for 
this study. 

In weighing up the social perspective of these authors, particularly in 
placing their thought into context, the possibilities available to the his- 
torian have undergone something of a minor revolution since research 
for this book began. At the start of the new millennium, in order to 
understand the context for a distinctive phrase, for example, Guibert of 
Nogent’s homines extremae vulgaritatis, scholars would either rely on defini- 
tions provided by earlier generations who devoted a lifetime of study 
to Latin, such as those in Du Cange’s monumental Glossarium mediae et 
infimae Latinitatis, or would be obliged root around among microfiches 
and indexes without ever being fully satisfied that perhaps a key tome 
had been left unturned. ‘Today, an enormous amount of classical and 
medieval material has been digitised and put on to databases, allowing 
searches to take place in minutes that would previously have taken years. 
In Dublin, for example, in 2006 Dr. Katherine Simms made available 
her database that catalogues the themes of Gaelic bardic poetry. ‘This 
allows researchers not only to search by opening lines, geographical 
area, key names, meter and period, but the poems have all been cat- 
egorised as to whether they are petitions, elegies, apologies etc.’ This 
particular database is freely available as are several other important 
ones, especially for the classical era. 

The two databases used most heavily in this study are the online 
versions of the Patrologia Latina and the scriptores series of the Monumenta 
Germaniae Historica. ‘These are immensely useful resources, invaluable 
for this kind of study. Additionally, the French Government has rather 
generously made the important crusading collection Recueil des Historiens 
des Croisades accessible for free.'° With the assistance of these huge 


5 RM 788. 
° At http://bardic.celt.dias.ie/main.html. 
10 At http://gallica.bnf.fr/. 


INTRODUCTION 7 


resources and databases it has proved possible to say something about 
each of the author’s distinct sociological perspectives. 

The main body of this book consists of a discussion of the material 
gleaned from these sources, assembled around the significant social 
groupings. Insofar as this book offers an original interpretation of the 
narrative of the Crusade, this appears mainly in Chapters Three and 
Four. In particular, although the case has previously been made that 
as the expedition stalled from July 1098 to May 1099, it was popular 
pressure that provided the impetus to drive the movement towards 
Jerusalem,'' up until now, this has only been asserted in outline, in 
Chapter Four the role of the poor of the Crusade is examined in great 
detail and it is demonstrated that their self-conscious activity played a 
significant part in the subsequent outcome of the expedition. 

Issues concerning knighthood and chivalry have proved to be a major 
interest right across the medieval era. By the time of the First Crusade 
the term milites was beginning to be applied not simply to the common 
soldier, but more and more to that distinct social group, the warrior 
members of the nobility. This is not to say that a knightly class emerged 
around the time of the Crusade. Analysis of charters, especially that done 
by Georges Duby for the Maconnais, suggests that in parts of France, at 
least, they were a distinct social grouping from around the year 1000.” 
Chapter Five demonstrates, albeit with important qualifications, that 
by the time that the early historians of the First Crusade were writing 
(c. 1100-1110) the term miles was often being used to indicate a knight, 
someone with a distinctly noble status, and not simply a soldier. The 
more interesting material concerning the class below that of the knights, 
the pedites, footsoldiers, namely their juxtaposition with the milites, has 
not warranted a separate chapter, but is included in Chapter Five. 

In sifting the information about social groupings it becomes clear 
that an entirely unrecognised strata of person was present on the First 
Crusade, not only present, but playing a key role as the ‘shock troops’ 
of the movement: first into battle, first on to the walls of a besieged 
city, rash, impetuous and thirsty for fame. This stratum, in essence 
senior nobles who had yet to establish families or careers, were termed 
by the sources zuvenes and they have been invisible for centuries due to 


1! Perhaps best by J. France, Victory in the East (Cambridge, 1994), pp. 297-324. 
2 G. Duby, La Société aux XT et XIT siècles dans la région mâconnaise (Paris, 1953). 


8 INTRODUCTION 


the fact that the term is also, and more commonly, employed simply 
for youths. Chapter Six discusses this term, along with the complexities 
of the issue. The discussion of the tuvenes of the First Crusade is worth 
pursing in its own right, but it also enriches the discussion about the 
motivation of the crusaders and this aspect of the material in Chapter 
Six is referred to in the conclusion. 

Chapter Seven examines the vocabulary of the sources with regard to 
the magnates. Although writers of this era could often be very crude in 
their depiction of society, splitting it into just two groups say, rich and 
poor, closer inspection reveals a very rich appreciation by them of the 
different layers of the nobility. Albert of Aachen, whose near contem- 
porary history makes an invaluable contribution to our understanding 
of the Crusade, wrote at various times of nobiles, magni, maiores, optimates, 
primores, potentes, principes, proceres, capitales, capitanei and domini. Are these 
terms synonyms? Or did their employment reflect different grades and 
status among the elite? The results of this investigation assist in under- 
standing how the Crusade was lead, the subject of Chapter Eight. 

Finally, Chapter Nine examines the role of women on the First 
Crusade. Strictly speaking the women present on the expedition were 
not a separate social grouping, rather they were a component part of 
each stratum, a vertical slice through the social structure of the expedi- 
tion rather than a horizontal one. Nevertheless, they were treated by 
the sources as a distinct group and played an interesting role on the 
expedition, both in deed and in their obtaining the unsympathetic atten- 
tion of the sources. One important issue dealt with in this chapter is 
whether the women who joined the First Crusade came as prostitutes, 
or was their motivation more spiritual, did they come as pilgrims? This 
book argues for the view that they saw themselves, in fact, overwhelm- 
ingly as pilgrims. 


CHAPTER ONE 


THE EYEWITNESSES 


The major Latin eyewitness accounts of the First Crusade consist 
of the anonymously written Gesta Francorum, a near identical version 
of the same text by Peter Tudebode, Raymond of Aguilers’s Historia 
Francorum and Fulcher of Chartres’s Historia Hierosolymitana. Each of the 
eyewitnesses had a distinct perspective on the events they wrote about 
and, although sharing a similar social vocabulary, reveal a consider- 
able difference in emphasis in their writing about the social structure 
of the expedition. 


The Gesta Francorum 


The Gesta Francorum et aliorum Hierosolimitanorum is the most studied and 
influential account of the First Crusade. It was the version of events 
that had the greatest impact in its day and it formed the basis of 
most of the subsequent twelfth century histories of the First Crusade. 
Although a new edition by Marcus Bull is in preparation, the most 
recent modern edition is that of Rosalind Hill (1962), which was issued 
with an accompanying English translation. It is Hill’s edition that is 
used for this discussion. ! 

The author of the Gesta Francorum is unknown, leading to considerable 
discussion over the centuries as to his background. There is no doubting 
that the emphasis of the author was slanted towards the activities of 
the South-Italian Norman prince Bohemond I of ‘Taranto and a strong 
consensus has been reached that the author travelled from Italy as far 
as Antioch in the contingent of Bohemond.” There is far more colour 


' Editions of the Gesta Francorum: J. Bongars, Gesta Det per Francos (Hanover, 1611); 
RHC Oc. 3, 121-63; Anonymi Gesta Francorum et aliorum Hierosolimitanorum, ed. H. Hagen- 
meyer (Heidelberg, 1890); Anonymi Gesta Francorum, ed. B. A. Lees (Oxford, 1924); 
Histoire Anonyme de la première Croisade ed. L. Bréhier (Paris, 1924); Gesta Francorum et 
aliorum Eerosolimitanorum ed. R. Hill (Oxford, 1962), hereafter GE 

? For Bohemond I of Taranto see R. B. Yewdale, Bohemond I, Prince of Antioch (New 
York, 1924). 


This is an open access chapter distributed under the terms of the CC-BY-NC License. 


10 CHAPTER ONE 


in the description of how Bohemond’s contingent was formed and its 
subsequent journey than for the equivalent, cursory, accounts of the 
armies of the expedition led by Hugh the Great, count of Vermandois, 
Count Raymond IV of ‘Toulouse or Duke Godfrey IV of Bouillon.’ As 
Rosalind Hill pointed out, the author knew the names of many of the 
individual knights of Bohemond’s following, but not even the correct 
titles of the other senior princes, let alone their followers.* 

There is also a consensus among scholars that the Gesta Francorum 
was completed shortly after the last event that it described, the victory 
of the Christian forces near Ascalon against al-Afdal, vizier of Egypt, 
12 August 1099. Louis Bréhier thought that two passages in the work 
indicated that the expedition was not complete at the time that they 
were written, indicating that the text as we have it is the result of more 
than one redaction.’ Hill further suggested that the first nine of its 
ten books were composed before the author left Antioch in November 
1099.° There is no explicit evidence in the work to support this insight, 
which Hill leaves unsupported in her introduction, but the structure 
of the work makes it plausible. The first nine books have roughly even 
amounts of material and finish coherently with the surrender of the 
citadel of Antioch, following the Christian victory over Kerbogha, 
atabeg of Mosul, 28 June 1098, that makes for the highpoint of the 
work. The tenth book is considerably longer and can be seen as a large 
addendum, written at a later date, that brings the story up to the battle 
of Ascalon. Colin Morris has noted that the way the Gesta Francorum 
deals with the matter of the discovery of the Holy Lance becomes 
more comprehensible if it is considered to be a work of two sections. 
Otherwise the passages of unqualified praise and acceptance of the 


3 For these princes see M. Bull, “The Capetian monarchy and the early crusade 
movement: Hugh of Vermandois and Louis VIP, Nottingham Medieval Studies 50 (1996), 
pp. 25-46; J. Hill and L. Hill, Raymond IV Count of Toulouse (Syracuse, 1962); J. C. 
Andressohn, The Ancestry and Life of Godfrey of Bouillon (Bloomington, 1947) and A. V. 
Murray, The Crusader Kingdom of Jerusalem, A Dynastic History 1099-1125 (Oxford, 2000), 
passim. 

t GF xi-xii. Although titles at this time had considerable fluidity, see I. S. Robinson, 
‘Eine unbekannte Streitschrift über die Salevamento von Exkommuniziesten im 
Münchener Kodex lat. 618’, Studi Gregoriani 11 (1978), p. 311 n. 30. 

° Histoire Anonyme de la première Croisade, ed. L. Bréhier, p. ix, referring to GF 
21 and 35. 

ê GF ix. 


THE EYEWITNESSES 11 


legitimacy of the lance do not fit well with the relic’s later loss of favour.” 
Another pertinent observation by Morris with regard to the bipartite 
structure of the work is that the epithet dominus is applied regularly to 
Bohemond in the first nine books but not at all in the tenth.® 

One common argument for a terminus ad quem by which the existence 
of the Gesta Francorum had to have existed has arisen from the testimony 
of the chronicler, Ekkehard, later abbot of Aura, who in 1101 made 
the pilgrimage to Jerusalem where he came across a libellus.’ This has 
often been taken as a reference to the Gesta Francorum and thus as giving 
a date by which the work must have been completed. But this is not 
an entirely safe assumption; Raymond of Aguilers’s Historia Francorum 
was available at around the same time'! and Peter Knoch’s detective 
work has raised the possibility that at least one other earlier crusad- 
ing history was available in the region.'* There is no reason to doubt 
that the version of the Gesta Francorum as we have it today had been 
written by 1101 but hard evidence is lacking. The earliest manuscript 
is Vaticanus Reginensis latinus 572, written and punctuated ‘in a bold 
round hand of the early twelfth century.’'’ 

‘Two historical events can be used to suggest a very early date for 
the completion of the Gesta Francorum, albeit with the risk that always 
attends an argument based on an absence of material rather than on 
more positive evidence. On 18 July 1100, Duke Godfrey of Lotharingia, 
Advocate of the Holy Sepulchre, died, yet nowhere does the author 
of the Gesta Francorum show any awareness of his death. In particu- 
lar, the description of the election of Godfrey as ruler of Jerusalem, 
23 July 1099, was written towards the very end of the text at which 
point it would have been conventional to have written an epitaph on 
his praiseworthy character or offer a blessing, should the writer have 
possessed knowledge of his death less than a year later.'* Similarly, as 


7 ©. Morris, ‘Policy and Visions’, p. 37, n. 14, referring to GF 59-60. For a full 
discussion of the Holy Lance see below pp. 121-5. 

8 C. Morris, “The Gesta Francorum’, p. 66. 

° EA 148. 

10 For example, Histoire Anonyme de la première Croisade, ed. L. Bréhier, viii; GF ix and 
xvi; RHC Oc. 5 (Paris, 1895), p. 21 n. b and ix; S. Runciman, A History of the Crusades 
p. 329; Fulcher of Chartres, A History of the Expedition to Jerusalem 1095-1127, F. R. 
Ryan trans. (Knoxville, 1969), p. 19. 

"RA cexxvi. See below p. 28. 

1? P. Knoch, Studien zu Albert von Aachen (Stuttgart, 1966), pp. 36-59. 

13 GF xxxviii. 


“4 GF 92-3. 


12 CHAPTER ONE 


Morris has observed, the author wrote of the election of Arnulf of 
Chocques, chaplain to Duke Robert of Normandy, to the Patriarchate 
of Jerusalem, 1 August 1099, without any indication that this election 
would be considered uncanonical and Arnulf deposed in favour of 
Daimbert of Pisa shortly after Christmas 1099." 

The exact social status of the anonymous author has proved to be 
difficult to determine. Bréhier initially proposed seeing the author as a 
cleric taking down the story from a knight. Heinrich Hagenmeyer argued 
in favour of seeing the author as a literate knight, which is a view that 
has found favour with subsequent historians, including Hill. But Colin 
Morris sounded a note of caution in regard to the characterisation 
of the author as a simple knight, with an analysis that went further 
than that of Bréhier in drawing attention to the clerical elements of 
the work.'® In resolving this issue there are inevitably great difficulties. 
What would be the difference in language between a knight dictating 
to a cleric who helped shape the material'’ and a literate knight with a 
‘half-conscious’ memory of the phrases he had heard in church?'® Do 
the rare moments when the author reveals a sophisticated grammar 
definitely indicate he was a cleric,’ or someone who had once trained 
for the clergy but subsequently become a knight??? 

The question of the authorship of the Gesta Francorum is an important 
one for historians of the crusades generally and social historians in par- 
ticular. If it is considered the work of a knight, the text can be utilised 
in a slightly different manner than 1f, like all the other sources for the 
First Crusade, it is thought to be the work of a cleric. In particular, the 
Gesta Francorum can then be cited as evidence for the outlook of a knight 
with regard to the key events and themes of the Crusade, it would also 
give greater weight to the author’s assessment of the military events 


1$ C, Morris, ‘The Gesta Francorum’, p. 66, referring to GF 93. For Arnulf of Chocques 
see B. Hamilton, The Latin Church in the Crusader States (London, 1980). For Duke Robert 
of Normandy see C. W. David, Robert Curthose Duke of Normandy (Gambridge, Mass., 
1920). 

a First in a footnote, C. Morris, ‘Policy and Visions—The case of the Holy Lance 
at Antioch’, War and Government in the Middle Ages, ed. J. Gillingham and J. C. Holt 
(Woodbridge, 1984), pp. 33-45, here p. 36 n. 12, then expanded in C. Morris, “The 
Gesta Francorum as narrative history’, Reading Medieval Studies, 19 (1993), pp. 55-71. 

17 Histoire Anonyme de la premiere Croisade, ed. L. Bréhier, v—viii. 

18 GF xiv. 

19 G, Morris, “The Gesta Francorum, p. 66, referring to GF 59-60. 

2 K, B. Wolf, ‘Crusade and narrative: Bohemond and the Gesta Francorum’, Journal 
of Medieval History 17, TI (1991), pp. 207-216. 


THE EYEWITNESSES 13 


he described. A detailed attempt to reach a verdict on this question 1s 
therefore warranted here. 

Insofar as this study sheds any light on the identity of the author of 
the Gesta Francorum, it is inclined not to see him as a cleric. Although 
knights were generally not literate around 1100, it was not particularly 
rare for a younger son of a knightly family to begin clerical training, 
only to be brought back into secular life. There are several examples 
of this type of person being on the First Crusade. From Guibert 
of Nogent’s Gesta Dei Per Francos comes an example of an otherwise 
unknown crusader, Alberic of Normandy, nobly born, who was sent 
to school early, became a cleric but ‘out of a love for warfare’ defected 
from the clergy.! Guibert himself declined the offer from his mother 
of arms and equipment to change profession from that of a monk to 
that of a knight.” 

In his discussion of the authorship of the Gesta Francorum, Bernard 
Hamilton drew attention to the example of a very prominent crusad- 
ing knight who had in his youth been clerically trained, Baldwin of 
Boulogne, later King Baldwin I of Jerusalem.” According to William 
of ‘Tyre, Baldwin, the youngest of the three sons of Eustace II, count 
of Boulogne and Ida of Bouillon, trained for the priesthood but left 
the clergy to become a miles.** Albert of Aachen described him as a 
vir litteris eruditus.” 

The crusading historian Raymond of Aguilers stated that he wrote 
his own history along with a knight, Pons of Balazuc.*° Finally, further, 
very significant, evidence that the ability by eyewitnesses to write a 
history of the crusade was not confined to the clergy comes from the 
author of the Gesta Francorum himself; at one point he observed that 
so much had happened that no clericus or laicus could possibly hope to 
write it all down.” In other words, general considerations of literacy 
c. 1100, along with the words of our author himself, do not have to 


2! GN 217: militiae amore. 

22 Guibert of Nogent, Monodiae, 1.6. 

° B. Hamilton, Religion in the Medieval West (London, 1986), p. 108. 

*! WT 10.1 (453). 

%3 AA vii.61 (573). For the early career of Baldwin of Boulogne see A. V. Murray, 
The Crusader Kingdom of Jerusalem (Oxford, 2000), pp. 30-36. 

2° RA 201. For Pons of Balazuc see RA iv-vi, see also J. Riley-Smith, First Crusaders, 
p. 218. 

7 GF 44, 


14 CHAPTER ONE 


lead to a conclusion that such narrative histories were necessarily the 
work of clerics. 

The key passage on which Collin Morris’ argument rests is the author’s 
report of a the death of the papal legate, Bishop Adhémar of Le Puy, 
1 August 1098: Quia ille erat sustentamentum pauperum, consilium divitum, 
ipseque ordinabat clericos, predicabat et summonebat milites, dicens quia: ‘Nemo ex 
vobis saluari potest nist honorificet pauperes et reficiat, vosque non potestis saluari sine 
illis, ipsique vivere nequent sine vobis.” (“Because [Adhémar] was the helper 
of the pauperes, the counsel of the rich and he ordered the clergy; he 
preached to and summoned the milites, saying this: none of you can be 
saved unless he does honour to the pauperes and assists them; you cannot 
be saved without them, and they cannot live without you’). 

For Colin Morris this passage is a decisive one in indicating that the 
author was a cleric, since it shows an outlook that would be unlikely 
for a knight, particularly in its concern for the poor.’ But a careful 
look at the phrasing of the sentence shows that, in fact, the concern 
for the poor reported here was Adhémar’s and, indeed, the reportage is 
given from the perspective of a miles who was remembering the bishop 
as someone who recalled them to their duties to the poor, which they 
might otherwise have neglected. The conclusion that this passage was 
not articulating the perspective of a cleric is strengthened by consid- 
eration of the work of Peter Tudebode. 

As discussed below, Peter Tudebode’s work has some small variations 
from the Gesta Francorum worth noting, in particular his revisions and 
additions show a slightly greater awareness of social division within 
the First Crusade than does the Gesta Francorum itself. Such changes are 
in keeping with the view that the original was the work of a knight, 
the revisions the work of a cleric. This is particularly true for the key 
passage on the death of Adhémar. 

The version of Adhémar’s words in the Historia De Hterosolymitano 
Itinere has the notable difference that the legate was reported as saying 
‘none of you can be saved unless he honours and assists the pauperes 
clerict.”*° This significantly changes the meaning of the passage. The 


°8 GF 74. For Bishop Adhémar of Le Puy see J. A. Brundage, ‘Adhémar of Puy: 
The Bishop and his Critics,’ Speculum 34 (1959), pp. 201-212. 

°C. Morris, “The Gesta Francorum, p. 66. 

3° PT 117: Quoniam nemo ex vobis salvus fieri potest, nisi honorificet et reficiat pauperes 
clericos. 


THE EYEWITNESSES 15 


theological message from Adhémar is no longer that by the meritorious 
deeds of the knights towards the pauperes they save their own souls, but 
now it is the prayers of the clergy that save the souls of the knights. It 
is a change that shifts the psychological standpoint of salvation from 
that of a knight to that of a cleric.*! 

Jay Rubenstein follows Hans Oehler in making the point that there 
is sufficient knowledge of scripture displayed in the Gesta Francorum to 
indicate that the author was no secular warrior. Indeed, ‘the evidence 
for his secular character barely withstands a second glance.” If the 
choice were between viewing the author as an irreligious knight or a 
cleric, the discussion would indeed have to conclude, without a second 
glance, that he was a member of the clergy. Not only does he paraphrase 
biblical passages but there is a strong theology at work throughout the 
book, most evident in the author’s belief that the crusaders were milites 
Christ. But this dichotomy fails to encompass a proper consideration 
of the observation that there were those on the First Crusade who had 
once received a certain amount of clerical training but nevertheless 
end up pursuing a career as a knight. The amount of clerical learning 
displayed in the Gesta Francorum is not great; it is considerably less than 
that visible in the other sources. It is, in fact, within the bounds that 
would be expected from someone with a limited amount of religious 
training, or whose prose learning had been shaped by the Vulgate, the 
most influential text of the Medieval period.** So long as the debate 
is not reduced to insisting the author was either an unlearned warrior 
or an educated cleric, then the possibility that he was a knight remains 
a likely one. A knight who was ‘secular’ in the sense of not being a 
practising member of the clergy, but who nevertheless held strongly to 
his Christian theology. 

The social vocabulary and concerns of the author of the Gesta 
Francorum are quite different from those of all the other early crusading 


5! Note that Peter Tudebode’s amendment is clumsy and artificial, as the new sen- 
tence no longer follows consistently with the start of the eulogy in which Adhémar is 
described as the helper of the pauperes. This is relevant to the discussion below on the 
relationship between Peter ‘Tudebode’s work and the Gesta Francorum, as it indicates the 
phrasing in the Gesta Francorum was the original. 

3 J. Rubenstein, ‘What is the Gesta Francorum, and who was Peter Tudebode?’ 
Revue Mabillon 16 (2005), 179-204, here p. 187. Hans Oehler, ‘Studien zu den Gesta 
Francorum , Mittellateinisches Jahrbuch, 6 (1970), 58-97. 

3 See also J. G. Gavigan, “The Syntax of the Gesta Francorum, Language 19, III (1943), 
pp. 10-102, here p. 12. 


16 CHAPTER ONE 


historians, including those who were heavily dependent on the Gesta 
Francorum, all of whom were demonstrably clerics. The attention of the 
author of the Gesta Francorum is almost entirely fixed on the activities of 
the seniores and milites. While the lower social groupings get a handful 
of mentions each, the milites have over a hundred. This simple fact is 
among the strongest pieces of evidence that the author was himself a 
member of the knightly class. 

The social concerns of the author were not particularly for the 
poor, although he was aware of the hardships they faced, but insofar 
as the author refers to an internal differentiation among the Christian 
forces (which was uncommon) much more attention was given to the 
milites, for example, in noting the loss of status of a miles through the 
death of his mount.** As will become evident in a closer examination 
of his language, the author of the Gesta Francorum was a writer who 
was untypical and rather clumsy in his vocabulary when it came to 
commentating on the lower social orders. It is the conclusion of this 
discussion then that some confidence can be given to assertion that the 
Gesta Francorum was indeed, as Hagenmeyer and his followers conjec- 
tured, written by a knight. 

As a social historian the author of the Gesta Francorum was extremely 
limited. He was generally content to describe the expedition as a whole 
and not comment on the internal differentiation within it. The standard 
point of view he adopted is that given by the first person plural, typi- 
cally he wrote of how ‘we’ viewed a certain event, meaning the whole 
movement. When the author went beyond this simple designation he still 
tended to use terms that embraced the entirety of the Christian forces: 
populus, peregrini, or milites Christi. In large part this is because the events 
that were of greatest interest to the author were the major military 
conflicts between the Christian army and their Muslim opponents. 

He seems to have been reluctant to dwell on internal dissension within 
the movement, so, for example, his own move from the contingent of 
Bohemond to that which journeyed on to Jerusalem is made without any 
justification, or any criticism of Bohemond for not fulfilling his oath. In 
this regard, as Colin Morris and Natasha Hodgson have observed, the 
Gesta Francorum appears to parallel a chanson, with its focus being on a 
simplified conflict between two undifferentiated blocks, Christians and 


* GF 23. 


THE EYEWITNESSES 17 


pagans.” Only in a few instances did the author comment on events 
that drew attention to the diverse social makeup of the First Crusade. 
His vocabulary had very few terms that carried a social connotation 
and those he did adopt were clumsy ones and invariably altered by the 
later authors who used the Gesta Francorum as their fons formals. 

The author of the Gesta Francorum had very little at all to say about 
the lower social orders. When wishing to comment on their plight he 
seems to have been at a loss for an appropriate term and coined a 
phrase, gens minuta, which, other than its occurrences in Peter Tudebode’s 
direct borrowings, does not occur in any other early crusading history, 
nor indeed, in the entire collection of writings in the Patrologia Latina. 
He wrote that because of the hardship of the siege of Antioch, around 
February 1098, the gens minuta et pauperrima fled to Cyprus, Rum and the 
mountains.*° When the Provençal magnate, Raymond Pilet, attempted 
prematurely to lead an expedition against Ma’arra in July 1098, Ridwan, 
emir of Aleppo, threw him back, in large part because Raymond’s forces 
had a great number of poor and local Christians unused to combat.*” 
Of this incident, the author of the Gesta Francorum wrote that the gens 
minuta were seized by extreme terror.** 

The phrase gens minuta is a vague one. From the example of those 
who accompanied Raymond Pilet out of Antioch in July 1098 it seems 
to be used to describe footsoldiers, probably of the less well equipped 
sort, unattached to any following. But the gens minuta et pauperrima who 
abandoned the hardship of the siege of Antioch are more likely to be 
the entire lower social orders, fighters and non-combatants. 

In the context of describing the totality of persons on the expedition, 
the Gesta Francorum used the couplet maiores et minores. This very simple 
division of the expedition says little about the make up of the Crusade, 
but its deployment might indicate a possible biblical reminiscence by 


3 For the Gesta Francorum as a chanson see GF xv, C. Morris, “The Gesta Francorum, 
p. 61 and N. Hodgson, “The Role of Kerbogha’s Mother in the Gesta Francorum and 
Selected Chronicles of the First Crusade’, Gendering the Crusades, ed. S. B. Edgington 
and S. Lambert (Cardiff, 2001), pp. 163-176. 

8 GF 35. 

3 For references to Raymond Pilet, lord of Alès, see J. Riley-Smith, First Crusaders, 
p. 220. See also RA 253 n. a. 

38 GF 74. 


18 CHAPTER ONE 


the author, despite the phrase maiores et minores being something of a 
commonplace.*? 

The issue of supplying the crusading army as it gathered, first at 
Constantinople and then at the siege of Nicea, April 1097 to its sur- 
render 19 June 1097, prompted the author of the Gesta Francorum to 
write more observantly about the poor. He recorded the promise of 
Alexios I Comnenus, the Byzantine emperor, to give alms to the pauperes 
in the contingent of Duke Godfrey to keep them alive after they had 
departed Constantinople, 4 April 1097.*° In summing up the siege of 
Nicea and the sense of frustration that the sacrifices of the expedition 
had not been properly rewarded, the anonymous author pointed out that 
many of the pauperrima gens had in fact starved to death.*! Immediately 
afterwards he nevertheless acknowledged that, exceedingly pleased with 
the fall of the city, Alexios ordered alms to be distributed bountifully 
to nostri pauperes”? 

After this cluster of usages in writing about the siege of Nicea and 
its aftermath, the term pauper appears only three times more in the 
entire work. Two of these instances were cases where the term pauperes 
was used as an adjective that seems to have been used to describe poor 
combatants rather than ‘the poor’. The author described a scene where 
the chief enemy of the Christian army, Kerbogha, the atabeg of Mosul, 
was brought a rusty sword, a bad bow and a useless spear, recently sto- 
len from the pauperes peregrini. The purpose of depicting this incident 
was to show Kerbogha as gloating hubristically and prematurely over 
the superiority of his forces to those of the Christians and the term 
pauperes peregrini here is being used very loosely. 

Similarly, when the castellan Achard of Montmerle left the siege of 
Jerusalem to contact six Christian vessels that had arrived at Jaffa on 
17 June 1099, he was intercepted by some Arab soldiers and killed. 
According to the report of the Gesta Francorum Achard died along with 
the pauperes homines pedites.** In this case, the only such formulation, 
the most likely meaning is that these were footsoldiers who were dis- 
tinguished, perhaps, by poverty relative to the condition of better-off 


I Chronicles 24:31: tam maiores quam minores. 

o GF 7. 

"GF 17. 

2 GF 18. 

= GF 51, 

+ GF 89. For Achard of Montmerle see J. Riley-Smith, The First Crusaders, 1095-1131 
(Cambridge, 1997), p. 197. 


THE EYEWITNESSES 19 


footsoldiers in the main body of the Christian forces for whom the 
author consistently used the term pedites without qualification.” The 
point here is that the author of the Gesta Francorum, even when employ- 
ing terms that make it seem as though he was attentive to the lower 
social grouping, was as often making a distinction between rich and 
poor warriors as that between those who fought and the non-combat- 
ant poor. In this regard, as will be seen, his vocabulary is significantly 
different to the clerical authors. 

There is one instance in which the term pauperes probably was being 
used by the author of the Gesta Francorum for non-combatants. ‘This was 
in the epitaph to Bishop Adhémar of Le Puy discussed above. Karl 
Leyser has noted that Adhémar’s speech reflected the contemporary 
orthodoxy of the tripartite division of society into those who worked, 
those who fought and those who prayed.*° This is a valuable observa- 
tion, but it applies with even greater force to the preceding description 
of the legate as: sustentamentum pauperum, consilium divitum, ipseque ordinabat 
clericos (helper of the pauperes, the counsel of the divites, and he regulated 
the clergy).* The division of rich and poor here is hierarchical rather 
than functional but nevertheless this passage provides evidence that the 
author of the Gesta Francorum did indeed see the expedition in tripartite 
terms and, by loose analogy with the orthodox understanding of the 
three orders, it seems that in this case at least pauperes is being used for 
non-combatants. 

If the author of the Gesta Francorum had little insight to offer with 
regard to the lower social orders, his language did become more 
nuanced with regard to the more senior social groupings of the Crusade. 
He employed the term, servientes in an interesting way, not in its com- 
mon sense of ‘servant’ but rather for warriors of some sort, perhaps 
serjeants, or perhaps for those whom other sources describe as iwenes, 
that is, knights yet to establish their own families and careers, who 
therefore attached themselves as followers to a prince." 


® Also J. G. Gavigan, “The Syntax of the Gesta Francorum; p. 37. 

‘© K, Leyser, ‘Money and Supplies’, p. 82 n. 25. For the tripartite division of society 
the best discussion still remains, G. Duby, The three orders, feudal society imagined (Chicago, 
1978). 

1 GF 74. 

#8 See below pp. 187-212. 


20 CHAPTER ONE 


With nearly a hundred usages, milites was by far and away the most 
common term for a group of persons in the Gesta Francorum. This should 
provide sufficient material to yield a precise interpretation of the social 
grouping referred to by the term. Yet milites was such a ubiquitous 
a term for the anonymous author that it was used to cover a broad 
variation of person, ranging from unnamed soldiers fighting in their 
thousands to the senior princes. Chapter Five contains a full discus- 
sion of this term, but it is worth noting here the common phrase in 
the Gesta Francorum: milites Christi.” Although the frequency with which 
the phrase appears tells us something about the theological framework 
through which the author viewed the expedition, it sheds little light on 
social status. For example, Bishop Adhémar was included in a grouping 
with Count Raymond, Godfrey of Lotharingia, and Hugh the Great 
that together were termed milites Christi.” It was not, therefore, a term 
specifically reserved for warriors of the First Crusade. 

The phrase miles Christi derives from a letter of the apostle Paul, 
a passage much exploited by Pope Gregory VII and by the authors 
of investiture polemics.°! Other examples of the appearance of miles 
Christi in the Gesta Francorum include it being adopted for the young 
Norman prince Tancred’? and collectively for Bohemond, Godfrey 
of Lotharingina and Count Raymond of ‘Toulouse, who together are 
termed Christi milites.” One of Bohemond’s speeches to his colleagues 
began: Seniores et fortissimi milites Christi.”* These examples indicate that 
the author of the Gesta Francorum considered the leadership of the First 
Crusade to be devoted to the idea of a Holy War, at least as they are 
depicted in the first nine books. For the battle with Kerbogha the entire 
army are described as milites Christi. Thereafter the term is never applied 
to individual knights but only for the general army of the expedition, 
suggesting both a certain disillusionment with the leaders and also 


GF 6, 11, 18, 19, 23, 24, 70, 73, 88, 89, 96. 

5 GF 19. 

5! Paul, to Tim 2:3. For Gregory VII and miles Christi see C. Erdmann, The Origin 
of the Idea of Crusade, trans. M. W. Baldwin and W. Goffart (Princeton, 1977), pp. 
202-3, 340-2. 

5 GF 24. For Tancred see R. L. Nicholson. Tancred: a study of his career and work in 
their relation to the First Crusade and the Establishment of the Latin States in Syria and Palestine 
(Chicago, 1940). 

5 GF 11. 

` GF 18. 


THE EYEWITNESSES 21 


providing further evidence that the work probably was written at two 
distinct stages.” 

One interesting variation was the phrase, Christi milites peregrini, for 
Raymond Pilet’s expedition of July 1098.°° As this contingent of the 
Christian army was made up from previously unattached footsoldiers 
and knights, including the gens minuta discussed above, it might well be 
the case that the author of the Gesta Francorum adapted his conventional 
phrase to match the less princely nature of that force.” The other 
variation on milites Christi that appeared in the Gesta Francorum was the 
phrase, ‘milites veri Det.’ This was used to describe a Christian force 
in battle with the garrison of Antioch, 6 March 1098. The Christians 
suffered heavy losses due to an ambush on an expedition returning 
from St Symeon’s Port. When they had regrouped, together with rein- 
forcements from the camp, they turned the battle around and won a 
major victory. The phrase, ‘knights of the true God,’ appeared here, 
not as any kind of point concerning knighthood, but to underscore 
the comforting thought that the author of the Gesta Francorum had just 
made, which was that those killed must surely have earned the reward 
of Heaven. 

One passage concerning milites deserves more detailed attention here 
as it makes an important point about the knightly class. When news 
of the crusade reached Bohemond, in the summer of 1096, he was 
engaged in the siege of Amalfi alongside his uncle, Count Roger I of 
Sicily.” The Gesta Francorum reported that when Bohemond declared he 
was joining the crusade, so many milites joined him that Count Roger 
remained behind almost alone, lamenting the loss of his forces.®” 

The interesting aspect of this passage is that milites who were once 
evidently vassals of Count Roger are described as transferring their 
allegiance to Bohemond. The same movement of milites from prince 
to prince can be seen during the course of the First Crusade and was 
a feature of the struggle of the magnates to exert leadership over the 


5 GF 70 (against Kerbogha), 88, 89, 96. 

8 GF 73. 

5 GF 73. For a discussion of the term peregrini for in early crusading sources see 
C. Tyerman, The Invention of the Crusades (London, 1998), pp. 20-22. 

5 GF 40. 

5° For Count Roger I Sicily (d. 1101) see G. A. Loud, The Age of Robert Guiscard 
(Harlow, 2000) chs. 4 and 5. 

60 GF 7. 


22 CHAPTER ONE 


expedition.”' In the view of the Gesta Francorum it was not inappropri- 
ate for a vassal to transfer his allegiance in the context of the crusade. 
The author of the Gesta Francorum himself, if it is accepted that he was 
a miles, might be an example of this, as, having travelled to Antioch 
in the contingent of Bohemond, he then joined that part of the expe- 
dition that pushed on to Jerusalem. Furthermore, the author of the 
Gesta Francorum seems to describe Raymond Pilet, a miles and vassal 
of Count Raymond of ‘Toulouse, as having made a bid for a more 
senior status by retaining (retinere) many milites and pedites from those 
who did not want to wait five months after the fall of Antioch for the 
expedition to continue.” The author of the Gesta Francorum may have 
been among those who set out with Raymond Pilet.® With the failure 
of his expedition the next appearance of Raymond Pilet in the Gesta 
Francorum showed him to be once again a member of the contingent 
of Count Raymond.” 

The association of the verb retinere with the enlistment of milites 
appeared again in the Gesta Francorum in al-Afdal’s lament that having 
been defeated by a poor Christian force (at the battle of Ascalon) he 
would never again retain (retinere) milites by compact (conventione).° Even 
though the statement was made by the vizier of Egypt concerning his 
own forces, it allows us to see the type of terminology that the author 
of the Gesta thought suitable for the recruitment of milites by a lord. 

There are several terms for the senior nobility in the Gesta Francorum, 
the most common of which was nostri maiores.°° In marked contrast to 
the other crusading sources, especially those northern French writers 
basing their work on the Gesta Francorum, the author used the term seniores 
a great deal to indicate the leading figures of the First Crusade.*” The 
author was displaying what is probably an Italian bias that contrasts with 
the vocabulary of the French sources. The term principes, so common 


ĉl See K. Leyser, ‘Money and Supplies’, pp. 89-92; and W. G. Zajac, ‘Captured 
property on the First Crusade’, The First Crusade, ed. J. Phillips (Manchester 1997), 
pp. 153-180, p. 169. See also below pp. xx-yy. 

& GF 73. 

° GF 73 n. 1. 

St GF 83. 

GF 96. 

& GF 12, 16, 30, 39, 40, 45, 57, 59, 63, 65, 66, 72, 75, 87. 

& GF 25, 29, 30, 33, 37, 44, 67, 72, 75, 76, 78, 80, 81, 84, 85, 86, 88, 89, 90. 
J. G. Gavigan, “The Syntax of the Gesta Francorum, p. 11. 


THE EYEWITNESSES 23 


in those other sources, seems to have been used in the Gesta Francorum 
only to indicate the very uppermost figures of the expedition. 

In general, the author of the Gesta Francorum clearly had a much 
more limited social vocabulary than any of the other early crusading 
historians. His attention to the condition of the milites does, however, 
provide particularly valuable material for a discussion of the meaning 
of that term as it was applied to participants of the First Crusade. 


The Historia de Hierosolymitano Itinere of Peter Tudebode 


There has been a centuries long controversy over the status of the 
Historia de Hierosolymitano Itinere of the Poitevin priest, Peter ‘Tudebode. 
The work is very similar indeed to the anonymous Gesta Francorum 
and the debate has been conducted about the relationship between 
the two. In 1641 Jean Besly produced an edition of the Historia De 
ETierosolymitano Itinere that challenged the version of the Gesta Francorum 
in Jacques Bongars’s famous 1611 collection of crusading sources."° 
From the internal evidence presented in the manuscript from which 
he was working (now Paris, B. N. MS. latin 4892), Besly argued for 
the primacy of the version in which the author gave his name as Petrus 
Tudebodus a sacerdos of Civray, approximately 50 km from Poitiers.” Henri 
Wallon and Adolphe Régnier adopted this perspective for the Recueil 
des Historiens des Croisades version edited in 1866.’! With the appearance 
of Heinrich Hagenmeyer’s scholarly edition of the Gesta Francorum in 
1880 the argument was made that the relationship of the two works 
should be reversed and that the Historia de Mierosolymitano Itinere should 
be considered the derivative work.” 

The consensus of historians since 1880 was to follow Hagenmeyer, 
until, in 1977, John and Laurita Hill produced an edition of Peter 


® Peter Tudebode, Historia de Hierosolymitano itinere, ed. J. Besly Historiae Francorum 
Scriptores, IV, ed. A. Duchesne (Paris, 1841); J. Bongars, Gesta Dei per Francos (Hanover, 
1611); see Peter Tudebode, Historia de Hierosolymitano Itinere trans. J. H. Hill and L. L. Hill 
(Philadelphia, 1974), pp. 1-2. 

” Petrus Tudebodus, Historia de Hierosolymitano Itinere, eds. J. H. Hill and L. L. Hill 
(Paris, 1977), hereafter PT, p. 138 n. b; see Peter Tudebode trans. J. H. Hill and L. L. 
Hill, pp. 1-2. 

" RHC Oc. 3, 3-117. 

7? Anonymi Gesta Francorum et aliorum Hierosolimitanorum, ed. H. Hagenmeyer (Heidelberg, 
1890). 


24 CHAPTER ONE 


Tudebode’s text. The Hills performed valuable work in examining the 
key manuscripts and, largely on stylistic grounds, separating the two 
traditions. This allowed them to publish the modern edition of Historia 
de Fierosolymitano Itinere, which is used here. On the issue of the rela- 
tionship between the Gesta Francorum and the Historia de Hierosolymitano 
Itinere, they argued in the introduction both to the Latin edition and the 
separately published English translation, that the Gesta Francorum, the 
Historia de Hierosolymitano Itinere and the Historia Francorum of Raymond 
of Aguilers shared a now lost common source.” 

The difficulty with this position is that the Historia de Hterosolymitano 
Itinere seems indisputably to be adopting passages wholesale from the 
Gesta Francorum, unconsciously importing the perspective of the anony- 
mous author in many instances. As John France has pointed out, the 
main problem with the ‘missing source’ theory is that it does not explain 
how a French priest came to adopt the term nos for events that are 
describing the viewpoint of the Italian contingent.” 

By and large, there is much more material in Peter ‘Tudebode’s work 
that appears to come from the Gesta Francorum than the other way 
around. ‘The issue is not a neat one, however, because, as Jay Rubenstein 
has shown, there are some very distinct passages which strongly suggest 
Peter ‘Tudebode had the fuller version of events than that given in the 
Gesta Francorum.” The solution to this puzzle offered by Jay Rubenstein 
is the very plausible suggestion that at least one, and, based on a study 
of the Monte Cassino chronicle, possibly two, early versions of the Gesta 
Francorum were in circulation when Peter Tudebode wrote his history.”° 
In other words, Peter ‘Tudebode was not amending the Gesta Francorum 
as we have it now, but a very similar, earlier, draft. 

This is not to dispute the importance of Peter ‘Tudebode as a source 
for the First Crusade in those matters where he does offer new material. 
It is clear that he was present on the First Crusade. He wrote several 
passages that offer new information, or slight revisions of the version 
of events that are described in the Gesta Francorum, consistent with 
his putting forward his own name as a participant. Indeed, he listed 


3 PT 21-24; Peter Tudebode, trans. J. H. Hill and L. L. Hill (Philadelphia, 1974), 

. 10-13. 
a? J. France, “The Use of the Anonymous Gesta Francorum in the Early Twelfth-Century 
Sources for the First Crusade’, From Clermont to Jerusalem. The Crusades and Crusader Societies 
1095-1500, ed. A. V. Murray (Turnhout, 1998), pp. 29-42. 

7 J. Rubenstein, ‘What is the Gesta Francorum, pp. 190-201. 

® Ibid., p. 201. 


THE EYEWITNESSES 25 


several other individuals who were not mentioned in other sources, 
including two knights also with the name Tudebode.”” All in all, as 
Susan Edgington puts it, ‘his work is...chiefly of ancillary value, add- 
ing convincing and circumstantial detail particularly about the sieges 
of Antioch and Jerusalem.’ 

It is hard to distinguish Peter ‘Tudebode as a social observer from 
the anonymous author of the Gesta Francorum. Since they both had a 
great amount of material in common they necessarily had the same 
social language. Peter Tudebode’s work did, however, have some small 
variations worth noting and he put a different perspective on some of 
the passages discussed with regard to the Gesta Francorum. Furthermore, 
he used two terms that are not to be found in the Gesta: clentes and 
Jamitares. His revisions and additions show a slightly greater aware- 
ness of social division within the First Crusade than does the Gesta 
Francorum itself. 

Peter ‘Tudebode retained the two usages of the expression gens minuta 
from the Gesta Francorum, a term so unusual that it is not found anywhere 
else in the Patrologia Latina. The author of the Gesta Francorum used 
minores as a broad term for the lower social order on three occasions. 
Peter Tudebode added two more examples.” These additions, although 
relatively unimportant, begin to demonstrate a greater awareness of 
the presence of the lower social orders in Peter ‘Tudebode’s work than 
in the Gesta Francorum. This distinction between the two texts is more 
clearly evident in their respective use of the term pauperes. 

In describing the vision of Christ by a priest, Stephen of Valence, 
at Antioch, 10 June 1098, Peter ‘Tudebode added an extra line of 
oratio recta, reporting that Christ ordered everyone to make penance, 
undertake a procession with bare feet through the churches and ‘give 
alms to the pauperes?® This is useful additional information that the 
visions of Stephen were giving expression to the needs of the poor. 
Peter Tudebode made it clear that this advice was acted upon, when he 
altered the Gesta Francorum’s report that just before battle with Kerbogha 
‘they gave alms’ to read ‘they gave alms to the pauperes.”®' In the month 


” PT 97 and 116. 

8 S. B. Edgington, “The First Crusade: Reviewing the Evidence’, The First Crusade, 
origins and impact, ed. J. Phillips (Manchester, 1997), pp. 55-77, p. 56. 

PT 108 and 109 referring to GF 67. 

8° PT 100:...pauperibus dent eleemosinas. 

5! PT 110: Et dederunt eleemosynam pauperibus. Referring to GF 67-8. 


26 CHAPTER ONE 


after the fall of Ma’arra, 11 December 1098, the pauperes engaged in 
a form of behaviour that, in the version of events reported by Peter 
‘Tudebode, brought forth a response from the seniores. The pauperes pere- 
grim cut open the bodies of the dead to look for coins hidden in the 
stomachs. They then cooked and ate scraps of flesh from the bodies. 
As a result, reported Peter, the seniores dragged the bodies outside the 
gates of the city, where they formed large piles that were burnt.” The 
version in the Gesta Franorum was blander, not distinguishing the pauperes 
as those responsible for cannibalism nor reporting the response of the 
seniores.” 

As noted above, there is a slight but interesting change to the critical 
passage in the Gesta Francorum on the death of Bishop Adhémar of Le 
Puy at Antioch, which alters the meaning of the passage to one where 
it is through the prayers of the clergy and not their own meritorious 
deeds that the knights will be saved. 

Peter Tudebode wrote a description of an appearance of St Andrew 
to the lowly Provençal visionary Peter Bartholomew that is not in 
the Gesta Francorum.™* The phrasing was drawn from the account of 
Raymond of Aguilers although Peter Tudebode placed it in his account 
of the storming of Ma’arra, while Raymond was referring to the 
events of March 1099. From this and the other passages that mention 
the lower social order it is evident that Peter Tudebode had a greater 
awareness of the activities and needs of the pauperes than did the author 
of the Gesta Francorum. 

Several times Peter Tudebode added the term seniores where the 
Gesta might have a more vague term like alii. None of these examples 
introduce new information or clarify the role of the seniores, other than 
the example under pauperes above, of the seniores being spurred to action 
to prevent acts of cannibalism by the poor. 

Since the Historia de Merosolymitano Itinere of Peter ‘Tudebode was so 
heavily dependent on the Gesta Francorum it added only a few new pas- 
sages containing extra information that distinguishes between the various 
social orders of the First Crusade. Although the quantity is limited, the 
additional material is in fact relatively rich in social information and 
there is sufficient to discern a difference in outlook between the two 


@ PT 124-5, 

8 GF 80. 
For references to Peter Bartholomew see J. Riley-Smith, The First Crusaders 
(Cambridge, 1997) p. 216. See also below pp. 121-147. 


THE EYEWITNESSES 27 


authors, in particular through Peter Tudebode having shown a greater 
interest in the presence of the poor. 


Raymond of Aguilers’s Historia Francorum qui ceperunt Iherusalem 


The Historia Francorum of Raymond of Aguilers is a critical text for 
the history of the First Crusade, yet it is a relatively neglected work in 
comparison to the other eyewitness sources. Ten manuscripts of the 
history have survived from the medieval period. It was first published 
by Jacques Bongars in the collection Gesta Dei per Francos (1611) and 
edited by various authors for the version that was published in the 
Recueil series (1866). A very important modern edition with consider- 
able critical apparatus was prepared by John France for his PhD. thesis 
(1967); surprisingly this thesis has not been published, perhaps because 
of the publication of an edition in 1969 by J. H. Hill and L. L. Hil. 
Nevertheless France’s is used here as easily the most reliable edition.” 
The edition of 1969 is based on one manuscript, Paris, B. N. MS Latin 
14378. The editors seem to have been unaware of France’s work, which 
has established that among the surviving manuscripts, MS 14378 is 
relatively far removed from the archetype. France’s edition used all 
ten manuscripts in a sophisticated reconstruction of the archetype. 
The biographical information available concerning Raymond of 
Aguilers derives entirely from the text. The author was a canon of the 
cathedral church of St Mary of Le Puy, in the Auvergne region of 
France.” He participated on the expedition with the Provençal con- 
tingent, probably that of Bishop Adhémar of Le Puy, the papal legate, 
to judge by the bias of his detail. Having earlier been raised to the 
priesthood during the course of the expedition,®’ Raymond of Aguilers 
subsequently joined the chaplaincy of Count Raymond IV of ‘Toulouse. 


% J. Bongars, Gesta Dei per Francos (Hanover, 1611); RHC Oc. 3, 235-309; J. France, A 
Critical Edition of the Historia Francorum of Raymond of Aguilers (unpublished PhD. thesis: 
University of Nottingham, 1967), hereafter RA; Le ‘Liber’ de Raymond d’Aguilers, eds. 
J. H. Hill and L. L. Hill (Paris, 1969). I am grateful to J. France for permission to quote 
from his thesis. References to the more easily accessible RHC edition are in brackets. 

% RA clxiv—cev. 

87 RA 5 (235). 

88 RA 11-12, 17 (237, 238). 

® RA 202 (276). 


28 CHAPTER ONE 


In referring to the events of 10 June 1098, when the visionary Peter 
Bartholomew first came forward, Raymond of Aguilers mentioned that 
he was already chaplain to Count Raymond at that time and presum- 
ably thereafter.” 

The Historia Francorum was written very soon after the end of the 
First Crusade, some time after the battle of Ascalon. As John France 
has pointed out, it must have been written before the end of 1101, 
when Count Raymond of ‘Toulouse’s participation in the Lombard and 
French expedition in Anatolia that summer would have contradicted a 
statement by the historian that the count intended to return to France.” 
The earliest writer to make use of the Historia Francorum was Fulcher 
of Chartres, which shows the work was available in Jerusalem between 
1101 and 1105. Through an analysis of the cross-references in the 
work, France has made a strong case for seeing the finished work as 
being based on notes or longer extracts that Raymond wrote during 
the course of the expedition.” 

As a writer Raymond of Aguilers had an above average command 
of Latin for a priest, but no familiarity with the classics, quoting only 
the Bible.** Shaped by the traditions of pilgrimage that were the 
dominant feature of religious life in the Le Puy region,” Raymond’s 
Historia Francorum was framed by the author’s perspective that the First 
Crusade was an ter Det and that God was working miracles through 
the participants of the journey.” 

The miracles and visions that fill the account have led later historians 
to treat Raymond as an excessively credulous and therefore unreliable 
source. Paulin Paris has described Raymond of Aguilers as a sinister 
fanatic.” L. L. and J. H. Hill in their biography of Count Raymond 
of ‘Toulouse and in their English translation of the Historia Francorum 
considered the historian to be extremely disingenuous, describing him 
as inaccurate, ‘superstitious, and prejudiced.” In particular they argued 


% RA 100 (255). 

9! RA 354 (301). See also RA cxxxviii-cxxxix. 
* RA cxxxix. 
RA cxxxix—cxliii. 

RA xvii. 

5 RA xvi. 

°° Ttinere Dei see RA 202 (276); ‘miracles’ see RA 59 (247). 

” Anon., La Chanson d’Antioche, ed. P. Paris (Geneva, 1969) 1, xxi. 

3 Raymond d’Aguilers, Historia Francorum Qui Ceperunt Iherusalem, trans. J. H. Hill 
and L. L. Hill (Philadelphia, 1968), p. 7. 


THE EYEWITNESSES 29 


that the entire account of the discovery and use of the Holy Lance 
found at Antioch was fanciful on Raymond’s part.” In fact, they con- 
sidered Raymond of Aguilers to have fabricated most of the material 
concerning the Lance as he ‘weaves in events along with miracles to 
give the semblance of truth. We think that he is the creator of most 
of the account rather than a naive reporter.’!° This is an unbalanced 
viewpoint. Steven Runciman’s statement that ‘within his limits he 
was obviously sincere and well informed,’'’! is a much more accurate 
assessment. 

Raymond of Aguilers seems to have taken to heart his avowed belief 
that, having been made a priest, he should speak the truth before God.'” 
This honesty is shown in particular with regard to the very issue of the 
peasant visionary Peter Bartholomew and the Holy Lance. Raymond 
clearly did wish to believe in Peter Bartholomew as an authentic conduit 
for the messages of Christ and the apostles, but this does not seem to 
have led him to falsify his account of events. Raymond reported the 
doubts of Bishop Adhémar on the subject of the Lance;!* he described 
an interview with Peter Bartholomew in which the visionary was caught 
out lying about his knowledge of scripture'™ and, in a convincingly 
candid passage, Raymond admitted that he held doubts about Peter 
Bartholomew and secretly desired to see the visionary take the ordeal 
of fire to have them resolved.” Raymond of Aguilers therefore was not 
given to invention in order to justify his view. Nor, in his own terms, 
would he need to, as the fall of Jerusalem to the Christians fully satis- 
fied the historian that the participants had performed God’s work so 
worthily that the event would be remembered in all the world to come 
as the day when paganism was reduced to nothing,!°° 

From the point of view of an investigation of social class the distinct 
theological perspective of Raymond of Aguilers is more helpful than 
harmful. It encouraged the historian to be attentive to the lower social 
orders, whom he understood to be especially meritorious in the eyes of 


9 Thid., p. 12. 

1 J. H. Hill and L. L. Hill, Raymond IV Count of Toulouse (Syracuse, 1962), 
p. 109. 

1! S, Runciman, A History of the Crusades (third edition: London, 1991), 1, 328-9. 

102 RA 202 (276). 

103 RA 100 (255). 

10+ RA 113-4 (257-8). 

105 RA 256-7 (284-5). 

1% RA 348 (300). 


30 CHAPTER ONE 


God, precisely because of the hardship that they had to endure during 
the expedition. The fact that the goals, desires and sentiments of the 
poor were seen as important by Raymond means that historians have 
an insight into the social tensions that existed during the expedition 
that would be almost indiscernible from the other sources. 

Although the lower social orders on the expedition were no longer 
living and working on farms, their former status was reflected in the 
vocabulary of Raymond of Aguilers. He reported that in the winter 
of 1097 sorties from the city of Antioch against their besiegers killed 
squires and rustici who were pasturing horses and oxen beyond the 
river.” Writing about a foraging expedition, 31 December 1097, 
Raymond described how Bohemond was alerted to the presence of 
an enemy force when he heard certain rustici from his men cry out. 
John France assumes this was a passing reference to Christian infantry, 
although, given the purpose of the expedition, it could be that non- 
combatants in search of foodstuffs accompanied the fighting forces.'” 
The visionary Peter Bartholomew, who came on the expedition as the 
servant of a knight, was described as a pauper rusticus.''° This shows 
the historian’s use of rusticus as a general social term for someone of 
a lowly background. According to Raymond, those who disbelieved 
Peter drew attention to this low social state, refusing to accept that 
God would desert principes and bishops to reveal Himself to a rusticus 
homo.''' The other two examples of rustici in the Historia Francorum are 
for people other than the Christian forces and convey no significant 
social information.!!” 

There are only three instances in the Historia Francorum in which 
Raymond of Aguilers used the term vulgus, in each case with the sense 
of the ‘crowd of commoners’. At Antioch, shortly after the discovery 
of the Holy Lance, 15 June 1098, the vulgus recovered from famine 
and demoralisation to accuse the principes of delaying battle against 
the forces of Kerbogha that were besieging them.''’ Shortly before the 
battle of Ascalon, Raymond reported that the Egyptians were being 


107 RA 36 (243). 

108 RA 42 (244). 

109 J. France, Victory in the East. A military history of the First Crusade (Cambridge, 1984), 
p. 237. 

10 RA 88-9 (253). 

n1 RA 229-30 (280-1). 

12 RA 81, 194-5 (252, 274). 

n3 RA 120 (259). 


THE EYEWITNESSES 31 


told by those who had fled from the fall of Jerusalem how few were 
the Christian forces and of the infirmity of the vulgus and the horses.!" 
In the latter case the term was deliberately chosen so as to emphasise 
just how lowly was the state of the Christian army in the eyes of the 
Egyptians; it cannot be therefore concluded that Raymond himself saw 
the term vulgus as appropriate for combatants. The one other appearance 
of the term vulgus in the history occurs with respect to non-Christian 
forces. When Raymond referred to the Muslims killed outside ‘Tripoli 
early in March 1099, he noted the great numbers of bodies both of 
the nobles and the vulgus." 

Raymond of Aguilers’s preferred term for the lower social orders 
on the First Crusade was pauperes; there are over thirty examples of his 
use of the term. Raymond’s early usages of the term help establish the 
social group he was referring to. In the winter of 1096 the stragglers 
of the Provengal contingent became the targets of the inhabitants of 
Dalmatia who slaughtered the feeble old women, the pauperes and the 
sick straggling behind the army because of their infirmity. ° Raymond 
reported that the Byzantine emperor, Alexios I Comnenus, promised 
that when Nicea was captured he would found there a Latin monastery 
and hospice for pauperes Francorum.''’ In these examples Raymond’s 
use of pauperes is for people in a state of weakness, not necessarily ‘the 
poor’. As Karl Leyser has written in an important footnote, ‘discussions 
of the pauperes on the First Crusade generally assume the translation 
pauper = poor, though western European usage even at this period prob- 
ably still had overtones of the sense pauper = defenceless.’!'® Similarly, 
later, January 1099, on the march through the Buqaia, the plain that 
connects inner Syria to the sea, Raymond wrote that certain pauperes, 
who were experiencing weakness and were lingering a long way behind 
the army, were killed and despoiled by Turks and Arabs.''? Raymond 
also reported that the Christian army before Jerusalem had no more 
than twelve thousand fighters, as well as many who were infirm and 
pauperes.'*° 


1t RA 369 (304). 
115 RA 262 (286). 
"6 RA 6-7 (236). 

"7 RA 22 (240). 

"8K. Leyser, Communications and Power in Medieval Europe: the Gregorian Revolution and 

beyond, trans. T. Reuter (London, 1994), p. 82 n. 26. 
"9 RA 191 (273). 
120 RA 338 (298). 


32 CHAPTER ONE 


The term pauperes could, however, be used by Raymond to indicate 
a class of people, not simply the weak and defenceless. In his descrip- 
tion of the famine experienced by the Christian forces as they besieged 
Antioch in the early days of 1098 he wrote that the pauperes began to 
leave ‘and also many divites fearing poverty.’!”' In this case the juxtaposi- 
tion of pauperes with the divites makes it clear they are being considered 
the lower part of a basic bipartite division of the Christian forces into 
‘rich’ and ‘poor’. In another example arising from the same period 
of the expedition the pauperes were described as fearing to cross the 
Orontes to find fodder, giving a small insight into at least one of their 
activities.’ Raymond singled out the pauperes as being most affected 
by the expedition being stalled at Antioch due to the discord of the 
princes at the end of October 1098." 

Raymond’s next example was the first that gives an indication 
that the term pauper could be positive one in the Historia Francorum, 
embracing the entire Christian army. Having described the victory of 
the Christians over the relieving forces of Ridwan, emir of Aleppo 
and Suqman ibn Ortuq, 9 February 1098, and the similarly successful 
defence of the camp from a sortie by the garrison of Antioch on the 
same day, Raymond wrote that the ambassadors of al-Afdal, vizier 
of Egypt, were in the camp at the time and seeing the miracles that 
God performed through His servants, praised Jesus, son of the Virgin 
Mary ‘who through His pauperes trampled under foot the most powerful 
tyrants.’'’* The use of pauperes here is schematic (there is an obvious 
echo of the Magnificat, Luke 1:52-3); clearly it was the fighting force 
of the expedition which was responsible for the miraculous victories, 
but Raymond was working in a framework that saw the mighty pagan 
powers being confronted by a Christian force which, although in 
appearance lowly and weak, was powerful through the assistance of 
God. From this theological point of view the entire movement could 
be considered to be one of pauperes. 

On 6 March 1098, a sortie from Antioch that began well ended 
disastrously for the ‘Turkish forces; they were thrown back and their 
retreat blocked by the narrowness of the bridge between them and the 


121 RA 46 (245): et multi divites paupertatem verentes. 

122 RA 50 (246). 

12 RA 163 (267). 

PY RA 59 (247):... qui, per pauperes suos, potentissimos tyrannos conculcabat. The embassy 
was sent by al-Afdal, vizier of Egypt in the name of the boy caliph, al-Mustali. 


THE EYEWITNESSES 33 


city. This was the occasion for Raymond of Aguilers to enjoy the sight 
of certain pauperes returning after victory. He described these pauperes 
as dashing in among the tents on Arab horses, displaying their new 
found wealth to their comrades, dressing themselves in robes of silk, 
and being strengthened with two or three new shields. He went on to 
say that the pauperes, provoked by these scenes broke into a Saracen 
graveyard in search of more booty.'” These pauperes returning from 
battle, on horseback, delighted that their hardship was over and carrying 
shields cannot therefore have been pauperes as traditionally understood. 
The incident has to be placed in the context of the loss of mounts and 
status by milites during the hard march through the desert of Anatolia 
and on the narrow mountain paths south of Coxon.'*° The people 
depicted by Raymond must have been those milites who had fallen 
to a status that Raymond clearly understood as being that of pauperes 
through the loss of their mounts and equipment. This conclusion is 
strengthened by his description of those breaking into the Saracen 
graves as pauperes, since according Robert the Monk, elaborating on the 
Gesta Irancorum’s brief version of the same incident, those who dug up 
bodies in search of booty were identified as iuvenes, that is, knights yet 
to become independent heads of households.'*’ In a certain context 
then, Raymond was willing to apply the term pauperes even to combat- 
ants. The appearance of two such examples of this unusual use of the 
term shows that the choice of vocabulary was not accidental; in this 
sense Raymond of Aguiler’s use of pauperes anticipates a similar use of 
the term by the scholar and civil servant, Peter of Blois (c. 1180), and 
Innocent II (r. 1198-1216). 

For Raymond of Aguilers, pauperes as an adjective and paupertas, the 
state of poverty, could also, depending on the context, be indicative of 
social status, of being a member of the pauperes. This seems to be the 
case in Raymond’s writings about Peter Bartholomew, the lowly servant 
of William Peyre of Cunhlat, from the Provençal region of France. As 
noted above, Raymond introduced Peter as, ‘a certain pauper rusticus’? 
He reported that when Peter explained his reason for being hesitant 


125 RA 68-69 (249). 

126 See below p. 180. 

127 RM 788. 

18 See I. S. Robinson, The Papacy 1073-1198 Continuity and Innovation (Cambridge, 
1990), pp. 365-6. 

129 RA 88-9 (253-4):... pauperem quemdam rusticum. 


34 CHAPTER ONE 


in approaching the princes, the visionary said that his reluctance had 
come about from ‘recognising... paupertas mea’'’® and from ‘standing 
in fear from paupertas mea.’'*' Peter emphasised his own paupertas twice 
more, the second time saying to the princes that reflecting on ‘paupertas 
mea led him not to want to come forward in case they believed he had 
made up the visions in order to obtain food.'* In these statements are 
possible reminiscences from the Vulgate, where there are many refer- 
ences to pauperes and paupertas such as ‘Tobias 5:25, ‘for our paupertas 
was sufficient for us.’ Or the prophet speaking in Lamentations 3:1, 
‘I am the man seeing paupertas mea...’'** Ecclesiasticus 10:33 reads, 
‘the pauper is glorified by his discipline and fear,’!*? which has echoes in 
Peter Bartholomew’s careful and avowedly fearful initial approach to 
the princes. In Ecclesiasticus 11:12-13, the point is made that no mat- 
ter the degree to which a person is experiencing paupertas, they can be 
raised up by the eye of God, a view that is very similar to Raymond’s 
with respect to Peter Bartholomew. 

Evidence that Raymond had in mind a treatment of the condition of 
paupertas that indicated it to be a state which was conducive to gaining 
the support of God was displayed in his report of Peter Bartholomew’s 
vision which took place on or about 1 December 1098. Here SS. Peter 
and Andrew appeared, but they were not initially recognised as they 
were wearing misshapen clothing and were dressed most sordidly, so 
that Peter Bartholomew thought them to simply members of the pau- 
peres.” St Peter explained to the visionary that they appeared in this 
condition to make him aware that anyone who serves God devotedly 
obtains His assistance.'*’ This vision gave an answer to the critics of 
Peter Bartholomew who could not believe that God would reveal him- 
self to one so lowly.'** 

Another example of Raymond seeing the pauperes as especially impor- 
tant to God arose from the deaths of six or seven people following a 
Saracen raid in January 1099. The corpses were found to have crosses 


5 (254): recogitans. . . paupertatis meae habitum. 
131 RA 96 (254): Metuens paupertati meae. 
(255 


Lam 3:1, Ego vir videns paupertatem mea. 

Eccus 10:33, Pauper gloriatur per disciplinam et timorem suam. 
136 RA 168 (268). 

87 RA 169 (269). 

138 RA 229-30 (280). 


135 


THE EYEWITNESSES 35 


on their right shoulders. Those who saw this gave great thanks to God, 
reported Raymond, for His having comforted His pauperes.’ 

In his reports of the visions of Peter Bartholomew, Raymond also 
used the term pauperes in a more sociological sense, one less laden with 
theological overtones, particularly in describing the social tensions that 
existed within the expedition over the distribution of plunder. The key 
visions are discussed in full below, in a context provided by the full range 
of early crusading histories.'*? Most of the remaining examples of the 
term pauperes in the Historia Francorum are connected with Raymond of 
Aguilers’s account of the actions of Count Raymond of ‘Toulouse. At 
times the historian portrayed the count as a religious and worthy leader 
of the poor, but Raymond of Aguilers also indicated a tension between 
those who were supposedly being led and the count. These examples 
are also discussed in the narrative of events set out in Chapter Four. 

Raymond of Aguilers seems to have believed in the obligation of 
the leadership of the expedition to show concern for the welfare of 
the pauperes. This idea is present in a vision of 3 August 1098 in which 
Bishop Adhémar of Le Puy appeared before Peter Bartholomew, having 
died just two nights earlier. According to Peter, as reported by Raymond 
of Aguilers, the Bishop said that he was saved from a punishing fire by 
a robe returned to him by the Lord because the robe had been given 
away to a pauper on his ordination as bishop."! 

The collective term for a crowd turba is not, strictly speaking, one that 
denotes social status, but it is discussed here for the important social 
information that accompanies its use in the Historia Francorum. Raymond 
used turba on four occasions, two of the which were straightforward: 
he described a crowd of footsoldiers, turba peditum, from the army of 
Duquq of Damascus, who were scattered in battle by Bohemond, 31 
December 1097;'” secondly he wrote of the turba that was the Christian 
army being roused for battle against al-Afdal near Ascalon. The two 
other usages of the term are more interesting. At an assembly during 
the siege of Jerusalem, in a speech by the leaders, the Christians were 
urged to remember the time when Christ entered Jerusalem humbly on 


189 RA 184 (272). 

40 See below pp. 120-152. 
1 RA 138-9 (262-3). 

2 RA 45 (245). 

"SRA 368 (304). 


36 CHAPTER ONE 


an ass, a {urba running to honour him with a great procession.'** This 
was a correct use of the Vulgate term for the crowd that spread their 
garments before Christ (Mat 21:8) and who surrounded him on that 
occasion (Mat 21:9, Luc 19:37, Luc 19:39, Ioh 12:12). But Matthew 
also used the same term, turba, for the armed mob who arrested Christ 
(Mat 26:47, 26:55, Mar 14:43, Luc 22:47). Mark used the term for the 
crowd who freed Barabbas rather than Christ (Mar 15:8, Luc 23:18). 
Raymond of Aguilers was familiar with how the term was used in the 
Vulgate, not just for a crowd, but a crowd that could be fickle and 
violently ungodly. This is particularly significant in his account of the 
ordeal of Peter Bartholomew, 8 April 1099. In the light of the Vulgate 
depiction of the passion of Christ it is noteworthy that in the Historia 
Francorum the watching crowds at the ordeal by fire of the visionary 
were described initially as populus, then multitudo populi, then turba as 
they progressed from praying, to watching, to charging across to Peter 
and inflicting wounds more lethal than those of the flames.'* In his 
choice of term for the crowd Raymond appears to have been echoing 
the scenes in the Vulgate.'*° 

There was a distinct grouping of craftsmen on the crusade, whose 
status seems to have been above that of the lowest social order on the 
expedition, given that pay was set aside for their work. The skills of the 
craftsmen were required especially in the making of siege equipment 
for the attacks on Nicea and Jerusalem. It was while preparing equip- 
ment for the storming of Jerusalem that they came to the attention 
of Raymond of Aguilers. He noted that while everyone else worked 
spontaneously, the artifices were given wages from the collections that 
were made among the people. Count Raymond had his own operari 
whom he paid out of his own wealth. The urgency to have this 
equipment made led the council of leaders to order those present to 
lend their mules and boys to the artifices and hgnarii.'** The term operarii 
seems to have been used by Raymond as synonymous with artifices. Not 
only is this evident in the first example above, but also in the report 
that Duke Godfrey and the Counts of Normandy and Flanders placed 


1 RA 398 (296). 

45 RA 259-254 (284). 
46 RA 959-4 (284), 
47 RA 333 (297). 

48 RA 334 (298). 


THE EYEWITNESSES 37 


Gaston, viscount of Béarn, over the same body of craftsmen, now 
termed operari.'*° 

Raymond of Aguilers wrote that Count Raymond put the recently 
arrived Genoese sailor William Ricau in charge of his operarii on Mount 
Zion.'”° The historian stated that the Genoese aided Count Raymond in 
the construction of siege equipment with the ropes, iron mallets, nails, 
axes, pick-axes and hatchets they had salvaged from the loss of their 
ships at Jafla.'"' These skilled workers were paid, unlike the captured 
Saracens who were put to work as slaves under the direction of the 
Bishop of Albara.!”” 

Although the main importance of Raymond’s work in terms of the 
social structure of the First Crusade is with regard to the lower social 
orders, his observations are also valuable for those of higher status. It 
becomes clear from Raymond’s account that the familiares, the members 
of the households of the senior princes, were a very significant politi- 
cal force. There role is discussed in the narrative of events in Chapter 
Four, particularly with regard to the household of Count Raymond, 
of which Raymond of Aguilers was a member.'** 

The use of the ubiquitous term milites was generally uncontroversial 
in the Historia Francorum. There is a single passage, however, which 
although applied to Turkish troops in Antioch stands out in so far as 
it indicates Raymond’s willingness to make a distinction between ordi- 
nary and senior knights. In the description of Antioch by Raymond 
of Aguilers at the time of the siege by the Christian army, 21 October 
1097, he wrote that there were in the city two thousand milites optimi 
and four or five thousand milites gregarit and also ten thousand pedites.'** 
Clearly the distinction here between good knights and common knights 
is not a reformulation of that between knights and footsoldiers. As 
Raymond makes this distinction only once, however, in connection with 
the hostile forces based at Antioch, it could be that he had in mind 
a very specific point here based on the difference between the lightly 


149 RA 331-2 (297). For Gaston of Béarn see J. Riley-Smith, First Crusaders, p. 206. 

150 RA 332 (297). For William Ricau see F Cardini, ‘Profilo d’un crociato, Guglielmo 
Embriaco’, Archivio Storico Italiano, 136 (1978), pp. 417-8. 

51 RA 337 (298). 

32? RA 332-3 (297). 

13 See below pp. 147-52. 

5t RA 33 (242). 


38 CHAPTER ONE 


armed ‘Turkish riders who fought with bow from horseback and their 
better armed superiors. 

One clear theme with regard to milites in the Historia Francorum is that 
of the importance they attached to horses and this provides valuable 
evidence for the discussion of milites in Chapter Five.'? Only three indi- 
vidual milites were identified by name in the Historia Francorum: ‘Isoard 
miles of Ganges, a most noble Provencal’;'*° ‘Roger of Barneville, a most 
illustrious miles, much loved by all’? and Raymond Pilet ‘a most noble 
and strong miles.” It is instantly obvious that the historian, possibly to 
distinguish these knights from the general body of milites, deliberately 
underlined the noble status of each of these males. 

The phrase milites Christi is notable for its near complete absence in 
the Historia Francorum. This is a marked contrast to all the other sources 
of the First Crusade and the Gesta Francorum in particular. Raymond 
wrote the formulation down only once, in reporting the battle cry 
of Isadore of Gaye.’ Although Raymond has the most theological 
framework for his Historia of any of the early crusading historians, his 
was not a work that praised the deeds of God through His milites, but 
rather through His whole army.’ 

In the discussion of twenes in Chapter Six, important material is 
provided by Raymond of Aguilers, who despite his general perspective 
displayed a familiarity with knightly culture and the mentality of the 
warrior class. If his use of the term for St George was for a warrior 
rather than simply a ‘youth’, then it suggests that he saw the unat- 
tached knights willing to carry banners in to the heart of battle as a 
model knight. '®! 

Raymond of Aguilers’ distinctive vocabulary extended to the upper 
social orders. Whereas in the other sources the term principes was lim- 
ited to the most senior leaders on the crusade, Raymond employed it 
to indicate a wider body of magnates, such as those from within his 


155 See below pp. 184-5. 

8 RA 66-7 (249): Lswardus miles de Gagia, Provincialis nobilissimus. For Isoard I, count 
of Die see RA 66 n. 2, see also J. Riley-Smith, First Crusaders, p. 213. 

157 RA 84 (252): Miles clarissimus et karissimus omnibus, nomine Rotgerius de Barnevilla. 
For Roger, Lord of Barneville-sur-mer, see RA 84 n. a; see also J. Riley-Smith, First 
Crusaders, p. 221. 

158 RA 253-4 (284): Miles nobilssimus et fortis. 

18% RA 67 (249). 

160 RA 5, 14, 64, 137, 180, 368, 369 (235, 237, 248, 262, 271, 304, 304): Exercitu 
Dei. RA 12 (237): Populus Dei. 

161 See below pp. 209-11. 


THE EYEWITNESSES 39 


following who advised Count Raymond of Toulouse.'” This sense, that 
all magnates were princes, is perhaps appropriate for someone writing 
from the perspective of the more lowly. When he came to write about 
those at the very apex of the social structure of the First Crusade he 
added an emphasis to the term principes, those leading the army were 
principes maiores.'°? He also referred to Bohemond and Raymond as the 
‘two greatest principes in the army. '®* 

The language and perspective of Raymond of Aguilers with regard 
to social structure is very different from all of the other early crusading 
sources. His theological outlook placed a much greater emphasis on 
the deeds of the commoners than did any of the other accounts. The 
consequence of Raymond’s belief that he was recording the events of 
a people chosen by God was not a history of irrational mysticism but 
one that provides a valuable insight into the outlook of the poor on 
the First Crusade. 


The Historia Hierosolymitana of Fulcher of Chartres 


Heinrich Hagenmeyer published the definitive edition of the Historia 
Merosolymitana of Fulcher of Chartres in 1913.'° The main strength 
of the 1913 edition was the fact that it took into account all fifteen 
existing manuscripts and the fact that in 1124 Fulcher reworked his 
history. While the edition of Jacques Bongars, which was reprinted 
in the Patrologia Latina was based on a reading of manuscripts of the 
first redaction, the 1913 edition was based on manuscripts containing 
Fulcher’s second redaction, giving variant readings from fourteen codices 
and all the printed editions." Hagenmeyer’s edition therefore allows 
an examination of the text as it would have appeared both before and 
after the 1124 revision. 


162 RA 49 (245), 157 (266). 

16 RA 183 (272). 

16t RA 64 (248): Duo maximi principes in exercitu. 

16 Fulcher of Chartres, Historia Hierosolymitana (1095-1127), ed. H. Hagenmeyer 
(Heidelberg, 1913), hereafter FC. 

166 J, Bongars, Gesta Dei per Francos (Hanover, 1611); PL 150, cols. 823-942B; RHC 
Oc. 3, 311-485. 


40 CHAPTER ONE 


According to his own account, on which we are almost entirely depen- 
dent for biographical information,'” Fulcher was born in 1058 or 1059.'% 
He indicated his place of birth from the use of the surname Carnotensis, 
which appeared three times in the Historia Hierosolymitana.'® Fulcher 
was a participant in the First Crusade. His description of the departure 
of the various contingents makes it clear that he set out with Duke 
Robert II of Normandy and Count Stephen of Blois.” Just south of 
Marash, 17 September 1097, Baldwin of Boulogne detached his forces 
from the main body of the Christian army and marched towards 
Tarsus. At this point Fulcher reported that he was in the company of 
Baldwin.'”' Fulcher stayed with Baldwin after the Lotharingian prince 
became ruler of Edessa, 10 March 1097, and in his account of those 
events wrote that ‘I, Fulcher of Chartres, was the chaplain of this same 
Baldwin.’!” This testimony implies that Fulcher was a cleric, probably 
a priest, the position ascribed to him by the northern French monk and 
historian, Guibert of Nogent, although not as one who knew him, as 
well as by the title of one of the manuscripts.'” 

Fulcher accompanied Baldwin, now count of Edessa, to Jerusalem 
late in 1099 to worship at the Holy Sepulchre.'’”* He was also present 
when Baldwin came to Jerusalem, 9 November 1100, to obtain the title 
of king.'” Thereafter Fulcher made his home in Jerusalem and lived at 
least until 1127, the year that his history abruptly ended; at this time 
Fulcher would have been approximately sixty-eight years old.'”° 

The first redaction of the Historia Mierosolymitana was Fulcher’s account 
of the First Crusade from the Council of Clermont, 18-28 November 
1095, and the history of the Kingdom of Jerusalem up until victory 
of King Baldwin I at Ramleh, 27 August 1105. Much of the history is 


167 With the possible exception of the appearance of ‘Fulcher’ and ‘Fulcher, prior 
of the Mount of Olives’ as a witness on three documents from the Kingdom of 
Jerusalem; see FC 2. 

168 FC TIL xxiv.17 (687); HI.xliv.4 (771). 

9 FC I.v.12 (153); I.xiv.15 (215); I.xxxiii.12 (330). 

' FC Ivii. | -viii.9 (163-176). For Robert II of Normandy see C. W. David, Robert 
Curthose, Duke of Normandy (Cambridge, 1920). 

11 FC Lxiv.2 (206). 

"2 FC Lxiv.15 (215): Ego vero Fulcherus Carnotensis, capellanus ipsius Balduini eram. 

"3 GN 329. FC 16. 

174 FC ILiii.12 (368). 

"3 FC ILv.12 (383-4). 

© FG M.xxiv.17 (687); HI.xliv.4 (771). 


THE EYEWITNESSES 4] 


that of an eyewitness, although once Baldwin’s contingent had left the 
main army for ‘Tarsus, Fulcher had to depend on other accounts for 
his narrative of their experience. The information that Fulcher used 
for events among the main body of the Christian army while he was 
at Edessa was mainly derived, as Hagenmeyer demonstrated, from the 
Gesta Francorum and the Historia Francorum of Raymond of Aguilers.'’’ 

Hagenmeyer has plausibly argued that Fulcher began writing his his- 
tory in 1101, after news of the secunda peregrinatio had reached him, but 
before the death of Stephen of Blois at the second battle of Ramleh, 17 
May 1102.'” In 1105 Fulcher probably ceased writing his first version 
and copies of his work then began to circulate. The strongest evidence 
for this is the appearance of a near copy of Fulcher’s history: Bartolf 
of Nangi’s Gesta Francorum Iherusalem expugnantium.'’? As Hagenmeyer has 
pointed out, Bartolf’s placing finis after the account of the Third Battle 
of Ramleh, 27 August 1105, might well have marked the completion 
both of Bartolf’s history and that of his source, Fulcher.'*° 

Guibert, abbot of Nogent, probably writing in 1109,'*' came across 
Fulcher’s Historia late in the composition of his own work and incor- 
porated a polemical response to the Historia HMierosolymitana in his own 
history.'®? While manuscripts of Fulcher’s first redaction began to 
be distributed through Europe, he continued his work in the fashion 
of a chronicle, until reworking the entire text in 1124. The second 
redaction made only slight modifications in style, but was sufficiently 
different in tone for Verena Epp to detect a development in Fulcher’s 
thinking. She argued that in his second redaction Fulcher became 
more willing to admit Christian losses in battle and she claimed that 
the portrayal of God in the work shifted from God as a ruler to God 
as a friend.'™ Fulcher then regularly updated the Historia Hierosolymitana 


"7 FC 66. 

8 FC 44-45, See Fulcher of Chartres, A history of the expedition to Jerusalem 1095-1127, 
trans. F£ R. Ryan (Knoxville, 1941), pp. 19-20. 

19 RHC Oc. 3, 491-543. Nothing is known of Bartolf outside of this work, the inter- 
nal evidence of which seems to indicate he was a resident in Syria and an acquaintance 
of frater Fulcherus Carnotensis, see RHC Oc. 3, 492. 

180 RHC Oc 3, 541, FC 46. 

181 See below p. 75. 

'2 GN 329. 

!8 V. Epp, Fulcher von Chartres (Dusseldorf, 1990), p. 11. 


42 CHAPTER ONE 


until it abruptly stopped in 1127, probably indicating the date of death 
of the author. 

Fulcher’s terse, straightforward, style does not favour a sophisticated 
examination of social structure. It is mainly through his occasional 
digressions from the historical narrative that the historian’s strong 
theological framework can be discerned along with a certain amount 
of social commentary. The most striking examples of this arise in 
Fulcher’s observations on Christian kingship. Fulcher reported in detail 
the dramatic escape of Joscelin of Courtenay, count of Edessa,'®** from 
Kharpurt (Hisn Ziyad) in August 1123, in which Joscelin had to disguise 
himself as a peasant. This led the chronicler to comment on the power 
of God, echoing the idea in I Samuel, 2:7-8 that God cast down the 
mighty from on high and ‘raises the pauper from the dust.’ Fulcher 
continued by writing that both Baldwin II and Joscelin of Courtenay 
had the experience of being a ruler in the morning, a slave in the 
evening.'®° Fulcher made an even stronger formulation concerning the 
power of God over kings with regard to the fact that the Kingdom of 
Jerusalem prospered despite the capture of Baldwin I, 18 April 1123. 
The historian went so far as to raise the idea that ‘perhaps he was no 
king.’'*’ Furthermore, Fulcher questioned whether someone deserved 
the title of king if he was lawless, did not fear God, was an adulterer, 
perjurer or sacrilegious;'*’ if the king was a dissipater of churches, 
if he was an oppressor of pauperes, then he did not rule but brought 
disorder.'*’ The perspective from which Fulcher was expressing these 
extremely critical ideas was not necessarily that of someone with a 
strong sense of social justice, but rather someone who subscribed to the 
ideas of ecclesiastical reform, as indicated by the ideas he attributed 
to pope Urban II concerning simony and the Truce of God at the 
Council of Clermont. 

Fulcher was clearly a believer in the rights of the church, although 
not necessarily an advocate of papal authority. He found himself hav- 
ing to formulate a response to his lord, Baldwin of Edessa, taking the 
title of ‘king’ of Jerusalem, 11 November 1100, and being crowned, 


For Joscelin of Courtenay, count of Edessa, see OV 5, 324. 
18 FC ILL. xxiv.16 (687):...de pulvere pauperem sublimet. 

186 Thid, 

187 FC M.xxi.2 (673): Forsitan non erat rex... 

188 FC IM.xxi.4 (674). 

189 Thid. 

19 FC I.ii.9-14 (126-130). 


THE EYEWITNESSES 43 
25 December 1100. Aware of the controversial nature of this step,'”! 
Fulcher took the side of those who argued that since Christ was crowned 
with thorns in Jerusalem, God had thereby turned a symbol of humili- 
ation into one of salvation and glory. It was permissible for Baldwin to 
be crowned.'” Fulcher, however, qualified his support for the existence 
of kingship in Jerusalem. A king was only rightly a king, especially in 
Jerusalem, if he ruled justly. During the relatively successful kingship 
of Baldwin I, to whom he was a chaplain, Fulcher suspended any 
expression of criticism. While writing on the kingship of Baldwin II, 
however, as noted above, Fulcher showed no hesitation in raising the 
question of whether a king was legitimate if he was unjust. 

Another interesting passage arising from Fulcher’s particular theo- 
logical perspective was his view of the attitude to personal property 
that existed among the participants of the First Crusade. Fulcher was 
diverted from his account of the difficulties of the journey through Asia 
Minor, August 1097, to comment that although many languages divided 
them, everyone seemed to be brothers in the love of God and kinsmen 
with a shared outlook.'*’ Fulcher added that if someone found property 
that had been lost, it would be kept carefully for many days, until the 
rightful owner was found, when it would be gladly handed back, as was 
proper among ‘those who undertook the pilgrimage rightly.’'* This is 
good evidence from an eyewitness that for all the regional differences, 
there was a sense of community among the Christian forces, at least 
among those who saw the expedition as a pious one. 

Fulcher had a strong sense of social order, evident from his use of 
both the ecclesiastical and military use of the term ordines. In his account 
of the Council of Clermont, Fulcher, who may have been an eyewitness 
although he does not state this directly,” quoted Urban II as telling 
his listeners to ‘maintain the Church in its ordines in every respect free 
from all secular power.” At the end of the work Fulcher wrote that in 


'! FC ILvi.l (385-6). See also A. V. Murray, “The Title of Godfrey of Bouillon as 
Ruler of Jerusalem,’ Collegium Medievale, 3 (1990), pp. 163-78; J. France, “The election 
and title of Godfrey de Bouillon’, Canadian Journal of History 18 (1983), pp. 321-29; 
J. Riley-Smith, “The title of Godfrey of Bouillon’, Bulletin of the Institute of Historical 
Research 52 (1979), pp. 83-86. 

12 FC ILvi.2-3 (386). 

193 FC Lxiii.5 (203). 

194 FC Lxviii.5 (203):... qui recte peregrinantur. 

5 FC 3 n. 5; Fulcher of Chartres, A history of the expedition to Jerusalem, pp. 7-8. 

© FC Lii.10 (127): Ecclesiam suis ordinibus omnimode liberam ab omni saeculari potestate 
sustentate. 


44 CHAPTER ONE 


the Kingdom of Jerusalem priests and the minor order (ordo) of clergy 
were known as tribunes of the people (tribuni plebis).!°’ In addition to 
this conventional understanding of the ‘orders’ of the clergy, Fulcher 
used the term ordo for military order of battle in three instances, one of 
which occurred in the letter of the Christian princes to Pope Urban I 
after their victory over the Turkish atabeg of Mosul, Kerbogha, which 
Fulcher inserted into his history.'** That Fulcher was aware that the 
term ordo could also be used in a social sense is evident from his report 
of a key passage in Urban IPs speech at Clermont. Fulcher described 
the pope as appealing to his audience to urge ‘everyone of whatever 
ordo, whether equites or pedites, divites or pauperes’ to join the expedition." 
Perhaps even more interesting is Fulcher’s use of the term gradus for 
rank in a similar manner to ordo. At one point he wrote of a squire 
being raised to the gradus of a miles.” This is very significant evidence 
that for Fulcher being a miles involved more than performing the mili- 
tary function of a horseman; it involved being of a certain gradus. The 
same sense of the term gradus for rank appeared when Fulcher echoed 
the Pseudo-Isidorian Decretals, writing that secular power had different 
worth according to its gradus, firstly the Augustus or emperor, next the 
Caesars, then kings, dukes and counts.””! 

A key theme for Fulcher’s entire work was to emphasise that condi- 
tions in the Latin Kingdom of Jerusalem were favourable for settlers 
of all ranks. As a result he several times gave particular mention to 
the situation of the lower social ranks. This was most notable in a late, 
1124, digression in which the chronicler wrote that in the kingdom those 
who were poor (inopes), God had made wealthy (locupletes), those who 
had little money had countless bezants and those who did not have an 
estate now possessed, by the gift of God, a city.” With this same theme 
in mind Fulcher twice made the point that pauperes had become wealthy 
through the conquests of the Christian forces. In an important passage 
describing the fall of Jerusalem, 15 July 1099, the historian wrote that 
‘after such great bloodshed they entered the homes seizing whatever 
they found in them, such indeed that whoever had entered the home 


197 FC TL. xxxiv.10 (738). 

198 Letter of Princes FC I.xxiv.10 (263); II.lx.2 (602); HI.xlii.7 (765). 

99 FC Liii.4 (134): Cunctis cuiuslibet ordinis tam equitibus quam peditibus, tam divitibus 
quam pauperibus. 

200 FC JILxxxi.7 (726-7). 

201 FC TIL.xxxiv.11 (739). 

° FC TL xxxvii.6 (749). 


THE EYEWITNESSES 45 


first, whether he was a poor man (pauper) or a rich man (diwes), was 
in no way to be subject to injury by any other. Whether a house or a 
palace, he was to possess it and whatever he found in it was his own. 
They had established this law (tus) to be held mutually. And thus many 
poor (inopes) were made wealthy (locupletes).”°°° 

The second appearance of a similar formulation arose with Fulcher’s 
description of the fall of Caesarea, 17 May 1101, where he reported 
that many pauperes became locupletes.*** Fulcher’s version of the speech 
of Pope Urban II at Clermont had the pope offer the pauperes precisely 
this prospect. Having exhorted every ordo, whether pauperes or divites 
to support the expedition,” Urban was reported as saying that those 
pauperes here will be locupletes there.*°° This part of the speech has the 
appearance of a retrospective formulation made in the light of Fulcher’s 
later examples of the poor becoming rich. The idea is not in keeping 
with one of the few surviving letters of Urban II, to the Bolognese, 
which specifically warned against taking the cross for material motives 
( pro cupiditate).°°’ Similarly the second canon of the council of Clermont 
decreed that the journey was a substitute for penance only for those who 
set out to free the Church out of devotion and not for the acquisition 
of honour or wealth.” 

For Fulcher, however, it was clearly important to make the point 
about the rise in condition of the pauperes. The Latin Kingdom of 
Jerusalem suffered a chronic shortage of Christian farmers as well as 
military forces and this fact seems to have influenced Fulcher’s report 
of Urban’s speech at Clermont as well as his own desire to emphasise 


23 FC Lxxix.1] (304): ... post stragem tantam ingressi sunt domos civium, rapientes quaecumque in 
eis reppererunt: ita sane, ut quicumque primus domum introisset, sive dives swe pauper esset, nullatenus 
ab aliquo alio fieret illi injuria, quin domum ipsam aut palatium et quodcumque in ea repperisset, ac 
si omnino propria, sibi adsumeret, haberet et possideret. Hoc itaque tus invicem tenendum stabilier- 
ant. Unde multi inopes facti sunt locupletes. The law (ws) of property refers to a tradition 
established during the course of the First Crusade that the first to obtain booty had 
the right to retain it; see below pp. 153-5. 

2 FC ILix.7 (403). 

25 FC Lii.4 (134). 

206 FC Liii.7 (137). 

207 Letter of Urban II to the people of Bologna: H. Hagenmeyer ed., Epistulae et 
Chartae ad Historiam Primi Belli (Innsbruck, 1901), p. 137. 

28 Decreta Claromontensia (n. 32), ed. R. Somerville, The Councils of Urban ITI, 
(Amsterdam, 1972), p. 74; see also I. S. Robinson, The Papacy 1075-1198 Continuity and 
Innovation (Cambridge, 1990), pp. 327-8, 343-4. 


46 CHAPTER ONE 


the gains for the pauperes on the fall of Jerusalem and Caesarea and in 
the Latin Kingdom of Jerusalem generally. 

In January 1098, during a time of extreme hardship for the Christian 
forces besieging Antioch, Fulcher wrote that both divites and pauperes suf- 
fered either from famine or the daily slaughter.” Verena Epp noted this 
passage as one of her examples for the view that Fulcher blurred social 
distinctions.”'” Certainly Fulcher was emphasising how the entire body 
of Christians was suffering, But he was also aware that the suffering was 
unequal, noting that in the same period of famine the poorer people 
( paupertores) ate even the hides of the beasts and seeds of grain found 
in manure.”'! A similar awareness of the uneven pressures on the poor 
seems to be evident when he reported that because of this hardship 
some left the siege, first the pauperes and then the locupletes.” 

One appearance of the term pauperes for Christian inhabitants in 
the region of Jerusalem revealed something of their function. In a late, 
1125, lament for those who lived around Jerusalem, Fulcher wrote that 
if they were pauperes, either agricolae or lignaru, they were captured or 
killed by the Ethiopians in ambush in ravines and forests.” The farm- 
ers and woodcutters of the region were evidently the main subgroups 
within the wider category of the poor settlers. 

Fulcher used the couplet minores et maiores on three occasions to 
encompass the entirety of society: for his lament on the evils suffered 
by Europe before the First Crusade; for the hunger of all the Christians 
besieging Antioch in the early months of 1098 and to emphasise the 
scale of slaughter of the inhabitants of Ma’arra when it fell to the 
Christian army.”'* A slightly different use of the term minores arose in 
Fulcher’s account of the fall of Tripoli, 12 July 1109, when he wrote 
that it was the minores of the Genoese who stormed the city after a 
great tumult had arisen among them due to dismay that King Baldwin 
I seemed about to allow the city to surrender on terms.?!? Here minores 
was being used not for the lower part of society in a broad sense, but 
the inferior Genoese combatant, probably footsoldiers. His sense of the 


29 FC Lxv15 (223). 

210 V, Epp, Fulcher von Chartres, p. 242. 

211 FC Lxvi.2 (226). 

222 FC Lxvi.6 (228). 

213 FC IMi.xlii.4 (763). 

214 FC v.11 (152); Lxvi.l (225); Lxxv.3 (267). 
219 FC ILxli.4 (533). 


THE EYEWITNESSES 47 


minores seems to have been a broad one that grouped together all the 
commoners, inclusive of footsoldiers. 

By contrast Fulcher seems to have reserved the term egem for the 
non-combatant poor of society. The first of only two usages of the term 
in the Historia Mierosolymitana arose in Fulcher’s account of the activi- 
ties in Jerusalem among those left behind, including himself, when, 
27 August 1105, the army of King Baldwin I went out to meet an 
invading force of the Egyptian vizier, al-Afdal. As well as praying and 
participating in processions, abundant alms were bestowed upon the 
egeni.”'° Again when those remaining in Jerusalem were praying after 
the Christian army departed to attempt to relieve a siege of Joppa, 
May 1123, alms were bestowed upon the egeni.?'’ In both these cases 
the phrasing echoes John 12:5, with the egeni clearly a passive and lowly 
body to whom charity ought to be extended. 

A passage of interest with regard to the peculiarities of Fulcher’s 
vocabularly concerns the fall of Jerusalem. Fulcher wrote that the pedites 
pauperiores and scutigeri of the Christian army searched through the intes- 
tines of the dead for hidden bezants.”'® Fulcher was not an eyewitness, 
so this activity might be apocryphal, but the report gives clear evidence 
that Fulcher was aware of a differentiation within the category of pedites, 
distinguishing the poorer footsoldiers from the main body. The term 
scutigert in the passage is an unusual one, not used by any other of the 
early crusading sources. It has troubled modern translators, with Martha 
McGinty opting for the literal ‘shield bearers”!? and F. R. Ryan for the 
more interesting ‘squires. Hagenmeyer also considered Fulcher’s use 
of the term scutiger to indicate a squire, without elaborating upon the 
point.’ An 1114 charter for Valenciennes is helpful here.” The charter 
lists fines for different categories of person, placing a scutifer below an 
armiger but above a burgensis. It is assumed in the charter that a scutifer 
has a dominus and, unlike the burgensis, a right to trial by combat. It is 
perhaps worth noting that in the early twelfth century Valenciennes 


216 FC ILxxxi.12 (494). 

217 FC M.xviii.2 (665). 

218 FC Lxxviii.1 (301-2). 

219 Fulcher of Chartres: Chronicle of the First Crusade, trans. M. E. McGinty (Phila- 
delphia, 1941), p. 69. 

0 Fulcher of Chartres, A history of the expedition to Jerusalem, p. 122. 
21 FC 302 n. 3. 
222° Charta Pacis Valencenensis, MGH SS 21, 605-6. 


h 


A 


48 CHAPTER ONE 


was under the control of the counts of Hainaut?” and that Baldwin II 
count of Hainaut had accompanied Fulcher’s lord, Baldwin of Boulogne 
on the First Crusade.”* The language of the Lotharingians may have 
therefore affected Fulcher’s own vocabulary. It might well be that Fulcher 
used the term to indicate someone who cared for horses, but was not 
in the same category of an armiger, who had the prospect of becoming 
a knight. Such a differentiation would fit with his description of the 
sculifert joining with the poorest footsoldiers in the scramble to search 
dead and burnt bodies in the hope of finding coins. 

Fulcher was untypical among the crusading historians in his pro- 
pensity to use the term clientes. He did so for persons engaged in a 
broad range of activities, usually associated with the lower ranks of 
the army, from baggage handler through to the personal followers of 
a prince, possibly knights. Fulcher often used the variation clientelae 
but it does not seem to represent any distinction of function, despite 
Hagenmeyer’s suggestion that it was Fulcher’s term of choice for those 
who minded the baggage and herds of an army.”” In describing the 
journey of Baldwin I to take up the kingship of Jerusalem, 25 October 
1100, Fulcher, who was present, wrote that the beasts loaded with pos- 
sessions preceded the army, driven by clientes.” Soon after, however, he 
described how the Christian fighting forces, having been victorious in 
an ambush, returned to the clentela who had been guarding the loaded 
animals.””’ In Fulcher’s account of the retreat of Baldwin H from the 
siege of Aleppo, January 1125, the Christian forces were described as 
losing one chens and six tents, indicating that the cliens was among the 
baggage train rather than the fighting forces.””* 

The term clientes was more usually used in the Historia Merosolymitana 
to indicate a section of the fighting forces distinct from the milites. In 
the wider medieval usage of the term, it covered a variety of positions, 
from vassal to squire to footsoldier.” Describing the seizure of Antioch 
by the Christian forces, 3 June 1098, Fulcher, not an eyewitness, wrote 


23 MGH SS, 21, 606. 

2 For Baldwin II, count of Hainaut, see A. V. Murray, The Crusader Kingdom of 
Jerusalem (Oxford, 2000), pp. 186-7. 

25 FC 363 n. 12; 792 n. 41; 726 n. 13. 

6 FC ILii.5 (360). 

27 FC ILiii.3 (363). 

28 FC I[Lxxxix.3 (755). 

229 J. F Niermeyer, Medwal Latin Dictionary, 2 (second edition: Leiden, 2002), 1, 
251. 


THE EYEWITNESSES 49 


that twenty clientes climbed up the walls on rope ladders.**° There is no 
doubt these men were combatants, but can a more precise status be 
determined for them? In the Gesta Francorum, which Fulcher tended to 
follow at this point, one of these soldiers was described as a serviens, itself 
a term open to a variety of interpretations.”*' Other early crusading 
accounts of the same incident described the first men onto the walls of 
Antioch as zvenes, that is, in its technical sense of a knight in the early 
part of his career, someone yet to establish a household.*” 

When, in 1122, Baldwin II learned of incursions near Antioch he 
hurriedly departed for the city with 300 milites lectissimi and 400 clientes 
probissimi.”” The division of milites and clientes here is suggestive of the 
common description of armies as consisting of knights and footsoldiers, 
but the close proportion between their numbers and the similar epithets 
indicate that Fulcher had in mind a grouping similar to the milites such as 
squires, iuvenes or hired knights; the latter is the view of Hagenmeyer.*** 
A sense that Fulcher sometimes used the term clentela for hired military 
forces comes from his report in January 1124, that to raise money for a 
siege of ‘Tyre and Ascalon, even the valuable ornaments of the Church 
of Jerusalem were used to obtain credit. Fulcher wrote that a large 
sum was collected to pay militia and clientela.*° Here again the distinc- 
tion between clentela and clientes is not consistent. Clentela were almost 
certainly combatants and not baggage handlers in Fulcher’s report that 
in the battle between Baldwin II and Atabeg Tughtigin of Damascus, 
25 January 1126, ‘our king conducted himself bravely on that day, 
together with all his equitatus and clientela.’*° Similarly, casualties of a 
successful battle by Joscelin of Edessa against Nir-ad-Daulah Belek, 
emir of Aleppo, in early 1124 near Manbij, included 30 milites and 60 
pedestris clientela.” Again Fulcher wrote that when Joscelin, count of 
Edessa and Baldwin II fought Tancred near Edessa, September 1108, 
500 of ‘Tancred’s clentela were killed; such a high figure suggests they 


280 FC Lxvii.5 (232-3). 

1 GF 46; Niermeyer, Medival Latin Dictionary, 2, 1255; J. G. Gavigan, “The Syntax 
of the Gesta Francorum, Language 19, III (1943), pp. 10-102, here pp. 34—5. See also 
above p. 19. 

32 RM 800; GP 164-6; RC 654-5. 

3 FC M.xi.4 (649). 

34 FC 649 n. 8. 

35 FC TIL xxvii.2 (694). 

86 FC TLI13 (791): Optime se habuit rex noster in die illa, cum omni equitatu suo, nec non 
et clientela. 

°87 FC M.xxxi.4 (725). 


N 


50 CHAPTER ONE 


were combatants.*** Although in the first two of these cases, F. R. Ryan, 
striving for consistency, translated clientela as baggage handlers, it seems 
more likely that Fulcher himself was not rigorous in his application of 
the term.” Other clientes displaying military activity were those fifty 
who were smuggled into Kharpurt (Hisn Ziyad) to help the escape of 
Baldwin II and Joscelin of Edessa in August 1123.74° 

Fulcher also seems to have interchanged clientela and clientes in writ- 
ing about servants. A Egyptian raid from Cairo that reached as far 
as Ramleh, 16 May 1102, threatened the bishop, Robert,?*’ and the 
clientela who stayed with him in the Church of St George.” After the 
escape from Kharpurt, Joscelin hid while his chens brought an Armenian 
farmer back to his lord (dominus).?* This same cliens was also described 
by Fulcher as being Joscelin’s famulus.?* 

Fulcher’s employment of the terms milites, equites and equestres pro- 
vides important evidence with regard to the discussion in Chapter 
Five concerning the social status of knights. It is worth stating here 
that Fulcher had a relatively strong sense of the existence of a distinct 
noble class, using the adjective nobilis to indicate someone of noble 
birth. An assessment of Fulcher’s concept of nobility can be found in 
Chapter Seven. 

Fulcher of Chartres wrote a succinct accounts of events without 
significant literary flourishes or extemporisation; nevertheless his work 
does convey a considerable amount of social information concerning the 
First Crusade and the early period of the Latin Kingdom of Jerusalem. 
It is notable that Fulcher had a more sophisticated and consistent 
vocabulary for the higher social orders than the poor. He was unusual 
in the early crusading sources in lumping together the non-combatant 
poor with the footsoldiers as minores. Fulcher’s interest in writing about 
the condition of the poor was particularly directed towards illustrating 
to potential settlers in the Latin Kingdom of Jerusalem that the lower 
orders had benefited from their participation in the First Crusade. 


38 FC IL xxviii.4 (480-1). 

°° Fulcher of Chartres, A history of the expedition to Jerusalem, p. 291 and p. 263. 

2 FC M.xxiii.3 (678); FC TL. xxiii.4 (679). 

%1 Robert of Rouen, Norman priest and possibly former chaplain to Duke Robert 
of Normandy, created Bishop of Ramleh soon after its capture by the forces of the 
First Crusade (3 June 1099). See J. Riley-Smith, First Crusaders, p. 221. 

*® FC ILxv.3 (426-7). 

8 FC TILxxiv.5 (683). 

%4 FC TL xxiv.4 (683). 


CHAPTER TWO 


THE EARLY HISTORIANS 


Four histories of the First Crusade were written in the decade follow- 
ing the conquest of Jerusalem by the crusaders, an undertaking that 
to Christian contemporaries seemed to be the most miraculous deed 
since the Crucifixion and one that was more glorious than any event 
of ancient times.’ 

Three of the histories have a very similar provenance, being the work 
of Benedictine monks from northern France, all basing their accounts 
on the Gesta Francorum and all seeking to improve the original account 
by writing a more sophisticated and edifying history. These histories 
were written in the aftermath of a journey by Bohemond, then prince 
of Antioch, through France in 1105; a tour that A. C. Krey plausibly 
conjectures led an increase in the circulation of the Gesta Francorum.? 

Modern narrative historians have worked hard to glean small amounts 
of additional information from these histories: extra data that might 
have been added to the basic text after the author had conversed with 
returned crusaders. In writing narrative history the eyewitness account 
is much the more reliable text and there is not a great deal to choose 
between the three subsequent versions, despite their considerable elabo- 
rations on the Gesta Francorum. From the point of view of attempting 
to understand the social dynamics of the First Crusade, however, the 
additional commentary is extremely important and the fact that each 
of the authors proves, on investigation, to have a distinct social and 
theological perspective makes each of them uniquely valuable. 

The fourth history under consideration in this chapter was the first 
to be written and stands quite apart from the others, not least in the 
fact 1t was composed at Aachen, in Lotharingia, a part of the kngdom 
of Germany, rather than France. 


RM 727; GN 86. 

A. C. Krey, ‘A neglected passage in the Gesta and its bearing on the literature of 
the First Crusade’, The Crusades and other historical essays presented to Dana C. Munro, ed. 
L. J. Paetow (New York, 1928), pp. 57-76. 


1 
2 


This is an open access chapter distributed under the terms of the CC-BY-NC License. 


52 CHAPTER TWO 
The Historia Hierosolymitana of Baldric, Archbishop of Dol 


Baldric was born at Meung-sur-Loire in 1046. He was a monk of the 
Benedictine monastery of Bourgeuil, becoming abbot of there in 1089. 
In 1107 he was made Archbishop of Dol, a position he held until his 
death in 1130.° Baldric had a high level of education and extensive 
knowledge of the classics, reflected in his poetry and hagiography, for 
which he is better known than his history.’ 

The Historia Hierosolymitana was written not long after Baldric’s 
appointment to the Archbishopric of Dol. This is the convincing conclu- 
sion of the editors of the Recueil des Historiens des Croisades, made on the 
basis of Baldric’s dedication of the work to Abbot Peter of Maillezais, 
himself an orator and viator of the First Crusade.’ In reply Peter of 
Maillezais congratulated Baldric’s achievement in becoming a bishop, 
praise that only seems appropriate if Baldric had been recently raised 
to that position.® Furthermore, in his prologue to the work, Baldric 
claimed to have been writing for nearly sixty years.’ If his education 
was similar to that of his friend Orderic Vitalis, he would have been 
‘taught letters’ from the age of five.® Even without a certain exaggera- 
tion arising from the prestige of being venerable, this would indicate 
the history was being written before 1111 with Peter’s congratulations 
indicating a date closer to 1107. 

There is no modern edition of the Historia Merosolymitana. The 1611 
edition in the collection of Jacques Bongars was based upon Paris, B. N. 
MS latin 5513. This manuscript has been the subject of a study by N. L. 
Paul, who concluded that it was an untypical version of the Historia 
EMerosolymitana ‘redacted to suit the political and commemorative impera- 
tives of the seigneurial family of Amboise.” J. P. Migne reproduced 
Bongar’s edition for volume 166 of the Patrologia Latina (1854). The edi- 
tors of the 1898 fourth volume of the Recueil des Historiens des Croisades 


3 Baldric of Dol, Hierosolymitanae Historiae, RHC Oc. 4, 1-111 (hereafter BD), here iii. 

t See F J. E. Raby, A History of Secular Latin Poetry in the Middle Ages, 2 (Oxford, 
1997), I, 337-348. 

° BD vi, 5, 8. 

° BD 7. 

7 BD 10. 

2 OV 6, 550; 6, 551. 

° N. L. Paul, ‘Crusade, memory and regional politics in twelfth-century Amboise’, 
Journal of Medieval History, 31.2 (June 2005), pp. 127-41, here p. 127. 


THE EARLY HISTORIANS 53 


considered seven manuscripts for the construction of their text. They 
recognised the untypical features of MS 5513, producing the best edi- 
tion to date and the one used by this study. At the time of writing, a 
research project has been created under Marcus Bull to produce a new 
edition, which will hopefully appear in due course. 

Baldric took the Gesta Francorum as the fons formalis for his own his- 
tory. He amended the original text for much the same reasons as those 
given by Guibert of Nogent and Robert the Monk, namely that the 
anonymous author was rustic, simple and that as a consequence a noble 
subject matter had become worthless. The effect of Baldric’s rewriting 
of the Gesta Francorum was to expand on the original to make the work 
more dramatic, richer in detail and, at a cost to historical precision, 
more favourable to the Christian forces. Baldric was also keen, where 
opportunity arose, to make the writing more poetic and indeed it was 
the sound of the concatenation of Baldric’s sentences that was singled 
out for praise by Peter of Maillezais."' 

The following comparison provides a useful illustration of the rela- 
tionship of the Historia Hierosolymitana to the Gesta Francorum. It is the 
account of cannibalism by the Christian forces at Ma’arra, December 
1098. 


Gesta Francorum: [Some of us] were cutting up the flesh of these [Saracen 
bodies] for scraps of food, and cooking them in order to eat them.’ 


Historia Hierosolymitana: It is recorded and proven that many [of the 
Christians] touched Turkish flesh, that is, human flesh, which they 
butchered and roasted with fire, shamelessly biting it. They therefore 
went out secretly from the city and kindling fires at some distance they 
cooked it. After devouring their criminal banquets they thus preserved 
their miserable lives. For all their secrecy, nevertheless word of this spread 
openly among the army. But since famine was so great, punishment was 
suspended. The magnates beat their breast but maintained a horrified 
silence. Nevertheless, their [the cannibal’s] behaviour was not imputed 
criminal since they willingly suffered that hunger for the sake of God and 
they made war on their enemies with hands and teeth.’ 


BD 10. 

" BD 86. 

12 GF 80: Caedebant carnes eorum per frusta, et coquebant ad manducandum. 

'S BD 86: Relatum est enim et compertum quia multi carnes turcinas, carnes scilicet humanas, 
verutatas et ignibus assas, inverecundis morsibus tetigere... Palam tamen verbum hoc factum est in 
exercitui; sed quoniam fame praevalebat, ultio suspendebatur. Majores tamen pectus et os percutiebant 


54 CHAPTER TWO 


For the terse comment in the Gesta Francorum, Baldric substituted not only 
a more vivid description but also an attempt to absolve the crusaders 
by representing their cannibalism as a continuation of the Holy War. 

The Historia Hterosolymitana is a much longer work than the Gesta 
Francorum as a result of these elaborations; the Gesta is a little over 20,000 
words, the Historia 36,000. For a historian attempting to reconstruct a 
narrative of events these revisions have to be treated extremely carefully. 
The additional information cannot always be dismissed as imaginative; 
Baldric himself drew attention in his prologue to the fact that the work 
as a whole did include new information from returning veterans.'* It 
is likely that Baldric had read the work of Raymond of Aguilers and 
occasionally drew upon information from it to supplement that of the 
Gesta Francorum, the work on which he was otherwise so dependent that 
the editors of the RHC edition did not seek for other written sources 
that might have informed Baldric’s account.!° 

It has also to be borne in mind that Baldric dedicated his history 
to someone who he knew had been present on the expedition and 
therefore could not have engaged in completely fanciful invention. In 
the particular case of the report of cannibalism at Ma’arra, however, 
the idea that some crusaders were so impoverished that they fought 
with hands and teeth has enough of an echo of the description of the 
cannibalism and gnashing of teeth of the tafurs in the Chanson d’Antioche 
to cast doubt on it as an example of new material arising from the 
reports of returning crusaders.'° 

As a classicist Baldric’s enrichment of the text of the Gesta Francorum 
is of mixed value. Some of his language for social orders seems to 
have been chosen to display his powers of rhetoric rather than convey 
accurate social information. So, for example, Baldric was unique among 
historians of the First Crusade in referring to its leaders as patres con- 
script. He was sufficiently attracted to the term that he used it on six 


at horrentes silebant; nec tamen imputabatur eis pro scelere, quoniam famem illam pro Deo alacriter 
patiebantur, et inimicis manibus et dentibus inimicabantur. 

BD xi-xii. 

' A modern editor might be able to identify the written sources used by Baldric 
other than the Gesta Francorum. A possible use of Raymond of Aguilers, for example, 
is the description of a shower at the start of the battle against Kerbogha, see BD 76, 
RA 131. At times, also, there seem to be complicated parallels between Baldric’s his- 
tory and Guibert of Nogent’s Gesta Dei Per Francos. 

16 CA 4050-4118. 


THE EARLY HISTORIANS 55 


occasions, all of them in passages of oratio recta.” Patres conscripti was 
a much-used classical term for the senate; Cicero, whose works were 
to become an essential part of the trivium, made considerable use of 
it.'° By Baldric’s day, however, the term was an unusual one, Orderic 
Vitalis, who imported large extracts of Baldric’s history verbatim into 
his own, edited it out of his version of events, probably considering 
it Inappropriate. It is perhaps significant, given that Baldric only ever 
used the phrase within a passage of oratio recta, that an early medieval 
guide to rhetoric drew attention to two speeches as examples worthy of 
emulation in which those being addressed were the patres conscripti. Its 
appearance in the Historia Mierosolymitana is probably best understood 
as Baldric displaying his knowledge of classical oratory rather than it 
being used to convey information about the relationship of the leaders 
of the First Crusade to their followers. 

A similar interpretation should probably be made of the phrase 
‘Consuls of the Lord’ that appears in the opening remarks of a speech 
by Bohemond before leaving the Christian camp at the siege of Antioch 
to meet the relieving expedition of Ridwan, emir of Aleppo, and 
Suqman ibn Ortugq, at the ‘Lake battle’, 9 February 1098. According 
to Baldric, Bohemond began by saying, domini consulares et illustres viri.. 7° 
Although the term consules was evolving to have a contemporary techni- 
cal meaning, especially in the Italian city states, for example featuring in 
Caffaro’s Annales Genuenses for the year 1099,” the fact it was employed 
by Baldric in a rhetorical context indicates that it was more being used 
to provide a classical flourish to the speech than to indicate anything 
about the social status of those being addressed. By contrast, when, 
for example, Fulcher of Chartres reported that King Baldwin I of 
Jerusalem made an agreement with the consules of a Genoese fleet, 25 
April 1101, a precise social grouping was meant.” 

For the social historian Baldric’s interpolations can be extremely valu- 
able. Just as with the revisions of the Gesta Francorum by Robert the Monk 
and Guibert of Nogent, the fleshing out of simple statements into more 


BD 44, 44, 49, 49, 53, 99. 

'®8 See especially Marcus Tullius Cicero, Jn Catilinam, 1.2, 4, 11, 12, 13; II.6; IV.1, 
2,35 9,0, 758; 10; 

19 Anon., Principia Rhetorices, PL 32, cols. 1439-1449. 

20 BD 46. 

2! Caffaro, ‘Annales Ianuenses’, ed. L. T. Belgrano, Annali Genovesi di Caffaro e de’ suoi 
continuatori (Rome, 1890), I, 5. 

“2 FC ILviii.2 (396-7). 


56 CHAPTER TWO 


colourful passages by someone with a much richer social vocabulary 
leads, at the very least, to an insight into the author’s understanding 
of contemporary social relations. 

Baldric’s theological and social frameworks for his understanding of 
the importance of the First Crusade were intertwined. This is evidenced 
by a very interesting report of the speech of the envoys of Raymond of 
Toulouse at Clermont, shortly after the announcement that Adhémar, 
bishop of Le Puy, had volunteered to go. ‘Behold! God be thanked, 
two men voluntarily offered to proceed with the Christians on their 
journey. Behold! Religious and secular power, the clerical ordo and the 
laity, harmonise in order to lead the army of God. Bishop and count, 
we imagine ourselves like another Moses and Aaron.” 

This speech shows Baldric using the social framework of ordo, here 
not quite the famous tripartite division between those who pray, those 
who fight and those who work, but a bipartite version obtained by 
referring to the entire laity as one undifferentiated order. It also shows 
Baldric tentatively engaging with the theological issue of leadership. 
The reference to Moses and Aaron seems to refer to the Lucan and 
Gelasian doctrine of the ‘two swords’, that is, the idea that the world 
was properly run by two authorities: the sacred authority of the bishop 
over ecclesiastical matters and the secular authority of the prince over 
all other forms of government.”' Baldric indicated here that Count 
Raymond’s envoys were evoking, indirectly, the traditional view of 
authority. Some contemporary Gregorian reformers, however, who were 
in favour of a view that the clergy should be considered the ‘masters 
of kings and princes’ would not have equated the roles of bishop and 
count in the manner of Baldric’s formulation.” Nor, during the First 
Crusade, was such a division of authority between Bishop Adhémar 
and Count Raymond ever actually realised.” 


°3 BD 16: Ecce, Deo gratias, jam Christianis ituris, duo ultronet processere viri; ecce sacerdotium 
et regnum; clericalis ordo et laicalis ad exercitum Dei conducendum concordant. Episcopus et comes, 
Moysen et Aaron nobis remaginantur. 

** Luke 22:38; Galasius I, Epistola 12 (JK 632) ed. A. Thiel, Epistolae Romanorum 
pontifcum genuinae I (Braunsberg, 1868), p. 350. 

2° Gregory VILviii.21 (15 March 1081), ed. E. Caspar, Gregory VII, Registrum, 
Monumenta Germaniae Historica Epistolae selectae 2, 553; see also I. S. Robinson, Authority 
and resistance in the Investiture Contest (Manchester, 1978). 

2° I, S. Robinson, The Papacy 1075-1198 (Cambridge, 1990), pp. 296-300, 320. 

7 Thid., pp. 322-3. See Chapter Eight. 


THE EARLY HISTORIANS 57 


Another key passage that intertwines a distinct theological perspective 
on the First Crusade with social information was Baldric’s observation 
that ‘in that expedition the duces themselves fought, the duces themselves 
took watches, so that you would not know a dux from a miles, or how 
a miles differed from a dux. In addition, there was such a community 
of all things, that hardly anyone designated anything individually to 
himself, but, just as in the primitive Church, nearly all those things 
were communal.” Gregorian reformers made much of the notion of 
the Ecclesia Primitiva; here Baldric’s desire to portray the First Crusade 
in the spirit of an imagined age of harmony between the social orders 
almost certainly was distorting the historical information of the passage. 
The communal sharing of property was an exaggeration of reports by 
the eyewitnesses Fulcher of Chartres and Raymond of Aguilers that 
there did exist a concern to give property to its rightful owners.*° The 
social information, however, regarding the relationship between a dux 
and a miles is of interest. 

There is a speech attributed to Bohemond in the Gesta Francorum 
shortly before the ‘Lake battle’ in which the anonymous author had 
Bohemond urge his fellow leaders of the First Crusade that while the 
footsoldiers should remain to guard the camp, the knights should ride 
out to meet the enemy. In a key passage for the exposition of his social 
schema, Baldric of Dol wrote a considerable elaboration of the speech, 
including the lines: ‘For until the populus Dec entrust themselves to us 
we will see many die. How does a dominus differ from a servus, a nobilis 
from a plebeius, dives from pauper, miles from pedes, if not that the counsel 
of us who rule over them should be useful, and our help should protect 
them?’*! The sense of the speech is noteworthy, for its message is that 
good leadership is the best means by which those of the upper half 
of society can protect those of the lower. This was one of Baldric’s 
major themes and his history utilised every opportunity to emphasise 


2 BD 28: In ista siquidem expeditione duces ipsi militabant, ipsi duces excubabant, ut nescires 
quid dux a milite, quid miles differret a duce. Praeterea tbi erat tanta omnium rerum communitas, 
ut vix aliquis aliquid sibi diceret proprium; sed, sicut in primitiva Ecclesia, ferme ilis erant omnia 
communia. 

°° G, Miccoli, ‘Ecclesiae primitivae forma’ Studi Medievali, II, 3a (1960), pp. 470- 
498. 

3 RA 73 (250), FC I.xiii.5 (203). 

31 BD 45-6: Nam quoad populum Dei qui se nobis commisit, multum mori conspicabimur. Quid 
differt dominus a servo, nobilis a plebeio, diwes a paupere, miles a pedite, nisi nostrum qui praesidemus 
eis prosit consilium, et patrocinetur auxilium? 


58 CHAPTER TWO 


the mutual interest of rich and poor. Several times Baldric described 
the motive for action of the rich being concern for the poor. This pas- 
sage also indicates Baldric’s awareness of basic bipartite distinctions 
in society: lord from servant, noble from commoner, rich from poor, 
knight from footsoldier. These divisions, as we shall see from several 
examples, Baldric considered to be harmoniously reconciled in the 
Christian forces of the First Crusade. 

Examining Baldric’s social vocabulary in more detail gives some 
greater precision to his outlook. A literal, if unusual, depiction of the 
lower social orders by Baldric arose through his use of the adjective 
deteriores in his account of the speech of Pope Urban I at Clermont. 
Baldric, who from the tone of his report is generally considered to have 
been an eyewitness, described Urban’s lament at the state of affairs 
arising from the pagan subjugation of former Christian lands, where 
nos abjectio plebis facti, et omnium deteriores.” Urban, using the language of 
Psalm 21:7, was emphasising how far Christians had fallen by their 
having become as abject as plebs and all the deteriores. Baldric’s use of 
the term plebs here is unusual but consistent with his list of bipartite 
divisions of society, in which he juxtaposed the plebs with the nobiles. In 
both cases Baldric, in contrast to the other early crusading historians 
but in keeping with his classicising bent, was using the term plebs for 
commoners and not simply all of the laity, noble and common. 

The division of nobiles and plebs occurs in a number of other instances 
in the Historia Mierosolymitana, discussed for their understanding of the 
social status of nobles in Chapter Seven. Here it is worth noting that 
as Baldric altered his fons formalis his conscious intent was to emphasise 
that it was proper for nobles to exert a paternalistic care for the com- 
moners. When Baldric commented on the motives of the crusade lead- 
ers in building a castle at Antioch in the spring of 1098, he explained 
that the nobility were mercifully concerned to look after the plebs.** 
The plebs appeared again as a grouping requiring the protection of 
the mighty (proceres and optimates) in a sermon given after the capture 
of Jerusalem. Baldric had the matres deliberate on the need to elect 


*® E Duncalf, “The councils of Piacenza and Clermont’, A History of the Crusades, ed. 
Setton, 1 (Madison, 1969), pp. 220-52; D. C. Munro, “The speech of Pope Urban II 
at Clermont, 1095’, American Historical Review 11 (1905-6), pp. 231-42; R. Somerville, 
“The council of Clermont and the First Crusade’, Studia Gratiana 20 (1976), 323-37. 

3 BD 14. 

* BD 48. 


THE EARLY HISTORIANS 59 


a ruler in order to provide for the plebs that intended to remain. This 
ruler was to allocate the responsibility of protecting and taking care of 
the plebs.” Baldric further used the idea of a basic division between the 
noble and the commoners in an interesting passage in which Bohemond 
was given a speech reminding the leaders of the Christian forces of the 
hardship everyone was suffering. Speaking to the optimates, he drew to 
their attention the plight of the plebeii homines, only to acknowledge that 
it was unnecessary to do when even those of illustrious birth (illustris 
sanguinis) were starving.*® 

Other, less significant, passages are consistent with the view that 
Baldric considered the plebs to be commoners. Baldric reported the 
Norman prince and nephew of Bohemond, Tancred, hid among 
the plebs in order to avoid taking an oath to the Alexios I Comnenus, the 
Byzantine Emperor.” The account of the defeat of an expedition from 
Antioch led by the Provengal knight, Raymond Pilet, 5 July 1098, 
included the report that many of the fainthearted and gens plebeia were 
killed.” This last example was an amendment of the Gesta Francorum’s 
highly unusual term minuta gens.” A further passage containing a 
description of the gens plebeia was a description of the reaction of the 
commoners to the preaching of the First Crusade. Baldric described 
how the gens plebeia displayed a cross that because of the presumption 
of certain foolish women they believed had been created from heaven.” 
He could well have been an eyewitness to such behaviour in the local 
population, which he considered to be credulous and erroneous. In all 
these instances the plebs were a lowly and somewhat shameful class. 

An interesting passage concerning the spirit of common leadership 
that Baldric imagined to have existed on the First Crusade also showed 
that Baldric’s opinion of the plebs was not always a negative one. After 
commenting on the unheard of nature of the Christian army, which 
was sine rege, sine imperatore, he praised the fact that everyone took respon- 
sibility for themselves, supported the common decision of the wise and 


3 BD 104. 
3 BD 53-4. 
37 BD 25. 
8 BD 82. 
% GF 74. 

© BD 17. 


60 CHAPTER TWO 


praised the resolution of the plebs.*' The passage echoed the Children 
of Israel in Hosea 3:4,” who were also sine rege, sine principe. 

Shortly before Christmas 1097 the hardship experienced by the 
Christian forces before Antioch resulted in a decision to send out a 
detachment in search of supplies. Baldric’s account of this period follows 
the Gesta Francorum very closely, but after he reported the announcement 
of the decision to send out foragers Baldric added the extra observa- 
tion that naturally, with paternal affection, the maiores gave protection 
to the minores. This was the only instance of Baldric’s use of the 
couplet maiores and minores for the basic bipartite division of noble and 
commoner. Again the message of the passage was that during the First 
Crusade the mighty took particular concern for the lowly. 

An important term for the poor in Baldric’s work was pauperes. He 
used the term several times for those who were in need of assistance 
from the rich, although with less frequency than Raymond of Aguilers 
for whom the pauperes were not simply those experiencing poverty, but 
the people chosen by God. In describing the journey of Bohemond’s 
contingent through Greece the Gesta Francorm reported that Bohemond 
called a council to restrain his forces from engaging in plunder.** Baldric 
took the opportunity to compose a speech for Bohemond at this point, in 
which he gave important social commentary. “You however, our proceres, 
our familiares, who are unencumbered, attend vigilantly to the pedites, 
that they do not falter on the road and wait for them. Go forward as 
soon as possible and pitch your tents in good time. And those of you 
who by the grace of God are opulentiores, pour out your resources as 
alms to the pauperes. Have God always present before your eyes.” As 
pauperes were coupled with opulentiores by Baldric here the meaning of 
the term as the ‘poor’ is unambiguous, and a fundamentally bipar- 
tite division of society between rich and poor is indicated. Here also 
Baldric saw it as the responsibility of the wealthy to be charitable to 
the poor, if for no other reason than such action was meritorious in 
the eyes of God and would not pass unnoticed. This is a similar theme 


" BD 9. 

Hosea 3.4:... sine rege, sine principe. 

® BD 42. 

“GN 8. 

BD 22-3: Vos autem, proceres nostri, familiares nostri, qui expeditiores estis, de peditibus vigi- 
lantius procurate, et ne deficiant in via, eos exspectando maturius procedite, et tentoria vestra tempestive 
jigite. Et quoniam, Deo gratias, opulentiores estis, opes vestras pro eleemosyna pauperibus effundite: 
Deum ante oculos praesentem semper habete. 


THE EARLY HISTORIANS 61 


to that in the passage above, in which Baldric had Bohemond refer to 
the responsibility of the dives to the pauperes in a list of other bipartite 
ways of looking at society: dominus and servus; nobilis and plebs; miles 
and pedes.*° In this latter case, however, the responsibility was to give 
leadership rather than charity. 

Upon the surrender of Nicea, 19 June 1097, Emperor Alexios I 
Comnenus was described by Baldric as making a large donation to 
the pauperes of the Christian forces.’ Baldric also described, however, 
expressions of discontent among the Christian forces that the city was 
not given over to plunder. In keeping with his theme of the sharing 
of resources among the Christian army, Baldric rather optimistically 
imagined that had this sacking of the city taken place the wealth would 
have become public property and so alleviated the poverty of the egenz, 
the ‘destitute’.*® The two terms pauperes and egeni were linked again when, 
at a council of the princes sometime after the defeat of Kerbogha, 28 
June 1098, they resolved, according to Baldric, to show compassion for 
the pauperes,” before going on to make an offer to take into service those 
egent who were fit enough to leave Antioch. ‘This was Baldric’s version 
of an important passage in the Gesta Francorum in which the princes 
had it announced throughout the whole city that if there should be 
present someone egens who wished for gold or silver, the princes would 
be pleased to make an agreement for their services.”” 

Baldric inherited the use of the term egeni for his own version of this 
offer, adding the detail that the princes said that ‘if someone is egenus 
and is a vigorous person, he should join service with us, and we, hav- 
ing bestowed a stipend on each, shall give relief to all. The sick will 
be nourished at public expense until they get well.” It is clear that for 
Baldric the offer of the princes was made for the well-being for the 
poor, with it being proposed that those who were able to do so should 
leave the city in the following of a prince. While this might well have 
been the actual content of the offer, the information provided by the 
Gesta Francorum is once again being used to illustrate Baldric’s message 


1 BD 46. 

7 BD 30. 

*® BD 30. 

* BD 80. 

° GF 72-3, 

`! BD 80: Si quis egenus est et corpore vegetus, jungatur nobis, et nos omnibus, datis unicuique 
stipendis, subsidiabimur; infirmi publica stipe donec convaluerint, sustententur. 


62 CHAPTER TWO 


that on the First Crusade the wealthy acted out of concern for the 
poor, rather than self-interest. 

In general Baldric was clearly sympathetic to the position of the poor, 
who appear in much greater vividness in his work than that of his fons 
Jormalis. ‘Typically, however, their appearance is as the lowly group to 
whom charity and concern is offered by their seniors. An implicit ten- 
sion over property can perhaps still be deduced, especially in Baldric’s 
account of the fall of Jerusalem, where the poor are portrayed in a 
more assertive manner: free from lordship and paid, rather than com- 
manded, for their work. 

The same material concerning the poor also indicates how, in 
Baldric’s version of the Crusade, the princes played a paternalistic 
role. He also had a few noteworthy social comments concerning the 
intermediary groupings between the great and the lowly. An interesting 
theological use of the term familia, normally used for the following of 
a prince, appears in the Historia Merosolymitana in a speech that Baldric 
attributed to the priests of the Christian army, 15 July 1099, in preparing 
everyone for the assault on Jerusalem. The entire army, milites et pedites 
were addressed as familia Christi.” This was an unusual variation of the 
idea of the miles Christi. Grouping the combatants into a familia served 
Baldric’s purpose by emphasising the unity of the Crusading army, 
which in fact was displaying distinct regional tensions at that point.” 

In other respects Baldric used the term familiares straightforwardly 
for the following of a prince. The one example of an individual being 
referred to directly as a familiaris was a person of relatively high status. 
The knight Raymond Pilet, who at one point led his own expedition- 
ary force east of Antioch, was described by Baldric, following the Gesta 
Francorum, as one of the familiares of Count Raymond of Toulouse.” 
Contemporaries, such as Raymond of Aguilers, saw Raymond Pilet 
as a miles nobilissimus.” The other appearances of the term familiares 
in the Historia Hierosolymitana are without significance, except perhaps 
Baldric’s amendment to the statement in the Gesta Francorum that in the 
summer and autumn of 1098 the senzores left Antioch with an agree- 
ment to return in November. Baldric made the alteration that it was 


2 BD 101. 

5 J. France, Victory in the East. A military history of the First Crusade (Cambridge, 1984), 
pp. 331-2. 

* BD 81. 

5 RA 253-4. 


THE EARLY HISTORIANS 63 


the ‘duces et familiae who thus dispersed throughout the neighbouring 
regions, choosing in his version of the same information to emphasise 
the presence of a household alongside the senior princes, indicating 
that he understood it as natural that a noteworthy body of household 
troops would accompany a leading prince. 

Baldric used the term satellites in a similar sense to his use of famili- 
ares with perhaps a slight variation of meaning. The two instances in 
which he applied the term to Christian forces concerned Tancred. 
Baldric wrote that having taken up the responsibility of garrisoning a 
castle south west of Antioch at St George’s monastery, 5 April 1098, 
Tancred’s satellites watched and blocked the way. The second instance 
arose soon after the fall of Jerusalem, when Tancred and Count Eustace 
of Boulogne took many satellites and clientes to Nablus.” It is possible 
that whereas Baldric thought it appropriate to use the term familiares for 
the members of the household of a very senior and long established 
prince, he preferred satellites for the status of those recently attached to 
Tancred, a knight still in the early stage of his career whose following 
was established during the course of the First Crusade. Orderic Vitalis, 
a contemporary and friend of Baldric, showed that satellites could be 
distinguished from equites. Orderic used the term satellites in a manner 
that suggested, in equipment at least, they were slightly inferior to equites 
when he wrote of loricati equites ac spiculati satellites.” The knights had 
breastplates, the followers javelins. 

Baldric’s contribution to the discussion of the social status of milites 
is important and the relevant material from his history is discussed in 
Chapter Five. Those individuals assigned the epithet miles by Baldric 
were Robert of Flanders, a miles audactssimus and in all respects a miles 
expeditissimus;® Duke Godfrey of Lotharingia, a miles acerrimus;*° Robert 
fitz-Gerard, the constable to Bohemond, a miles audacissimus;°' Raymond 
Pilet;® Tancred, a princeps et miles strenuus and a miles acerrimus; Achard 


5 BD 52. 

`“ BD 105. For Eustace III, count of Boulogne see A. V. Murray, The Crusader 
Kingdom, p. 193. 

58 OV 8, 14. 

5 BD 28, 35. 

& BD 34. 

°! BD 47. For Robert fitz-Gerard see J. Riley-Smith, First Crusaders, p. 221. 

2 BD 81. 

° BD 33, 75, 108. 


64 CHAPTER TWO 


of Montemerle, twice referred to as a miles audacissimus* and Letold of 
Tournai.” Clearly senior leaders of the First Crusade were included 
in the category of miles, but in the interesting passage noted above 
about the divine nature of the Christian army Baldric made it clear 
that at the same time he retained a notion that in wider society the 
duces were a social grouping distinct from the milites. ‘In that expedition 
the duces themselves fought, the duces themselves took watches, so that 
you would not know a dux from a miles, or how a miles differed from a 
dux.’°® Baldric saw the blurring of distinction between miles and dux as 
untypical of his day. 

A curious division of the social groupings present at the siege of 
Antioch involves the term miles. When, 9 February 1098, the knights 
departed from the Christian camp to fight the ‘Lake Battle’, Baldric 
wrote that everyone became anxious. ‘No one was confident in himself, 
neither the priest, nor the woman, nor the populus, nor the miles. ® There 
is an echo here of the famous three orders based on function with the 
populus substituted for laboratores. Baldric also found the distinct pres- 
ence of women was sufficiently notable that they too merited mention 
as a distinct category. 

The phrase milites Christi occurs several times in the Historia Hiero- 
solymitana and was clearly theologically laden, rather than a method of 
identification.” This is most evident with regard to the speeches that 
Baldric attributed to Bohemond in which the Norman prince addressed 
his fellows as milites Christ. As the Italian contingent marched through 
Greece in the winter of 1096 they were warned by Bohemond not to 
plunder their fellow Christians, according to the report in the Gesta 
Francorum.® Baldric used the report to imagine the actual speech of 
Bohemond, in which he attributed to him the statement that ‘we are 
pilgrims for God, we are Christi milites?” 

Another speech by Bohemond, in Baldric’s version of events, also 
addressed the Christi milites as did the maiores of the army on one 
further occasion.” These instances are clearly different from the duo 


* BD 99. 

® BD 102. For Letold of Tournai see A. V. Murray, The Crusader Kingdom, p. 215. 

& BD 28: In ista siquidem expeditione duces ipsi militabant, ipsi duces excubabant, ut nescires 
quid dux a milite, quid miles differret a duce. 

® BD 46: Neuter de se confidebat, nec sacerdos, nec mulier; nec populus, nec miles. 

For milites Christi see above p. 20. 

69 GF 8. 
BD 22: Peregrini pro Deo sumus, Christi milites sumus. 
7 BD 34, 42. 


THE EARLY HISTORIANS 65 


milites Christiani who were killed by ‘Turkish raiders from the castle of 
Harem early in the siege of Antioch. The milites Christi addressed in 
the speeches were ‘pilgrims for God’; those killed in the raid were two 
from the Christian forces. The more theological, Gregorian, sense of 
the special relationship with God of the knight on crusade was pres- 
ent in Baldric’s account of the election of Duke Godfrey to the rule 
of Jerusalem, 23 July 1099, where the assembly told Godfrey ‘you will 
be a miles Dei.’” 

Baldric’s preferred term for the leading nobles of the First Crusade 
was optimates, which he favoured over that used by his fons formalis: seniores. 
For example, the Gesta Francorum reported a speech of Bohemond to 
the other Christian princes as beginning: Seniores et prudentissimi milites.” 
Baldric adjusted the same speech to begin: Optimates et domini.” The 
term seniores, which was common in the Gesta Francorum, was consistently 
edited out of his own history by Baldric. Sentores appears just once in 
the Historia Hterosolymitana, surviving in the address of Bohemond to the 
other princes shortly before the capture of Antioch.” Baldric’s prefer- 
ence for optimates over seniores almost certainly reflected a geographical 
difference between the terminology used for magnates in northern 
France and southern Italy. 

Baldric of Dol is a relatively neglected source for the First Crusade; 
his work lacks a modern edition and translation. Undoubtedly this is 
because the vast majority of actual historical material in the Historia 
EMierosolymitana came from the Gesta Francorum. Baldric’s history, how- 
ever, merits analysis in its own right for the theological and classical 
perspectives that Baldric offers on the First Crusade. As a source of 
information concerning the events of the expedition it is limited; as a 
source for how a senior member of the northern French clergy framed 
their understanding of the First Crusade some ten years later it is 
extremely rich. In the process of investigating Baldric’s language of 
social class his major themes can be seen, namely the parallel between 
the Children of Israel and the participants of the First Crusade; their 
behaviour mirroring that of the primitive Church; the responsibility 
of the seniors to the poor and as a result the harmony that existed 
between the social classes. 


2 BD 105: ‘esto miles Dei.’ 
3 GF 30. 
™ BD 42. 
5 BD 54. 


66 CHAPTER TWO 
The Historia Iherosolimitana of Robert the Monk 


Although the Historia Lherosolimitana was popular in the medieval period, 
with around a hundred surviving manuscripts, there is no modern 
edition. In large part this is because the vast majority of the his- 
torical information in the work was based on a rewriting of the Gesta 
Francorum and modern historians have naturally favoured the eyewit- 
ness account. Its fall from favour has been relatively recent. An edition 
of the Historia Lherosolimitana appeared as early at 1492 in Cologne, it 
was printed in Basle in 1533 and Frankfurt-am-Main in 1584.” It was 
included in Jacques Bongars’ important 1611 collection of crusad- 
ing accounts and was printed in the Patrologia Latina series in 1844 by 
J. P. Migne.” The most recent edition, however, was that published in 
the Recueil des Historiens des Croisades series in 1866.”° This edition is not 
ideal, as it lists just twenty-four of the surviving manuscripts, neverthe- 
less it is used here.” The manuscript used as the base text for the RHC 
edition was Paris, B. N. MS latin 5129, a twelfth century manuscript 
from Reims.® 

The Historia Lherosolimitana was written by a monk, Robert, who, apart 
from his testimony that he was present at the Council of Clermont, 18- 
28 November 1095,*' was not an eyewitness to the events he described. 
He worked from a monastery in the episcopate of Reims. This might 
well have been the Benedictine abbey of St-Rémi in the city itself, given 
that the abbey was large institution with a high reputation in the twelfth 
century. Although some scholars have identified Robert the monk with 
an Abbot Robert of St-Rémi, d. 1122, the most recent study of the 
Historia Therosolinutana, the English translation by Carol Sweetenham, 
points out that the abbot’s chequered career, the basic style of the text 
and, particularly, the fact that Robert the historian says he was writing 
per obedientiam of his abbot, makes the connection unlikely.” 

There is no internal evidence in the text for even an approximate 
date of composition, but based on the probable use of Robert’s work 


” RHC Oc. 3, 719-20. 

” J. Bongars, Gesta Dei per Francos (Hanover, 1611); PL, 155, 669-758. 

® RHC Oc. 3, 717-882. 

7 RM xlvii. 

2 RM1. 

83! RM 725. 

® Robert the Monk, History of the First Crusade, trans. C. Sweetenham (Aldershot, 
2005), pp. 3—4. 


THE EARLY HISTORIANS 67 


in the Magdeburg Charter of 1107/8, a plausible suggestion is 1106.°° 
This would place Robert’s work in chronological proximity to that of 
the two other rewritings of the Gesta Francorum in northern France, 
those of Guibert, abbot of Nogent, c. 1109 and Baldric, bishop of Dol, 
c. 1107. If A. C. Krey’s conjecture that Bohemond’s tour of France 
in 1105 led to an increase in the circulation of the Gesta Francorum was 
correct, then this would also fit with Robert having started his own 
version soon after."* 

Robert was heavily dependent on the Gesta Francorum for the basic 
form of his history and for most of its content. His reworking of the 
Gesta Francorum, however, introduced new material and significant 
elaborations. Where the Gesta Francorum is some 20,000 words long, the 
Historia Iherosolimitana is around 35,000. There is a certain amount of 
historical information in the text that is original to Robert. This might 
well be valuable eyewitness testimony from returning crusaders, but 
any such genuine material has to be reconstructed to free it from the 
distorting effect of the strong theological lens through which Robert 
viewed his fons formalis 

Robert made his outlook clear in the prologue of the Historia 
Lherosolimitana when he wrote that just as Moses held the principal place 
among historians of the Old and New Testament due to his descrip- 
tion of the beginning of the world, so the historian who embarked 
on writing about the journey to Jerusalem must be pleasing to God, 
for this, with the exception of the martyrdom of Christ, was the most 
miraculous undertaking since the creation of the world.” ‘Throughout 
his work Robert therefore underlined both the heroic achievements of 
the Christian forces and that they were performing the work of God. 
The speeches that Robert gave to the leaders of the First Crusade 
were particularly adapted to this purpose. So, for example, Bohemond’s 
negotiations with Firuz, the warden of three towers along the walls 
Antioch, which eventually led to the Christian forces being let into the 
city, 3 June 1098, are considerably reworked from the account of the 


88 G. Constable, ‘The Place of the Magdeburg Charter of 1107/08 in the History 
of Eastern Germany and of the Crusades,’ Vita Religiosa im Mittelalter. Festschrift fiir Kaspar 
Elm zum 70 Geburtstag ed. F. J. Felten and N. Jaspert (Berlin 1999), pp. 283-300. See 
also Robert the Monk, trans. C. Sweetenham, p. 7. 

8 A. C. Krey, ‘A neglected passage in the Gesta and its bearing on the literature of 
the First Crusade’, The Crusades and other historical essays presented to Dana C. Munro, ed. 
L. J. Paetow (New York, 1928), pp. 57-76. 

® RM 723. 


68 CHAPTER TWO 


Gesta Francorum, through new passages of oratio recta. These additional 
speeches completely avoided mention of the offer by Bohemond to 
make Firuz rich,®° but instead took the form of a theological debate 
during which Bohemond had to seek the assistance of his chaplain to 
explain certain miracles.*’ 

For a study of the social classes of the First Crusade, Robert’s 
reworking of the Gesta Francorum is of considerable value. Robert had 
a richer social vocabulary than the anonymous author and in revising 
what he felt to be a crudely written work, as part of his attempt to give 
more details and a greater theological meaning to the history, he gave 
descriptions of social textures that are lacking in his main source. While 
Robert was not an eyewitness to the events of the First Crusade, his 
social commentary can be taken as that of a contemporary. To illustrate 
the difference between the social and historical information available in 
the Historia Lherosolmitana it is helpful to take an example. 

An embassy sent by al-Afdal, vizier of Egypt arrived at the crusader 
camp outside of Antioch in early spring, 1098. ‘This was an opportunity 
for Robert to describe a vivid scene in which the tuventus displayed their 
riding prowess by exercising at quintain and other sports, while the 
elders sat together.** With Robert as the only source for this activity 
by the zwventus it cannot be relied upon as historical information. But 
the passage does show Robert’s awareness of the tuventus as a social 
grouping with their own particular activities and characteristics. It is in 
this latter sense that he can be treated as an important witness for the 
social dynamics of his era, and, with care, of the First Crusade. 

In a useful passage that outlines how Robert understood the divisions 
in his society, he wrote about the assembling of people to Bohemond’s 
contingent of the First Crusade. ‘Therefore the optimates of Apulia, 
Calabria and Sicily hearing that Bohemond had taken up the cross of 
the journey of the Holy Sepulchre all gathered to him, and both the 
mediocres and the potentes, both the old and the young, both servi and 
domini pledged themselves to the way of the Holy Sepulchre.’ These 
couplets indicate a basic bipartite division of society, with equivalent 


RM 742: Audientes gitur optimates Apuliae, et Calabriae, et Siciliae, quod Boamundus crucem 
viae Sancti Sepulcri susceperat, omnes ad eum confluunt, et tam mediocres quam potentes, senes quam 
tuvenes, servi quam domin, viam Sancti Sepulcri promittunt. 


THE EARLY HISTORIANS 69 


terms: potentes and domini, mediocres and servi. Although the term mediocres 
could be used for a middle class,” it also could be used for persons 
of lower means.” It is the latter sense that seems more appropriate 
here as the term is juxtaposed with the potentes. Servi was also a term 
that covered a wide range of social status, from slave through serf to 
a personal servant who could be of relatively high position. Here, the 
juxtaposition with domini and the association with mediocres suggests 
‘servants.’ 

While Robert was not here using the term servi for slaves, he did make 
reference to the practice of slavery during the First Crusade. On the 
fall of Jerusalem at the ‘Temple of Solomon many of the young, both 
male and female, were spared so as to be sold into slavery.” The next 
day, those on the roof of the Temple were slaughtered. Again, Robert 
reported, many of them were spared to servitude.” Some of those on 
the roof preferred to meet with swift death than to die slowly from the 
wretched yoke of slavery.°* This comment from Robert contradicts some 
of the eyewitness reports of the total annihilation of the population, 
but, as modern historians have pointed out, claims that the entire non- 
Christian population of the city were killed were not in fact correct.” 
Several times Robert used the theologically conventional phrase servus 
Dei to indicate that he saw the entirety of the Christian forces as being 
servi of the Lord. 

There is a sense in Robert’s work that all the events of the First 
Crusade were a fulfilment of biblical prophecies and that to some extent 
the entire expedition were the ‘humble.’ After his description of the 
battle of Dorylaeum, | July 1097, Robert exulted in his report of the 
extent of captured booty, ‘indeed those of His people desiring food He 
filled with good things, those dwites not of His people He sent away 
empty. He has deposed potentes and elevated humiles. Potentes cast down, 


% See below pp. 83-4. 

°! J. EF Niermeyer, Medival Latin Dictionary, 1, 870. 

2 RM 868. 

3 RM 869. 

* RM 869. 

5 S. D. Goitein, ‘Contemporary Letters on the Capture of Jerusalem by the 
Crusaders’, The Journal of Jewish Studies, 3, No. 4, 1952, pp. 162-177; D. Hay, ‘Gender 
Bias and Religious Intolerance in Accounts of the “Massacres” of the First Crusade’, 
in Tolerance and Intolerance—Social Conflict in the Age of the Crusades, ed. M. Gervers and 
J. M. Powell (New York, 2001), pp. 3-10; J. France, Victory in the East, pp. 355-6. For 
a discussion of the massacre at Jerusalem see below pp. 153-7. 


RM 817, 821, 822, 868. 


70 CHAPTER TWO 


humiles gloriously restored.”*’ This passage was drawn from the Magnificat 
(Luke 1:52-3) and cast the entire crusading body in the position of the 
humble, who have overthrown the ‘Turkish potentes and become elevated. 
It was more a theological point than a social one and this sense there 
are echoes of the similar way in which Raymond of Aguilers sometimes 
put the entire expedition into the category of pauperes. 

Robert achieved a similar effect through an unconventional use of 
the term minores in a passage in which he praised the success of the 
crusade in obtaining the submission of Arab towns. He wrote that since 
the principes who normally directed the people were far away, the Lord 
began to overcome even the kings themselves through the pauciores and 
minores.” This is an unusual use of the term minores as it embraces the 
entirety of those present on the First Crusade rather than being the 
lesser part of a body of the bipartite division mazores et minores. Here, 
as with humiles above, Robert was portraying the entire expedition as 
being modest and humble enough that it should receive success through 
divine intervention rather than the support of kings. 

As an eyewitness to the Council of Clermont Robert’s report on 
the speech of Urban II that launched the crusade is one of the key 
accounts. He wrote that one of the points made by Urban was that 
‘the ditiores should give assistance to the iopes.’*? The bipartite division 
between rich and poor is clear, what is inconclusive is whether the 
pope at the time of his speech anticipated a strong response from the 
inopes and made provision for them. A letter written later by Urban II 
as the momentum for the crusade was gathering strongly discouraged 
non-combatants from joining the expedition, suggesting that such was 
not his intention.'°° Robert may have rewritten the pope’s speech in 
the light of his later knowledge that a large body of poor did in fact 
undertake the crusade. 

Robert the Monk was more attentive to the presence of the pauperes 
on the First Crusade than was the anonymous author of his fons formalis. 
His descriptions of the pauperes, however, follow the Gesta Francorum in 
that they largely appear as a passive body of people requiring sustenance 
from the wealthy. After fall of Nicea, the Byzantine emperor, Alexios 


9” RM 764. 

2 RM 854-5. 

9 RM 729: Ditiores inopibus subveniant. 
Letter of pope Urban II to the people of Bologna: Hagenmeyer, Epistulae et 
Chartae, pp. 137-8. 


THE EARLY HISTORIANS 71 


I Comnenus, instructed a payout of lavish alms to the pauperes.'°! As a 
result of the booty acquired at the battle of Dorylaeum, says Robert, 
those who were pauperes were made divites, those who were before 
semi-nude were being clothed in silk garments.’ As an eyewitness 
to the setting forth of the crusade, Robert’s description that some of 
the pauperes were semi-nude might have some value, even allowing for 
exaggeration in order to emphasise the impact of the captured booty 
for the expedition. 

In describing the effect of famine in the winter of 1097 while the 
crusade was besieging Antioch, Robert emphasised the hardship of the 
entirety of the Christian forces by saying that it was hardly surprising 
that those of poor and feeble spirits wavered when even the staunchest 
faltered.' When the herald of al-Afdal, vizier of Cairo, came to the 
camp of the crusaders at the siege of Antioch, Robert elaborated on 
the Gesta Francorum by reporting the details of the offer that the envoy 
is supposed to have made. The proposal was to allow the Christians to 
travel and worship at Jerusalem with great honour, provided that they 
travelled as unarmed pilgrims. Moreover, they would be endowed with 
rich property so that from pedites they would be made equites. ‘Those 
who were pauperes would be provided both for the journey and their 
return.'”* The important offer to make equites from pedites is discussed 
in Chapter Five, but here the passage illustrates Robert’s picture of the 
expedition: that there was a fundamental division between the combat- 
ants and the non-combatants. He also clearly believed that the latter, 
the pauperes, wished above all to be relieved from want. 

Robert slightly reworked the very important eulogy to Bishop 
Adhémar of Le Puy, the papal legate, in the Gesta Francorum. ‘Everyone 
lamented [the death of Adhémar], rightly as was due, because he was 
the counsellor of the divites, comforter of the grieving, sustainer of the 
weak, treasurer of the needy, reconciler of the quarrelling. He was 
accustomed to say this to the milites: “If you wish to be triumphant 
and the friends of God, guard cleanliness of the body, and feel pity for 
the pauperes.”’'°° Here, Robert retained the idea that the milites could 


1! RM 758. 

12 RM 764. 

13 RM 781. 

10t RM 791. 

15 RM 839: Hunc omnes iure debito lacrymabantur, quia consilium erat divitum, consolator 
moerentium, sustentator debilium, thesaurus indigentium, reconciliator discordantium. His militibus 


72 CHAPTER TWO 


themselves earn the favour of God by assisting the pauperes, an idea 
that was changed in the version of the passage written by Peter 
‘Tudebode. 

The day before the storming of Jerusalem, reported Robert, the 
Christian forces celebrated by fasting and distributed alms to the pau- 
peres.'°° Finally, on the fall of Jerusalem, ‘then [Jerusalem] enriched 
her sons, coming from afar [Isa 60:4], so that no one in her remained a 
pauper.'°’ This passage is more theological and literary than histori- 
cal, although the information it does convey is consistent with other 
sources, which indicate that the pauperes gained considerable property on 
the fall of Jerusalem." But its main message, echoing Chapter 60 of 
Isaiah, was that the journey of the pauperes had culminated in a glori- 
ous conclusion and that they had obtained their just reward. Again the 
fulfilment of biblical prophecy seems to have been uppermost in the 
historian’s mind. 

The term plebs occurs twice in the Historia Lherosolimitana, in both 
cases when Robert was writing in a lyrical mode and a theological 
context. After Jerusalem had fallen he wrote that the humble Christian 
plebs humbly worshiped Christ.'°? Before the battle of Ascalon the plebs 
marched out from the church and ran to arms and despite their fasting 
proceeded to the enemy.” The context suggests that Robert was using 
the term plebs to indicate the entirety of the Christian people, intention- 
ally emphasising unanimity, rather than for just the commoners. 

As can be seen from the other early crusading histories, clientes was 
a term that could cover a wide variety of meanings, from relatively 
senior vassals, footsoldiers or lowly servants. For Robert, who used the 
term clientes just once, it is clear that the term meant squires. In a pas- 
sage concerning the fighting that flared up between the forces of Duke 
Godfrey and Alexios I Comnenus, the Byzantine emperor at the end of 
May 1097, Robert wrote that when Godfrey began to send his clentes to 
acquire necessary provisions the Emperor commanded his ‘Turcopoles 


dicere solitus erat: ‘Si vultis esse triumphatores et amici Dei, munditiam corporum custodite, et pau- 
perum miseremim.? 

10 RM 866 

107 RM 868: Tunc quippe filios suos, de longe ad se venientes, ita ditavit quia nullus in ea 
pauper remansit. 

108 For a discussion of the pauperes and the fall of Jerusalem see below pp. 153-7. 

09 RM 869. 

10 RM 873. 


THE EARLY HISTORIANS 73 


and Patzinaks to attack them.'!! This is an amendment of the Gesta 
Francorum, which described the same people as squires (armigeri), 

While most of the eight historians examined here tended to under- 
stand the miles as a knight, a warrior with a certain social status, the 
same term for Robert could be employed more broadly. This is fully 
discussed in Chapter Five, but it is worth noting here that it is those 
passages in the Historia in which Robert was making a theological point 
that the term milites was used for soldiers in a broad sense rather than 
knights in particular. In particular it is formulations like milites Christi 
and milites Dei, which had a Biblical resonance, echoing St Paul’s second 
letter to Timothy, that are more likely to have meant ‘soldier’ of Christ 
or God rather than ‘knight’.'' 

Robert was clearly very aware of the class of knights, often young in 
age but not necessarily so, who had yet to establish themselves as heads 
of independent households and were termed iwvenes.''* His is perhaps 
the richest history with regard to their actions and the relevant material 
is examined in Chapter Six below. 

The Historia Therosolimitana employed a wide range of terms for the 
higher social order: consules, ditiores, divites, principes, domini, maiores, opti- 
mates, potentes, seniors and proceres. The nuances of these are discussed in 
Chapter Seven, but it worth noting here that as with the other varia- 
tions of the Gesta Francorum, once a writer with a more sophisticated 
vocabulary turned to the material provided by the anonymous author, 
the depiction of the upper classes of the First Crusade becomes con- 
siderably more textured. 

Robert the Monk’s most important contribution to an understand- 
ing of the social dynamics of the First Crusade was his enrichment 
of the raw material provided by the Gesta Francorum, particularly his 
descriptions of the activities of the iawvenes which allow the modern 
historian to identify a distinct layer of knights, which must have existed 
in society around him. In other respects his departures from his fons 
jormalis seem to be exaggerations to suit a theological purpose, namely 
to portray the First Crusade as the greatest event since creation. As 
shall be seen in Chapter Five though, in his acceptance of the reports 


1 RM 743. 

112 GF 6. 

13 2 Tim 2.3: labora sicut bonus miles Christi Iesu. For miitles Christi see above p. 20. 

14 For a full discussion of the category iwvenes and their role on the First Crusade 
see below Chapter Six. 


74 CHAPTER TWO 


in the Gesta Francorum that miles fell to the state of pedes and that pedes 
could be promoted to miles he did, however, provide corroboration for 
the relative fluidity of those boundaries. 


Guibert of Nogent’s Gesta Dei per Francos 


Guibert, abbot of Nogent, is the best known of the early crusading 
historians, largely because he wrote an autobiography so vivid that 
it has drawn a great deal of attention from those interested in the 
psychology of the Middle Ages.''? Born near Beauvais around the 
year 1060, to parents of whose nobility he never ceased to be proud, 
Guibert entered the abbey of St Germer de Fly, where he obtained a 
relatively sophisticated education and was attracted to the verba dulcia 
of Ovid and Virgil.''® In 1104 he obtained the position of abbot at 
the Benedictine monastery of Nogent-sous-Coucy that he held until 
his death in 1124. 

He was a prolific writer, many of whose works have survived, most 
focused on theological issues.'!’ To a large extent Guibert’s history of 
the First Crusade can be seen as being shaped by religious concerns.'!® 
In common with Robert the Monk and Baldric of Dol, Guibert wrote 
the Gesta Dei per Francos based on a reworking of the material in the 
Gesta Francorum. Written with the intention of providing many edifying 
passages for the reader, however, the work has many commentaries, 
observations, reports of visions and miracles which means that, unlike 


"5 Guibert of Nogent, Monodiae, ed. E.-R. Labande (Paris, 1981); J. Benton, Sef 
and Society in Medieval France: The Memoirs of Abbot Guibert of Nogent (1064-c. 1125) (New 
York, 1970); J. Benton, “The personality of Guibert of Nogent,’ Pyschoanalytical Review, 
57, 4 (1970), pp. 563-86; C. Morris, The Discovery of the Individual 1050-1200 (London, 
1972), pp. 83-5; M. D. Coupe, “The personality of Guibert of Nogent Reconsidered,’ 
Journal of Medieval History, 9 (1983), pp. 317-29; Jay Rubenstein, Guibert of Nogent: Portrait 
of a Medieval Mind (New York, 2002). 

"© Guibert of Nogent, Monodiae, I. 17. 

17 Quo ordine sermo fieri debeat, ed. R. B. C. Huygens, CC 127, 47-63; Moralium Geneseos 
libri decem, PL 156, cols. 032-337; Tropologiae in prophetas Osee, Amos ac Lamentationes Jeremiae, 
PL 156, cols. 337—488; Tractatus de Incarnatione contra Judaeos, PL 156, cols. 489-528; 
Epistola de buccella Judae data et de veritate dominici Corporis, ed. R. B. C. Huygens, CC 
127, 65-77; De laude sanctae Mariae liber, PL 156, cols. 537—578; De virginitate opusculum, 
PL 156, cols. 579-608; De pignoribus sanctorum libri quatuor, ed. R. B. C. Huygens, CC 
127, 79-175. 

18 J, Charaud, ‘La conception de Phistoire de Guibert de Nogent’, Cahiers de civilisation 
médiévale, 8 (1965), pp. 381-95; J. G. Schenk, The Use of Rhetoric, Biblical Exegesis and Polemic 
in Guibert of Nogent’s ‘Gesta Dei per Francos’ (unpublished Masters thesis: TCD, 2001). 


THE EARLY HISTORIANS 75 


the works of Robert and Baldric, it diverges considerably in structure 
and in content from the Gesta Francorum. Guibert also incorporated more 
historical material into the work than either of the other two northern 
French historians, both concerning the departure of the expedition, to 
which he was an eyewitness, and from the testimony of those who had 
returned from the expedition. 

There are five editions of the Gesta Dei per Francos, the most recent 
being the exemplary modern edition by R. B. C. Huygens, 1976, which 
is used here.'!? The Huygens edition is a modern reconstruction of the 
text on the basis of eight surviving full manuscripts and other manu- 
scripts that contain extracts from the Gesta Dei per Francos. Huygens 
recognised that the manuscript traditions of the work divided into two 
branches and that there was a need for a modern edition given that 
the edition for the series Recueil des Historiens des Croisades was based 
on the branch that was further away from the archetype.'*! From the 
references in the text to a number of individuals and our knowledge 
of their careers from other sources, Huygens argued that the date of 
composition of the archetype was probably 1109.'” The strongest evi- 
dence in this regard is that Guibert wrote that the death of Gervase of 
Bazoches, who was killed in May 1108, took place ‘last year.’ 

The fact that Guibert held strong opinions and enjoyed polemics 
makes him a valuable source of social history. Guibert interrupted 
his narrative to engage in theological debate and commentary more 
than any other early source for the First Crusade. This resulted in 
passages full of social information; such as his report that after the 
death of Bishop Adhémar of Le Puy, the papal legate, 1 August 1098, 
‘there began to arise amongst the principes quite frequent arguments 
and insolent behaviour, and especially among the mediocres and vulgares 
licentiousness, which it was by no means fitting that it should take 
place.... Therefore while they obeyed no one single ruler and all things 


19 J. Bongars, Gesta Dei per Francos (Hanover, 1611); Dom. L. D’Achery, Venerabilis 
Guiberti abbatis B. Mariae de Novigento opera ominia (Paris, 1651), pp. 367-453; PL 156 
(Paris, 1853), cols. 679B-834A; RHC Oc. 4, 117—260; Guibert of Nogent, Gesta Dei per 
Francos, ed. R. B. C. Huygens, CC LXXVUHa, (Turnhout, 1996), hereafter GN. For a 
discussion of these editions see GN 18-23. 

120 GN 24. 

21 GN 24-5. 

2 GN 51-56. 

123 GN 349-50. See also J. Rubenstein, Guibert of Nogent, pp. 95-6. For Gervase of 
Bazoches, lord of Tiberias see A. V. Murray, The Crusader Kingdom of Jerusalem (Oxford, 
2000), p. 201. 


76 CHAPTER TWO 


were regarded as equal among them and very often while the desire 
of the people (libido vulgi) prevailed, judgments that were inappropriate 
were made among them.’!** 

This passage not only reveals Guibert’s aristocratic disdain for the 
lower social orders, but an interesting social schema. Guibert had a 
tripartite view of society, but not the famous division of the ‘three 
orders’: the bellatores, oratores and laboratores.'* For Guibert the divisions 
of society were hierarchical, not functional: principes, mediocres, minores. 
This schema was made clear by a speech by Bohemond to other lead- 
ers during the siege of Antioch, May 1098, Guibert had the Norman 
prince refer to ‘all of our people, magni, minores, and mediocres.’'*® It is 
Guibert’s use of the term mediocres that is distinctive here. ‘The notion 
of the ‘middle rank’, the mediocres, was not a common one in the 
early twelfth century. It was not used in the Vulgate and nor did it fit 
comfortably with the division of society into three orders based on 
their profession. The Church Fathers, Bishop Ambrose of Milan and 
Augustine of Hippo, spread the use of mediocres as a social term in the 
fourth century and while it was subsequently part of the vocabulary 
of medieval writers, it was not used with any great popularity, except 
by Rabanus Maurus, abbot of Fulda and the leading scholar of the 
early ninth century.!’ 

The richness of Guibert’s social vocabulary led to his coming new 
phrases. In explaining that the desire to take up the cross reached to 
the very bottom of the social structure, Guibert devised the unique 
phrase homines extremae vulgaritatis. So, for example, he noted that ‘the 
men of the furthest level of the vulgus’ were taking up the crusade.'*? In 
his description of the praiseworthy behaviour of King Baldwin I, who 
would not have a prisoner wounded in order to study the treatment 
of his own condition, Guibert had Baldwin declare that he would not 


124 GN 262: Cepere inter principes simultates aliquotiens ac insolentiae oboriri, apud mediocres 
preterea et vulgares licentiae quas non omnino deceret haberi... Dum ergo nemini singulariter parent 
et universa inter eos estimantur equalia, fiebant sepius, dum vulgi libido prevalet, apud ipsos minus 
apta iudicia. 

15 See G. Duby, The three orders, Feudal Society Imagined (London, 1980). 

126 GN 201: Cunctisque personis magnorum, minorum atque mediocrum.... 

17 A conclusion reached by examining the pattern of usage of the term by the 
authors in the Patrologia Latina database. For Rabanus Maurus’ use of minores, mediocres, 
summi vires see PL 112, col. 961D. 

128 GN 300. 


THE EARLY HISTORIANS 77 


be the cause of the death of any man, not even a man of the lowest 
condition of all, hominum deterrimae omnium conditionis.'°° 

When the Gesta Francorum reported that Roger I of Sicily lost his 
army at Amalfi because most of the milites there joined with Bohemond, 
Guibert wrote instead that Roger lost ‘people of all sorts,’ omnimodi 
gentium. Other rare terms for types of person in the Gesta Dei per Francos 
include personae dignitatis,” personae opulentes;'?' and personae spectabiles;'** 
persons of dignity, wealth and importance. Guibert had a strong sense 
of ordo. He reported that many of the ‘illustrious orders’ inclyti ordines 
departed on the crusade.'** In praising his friend, an eques, Matthew, 
Guibert wrote that ‘of all his ordo’, pre omnibus suae ordinis, he had the 
most impressive moral conduct.'* 

In his eulogy to Adhémar Guibert wrote that everyone, of whatever 
ordo, mourned him!*? and in his description of the entourage of Count 
Stephen of Blois at Constantinople in 1101 Guibert reported that there 
were many worthies of all ordines. ?® Three times Guibert wrote of the 
‘knightly order’, ordo equestrs.'*’ As the abbot of a monastery Guibert 
also used the term ordo not in its social sense but with respect to the 
need for proper order within the monastic discipline. In describing how 
Peter the Hermit attempted to abandon the expedition at Antioch, 
early in 1098, Guibert directly addressed Peter, pointing out that his 
behaviour did not comply with the monastic ordo.'** 

At times, however, Guibert’s sense that the First Crusade was an 
important event that echoed the journey of the Children of Israel, led 
him to portray it as an occasion where harmony overcame social tension. 
At one point Guibert wrote that in the army of the iter Dei,!” ‘no serous 
had to look up to the dominus, nor the dominus claim anything from the 
famulus except brotherhood.’ In the same theme Guibert wrote that 


98. For Matthew see J. Riley-Smith, The First Crusaders, p. 215. 
136 3 14. 
aT 87, 323, 344. 


138 


139 


QQQOQNONOOO2O 
ZAAAA ALA AZZ 


a 312:...ut non respectaret servus ad dominum, nec dominus nisi fraternitatem usurparet 


in famulum. 


78 CHAPTER TWO 


on the expedition, ‘without prince, without king’, (Hosea 3:4) under 
God only, both the parvus and the magnus learned to carry the yoke.'*! 
This was his one use of the couplet parvus et magnus to represent a basic 
bipartite division of the whole people. In a passage rich with the kinds 
of classical and biblical references that Guibert delighted in, he again 
indicated a similar outlook. Guibert drew attention to the fact that 
Stephen of Blois, who had been granted leadership of the holy army 
and Hugh the Great, ‘a man of royal name’, had both abandoned the 
crusade.'” Therefore, when ‘shades of a great name’ (Lucan 1.135)” 
were rejected it was the pusillus grex who remained, relying now on 
God’s aid only. When decisions were made not according to birth, but 
by God’s choice, ‘the unexpected one wore the crown’ (Ecc. 11:5).!** 
In the course of making the point that the First Crusade was not led 
by those of the highest birth, as might have been expected, Guibert 
here also displayed an ability to adapt Scriptural terms to his social 
schema. In Luke’s account of Christ’s words to a multitude, the pusillus 
grex were told not to fear, for they had been promised a kingdom,'” 
Guibert invoked Luke’s image of the destitute crowd, the pusillus grex, 
for the lower social orders, knowing that his readers would themselves 
make the connection between the heavenly kingdom promised by God 
and the crusaders’ actual establishment of a kingdom after the capture 
of Jerusalem. 

Guibert’s confidence as a writer, his broad vocabulary and willing- 
ness to coin new phrases rather than repeat the language of the Gesta 
Francorum, make his rewriting of that text extremely valuable from the 
point of view of gathering information about social structure in the 
early twelfth century. 

Guibert is a useful source for the fact that the enslavement of 
Christians was not practised in northern France around 1100. He 
expressed outrage at the practice of the Byzantines who bought and 
sold Christians like brute animals and, even worse, sent them to be sold 
as mancipia to pagans.'*° The practice of Christians enslaving pagans, 
however, was clearly in another category, as Guibert reported without 


4) GN 312: sine rege, sine principe. 

"2 GN 328: Hugo Magnus... homo regii nominis. 
13 Thid; magni nominis umbris. 

1 Tbid: insuspicabilis portavit diadema. 

1 Luke 12.32. 

46 GN 93. 


THE EARLY HISTORIANS 79 


comment the capture of the inhabitants of Ma/’arra for sale in the 
slave market of Antioch. He also noted the reverse. ‘Those Christians 
captured after the defeat of the section of the People’s Crusade led by 
the Italian lord, Rainald, 7 October 1096, faced dismal servitude at 
the hands of cruel domini.'** Those taken to Antioch also experienced 
wretched slavery.'*’ Turks fleeing from the defeat at Dorylaeum looted 
the cities that they passed before abandoning them taking the sons of 
Christians as mancipia.’ 

When Guibert wished to comment on the lower social orders in a 
pejorative context he tended to use the term vulgus.'°' Two passages in 
the Gesta Det per Francos contain not only this negative sense to his use 
of the term vulgus but important additional social commentary. After 
reporting the death of Bishop Adhémar of Le Puy, Guibert wrote the 
significant passage discussed above, in which he stated that with the 
loss of the authority of the legate, the principes began to argue leading 
to a collapse in authority in which the desire of the vulgus now pre- 
vailed: they were insolent and made inappropriate decisions.'*” This 
comment provides a valuable observation from Guibert that it was 
division amongst the leadership of the First Crusade that created the 
conditions under which the lower social orders began to successfully 
assert themselves. 

Another equally important passage concerning the vulgus was 
Guibert’s commentary on the value of the iter Dei as a way of earning 
heaven for the participants. “God ordained holy wars in our time, so that 
the knightly order (ordo equestris) and the erring vulgus, who, like their 
ancient pagan models, were engaged in mutual slaughter, might find a 
new way of earning salvation.’’* Again attached to the term vulgus is a 
pejorative adjective, but here Guibert also imparted the information that 
he saw the crusade as important in preventing a violent social conflict 


47 GN 117. 


“8 GN 126. For Rainald see J. Riley-Smith, First Crusaders, p. 218. 
1 GN 126. 
10 GN 160. 


51 See also Guibert of Nogent, Monodiae, IIL. 8: vulgus insolens; Tropologiae in prophetas, 
PL 156 col. 373D, I.7.3: ineptum vulgus, col. 393C II.10.5: vulgus ineptum; col. 454A, 
V.1.7: vulgus lasciviens; Tractatus de Incarnatione contra Judaeos, PL 156 col. 511C, III: pro- 
Janum et pertinax vulgus. 

152 GN 262. 

153 GN 87: Instituit nostro tempore praelia sancta deus, ut ordo equestris et vulgus oberrans, 
qui vetustae paganitatis exemplo in mutuas versabantur cedes, novum repperirent salutis promerendae 
genus. 


80 CHAPTER TWO 


between the knightly and the common order that he considered to be 
part of society since ancient times. 

The use of the term vulgus in both these commentaries was consistent 
with many other examples in which Guibert clearly considered the 
body of people referred to as vulgus to be ignorant and gullible.'** In 
his description of the enthusiasm of the crowds for Peter the Hermit, 
Guibert wrote that vulgus, with their love of novelty, even tore out the 
hairs of the mule as if they were relics.” This passage has echoes of 
the classical commonplace, that the people were always ‘avid for new 
things.’ A passage with an even stronger connection to the same idea 
was written about the credulity of the vulgus in response to various 
claims of divine intervention during the period in which the crusade 
was being preached; here Guibert referred to the vulgus as indocile et 
novarum rerum cupidum.” 

When Guibert wished to refer to the lower social order in a less pe- 
jorative sense he preferred to use the term pauperes. In a very interest- 
ing aside with regard to William Carpenter, one of the knights active 
in the People’s Crusade who eventually abandoned the expedition 
shortly before the battle with Kerbogha, Guibert reported that William 
Carpenter, when he set out for Jerusalem, first plundered from the pau- 
peres near to him to obtain his provisions. ë He also wrote about other 
unnamed knights from France, who before departing on the expedition 
had been fighting unjustly and were making pauperes by their criminal 
plunder.'*? This awareness of social conflict between rich and poor 
pervades the Gesta Det per Francos, although Guibert’s sympathy for the 
pauperes in these cases is not typical of the work as a whole. 

After the victory of the Christian army over Kerbogha, Guibert 
wrote that if a pauper took something that he wanted, no wealthier 
man (ditior) tried to take it from him by force, but each permitted the 
other to take what he wanted without a fight.’'*’ The suggestion that 
rich and poor in other circumstances could come to blows is consistent 


154 GN 88, 97, 120-1, 121, 156, 262, 314. 

85 GN 121. 

156 For example, Caesar, De Bello Gallico, 1.18; Tacitus, Historiae, 2.8, 3.4, 3.12 (spe- 

cifically the vulgus), ‘Tacticus, Annales, 3.13, 5.3, 5.46. 

157 GN 88. 

158 GN 178-9. For William Carpenter see J. Riley-Smith, The First Crusaders, p. 226. 
159 GN 179. 

160 GN 243. 


THE EARLY HISTORIANS 8l 


with Guibert’s description of the plundering of pauperes by knights in 
France. The description of the distribution of booty here is significant 
and agrees with other sources, which indicate that after the siege of 
Nicea the Christians adopted a policy that seems to have been that the 
first to obtain booty was entitled to keep it, regardless of their social 
status. ®! The same sentiment reappeared in Guibert’s description of the 
sacking of Jerusalem in which he reported an equality in the distribution 
of plunder in the Lord’s army, such that even the poorest ( pauperrimi) 
kept thereafter whatever good things came to them, without doubt or 
challenge, whatever the rank (conditio) of the man into whose hand it 
had first fallen.' 

In his description of the building of the castle Malregard, soon after 
17 November 1097, Guibert made a remark consistent with his view 
that the crusade saw a lull in a state of affairs that more usually saw 
the rich prey upon the poor. He wrote that no egena manus was able to 
complain that it had to endure service inflicted upon him by the power 
of maiores, since they too worked hard to bring the work to completion.'™ 
Again a basic bipartite division of the expedition, this time between 
principes and minores, was indicated by Guibert’s description of a meeting 
of the principes, 10 June 1098, which resulted in the swearing of oaths 
that they would not abandon the enterprise. When the oath-taking had 
been learnt of by the minores they took heart. '®* 

The body of people who demanded that the visionary Peter 
Bartholomew test the legitimacy of the Holy Lance were termed ple- 
beculae by Guibert. He wrote that a murmur began to circulate that the 
discovery of the relic had been staged and that it was merely any old 
lance, therefore an enormous plebeculae began to mutter (mussitare).!® To 
‘mutter’ was a very serious offence against the rules of St Benedict and 
therefore has an extremely pejorative sense in the work of an abbot of 
a Benedictine monastery. Guibert was a supporter of the legitimacy 
of the Holy Lance and consequently there is a negative connotation 
attached to the term plebeculae for those who by doubting the Holy Lance 
damaged the faith of others. Although not strictly a social term there is 
a similarly negative connotation in Guibert’s use of turba, which in the 


161 


See below pp. 153-7. 
162 GN 281. 
3 GN 172. 
164 GN 221. 
165 GN 262. 


82 CHAPTER TWO 


Gesta Dei per Francos was consistently employed in the sense of a ‘mob.’ 
Examples of its appearances include for the credulous crowd who fol- 
low Mohamed; the People’s Crusade in general; those of the People’s 
Crusade at Exorogorgum [Eski-Kaled] and Civetot; the potentially 
seditious people of Edessa under Baldwin’s recently established rule 
and those who rushed to loot the city of Ma’arra on its fall. '®° 

Guibert’s use of plebs was consistent with its appearances in the 
Vulgate as being a broad term for the people or the laity. Echoing 
Romans 9:25, Guibert had Kerbogha’s mother remind her son that 
by the mouth of God it was said that those who had not been his 
plebs were now his plebs.'®’ He referred once to the ‘Catholic plebs.”'™° 
Before the final assault on Jerusalem, Guibert wrote that the bishops 
and priests directed the plebs, who were their subjects, to sing litanies, 
undertake fasts, pray and give alms.'® The other examples of Guibert’s 
use of the term are equally straightforward; although it is perhaps worth 
noting that he reported that those Christians who urged the principes to 
resume the march to Jerusalem after they expedition had rested over 
five months in Antioch were the plebs.'”° In this instance the plebs were 
distinct from the princes within the whole laity. 

Guibert is the only one of the early crusading historians to mention 
the tafurs, a distinct body of the poor.'”! They were provided with a 
lengthy description in the Gesta Dei per Francos. According to Guibert 
the tafur marched barefoot, carried no arms, and was not permitted to 
have any quantity of money. Naked, needy and altogether filthy, the 
tafurs went ahead of everyone, living on the roots of herbs and on any 
worthless growth. Their leader was a certain well-born man originating 
from Normandy, who, having become a pedes from an eques, saw these 
impoverished people going astray. Casting aside his arms he declared 
his wish to become their king and thus he was called King Tafur.'” 


166 GN 98, 124, 127, 165, 254. 

167 GN 214. 

168 GN 341. 

16 GN 276. 

10 GN 250. 

1 For tafurs see CA and La Chanson de Jérusalem, ed. Nigel R. Thorpe, (Tuscaloosa, 
1991), passim; L. A. M. Sumberg, “The “Tafurs” and the First Crusade’, Mediaeval Studies, 
21 (1951), pp. 224-246; N. Cohn, The Pursuit of the Millennium (London, 1970), pp. 65-7, 
72, 89, 283; N. Daniel, The Arabs and Mediaeval Europe (London, 1979), pp. 133-4. 

'® GN 310. 


THE EARLY HISTORIANS 83 


Both of the vernacular epics, the Chanson d’Antioche and the Chanson 
de Jérusalem give descriptions of the tafurs. Although there is continuing 
debate over the value of the Chanson d’Antioche as a source, the consensus 
of modern historians is that it does contain eyewitness material.” The 
Chanson de Jérusalem is, however, clearly not historical and both epics 
are likely to have exaggerated those aspects of the tafurs that would 
have appeared comical for the sake of entertainment. Nevertheless, as 
Norman Daniel has argued, the kinds of behaviour they ascribe to the 
tafurs was likely to have been a reflection of a social reality, even if their 
specific actions and speeches were fictitious.'”* The tafurs were portrayed 
in these epics as being near to starvation, resorting to cannibalism and 
being so wild that even the Christian princes did not dare to approach 
them.'” As Guibert might well have been exposed to epic material 
concerning the First Crusade before writing the Gesta Dei per Francos 
around the year 1109, he cannot be considered an independent source 
for the actions of the tafurs or the existence of King Tafur. However his 
comment that the king of the ‘Tafurs was an eques who had become a 
pedes is crucial evidence that for Guibert and his readers such a change 
in status was readily conceivable under the difficult circumstances of the 
First Crusade. 

The Gesta Det per Francos has a more polished form of writing about the 
middle ranks than any author before William of Tyre’s Chronicon (1184). 
That Guibert used the term mediocres for a middle rank is made clear 
from its appearance in a tripartite division of the entire people, noted 
above, in a speech by Bohemond who referred to ‘all of our people, 
magni, minores, and mediocres’ ™® In describing those who set out from 
France on the Crusade of 1101, Guibert used the same schema when 
he wrote of a great crowd of the summe, mediocris and infimi generis.” 

Guibert wrote an important passage on the disintegration of the 
leadership of the First Crusade after the death of Adhémar, in which 
he described unfitting licentiousness taking place among the mediocres 
and the vulgus.'”* In his polemic against Mohamed, Guibert accused 


3S. B. Edgington, “The First Crusade: Reviewing the Evidence’, The First Crusade, 
Origins and Impact, ed. J. Phillips (Manchester, 1997), pp. 55-77, p. 62. 

14 N. Daniel, The Arabs and Medieval Europe, p. 133. 

175 CA 4050-4118. 

© GN 201. See above p. 76. 

EIGN 313: 

8 GN 262. 


84 CHAPTER TWO 


the followers of Mohamed of intolerable crimes against the mediocres 
and the lowest people.'’? After the fall of Nicea, Alexios I Comnenus, 
the Byzantine emperor rewarded the princes and the very poor of the 
Christian army. According to Guibert envy and enmity towards the 
principes grew among the mediocres exercitus personae of the army, whom 
his generosity had overlooked.'*° This is important evidence of serious 
social tension at the outset of the crusade, somewhat more complex 
than simply rich against poor, focused on the issue of plunder. 

There is a great deal of rich material concerning milites in the Gesta 
Dei per Francos, which is discussed in Chapter Five. Of all the writers 
discussed in this book Guibert was the most consistent in using the 
term for knights, a noble class distinguished in social status from the 
common footsoldier. He also provides valuable examples of the term 
iuvenes being employed to indicate not ‘youths’, but knights in an early 
stage of their careers. These are discussed in Chapter Six. 

His own aristocratic leanings made Guibert very sympathetic to the 
upper social orders for whom he employed a great range of terms, 
reflecting a sensitivity to gradations among them: nobiles, matores, optimates, 
principes, primores, potentes, seniores, comites, proceres, domini. The different 
senses of these terms are discussed in Chapter Seven. 

From the point of view of drawing out the nuances of social dif- 
ferentiation that are barely present in the Gesta Francorum, Guibert of 
Nogent’s work is by far the most important. His rich vocabulary and 
sense of social order led him to write a history full of social texture. 
His awareness of ‘middle ranks’, both in society as a whole, but also 
within the nobility was perhaps his most important contribution, not 
only to the history of the First Crusade but to sociological writing 
generally. Not until William of ‘Tyre’s work was such a sophisticated 
social schema seen again. 


Albert of Aachen’s Historia Therosolimitana 
The Historia [herosolimitana of Albert of Aachen has been restored 


to prominence as a very important source for the First Crusade, in 
large part due to the work of Peter Knoch and, especially, Susan B. 


v9 GN 102. 
180 GN 153. 


THE EARLY HISTORIANS 85 


Edgington.'®! Although not an eyewitness account, the strength of 
Albert’s history is that it is rich with vivid descriptions, supplying a 
great amount of detail that makes the other sources appear sparse in 
comparison. It is a substantial work that covers the period from the 
initiation of the Crusade, ascribed to the itinerant preacher, Peter the 
Hermit, through to 1119.'® It is around 128,000 words long, in com- 
parison to the 20,000 words of the Gesta Francorum.'** 

The Historia Iherosolimitana was written in twelve books by one person, 
whom historians refer to as Albert of Aachen on the basis of a thirteenth 
century introductory sentence to one of the manuscripts.'“* The first 
six books form a distinct unity in style and framework, as they narrate 
the history of the First Crusade. Thereafter the work becomes more 
like a chronicle and continues up to 1119. It is on the basis of this 
clear distinction in style that Edgington and Knoch have argued that 
completion of the first part of the work should be considered separately 
from the second six books. They have dated the completion of the first 
six books to soon after 1102. Knoch dated the prologue of the work 
as being written 1100-1101, ‘with some probability’, then books I-VI 
were, ‘evidently written in one flow of literary activity’, in 1102 or 
soon after. Edgington made a similar case, seeing the author’s original 
intention as rounding off the work with the victory of the Christians 
over al-Afdal, vizier of Egypt, 12 August 1099." 

The perception that the first six books were written up shortly 
after the events they described represents something of a revolution. 
Earlier historians saw the Historia [herosolimitana as a much later work, 
with Steven Runciman, for example, dating it to around the 1130s, 
nonetheless relying heavily on it for his famous narrative of the 


181 P Knoch, Studien zu Albert von Aachen (Stuttgart, 1966); S. B. Edgington, The ‘Historia 
Lherosolimitana’ of Albert of Aachen, a critical edition (unpublished PhD. thesis: University of 
London, 1991); S. B. Edgington, “The First Crusade: reviewing the evidence’, The First 
Crusade, Origins and Impact, ed. J. Phillips (Manchester, 1997), pp. 55-77; S. B. Edgington, 
‘Albert of Aachen reappraised’, From Clermont to Jerusalem ed. A. V. Murray (Turnhout, 
1998), pp. 55-68; Albert of Aachen, Historia Ierosolinutana, ed. S. B. Edgington (Oxford, 
2007), hereafter AA. 

'8 For Peter the Hermit see J. Flori, Pierre PErmite et la Première Croisade (Paris, 
1999); see also H. Hagenmeyer, Peter der Eremite (Leipzig, 1879); E. O. Blake and 
C. Morris. ‘A hermit goes to war: Peter and the origins of the First Crusade,’ Studies in 
Church History 22 (1984), pp 79-107; M. D. Coupe, ‘Peter the Hermit—A reassessment,’ 
Nottingham Medieval Studies 31 (1987), pp. 37-45 and below pp. 198-201. 

18 S, B. Edgington, ‘Albert of Aachen reappraised’, p. 55. 

18t AA xxili-iv. 

185 Knoch, Studien zu Albert von Aachen, p. 89; AA xxiv-v. 


86 CHAPTER TWO 


186 As Albert based his history primarily on oral sources, ‘the 


crusades. 

narration of those who were present’,'®’ and epic songs his is a very 
valuable work, independent of the other traditions, so much so, that 
the opinion of John France is that ‘given the early date and the nature 
of his sources Albert’s work deserves to be treated as an eyewitness 
account.’!% 

As a social historian Albert is extremely valuable. Not only is his 
vocabulary far richer than that of his contemporaries, but also he 
reported vivid details that give an insight into social life, such as 
the falcons of the lords dying of thirst as the First Crusade crossed 
Anatolian plateau. The manner of Albert’s description of events was 
straightforward, lively and full of anecdote. In contrast to the north- 
ern French revisers of the Gesta Francorum, Albert did not organise his 
material to suit theological themes, in fact his biblical citations were, as 
Susan Edgington notes, mainly references to well-known gospels and 
the psalms.!*” Nor did Albert engage in displays of classically inspired 
rhetorical oratory. His main stylistic peculiarity was a very helpful one 
for a study of Albert’s language of social order: he was fond of form- 
ing couplets from synonymous words. As Edgington puts it, ‘Albert 
was addicted to duplication. He duplicated nouns, like cedes et strages, 
mema et muri, adjectives such as nudus et vacuus, fessus et gravatus; verbs, as 
in videre et intelligere and offere et dare.’'*' This habit of Albert’s makes it 
easier to establish social terms that he considered to be synonymous, 
such as magni and nobilies, parvi and ignobiles. 

Albert was aware of the existence and importance of social gradations 
and used the terms ordo, gradus, manus and status to express them. In a 
very interesting passage concerning the departure of great princes on 
the crusade he wrote that along with so many capitanei primei ‘were no 
few sequaces and inferiores: servi, ancillae; married and unmarried maids; 
men and women of every ordo.’'** Most of the early crusading historians 


18 S, Runciman, A History of the Crusades, 3 (fifth edition: London, 1991), 1, 331. 
187 AA i.1 (2): relatione nota fierent ab hits qui presentes affuissent. See also AA iii.2 (138). 
'88 John France, Victory in the East, p. 381 

189 AA iii.2 (140). 

0 S, B. Edgington, The ‘Historia Iherosolimitana’ of Albert of Aachen, a critical edi- 
tion (unpublished PhD. thesis: University of London, 1991), p. 41. I am grateful to 
S. B. Edgington for permission to quote from her thesis. 

19! Tbid., p. 31. 

19 AA ii.24 (100):...non paucos affisse sequaces et inferiores, servos, ancillas, nuptas et innuptas, 
cuiusque ordinis, viros ac mulieres. 


THE EARLY HISTORIANS 87 


did not go beyond simple bipartite schema, rich and poor, for the social 
structure of the First Crusade; here Albert was indicating his awareness 
of a variety of ordines among the inferiores. Even Raymond of Aguilers, 
who wrote with particular interest in the activity of the pauperes, did not 
have this conscious sense of gradation among the lower ranks. Albert 
similarly differentiated ordines within the ranks of the princes. In his 
account of Pope Urban Is call to the crusade at Clermont, he wrote 
that ‘the great principes, of every ordo and gradus vowed to undertake 
the expedition. !” 

The implied gradations among the nobility were reflected in his 
vocabulary. A social group between the nobles and commoners, soldiers 
in the following of Count Baldwin of Boulogne, probably footsoldiers, 
were also termed a plebeius ordo by Albert.!™ He also made a reference 
to the city of Edessa having inhabitants of every status.' It seems 
that Albert adopted a hierarchical framework for social order, where a 
grouping was defined by its social ‘status’, rather than the framework 
of the ‘three orders’ that grouped together those who fought, prayed 
and worked by function.'”° 

Of all the early crusading sources the Historia Therosolimitana has the 
most sophisticated vocabulary and understanding of the lower social 
orders. For example, unnoticed by the other historians were those 
people brought along as servants to the princes. Servi and ancillae, as 
noted above, were listed among those inferiors who accompanied the 
captains of the first rank.” 

A common term for Albert, used to indicate a fundamental bipartite 
division in the crusade, was ignobiles. It never appeared other than in 
the couplet nobiles et ignobiles. It appears, for example, in an important 
passage concerning the plague of August 1098 among the Christian 
forces in Antioch, where both nobiles et ignobiles wept over the death of 
Adhémar, the papal legate.!”® Soon afterwards the losses in the city 
due to plague were so great that ‘both nobiles et ignobiles gave up the 
spirit of life.’'°? Furthermore ‘whether equites or pedites, nobiles et ignobiles, 


193 AA i.5 (8): ... magnique principes, cuiusque ordinis et gradus... 

19 AA Tii.11 (156). 

19 AA ii.l9 (168). 

1% For the ‘three orders’ see G. Duby, The Three Orders, Feudal Society Imagined (Chicago, 
1978). 

197 AA ii.24 (100). 

198 AA v.4 (342). 

199 AA v.4 (344): Tam nobiles quam ignobiles spiritum vite exalarent. 


88 CHAPTER TWO 


monachi et clerici, parvi et magni, to say nothing of the female gender, 
more than 100 thousand were laid waste by death without being struck 
down by swords.’ While parvi et magni seems to be synonymous with 
nobiles et ignobiles in this passage, the appearance of clergy and fighters 
alongside them has confused overtones of the notion of ‘three orders.’ 
The image created of the Christian army here is one in which there 
was a basic horizontal division between the great and the lesser men, 
with a separate, vertical, order of clergy and indeed a further distinct 
grouping, women. 

Another couplet parvi et magni was used independently but with the 
same sense in several instances, particularly those where formal deci- 
sions were made.””' In all of these the point of the couplet seems to be 
to indicate the consent of the entirety of the population to a decision. 
One variation on magni et parvi was that of magni et pusilli. It occurred in 
an interesting passage in which it is joined with primores et subditi, a rare 
phrase but expressive of a social relationship between the two orders, 
the ‘magnates and subordinates.’ In August 1099, at Jerusalem, magni et 
pusilli, primores et subditi, planned to return home.*” Again the point of 
the couplets was to emphasise the unanimity of feeling on the issue. 

A less frequently used term in the Historia Lherosolimitana for the lower 
of two basic social orders was minores. When Baldwin first triumphantly 
entered the city of Edessa, 6 February 1098, everyone ran to meet 
him, whether maiores or minores.” During the siege of Antioch, towards 
the end of 1097, due to his success in a counter attack against those 
raiders from the city threatening the Christian foragers, the glorious 
iuvenis, Engelrand, son of Hugh of Saint-Pol, was lifted up with the 
goodwill and applause of all persons mazores ac minores.*** In August 1099 
Daimbert, archbishop of Pisa, unexpectedly encountered Raymond 
of Toulouse, Robert of Normandy and Robert of Flanders, returning 
from Jerusalem, near Latakia. Albert gave an implied indication of the 
untrustworthy nature of the future controversial patriarch of Jerusalem 
through a description of the over-effusive greeting that Daimbert then 


200 AA v.4 (344):...tam equites quam pedites, nobiles et ignobiles, monachi et clerici, parvi et 
magni, quin sexus femineus supra centum milia sine ferro morte vastati sunt. 

%1 AA ii.32 (114); ii.37 (124); iii.22 (172); iv.46 (320); v.4 (344); v.27 (372); v.36 (386); 
vi.37 (450); vi.58 (482); vii.37 (540); vii.37 (540); viii.18 (610); x.37 (752). 

202 AA vi.54 (474). 

%3 AA iii.20 (168). 

204 AA iii.49 (216). For Engelrand see A. V. Murray, The Crusader Kingdom, 
pp. 192-3. 


THE EARLY HISTORIANS 89 


proceeded to make. Daimbert was described as weeping with joy and 
rushing upon the necks of everyone, maiores ac minores, to kiss them 
all warmly, declaring everyone to be the sons and allies of the living 
God.? 

Albert twice used the term egeni as a means of indicating the desti- 
tute. At the funeral of Guy of Possesse and Walo of Lille, during the 
siege of Nicea, a large amount of alms were generously distributed to 
the egent and the mendici.2”° In a very interesting comment on the effect 
of hardship on the different social classes, Albert wrote that during 
the siege of Jerusalem a rich supply of wine always abounded among 
the primores. For the egent, however, even drinking water was in short 
supply.” 

The term vulgus was an important and much used one in the 
Historia ITherosolmitana. In a significant passage concerning Peter the 
Hermit, Albert described how ‘through his assiduous warnings and 
summonses and by calling upon bishops, abbots, clerics, monks, then 
the most noble laity, the princes of various kingdoms, and the whole 
of the vulgus, whether pure or unchaste, adulterers, murderers, thieves, 
perjurers, robbers, everybody, in fact, of the Christian faith, even the 
feminine sex, all joyfully undertook the journey, led by penitence.” 
In a manner similar to his description of those who died of plague at 
Antioch, noted above, Albert was presenting the crusade as consisting 
of the order of clergy, then the laity, both great and lesser (including 
conspicuous numbers of criminals). Additionally the presence of women 
was significant enough to be noted and again they were outside the 
bipartite schema, clergy and laity. 

The implicit connection between the vulgus and irresponsible, sedi- 
tious, behaviour created by the inclusion of the unchaste and crimi- 
nals under the term is sustained in Albert’s writing concerning the 
People’s Crusade. He described Peter’s following as ‘the rebellious and 


205 AA vi.57 (481). 

206 AA ii.29 (112). For Guy of Possesse see J. Riley-Smith, First Crusaders, p. 210. 
For Walo of Lille there are no other references other than by William of Tyre WT 
(203). 

207 AA vi.7 (412). 

208 AA i.2 (2-4): Huius ergo admonitione assidua et invocatione, episcopi, abbates, clerici, 
monachi, demde laici nobilissimi dwersorum regnorum principes, totumque vulgus, tam casti quam 
incesti, adulteri, homicide, fures, periurt, praedones, unwersum scilicet genus Christiane professionis, 
quin sexus femineus penitentia ducti ad hanc letanter concurrerunt viam. 


90 CHAPTER TWO 

incorrigible vulgus on foot’ when they set off from Nish, 4 July 1096.?°° 
When, in mid-June 1098, the Christian forces in Antioch were experi- 
encing demoralisation and desertions, a vision of St Ambrose of Milan 
was reported to the crusaders. ‘The priest to whom Ambrose appeared 
was unsure whether the expedition was a genuinely pious enterprise, 
because very many of the vulgus had been motivated by an improper 
lightness of mind.?!° 

Thereafter the term vulgus was used in a less pejorative sense. It was 
his term of choice for unarmed commoners, especially when there 
were large numbers of women present.?'! Albert applied two interest- 
ing adjectives to the vulgus during his account of the siege of Antioch. 
Trapped in the city by Kerbogha, famine led the inactive and modicum 
vulgus to devour the leather from their shoes.”!? While the ‘middle com- 
moners’ were driven to eating their shoes, the humile vulgus, the ‘lowly 
commoners’ were those whom were ignorant of the fact that some 
princes were conspiring to flee the city and abandon them.*'’ Given 
that it seems unlikely there were any significant layers of people beneath 
those barely surviving on worn leather, these adjectives were probably 
employed to elicit sympathy for the vulgus rather than to indicate a 
sense of hierarchy among them. 

A priest, Godschalk, leader of one of the contingents of the People’s 
Crusade, was described as gathering together more than 15,000 soldiers 
and pedestre vulgus.*'* It would be natural to understand this distinction 
to be between fighting forces and non-combatants, but for the fact that 
elsewhere the pedestre vulgus were clearly fighters. Thus it is likely that 
Albert intended to convey that Gottschalk had gathered to himself 
15,000 knights and footsoldiers. When the battle against Kerbogha 
began, a whole band of archers of the class of pedestre vulgus were sent 
ahead.” In Albert’s description of the battle of Ascalon, the Christians 
cavalry charged into the midst of their enemies accompanied by the 


209 AA 1.12 (24): Pedestris vulgus rebellis et incorrigibilis. 

210 AA iv.38 (307). 

21! Albert nevertheless used vulgus as a masculine noun, rather than neuter, its clas- 
sical form. 

212 AA iv.34 (300). 

215 AA iv.39 (308). 

214 AA 1.23 (22). For Godschalk see J. Riley-Smith, First Crusaders, p. 209. 

21) AA iv.49 (324). See also J. France, Victory in the East, p. 290. 


THE EARLY HISTORIANS 91 
war cry of the pedestre vulgus.” 
one dying, except a few of the pedestre vulgus. 

Albert recorded that during the siege of Nicea a certain Turkish 
soldier flung rocky stones in the middle of the vulgus with both hands.?® 
The vulgus here were sufficiently close to the enemy that it seems that 
they might have been playing a part in the battle. Equally, it could 
simply have been that, anticipating a breakthrough, non-combatants 
drew too close to the city. This seems to be the case for the two uses of 
vulgus that arose in Albert’s description of the fall of Jerusalem. Here, in 
both instances, the vulgus were described as crowding around the walls, 
ready to pour into the city once it had been breached.*'” These are 
probably better understood to be a crowd of non-combatant poor than 
the common footsoldiers for whom Albert seemed to prefer the phrase 
pedestre vulgus. Once inside the city it was the vulgus who, at Solomon’s 
Palace, inflicted a massacre of excessive cruelty on the Muslims.*? 

A key term for the lower social orders in other early crusading sources, 
especially in the work of Raymond of Aguilers, was pauperes. For Albert 
of Aachen, however, it was a relatively infrequent term. The pauperes 
appear in the Historia Lherosolimitana almost always as a passive category, 
the weak and poor who require charity or assistance. There is only 
a limited sense in the Historia Lherosolimitana that the pauperes were an 
active grouping, although Albert did once indicate that he considered 
their presence on the crusade to accord with the holy nature of the 
expedition through his use of the phrase pauperes Christi”?! 

With the exception of Baldric of Dol, for whom as discussed above, 
the term meant ‘commoners’, all the early crusading historians, includ- 
ing Albert of Aachen used the term plebs very broadly, to indicate ‘the 
people’. An important example, however, that shows Albert consciously 
using the adjective plebeius for a specific ordo relates to Baldwin’s con- 
trol of ‘Tarsus in September 1098. Having just wrested the city from 
Tancred, Baldwin refused to let 300 soldiers into the city who had 
come from the main army to reinforce Tancred. ‘These soldiers and 
the whole of the plebeius ordo from the escort of Count Baldwin pleaded 


The victory was miraculous, with no 
217 


216 AA vi.47 (464). 
217 AA vi.50 (468). 
218 AA ii.33 (118). 
219 AA vi.19 (426); vi.21 (428). 
20 AA vi.25 (436). 
21 AA v.14 (354). 


92 CHAPTER TWO 


with him to let them inside the city.” Since Baldwin had left his wife 
and baggage behind when he had parted from the main army to enter 
Cilicia this grouping making a protest were combatants, in all likelihood 
footsoldiers. A similar formulation was used in Albert’s description of 
the plague in Antioch, August 1098, where many of the princes together 
with a plebeian class (plebeia manus) were dying.” 

When Albert used the term plebs to indicate the poor, he qualified it. 
In the winter of 1097, during the siege of Antioch, a famine led to an 
uncountable mortality of the humilis plebs.?** As a result Duke Godfrey 
agreed to lead an expedition so as to restore the adtenuata plebs.* The 
other three occurrences of plebs in the Historia [herosolimitana arise from 
the phrase plebs Christiana, ‘the Christian people.’ In each cases Albert 
seems to have envisaged it as an all-embracing term for Christian 
society. He wrote of the army at Antioch overcoming the enemies of 
the plebs Christiana;”® of King Baldwin I stating that he was prepared 
to distribute the gold from the Lord’s Sepulchre and altar to pay the 
knights and defenders of the plebs Christiana; and of Baldwin I refer- 
ring to his nobles as primores of the plebs Christiana.” 

Since Albert was writing at Aachen, in Lotharingia, his use of the 
term milites deserves a great deal of attention, as it considerably extents 
the geographical extent of an investigation into the social content of the 
term and, in particular, to a province in which the use of ministeriales as 
warriors was far more common than in France and Italy. The origins of 
this class, who would later be assimilated into the nobility, was servile, 
although their status was improving at the time of the First Crusade.*”* 
Did this difference in the composition of the warrior class affect Albert’s 
understanding of the social content of the term milites? 

The meaning of miles in the Historia [herosolimitana is discussed in full 
in Chapter Five, but here it is worth noting the one possible example 
where regional differences in the use of the term might have been an 
issue. When faced with the outbreak of plague in Antioch, August 1098, 
Albert described how Duke Godfrey of Lotharingia recalled being in 


222 


2 AA ii.11 (156). 
3 AA v.14 (354). 
AA ii.52 (220). 
23 AA ii.58 (228). 
2 AA iv.1 (248). 

?7 AA vii.62 (572). 

38 AA x.57 (770). 

°° See B. Arnold, German Knighthood 1050-1300 (Clarendon Press, 1985), passim. 


NNN NN WN 


i 


THE EARLY HISTORIANS 93 


Italy with Henry IV, at which time ‘in the pestilential month of August 
500 very brave milites and many nobiles had died [in Rome]. The 
incident was presumably that of 1083, where Bernold of St Blaisen 
(Constance) spoke only of milites.”' The distinction between being a 
noble and being a miles is untypical of Albert and it might be that in 
this case we are dealing with a description of ministeriales as they were 
particularly likely to have been present in an imperial army. 

Albert attached to the Christian fighting forces the phrase milites Christi 
on twenty-five occasions, it was evidently an expression he favoured 
greatly. An interesting variant used three times by Albert was milites 
peregrin” This latter use suggests that in some cases at least Albert must 
have considered there to be a pious content to the phrase milites Christa, 
although he used pedites Christi simply to identify Christian footsoldiers 
from non-Christian forces and by analogy it cannot be taken for granted 
that all the instances of milites Christi in the Historia Therosolimitana are 
examples of a particular theological framework held by the author. The 
fact that no individual knight was described as a miles Christi by Albert 
puts him in distinct contrast with the anonymous author of the Gesta 
Francorum who conveyed in his a work a stronger spiritual dimension 
in the practice of being a miles on the First Crusade.’ 

As with his vocabulary for the lower social orders, Albert had a rich 
and varied range of terms for the upper classes. The perspective they 
offer on the social structure of the crusade is discussed in Chapter 
Seven. 

Albert of Aachen was unusual in early crusading historians in that 
his reports were evenly spread across all the social orders. Whereas 
Raymond of Aguilers paid particular attention to the activities of the 
pauperes, the anonymous author of the Gesta Francorum the milites and 
Fulcher the nobility, Albert was much more balanced. His vocabulary 
was rich and nuanced, with a straightforward style largely unadorned 
by classical allusion or biblical citation. ‘This makes him a key source 
for social ordo on the First Crusade. 


250 AA v.13 (354): In pestifero mense Augusto quingenti fortissimi milites et plures nobilies 
obierint. 

”1 I. S. Robinson, Henry IV, p. 255. Bernold of St Blaisen (Constance), Chronicon, 
ed. I. S. Robinson, Die Chroniken Bertholds von Reichenau und Bernolds von Konstanz, MGH 
Scriptores Rerum Germanicorum nova series 14 (Hannover, 2003), p. 432. 

32 AA i.22 (44); iv.30 (292); iv.42 (314). 

33 See above p. 20. 


CHAPTER THREE 


PAUPERES AND THE FIRST CRUSADE: 
FROM THE PREACHING OF THE CRUSADE 
TO THE RISE OF THE VISIONARIES 


Six months before the main armies of Europe set forth on the crusade 
under the leadership of princes, a more turbulent crowd embarked on 
the expedition under a variety of leaders: peasant visionaries, rogue 
magnates, mercenary commanders. This, the first wave of Christian 
armies making for Jerusalem, has become known as the Peasants’ 
Crusade or People’s Crusade, in contrast to the Princes’ Crusade that 
followed them soon after. Most of narrative accounts of the activities of 
‘poor’ of the First Crusade have tended to concentrate on the People’s 
Crusade, after the defeat of which, at Civetot, 21 October 1096, their 
role is often depicted as being negligible, at best a burden to the better- 
armed sections of the army. 

In 1921, Frederick Duncalf published his study of the People’s 
Crusade, helping shift a perception that the participants were separated 
from those of the Princes’ Crusade by a wide social gulf and were 
something of a rabble.' Duncalf pointed out that although the propor- 
tion of knights was indeed far less than for the later expeditions, they 
did include members of the nobility and displayed a high degree of 
organisation; especially the early contingents of the People’s Crusade. 
The first group, who set off under the leadership of a knight from 
Poissy, Walter Sanzavohir, reached Constantinople, 20 July 1096, without 
significant mishap.” Duncalf’s article, primarily a narrative of events 
based upon the account in Albert of Aachen’s Historia Lherosolimitana, 
concluded with an argument that the economic background to the 
appeal of the Crusade was one of prosperity rather than poverty. ‘This, 
rather unconvincing conclusion, was somewhat tangential to the study 
and left unconsidered the question of the size and contribution of the 
survivors of the People’s Crusade to the subsequent united army. 


! F Duncalf, ‘The Peasants’ Crusade,’ American Historical Review, 26 (1920/1), 
pp. 440-453. 
2? For Walter Sanzavohir see J. Riley-Smith, First Crusaders, p. 224. 


This is an open access chapter distributed under the terms of the CC-BY-NC License. 


96 CHAPTER THREE 


The key study of the role of the pauperes on the First Crusade, there- 
fore, was that of Walter Porges published in 1946.° At the core of 
his study was a belief that ‘by the time the siege of Antioch was well 
underway, the non-combatants—the sick, crippled, and destitute, the 
women, children, and clergy—had captured and maintained an abso- 
lute and overwhelming mapjority.’* Although the article did not explore 
in full the consequence of this observation for the internal dynamics 
and tensions of the expedition, it did allow Porges to emphasise the 
importance of the role of the large numbers of clergy present in acting 
as the guardians of the common welfare, with responsibility above all 
for the poor. He was particularly insightful with regard to events at 
Antioch immediately before battle between the besieged Christian forces 
and Kerbogha, atabeg of Mosul, 28 June 1098. Porges demonstrated 
that it was an alliance of the poorer Christians with the clergy, led by 
the papal legate, Bishop Adhémar of Le Puy, which, via visions and 
miracles, insisted the magnates lead the Christian forces into battle.® 
On this issue Porges has not been superseded, despite the publication 
of a number of subsequent studies. 

Colin Morris’s detailed study of the finding of the Holy Lance (1984) 
added an important political dimension to the context of the discovery 
of that particular relic, namely the rivalry between the Norman and 
the Provengal contingents.’ His defence of the reliability of the account 
of Raymond of Aguilers was an important corrective to the view of 
the key historian for that event, whose credibility as a witness had been 
subject to challenge, particularly by J. H. Hill and L. L. Hill.? Morris’s 
observation that the outlook of the visionary Peter Bartholomew was 
shaped by three influences, Provengal, social, and clerical, was astute and 
while only briefly substantiated in the short article, is nevertheless borne 
out by a close examination of the content of all of the visions.’ 


3 W. Porges, “The Clergy, the Poor and the Non-Combatants on the First Crusade,’ 
Speculum, 21 (1946), pp. 1-21. 

* Ibid., p. 4. 

5 Ibid., p. 9. 

ë Ibid., p. 17. See below pp. 118-130. 

7 Colin Morris, ‘Policy and Visions: the case of the Holy Lance at Antioch,’ in War 
and Government in the Middle Ages: essays in honour of J. O. Prestwich, ed. J. Gillingham and 
J. C. Holt (Woodbridge, 1984), pp. 33-45. 

8 See above pp. 28-9. 

? Morris, “Policy and Visions,’ pp. 41—2. For Peter Bartholomew and an analysis of 
his visions see below pp. 121-147. 


FROM THE PREACHING TO THE RISE OF THE VISIONARIES 97 


Randall Rogers’s subsequent study (1992) of the career of the most 
prominent visionary, Peter Bartholomew, in relation to the pauperes on 
the First Crusade was disappointing.'® Ironically, given the title of his 
work, Rogers did not include the perspective of the poor in the context 
of the discovery of the Holy Lance, except as a passive body in need 
of alms." Although he referenced Porges, Rogers failed to consider the 
earlier argument that behind the discovery of the Holy Lance was an 
active body of the poor, in alliance with the clergy, who through visions 
were articulating their own perspective and in particular their desire that 
the Christian forces should march out against Kerbogha before deser- 
tions by the magnates caused the expedition to disintegrate. Rogers’s 
most valuable observation was a passing one, that ‘the thoroughness 
with which the poor and pilgrims conducted their sackings were in part 
a consequence of the structure of the expedition and the economic 
impulses of crusading. Looting captured cities was a primary source 
of the income so essential for continued crusading,’’? Not only is this 
statement true but the sources also allow considerable insight into the 
tension that existed within the First Crusade over the distribution of 
booty and its eventual resolution in favour of the poor in the form of 
a ‘law of conquest.” This ‘law’ did not allocate any captured goods or 
houses by right to the leaders of the army, but insisted that all booty 
be considered the inviolate property of its discoverer. 

Rogers’s discussion of the trial by ordeal of Peter Bartholomew fell 
short of that of Morris’s brief account and was wrong in asserting that 
‘the poor exercised no independent political role subsequent to the fall 
of Peter Bartholomew.’'' As discussed below, an alliance between the 
pauperes and the familiares of Count Raymond of ‘Toulouse drove their 
prince on to Jerusalem, both from ‘Arga and from an attempt to stall 
at Tripoli. The lower social orders also asserted their property rights in 
advance of the storming of Jerusalem. Rogers stated in his conclusion 


10 R., Rogers, ‘Peter Bartholemew and the Role of “The Poor” in the First Crusade’, 
in Warriors and Churchmen in the High Middle Ages, ed. T. Reuter (London, 1992), pp. 
109-122. 

" Tbid., p. 115. 

2 Thid., p. 117. 

'S See below pp. 153-7; see also J. Prawer, The Latin Kingdom of Jerusalem (London, 
1972), p. 65, and Crusader Institutions (Oxford, 1980), pp. 253-4; see also W. G. Zajac, 
‘Captured Property on the First Crusade,’ The First Crusade, Origins and Impact, ed. 
J. Phillips (Manchester, 1997), pp. 153-180. 

“ Rogers, ‘Peter Bartholomew’, p. 121. 


98 CHAPTER THREE 


that he considered the poor to have been a grouping on the crusade who 
‘tried to influence its course, but gave no evidence that he believed 
they actually did so, other than as auxiliaries in military activities. 

A few modern longer works give some attention to the role of the 
poor during the First Crusade.’ Particular mention must be made 
of Norman Cohn’s distinct perspective in The Pursuit of the Millennium 
where a short but vivid section attempts to place the violence of the 
poor in a context of wider medieval traditions of messianic fervour.” 
This argument certainly carries some weight and draws attention to the 
fact that the official ideology of the First Crusade, as represented by 
Pope Urban II, might not have been the dominant one in the minds of 
the majority of the participants. Gohn’s work is a useful corrective to 
those historians who simply take the hegemony of the senior princes for 
granted. A close study of the sources, however, particularly the work of 
the historian and eyewitness with the greatest interest in the thoughts of 
the poor, Raymond of Aguilers, does not reveal a feverish subterranean 
messianism among the poor but in fact a pragmatic adoption of ideas 
that would have been recognised as orthodox by the senior clergy. This 
is not to belittle the levels of insubordination evidenced by the poor, 
but simply to recognise that their actions were justified by reference to 
current religious practices, rather than violent eschatological language. 
Peter Bartholomew was no Jan Brockelson." 

Possibly the most significant study of the poor on the First Crusade 
is the least readily available. In the introduction to his unpublished 
PhD. edition of Raymond of Aguilers’s Historia Francorum qui ceperunt 
Iherusalem, John France undertook a considerable analysis of the political 


© Rogers, ‘Peter Bartholomew’, p. 122. 

© P. Alphandéry, L’Europe et Lidée de Croisades, 1 (Paris, 1954); N. Daniel, The Arabs 
and Mediaeval Europe, (London, 1979), pp. 120-135; J. Riley-Smith, The First Crusade 
and the Idea of Crusading (London, 1986) chapters 3 and 4; J. Flori, Pierre L’Ermite et la 
Première Croisade (Paris, 1999) chapters 17 and 18. 

1 N. Cohn, The Pursuit of the Millennium (London, 1957: Fifth edition 1972), pp. 
61-70. 

'8 Jan Brockelson (John of Leyden), leader of an Anabaptist sect and insurrection 
in Münster (1534-5), see N. Cohn, In Pursuit of the Millenium, pp. 261—280. See also J. 
Riley-Smith, “Christian Violence and the Crusades,’ A. Sapir Abulafia, ed., Religious 
Violence between Christians and Jews: Medieval Roots, Modern Perspectives (New York, 2002), 
pp. 3-20. On eschatology and the First Crusade see J. Rubenstein, ‘How, or How 
Much, to Reevaluate Peter the Hermit’, in S. J. Ridyard ed., The Medieval Crusade 
(Woodbridge, 2004), pp. 53-70. 


FROM THE PREACHING TO THE RISE OF THE VISIONARIES 99 


activities of the lower social orders. Some of this material has found its 
way into his later work.” France added to Porges’ view of the finding of 
the Holy Lance an assessment of the first vision of Peter Bartholomew 
that drew attention to those elements hostile to the princes.” He also 
saw the vision following the death of Adhémar, | August 1098, as one 
that ‘revealed the anger, fears and desires of the people.”! The vision 
was correctly analysed as ‘virtually a popular manifesto, but one with 
a strong Provençal bias.” France also convincingly showed that there 
is a tension between the elements of the visions that articulate the 
needs of the poor and those that reserve a special position for Count 
Raymond of Toulouse.” This is the key, in fact, to understanding the 
fall of Peter Bartholomew, immediately after he gave voice to a vision 
that stood too firmly in the camp of Count Raymond.” In provid- 
ing an introduction to one particular author France was necessarily 
restrained from expanding these important insights into a full account 
of the career of Peter Bartholomew and the political role of the poor 
on the First Crusade. 

A precondition for a thorough analysis of the role of the pauperes on 
the First Crusade has to be a close examination of the vocabulary of 
the major sources, in particular their complex use of a variety of terms 
for the lower social orders. The value of building a discussion on the 
results of the opening chapters of this book is that a tight focus can be 
obtained on the subject matter and it becomes possible to construct a 
fuller account of their role than has hitherto been achieved. But there 
is a further source of material that can be tapped, particularly with 
the setting forth of the expeditions and that is the substantial annalistic 
evidence. ‘Typically, an annalist would only write a sentence or two about 
the crusade: ‘in this year was the great expedition to Jerusalem’, or some 
similar terse comment. But occasionally they would add an observation, 
which although brief, when compiled with the remarks by all the other 
annalists of the day, amounts to something of a treasure trove. 


19 J. France, “The crisis of the First Crusade: from the defeat of Kerbogha to the 
departure from Arqa’, Byzantion, 40 (1970), pp. 276-308; J. France, Victory in the East 
(Cambridge, 1994), Chapter 10. 

2 RA XXX, 

21 RA XXXI. 

2 RA XXXII. 

3 RA XXXVII. 

** See below pp. 143-7. 


100 CHAPTER THREE 


In his article on the People’s Crusade, Frederic Duncalf advanced 
the argument that the movement took place against ‘favourable eco- 
nomic conditions rather than in famine and distress.” Duncalf wished 
to reinforce his view that the expeditions of the People’s Crusade 
were better organised than is generally given credit for. But while the 
main thrust of his argument was valid, this particular assertion needs 
amendment, for it gives the impression of an untroubled background 
to the preaching of the crusade. In fact, while the year 1096 might 
have been a relatively prosperous one, there is little doubt that the years 
immediately preceding the departure of people on the First Crusade 
were extremely difficult ones all over northern Europe. 

An examination of the annalistic evidence makes clear that an 
acute upsurge of famine and plague took place at this time. ‘Taking 
as the basis for a survey those annals published in the 38 volumes of 
the MGH Scriptores series, it can be seen that for the year 1092 there 
were three reports of a plague. Additionally, Bernold of St Blaisen (or 
Constance) recorded a famine for the whole of Saxony.” For 1093, four 
annals report a plague, one a famine and one both.’ With respect to 
the entries for 1094, however, twenty annals record plague, two famine 
and three both.” Furthermore Orderic Vitalis wrote of England that 
a drought that year gave rise to famine;*’ Bernold that a plague led to 
an increase in penitence and confession*’ and Frutolf that it was a year 
of plague, hurricanes and floods.*! The upsurge of plague waned the 
following year, 1095, but it was still reported in seven annals, two of 
which recorded both plague and famine.” Six annals reported famine 
for 1095, including Sigebert’s, which added that as a result theft and 
arson against the rich had increased.” Additionally the Annals of the 


> E Duncalf, ‘The Peasants’ Crusade’, p. 452. 

°° MGH SS 17, 744; 30, 527; 2, 246. Bernold of St Blaisen (Constance), Chronicon, 
I. S. Robinson ed., Die Chroniken Bertholds von Reichenau und Bernolds von Konstanz, MGH 
Scriptores rerum germanicorum nova series 14 (Hannover, 2003), p. 494. 

27 MGH SS: 3, 134; 6, 394; 9, 568; 17, 277; 17, 744; 24, 36. 

°8 MGH SS: 3, 134; 4, 21; 4, 29; 5, 8; 5, 27; 6, 366; 8, 547; 10, 21; 10, 35; 10, 54; 
10, 54; 10, 253; 11, 103; 16, 16; 16, 604; 16, 726; 17, 14; 17, 294; 17, 585; 17, 744; 
21, 313; 27, 521; 30, 366. 

2 OV 5,8. 

3 Bernold of St. Blaisen, Chronicon, 515. 

3! Frutolf, Chronicon, Frutolfs und Ekkehards Chroniken und die Anonyme Kaiserchronik, ed. 
E-J. Schmale and I. Schmale-Ott (Darmstadt, 1972), p. 106. 

® Plague, MGH SS: 5, 8; 5, 1301; 10, 111; 13, 648; 17, 713. Plague and famine, 
MGH SS, 8, 547; EA 123. 

3 MGH SS: 4, 29; 5, 27; 6, 367 (Sigebert); 14, 307; 19, 2; 23, 803. 


FROM THE PREACHING TO THE RISE OF THE VISIONARIES 101 


four Masters reported that in Ireland up to a quarter of the population 
died of famine in 1095.** Astonishingly, the only annals to record any 
natural disaster for 1096 were Annales Pragenses, to where the plague 
had evidently spread, and the Peterborough version of the Anglo-Saxon 
Chronicle, which reported the continuation of famine in England.” In 
1097, Ekkehard and Sigebert reported a famine and a plague respec- 
tively, but no other annal did so. In 1098 not one annal or chronicle 
reported a natural disaster. 

These figures are not unproblematic, as some later annals incorpo- 
rated earlier ones wholesale.” So, for example, information from the 
entries in the Annals of Rosenfeld or the Annals of Wiirzburg has not been 
used here, as at this point both were copies of the Annals of Hildesheim. 
The picture created by this information is nevertheless distinct enough 
to draw firm conclusions. Famine and plague were present but localised 
in 1092 and 1093, only to rage widely during the years 1094 and 1095, 
before abruptly ending. The preaching of the crusade, from November 
1095 and through 1096, took place then against a background of 
recent hardship and dislocation. Indeed, according to the brief entry 
in the Annals of St Blaisen for 1093, it was the plague that created the 
movement to Jerusalem.*’ 

The annalistic evidence is supported by the crusading sources. 
Guibert of Nogent, an eyewitness, reported that the preaching of the 
crusade took place at a time of famine, which had the consequence 
that the inopum greges learned to feed often on the roots of wild plants.** 
The famine reduced the wealth of all and was even threatening to the 
potentes”? Guibert condemned those magnates who stored food for profit 
during a year of famine, writing that they considered the anguish of 
the starving vulgus to be of little importance.” 

The Bavarian monk, Ekkehard, later abbot of Aura (1108-1125), 
wrote the relevant parts of his chronicle around 1105, having returned 


3t Annals of the Four Masters, ed. J. O’Donovan (Dublin, 1856), p. 949. 

3 MGH SS 3, 120; Anon. various, The Anglo-Saxon Chronicles, ed. and trans. Michael 
Swanton (London, 2000), p. 233. 

3 For a discussion of this problem in general see F Curschmann, Hungersnite im 
Mittelatler (Leipzig, 1900), pp. 2-5. For the Annals of Nieder-Altaich, Regensburg, Freising, 
Salzburg and Passau in particular see W. Wattenbach ed., Deutschlands Geschichtsquellen im 
Mittelalter (Tübingen, 1948), 1.3, 545-562. 

37 Annales Sancti Blasii, MGH SS 17, 277. 

*® GN 118. 

3 GN 118. 

GN 119. 


102 CHAPTER THREE 


Number of Annalistic Entries 


30 

E Famine 
25 

O Plague 
20 
15 
10 


cea ol E 


1092 1093 1094 1095 1096 1097 1098 


from Jerusalem where he had been a participant of the Crusade of 
1101 and had come across a libellus of the First Crusade.*! He reported 
in his chronicle that it was easy to persuade the Francigenae to go to 
the orient because for some years previously Gallia had been afflicted 
by civil disorder (seditio), famine and an excessive mortality.” Ekkehard 
vividly portrayed the appearance of a plague that caused limbs to wither 
through an invisible fire. It has plausibly been suggested that this was an 
outbreak of ergot poisoning among the rye crop, which would fit not 
only Ekkehard’s description but also the pattern of a sharp outbreak 
of plague that disappeared by the time of the following harvest.” 

In Robert the Monk’s account of the preaching of the crusade by 
Pope Urban II at the council of Clermont, specific mention of the 
shortage of food in Christendom formed part of the appeal.** If the 


EA 148. 

2 EA 140. 
EA 140: Tactus quisquam igne invisibili quacumque corporis parte tam diu sensibili, immo 
incomparabili tormento etiam inremediabiliter ardebat, quosque vel spiritum cum cruciatu vel cruciatum 
cum ipso tacto membro amitteret. Testantur hoc hactenus nonnulli manibus vel pedibus hac pena truncati. 
For Ergot poisoning, high temperatures and gangrenous limbs, see M. McMullen and 
C. Stoltenow, Ergot (Fargo, 2002). See also J. Sumption, Pilgrimage (paperback edition: 
London, 2002), p. 75; J. Riley-Smith, The First Crusaders, p. 16. 

"RM 728. 


FROM THE PREACHING TO THE RISE OF THE VISIONARIES 103 


contrast between the poverty of the Western lands and lands flowing 
in milk and honey (Exodus 3:8) did indeed form part of the official 
message concerning the crusade addressed to the magnates, then it was 
all the more likely to have been an aspect of the unrecorded sermons 
of those who from their own initiative were preaching to more lowly 
orders.” 

By the time for departure, however, especially for those leaving in 
the autumn of 1096, after the harvest, it was clear that yields for that 
year, on the continent, had recovered. Fulcher of Chartres, setting out 
in October 1096 with the contingent of Robert, duke of Normandy, 
wrote that there was a great abundance of grain and wine, so that there 
was no lack of bread for the travellers.“ Duncalf may have been right, 
therefore, to conjecture that the relatively successful march of the great 
crowds with Peter the Hermit, the itinerant preacher of the crusade,” 
and Walter Sanzavohir to Constantinople implied ample supplies were 
present. But the supplies for these early crusading contingents, setting 
out before the autumn harvest, would either have been costly grain 
purchased from the great chest with innumerable gold and silver coins 
in which Peter the Hermit stored the contributions given to him,” or 
else would have been livestock brought by the farmers. 

Walter Sanzavohir left Cologne shortly after Easter, 12 April 1096, 
and Peter soon after, on or around 20 April 1096, both too early to 
benefit from any improved grain or legume harvests but perhaps able 
to find sufficient resources from a revival of livestock numbers and milk 
products. Whether or not the armies of Walter and Peter departed with 
adequate provisions, Duncalf certainly underestimated the agricultural 
hardship of 1094-1095 and thus the sense of dislocation that would 
have formed the background to the dissemination of the news of the 
crusade in the winter of 1095 and the spring of 1096. 

There was clearly a massive response from the lower social orders 
to the idea of an expedition for God under the sign of the cross. 


*® ‘Freelance’ preaching, see J. Riley-Smith, The First Crusade, p. 31. 

© FC Lvi.2 (154). Although famine persisted in England, The Anglo-Saxon Chronicles, 
ed. and trans. Michael Swanton (London, 2000), p. 233. 

1 For Peter the Hermit see J. Flori, Pierre PErmite et la Première Croisade (Paris, 
1999). See also H. Hagenmeyer, Peter der Eremite (Leipzig, 1879); E. O. Blake and 
C. Morris. ‘A hermit goes to war: Peter and the origins of the First Crusade,’ Studies in 
Church History 22 (1984), pp. 79-107; M. D. Coupe, ‘Peter the Hermit—A Reassessment,’ 
Nottingham Medieval Studies 31 (1987), pp. 37—45. 

#8 AA i.12 (24). 


104 CHAPTER THREE 


Ekkehard was an eyewitness to the departure of people in Bavaria on 
the expedition and a key source for the People’s Crusade. He observed 
of the very first contingents that along with a great many legions of 
equites were as many troops of pedites and crowds of ruricolae, women 
and children.*” Ekkehard also noted that some of the plebs as well as 
persons of higher rank admitted to having taken the vow through 
misfortune.” Furthermore, a great part of them proceeded laden with 
wives and children and all their household goods.°! 

Guibert of Nogent, an eyewitness to the departure of people from 
northern France to join with Peter the Hermit’s contingent, observed 
exactly the same phenomena, that entire families of pauperes with carts 
full of their belongings joined the various contingents. He wrote that 
after the Council of Clermont: ‘the spirit of the pauperes was inflamed 
with great desire for this [expedition] so that none of them made any 
account of their small wealth, or properly saw to the sale of homes, 
vineyards and fields. ”? This passage is evidently a description of prop- 
erty-owning farmers, turning their fixed assets into ready wealth for 
the journey, even at much reduced prices. Guibert referred to the same 
body of people again, with additional detail: “There you would have 
seen remarkable things, clearly most apt to be a joke; you saw certain 
pauperes, whose oxen had been fitted to a two-wheel cart and iron-clad 
as though they were horses, so as to carry in the cart a few possessions 
together with small children.” Independently but with a similar turn 
of phrase, the northern French historian and the Bavarian chronicler 
found it noteworthy that peasant families participated in the crusade. 

Guibert also provided clear evidence that people from the very low- 
est layers of the eleventh-century social spectrum responded to the 
idea of the crusade. He noted that the meanest most common men 
(homines extremae vulgaritatis) appropriated the idea of the expedition for 
themselves. Further evidence of the presence of those at the very 
bottom of society at the outset of the movement comes from a variety 


9 EA 140. 

5 EA 140. 

| EA 140. 
GN 119:... pauperum animositas tantis ad hoc ipsum desiderits aspiravit ut eorum nemo de 
censuum parvitate tractaret, de domorum, vinearum et agrorum congruenti distractione curaret. 

5 GN 120: Videres mirum quiddam, et plane joco aptissimum, pauperes videlicet quosdam 
bobus biroto applicitis, eisdemque in modum equorum ferratis, substantiolas cum parvulis in carruca 
convehere. 


5 GN 300. 


FROM THE PREACHING TO THE RISE OF THE VISIONARIES 105 


of sources. The Anglo-Saxon chronicler, writing in Peterborough, had 
very little to say about the Crusade, but he did think it noteworthy that 
countless people set out, with women and children (wefan and cildan).* 
The near contemporary Annals of Augsburg say that along with war- 
riors, bishops, abbots, monks, clerics and men of diverse professions, 
‘serfs and women’ (coloni et mulieres) joined the movement.” For 1096 
Cosmas of Prague wrote that so many people departed for Jerusalem 
that there remained very few coloni in the urbes and villae of Germany 
and Eastern France.” 

The appearance of the term coloni is important here. Christopher 
‘Tyerman’s very impressive survey across the history of the crusades 
as to the various social groupings who took the cross expresses doubts 
when it comes to the question of serfs. Because, he argues, the serf had 
no freedom of action or choice, the serf could not participate in the 
movement independently of their master. Also their lack of resources 
meant that ‘it does seem to have been the case that...serfs did not 
become crusaders.’ But this precludes the possibility that some serfs 
took advantage of the crusading message to leave their homes with- 
out permission from their lords, hoping to survive on charity and the 
distribution of captured booty. 

That such a phenomena could happen in a crusading context is 
evident from the writings of Gerhoch, provost of Reichersberg, with 
regard to the departure of forces for the Second Crusade (1147). He 
noted that there was no lack of peasants and serfs on the expedition, 
‘the ploughs and services due to their lords having been abandoned 
without the knowledge or against the will of their lords.” That this 
insubordinate participation took place in regard to the First Crusade 1s 
suggested by the mention of coloni in the Annals of Augsburg, the chronicle 
of Cosmas, and also the Monte Cassino Chronicle, which reported that so 
great a commotion of men and women took place in all the regions 
of the world wishing to join the Holy Journey that ‘the father did not 
dare restrain the son, nor the wife the husband, and the dominus did 
not dare to restrain the servus. Because of the fear and love of God, 


5 Anon. various, The Anglo-Saxon Chronicles, p. 232. 

5 Annales Augustani, MGH SS, 3, 134. 

57 Cosmae Chron. Boemorum, MGH SS 11, 103. 

5 C. Tyerman, ‘Who Went on the Crusades?’ in B. Z. Kedar ed., The Horns of 
Hattin (Jerusalem, 1992), pp. 14—26, here p. 24. 

5 Gerhoch, De Investigatione Antichristi Liber I MGH Historica Libelli de Lite Imperatorum 
et pontificum, Saeculis XI et XII conscripti, 3 (Hanover, 1897), p. 374. 


106 CHAPTER THREE 


everyone was free to join the journey.® Marwan Nader assumes servus 
here stands for a serf,°' which is entirely possible, but even if its alterna- 
tive meaning of ‘servant’ was meant by the compiler of the history, the 
point still stands, that the usual bonds of authority could be undermined 
by the appeal of the crusade. 

The key figure in the mobilisation of the lower social orders on the 
First Crusade was Peter the Hermit. In an important passage concern- 
ing Peter the Hermit, the monk and historian Albert of Aachen, who 
had direct experience of the mobilisations for the crusade, described 
how through his powers of persuasion and his ability to inspire people 
to action, Peter mobilised all kinds of person, from senior clergy to 
the worst of criminals." Albert went to some length to indicate that 
Peter was preaching to all social layers and he drew attention to the 
preacher’s success in appealing to women. 

Guibert of Nogent, who wrote as an eyewitness to the preaching 
of Peter the Hermit, gave a very similar picture. He described Peter 
as moving through cities and towns surrounded by great multitudes 
and being given great donations. The fact that Peter the Hermit was 
described as travelling through towns and cities has been noted by E. 
O. Blake and C. Morris as showing that his was an urban audience.” 
The report of the donations of sizeable gifts suggests that Peter was 
obtaining some support from those with wealth in these urban centres. 
The evidence that Peter, nevertheless, had a particular appeal to the 
poor comes from Guibert’s observation that the vulgus, slender in posses- 
sions and abundant in numbers, clung to the hermit. By contrast with 
the princes these vulgus made no careful preparations for the journey.” 
Furthermore Peter was very generous to the pauperes with the gifts he 


°° Guibert also reported that the vulgus, from love of novelty, 
67 


was given. 
tried to obtain hairs from the tail of the Hermit’s donkey, as relics. 


° MC 174: Pater non audebat prohibere filium, nec uxor prohibere virum, et dominus non 


audebat prohibere servum. 

ĉl M. Nader, Burgesses and the burgess law in the Latin Kingdom of Jerusalem and Cyprus 
(1099-1325) (Aldershot, 2006), p. 20. 

& AA i.2 (2-4). 

° GN 121. 

® E, O. Blake and C. Morris, ‘A hermit goes to war: Peter and the origins of the 
First Crusade’, Studies in Church History 22, 1984, 79-107. 

SGN 121. 

& GN 121. 

87 GN 121. 


FROM THE PREACHING TO THE RISE OF THE VISIONARIES 107 


In a passage that could well have been that of an eyewitness, Baldric 
of Dol also noted a similar eagerness of the poor to believe in miracles 
in response to news of the expedition. Baldric wrote that the gens plebia 
displayed a cross that certain ‘foolish women’ (mulierculae) claimed had 
been made in heaven.” 

Once Peter and his following were underway the sources make it 
clear that the army was not a conventional one. Albert reported that 
the contingent of Walter Sanzavohir contained only eight knights;°° 
while that of Peter the Hermit was as innumerable as the sands of the 
sea and contained people who were foolish (insipientes) and rebellious 
(rebelles).’” Several times both Albert and Guibert described the contin- 
gent of Peter the Hermit as the vulgus. Albert again described Peter’s 
following as ‘rebellious’ and also this time ‘the incorrigible vulgus’ when 
they set off from Nish, 4 July 1096, with their carts.’’ That Albert was 
using the term vulgus in a pejorative manner is clear not only from the 
adjectives rebellis and incorrigibils but also from his later account of a 
vision in which St Ambrose of Milan appeared. In this vision the saint 
explained that not everyone had departed on the expedition in the 
proper spirit, some of the primores and very many of the vulgus had set 
about this through lightness of mind (pro levitate animi).” 

In a digression from his account of the People’s Crusade Albert 
made his opinion clear, that many of these ‘innumerable’ people were 
using the glorious expedition inappropriately, particularly the women 
who boasted about the opportunities for pleasure offered by the expedi- 
tion.” Guibert, having observed that Peter the Hermit was unable to 
restrain the wayward behaviour of his followers in Hungary, described 
them as an indisciplinatum vulgus utpote mancipia et publica servitia.”* Again 
Guibert described the same immense army as an indocile vulgus who ran 
completely wild (debacchari).’? Robert the Monk wrote that because they 
did not have a wise princeps who ruled over them, they performed rep- 
rehensible deeds.” When reporting that the Turkish forces annihilated 


% BD 17. 

® AA i.6 (8). 

AA i7 (12); 1.16 (32). 

™ AA i12 (24). 

® AA iv.38 (307). 

™ AA i.25 (49). For these women, see below Chapter Nine. 
™ GN 123. 

3 GN 121. 

7° RM 732. 


108 CHAPTER THREE 


the People’s Crusade at Civetot, Robert wrote that ‘there the multitudo 
overcame rashness, not rashness the multitudo.” Guibert of Nogent 
applied the term turba to the People’s Crusade on three occasions.” 

This kind of language was not used for the forces marshalled under 
the leadership of the senior princes. In part it expresses a sense of 
offended propriety by monastic authors that a section of the population 
should display an independence of spirit in choosing to join the crusade 
outside the direction of a superior. But it also reflects a genuine incho- 
ateness in these armies, arising from the fact that non-combatants and 
poorly armed farmers with no military experience formed such a large 
part of their body. In the course of his account Albert used the device 
of an imagined letter from Qily Arslan, sultan of Rim, to Kerbogha, 
atabeg of Mosul, after the destruction of the army of Peter the Hermit. 
It provides a summation of how Albert supposed an outsider would 
see the forces of the People’s Crusade, namely: a pitiful band, mostly 
footsoldiers and a useless vulgus of women, all being wearied from the 
long journey, with only 500 knights.” 

Thousands more gathered together in armies intending to join with 
Peter the Hermit. One of these was the contingent led by the priest 
Godshalk, described by Albert of Aachen as having been inflamed by 
the preaching of Peter, and by Ekkehard as a false servant of God."! 
A priest, Folkmar, led another and a third was led by Count Emicho 
of Flonheim.” Parts of Emicho’s army were described by Albert of 
as being stultus and having a ‘frenzied levitas’ for claiming to follow 
the lead of a goose and a she-goat.® These expeditions disintegrated 
without contributing to the Christian forces in Asia Minor (with the 
exception of a group of knights from the company of Emicho, who 
later joined with Hugh the Great), although not before terrorising the 
Jewish communities of the Rhineland.” 


™ RM 735: Ibi multitudo audaciam, non audacia multitudinem superavit. 
8 GN 98, 124, 127. 

™ AA iv.6 (254). 

8° AA i.23 (44). 

81 EA 144. For Godschalk see J. Riley-Smith, First Crusaders, p. 209. 

® For Folkmar see J. Riley-Smith, First Crusaders, p. 205, for Emicho of Flonheim 
see AA 51 n. 66. 

3 AA i.30 (58). 

8t See N. Golb, ‘New Light on the Persecution of French Jews at the Time of the 
First Crusade, Proceedings of the American Academy for Jewish Research, Vol. 34. (1966), 
pp. 1-63. R. Chazan, European Jewry and the First Crusade, (Berkeley, 1987). See also J. 
Riley-Smith, The First Crusade, pp. 50-7; J. Riley-Smith, “The First Crusade and the 


FROM THE PREACHING TO THE RISE OF THE VISIONARIES 109 


The reunited army of Peter the Hermit and Walter Sanzavohir at 
Civetot, 11 August-21 October 1096, was a vast one with a dispropor- 
tionate body of people from the lower social orders. Can an estimate 
be made of its numbers? Among the wilder stylistic and biblical figures 
given by the sources, Jean Flori, in his discussion of the subject, draws 
attention to two plausible figures.® Raymond of Aguilers, who would 
have obtained the information only after his arrival at Constantinople 
the following April, wrote that 60,000 followers of Peter the Hermit 
were lost when the Christian forces suffered their catastrophic defeat at 
the battle of Civetot.® Albert of Aachen wrote that Walter Sanzavohir 
led out 500 knights and 25,000 footsoldiers to that battle. The two 
figures are not incompatible as Albert also reported that ‘innumerable’ 
non-combatants remained in the camp.” An impressionistic but vivid 
indication of the large numbers of people who had been killed in and 
around the camp at Civetot was that given by Fulcher of Chartres, who 
shed tears at the great number of severed heads and bones he saw in 
the fields nine months after the battle of Civetot.™ 

With the destruction of the armies of Peter the Hermit and Walter 
Sanzavohir the unspoken assumption of many twentieth century narra- 
tive histories of the First Crusade is that the impact of the lower social 
orders on subsequent events was negligible. It will be demonstrated that 
this was not the case. A sizeable remnant of the forces of the People’s 
Crusade joined with the princes, not only the fragment remaining with 
Peter at Constantinople, but also those who had been taken to Nicea 
and Antioch as prisoners. 

The Gesta Francorum has quite a detailed account of the destruction 
of the united army of the People’s Crusade. Although the anonymous 
author did not arrive in the region until April 1097, the details seem 
to be convincingly authentic and agree with the well-informed account 
of Albert of Aachen. Albert wrote that three thousand pilgrims sought 


Persecution of the Jews’, Studies in Church History, 21 (1984), pp. 51-72; R. Chazan, 
In the year 1096: The First Crusade and the Jews (Philadelphia, 1996); A. Havercamp ed., 
Juden und Christen zur Zeit der Krezziige (Sigmaringen, 1999); D. Malkiel, ‘Destruction 
and Conversion: Intention and Reaction, Crusaders and Jews in 1096’, Jewish History 
15 (2001), pp. 257-80. 

8 J. Flori, Pierre L’Ermite, pp. 455-7. 

% RA 63. 

87 AA i.19 (38). 

% FC Lix.5 (180). 


110 CHAPTER THREE 


to defend themselves in a ruined fortress and that the Turks sought to 
force them to surrender.” The Gesta Francorum reported these Christians 
as having been captured alive and distributed through all the neigh- 
bouring lands.*” Raymond of Aguilers made a similar observation.” 
Guibert described how the defeated forces faced dismal servitude at 
the hands of cruel lords.” It is clear that the Turks sought for cap- 
tives after defeating the military forces of the People’s Crusade.” This 
explains the observation of Albert of Aachen, that on the surrender of 
Nicea, 19 June 1097, many of the Christian prisoners were returned, 
including a nun from the convent of St Maria in Oeren (Trier) who 
was described as having been captured at the time of the reduction of 
Peter the Hermit’s forces.” Given the nature of the market for slaves, 
it is likely that these released prisoners were female or young non- 
combatants. A large slave market was held at Antioch and after the 
crusade had captured the ‘Iron Bridge’, a fortress on the bridge that 
controlled the crossing of the Orontes to the north of the city, they 
discovered ‘very many of Peter’s army’ who had been imprisoned all 
around the region of Antioch.” 

If the regrouped remnants of the People’s Crusade under Peter the 
Hermit, together with those released from captivity from Nicea and 
the regions of Antioch, formed a part of the pauperes that now marched 
with the united expedition, there were even greater numbers of pauperes 
present who had set off with the princes. The sources indicate that a 
body of pauperes accompanied each of the main contingents. 

Raymond of Aguilers wrote of how in the winter of 1096 the strag- 
glers of the Provençal contingent became the targets of the inhabitants 
of Dalmatia who slaughtered old women, the pauperes and the sick.*° 
Fulcher reported with compassion that very many of the plebs of the 
contingent of Duke Robert of Normandy and Count Stephen of 
Blois drowned in a sudden surge of the current as they tried to cross 
the Skumbi (Genusus) river on the Via Egnatia between Durazzo and 
Constantinople, April 1097.°” 


AA i.21 (42). 

90 GF 5. 

°! RA 23 (240). 

2 GN 126. For Rainald see J. Riley-Smith, First Crusaders, p. 218. 
3 GN 126; GF 4; AA i.17 (36); 1.21 (42). 

% AA ii.37 (126). 

AA iii.35 (194): plurimos de exercitu Petri. 

% RA 6-7 (236). 

” FC Lviii.6 (172). 


FROM THE PREACHING TO THE RISE OF THE VISIONARIES lll 


The author of the Gesta Francorum noted that the offer by the 
Byzantine emperor, Alexios I Comnenus, to Duke Godfrey that encour- 
aged the leader of the Lotharingian contingent to cross the Arm of 
Saint George included the promise that the emperor would give alms 
to the pauperes of the Lotharingian forces. 

The anonymous author of the Gesta Francorum had a limited vocabu- 
lary of social order and elsewhere rarely commented on the pauperes. ‘The 
Benedictine monks of Northern France who used his work as their fons 
Jormalis, however, added more social detail, including observations made 
with regard to the lower social orders. Robert the Monk, for example, 
wrote that when Bohemond gathered forces to him from Apulia for 
the journey to the Holy Sepulchre, it was not only optimates but people 
from across all social layers came to him, the mediocres and the potentes, 
the old and the young, servi and domini.” Guibert of Nogent indicated 
that he also considered there to have been a sizeable presence of pauperes 
in the contingent of Bohemond. According to the Gesta Francorum, as a 
result of a shortage of markets in Greece, 5 April 1097, Bohemond left 
the route that he had agreed with the Byzantine authorities to march 
along and entered a valley abundantly supplied with different kinds 
of food.'® In Guibert’s recounting of this incident he added that the 
decision was taken in order to provide for the pauperes.” 

Baldric took the opportunity provided by the same incident to com- 
pose a speech for Bohemond that expressed one of Baldric’s major 
themes: that the Christian forces on the expedition displayed social 
harmony. He had Bohemond urge the proceres and opulentiores to attend 
to the pedites and use their resources as alms for the pauperes.'°? The 
speech is fanciful but it indicates that Baldric considered there to have 
been a sizeable body of pauperes attached to Bohemond’s forces. This is 
also evident in Baldric’s report that when the Norman prince Tancred 
wished to avoid taking an oath to Alexios, together with Richard of 
the Principate, count of Salerno, he hid among the commoners.! 
Albert of Aachen gave a summary of this issue with regard to all the 
contingents led by senior princes when he wrote that ‘it is not to be 


® GF 7. 

% RM 742. 
100 GF ie 
wi GN 141, 
2 BD 22-3. 
3 BD 95. 


112 CHAPTER THREE 


doubted that together with so many captains of the first rank were not 
a few sequaces and inferiores: servi, ancillae; married and unmarried maids; 
men and women of every ordo.”!** 

The combined grouping of pauperes formed a significant body within 
the expedition. There were enough young children present for Guibert 
of Nogent later to learn that they formed themselves into an army 
and elected princes of their own, named after the adult leaders of the 
army.’ Albert of Aachen noted the presence of the poor during the 
siege of Nicea, April 1097-19 June 1097. A large amount of alms was 
distributed to the egeni at the funeral of Guy of Possesse and Walo of 
Lille.'°° Here the ‘destitute’ were simply the conventional body to whom 
charity extended. Albert recorded, however, a more active role for the 
lower social orders at the siege when he described a certain Turkish 
soldier as flinging rocky stones with both hands into the middle of the 
vulgus.” 

‘Towards the end of May 1097, during the siege, Albert wrote about 
the ‘whole of the Christian army, parvi et magn? assembling as one, so that 
innumerable numbers of the vulgus both on horse and on foot, could go 
to Civetot where there were ships that needed to be hauled overland to 
the lake at Nicea." It is notable that for an undertaking that required the 
labour of thousands of people, the princes could not simply order the 
commoners, but had to win their agreement through the mechanism 
of a decision-making council in which parvi participated. 

Lacking one overall leader the expedition had decision-making bodies 
of several types. Each contingent held meetings of its own people, and, 
separately, its own proceres. Collectively, a council of the senior princes 
usually made the major decisions of the crusade, but sometimes, as 
in this instance, it seems to have been the case that a much broader 
assembly of people was called together. 

After the siege of Nicea, very many of the sources noted that the 
Byzantine emperor, Alexios I Comnenus, gave a distribution of alms to 
the pauperes. This was one of the few occasions that the pauperes came 
to the attention of the author of the Gesta Francorum. In summing up 


10 AA ii.24 (100): Nec dubitandum est cum tot capitaneis primis, non paucos affuisse sequaces 
et inferiores, servos, ancillas, nuptas et innuptas, cutusque ordinis, viros ac mulieres. 

105 GN 309. 

106 AA ii.29 (112). 

107 AA ii.33 (118). 

108 AA ii.32, (115): Universi de exercitu, parvi et magni. 


FROM THE PREACHING TO THE RISE OF THE VISIONARIES 113 


the siege and the sense of frustration that the sacrifices of the crusad- 
ing forces had not been properly rewarded, he pointed out that many 
of the pauperrimae gentes starved to death.'”’ Immediately afterwards he 
nevertheless noted that, exceedingly pleased with the fall of Nicea, 
Alexios ‘ordered alms to be distributed bountifully to nostri pauperes.”''® 
Karl Leyser wrote that those who received alms from the emperor 
were ‘our “poor”, i.e. the mass of the pedites?! The conflation of 
pauper with pedes here is unhelpful. It does not seem to be the case that 
the alms distributed by Alexios were given to footsoldiers, since there 
was considerable resentment after the siege of Nicea that those who 
actively took part in it were left without reward.'”” It seems inherently 
more likely that the alms were given to the most impoverished among 
the Christian forces, the non-combatant poor. 

Robert the Monk simply repeated the information that after fall 
of Nicea, Alexios instructed a payout of lavish alms to the pauperes.'!% 
Baldric of Dol, however, not only reported that Alexios made a large 
donation to the pauperes of the Christian forces,''* but he elaborated 
on the Gesta Francorum’s implicit criticism that the crusading army had 
not been properly rewarded. Baldric wrote that the Christian army 
regretted the long siege and that if the property of their enemies had 
been made public, the poverty of the egent could have been allevi- 
ated. Raymond of Aguilers added a further small detail to this 
incident, when he reported that Alexios promised that when Nicea 
was captured he would found there a Latin monastery and hospice for 
pauperes Francorum. The sources for the First Crusade at the siege of 
Nicea all therefore indicate an awareness of the Christian pauperes and 
also that they were suffering hardship. Only Albert of Aachen at this 
point described them as an active body of persons, rather than simply 
those in need of charity. This was a perspective that did not begin to 
change in the early crusading histories until they came to report the 
events following the fall of Antioch. 


109 GF 7: 
110 GF 18: Jussit maximas elemosinas erogari nostris pauperibus. 
K. Leyser, Communications and Power, p. 88. 
1? GN 153. WT 3.12 (211). 
13 RM 758. 
" BD 30. 
"SBD 30. 
"6 RA 22 (240). 


114 CHAPTER THREE 


The Christian forces arrived at Antioch on 21 October 1097. It was 
not to fall to them until 3 June 1098. The various accounts of the siege 
of the city all included a recognition that when winter came, famine 
struck the besieging forces and it was the poor among them that suf 
fered the most. Albert of Aachen described how death from famine 
was great among the humilis populus.''’ He also reported that the great 
famine caused an inestimable mortality of the humilis plebs and the 
whole army began to diminish.'!® 

In writing about the extreme hardship of January 1098, Fulcher 
described a situation where ‘both dwites and pauperes, were desolate either 
from famine or the daily slaughter.’''’ Not that the suffering affected 
both groups equally, Fulcher also observed that ‘the poorer people 
(paupertores) ate even the hides of the beasts and seeds of grain found 
in manure.’!™ Because of the hardship of the siege it was the pauperes 
who were first to leave in search of sustenance from nearby towns they 
were subsequently followed by the locupletes. ?”! Raymond of Aguilers also 
reported that as a result of the famine experienced by the expedition 
as it besieged Antioch in the early days of 1098, the pauperes began to 
leave and also many divites fearing paupertas. !”? 

In another example arising from the same period of the expedi- 
tion the pauperes were described as fearing to cross the Orontes to find 
fodder, giving an insight into at least one of their activities. That 
the ‘poor’ included farmers with oxen was indicated by Raymond of 
Aguilers in his report that during the winter of 1097 sorties from the 
city of Antioch against their besiegers killed squires and rustici who 
were pasturing horses and oxen beyond the river.'** 

The anonymous author of the Gesta Francorum wrote that because 
of the famine, around February 1098, the gens minuta et pauperrima, fled 
to Cyprus, Rum and into the mountains. Guibert’s version of the 
same information was that the vulgus, having been eaten up by all kinds 


"7 AA ii.50 (216). 

NB AA ii.52 (220). 

19 FG Lxv.15 (223): Desolati tam fame quam cotidiana occisione, tam divites quam pauperes. 

120 FC I, xvi.2 (226): Pauperiores etiam bestiarum coria et annonae grana in stercoribus reperta 
comedebant. 

121 FC Lxvi.6 (228). 

122 RA 46 (245). 

123 RA 50 (246). 

124 RA 36 (243). 

GF 35. 


FROM THE PREACHING TO THE RISE OF THE VISIONARIES 115 


of poverty, wandered through various provinces.'*° Both Guibert and 
Robert the Monk made the similar observation that it was no wonder 
those of poor or feeble spirits faltered at this time when even the princes 
wavered.” The anonymous mentioned the poor again, this time in 
attributing a speech to Bohemond shortly before the city fell, in which 
the Norman prince drew attention to the great poverty that everyone 
was suffering, maiores siue minores.'*® Baldric of Dol in his version of the 
same speech had Bohemond refer to the suffering both of the plebei 
homines and those who were illustris sanguinis stemmata.'*° 

By and large the depiction of the suffering of the poorest of the 
Christian army in the winter of 1097 was a passive one. In the main 
they were considered to be the undeserved victims of hardship, elicit- 
ing the sympathy of the historians. One grouping of the pauperes who 
were not considered in such a light were the women who had come 
on the expedition. A purge of the camp in the first few days of 1098 
saw many women driven off to nearby towns and a reinforced effort 
at social control, which included a clampdown on adultery. This event 
is discussed in context in Chapter Nine. 

There are hints though that a degree of social tension over the direc- 
tion of the crusade might have arisen at this time. Robert the Monk’s 
version of these events was that as the multitudo was being pressed by 
so many hardships, there was no lack of murmuring voices.'*! In the 
vocabulary of a Benedictine monk the verb murmurare has strong over- 
tones of rebellion, as ‘murmuring’ was considered a major infringement 
of the well known Rule of St Benedict.'°? 

A similar note of social dissension occurred in the appearance of 
a distinct band of poor crusaders at this time, the tafurs. In a famous 
passage Guibert of Nogent described a body of the poor as hav- 
ing formed a company who revelled in their poverty. They marched 
barefoot, had no arms or money, but nevertheless they were ferocious. 
Their leader had fallen from his status as a man of high birth, to that 
of a footsoldier. He offered to put himself at the head of this band 


26 GN 185. 

17 RM 781; GN 175. 

28 GF 44. 

29 BD 53-4. 

130 See below pp. 281-2. 

i RM 777. 

132 Benedicta Regula, 34, 6: Ante omnia, ne murmurationis malum pro qualicumque causa in 
aliquo qualicumque verbo vel significatione appareat. 


116 CHAPTER THREE 


and was declared to be their king." It is hard to tell how much of 
this information is authentic as it is likely that Guibert would have 
been exposed to material from two vernacular epics whose comic and 
shocking portrayal of the behaviour of the tafurs was primarily included 
for the sake of entertainment and thus liable to have been consider- 
ably exaggerated. Although the specific historical information given in 
the Chanson d’Antoche is unreliable, and that in the Chanson de Jérusalem 
almost entirely without value, echoes of the genuine experiences of the 
crusaders can be found in them.'** 

The tafurs were portrayed in these epics as resorting to cannibalism 
and being so ferocious that even the Christian princes did not dare 
to approach them.'*’ This, rather than the reported speeches of King 
‘Tafur, is the kind of material that is most likely to reflect some genuine 
aspect of the behaviour of the tafurs: certainly acts of cannibalism are 
well documented by the sources. At the very least it indicates that a 
large body of the poor, unattached to any of the princes, organised 
themselves and become a noteworthy part of the expedition. More reli- 
ably, Albert of Aachen described other bands of starving people from 
the Christian army, some two or three hundred strong, searching for 
food with an agreement to divide everything they found or captured 
equally. 36 

While there is a more than a hint of insubordination in this banding 
together of the poor, in general it is clear that the princes of the expe- 
dition did consider it their responsibility to assist those in need in this 
time of famine and harassment from the garrison of Antioch. Albert 
of Aachen reported that Duke Godfrey agreed to lead an expedition 
for the sake of the adtenuata plebs.'*’ He also described how Count Hugh 
of Saint-Pol urged that his son Engelrand should free and avenge his 
pauperes and fellow Christians from the attacks and slaughter of the 
Turks: 


133 GN 310. 

13t La Chanson d’Antioche ed. S. Duparc-Quioc, 2 (Paris, 1977); La Chanson de Jérusalem, 
ed. Nigel R. Thorpe, (Tuscaloosa, 1991). For references to secondary literature con- 
cerned with the tafurs see above p. 82 n. 171. 

13 L, A. M. Sumberg, “The Tafurs and the First Crusade’, Mediaeval Studies 21, (1951), 
pp. 224-246, passim. CA 4050-4118. 

136 AA ii.52 (22). 

137 AA iii.58 (228). 

18 AA 265. For Hugh II, count of Saint-Pol A. V. Murray, The Crusader Kingdom 
of Jerusalem (Oxford, 2000), p. 213. For Engelrand of Saint-Pol see A. V. Murray, The 
Crusader Kingdom, pp. 192-3. 


FROM THE PREACHING TO THE RISE OF THE VISIONARIES 117 


Shortly before Christmas 1097 the hardship experienced by the 
Christian forces before Antioch resulted in a decision to send out a 
detachment in search of supplies. Baldric of Dol’s account of this 
period follows the Gesta Francorum very closely. After he reported the 
announcement of the decision to send out foragers, however, Baldric 
added the extra observation that, ‘naturally, with paternal affection, the 
maiores were giving protection to the minores.” Baldric was consistently 
anxious in his work to emphasise that social harmony existed on the 
crusade. Perhaps a more reliable indicator of the historical reality was 
Guibert’s description of the building of the castle Malregard, soon 
after 17 November 1097. Guibert was well aware that he lived in a 
society in which the rich preyed upon the poor, so although he was no 
nearer to events than Baldric, his observation that both the egena manus 
and the maiores worked equally hard to build the castle looks less like 
a didactic insertion." 

Antioch fell on 3 June 1097. According to the account of Fulcher 
of Chartres, who was in Edessa at the time, the scramble for booty 
in the city led to the first open social breach between rich and poor 
on the First Crusade. While the plebs seized everything they could in 
a disorderly manner, the milites continued to seek out and kill Turks.'*! 
The question of the distribution of captured goods was an acute one. 
As early as at the siege of Nicea the right of the princes to dispose of 
captured property was being challenged; not initially by the poorest of 
the pauperes, who had been given a gift of cash by Emperor Alexios I 
Comnenus, but those of the middle rank, who felt that they had done 
all the work but been deprived of their just reward.'” 

In the early twelfth century poetic reworking of the Gesta Francorum 
by Gilo, a Cluniac monk from ‘Toucy in Auxerre who subsequently 
became cardinal-bishop of Tusculum,'’ there is more than a suggestion 
that during the course of the siege of Antioch the knights had sought 
to retain to themselves all the plunder they had obtained. On 5 April 
1098, a castle was built opposite the Gate of St George and for the 
sum of four hundred marks Tancred took charge of it. Of this Gilo 


8° BD 42: Affectu quippe paterno maiores minoribus patrocinabantur. 

"0 GN 172. 

MY FC Lxvii.7 (234-5). 

2 GN 153, WT 3.12 (211). 

143 GP xviiiiv. For Gilo see GP xix-xxii and R. Hiils, Kardinäle, Klerus and Kirchen 
Roms (Biblothek des Deutschen Historischen Instuits in Rom 48: Tübingen, 1977), 
pp: 142-3. 


118 CHAPTER THREE 


stated: “Here also a certain castle was renovated and an old rampart was 
repaired where the iuvenes could keep their plunder.’'** At some point 
during the course of the expedition a law (tus) had become established, 
such that ownership of booty was retained by the first person to lay 
hands on it, or leave their mark on it, no matter how lowly their status. 
The fall of Antioch was the first opportunity for the poor to obtain 
plunder ahead of knights, such as those at ‘Tancred’s castle, and they 
seem to have taken it without reprisal. 

Within three days of Antioch having fallen to the Christian forces, on 
6 June 1098, a great army led by Kerbogha, atabeg of Mosul, arrived 
to trap the Christians in the city. A Turkish garrison still held the cita- 
del, putting the crusaders under pressure from within the walls. ‘This 
was the period of greatest crisis for the expedition, where it seemed 
to be on the verge of disintegration right up to the moment when the 
Christian army came out to battle and inflicted a decisive defeat on 
Kerbogha’s forces. 

The vulgus were the subject of sympathetic commentary by Albert 
of Aachen in this critical period. He reported that on the day of the 
Christian breakthrough into Antioch, the Turkish forces in the citadel 
savaged with arrows very many incautious Christians of the vulgus, 
men and women.'* The subsequent famine among the Christians in 
the city was so severe that the inactive and modicum vulgus were reduced 
to attempting to obtain sustenance from the leather of their shoes.'*® 
Guibert of Nogent similarly wrote that the extraordinary lack of 
food particularly weakened the courage of everyone of poorer means 
(pauperior).'*” He continued by reporting that while the wealthy ate the 
meat of animals, the poor ate the skins that had been boiled for a 
long time.'** 

The real danger for the poor, however, was that knights were lower- 
ing themselves by ropes from the walls of Antioch in order to escape 
the crisis and if this were to continue the Christian forces would 
melt away to the point that battle against Kerbogha was impossible. 
Tatikios, the envoy of the Byzantine Emperor, made his excuses and 


1 GP p. 123: Hic quoque, quo iuuenes predam cepere, nouatur Quoddam castellum uallumque 
uetus reparatur. 


FROM THE PREACHING TO THE RISE OF THE VISIONARIES 119 


abandoned the siege in February 1098.'*° Just before Antioch had been 
captured Stephen of Blois had departed, giving rise to a great deal of 
bitterness at his conduct. Now, while besieged by Kerbogha, many 
more knights were stealing away from the Christian army. The Gesta 
Francorum recorded that William of Grandmesnil, Aubrey his brother, 
Guy Trousseau of Montlhéry, Lambert the Poor and many others let 
themselves down from the wall secretly during the night and fled on 
foot towards the sea.'”' Peter Tudebode added the name of Ivo of 
Grandmesnil, sheriff of Leicester, to the list and reported that many 
of the maiores wished to flee from the city by night. ° 

Raymond of Aguilers reported that the people believed there were 
few principes who did not, in fact, wish to flee to the port. But for the fact 
that the Bishop Adhémar of Le Puy, the papal legate, and Bohemond 
had closed the gates to the city ‘very few would have remained.’!** 
Raymond reported that many people did leave, both clergy and laity. 
Fulcher similarly reported that many people wished to descend by ropes 
at night and escape.'” 

According to Albert of Aachen, when the news that even illustri- 
ous proceres had fled the city, very many people considered making a 
similar escape.” Worse, there were princes so terrified of the plight 
of the crusade, that, unknown to the humilis vulgus, they had formed a 
conspiracy to leave the city together.” Robert the Monk was apologetic 
for reporting such desertions and explained that he did so only so that 
it should be learned how great a need existed in the camp that even 
the dwites were compelled to flee and to break their oaths ( perjurare).'”* 
Guibert, familiar with some of the returned knights, was more scathing 
and added the information that Guy ‘Trousseau of Montlhéry was the 
ringleader of the party of deserters listed in the Gesta Francorum.'”” The 


154 


49 GF 34. 

150 GF 63. FC Lxvi.7 (228). 

51 GF 56-7. For these knights see J. Riley-Smith, First Crusaders, p. 226 (William 
of Grandmesnil); p. 200 (Aubrey); p. 210 (Guy Trousseau of Montlhéry) and p. 214 
(Lambert the Poor). 

12 PT 97-8. For Ivo of Grandmesnil see J. Riley-Smith, First Crusaders, p. 214. 

153 RA 256 (284):... admodum pauci remansissent. 

15t RA 256 (284). 

155 FC I.xx.2 (246). 

1356 AA iv.37 (307). 

157 AA iv.39 (309). 

158 RM 782. 

159 GN 217; GF 56. 


120 CHAPTER THREE 


phenomenon of knights slipping away by rope was sufficiently wide- 
spread that it came to the attention of the Byzantine historian Anna 
Comnena and by the time that Orderic Vitalis wrote his Keclesiastical 
History (1123-1141) these escapees were being known by the mocking 
sobriquet ‘rope-dancers.’!° 

Under these circumstances several visionaries came forward, two of 
whom were very explicitly connected to the pauperes of the Christian 
forces and both with a similar message, that God would aid the 
Christians if they sought battle with Kerbogha. 

Stephen of Valence was a priest,'°! ‘a man most worthy of credit 
and of good life.’ He mounted the hill in Antioch, to where there 
was a gathering of the princes near the citadel, and reported his vision. 
Stephen said that he had taken refuge in the Church of St Mary in a 
fearful state of mind. Christ had appeared to him and, although express- 
ing anger at the lust of the Christians following the fall of Antioch, 
Christ had relented following the intervention of Our Lady and St Peter. 
The Lord promised that if they sung Congregati sunt (Psalm 47:5) in the 
daily Office he would return within five days with a mighty help.'° In 
an addition to the text of the Gesta Francorum, Peter ‘Tudebode, present 
in Antioch at the time, put in an extra line of oratio recta, reporting that 
Christ ordered everyone to accept penance and with bare feet make 
procession through the churches and give alms to the pauperes.'™* 

This is useful additional information that the vision of Stephen was 
giving expression to the needs of the poor. The vision of Stephen 
was rooted in an orthodox theology and practice of the clergy. He 
offered to throw himself from a tower to prove the truth of his words, 
but Adhémar, who instead had the priest swear on the Gospels and a 
crucifix, rejected this.'® As a result of this vision the princes assembled 
and took an oath. According to the Gesta Francorum the oath was that 
they would not flee so long as they lived. Raymond of Aguilers’s version 
had the qualification, ‘unless by the common counsel of all,’ testifying 
to the low morale among even the most determined of the princely 
leaders of the crusade.'® In either case, as the news of the oath spread 


160 AC xi.6 (348); OV 6, 18. 
161 GF 57; RA 236 (282): sacerdos. 
* RA 236:...vir magni testimonu, et bonae vitae. 
16 GF 57-8. 
PT 100. 
63 GF 58. 
16 GF 59, RA 107 (256):... nisi de communi consilio omnium. 


FROM THE PREACHING TO THE RISE OF THE VISIONARIES 121 


it greatly encouraged the broader body of Christians. Guibert of 
Nogent elaborated on the terse account in the Gesta Francorum to make 
it clear that it was the minores, the lower social order, who rejoiced on 
the news of the oath taking. '® 

A second visionary who came forward at this time was Peter 
Bartholomew, the discoverer of the much-debated relic, the Holy Lance. 
Peter Bartholomew was the servant of William Peyre of Cunhlat, 
from the Provençal region of France.'*? Raymond of Aguilers intro- 
duced Peter as, ‘a certain pauper rusticus.’ '® He reported Peter as being 
hesitant to approach the princes, recognising his paupertas.” Similarly 
Peter claimed to have been, standing in fear from his paupertas.'”' Peter 
emphasised his paupertas twice more, the second time indicating that he 
was among those of the expedition who were starving at the siege of 
Antioch, telling the princes that having reflected again on the weakness 
of his paupertas he feared that if he came forward they would proclaim 
him a famished man who invented the visions to obtain food.'” As 
discussed in Chapter One, the language of Raymond’s history at in this 
account has echoes of the Vulgate and particularly of Ecclesiasticus, 
where it is stated that no matter how lowly a person, God can raise 
them up.” 

In general, Raymond of Aguilers, had a very different view of the 
pauperes from the other early crusading sources. For him they were not a 
burden, nor dissolute or foolish, but rather they were particularly suited 
to the expedition, with its echoes of the journey of the Children of 
Israel. Peter Bartholomew in particular fitted Raymond’s notions that 
poverty was no barrier to being close to God. According to Raymond, 
it was precisely this point that was at issue in the credibility of Peter 
Bartholomew as a visionary. Those who disbelieved Peter drew attention 
to his low social state. ‘Certain people began to say that they would 
never believe that this man was spoken to by God, and He would desert 
princes and bishops to be revealing Himself to a rusticus homo.’'™* 


0 GN 221. 

168 For Peter Bartholomew see J. Riley-Smith, The First Crusaders, p. 216. 

169 RA 88-9 (253):... pauperem quemdam rusticum. 

170 RA 95 (254). 

17 RA 96 (254). 

12 RA 97 (255). 

13 See above pp. 33-4. 
* RA 229-30 (280-1): coeperunt quidam dicere, quod numquam crederent quod huiscemodi 
homini loqueretur Deus et dimitteret principes et episcopos et ostenderet se rustico homini. 


a 


I 


= 


122 CHAPTER THREE 


Peter Bartholomew had a certain level of knowledge of Scripture 
and church Offices.'’”? Although a servant, he was also a combatant, as 
he was on foot in a skirmish between the arriving forces of Kerbogha 
and the garrison of Antioch, 10 June 1098, where, trapped between 
two knights, he was nearly crushed to death in the retreat through the 
city gates.'”° 

The other sources, especially those dependent on the Gesta Francorum, 
were unable to define the social status of the visionary, as for them 
Peter Bartholomew was described very vaguely as ‘a certain man’ 
or ‘a certain pilgrim.’'”’ The descriptions provided by Raymond of 
Aguilers are therefore crucial, particularly as the chaplain was given 
responsibility for Peter after the visionary came forward and they shared 
a tent together.'”* From Raymond’s account and his report of the views 
of the enemies of the visionary it is clear that Peter was a youth of 
very lowly social status. 

It is understandable then that Peter Bartholomew should initially 
approach the senior princes in a very deferential and cautious manner. 
For someone of his status to confront the princes of the expedition over 
its direction was a challenge that under other circumstances would have 
been very dangerous. Peter Bartholomew returned from several wide 
ranging foraging expeditions to seek a meeting with the papal legate, 
Bishop Adhémar of Le Puy, Count Raymond of Toulouse and Peter 
Raymond of Hautpoul, one of the Count’s leading vassals.'’? This 
company was from his home territory and, at least, could understand 
him. The peasant visionary claimed that St Andrew had appeared to 
him during the night and that this was the fifth such visitation. 

After a lengthy and apologetic recounting of the circumstances that 
obliged such a lowly person as himself to approach the princes, Peter 
came to the point. He declared that he had a tangible proof of divine 
aid, the Lord’s Lance, whose hiding place was revealed to him by St 
Andrew.'®? St Andrew was the predominant figure in the visions of 
Peter Bartholomew. J. Riley-Smith suggested that being the patron of 
Constantinople in its resistance to Petrine ecclesiology, St Andrew would 


'® RA 113-14 (257-8). 

"6 RA 89 (253). 

"7 GF 59: Quidam peregrinus. FC Lxviii.1 (235): Quodam homine. BD 67: Quidam peregrinus. 
GN 221: Cuidam de exercitu. RM 822: Quidam peregrinus. 

8 RA 100 (257). 

9 RA 254 (284). For Peter Raymond of Hautpoul see J. Riley-Smith, First Crusaders, 
p. 217. 

180 RA 94 (254). 


FROM THE PREACHING TO THE RISE OF THE VISIONARIES 123 


have been seen to be more exotic and appropriate to the fact that the 
crusaders found themselves in a foreign region.'*! This issue might well 
have influenced the visions of Peter Bartholomew. Although there was 
a church dedicated to St Andrew in Antioch at the time of the First 
Crusade,'” it would have been extremely undiplomatic to come before 
a legate of the Gregorian papacy with the news that the lance that had 
pierced Christ’s side had been hidden there, rather than in the church 
of St Peter. As it was, Adhémar was extremely sceptical of the news 
brought by Peter Bartholomew, not least because, as Stephen Runciman 
has shown, the legate would have been aware of Constantinople’s much 
more convincing claims to house the same lance.'** 

One of the themes of the visions of Peter Bartholomew was that 
God had allocated a special role in the expedition to Count Raymond 
of Toulouse.'** This bid for the patronage of the elderly and devout 
count was entirely successful and Peter Bartholomew was taken into 
the care of his chaplaincy.'® 

On 13 June 1098 a meteorite fell in the direction of the camp of 
Kerbogha, giving material for the clergy to give further encourage- 
ment to the Christian forces.'®° The following day digging began in the 
Church of St Peter in order to unearth the Holy Lance. Initially Count 
Raymond of Saint-Giles himself along with his more powerful vassals, 
having locked out all others, undertook the work. But by evening they 
were overcome with tiredness. A note of doubt and inconsistency enters 
the description of events by Raymond of Aguilers, himself a member 
of the first party of workers. St Andrew had been described by Peter as 
having placed the Lance in the ground while the visionary was watch- 
ing, implying that it was close to the surface; but the initial twelve men 
must had dug a great deal deeper than they would have been led to 
expect and indeed ‘by evening some had given up hope of unearthing 
the Lance.’!*’ Fresh workers dug furiously until they too became tired. 
At this point Peter dropped into the deep hole and urged everyone to 
pray at length. Raymond’s account is honest enough to convey a certain 


‘8! J, Riley-Smith, The First Crusade, pp. 105-6. 

182 AA vi.30 (376). 

!8 S., Runciman. “The Holy Lance Found at Antioch’, Analecta Bollandiana 68 (1950), 
pp. 197-205. 

18t RA 93 (254). 

18 RA 100 (255). 

18 RA 257 (285); GF 62. 

187 RA 257 (285): In vespere desperare quidam de inventione lanceae coeperunt. 


124 CHAPTER THREE 


lack of conviction in his description that while everyone else present 
was above the pit, praying, Peter alone discovered the Lance.'*® 

Those who had less of an interest in promoting the leading role 
of Count Raymond were quick to dispute the legitimacy of the relic. 
Fulcher of Chartres reported that the allegation made against Peter 
Bartholomew by many of the clergy and the people was that it ‘was 
not the Lord’s Lance, but it was another one deceitfully contrived by 
that stupid man.”'*’ Guibert of Nogent, a defender of the Holy Lance, 
wrote that later the vulgus began to challenge Peter Bartholomew for 
staging the discovery and exhibiting an ordinary lance.’ Ralph of 
Caen, the author of the Gesta Tancredi, wrote that Peter Bartholomew 
was a ‘versatile fabricator of lies’. Ralph described the finding of the 
Lance as a deception involving the planting of an Arabic spear point. 
Ralph was not present on the First Crusade. He wrote his near pan- 
egyrical metrical work between 1112 and 1118, but he had served with 
Bohemond and ‘Tancred. More importantly for Ralph’s sources with 
regard to Peter Bartholomew, Arnulf of Chocques, chaplain to Duke 
Robert of Normandy on the First Crusade and Patriarch of Jerusalem 
from 1112, whom he visited before writing his history, taught him and 
helped shape the work. It was Arnulf who led the challenge that resulted 
in the death of Peter Bartholomew.'*? Not only did Ralph record the 
grounds on which the legitimacy of the Lance was challenged: he also 
saw the whole issue in decidedly political terms. Those in favour of the 
Lance were Count Raymond and the Provengals; those against were 
Normans led by Bohemond.” 

Unsurprisingly, equal scepticism was evident in the version of events 
that subsequently circulated in the Arab world. Ibn al-Athir (1160-1233) 
wrote that: ‘there was a monk there, of influence among them, who 
was a cunning man. He said to them, “the Messiah (blessings be upon 
Him) had a lance which was buried in the church at Antioch, which 


188 RA 203 (276). 

189 FC Lxviii.3 (237-8):...contigit multos de clero ac populo haesitare, quod non esset illa 
dominica Lancea, sed ab homine illo stolido altera erat fallaciter inventa. 

19 GN 262 (286). 

191 RC 676: versutus mendactique commentor. 
For Arnulf, chaplain to Robert I, duke of Normandy before becoming patriarch 
of Jerusalem in 1099 and again from 1112 to 1115. See R. Foreville, ‘Un chef de la 
première croisade: Arnulf Malecouronne,’ Bulletin Philologique et Historique du Comité des 
Travaux Historiques et Scientifiques (1953-4), pp. 377-90. See also B. Hamilton, The Latin 
Church in the Crusader States (London, 1980), pp. 12-13. 

3 RC 678. 


192 


FROM THE PREACHING TO THE RISE OF THE VISIONARIES 125 


was a great building. If you find it, you will prevail, but if you do not 
find it, then destruction is assured.” He had previously buried a lance 
in a place there and removed the traces [of his digging].’!** 

At the time, however, as several modern historians have noted, all 
the crusading princes united behind the Lance.!” This is evident from 
the view of the Gesta Francorum, which, while generally being positively 
disposed towards Bohemond, whose faction later became the greatest 
critics of the Lance, wrote of the discovery of the Lance that it was 
found as had been foretold by Peter Bartholomew with subsequent 
boundless rejoicing.'*° A letter to Pope Urban II of the united princes, 
headed by Bohemond, also referred favourably to the Lance, reporting 
that through its discovery and many other divine revelations they were 
much strengthened and more willing to do battle.” 

In his account of the finding of the Holy Lance, Robert the Monk 
wrote that once it had been unearthed all swore that they would not 
give up the journey and so all the plebeia multitudo rejoiced, that the 
maiores had sworn this oath.” This oath taking, as has been noted, was 
attested to by other sources but was described as arising from the vision 
of Stephen of Valence rather than the discovery of the Holy Lance. 
Robert’s version of events does, however, convey his understanding 
that a tension existed between the upper and lower social orders over 
the question of flight from Antioch, as well as contain the interesting 
phrase for the lower class, the plebeca multitudo. 

In addition to the two major visions, the crisis of the crusade pro- 
duced several others. Albert of Aachen reports how a Lombard cleric 
brought great comfort to all by recounting how at the outset of the 
expedition, an Italian priest had met the fourth century Church Father, 
Bishop Ambrose of Milan. ‘The saint had promised that after many 
hardships the Christians would conquer Jerusalem. Those that died on 


194 Tbn al-Athtr, al-Kamil fi’l-ta’nkh, Part 1, trans. D. S. Richards (Aldershot, 2006), 
. 16. 

Piss C. Morris, ‘Policy and Visions—The case of the Holy Lance at Antioch’ War 
and Government in the Middle Ages, ed. J. Gillingham and J. C. Holt (Woodbridge, 1984), 
p. 36; J. France, Victory in the East, pp. 278-9. 

196 GF 65. 

197 Letter of Bohemond and the other princes to Pope Urban II: Hagenmeyer, 
Epistulae et Chartae, p. 163 

18 RM 823. 


126 CHAPTER THREE 


the way, providing they had been abstinent, would be crowned joyfully 
in heaven.'” 

The chronicler Fulcher of Chartres, not an eyewitness at this point, 
being with Baldwin’s contingent in Edessa, nevertheless reported a further 
vision of which he was subsequently informed and which he described 
as being typical of many. A fleeing Christian descended by ropes from 
the walls of Antioch only to meet the apparition of his dead brother, 
who told him not to flee because the Lord would be with the Christians 
in battle.?” It is extraordinary how consistent was the issue addressed 
in the cluster of visions that took place at this time of crisis. In each case 
they were a response to the threat of the disintegration of the move- 
ment. In the case of the visions of Stephen, Peter and that reported by 
Fulcher, they were also a direct appeal for battle with Kerbogha. 

The commoners were revitalised by the oath of the senior princes 
and the apparent signs of divine favour. They now began to agitate 
that the princes should go further and initiate battle without delay. 
Raymond of Aguilers wrote that the vulgus, despite having recently been 
consumed by famine and fear, now criticised the princes, questioning the 
reason for the delay in the battle.” The historian Archbishop William 
of ‘Tyre, writing some seventy years after these events, but with eyewit- 
ness accounts before him, including now lost material, and with access 
to an oral tradition about the First Crusade, echoed this observation. 
William wrote that ‘the common people, aflame with desire, accused 
the princes of inactivity and criticised their delays.” 

The princes responded by sending an envoy to negotiate with 
Kerbogha. Their striking choice to conduct the embassy was Peter 
the Hermit, the main leader of the People’s Crusade. This was par- 
ticularly surprising as it was claimed in the Gesta Francorum, that dur- 
ing the difficult winter siege of Antioch, 20 January 1098, Peter the 
Hermit had attempted to abandon the crusade, in the company of 
William Carpenter, only to be hauled back by Tancred.” Jean Flori 
has discussed this passage and disputes its veracity, suggesting that the 
appearance of Peter the Hermit’s name in the text was a later addition 


19 AA iv.38 (307-9). 

200 FC I.xx.1 (244-7). 

%1 RA 259 (285). 

° WT 6.15 (326): populares, eodem succensi desiderio, principum arguebant desidiam et moras 
increpabant. 

23 GF 33. See H. Hagenmeyer, Chronologie de la Première Croisade 1094-1100, 
(Hildesheim, 1973), p. 122. For William Carpenter see J. Riley-Smith, The First Crusaders, 
p. 226. 


FROM THE PREACHING TO THE RISE OF THE VISIONARIES 127 


by someone hostile to the anarchic and subversive people represented 
by the itinerant preacher.” 

The idea that Peter the Hermit left the crusade is not present in any 
of the sources outside the Gesta Francorum tradition and particularly 
important here is Tancred’s biographer, Ralph of Caen, who while 
providing the information that as a punishment and public display 
of his ignominy, William’s tent was made into a latrine, says nothing 
about Peter the Hermit or Tancred’s role in bringing him back to the 
siege of Antioch. Moreover, Ralph reported that it was Guy II, count 
of Rochfort, ‘the Red’, seneschal of the king of France, who was 
William’s companion in trying to flee.” Flori points out that since the 
Gesta Francorum was promoted in France around the year 1105, in sup- 
port of a recruiting drive for Bohemond, the Norman prince would 
not have wanted to risk the enmity of the royal entourage and the now 
popular hero, Guy, by drawing attention to the fact that he had tried 
to flee the siege of Antioch. Therefore, offers Flori, Guy’s name was 
deleted and Peter the Hermit’s name inserted at this point.* Even if 
Peter the Hermit had deserted the crusade in January, he must have 
very quickly regained lost ground to be selected for such an important 
mission by June. 

The negotiations between Peter the Hermit and the ‘Turkish atabeg 
provided dramatists with a great moment. Those parts of the Gesta 
Francorum that read most like a chanson take place here and in the preced- 
ing discussion between Kerbogha and his mother. The opportunity for 
placing a proud defence of Christianity into the speech of Peter and a 
hubristic reply into that of Kerbogha undoubtedly distorts the report 
of this mission in the Gesta Francorum and those writings dependent on 
it. It is valuable therefore, that John France has drawn attention to the 
version of the embassy in a source belonging to a different tradition, 
the Historia Iherosolinitana of Albert of Aachen.” 

According to Albert, the city was offered to Kerbogha and the senior 
princes were willing to serve under him, providing that he become a 
Christian; failing this, a combat of twenty champions was offered. 


208 J. Flori, Pierre L’Ermite, pp. 482-92. 

2° RC 650. For Guy I, count of Rochfort, ‘the Red’, see J. Riley-Smith, The First 
Crusaders, p. 209. 

20 Thid., p. 490. 

27 J. France, Victory in the East, p. 280. 

208 AA iv.44 (316-8). 


128 CHAPTER THREE 


This latter part of the embassy, the offer of a trial by combat, is con- 
firmed by the accounts of the incident in Raymond of Aguilers and 
Fulcher of Chartres.” France, however, found the former aspect of 
Albert’s report, the idea that the princes offered to convert and become 
vassals of the atabeg, difficult to take seriously and conjectures that 
it might have reflected Albert’s sources, who were ordinary crusad- 
ers, suspicious at this point of the senior princes.*!° Certainly, if the 
Christian princes seriously intended to come to an understanding with 
Kerbogha they picked an unlikely conduit for the negotiations. Peter 
the Hermit was not one of their class and had a special association 
with the pauperes on the First Crusade, for example, as the main person 
responsible for the distribution of tithes to the poor after Adhémar’s 
death.”'' It seems possible, in fact, given the agitation of the poor in 
favour of battle that formed the background to this embassy, that Peter 
the Hermit was chosen precisely because of the mistrust shown by the 
pauperes towards the princes. 

In an interesting amendment to a line in the Gesta Francorum Peter 
‘Tudebode altered Peter’s speech to Kerbogha from reading ‘our maiores 
say that you should quickly withdraw?” to ‘our maiores sive minores say 
that you should quickly withdraw.?'’ Peter Tudebode generally followed 
the Gesta Francorum word for word, so although the alteration is slight, 
it might well reflect the fact that Peter Tudebode wanted to make clear 
that Peter the Hermit was speaking not just on behalf of the maiores 
but everyone trapped in the city. 

Naturally, given the strength of his position and the opportunity to 
become ruler of Antioch, something that would not have previously 
have been a possibility for him, Kerbogha rejected the embassy. He 
would accept surrender by the Christians and made some kind of 
offer to give land and castles to the leaders.*!* Peter returned and the 
Christians prepared for battle by distributing alms to the poor, fasting 
and conducting religious services. 

The battle of 28 June 1098 was the turning point of the entire 
crusade. As the Christians set out in a series of contingents, approxi- 


209 AA iv.45 (318); RA 127; FC I.xxi.1 (247-8). 
210 J. France, Victory in the East, p. 280. 

211 RA 214-5 (278). 

212 GF 66. 

23: PT 108: 

2t See below pp. 181-2. 


FROM THE PREACHING TO THE RISE OF THE VISIONARIES 129 


mately based on region, their enemies in the citadel of city, high up the 
mountainside, waved a black flag to alert Kerbogha.’ The atabeg of 
Mosul allowed the full body of Christian forces to emerge, much to their 
relief. In Raymond of Aguilers’s history this is explained by Kerbogha’s 
complacency, which was so great that he continued to play chess as 
they advanced.”'® A more likely explanation for his decision is that the 
Muslim leader wished to employ their traditional tactic of letting the 
enemy move forward, while light cavalry encircled them.?!” 

The main battlefront would have looked bleak for the crusaders. ‘They 
were desperately short of horses, Albert of Aachen says there were 
only 150-200 horses available for the battle. Matters were so bad that 
some knights rode to the conflict on donkeys.*'* By contrast Kerbogha 
was at the head of an enormous army, with troops drawn from across 
the Seljuk world. The very size of the Muslim army, however, was to 
count against it. For the political fault lines it contained were deep. In 
particular Duqaq of Damascus probably estimated it was more dan- 
gerous to his rule if Kerbogha were victorious and Mosul united with 
Antioch, than for the Christians to win. Other Muslim rulers, such as 
Janah ad-Daulah of Homs, had fears for their future in the event of 
Kerbogha being victorious.?'® 

A direct and swift assault by the Christian forces caught the vast 
Muslim army in a state of dispersal and opened up the political fault 
lines. Duqaq took his troops from the field and the rest of the Muslim 
cavalry soon followed, leaving their infantry to be destroyed and their 
camp to be overrun, with Kerbogha’s own tent a prize of battle. From 
the Christian perspective it was an astonishing victory with very few 
casualties. More than astonishing, it was a miracle. The Holy Lance 
had been carried into the battle by Raymond of Aguilers, who felt that 
it had protected him.™ The author of the Gesta Francorum recorded 
the fact that some of his fellow knights had seen celestial warriors, 
SS George, Demetrius and Mercurius, lead a charge.”! Above all, the 
rejoicing Christian poor celebrated those whose visions had promised 


219 AA iv.48 (324). 

216 RA 125; see also FC I.xxii.5 (253); RC 667. 

217 For this battle see J. France, Victory in the East, pp. 269-296. 

218 AA iv.54 (332). 

219 Ibn al-Athir, al-Kamil fi’l-ta’nkh, pp. 16-7; Kemal al-Din, Extraits de la Chronique 
d’Alep, RHC Or. 3, 577—690, here 582-3. 

220 RA 263 (286). 

*1 GF 69. 


© 


130 CHAPTER THREE 


victory and whose promises had come true in such a spectacular fashion. 
The standing of Peter Bartholomew in particular now soared, to bring 
this lowly servant to a position of great authority. 


CHAPTER FOUR 


PAUPERES AND THE FIRST CRUSADE: 
FROM ANTIOCH TO JERUSALEM 


The authority of Peter Bartholomew and Stephen of Valence was 
greatly enhanced by the decisive victory of 28 June 1098. Not only was 
the result of the battle an indication for contemporary eyes of God’s 
judgement, but also during the course of the battle, Stephen’s predicted 
divine aid was said to have materialised in the form of the three fight- 
ing saints leading a detachment of troops.' Bruno of Lucca was one of 
those who claimed to have seen divine intervention during the battle. 
On 20 July he left Antioch and returned home to describe his experi- 
ences, which were put into a letter by the clergy and people of Lucca 
and widely circulated. He claimed that the crusaders entering battle 
saw a wonderful white standard and a countless host of knights.” 

There was a great deal of plunder arising from the victory about 
which Guibert of Nogent wrote that if a pauper took something that 
he wanted, no wealthier man (ditior) tried to take it from him by force, 
but each permitted the other to take what he wanted without a fight.” 
Whether or not this was one of the insertions by Guibert of actual 
historical material from returned eyewitnesses, it is interesting testimony 
that Guibert considered the conditions on the First Crusade at this point 
unusual because the rich were not taking wealth by force from the poor. 
By contrast Raymond of Aguilers reported conflict over property then 
took place among the princes and their followers. He wrote that in the 
period after the victory discordia shook not only the principes, but thefts 
and robberies took place among their households.* 

Social tension between rich and poor did not ease once the battle 
with Kerbogha took place, but rather it found different expression. 
The key issue that now made manifest this social tension was that 


' GF 69. 

2 Letter of the clergy and people of Lucca to the faithful, Hagenmeyer, Epistulae 
et Chartae, p. 166. 

3 GN 243. 

* RA 136 (262). 


This is an open access chapter distributed under the terms of the CC-BY-NC License. 


132 CHAPTER FOUR 


of whether the expedition was to continue to Jerusalem or not. The 
princes, wanting to avoid plague in Antioch and to consolidate their 
local gains, scattered throughout the region. Firstly though, they did 
make an offer to the poor. In a very interesting passage, describing an 
offer by the princes after the victory over Kerbogha, the author of the 
Gesta Francorum wrote: ‘the princes had it announced throughout the 
whole city that if by chance there should be present someone egens in 
that place, and lacking in gold and silver, if he wished to remain, having 
made a compact with them, he would be retained with pleasure.” 

To whom was the offer being made? Clearly it was addressed to 
persons experiencing poverty, but did the princes, after their stunning 
victory, want to consolidate a labour force or a military following? Were 
they appealing to non-combatants, footsoldiers, or knights? Some insight 
on the matter is offered by the reworking of the incident by one of the 
later authors. Baldric of Dol interpreted the offer as deriving from a 
concern by the princes for the welfare of the pauperes and while this is 
possible, it has to be borne in mind that Baldric used every opportunity 
to portray the First Crusade as displaying social harmony between 
rich and poor.® Baldric did, however, offer a clarification of the offer 
of the princes. His version of the same passage distinguished between 
those egent who were vigorous (corpore vegetus), whom the princes wished 
to take away into service, and those too weak to leave the city, who 
were instructed to be maintained from public stipends until recovered.’ 
So, according to Baldric’s interpretation of this passage of the Gesta 
Francorum, even though the language used by the anonymous author 
had overtones of a feudal legal contract of vassalage, particularly with 
the use of the verb retinere, it was addressed, in fact, to the lower social 
order. The offer does not seem to have been a popular one. Instead, 
when Raymond Pilet attempted prematurely to lead an expedition 
against Ma’arra in July 1098, a great number of poor from Antioch 
and local Christians unused to combat attached themselves to him. In 
large part it was their presence that resulted in Raymond Pilet’s forces 


° GF 72-3: Feceruntque principes preconari per urbem universam, ut si forte aliquis egens illic 
adesset et auro argentoque careret, conventione facta cum illis remanere si vellet, ab eis cum gaudio 
retentus esset. 

ê BD 80. 

7 BD 80: Dispersi sunt ergo duces et familiae per finitimas regiones et egeni eos subsequebantur, 
vwendi causa. Dixerant enim duces: ‘Si quis egenus est et corpore vegetus, jungatur nobis, et nos omnibus, 
datis unicuique stipendus, subsidiabimur; infirmi publica stipe donec convaluerint, sustententur.? 


FROM ANTIOCH TO JERUSALEM 133 


being thrown back by Ridwan of Aleppo. According to the author of the 
Gesta Francorum it was the Syrians and the gens minuta who fled first.® 

Expressions of social discontent increased following the death of 
Bishop Adhémar of Le Puy, 1 August 1098, the papal legate and the 
key figure in maintaining harmony between the princes and between 
the different social forces. ‘The final appearance of the term pauperes in the 
text of the Gesta Francorum was in the epitaph to Adhémar: ‘Because he 
|Adhémar] was the helper of the pauperes, the counsel of the rich, and 
he ordered the clergy, preached to and summoned the knights, saying 
this, “None of you can be saved unless he does honour to the pauperes 
and assists them; you cannot be saved without them, and they cannot 
live without you.” Guibert’s version of the same passage returned to 
the theme of tension over property. He had Adhémar say that unless the 
minores were treated as equals and wealth that was obtained unequally 
was shared, the magnates would exclude themselves from divine mercy. 
For Guibert of Nogent the death of Adhémar also marked the point at 
which the principes began to argue among themselves, while the mediocres 
and vulgus became insolent, obeying no one single ruler and regarding 
all things as equal among them. He added that often, while the desire 
of the vulgus prevailed, their conduct was inappropriate for the divine 
nature of the expedition.'’ This passage is important in showing that 
Guibert’s perspective was markedly different from that of Raymond 
of Aguilers. While Guibert encouraged acts of charity from magnates 
to the poor, he did not approve of the lower social orders acting for 
themselves and displaying insolentia towards the princes. Albert’s account 
of the death of Bishop Adhémar of Le Puy emphasised the respect that 
the legate received from all social groupings by reporting that everyone, 
nobiles et ignobiles, mourned with extreme lamentations.'* 


8 GF 74. 

9 GF 74: Quia ille erat sustentamentum pauperum, consilium divitum, ipseque ordinabat clericos, 
predicabat et summonebat milites, dicens quia: Nemo ex vobis saluari potest nisi honorificet pauperes 
et reficiat, vosque non potestis saluari sine illis, ipsique vivere nequent sine vobis.’ For an analysis 
of this passage see above pp. 14-15. 

10 GN 246. 

"GN 262: Cepere inter principes simultates aliquotiens ac insolentiae oboriri, apud mediocres 
preterea et vulgares licentiae quas non omnino deceret haberi... Dum ergo nemini singulariter parent 
et unwersa inter eos estimantur equalia, fiebant sepius, dum vulgi libido prevalet, apud ipsos minus 
apta iudicia. 

AA v.4 (342). 


134 CHAPTER FOUR 


No sooner was Adhémar dead, than Peter Bartholomew came 
forward in an immediate bid to step into the role played by the leg- 
ate and address the social and political issues facing the crusade. He 
reported a vision two days after the death of the legate, in which the 
dead bishop appeared accompanied by St Andrew." Firstly Peter rein- 
forced the legitimacy of the Lance—and therefore his own prestige—by 
describing Adhémar as appearing before him with terrible burns on 
his head and face, the scars of being in hell for a time, for having 
doubted the miracle. Secondly, Peter reported that Adhémar asked that 
his, by no means inconsiderable following, attach themselves to Count 
Raymond. Thirdly, Adhémar stated that ‘I have never been as useful 
to [the Christian forces] as I shall be [in future]... For I shall dwell 
with them...I shall appear and offer better counsel than I have done 
hitherto.’'* Although it is unstated, there is no doubt as to whom the 
dead Bishop would communicate his future, better, counsels. 

Peter also had Adhémar emphasise the value of charity extended 
to the pauperes. According to Peter the Bishop said that he was saved 
from a punishing fire by a robe returned to him by the Lord, because 
on his ordination as bishop he had presented it to a certain pauper.” 
St Andrew then intervened to address the split among the princes over 
the issue of who should rule Antioch. The saint was non-committal 
as to which individual prince should command Antioch, but was very 
clearly hostile to restoring the city to the Byzantine Empire, using the 
example of Nicea as a city won by God for the Christian forces only 
to be given away. St Andrew added that to use force to obtain the 
city was illegal and unrighteous, which was clearly an attempt to head 
off a coup attempt by Bohemond by threatening him with the united 
disapproval of the entire Christian body. Already by the time of the 
vision Bohemond had violently ousted Raymond’s troops from the 
citadel of Antioch and was tightening his grip over towers and gates. St 
Andrew’s message in response was that peace was essential as disunity 
could lead to disaster. 

A major theme of the vision concerned the poor crusaders. St Andrew 
commanded that there should be a public accounting of the wealth of 
the princes through their bishops followed by a redistribution of wealth 


13 RA 263 (286). 
“ RA 263 (286):...nunquam eis profui quantum prodero... Etenim cum illis habitabo... ut 
ego, finierunt; et eis apparebo, et multo melius quam hactenus consiliabor eis. 


$ RA 138-9 (262-3). 


FROM ANTIOCH TO JERUSALEM 135 


to the pauperes.'° This seems to be a direct alternative to the offer of the 
princes to take the poor into their service. Many pauperes had marched 
for over two years without experiencing any form of lordship; this 
proposal by St Andrew for a public accounting of the wealth of the 
princes followed by increased donations to the poor would have been 
immensely more palatable to them. This vision of Peter Bartholomew 
then, was a highly political one, shaped by the immediate circumstances, 
particularly those arising from the death of the papal legate. 

The most striking feature of the vision was the confident tone in 
which one of the poorest of the crusaders was addressing one of the 
most senior princes. Count Raymond was reminded of his faults and 
given orders. Even at this early stage of his career the manner of Peter 
Bartholomew was becoming bolder. But neither the social weight of 
his supporters among the pauperes, nor his appeal to the patronage of 
Count Raymond were sufficient to impose the demands of the vision on 
the crusade leaders. Raymond of Aguilers reported that the words of 
St Andrew were first believed but due to continuing strife over whether 
to acknowledge the Byzantine emperor as ruler, and other discords, 
the property of the pauperes was destroyed and nothing came of the 
advice that the principes had obtained from St Andrew.'’ Nonetheless, 
through his association with the Lance and under the protection of 
Count Raymond, Peter Bartholomew remained in a position to reassert 
himself if the opportunity presented itself. 

The longer time passed without the Christian forces reuniting and 
pressing on to Jerusalem, the greater the hardship on the pauperes. 
Lacking any form of income other than plunder, victory over Kerbogha 
had brought the pauperes only temporary relief from the hardship they 
were suffering. Not only did famine conditions continue inside the city 
but in August there was an outbreak of a plague that, reported Albert 
of Aachen, killed an uncountable multitude, whether nobiles proceres or 
humilis vulgus.'* Albert reflected the discontent of the poor from the 
perspective of the Lotharingian contingent in his account of the period 
from September to November 1098. He reported that Duke Godfrey 
of Lotharingia was urged to undertake warfare by the complaints of 
the pauperes Christi.” Godfrey, having learned of the attacks of the 


1 RA 264 (286). 
7 RA 264 (286). 
18 AA v4 (342). 

19 AA v.14 (354). 


136 CHAPTER FOUR 


Armenian lord Bagrat, brother of the robber prince Kogh Vasil, from 
messengers sent by his brother Baldwin, now ruler of Edessa, under- 
took an expedition north from Antioch to Turbessel (Tell Bashir) and 
Ravendel. Albert wrote that the Duke set out because of this incident 
‘and the complaints of the pauperes.” 

By October 1098, according to Albert, a great dissension took 
place among the populus. And many of the populus of Duke Godfrey, 
Robert of Flanders and Bohemond, who had no faith or trust in their 
replies and their words about going to Jerusalem before long, withdrew 
themselves.”! Raymond of Aguilers had a similar account of the same 
period, from the Provengal perspective. Count Raymond of ‘Toulouse 
was described as leading a raid, 14-17 September 1098, from Antioch, 
pro causa pauperum.” Raiding again in the latter half of the month, the 
Count assembled his knights that he might lead the plebs pauperum, who 
were suffering hunger and weariness at Antioch, into Palestine.” These 
‘commoners of poor means’ seem to be a variation on pauperes used 
by the author to avoid direct repetition of very similar phrases. So too 
with the appearance of populus pauperum in a sentence that arose in the 
historian’s account of a third raid led by Count Raymond, which cap- 
tured Albara on or about 25 September 1098.** Raymond of Aguilers 
also singled out the pauperes as being most affected by the expedition 
being stalled at Antioch due to the discord of the princes at the end 
of October 1098.” 

During this period Peter Bartholomew consolidated his position within 
the Provençal contingent with further visions. One took place during the 
foraging expedition of Count Raymond 14-17 September. This time the 
visionary spoke aloud in the night in the tent that housed the count’s 
chaplaincy and subsequently attempted to draw the others present into 
supporting the revelation, but Simon, a chaplain, covered his head. The 
Bishop of Apt was not sure if he had seen a vision or whether he had 
been dreaming. He shook awake the chronicler Raymond of Aguilers, 
who felt that he was in the presence of extra light and great emotion, 


20 AA v.14 (356):...et pauperum querimoniis... 

71 AA v.28 (372). 

2 RA 148 (264). 

3 RA 149 (265). For Hyspaniam see RA xxix where John France defines it as roughly, 
‘Saracen held land to the South.’ 

+ RA 156 (266): Zgitur comes cum populo pauperum et paucis militibus in Syriam profectus. 

3 RA 163 (267). 


FROM ANTIOCH TO JERUSALEM 137 


as if Holy Grace had entered his soul. Peter Bartholomew explained 
that was indeed the case as the Lord had been present for some time.?° 
The message of the Lord and St Andrew was for Count Raymond 
and it was a strong one. They claimed that although he had received 
the gift of the Holy Lance he had nonetheless sinned badly. Therefore 
he was commanded to do penance before Peter Bartholomew.” The 
visionary was playing for high stakes by confronting Count Raymond in 
this way and he risked reprisals from the wrath of the Count’s vassals 
or the Count himself if he made an error of judgement. 

It was an extraordinary encounter, most unusual in any medieval 
period, that a servile youth would seek to dictate to a prince of great 
age, dignity and standing. The particular theology of the crusade, 
adapted to the mood of a politically large body of suspicious and dis- 
contented pauperes, had allowed Peter Bartholomew to project himself 
into a prominence that he could never otherwise have achieved. ‘This 
is not to portray the visionary as necessarily a charlatan. Although 
there were certainly rogues in France at this time who cynically traded 
on the credulity of others to obtain an income,” equally those monks 
who created false documents to serve the Church saw themselves as 
divinely inspired rather than forgers. Peter Bartholomew might well 
have understood his role in this light, acting out of necessity, to save a 
divine expedition that might otherwise disintegrate through the rivalry 
of the princes. He had to strike a careful balance; promoting Count 
Raymond over the other princes but at the same time giving voice to 
the criticisms of the count raised by the poor. His room for manoeuvre 
was narrow, as his visions were making many enemies, particularly 
among the other princes. By coming forward and taking up a significant 
position as a leader of the expedition Peter Bartholomew was playing 
with fire, literally. 

Faced with the news of this vision from his own clerical household 
Count Raymond prevaricated before Peter privately told him his sin, 
after which he confessed and performed penance.” The political content 
of the vision consisted of a demand for an immediate resumption of 


2% RA 265 (286). 

27 RA 265 (286). 

"8 For example, in Guibert’s autobiography the saintly Everard of Breteuil was 
unpleasantly surprised to encounter an impersonator claiming to be himself. Guibert 
of Nogent, Monodiae, I. 9. 

” RA 266 (286). 


138 CHAPTER FOUR 


the crusade and an attack on the advisers of the count for their evil 
counsel. Whatever difficulties Count Raymond had in controlling an 
unruly and disparate following were by this point clearly compounded by 
the role of Peter Bartholomew. Just why Raymond accommodated the 
self-proclaimed visionary in the tent of his chaplaincy in the first place 
becomes more understandable in the light of Raymond of Aguilers’ 
observation that during the siege of Antioch, it was proclaimed that 
Count Raymond was nobody because he was believed to be shirking 
from battle. Having incurred this problem, namely about the substance 
of his courage, he suffered such great hostility from his men that he 
was almost estranged from his household.” Once he had leapt at the 
chance of increased authority through supporting the legitimacy of 
the Holy Lance, which Peter Bartholomew humbly and cleverly cited 
as being evidence of particular divine favour for Raymond, the count 
was in no position to doubt the subsequent visions. His choice was 
either to have the Lance accompanied by a special status for Peter, 
or to discredit them both. Count Raymond followed the direction of 
Peter’s latest vision. 

On 5 November 1098 the senior princes, their immediate followers 
and the clergy met in the cathedral of St Peter. It soon became clear 
that a deep division remained between Count Raymond, who reminded 
Bohemond of the oath they had taken to the Byzantine emperor, and 
the Norman prince who was determined to hold the city. Raymond of 
Aguilers reported that as a result frustration grew among the populus. 
The fact that he used a wider term at this point than pauperes is indica- 
tive that a wide social grouping wished to press on to Jerusalem. The 
people threatened to choose their own leader to lead them onward and 
even to tear down the walls of the city if no resolution was come to.*! A 
compromise was resolved, that in practice favoured Bohemond. Oaths 
were taken and the expedition resumed by the princes with agreement 
that their first goal should be the reduction of Ma’arra. It was Count 
Raymond and Robert, count of Flanders, who led the first army out 
of Antioch, 23 November 1098, accompanied, wrote William of Tyre, 
by a great number of pauperes.” 

Once underway, the apostles returned to give advice to the crusaders 
through their now powerful intermediary, Peter Bartholomew. On the 


3 RA 250 (284). 
31 RA 163-4 (267-4). 
2 WT 7.8 (352). 


FROM ANTIOCH TO JERUSALEM 139 


night of 30 November 1098, at the siege of Ma’arra, Peter Bartholomew 
claimed to a mass assembly the next day, SS Peter and Andrew, initially 
clad in the ugly and filthy clothing of pauperes, visited him. The saints 
explained that this dress was the garb in which they came to God, a 
point that no doubt was welcomed by the poor crusaders.” Their initial 
appearance also gave an answer to the critics of Peter Bartholomew 
who could not believe that God would reveal himself to one so lowly.** 
The saints then outlined their criticisms of the crusade and how they 


should be addressed: 


Among you are murders and plunders and thefts, there is no justice and 
very many adulteries, although it is pleasing to God if you all take wives. 
Concerning justice, however, the Lord commands thus: that if anyone does 
violence to a pauper, whatever is in the oppressor’s house should entirely 
be made public. Concerning tithes, however, the Lord says that if you 
pay them, he himself is willing to give you what is necessary.” 


Peter Tudebode had a description of the same vision of Peter 
Bartholomew in his most marked departure from the Gesta Francorum. 
It was drawn from the account of Raymond of Aguilers but is worth 
noting in full, as it is clear from his other comments concerning the siege 
of Ma’arra that Peter ‘Tudebode was an eyewitness to events there and 
that his borrowing from Raymond can be considered corroborative. 


St Andrew announced to Peter Bartholomew... that the Lord had instruc- 
tions: Love your brothers as yourself (Lev 19:34). And they should return that 
part which He individually retained, when He created the world itself 
and all the creatures that are in it, namely a tenth part of all things that 
are possessed. He himself will give the city in a short time and fulfil all 
His will. He ordered the aforementioned tithe to be divided into four 
parts, one of which was to be given to the bishop, another to the priests, 
another to the churches and the other to the pauperes. This they all con- 
ceded after it was recited in a council.*° 


3 RA 269 (287). 

RA 229-30 (280-1). 

3 RA 269 (287): Inter vos caedes et rapinae et furta; nulla justitia, et plurima adulteria: quum 
Deo placitum sit, si uxores vos omnes ducatis. De justitia vero, sic praecepit Dominus: ut quicumque 
pauperi violentiam intulerit, quicquid in domo oppressoris est, totum publicetur. De decimis autem dicit 
Dominus, quod si reddatis eas, quicquid necesse fuerit, ipse donare paratus est. 

3 PT 122:...beatus Andreas nuntiavit Petro Bartholomaeo. .. quod ipsemet praecepit, dicens: 
‘Diligite fratres vestros tanquam vosmetipsos’ atque redderent illam partem quam ipse propriam 
retinuit quando mundum ipsum, omnesque creaturas que in eo sunt, creavit, scilicet decimam partem 
omnium rerum quae possidentur; ipse daret illis civitatem brevi tempore atque impleret omnem suam 
voluntate; quam praedictam decimam partem jussit dividi in quatuor partibus, una quarum detur 


140 CHAPTER FOUR 


These reports suggest that the vision contained four significant points. 
The first was that justice was seen as being required on behalf of 
the pauperes, to defend them from violence from their fellow Christian 
oppressors. The second, that the solution to the presence of large 
numbers of unmarried women on crusade was that they be married; a 
response that contrasted with the policy of the senior clergy who were 
more inclined to drive women from the crusade altogether.” The third 
point was that once again the Peter Bartholomew raised the idea of a 
public accounting of the resources available to the crusaders, this time 
of those suspected of taking goods from the pauperes. Lastly the vision 
raised the idea of taking a tithe for the church and the pauperes. This 
reflects the harsh poverty that existed among the Christian forces at 
the siege and that would shortly drive some of the poorest crusaders 
to acts of cannibalism. 

At a council of Count Raymond’s faction the following day, which 
was attended by the people as well as the nobles, a partial concession 
was made to the needs of the poor crusader. A collection was taken to 
which the faithful offered generous alms.” Having been inspired by this 
vision of Peter Bartholomew, reported Raymond of Aguilers, the army 
was now aroused and willing to attempt to seize the city, in order that 
the plebs pauperum means should be liberated.” The subsequent attack, 
11 December 1098, demoralised the population of Ma’arra to the point 
that they abandoned their defences and the pauperes took advantage of 
the now established tradition of looting to break into the city at night 
to secure all the plunder and houses, after the milites had forced a way 
into the city during the day. When the milites entered the next morning 
they found little they could take away with them." 

The plunder clearly only ameliorated the hardship faced by the 
pauperes for a short interval. Within a month of the fall of Ma’arra 
the pauperes engaged in acts of cannibalism. According to Peter 
‘Tudebode the pauperes peregrini began to split open the bodies of the 
pagans, because they came across bezants hidden in the stomachs. 
Others then fell to the meat of these for scraps of food. As a result the 


episcopo, alia sacerdotibus, alia ecclesits, alia pauperibus. Quod postquam fuit in concilio recitatum, 
concesserunt omnes. 

3 GN 196. See also J. A. Brundage, The Crusades, Holy War and Canon Law, (Aldershot, 
1991) II, 380 and XIX, 59. 

° RA 269 (287). 

3 RA 173 (269). 

© RA 270 (287). 


FROM ANTIOCH TO JERUSALEM 141 


seniores had the pagans dragged outside the gates of the city, where they 
made mountains of them and afterwards they were burned.*' The Gesta 
Francorum formed the basis of Peter ‘Tudebode’s phrasing, but typical 
of the anonymous’s limited social vocabulary, he did not distinguish 
the pauperes from the seniores. According to the Chanson d’Antioche it was 
the tafurs who ate the bodies of the Saracens." 

Among the Christian forces at Ma’arra a major political upheaval 
now took place, one in which the latent alliance of pauper and miles 
that had recently made threats towards the principes at Antioch became 
manifest. Count Raymond had hoped to use the town as a base for a 
principality that he could hold as a vassal of the Byzantine emperor. 
But in the harsh circumstances of December 1098 this was an ambition 
that neither the pauperes nor the milites would support. Around Christmas 
1098 at a council of the Provençals the milites sided with the pauperes in 
insisting that the Count lead the way to Jerusalem, failing which they 
demanded that he hand over the Holy Lance and the people would 
march to Jerusalem with the Lord as their leader.“ 

Count Raymond therefore arranged a conference with the other 
princes to negotiate the terms on which the expedition would continue. 
This meeting took place at Chastel-Rouge, probably on 4 January 
1099, but came to nothing. According to Robert the Monk, when the 
other princes departed, many iuvenes remained at Chastel-Rouge, ‘on 
fire’ to complete the journey to Jerusalem.” Count Raymond, however, 
now allocated a significant number of his knights and footmen to gar- 
rison Ma’arra. As a result, reported Raymond of Aguilers, the pauperes 
began to worry that the Christian forces would be diminished by the 
allocation of a garrison to every captured city between Antioch and 
Jerusalem.“ They decided to force Raymond’s hand and destroy the 
walls of the city, making it defenceless and unsuitable as a base for 
Raymond’s local operations. 

The bishop of Albara, acting for the Count, used threats and force 
to prevent the poor, including the sick and infirm, from destroying the 
city defences. But as soon as his guards passed by, people returned to 


4 PT 124-5. 

2 GF 80. 
CA 4050-4118. See also M. Rouche, ‘Cannibalisme sacré chez les croisés popu- 
laires’, Y. M. Hilaire ed. in da Réligion Populaire (Paris, 1981), pp. 56—69. 

* RA 270-1 (287). 

® RM, 837. 

© RA 271 (287). 


142 CHAPTER FOUR 


their task. Count Raymond on his return to the city was furious but 
helpless. He bowed to the alliance of poor pilgrim and knight and set 
off southwards, pro causa pauperum, wrote Raymond of Aguilers.*”7 On 
the march through the Buqaia, the plain that connects inner Syria to 
the sea, in January 1099, those pauperes, who because of their weakness 
lingered a long way behind the army, were killed by Turkish forces." 
The situation of the pauperes and the whole army improved, however, 
reported Raymond of Aguilers, following the arrival of provisions from 
the emir of Shaizar in January 1099. Day by day the pauperes regained 
health, the milites became stronger, and the army seemed to multiply.” 
Soon after, 28 January 1099, the pauperes again grabbed plunder from 
under the noses of the milites at Hosn al-Akrad. While Count Raymond 
with certain milites strained in the battle, the pauperes, having obtained 
booty, began to leave, one after the other. Next the poor footsoldiers 
took to the road, and after these the common knights.” 

Count Raymond still harboured ambitions in the region. Raymond of 
Aguilers reported a very interesting speech by ‘Tancred against diverting 
the expedition from its goal of Jerusalem, at a time, during January 
1099, when Count Raymond was considering the capture of Jabala: 
‘God visited the plebs pauperum and us, and must we therefore turn aside 
from the journey?’?! The Norman faction of the expedition was willing 
to endorse the idea that God was making his will known through visions, 
provided that the visionaries endorsed the idea of moving southwards. 
Bribed with a huge amount of gold and silver from the emir of ‘Tripoli, 
however, and with a temporary restoration of loyalty from his milites 
who anticipated further tribute, Count Raymond did manage to divert 
the crusade to ‘Arga (‘Akkar) and began a three month siege on 14 
February, 1099. The support for this action quickly became lacklustre, 
especially after the emir of Tripoli ceased his payments.” Soon, wrote 
Albert of Aachen, all persons, parvi et magni, pressed for a continuation 
of the journey to Jerusalem according to their vow.” 


9 RA 188 (273). 

5 RA 195-6 (274). 

5! RA 189 (273): Deus visitavit plebem pauperum et nos, et declinare ab itinere debemus? 
5 WT 7.20 (366). 

53 AA v.36 (384-6). 


FROM ANTIOCH TO JERUSALEM 143 


At some point in March 1099 the idea of taking a tithe was imple- 
mented. According to Raymond of Aguilers, ‘it was announced there 
at that time that the people should give tithes of all things which they 
had captured, since there were many pauperes in the army and many 
infirm people. And it was ordered that they should deliver a fourth part 
to their priests whose masses they attended, a fourth to the bishops and 
the remaining two [fourths] to Peter the Hermit whom they had placed 
in charge of the pauperes, from the clergy and the people.’ This is an 
interesting passage, clearly the source of Peter ‘Tudebode’s phrasing for 
the earlier vision of Peter Bartholomew. The division of pauper, clerus 
and populus looks a little like the traditional tripartite division of those 
who work, pray and fight. But this cannot be Raymond’s meaning as 
Peter the Hermit was not in charge of the entire expedition. Rather it 
seems that he had a special responsibility for non-combatants, as was 
seen again before the battle of Ascalon, 12 August 1099, where he was 
left behind in Jerusalem after the fighting forces had left, in order to 
lead the processions and services.” 

The complex division of the tithe might well reflect the confused 
organisation of the expedition at this point. As well as horizontal 
divisions between rich and poor, there were vertical ones between the 
different regional contingents, many of which were hostile to Count 
Raymond of ‘Toulouse. The distribution of the tithe looks like a com- 
promise. All the tithe was intended to go to the clergy, the pauperes and 
the infirm, but apart from a share that was given communally to those 
most in need by Peter the Hermit, like the stipend mentioned by Baldric 
available to the sick in Antioch in August 1098, the rest was distributed 
to the clergy through their particular regional contingents. 

On the night of 5 April, during the now deeply unpopular siege, 
another vision occurred to Peter Bartholomew, which he dictated to 
Raymond of Aguilers. The peasant visionary had been brooding on 
why Christ had favoured Stephen of Valence by not only appearing 
before him on the cross but also addressing him. That night Peter 
Bartholomew caught up to his rival with a vision of St Peter, St Andrew 


RA 214-5 (278): Praedicatum est eo tempore ut daret populus decimas de omnibus quae cepis- 
set, quoniam multi pauperes erant in exercitu, et multi infirmi: et mandatum est ut quartam partem 
redderent sacerdotibus suis ad quorum missas veniebant; et quartam episcopis; reliquas vero duas Petro 
Heremitae quem pauperibus de clero et populo praefecerant. 

5 GF 94. 


144 CHAPTER FOUR 


and Christ, in which Christ addressed the visionary. ‘The Lord had a 
five-fold assessment of the crusading expedition. ‘The first rank of the 
crusaders consisted of those who fought and who after dying would 
be seated on God’s right. In the second rank were the auxiliaries, the 
rear guard for the fighters. In the third rank were crusaders who acted 
to provide supplies to the fighters. But those of the fourth rank were 
reprehensible as they stayed away from combat. Even worse, in the 
fifth rank were the cowards who urged other crusaders not to join the 
battles or even furnish arms to the fighters. These types of crusader 
were compared to Judas and Pontius Pilate. Christ then gave orders 
intended for Count Raymond concerning the cowards. The crusaders 
were to be called together and the alarm sounded, then the shirkers 
would be discovered. They should then be executed and their worldly 
goods given to those of the first rank. The Lord also gave a command 
to the crusaders regarding justice, which was that they appoint judges 
according to family and kin. These judges should have the right to take 
the possessions of a defendant, giving half to the plaintiff and half to 
the authorities.”° 

This vision was to cost Peter Bartholomew his life. The visionary had 
kept his influential position by striking a balance between enhancing 
the authority of Count Raymond and by articulating the needs of the 
pauperes. His enemies included the secular vassals of the count and the 
nobility of the other factions. As has been noted, although the Normans 
were sceptical of the Holy Lance, it seems that Tancred was willing to 
utilise the message of the visionary so long as it advocated continuation 
of the expedition towards Jerusalem. By siding with the unpopular per- 
spective of the count at ‘Arqah, the visionary had made a fatal mistake. 
The attitude of the Norman contingent hardened against him. Worse, 
the last message that the now politically active body of poor crusaders 
wanted to hear was that they must bestir themselves in this siege or risk 
execution for cowardice. By advocating a continuation of the siege of 
‘Arqa Peter Bartholomew precipitated a clash with the other princely 
factions and by alienating himself from his supporters amongst the 
pauperes he allowed his enemies the chance to bring him down. 


3% RA 280 (288). 


FROM ANTIOCH TO JERUSALEM 145 


The legitimacy of the Lance was immediately challenged at a two- 
day council of the clergy 6-7 April 1099.” The chief author of this 
controversy, William of Tyre later wrote, was Arnulf of Chocques, the 
friend and chaplain of the duke of Normandy.” Testimony was taken 
from Arnulf against the Lance. In favour of the authenticity of the relic 
were not only Peter Bartholomew but also other visionaries of lowly 
status, including a priest Peter Desiderius, chaplain to Isoard I, count 
of Die (a senior noble in the company of Raymond of Toulouse), who 
had come to the attention of the Provengal chaplaincy at Antioch with 
a vision concerning the relics of St George.” Peter Desiderius claimed 
also to have seen a vision of the singed Adhémar. Ebrard, a priest, said 
that Mary, Christ’s mother, had appeared to him while he was in Tripoli 
shortly before Antioch’s capture and told him of the Lance. Stephen 
of Valence repeated his story of Christ’s appearance, and while not 
claiming to have had foreknowledge of the Lance, believed that it was 
part of Christ’s promise of aid to the crusaders. The bishop of Apt 
and Raymond of Aguilers himself both were inclined to support the 
Lance, but hedged their testimony, the bishop by being uncertain if 
his vision of the Lance may have been a dream, and the chronicler 
through his wavering defence of the Lance. Raymond of Aguilers was 
later confronted by Peter Bartholomew and in tears admitted to the 
visionary that he had secretly desired to see the miracle of the Lance 
confirmed by ordeal.°! 

According to Raymond of Aguilers, Arnulf backed down when faced 
with this testimony, effectively a rallying of a section of the clergy to 
Peter Bartholomew. He was about to perform penance for his false accu- 
sation, when he changed his mind. William of ‘Tyre’s later summary of 
the situation was that for a long time the pilgrims discussed this matter, 
hesitating between different opinions.” Albert of Aachen’s report of a 
schisma among the Christian forces suggests the matter was the cause 
of a serious split. Evidently, despite his loss of prestige from the latest 


°” H. Hagenmeyer, Chronologie, p. 224. 

5 WT 7.18 (366). 

°° RA 111-13 (257). For Peter Desiderius see J. Riley-Smith, The First Crusaders, 
p. 216; For Isoard I, count of Die see RA 66 n. 2, see also J. Riley-Smith, First Crusaders, 
p. 213. 

° RA 238-43 (282). 

| RA 284 (289). 

®& WT 7.18 (366). 

& AA v.32 (378). 


146 CHAPTER FOUR 


vision, Peter Bartholomew had enough support to make the crisis a close 
run thing. Tipping the balance were probably those, like Raymond of 
Aguilers, who sincerely believed in Peter and his visions but wished to 
see them proven. Finally, Arnulf faced down the visionary, who then 
offered to undertake an ordeal by fire to prove his testimony.” 

The body of people who demanded that the visionary Peter Bartho- 
lomew test the legitimacy of the Holy Lance were termed plebeculae by 
Guibert. He wrote that the rumour began to circulate that the discovery 
of the relic had been staged and that it was merely a lance, therefore 
an enormous plebeculae began to mutter (mussitare). As has been noted, 
to ‘mutter’ was extremely disobedient conduct from the perspective of 
an abbot of a Benedictine monastery.*° Guibert was a supporter of the 
legitimacy of the Holy Lance and therefore his sense of the term ple- 
beculae here is thus probably pejorative, ‘a mob of commoners.’ Guibert 
also wrote that the pile of timber needed for the trial was heaped up 
by many of the populus, ‘eager for novelty,’ a classical phrase employed 
by Guibert for tumultuous and irresponsible crowds.” 

The ordeal of Peter Bartholomew is one of the most vivid descrip- 
tions of trial by fire in the Middle Ages. The sources for the First 
Crusade are extremely consistent in the description of it, less so on 
the meaning of the outcome. Two huge pyres were set alight, with 
a small path between them. Raymond of Aguilers, the chronicler, 
was master of ceremonies and shouted aloud the issue to the eager 
crowd: if God and St Andrew had talked to Peter Bartholomew, he 
would walk through unhurt, if it was a lie, Peter and the Lance that 
he carried would be consumed by the flames.’ Clad only in a tunic 
Peter Bartholomew carried the Lance through the fire and emerged 
from the flames to hold the Lance aloft and scream ‘God help us.’ He 
was mobbed by the crowd and had to be forcibly rescued from them 
by Raymond Pilet. 

In the light of the Gospel depiction of the passion of Christ it is 
significant that in his account of this event Raymond of Aguilers 
described the watching crowds at the ordeal initially as populus, then 


& RA 236 (282). 

6 GN 262: Incipit itaque enormis plebeculae passim mussitare... 

6 See above p. 115. 

& GN 262: rerum novarum cupidis... For classical examples, Caesar, Gallic War, 1.18; 
Tacitus, History, 2.8, 3.4, 3.12 (specifically the vulgus); Tacticus, Annals, 3.13, 5.3, 
5.46. 

6 GN 121-2; AA v.32 (378); RA 100-2 (255-6). 

®© RA 283 (289). 


FROM ANTIOCH TO JERUSALEM 147 


multitudo populi, then turba as they progressed from praying, to watch- 
ing, to charging across to Peter and inflicting wounds more lethal than 
those of the flames.” In Guibert’s account of the ordeal he wrote that 
the vulgus surrounded the visionary to seize his clothes like relics.”! 
Moreover, the outcome of the trial led to a division among the vulgus, 
who unreliable and fickle in their judgment, were now disturbed by 
an even worse form of confusion.” Albert of Aachen and Fulcher of 
Chartres both considered the outcome to have been more decisive. For 
Albert the ordeal led to a decline in the veneration of the relic. To 
a great extent it was now thought that the relic had only come into 
being through the ambitions of Count Raymond.” Fulcher described 
the followers of the Lance as becoming sad and disillusioned, although 
he noted that it continued to be venerated by the count.” 

Twelve days after his ordeal Peter Bartholomew was dead. Not only 
had he to contend with burns but the wounds inflicted upon him by 
his enemies among the mob that engulfed him had been deep; further- 
more his back was probably broken.” With the death of the visionary 
came the final disintegration of the hegemony of Count Raymond’s 
entourage over the crusade, particularly because those Southern French 
followers of the Bishop of Le Puy who had joined the familia of the 
Count after the death of their lord no longer co-operated with their 
Provencal comrades. 

Around 18 April 1099, during the siege of ‘Arqa, at a point where 
the emir of Tripoli was refusing to pay further tribute, emissaries 
from Emperor Alexios I Comnenus caught up with the main body 
of crusaders, to complain about Bohemond’s possession of Antioch. 
Their arrival reawakened Count Raymond’s aspiration of using the 
presence of crusaders, who might otherwise leave following the capture 
of Jerusalem, to win a principality that could be held as a fief from 
the Emperor. He advocated stepping up the siege and waiting for aid 
from Alexios before journeying on to Jerusalem.” Raymond of Aguilers 
noted that the majority of people rejected these arguments, but the 


7” RA 252-254 (284). 

7 GN 263. 

32 GN 263. 

3 AA v.32 (378). 

4 FC Lxviii.4-5 (240-1), 
3 RA 252 (284). 

3 RA 106 (256). 


148 CHAPTER FOUR 


crusade remained at an impasse due to the large entourage of Count 
Raymond.” Prayers, fasting and alms for the people were proclaimed 
in the hope of resolving the situation, and another vision promptly 
occurred. Into the vacuum created by the death of Peter Bartholomew 
stepped the priest and visionary Stephen of Valence. 

Stephen now reported that Christ, Bishop Adhémar and Mary had 
appeared to him. The papal legate had shown Stephen his burns, sup- 
porting therefore the legitimacy of the Lance, but the legate primarily 
urged veneration for the relic of the cross that had been brought with 
him on crusade.” The vision of the Bishop also turned Stephen’s ring 
into a relic by asking him to present it to Count Raymond as an object 
through which he should invoke the aid of Mary. The legate had fur- 
ther instructions as to how the Lance should be treated, namely that it 
should not be shown unless carried by a priest clad in sacred vestments 
and that it be preceded by Adhémar’s cross.” 

The effect of the vision was to eclipse the discredited Lance and 
substitute the new relics in its place, in particular the cross of the leg- 
ate, which had been left in Latakia. Wiliam Hugh of Monteil, brother 
of Adhémar, was sent to retrieve the relic. The vision, as reported by 
Raymond of Aguilers, did not contain a resolution to the issue of the 
siege of Arqa. It is significant, however, that with the return of William 
and the cross a new mutiny broke out against Count Raymond and 
the other princes. This time the familia of the Count led the way and 
the drawback to having absorbed so many followers from the following 
of Bishop Adhémar of Le Puy became apparent. A great commotion 
took place in which Count Raymond’s followers set fire to their own 
tents and departed from the siege.® The count broke into tears and 
attempted to halt the movement, but, once a part of the Provencal 
contingent was underway the other crusaders quickly followed. They 
needed little encouragement from Duke Godfrey of Lotharingia who 
now urged a resumption of the journey to Jerusalem." 

At Tripoli, from 13 to 16 May 1099, Count Raymond made one 
last attempt to channel the crusade into the direction he desired. He 


7 RA 266 (286). 
78 RA 987 (289). 
3 RA 287 (289). 
8” RA 289 (290). 
8! RA 281-2 (289). 


FROM ANTIOCH TO JERUSALEM 149 


offered gifts to the nobiles, that they should besiege Tripoli.” This elicited 
the stinging rebuke that took the form of another vision. According to 
Raymond of Aguilers, St Andrew appeared to Peter Desiderius and 
said to him: ‘go and speak to the count as follows: do not be a plague 
to yourself or to others because unless Jerusalem is captured you will 
have no help. Let the incomplete siege of ‘Arqa not trouble you, it is 
not to concern you that this city or others which are on the route are 
not at present captured.” This vision encouraged a further mutiny, with 
Raymond of Aguilers reporting that the Lord sent so great a love of 
going to Jerusalem that no one could restrain themselves and they set 
out in the evening against the decrees of the princes and against the 
custom of the army.** The resumed march was enthusiastic but hard 
on those who could not keep up. On or around 18 May 1099 the army 
was near Jbeil, where those of the debile vulgus who had been overcome 
by the hardship of the journey were buried. A few days later at a 
river bank near Sidon they found enough shade for the ‘innumerable’ 
debile and pauper vulgus to rest.®® 

After the investment of Jerusalem, 7 June 1099, the vision of an 
unnamed hermit gave hope that the city could be stormed, despite 
the lack of siege machinery. So on the night 12 June a great assault 
was attempted but beaten back. Thereafter the crusaders settled down 
to fill the town ditch and build substantial siege engines. Raymond of 
Aguilers reported that the Christian army at this point had no more 
than twelve thousand fighters, as well as many who were infirm and 
pauperes.®’ The work was hard and a great deal of suffering was caused 
by the lack of drinkable water nearby. In a very interesting comment 
on the differing extent of hardship on the different social classes, Albert 
of Aachen wrote that during the siege of Jerusalem ‘a quantity of 
grapes and a rich supply of wine always abounded for the primores 
and for those who had the money. For the egeni, however, and those 


2 RA 282 (289). 

88 RA 289 (290): ‘Vade et loquere comiti, dicens: Noli esse molestus tibimet, neque aliis: quia nist 
prius capta fuerit Iherusalem, nullum succursum habebitis. Non te molestet nexpleta obsidio Archados; 
non te gravet quod haec civitas vel aliae quae in itinere sunt ad praesens non capientur? 

3# RA 291 (290). 

5 AA v.38 (390). 

3 AA v.40 (392). 

7 RA 338 (298): Et qui de nostris ad arma valebant, in quantum nos existimabamus, numerum 
duodecim milla non transcendebant, sed habebamus multos debiles atque pauperes. 


go 


o 


150 CHAPTER FOUR 


whose means had been exhausted, as you have heard, there was even 
an extreme lack of water. The iners vulgus risked drinking bad water 
and many died of the swelling that resulted from leeches becoming 
attached to their throats.” 

Guibert was disturbed by accounts of the shortages of food and water 
among the Christians at the siege of Jerusalem and he gave vent to his 
sympathy for the virt nobiles having to undergo the experience of eating 
rough bread and drinking bitter liquids. Unconsciously, Guibert was 
highlighting the same point made more directly by Albert of Aachen, 
that although the nobility suffered hardship, unlike the pauperes they did 
not face death from poverty, but rather, upset stomachs.” 

During this time the castellan Achard of Montmerle left the siege 
of Jerusalem to contact six Christian vessels that had arrived in Jaffa 
on 17 June 1099; he was intercepted by some Arab soldiers and killed. 
Guibert’s account of this reported not only the death of Achard, but 
also some of the most respected leaders (honoratiores) among the pauperes 
and the pedites”! This seems to be a clarification of the Gesta Francorum, 
in which the same incident is reported as involving the death of ‘Achard 
of Montmerle and the pauperes homines pedites.’*’ The latter is a slightly 
ambiguous term that should probably be understood as meaning poor 
footsoldiers, although Guibert’s separation of pauperes and pedites is a 
plausible amendment. If Guibert was correct he was providing valu- 
able evidence for the continuing organisation of leadership among 
bands of pauperes. 

The manufacture of great siege towers was an important feature 
of the siege of Jerusalem. The Gesta Francorum simply reported that 
Duke Godfrey and Count Raymond had two siege towers made. 
Non-Christian slaves did some of the work. The senior princes of the 
expedition had no qualms about selling pagan prisoners as slaves” 
and were not averse to making use of them, as Raymond of Aguilers 
indicated in his description of the construction of the siege towers. 


88 AA vi.7 (412): Vuarum copia et vini affluentia primoribus semper habundabat, et precium 
habentibus, egenis vero et rebus exhausts, etiam aque ut audistis nimia erat defectio. 

3 AA vi.6 (412). 

° GN 274. 

9! GN 273. For Achard of Montmerle see J. Riley-Smith, First Crusaders, p. 197. See 
also RA 318 n. A. 

° GF 89:...Achardum de Mommellou, et pauperes homines pedites. 

* RA 156-7 (266). RM 868, 869. 


FROM ANTIOCH TO JERUSALEM 151 


The men of Count Raymond had taken many fortresses and villages 
of the Saracens and the Saracens, as if his servi, were inflicted with 
the work, fifty or sixty of whom carried on their neck great logs that 
could not be brought by four pairs of oxen, to make siege machines 
for Jerusalem.” Baldric, however, made it clear that the skilled work 
was done by Christian gna and artifices.” Fulcher also wrote that on 
15 June 1099 artifices were ordered to build machines of war for the 
siege of Jerusalem.” 

From the account of the building of the same siege towers by 
Raymond of Aguilers it can be determined that these craftsmen were 
independent paid labourers rather than serfs. He wrote that the arti- 
jices were given wages from the collections that were made among the 
people, or, in Count Raymond’s case, the operarii were paid out from 
his own wealth.” The urgency to have this equipment made, led the 
council of leaders to order those present to offer their mules and boys 
to the artifices and lgnarii so that they could carry off tree-trunks, poles, 
stakes and branches for the making of wicker screens.” The term operarii 
seems to have been used by Raymond as synonymous with artifices. Not 
only is this evident in the first example above, but also in the report 
that Duke Godfrey and the counts of Normandy and Flanders placed 
Gaston, viscount of Béarn, over the operarii who were constructing 
machines, and they prepared wickerworks and material for ramparts 
for the purpose of attacking the walls. Gaston was described as dividing 
up the operarii wisely.® Count Raymond was left to his own devices, and 
put William Ricau in charge of his operarii on Mount Zion.'°° Nothing 
more is known of William Ricau, but John France has observed that 
the name suggests that he was Genoese. '®” 

Sailors from Genoa, who had abandoned their ships at Jaffa, had 
recently reinforced the Christian army, thanks to their Provençal escort. 
Raymond of Aguilers states that they aided Count Raymond in the 
construction of siege equipment with the ropes, iron mallets, nails, axes, 


% RA 333 (297). For enslavement after the fall of Ceaserea to Baldwin I (17 May 
1101) see FC ILix.6, (403). 

® BD 100. 

% FC Lxxvii.3 (294). 

9% RA 333 (297). 

% RA 334 (298). 

® RA 331-2 (297). 

100 RA 332 (297). 

10! J, France, Victory in the East, p. 346. 


152 CHAPTER FOUR 


pick-axes and hatchets they had salvaged." These skilled workers were 
paid, unlike the captured Saracens described above, who were put to 
work under the direction of the bishop of Albara.'” 

A spate of people came forward during this time, claiming to have 
messages from God as to how Jerusalem could be taken, but, wrote 
Raymond of Aguilers, ‘because they were our brothers, they were not 
believed.’ The crusade remained deeply divided at this point and 
the disbelief was probably that of the Lotharingians and the Normans 
to towards those who continued to cling to the Holy Lance and the 
reputation of Peter Bartholomew. 

In the end it was Peter Desiderius who had the authority to deter- 
mine the final direction of the crusade. Peter Desiderius claimed to 
have received instructions from Adhémar who urged a fast and that 
the whole army walk on bare feet around the besieged city. Following 
this an all-out assault was to take place. It is noteworthy that Peter 
Desiderius took news of this vision to his lord, Count Isoard of Die 
and to Adhémar’s brother, William Hugh of Monteil rather than Count 
Raymond.!” 

It seems likely that the split in the southern French contingent that 
took place when William Hugh returned with the Adhémar’s cross had 
continued down to Jerusalem and that the visionary had permanently 
aligned himself with those who led the ending of the siege of ‘Arqa. 
Those grouped around Desiderius called a council on 6 July, at which 
all decided to adopt the legate’s commands. Interestingly, though, the 
Provencal clergy decided not to announce that a vision of Adhémar 
was the source of the instruction to walk bare-footed around the city, 
through fear that it would be disbelieved.'°° Again this was probably 
due to scepticism by the non-Provengal crusaders. 

Although the noisy procession must have seemed bizarre, and was 
an opportunity for those within the city to mock the Christians, it did 
serve a practical purpose. It united the rival factions and raised the 
morale of the army for the effort ahead of it.'°” 


102 RA 337 (298). 
3 RA 332-3 (297). 
104 RA 296 (291): sed quia fratres erant, non credebant eis. 


(291). 
10 RA 296 (291). 
107 RA 322 (295). 


FROM ANTIOCH TO JERUSALEM 153 


The vulgus made an appearance in Albert of Aachen’s description of 
the fall of Jerusalem on 15 July 1099. They were described as being 
let into the city once the gates had been breached, where they perpe- 
trated slaughter with extreme cruelty." The vulgus here were probably 
a crowd of lowly non-combatants, rushing in to the fray now that their 
enemies were fleeing, rather than the common footsoldiers for whom 
Albert preferred the phrase pedestre vulgus. 

Once inside the city there was a scramble for the goods of the 
former citizens. Fulcher, not present, but a resident of the city from 
9 November 1100, wrote that after such great bloodshed they entered 
the homes seizing whatever they found in them. Whoever had entered 
the home first, whether he was a poor man (pauper) or a rich man (dives), 
was in no way to be subject to injury by any other. Whether a house 
or a palace, he was to possess it and whatever he found in it was his 
own. They had established this law (tus) to be held mutually. And thus 
many poor (inopes) were made wealthy (locupletes). William of Tyre’s 
description of the fall of the city included the report that whoever broke 
into a house, he claimed it together with all its contents as a perpetual 
right (tus), for it had been agreed among them before the city was cap- 
tured that once the city had been violently attacked, whatever anyone 
acquired, he should posses it in perpetuity and without molestation by 
right of ownership (ius proprietatis). Therefore very diligently searching 
through the city and most energetically taking part in the massacre of 
the citizens, they broke into the recesses and more hidden places of 
the city, fixing swords or any other kinds of weapons on the entrance 
of the house so they should be a sign to those who set foot there that 
they should avoid these places as already seized.'! 

This is important testimony from a careful historian who was born in 
Jerusalem a generation later (c. 1130). The same sentiment reappears in 
Guibert’s description of the sacking of the city. He reported an equality 
in the method of the Lord’s army, so that even the poorest (pauperrimi) 
should have whatever good things came to them thereafter without 
doubt or challenge, whatever the station of the man into whose hand it 
should have fallen first.''' In Baldric’s version of the sacking of the city 
the scene appears to be more harmonious than in other sources. The 


108 AA vi.25 (436). 

19 FC Lxxix.1 (304). 
10 WT 8.20 (412-13). 
n GN 281. 


154 CHAPTER FOUR 


houses were discovered to have been filled with all good things. ‘They 
held on to these hoarded necessities and with an abundance having 
been discovered they were shared with the pauperiores.''? 

Ralph of Caen indirectly reported on the importance of the law 
of property, when he composed speeches for Tancred and Arnulf of 
Chocques, regarding the valuables that Tancred had stripped from 
the ‘Temple following the sack of the city. Tancred’s defence was that 
before the attack he had asked Arnulf who would be the owner of 
the houses and palaces of Jerusalem. Tancred quoted Arnulf’s reply 
to that question: ‘it was decreed and universally ordained, that with 
the town having been entered, he who first seized [the property] will 
be bequeathed it, no matter who he is.’”!8 

Orderic Vitalis wrote an account of the First Crusade in his Eccle- 
stastical History informed by previous chronicles and returning crusaders. 
Orderic generally was content to follow Baldric of Dol word for word, 
but significantly added to the description of the fall of Jerusalem the 
following lines: ‘everyone freely and peacefully obtained possession of 
whatever house, great or small, that he first broke into and emptied of 
pagans, together with all the possessions inside it, and up to the present 
day he has retained it by hereditary right (hereditarium ius). !!* 

This very distinct right, evidenced by a wealth of testimony, by the 
time of the later historians (Orderic and William) was considered a legal 
tradition accepted without question. It seems to have evolved out of the 
practice already noted, that during the expedition it became accepted 
practice that whoever first obtained plunder, even if they were poor 
non-combatants, could not have it forcibly removed from them.'” 

For the pauperes who had come on the expedition as emigrants the 
question of property was a vital one to their future status. It is no wonder 
that they insisted upon a ‘right of ownership’. But as a result of this 
rule, in addition to religious motivations for a massacre of the inhabit- 
ants of the city, such as those expressed by Raymond of Aguilers,'!® 


"2 BD 103. 

13 RC 701: Decretum est... atque universaliter sancitum, id suo juri cuique, quodcumque sit, 
relinquendum fore, cujus post ingressum urbis primus fieret occupator. 

14 OV 5, 172: Unusquisque domum qualemcumque magnam seu paruam quam primitus inu- 
asit, ac ethnicis euacuauit; quietam sibi cum omnibus gazis quae intus erant libere possedit, et usque 
hodie hereditario iure custodit. 

113 See above pp. 117-8. 

16 RA 346-8 (300). 


FROM ANTIOCH TO JERUSALEM 155 


the pauperes had a powerful material incentive: the previous inhabitants 
had to be eliminated, for these were to be their new homes. 

After the massacre in Jerusalem the Christian leaders were faced with 
an immense number of bodies that needed to be carried out. Baldric’s 
EMerosolymitanae Historiae had a detail concerning this, not reported else- 
where until it was incorporated into the history of William of Tyre, 
but which has a note of authenticity about it. Baldric wrote that the 
surviving pagans were ordered to take the bodies out and, because their 
numbers were not sufficient, the poor Christians (pauperes Christiani), after 
being given pay (dato pretio), engaged in the same work.''’ The report 
in the Gesta Francorum agrees that the surviving Saracens dragged out 
the dead bodies, but has no mention of this being insufficient and the 
Christian poor being paid for the same work.''® Even if this payment 
was an invention by Baldric, his report indicates that he considered the 
pauperes on the expedition at this point to be free from compulsory labour. 
It is noteworthy in this regard that labour at the siege of Jerusalem 
could not be commanded, except from non-Christian captives: rather, 
it was voluntary or else had to be paid for.'’° 

Nor does it seem to be the case that after the fall of Jerusalem the 
Christian poor became serfs; those who stayed as settlers in the Kingdom 
of Jerusalem were free, rent-paying, farmers. ‘This is the conclusion that 
Joshua Prawer drew from the charters of the kingdom. For example, 
those concerning the colonisation of Beit-Jibrin, built in 1136, and 
whose charters were renewed in 1158 and 1177. These charters show 
that the settlers had the right to leave the land. Tenures there were 
hereditary and could be sold, the obligation on the producers being 
the payment on rent. The rent was not a fixed one base on the amount 
of land cultivated but, more favourably to the farmers, was terraticum, a 
portion of the crops.'”” Similarly with Castle Imbert (Akhzib), colonised 
by royal initiative 1146-1153. There the inhabitants received houses as 
hereditary possessions without rent or duty. Each farmer obtained a plot 
of land for tillage and a further allocation in order to cultivate vines 
or a garden. Rent to the king was a quarter of the crop, and although 
these conditions were extremely favourable, the king also obtained 


n7 BD 103, WT 8.24 (417). 

18 GF 92. 

19 GF 91, RA 333. 

120 J, Prawer, Crusader Institutions (Oxford, 1980), p. 124. 


156 CHAPTER FOUR 


revenues from his control of baking and bathing.'*! As Joshua Prawer 
concluded in his study of charter evidence, ‘with rare exceptions there 
was no terra dominicata, no lordly demesne in the Crusader Kingdom. 
There is no reason to accuse our documentation. Dozens of villages are 
minutely described, but the demesne is conspicuous by its absence.’!” 
Confirmation of the free status of the Christian peasantry of the 
Kingdom of Jerusalem is indicated by the vocabulary of William, 
Chancellor of the kingdom (1174) and archbishop of Tyre (1175). 
William, when describing a settlement near Daron, made a very inter- 
esting observation. He explained that, ‘certain cultivators of the fields 
from the neighbouring places had gathered together and certain of 
them giving help through mediation they had built there a church and 
a suburb near the fortress of Daron, where the men of less substance 
could prosper more easily than in the city.’'?? The social terms here 
are agrorum cultores for those who initially gathered together, and tenui- 
ores homines for the class of people who prospered more easily. Both are 
unusual terms. Why did William not use the more conventional terms 
of rusticus say, or agricola? Almost certainly because the situation he 
was describing was itself unconventional. The colonists are described 
as gathering and erecting a church and dwellings on their own initia- 
tive. So whilst they were clearly of the lower, labouring, social orders, 
they seem to have been free from lordship and indeed prospering as a 
result. The point here is that the evidence from later generations in the 
crusader kingdom suggests that there was no serfdom and relatively light 
levels of taxation on Christian farmers. If an aspect of the motivation 
of the serfs who left for the Promised Land was a wish to improve their 
social condition, then it seems likely their aim was achieved. The small 
minority of them, that is, who survived the hardship of the journey. 
The payment of the pauperes for their work in the siege and in particu- 
lar the manner in which property was distributed on the fall of Jerusalem 
is testimony to the political strength of the pauperes in the later stages of 
the crusade. Robert the Monk articulated his admiration for the position 
of the pauperes who had travelled so far and undergone so much hard- 
ship with reference to the Old Testament. “Then [Jerusalem] enriched 


2) Thid., pp. 140-1. 

122 Thid., p. 141. 

123 WT 20.19 (937): Convenerant autem aliqui ex locis finitimis agrorum cultores et negociationibus 
quidam operam dantes, edificaverant ibi suburbium et ecclesiam non longe a presidio, facti illius loci 
habitatores: erat enim locus commodus et ubi tenuiores homines facilius proficerent quam in urbibus. 


FROM ANTIOCH TO JERUSALEM 157 


her sons, coming from afar [Isa 60:4], so that no one in her remained a 
pauper.’'** This passage is more theological and literary than historical, 
although the information it conveys is consistent with other sources, 
which indicate that the pauperes gained considerable property on the 
fall of Jerusalem. But its main message, by association with Chapter 
60 of Isaiah, was that the journey of the pauperes had culminated in a 
glorious conclusion and that they had obtained their just reward. 

The early crusading sources were not generally sympathetic to the 
lower social orders. But their evidence is sufficient to show that the 
pauperes on the First Crusade were not simply a passive body awaiting 
alms and military success from the milites. The crisis at Antioch as the 
‘rope-dancers’ fled the city impelled them to find their voice. Given 
the inappropriateness of a member of the pauperes attempting to com- 
mand senior princes directly, the political demands of the pauperes were 
cloaked in the respectable and orthodox language of visions. Often those 
writing about the First Crusade have removed from its political context 
the fervour with which the visions at Antioch were greeted, making 
the visionaries and their supporters appear irrational. But the outcry 
in support of the finding of the Holy Lance was an opportunity for 
the crowds to bring pressure to bear on the knights to come to battle 
while there was still hope of victory. 

Thereafter the presence of the pauperes as an active, creative, force in 
the direction of the expedition was constant, surging up in alliance with 
the Norman contingent and the large numbers of knights who were not 
tightly bound into the following of a senior prince to force the move- 
ment onwards, firstly from Antioch itself, then Ma’arra, Jabala, ‘Arqa, 
and Tripoli. No account of the First Crusade that ignores this pressure 
from below can be considered a full one. Even at the culmination of 
the expedition, the fall of Jerusalem, the political momentum of the 
poor was visible in the fact that their property rights were respected, 
albeit at the cost of the lives of the local inhabitants. 


14 RM 868: Tune quippe filios suos, de longe ad se venientes, ita ditavit quia nullus in ea 
pauper remansit. 


CHAPTER FIVE 


MILITES: KNIGHTS OR SIMPLY MOUNTED WARRIORS? 


There is a considerable literature on the question of ‘knighthood’ in 
the eleventh and twelfth centuries, particularly with regard to various 
debates on the nature and evolution of the knightly class and whether, 
indeed, it is correct to see knights as forming a class.' The incontestable 
spread of the use of the term milites from the ninth to the thirteenth 
centuries, so that it came to be applied to emperors, kings and princes 
as well as less distinguished soldiers, has created a debate of a very 
important and wide ranging nature. A typical topic of this debate 
would be the issue of whether the change in the usage of milites was a 
reflection of the growth of a rising social class of knights from lowly 
soldiers into an aristocracy, or whether the sources are indicating not 
so much change in material social conditions but an ideological change 
in the concept of knighthood and the evolution of the term milites.’ 
In other words, was the change in the usage of milites sociological or 


' See especially the selection from key articles in A. Borst ed. Das Rittertum im 
Mittelalter (Darmstadt, 1976). G. Duby’s important articles are reprinted in full in 
Hommes et Structures du Moyen Age (Paris, 1973) translated as The Chivalrous Society 
(Berkeley, 1977). See also P. Noble, ‘Attitudes to Social Class as Revealed by Some 
of the Older Chansons de Geste, Romania 94 (1973), 359-85; P. Van Luyn, ‘Les 
Milites du XI° siècle’, Le Moyen Age, 77, 1 and 2 (1977), pp. 5-51 and 193-238; C. 
Morris, ‘Equestris Ordo: Chivalry as a Vocation in the Twelfth Century’, Studies in 
Church History 15 (1978), pp. 87-96; T. Reuter ed., The Medieval Nobility: Studies in the 
Ruling Classes of France and Germany from the Sixth to the Twelfth Centuries (Amsterdam, 
1979); J. Bumke, The Concept of Knighthood in the Middle Ages, trans. W. T. H. and 
E. Jackson (New York, 1982); T. N. Bisson, ‘Nobility and Family in Medieval France: A 
Review Essay’, French Historical Studies 16:3 (1990), 597-613; D. Fleming, ‘Landholding 
by milites in Domesday Book: A Revision’, Anglo-Norman Studies 13 (1990), 83—98; 
Jean-Pierre Poly and E. Bournazel, The Feudal Transformation, 900-1200 (London, 1991); 
J. Scammell, “The Formation of the English Social Structure: Freedom, Knights and 
Gentry, 1066-1300’, Speculum 68:3 (1993), 591-618; J. Gillingham, “Thegns and Knights 
in Eleventh Century England: Who then was the Gentleman?’ Transactions of the Royal 
Historical Society 6:5 (1995), 129-153; J. Flori, “Knightly Society’, The New Cambridge 
Medieval History IV c. 1024-1198, ed. D. Luscombe and J. Riley-Smith, 2 (Cambridge, 
2004), I, 148-184; D. Crouch, The Birth of Nobility (Harlow, 2005). March Bloch’s Feudal 
Society (Chicago, 1961), remains valuable, especially pp. 312-27. 
* See J. Bumke, The Concept of Knighthood, p. 77. 


This is an open access chapter distributed under the terms of the CC-BY-NC License. 


160 CHAPTER FIVE 


philological? Or, if there was an interaction between the two, what 
was its nature? 

Such questions are wide-ranging and complex. They are not the 
subject matter of this book, deserving book-length investigation in their 
own right. This study of the social vocabulary of the early crusading 
sources can, however, at least shed some light on the usage of the 
term milites for this particular group of historians. ‘Two closely related 
themes arise from an examination of the use of the term milites by the 
early crusading authors; did these historians understand the miles to 
be a member of a certain social rank? Was that rank one of nobility? 
Or did they employ the term simply to indicate a person performing 
a particular function, a soldier? Secondly, the sources reflect a major 
concern among the milites of the First Crusade for their horses. All the 
historians comment on the loss of horses during periods of hardship 
during the First Crusade and many state that because of this there were 
milites who became pedites. This warrants close examination. Were they 
reporting a loss of social status or a change in military function? 

Before examining these issues a preliminary investigation is neces- 
sary concerning the terms equites and equestres. Were they synonymous 
with the term milites for the early crusading sources? The term equestres 
was used above all by the most consciously classicist author, Guibert 
of Nogent. At issue is whether Guibert was using the term to indicate 
milites or a broader body of mounted soldiers. Among the passages 
in which Guibert used the term was the report that many equestres viri 
died during the harsh passage of the First Crusade through the desert 
terrain of Anatolia in July 1097. Here Guibert was making a minor 
alteration to a passage in his fons formalis, the Gesta Francorum, which 
referred to milites.* This was the important passage discussed below in 
which the anonymous author of the Gesta Francorum described milites 
becoming pedites through the loss of their horses.° Guibert used this 
information about knights becoming footsoldiers for his description of 
a later part of the difficult journey through Anatolia, after the expedi- 
tion had passed through Coxon, October 1097. In Guibert’s account 
hardship converted equestres into pedites. These two examples suggest 
that Guibert saw the term equestres as interchangeable with milites. 


3 GN 161. 

* GF 23. 

5 See below pp. 180-1. 
° GN 168. 


MILITES: KNIGHTS OR SIMPLY MOUNTED WARRIORS? 161 


In his dispute with the chaplain and historian Fulcher of Chartres 
over the numbers that participated on the First Crusade, Guibert wrote 
that the entire Christian force could not have been 6,000,000 as he 
believed there to be scarcely 100,000 fully equipped equestres at the first 
assault on Nicea, April 1097.’ Here the term was evidently being used 
by Guibert to cover a body of knights who were not simply riders, as 
they were attempting to storm a city. Fulcher of Chartres also used the 
term equestres, but only once, in 1118, for those knights in the company 
of Baldwin I at the Nile near al-Farama’, where they were described 
as skilfully using their lances to spear fish.® The context makes it clear 
that these equestres were not simply riders, as Fulcher considered the 
term appropriate to them even while they were described as on foot 
and fishing, The evidence for seeing equestres and milites as synonymous 
in the work of both Guibert and Fulcher is therefore strong, 

A similar question arises over the term equites, which appears in all 
the early crusading sources other than the Gesta Francorum and its close 
variant the Historia de Hierosolymitano Itinere of Peter Tudebode. ‘There 
are several clear examples of the interchange of the terms milites and 
equites within the individual works as well as examples of the substitution 
of equites for milites by later writers in their version of passages in the 
Gesta Francorum. Fulcher of Chartres generally used the phrase equites 
and pedites to refer to the entirety of an army.” 

In describing an expedition of King Baldwin II in 1125, Fulcher ini- 
tially referred to the equites of the king and soon after the same body of 
knights was termed mulites.'° Guibert of Nogent shared with Fulcher the 
phrasing equites and pedites to indicate a typical body of fighting men." 
Three examples in the Gesta Det per Francos show that Guibert considered 
equites and milites to be interchangeable. In mid June, 1098, the Byzantine 
emperor, Alexios I Comnenus, turned back from his march towards 
Antioch having been brought the news, by Stephen of Blois amongst 
others, that the rest of the expedition was doomed. Guibert described 
how the milites accepted the order to turn back, he then added that the 


7 GN 344. 

® FC ILIxiv.1 (610). 

9 FC Liii4 (134); Lviii.6 (172-3); Lxi.5 (193); Lxxi.3 (249); Lxxxi.7 (315); Lxxxiii.8 
(328); ILii.6 (364); ILxv.1 (425); Il.xvi.3 (431); ILxxxi. 1 (490); IL.xxxi.11 (493); IL.xxxii.1 1 
(500); IELii.1 (618); I.xi.2 (647-8); IL xxxi.] (722); HI.xxxi.4 (725); IH.. 12 (791); HI. 
1.15 (793). 

10 FC IL xlvi.2 and 3 (773). 

n GN 135; 137; 164; 171; 185; 231-2; 239; 293-4; 336; 345. 


162 CHAPTER FIVE 


pedites could not keep up with these swift equites on the retreat.’? The 
second example of the interchange of milites and equites appears in a 
passage concerning the expedition to Jaffa of Raymond Pilet during 
the siege of Jerusalem in mid-June 1099. Raymond Pilet, together with 
two other proceres, was described as taking 100 equates from the army of 
his lord, Count Raymond of ‘Toulouse; soon after 30 of these equates 
left the main body and were referred to by Guibert as milites.'° Thirdly, 
Gervase of Bazoches was referred to as both an eques and a miles."* 

A comparison with the anonymous Gesta Francorum also shows Guibert 
using the term equites for the Anonymous’s milites. The Gesta Francorum 
has a passage in which the Turkish atabeg of Mosul, Kerbogha, offered 
to make milites from the pedites of the Christian forces facing him in 
Antioch.” In Guibert’s version Kerbogha offered to make equttes.'° 
The work of Robert the Monk reveals the same type of substitutions 
in his reworking of the Gesta Francorum. In his account of the journey 
through the desert after the battle of Dorylaeum, 1 July 1097, Robert 
wrote that ‘there died the greater part of our horses, and many who 
previously had been equites became pedites?!” The Gesta Francorum has a 
near identical account, but used the term milites.!8 Robert also wrote 
that when Bohemond and Robert of Flanders decided to lead a forag- 
ing expedition from the siege of Antioch, around Christmas 1097, they 
picked out thirty thousand equites et pedites.'° The Gesta Francorum referred 
to twenty thousand milites et pedites for the same expedition.” 

Baldric of Dol used the term equites rather than milites in connection 
with the battle between the Christian forces and Kerbogha, 28 June 
1098, and subsequently only on one other occasion.”! The account of 
the battle with Kerbogha was embellished by Baldric with many poetic 
details. A consciously literary context is probably the reason why Baldric 
preferred the classical term for an order of horsemen, equites, to that 


N 231-2. 

N 272-3. 

N 349 (miles), 350 (eques). 
F 67. 


ms. variations] exstiterant pedites effecti sunt. 

'8 GF 23: Illic fuit mortua maxima pars nostrorum equorum, eo quod multi ex nostris militibus 
remanserunt pedites. 

19 RM 778. 

2 GF 30. 

*! BD 75, 76, 78, 86. 


MILITES: KNIGHTS OR SIMPLY MOUNTED WARRIORS? 163 


used for the same scenes in the Gesta Francorum, milites. Raymond of 
Aguilers’ preferred term for knights was milites, but on five occasions he 
used the alternative, equites. Two of these instances were simply a result 
of stylistic considerations, the chronicler preferring not to repeat himself 
when he wished to use a noun for knight twice in the same sentence. 
Thus Raymond reported a speech of Tancred in which the Norman 
prince pointed out that that while there had once been a hundred 
thousand equites in the Christian forces now hardly a thousand milites 
remained.” Later the historian wrote of there being an increase in the 
garrison of Albara from seven milites to sixty equites.” For Raymond of 
Aguilers it is unlikely that the use of the term equites was shaped by 
classical authors, of whom he showed little awareness. His influences 
in choosing to use the term were likely to be biblical.** 

In the Vulgate the term equites is used approximately twice as often 
as milites and it might well be that Raymond of Aguilers found it the 
more appropriate of the terms when he reported a certain vision of 
divine aid. ‘This miracle took the form of two equites who were said to 
have appeared before the Christian forces at the battle of Dorylaeum, 
1 July 1097.” 

As there are no examples where the terms equestres, equites and milites 
are juxtaposed to suggest they carry different meanings, but several 
where they are used synonymously, it seems reasonable to conclude that 
for these authors the terms were being applied to the same category of 
person. This was also the conclusion of Pierre van Luyn in his study 
of eleventh century narrative sources, which included the early French 
crusading sources.”° 

Did the early crusading sources use the term miles to refer to riders, 
soldiers, or nobles? Were they consistent in their use of the term or 
did it have a broad enough range of meaning for it to be applied in 
several different senses? Joachim Bumke’s summary of his chronologi- 
cally and geographically wide ranging study of the terms miles, chevalier 
and Ritter was that ‘at times it was the military, the social, the religious, 
the ideological or the hierarchical meaning of the word which was 
most prominent. For the most part they ran parallel to one another 


2 RA 190 (240). 
° RA 193 (274). 
See above pp. 27-39. 
RA 25-6 (240). 
P. van Luyn, ‘Les milites dans la France du XI siècle’, pp. 20-1. 


164 CHAPTER FIVE 


and it is fair to assume that there was mutual influence and that they 
overlapped.’ This, ‘multiple-meaning’, view was followed by Verona 
Epp in her study of Fulcher of Chartres and, consciously following 
Epp, by Carol Sweetenham in her translation of Robert the Monk.” 
Undisputable as Bumke’s conclusion is for a period of several centuries 
and across a great extent of Western Europe, the work of an individual 
author, or those closely linked by subject matter and chronology, might 
yield a more restricted and consistent meaning. A study of the use of 
the term milites and its equivalents in the early crusading sources reveals, 
in fact, that they gravitated towards an understanding of the term that 
included a social sense to it. In other words, in the main, they were 
writing about ‘knights’ rather than ‘soldiers’ or ‘cavalry’. 

Verena Epp is the only historian to have conducted a very close 
analysis of the social vocabulary of one of the early crusading histo- 
rians, namely that of Fulcher of Charters. In her study of Fulcher’s 
use of the term milites she concluded that the term was used almost 
equally in a functional sense, for soldiers, as well as in a social sense, 
for noble knights.” For her a key passage was one in which Fulcher 
lamented for the loss of many ‘nobiles and probi milites, at the second 
battle of Ramleh, 17 May 1102.°° Epp observes of this passage that 
it implies there were other losses of non-noble milites.*! ‘This is a pos- 
sibility, but it might also simply have been that Fulcher was trying to 
emphasise the loss of several senior princes. In other words his intended 
distinction might not have been between noble and non-noble milites 
but between milites and very distinguished princes, all of whom were 
noble. ‘That this was Fulcher’s intended meaning is suggested by the 
fact that immediately after his general lament he recorded the deaths 
of Count Stephen of Blois, a vir prudens et nobilis and Count Stephen 
of Burgundy.” Epp also made a similar point in regard to a second 
instance in which Fulcher referred to milites nobiles.” The passage in 
question is Fulcher’s account of the march of Baldwin of Edessa and 
Bohemond of Antioch to Jerusalem in the autumn of 1099. Fulcher, 


7 J. Bumke, The Concept of Knighthood, p. 155. 

38 V. Epp, Fulcher von Chartres, p. 251. 

 Tbid. 

3 FC ILxix.4 (443). 

3l V. Epp, Fulcher von Chartres, p. 257. 

3 FC ILxix.4 (443). For Stephen I, count of Burgundy see J. Riley-Smith, First 
Crusaders, p. 222. 

3 V. Epp, Fulcher von Chartres, p. 256. 


MILITES: KNIGHTS OR SIMPLY MOUNTED WARRIORS? 165 


who was present, wrote that ‘you would see milites nobiles, having lost 
their horses in some way, become pedites.” ”* Epp’s understanding of 
this passage is that by reporting the loss of status of the noble knights, 
Fulcher therefore implied the existence of non-noble knights. Again this 
is a possible interpretation, but equally the Latin does not preclude the 
interpretation that through his application of the adjective nobiles to the 
milites, Fulcher was emphasising how painful the loss of status was for 
certain particularly distinguished milites. Fulcher’s first, 1105, redaction 
shows that he was writing in this spirit as he referred to milites progenie 
inclyti, ‘knights, illustrious by their ancestry’ becoming pedites.” 

If Fulcher’s intended meaning in these two passages is uncertain, 
there is one clear example where Fulcher does distinguish between 
the different status of those within a body of cavalry, and here it is 
clear that he was not using the schema suggested by Epp, of noble and 
non-noble milites. When the army of Jerusalem marched out to meet 
an invasion by al-Afdal, vizier of Cairo, 27 August 1105, Fulcher, an 
eyewitness, wrote that ‘there were 500 of our milites, excepting those, 
who although riding, were not counted with the name of a soldier. ””® 
Heinrich Hagenmeyer discussed the unusual phrase qui militari nomine 
non censebantur, making the likely suggestion that Fulcher was drawing 
a distinction between those of noble birth, who were counted as milites 
and the others, who were perhaps squires.” Even if Hagenmeyer’s view 
is not accepted, this passage does show that Fulcher did not extend his 
use of the term milites down a social or military scale beyond a certain 
point. ‘They were a group apart, in some sense other than riding horses. 
It remains to be shown that this was a social division and not simply a 
division according to the quality of their military equipment. 

It is clear that Fulcher at times considered some bodies of milites to 
be members of a distinct social order, that is, a knightly class. Those 
passages in which Fulcher referred to milites nobiles discussed above 
are Important in this regard, whether Epp’s understanding of them 
is accepted or not. Two other passages deserve consideration here. In 
Fulcher’s account of Pope Urban I1’s speech at Clermont he described 
the pope as asking his audience to urge ‘everyone of whatever ordo, 


3t FC Lxxxiii.13 (331): Videretis milites nobiles, equis quoquomodo amissis, pedites effici. 

3 FC Lxxxiii.13 (331d). 

3 FC ILxxxii.3 (496): Milites erant D, exceptis illis, qui militari nomine non censebantur, 
tamen equitantes. 


37 FC 496 n. 9. 


166 CHAPTER FIVE 


whether equites or pedites, divites or pauperes’ to join the expedition.” Here 
Fulcher made it clear that he understood the division between knight 
and footsoldier to mirror that of rich and poor, suggesting that ordo was 
not a matter of function, ‘cavalry’ and the footsoldiers, but of social 
rank, ‘knights’ and footsoldiers. Fulcher wrote an even clearer passage 
for indicating that he considered the position of a miles to be a social 
rank. Soon after the death of Ntr-ad-Daulah Belek, emir of Aleppo, 
5 May 1124, in battle with Joscelin of Courtenay, count of Edessa, a 
messenger came to the army of Pons, count of Tripoli,” with the head 
of Belek to proclaim the news. Fulcher reported that this messenger was 
the armiger of Joscelin ‘and since he had brought this most greatly desired 
news to our army standing before ‘Tyre, having received the arms of a 
miles, he was advanced (provectus est) from armiger to miles. Indeed it was 
the Count of Tripoli who raised him (sublimavit) to this rank (gradus).’*° 
Here there is no doubt that for Fulcher to become a miles was not only 
to receive the appropriate arms but also a promotion in status. 

Does the description, discussed above, of milites becoming pedites due 
to the loss of their horses contradict the view that Fulcher saw the 
milites as being of a certain social status? Fulcher made it clear that the 
change was a temporary one in his description of the very many milites 
who were in Joppa in May 1102 awaiting to cross to France. These 
milites had no horses because they had lost everything in Anatolia, on 
their way to Jerusalem (a reference to the crusade of 1101)."' For this 
large body of milites in Joppa, no longer part of a campaigning army, 
their lack of horses did not mean they were termed pedites. Fulcher 
went on to report that many of them, including the very senior nobles 
Geoffrey I Jordan, count of Vendôme, Stephen, count of Burgundy 
and Hugh VI of Lusignan, borrowed horses in order to fight in the 
second battle of Ramleh, 17 May 1102.” The fact that this body of 
soldiers were termed milites whilst awaiting return on foot to France 


3 FC Lii4 (134): Cunctis cuiuslibet ordinis tam equitibus quam peditibus, tam divitibus quam 
pauperibus... 

3 Pons of Tripoli (c. 1098-1137), son of Bertrand of Tripoli and count of Tripoli 
from 1112 to 1137. 

FC M.xxxi.7 (726): Et quia nuntium attulit desiderantissimum in exercitu nostro ante 
Tyrum astante, acceptis armis ab armigero in militem provectus est. Comes nempe Tripolitanus ad 
hunc gradum eum sublimavit. 

"FC ILxv.6 (427-8). 

® FC ILxviii.4 (437-8). See J. Riley-Smith, The First Crusaders, p. 207 (Geoffrey) and 
p. 213 (Hugh). 


MILITES: KNIGHTS OR SIMPLY MOUNTED WARRIORS? 167 


and the inclusion of senior princes in the category does make their 
social status evident here. 

Many other appearances of the term milites in Fulcher’s work are 
statements that describe the military activities of Christian knights but 
contain no social information.’ Verena Epp’s analysis of Fulcher’s use 
of the term milites found that approximately half the terms were associ- 
ated with a social dimension and of the other uses of the term milites, 
she found it to be equally often used for a soldier in general and for a 
mounted soldier.“ As Epp herself observed, however, for Fulcher the 
functional and social sense of the term milites frequently overlaps and 
it would perhaps be imposing an artificial distinction to assume that 
in such examples he intended to convey the meaning ‘soldiers’ rather 
than ‘knights. Overall it does seem to be the case that Fulcher used 
the term milites for ‘knights’ and understood that it had a distinct social 
aspect to it, milites were not simply soldiers or mounted soldiers but 
were of a distinct ordo or gradus. 

The anonymous author of the Gesta Francorum had a great deal to 
say about the relationship between a miles and his horse, but he was not 
given to generalisations of a social nature. One passage worth noting 
with regard to whether milites were noble in the Gesta Francorum occurs 
during the course of a discussion of the fighting qualities of the Turk- 
ish milites: “They say of themselves that they are of Frankish extraction 
and because of that no men ought by nature to be milites, except the 
Franks and themselves.” Contained in this comment is the view that 
to be a miles is a condition that is related to birth. The content of the 
passage does not, however, stretch to the implication that all milites are 
of high birth as clearly not all Franks are nobles. Nevertheless the con- 
nection between generatio and miles was in the author’s mind and this is 
of interest as a tentative step in the direction of seeing the status of a 
miles as one that is inherited. For a greater understanding of the nature 
of the milites on the First Crusade, the work of the northern French 


® FC Lvii.5 (233); Lxxiv.10 (263); Lxxvii.6 (296); Lxxxi.5 (314); I.i.3 (359); I.i.5 
(361); I.iii.2 (363); I1-vi.9 (389); IL.ix.2 (402); I.xi.2 (408); H.xi.14 (414); lixvin.7 (440); 
TL-xxxii.2 (495); T.xxxii.3 (496); H.xxxvii.3 (517); I.xliii.4 (540); II.xlv.8 (556); I.xlvi.3 
(560); I.xlix.5 (569); M.xxviii.4 (698); T.xxxi.4 (725); II.xliv.4 (769); W118 (789). 

“ V. Epp, Fulcher von Chartres, p. 251. 

© Tbid. 

46 GF 21: Verumtamen dicunt se esse de Francorum generatione, et quia nullus homo naturaliter 
debet esse miles nisi Franci et ill. 


168 CHAPTER FIVE 


historians who, some ten years later, rewrote the Gesta Francorum, has 
to be examined. 

In Robert the Monk’s Historia Lherosolimitana the phrase milites et pedites 
quite clearly referred to knights and footsoldiers. Robert used it a num- 
ber of times. Duke Godfrey was described as taking the road through 
Hungary with a great band of milites et pedites.” When he learned of 
the crusade, Bohemond was described as addressing everyone, whether 
milites or pedites. In preparation for the storming of Antioch, 3 June 1098, 
the leaders of the fighters assembled huge battalions of milites and even 
more troops of pedites. In November 1098 the crusading forces that 
had scattered from Antioch while plague raged there returned and from 
many parts of the world many distinguished milites et pedites followed 
the example of those who had left earlier.” When Raymond Pilet led a 
newly recruited force out of Antioch in July 1098, he bound to himself 
a multitude of milites et pedites.™® Godfrey, as ruler of Jerusalem, sent to 
the people of Nablus, his brother Eustace, Tancred and a great band 
of milites et pedites." At the battle of Ascalon, 12 August 1099, the pedites 
were lined up in front of the milites.” 

There are two significant passages in the Historia Lherosolimitana con- 
cerning milites and riding in which the passage loses its sense unless 
the term milites is understood to be referring specifically to knights. As 
considered under pedites, Robert reported that while crossing the Anti- 
‘Taurus range of mountains ‘on this uneven path the milites and armigert 
carried their arms from their necks as did the pedites because none 
of them were riding,’ For the battle against Kerbogha, ‘Bohemond 
formed a sixth [squadron] with those pedites who were lightly armed 
for war, and milites, who had been compelled by necessity to sell their 
horses.””* The relegation of milites to a contingent of pedites is discussed 
in full below.” Here Robert was clear that even though the miles was 
having to fight from foot, he was still a knight, a point which is similarly 


“RM 732. 

RM 799. 

9 RM 843. 

5 RM 838. 

5 RM 871. 

5 RM 874. 
RM 770 hac inaequali semita milites et armigeri collo suo arma dependentia gestabant, omnes 
aequaliter pedites, quia nulli eorum equitabant. 

* RM 828: Boamundi fuit sexta, cum quo expeditiores ad bellum pedites fuerunt, et milites qui 
equos suos, necessitate compulsi, vendiderant. 


5 See below pp. 179-86. 


MILITES: KNIGHTS OR SIMPLY MOUNTED WARRIORS? 169 


evident in the description of those milites and armigert required to walk 
like pedites due to the difficulty of the mountain terrain. 

There are a further group of references to milites by Robert that 
should probably be understood to refer to the activity of knights rather 
than soldiers in general. After victory over Kerbogha, Robert reported 
a speech of the papal legate, Bishop Adhémar of Le Puy, to the victori- 
ous Christian forces, which claimed that never had such milites existed, 
since none had fought so many successful battles in so short a time.*° 
Robert described Duke Godfrey as a “Duke of Dukes, a miles of milites.” 
He was also described as so gentle to the meek that he seemed more 
a monk than a miles.” In a further passage concerning Duke Godfrey, 
Robert wrote that ‘God guarded his miles.” During the battle with 
Kerbogha, Robert, closely following the Gesta Francorum claimed that 
a countless army of milites clothed in white was seen to come down 
the mountain, whose standard bearers and leaders were said to be SS 
George, Mauricius, Mercurius and Demetrius. On another occasion 
Robert referred to Saint George as invictus miles.°! 

There were several individuals given the epithet miles by Robert the 
Monk. Walter Sanzavohir, a leader of one of the contingents of the 
People’s Crusade was a miles egregius; Duke Robert of Normandy a miles 
animosus and miles interritus;® Fulcher of Chartres, first on to the walls of 
Antioch, a miles; Guy of Hauteville, half-brother of Bohemond a miles,” 
Bohemond himself, miles and animosus miles; Raymond Pilet a miles;°’ 
Gouffier of Lastours, miles honestus, and Letold of Tournai, a miles.°° 
Robert did not name a certain Armenian lord, who was appointed 


5 RM 834. 

5 RM 855: ...dux ducum et miles militum. 

3 RM 731. 

5 RM 787: Deus militem suum custodvitt. 

50 RM 832. 

5! RM 834. 

® RM 735. 

53 RM 760, 875. 

ĉ& RM 799. Fulcher of Chartres the miles is not to be confused with the chronicler 
of the same name. See C. Sweetenham, Robert the Monk’s History of the First Crusade, 
p. 145 n. 24. 

5 RM 816. 

5 RM 817, 741. 

°7 RM 838, 844. 


° RM 847. For Gouffier of Lastours see see J. Riley-Smith, First Crusaders, p. 209. 
° RM 867. 


170 CHAPTER FIVE 


ruler of a castle between Mamistra and Caesarea, although the Gesta 
referred to him as Symeon. While the author of the Gesta simply called 
Symeon ‘a man’, Robert described him as a miles fortis et strenuus.” Peter 
of Aups was described as a miles by both the Gesta and Robert.” The 
Byzantine envoy Tatikios together with William Carpenter was called 
a miles and dives.” With the one exception of Raymond Pilet, Carol 
Sweetenham has preferred to translate all these terms as ‘soldier.’ This 
seems to be overly cautious, as all of those described as miles, with the 
possible exceptions of the Armenian Symeon and Byzantine Tatikios, 
clearly held a distinct social position, a very senior one in the case of 
Robert of Normandy and Bohemond. To portray Robert the Monk 
as intending the meaning ‘soldier’ rather than ‘knight’ in these cases 
risks losing information concerning the term milites. 

There are, however, passages in the Historia in which Robert used 
the term miles in a general sense, for a soldier rather than a knight. In 
this regard, Carol Sweetenham’s introduction to her English translation 
of the Historia Lherosolimitana is correct in stating that ‘Robert’s use of 
the term miles is fluid; in this he mirrors his contemporaries such as 
Fulcher. Miles can mean variously a soldier, a vassal, a Christian soldier 
or a knight.” But as noted in Chapter Two, those passages where the 
term was not confined to the meaning of ‘knights’ tended to occur 
where Robert was making a theological point. 

A very interesting passage in this regard occurs in Robert’s report of 
a speech of Bohemond at Constantinople, a speech that is not in the 
Gesta Francorum. Bohemond is described as being tearful with delight 
that so many consules, duces and optimates are at the city to meet him. 
He opened his address to these senior nobles by calling them ‘bellatores 
Dei?” Later he declaimed, ‘O ordo of milites, now three and four times 
blessed! You who up to these times were polluted by the blood of mur- 
der, are now through the sweat of the saints equal to the martyrs.’” In 
a metaphorical language, Robert was making the point that the expe- 
dition to Jerusalem gave a soldier the opportunity to earn a heavenly 


” RM 768, GF 25. 

7! RM 769. GF 25. For Peter of Aups see C. Sweetenham, Robert the Monk’s History, 
p: 117 n. 52. 

2 RM 782. 

3 C. Sweetenham, Robert the Monk’s History, p. 71. 

™ RM 747. 

3 RM 748: O ordo militum, nunc terque quaterque beatus! Qui huc usque fuisti homicidii sanguine 
deturpatus, nunc sanctorum sudoribus compar martyrum. 


MILITES: KNIGHTS OR SIMPLY MOUNTED WARRIORS? 171 


reward through the same activity that formerly condemned him. The 
occurrence of bellatores and ordo in the same passage makes it clear that 
at this point Robert was writing within the functional framework of 
the ‘three orders.” His theological message was aimed at the broad 
category of ‘those who fight’ from emperor to poor footsoldier. Because 
of this context it would probably be inaccurate to narrow down those 
milites being addressed to the category of knights. The sense of ordo here 
is not one of hierarchy; Sweetenham in her translation also preferred 
‘soldiers’ to ‘knights’ at this point.” 

A similar observation can be made for Baldric of Dol’s reworking 
of the Gesta Francorum. Baldric used the term miles in a passage with a 
curious division of the Christian forces present at the siege of Antioch. 
When the knights departed from the Christian camp to fight the ‘Lake 
Battle’, 9 February 1098, Baldric wrote that everyone became anxious. 
‘No one was confident in themselves, neither the sacerdos, nor the woman, 
nor the populus, nor the miles.’’* There is an echo here of the famous 
three orders based on function, with miles here almost certainly stand- 
ing for a soldier in general rather than a knight in particular. So for 
Robert the Monk and Baldric of Dol, Benedictine monks of northern 
France, milites were not necessarily a distinct social grouping of ‘knights’, 
particularly when they used the term in the context of a schema of 
society that ordered people by their function. 

For Guibert of Nogent, however, although sharing a similar back- 
ground to Robert and Baldric, the use of the term miles is very different. 
Not least because Guibert’s rich social vocabulary and acute awareness 
of social division led him to echo a classical hierarchical ordering of 
society rather the simple functional division of orders. Guibert used the 
terms milites, equites, and equestres for ‘knights’ of a distinct social class 
and not simply mounted soldiers. ‘This is particularly evident from the 
three appearances of the phrase ordo equestris in the Gesta Dei Per Francos, 
although Joachim Bumke has pointed out that such a phrase is not 
necessarily a ‘star witness’ for the case that equestres or milites formed a 
knightly class.’? Bumke argued that as the phrase ordo equestris or ordo 
militaris often appears in the works of writers consciously emulating 


7 On the ‘three orders’ see Georges Duby, The Three Orders, Feudal Society Imagined, 
(Chicago, 1978). 

” C. Sweetenham, Robert the Monk’s History, p. 98. 

® BD 46: Neuter de se confidebat, nec sacerdos, nec mulier; nec populus, nec miles. 

J. Bumke, The Concept of Knighthood, p. 110. 


172 CHAPTER FIVE 


Cicero, it might better reflect the transmission of classical language 
than the actual sociological formation of a class of knights. Certainly 
Guibert’s work contained a certain amount of Ciceronian imagery."° 
His three uses of the phrase ordo equestris can be seen as echoes of Cice- 
ronian history, but they are not simply rhetorical flourishes. Guibert’s 
description of how before the expedition the ordo equestris were engaged 
in mutual slaughter with the vulgus had a real content.*' Social discontent 
and the ‘Truce of God were major themes of Urban II at the Council 
of Clermont.® Guibert was very conscious of the depredations against 
the poor made by certain knights known to him.” Guibert was using 
his classical vocabulary to comment on a genuine sociological issue 
of his day, the conflict between knights and commoners. The other 
two examples of the phrase were introductions by Guibert to specific 
figures: Raymond Pilet was described as a vir equestris ordinis among the 
primores of Count Raymond and an unnamed ‘knight’ who appeared 
in a colourful anecdote as joining the expedition to rid himself of the 
devil, was again a vir equestris ordinis. The imagery is evocative of the 
ancient Roman order of knights,” but if the sentences meant any- 
thing at all to Guibert and his contemporaries, it was surely that that 
Raymond Pilet and the anonymous figure belonged to a current social 
ordo of knights. Nor was Guibert referring to the so-called ‘open’®’ ordo 
of bellatores from the functional tripartite schema of those who pray, 
those who work and those who fight. By analogy with Roman social 
order, Guibert here was referring to an ordo with a distinct position in 
the social hierarchy. 


* GN 100, 121, 206, 298, 308, 319. 

8! GN 87. 

® R. Somerville, The Councils of Urban I, 1, Decreta Claromontensia (Amsterdam, 
1972). 

8 GN 179. 

8! GN 244. 

8° GN 324. This person was later described as a miles, he was the owner of a horse, 
his brother died in combat and he was approached by the devil in the guise of an 
eques with a falcon on his hand. 

8° About which in Cicero’s time see R. Syme, The Roman Revolution (Oxford, 1939), 
pp. 13-14. 

8 On ‘open’ orders, that is those without a barrier created by the need for distin- 
guished birth, see J. Fleckenstein, ‘Zum Problem der Abschliessung des Ritterstandes,’ in 
Historische Forschungen fiir Walter Schlesinger, H. Beumann ed. (Koln, 1974), pp. 264-5. 

8 Roman hierarchy, for classes in particular see Livy, Ab Urbe Condita, ed. B. O. 
Foster (Cambridge, Mass., 1976) 1.42-3. See also R. Syme, The Roman Revolution, 
(Oxford, 1939), passim. 


MILITES: KNIGHTS OR SIMPLY MOUNTED WARRIORS? 173 


Of all the early crusading authors Guibert had the most refined 
sense of social hierarchy, reflected in particular in his use of the term 
mediocres. Indeed Guibert indicated that stratification existed among the 
class of equestres with his use of the highly original phrase, medocritates 
equestrium virorum, the ‘middle ranks of knights’. The context of this 
improvisation by Guibert was his observation that after Pope Urban 
II had preached the iter Dei at the Council of Clermont, ‘the will of 
counts palatine was aroused and the middle ranks of equestres besides 
had come to the brink [of departure]. The distinction made here 
indicates that Guibert considered that senior nobles were part of the 
order of equestres, but so too were equestres of more modest means. 

To emphasise how the whole of that order, great and lesser, desired 
to join the expedition he coined a unique phrase. Further evidence 
that Guibert’s social schema for the First Crusade was a pyramid-like 
hierarchy arises from his observation that a multitude of the mediocres 
principes joined the expedition. These ‘middling princes’ were defined 
by Guibert as the owners of one, two, three or four towns and were 
present in sufficient numbers to draw comparisons with the siege of 
Troy.™® Guibert might well have coined the highly unusual phrase 
mediocres principes to assist his description of the Christian forces. At the 
top were the handful of senior princes, below them a large number of 
others encompassed by the term princeps, but of more modest means, 
being the lords of between one and four towns. Below these were 
the milites. All these groupings were encompassed within the category 
equestris ordo. 

In describing the forces that accompanied Bohemond from Apulia, 
Guibert wrote that in his following were many equestres of the highest 
probity (virorum probitas).?' Again the term equestres here clearly has a 
social content. Similarly in Guibert’s report of the departure of the 
Crusade of 1101 he noted the presence of ‘so many battalions of 
equestres of considerable reputation (non contemnendi nominis).’** Two indi- 
viduals termed ‘knight’ by Guibert were specifically praised as noble as 
a result of birth. It has been noted that Guibert described Gervase of 
Bazoches as an eques and a miles. Guibert described Gervase as an eques 


8° GN 118: Jam Palatinorum comitum pruriebat intentio, et mediocritas equestrium virorum 


parturive iam coeperat. 
° GN 133. 
9 GN 138. 
2 GN 312. 


174 CHAPTER FIVE 


‘of famous descent’ (nobiliter oriundus). Gervase was related to the lords 
of Milly in the Beauvaisis, was a senior member of the entourage of 
Baldwin I and was made lord of ‘Tiberias in 1106. 

A more significant example is that of Guibert’s friend Matthew, 
who was described as being an equester of noble birth (genere nobilis); 
Matthew was not a particularly senior eques as Guibert informs us that 
Matthew’s parents owed homage to Guibert’s.°t Between them these 
examples indicate that Guibert considered nobility was associated 
with family and that it extended down the social scale as far as other- 
wise undistinguished milites and equites. The fact that Guibert saw the 
whole body of milites on the First Crusade as noble is strengthened by 
consideration of his description of the moment the entire Christian 
fighting force gathered at Nicea, June 1097. Guibert wrote that those 
present wearing the arms of equestres were the ‘flower of the nobility’ 
(flos nobilitatis) of the Franks.” 

It is worth noting the story in the Gesta Der Per Francos of the devil 
who appeared to the unnamed knight mentioned above. Guibert’s 
description of the devil reads: ‘Indeed he appeared as an eques, holding 
a sparrow-hawk in his hand.’ The hunting bird as an accoutrement 
of the eques is important here. As Albert of Aachen noted, such birds 
were beloved ‘of the highest nobiles.’ Although Guibert’s story here 
is a miraculous and edifying anecdote it does provide evidence linking 
the term eques to a noble class with a distinct culture and not simply 
a soldier on a horse. 

The work of Guibert of Nogent therefore provides the strongest 
evidence that the milites of the First Crusade were a social as well as 
a military grouping. 

Importantly, a similar conclusion arises from consideration of Albert 
of Aachen’s history. As Albert was writing in Lotharingia his experience 
considerably broadens the geographical scope of investigation into the 
terms. Over the course of his long work Albert identified very many 
individuals as mites, usually with a praiseworthy epithet: Walter Sanza- 
vohir, one of the leaders of the People’s Crusade was a miles egregius;” 


°% GN 198. 

* GN 198. 

5 GN 147. 
> GN 324: Videbatur etiam et ipse eques, accipitrem manu gestans. 
7 AA iii.2 (140): procerum nobilium. 
3 AA i.6 (8). 


MILITES: KNIGHTS OR SIMPLY MOUNTED WARRIORS? 175 


99 100 


Henry of castle Esch was variously miles,” miles fortissemus,'°° miles nobilis!" 
and miles nobilis genere;! Along with Henry, his brother Godfrey and 
Cono of Montaigu were ‘milites always most dangerous to the enemy’, 
Godfrey had earlier been described as a miles fortissimus;'°? Warner, count 
of Grez, was ‘a miles irreproachable in the art of war’;'!°' Thomas de 
Marle of the castle of La Fère a miles acerrimus; Engelrand, son of 
Hugh of Saint-Pol a miles egregius;'°° Milo Louez a miles famosissimus;!°’ 
Oliver of the castle Jussey a miles audax et pugnax;'*’ Welf of Burgundy 
a miles egregius; Richard of the Principate, count of Salerno, brother- 
in-law of Tancred, and Robert of Anzi, together milites acerrimi;''° 
Roger Barneville;''’ Udelrard of Wissant, a miles inreprehensibilis, in the 
household of Duke Godfrey ‘who always shared his secrets before all 
others’ and also a ‘splendid and most noble’ knight;'!? Everard MI, 
lord of Le Puiset;'!? Walbricus, Ivo, Rodolphus of Fontanais, Raimbald 
Croton, Peter son of Gisla, together milites Christiani;''* Tancred, miles 
acerrimus, miles gloriosus;''? Reinhard of Hemmersbach, ‘a miles most 


9 AA iv.35 (303); iii.39 (200). For Henry of Esch see A. V. Murray, The Crusader 
Kingdom, p. 209. 

100 AA ii.l (60-62). 

101 AA iv.54 (332). 

102 AA v.4 (342). 

103 AA iii.39 (200); AA ii.1 (60-62): milites semper hostibus infèstissimi. For Godfrey of 
Esch see see A. V. Murray, The Crusader Kingdom, p. 205. For Cono, count of Montaigu 
see see A. V. Murray, The Crusader Kingdom, p. 189. 

10t AA ii.22 (96): Warnerus de Greis castro, miles inreprehensibilis in arte bellica. For Warner, 
count of Grez see A. V. Murray, The Crusader Kingdom, pp. 234-5. 

105 AA ii.22 (96). For Thomas de Marle, lord of Coucy, count of Amiens see 
D. Barthélemy, Les Deux Ages de la seigneurie banale: Pouvoir et société dans terre des 
sires de Coucy (mileu Xi'—milieu XIII siècle), (Paris, 1984) Chapters 1—2. See also 
J. Riley-Smith, First Crusaders, p. 223. 

106 AA ii.22 (96). 

107 AA ii.23 (98). Milo Louez is otherwise unknown. 

108 AA ii.23 (100). For Oliver of Jussey see J. Riley-Smith, First Crusaders, p. 215. 

109 AA iii.1 1 (154). For Welf of Burgundy see AA 154 n. 29. 

"NOAA iïi.16 (162-4). See J. Riley-Smith, First Crusaders, p. 220 (Richard), p. 221 
(Robert). 

"AA ii.33 (190). For Roger Barneville, see AA 108 n. 96. 

N2 AA ii.27 (182): Udelarus de Wizan...miles inreprehensibilis...de domo ducis Godefridi 
semper secretorum illius ante omnes conscius; AA v.22 (364): preclari militis et nobilissimi. For 
Udelrard of Wissant see A. V. Murray, The Crusader Kingdom, p. 231. 

13 AA ii.33 (190); iv.32 (294). 

1t AA iv.32 (294). For Raimbold Croton see J. Riley-Smith, First Crusaders, p. 218. 
For these other knights see AA 294 n. 45, 46, 47 and 49. 

15 AA ii.7 (148); vi.29 (440). 


176 CHAPTER FIVE 


famous in deeds and birth’;''® Folbert, ‘a miles egregius by birth from 
the castle Bouillon’;!'” Heribrand of Bouillon, miles nobilis;!!® Walter of 
castle Verra, ‘a man and miles of noble parents’, also a miles egregius;''® 
Gerard, born of the castle Avesnes, a miles, miles egregious, miles acerrimus 
and a beloved miles of Duke Godfrey;'”? Franco I of Maasmechelen 
on the river Meuse, miles inperterritus;'*! Rothold a miles acerrimus;'”? 
Ralph of Mousson, Geldemar Carpenel, Wicher the Swabian and 
Ralph of Montpingon, together milites probi; Geldemar Carpenel was 
elsewhere termed a miles egregius and a miles ferocissimus;'** while Wicher 
the Swabian was also a miles magnificus;'” Peter, a miles preclarus from 
Lombardy;'*° Robert a miles probus from Apulia;'*’ Wirich the butler of 
Duke Godfrey, a miles egregius and miles probus;'*® Milo of Claremont;!?° 
King Baldwin I, ‘always a miles imperterritus’;'°° Walter and Baldwin of 
Tahun;!?! Berwold, a miles nobilissimus;'** Guido of Biandrate, a miles 


16 AA v.4 (344): Reinardus de Hamerbach, miles clarissimus opere et genere. For Reinhard 
of Hemmersbach see A. V. Murray, The Crusader Kingdom, p. 224. 

"7 AA v.5 (344): Folbertus, miles egregius de castello Bullon ortus. For Folbert of Bouillon 
see A. V. Murray, The Crusader Kingdom, p. 195-6. 

18 AA v.12 (352). For Heribrand of Bouillon see A. V. Murray, The Crusader Kingdom, 
pp. 209-10. 

19 AA v.40 (392): miles nobili editus parentela, AA v.41 (394). For Walter of Verra see 
J. Riley—Smith, First Crusaders, p. 224. 

120 AA vi.53 (474); vii.2 (486); vii.3 (488); vii.15 (506). For Gerard of Avesnes see 
A. V. Murray, The Crusader Kingdom, p. 199. 

121 AA vii.3 (490). For Franco I of Maasmechelen see A. V. Murray, The Crusader 
Kingdom, p. 196-7. 

2 AA vii.4 (490). Rothold is otherwise unknown. 

123 AA vii.36 (538). For these knights see A. V. Murray, The Crusader Kingdom, pp. 
223-4 (Ralph of Mousson); p. 198 (Geldemar Carpenel); p. 235-6 (Wicher the Swabian); 
p. 223 (Ralph of Montpincon). 

4 AA vii.22 (516); vii.65 (576). 

13 AA vii.71 (584). For Wicher the Swabian see A. V. Murray, The Crusader Kingdom, 
pp. 236-6. 

12 AA vii.4 (490). Peter the Lombard is otherwise unknown. 

127 AA vii.ll (500). For Robert of Apulia see A. V. Murray, The Crusader Kingdom, 
p. 225. 

128 AA vii.24 (518); 559. For Wirich the butler see A. V. Murray, The Crusader 
Kingdom, p. 238. 

129 AA vii.24 (518). For Milo of Clermont see A. V. Murray, The Crusader Kingdom, 
p. 218. 

130 AA vii.34 (536): Baldwinus semper miles imperterritus. 

131 AA vii.34 (536). Walter and Baldwin of Tahun are otherwise unknown. 

132 AA vii.65 (576). For Berwold see A. V. Murray, The Crusader Kingdom, p. 189. 


MILITES: KNIGHTS OR SIMPLY MOUNTED WARRIORS? 177 


egregius;'*? Baldwin of Grandpré a miles pulcherrimus;'** Stephen, count 


of Burgundy, a miles clarissimus and miles egregius;'®? Conrad, constable 
of King Henry IV Germany, a miles imperterritus, egregius, famosus et mira- 
bilis; Dodo of Clermont a miles egregius;'*’ Wibert of Mount Laon, a 
miles ferocissimus;'*® Engelbert;'*? Arpin, a miles egregius;'*° Count Stephen 
of Blois, a miles egregius;'*! Reinold, a miles of King Baldwin J;'** Otto 
Altaspata;'*? Baldwin of Bourcq a miles egregius and also a miles inperter- 
ritus;'** Joscelin of Courtenay a miles egregius and a miles fidelissimus;'* 
Reinard of Verdun, a miles egregius; Arnulf of Oudenaarde, a miles 
illustris;'*’ Roger of Rozoy;'** Gerard the Chamberlain; Hugh of Cas- 
sel and Albert surnamed Apostle, milites egregii;'°’ Gervase of Bazoches, 
a miles egregius;'' Robert of Vieux-Ponts, a miles indefessus;'°? William 
of Wanges, a miles gloriosus et nobilis; >? Eustace I Granarius, lord of 


133 AA viii.l (586). For Guido of Biandrate see AA 587 n. 3. 
134 AA viii.7 (594). For Baldwin of Grandpré see J. Riley-Smith, First Crusaders, 
p. 200. 
135 AA viii.15 (604); ix.5 (644). 
86 AA viii.16 (606); ix.5 (644); ix.6 (644). For Conrad the constable see J. Riley- 
Smith, First Crusaders, p. 203. 
'87 AA viii.23 (616). For Dodo of Clermont see AA 595 n. 26. 
88 AA viii.17 (609). For Wibert of Mount Laon see AA 608 n. 39. 
139 AA viii.48 (636). For Engelbert see AA 637 n. 79. 
10 AA ix.5 (644). For Arpin of Bourges see AA 567 n. 71. 
141 AA ix.5 (644). 
42 AA 673. For Reinold see A. V. Murray, The Crusader Kingdom, p. 224. 
13 AA ix.30 (674). For Otto Altaspata see A. V. Murray, The Crusader Kingdom, 
. 218. 
i Mt AA ix.40 (692); 860. For Baldwin of Bourcq see A. V. Murray, The Crusader 
Kingdom, p. 185-6. 
45 AA ix.40 (692); x.37 (752). For Joscelin of Courtenay see A. V. Murray, The 
Crusader Kingdom, p. 214. 
46 AA ix.50 (710). For Reinhard of Verdun see A. V. Murray, The Crusader Kingdom, 
p: 224. 
17 AA ix.52 (714). For Arnulf of Oudenaarde A. V. Murray, The Crusader Kingdom, 
. 184. 
P. a AA x.14 (730). For Roger of Rozoy see A. V. Murray, The Crusader Kingdom, 
mae 
F 149 AA x.14 (730). For Gerard the Chamberlain see A. V. Murray, The Crusader 
Kingdom, p. 227. 
150 AA x.34 (750). For Hugh of Cassel see A. V. Murray, The Crusader Kingdom, 
pp. 210-11. Albert the Apostle is otherwise unknown. 
51 AA x.55 (770). 
12 AA xi.40 (816). For Robert of Vieux-Pont see AA 816 n. 77. 
53 AA xii.5 (830). William of Wanges is otherwise unknown. 


178 CHAPTER FIVE 


155 


Caesarea, a miles preclarus'** Rainer of Brus, a miles imperterritus; and 
lastly Hugh a males illustris.'°° 

This list has some interesting features. As a rule the term milites is 
not used for the most senior princes. During the course of the first six 
books, none of the leaders of the First Crusade are singled out by the 
term. Only in writing his later, chronicle style, history of the Kingdom 
of Jerusalem did Albert begin to apply the term to notable figures 
such as Joscelin of Courtenay and Baldwin of Bourcgq. ‘The fact that at 
one point Albert wrote that Baldwin I was ‘always a miles imperterritus’ 
was as much a comment on the king’s unvarying tactic of charging 
at the enemy regardless of the odds than an as epithet concerning his 
status. 

In the cases of Henry of Esch, Warner, count of Grez, ‘Thomas de 
Marle, Oliver of Jussey, Folbert of Bouillon and Walter of Verra, Albert 
introduced the knights as being from a particular castle. There is a 
considerable debate on the origin of the castle, but private ownership 
of castles, flourishing from around the year 1000 onwards, has gener- 
ally been considered an important feature of post-Carolingian society.'*” 
Albert’s brief epithets fit with a perspective that considers the castle to 
be of growing importance, for they provide evidence that by 1100 some 
miles at least were defined by their ownership of a certain castle. 

As with the other early crusading historians Albert considered there 
to be a connection between nobility and family. Henry of Esch was 
called a miles nobilis by birth (genere).!°° Similarly Walter of castle Verra 
was described as ‘a man and miles from noble elevated parents’!” 
Reinhard of Hemmersbach, while not obtaining the epithet nobilis was 


154 AA xii.6 (832). For Eustace I Granarius see A. V. Murray, The Crusader Kingdom, 
pp. 193-195. 

155 AA xii.11 (840). For Rainer Brus see A. V. Murray, The Crusader Kingdom, pp. 
221-222. 

156 AA xii.11 (840). Hugh is otherwise unknown. 

7 For a summary of the discussion see D. Crouch, The Birth of Nobility (Harlow, 
2005), pp. 204-7. For castles in the era of the crusades, see J. France, Western 
Warfare in the Age of the Crusades, 1100-1500 (London, 1999), pp. 77—106. See also 
J. Flori, ‘Knightly Society’, The New Cambridge Medieval History IV c. 1024-1198, ed. 
D. Luscombe and J. Riley-Smith, 2 (Cambridge, 2004), I, 169. 

158 AA v.4 (342): Miles nobilis genere. 

159 AA v.40 (392): Vir et miles nobili editus parentela. 


MILITES: KNIGHTS OR SIMPLY MOUNTED WARRIORS? 179 


‘a miles most famous in deeds and birth’;'* as was Folbert, ‘a miles egregius 
by birth from the castle Bouillon’.'°! 

In Albert’s writing then, it seems that there is a considerable overlap 
between milites and nobiles. As noted in Chapter Two, however, there 
is one passage in the work of Albert of Aachen that suggests that for 
him there could be a distinction between milites and nobiles. ‘This was 
the account of plague in Italy in 1083 that killed milites and nobiles. ‘This 
might well be a reference to ministeriales, at this time often performing 
exactly the same function as knights, but with a servile social status. 
Albert, more than the French historians, would have been familiar 
with the fact that the German kings used this particular category of 
warriors. 

Although not absolute, fixed, categories, a survey of the usage of the 
terms milites, equites and equestres in the early crusading histories shows 
their usage to cluster far more around a notion that includes that of 
social status than that of their being simply bellatores. David Crouch’s 
discussion of this issue made the point that ‘knighthood and noble status 
came together at some time before 1190.’! It seems, in fact, that around 
1110, especially in the history of Guibert of Nogent, the two concepts, 
knighthood and nobility, were already closely linked. This is not to argue 
that the sociological phenomenon came into being at around this date, 
conceptual language has always lagged behind social evolution. The 
testimony of the crusading sources is not that there was a new knightly 
nobility on the First Crusade, but only that the terms milites, equites and 
equestres were becoming fastened to the activities of a social layer who 
might well have seen themselves as both knights and noble for some 
time, perhaps for as long as a hundred years in parts France.'® This 
conclusion is strengthened by the considerable commentary of these 
sources on the relationship between knights and horses. 


Since there were very many illustrious and nobilissimi equites, whose number 
lies hidden, their horses having died and having been eaten because of 
the hunger of famine, they were reckoned in the number of pedites. And 
they, who from their boyhood had always been accustomed to horses and 
had been in the habit of riding horses into battle, were schooled to do 
battle as pedites. Indeed among these illustrious men he who could acquire 


100 AA v.4 (342): Reinardus de Hamerbach, miles clarissimus opere et genere. 

161 AA v.5 (344): Folbertus, miles egregius de castello Bullon ortus. 

12 D, Crouch, The Birth of Nobility, p. 246. 

16 G, Duby, La Société aux XT et XIF siècles dans la région maconnaise (Paris, 1953). 


180 CHAPTER FIVE 


a mule or ass or worthless beast of burden or palfrey, would use it as a 
horse. Among them were principes, most powerful and rich in their own 
lands, who entered the conflict sitting on an ass.'* 


Albert of Aachen wrote this key passage concerning equites and pedites 
at the time of the battle outside Antioch between the Christian forces 
and Kerbogha. The statement that illustrious and noble equites were 
numbered among the pedites seems to be carefully chosen by Albert, 
especially in the light of his following remark. The loss of status indi- 
cated was temporary and could be alleviated by the eques obtaining 
any kind of mount on which to ride. The eques did not become a pedes, 
but was counted among them, his years of training from boyhood still 
represented a differentiation from those with whom he now fought. 
Nevertheless, the desperation of the eques to hold on to their visible status 
was shown by those who could obtain mules preferring the humiliation 
of riding an ass into battle to that of being assigned to the pedites. 

The struggle by milites not to fall into the ranks of the pedites is one of 
the themes of the Gesta Francorum, noted by those who used the history 
for their fons formalis. In describing the hardship of the march, early in 
August 1097, en route to Iconium, the anonymous author wrote that ‘a 
great number of our horses died, so that many of our milites remained 
pedites, and for lack of horses oxen served us in place of nags.’'® Fulcher 
of Chartres used the Gesta Francorum for this period of his own history, 
although he was an eyewitness to the difficulties of the march of the 
united Christian army. His repetition that the loss of horses led to the 
use of oxen as mounts by some knights is therefore corroborative. '®®° 
Baldric of Dol’s version of this passage was very similar, reporting that 
many renowned milites were compelled to march as pedites.!°’ 

The anonymous author wrote that due to poverty at the siege of 
Antioch early in 1098 there were less than a thousand milites who had 
kept their horses in the best condition.'™ Baldric’s version of the same 


16t AA iv.54 (332): Plurimi sequidem egregii equites et nobilissimi quorum latet numerus, equis 
mortuis et pre famis inopia consumptis, in numero peditum computati, pedites prelia discebant, qui 
a puerili euo semper equis assueti et invecti certamen inire solebant. Ex hus vero egregus viris qui 
mulum aut asellum vel vile iumentum vel palefridum nunc adquirere poterat pro equo utebatur. Inter 
quos fortissimi et ditissimi sua in terra principes asino insidentes certamen inierunt. 

16 GF 23: Ilic fuit mortua maxima pars nostrorum equorum, eo quod multi ex nostris militibus 
remanserunt pedites; et pro penuria equorum, erant nobis boves loco caballorum. 

166 FC I.xiii.3 (202). GF 23. 

r BD 37. 

168 GF 34. 


MILITES: KNIGHTS OR SIMPLY MOUNTED WARRIORS? 181 


report was that ‘at that time, indeed, there was so great a decline in 
the number of horses of the Christians, that scarcely a thousand milites 
could be found in the whole of that great army who still enjoyed the 
use of a mount.’'®* Both versions suggest there were very many milites 
without mounts, but at the same time, in calculating the forces avail- 
able to the Christian army the message seems clear. Only those with 
a mount counted. ‘This tension, between the practical assignation of 
milites without mounts to the ranks of pedites but their theoretical reten- 
tion of their former status was an important source of internal stress 
within the expedition. 

The section of the Gesta Francorum dealing with the embassy of 
Peter the Hermit to Kerbogha has the form of a chanson with invented 
speeches by the two parties.” One feature of the account that is 
important here is Kerbogha’s purported offer to the Christian forces 
that if they renounced their religion he would give them land, cities and 
castles, so that none should remain a pedes, but all would be milites.'” 
Whether apocryphal or not the matter was milites becoming pedites was 
a continual grievance of some significance to the author of the Gesta 
Francorum, since he placed it at the heart of Kerbogha’s offer to the 
Christians. 

It is notable that the author’s definition of a miles here was to be the 
owner of land, cities or castles. Baldric of Dol, Guibert of Nogent and 
Robert the Monk all repeated the offer in similar terms, although all 
three substituted equites for milites at this point.” Carol Sweetenham 
was so anxious to avoid the difficulties of the term ‘knight’ that in her 
translation of Robert the Monk’s Historia Iherosolomitana she had Ker- 
bogha offer land so as to make the Franks ‘mounted soldiers.’'’? But 
‘knights’ makes much more sense here, as the offer of land is an offer 
to raise their status: there is no mention of mounts. In his version of 
the negotiations between Peter the Hermit and Kerbogha, Fulcher, 
dependent on the Gesta Francorum for information as he was in Edessa 
at the time, wrote that ‘indeed [Kerbogha’s forces] knew our milites 
had become pedites, weak and poor.’!’* Similarly in his account of the 


169 BD 44: Tune etiam in tantum Christianorum defecerunt equi, ut vix in toto et tanto exercitu 


mille milites invenirentur qui caballis uterentur. 
170 See above p. 17 n. 35. 
"1 GF 67. 
'® BD 75, GN 236, RM 826. 
13 C. Sweetenham, Robert the Monk’s History, p. 166. 
'™ FC Lxxi.3 (249): Nostros vero milites sciebant effici pedites, debiles, inopes. 


182 CHAPTER FIVE 


march of Baldwin of Edessa and Bohemond of Antioch to Jerusalem 
in the autumn of 1099, Fulcher, who was now an eyewitness, wrote 
that ‘you would see noble milites, having lost their horses in some way, 
become pedites.’'” All of the early crusading historians had no difficulty 
in envisaging that a body of milites could fall to the ranks of pedites 
through hardship. 

Robert the Monk provided several more examples of the same theme. 
When the herald of al-Afdal, vizier of Cairo, came to the camp of the 
crusaders at the siege of Antioch, early in the spring of 1098, Robert 
elaborated on the Gesta Francorum by reporting the details of the offer 
that the envoy is supposed to have made. The proposal was to allow the 
Christians to travel and worship at Jerusalem, ‘if you wish to go with 
the satchel and stave, they will cause you to travel there with the greatest 
honour and you will be endowed with rich property: from pedites will be 
made equites.’'’° It seems that Robert imported the same ideas present in 
the offer of Kerbogha into this section also. Robert also described an 
imagined rout of the forces of Duqaq, ruler of Damascus, in which the 
Christian forces were all able to join the pursuit ‘since those who had 
come as pedites were turned into riders (ascensores equorum efficiebantur).”'"7 
It is unusual to have a report of pedites mounting horses and perhaps 
noteworthy that Robert did not write that they thereby became equites. 
It could be that while Robert was willing to write of pedites becoming 
equites through the grant of rich property, he was more reluctant to use 
the same idea for those pedites who mounted captured horses. 

For the battle against Kerbogha ‘Bohemond formed a sixth [squad- 
ron] with those pedites who were lightly armed for war, and milites, who 
had been compelled by necessity to sell their horses.’ Here Robert was 
clear that even though the miles was having to fight on foot, he was still 
a knight, a point which is similarly evident in the description of those 
milites and armigeri required to walk like pedites due to the difficulty of 
the mountain terrain when the expedition descended the Anti-Taurus 
range of mountains early in October 1097." 


15 FC Lxxxiii.13 (331): Videretis milites nobiles, equis quoquomodo amissis, pedites effici. 

176 RM 791: Quod si de cetero in pera et baculo vultis ire, cum honore maximo rerumque opulentia 
vos illuc facient pertransire: de peditibus equites facient. 

"7 RM 779: ... quoniam qui pedites venerant, ascensores equorum efficiebantur. 

8 RM 828: Boamundi fuit sexta, cum quo expeditiores ad bellum pedites fuerunt, et milites qui 
equos suos, necessitate compulsi, vendiderant. 

v9 RM 770: Milites et armigeri collo suo arma dependentia gestabant, omnes aequaliter pedites, 
quia nulli eorum equitabant. 


MILITES: KNIGHTS OR SIMPLY MOUNTED WARRIORS? 183 


A very interesting related passage is Guibert’s description of Robert 
Guiscard, duke of Apulia and Calabria, father of Bohemond, whom 
Guibert introduced as someone who was ‘from feeble enough station 
of birth, '® Guibert wrote that Robert Guiscard was sent away ‘a pedes 
from Normandy, perhaps banished, ‘to Apulia, where by whatever 
method, he earned horses and arms to become an eques.’'®! This is 
an extraordinary statement. Factually it is dubious, in that no other 
source mentions banishment and while Tancred, Robert’s father, was 
a poor lord with twelve sons, of whom Robert was the sixth, it seems 
unlikely he would have been so impoverished as to journey to Italy as 
a footsoldier.'*’ Guibert’s report does, however, testify to contemporary 
experience of the fluidity of social classes. 

In his comments on Robert Guiscard’s early career Guibert seems to 
be echoing the idea that is present in Kerbogha’s offer to the Christian 
forces in Antioch, that a knight impoverished to the point of being a 
pedes could restore his status as an eques by regaining a mount and arms. 
Guibert continued his account of the career of Robert Guiscard by 
reporting that the Norman eques took over certain castles, laid siege to 
wealthy cities and in short ‘this new man (novus homo) extended his ter- 
ritory of domination.” This idea of the creation of a ‘new man’ was 
sustained in Guibert’s comment that ‘anyone who wishes today may 
see the power of [Robert’s] son Bohemond who, having obliterated the 
worthlessness of his forbears, married the daughter of Philip, King of 
France.’!** The phrase novus homo is the key to understanding Guibert’s 
intent here. He was echoing the classical descriptions of those families 
who through their military and political successes were able to thrust 
themselves into the ranks of the Roman elite.'® Just as, very rarely, new 
families were reported as entering the political arena of the late Roman 
Republic, so Guibert considered it possible for someone of relatively 
low birth and the equipment of a pedes to rise to the status of an eques 
through the acquisition of a horse, castles and cities. Humble parentage, 


180 GN 137: ...et tenui satis loco natus. 

181 GN 137: Pedes in Apuliam abiit; ibi equos et arma, quibus eques fieret, qua potuit arte, 
commeruit. 

18 G, A. Loud, The Age of Robert Guiscard: Southern Italy and the Norman Conquest 
(Harlow, 2000), p. 2. 

183 GN 137: ...novus homo suae loca dominationis extendit. 

18t GN 138: Videat qui vult hodie filii eius Boemundi potentiam, qui veterum obliterata vilitate 
parentum Philippi regis Francorum fiham duxit in coniugium. 

'® For the classical ‘novus homo’ see R. Syme, The Roman Revolution, p. 11. 


184 CHAPTER FIVE 


while not completely forgotten, could be obliterated through a successful 
military career. This whole passage unequivocally concerns status, not 
function, and throughout Guibert used the term eques. Here, at least, 
there can be no other meaning to the term than ‘knight.’ 

Although Raymond of Aguilers occasionally drew on parts of the 
Gesta Francorum, his work, the Historia Francorum, represents a very dif- 
ferent tradition. Nevertheless, through several independently recorded 
examples, he also provided evidence for the importance that milites 
attached to horses. Outside the walls of Antioch on the evening of 29 
December 1097, Raymond observed the eagerness of certain milites 
to chase a horse in mid-battle, even to the point of incurring a defeat 
for the Christian forces.'*° This pursuit by the milites resulted in the 
footsoldiers thinking that a flight had begun and in the confusion the 
besieging army sustained many casualties. It is highly significant that 
one horse should be the source of undisciplined pursuit by milites. The 
incident is best understood within the context of the considerable loss 
of horses that had seen many milites numbered among the pedites due 
to the loss of their mount. Under such circumstances a healthy Arab 
horse was of immense value.'®’ The same context makes clear the 
importance of a council of the Provençals in January 1098, at which 
Count Raymond granted 500 marks of silver, ‘so that if any of the 
milites should lose his horse, he should be restored from the 500 marks 
and the rest that had been given up to the fraternity.’'** This agreement 
addressed the problem that the milites were reluctant to defend foraging 
expeditions due to their horses being in no fit state. '® 

At the fall of Antioch, the chronicler noted with pleasure that fleeing 
Turkish riders were intercepted and in their panic were thrown down 
to their deaths, ‘but we were grieved that more than three hundred 
horses came to naught in that place.” While trapped in Antioch by the 
arrival of Kerbogha, famine was so severe that ‘the majority of milites 
lived through the blood of their horses, but anticipating the mercy of 


186 RA 39, 

187 J, France, Victory in the East, pp. 281-2. 

18 RA 49 (245): ...ut, st quis militum suorum equum deperderet, de illis quingentis marchis 
illi restauraretur, ac de alis quae fraternitati concessa sunt. See also J. Richard, ‘La confrérie 
de la première croisade’, Etudes de Civilisation Médiéval: Mélanges Offerts à E. R. Labande, 
ed. B. Jeannau (Poitiers, 1974), pp. 617-22. 

189 RA 50 (246). See also J. France, Victory in the East, p. 242. 

1 RA 80 (252): Sed de equis plusquam tercentis inibi decollatis doluimus. 


MILITES: KNIGHTS OR SIMPLY MOUNTED WARRIORS? 185 


God, they were unwilling to kill them.’'”' No sooner did the milites and 
wealthier plebs obtain booty than they rushed to Caesarea and Homs 
to buy Arab horses.!'% 

A full discussion of the military importance of the mounted knight 
in the First Crusade can be found in John France’s Victory in the East.’ 
Here the evidence has been gathered with a view to the connection 
between being mounted and social status. One clear conclusion is that 
owning a mount was a necessary, although not sufficient, condition for 
being numbered among the milites. The descriptions of oxen and asses 
being ridden are strong testimony to the determination of milites not to 
fall to the ranks of pedites. All the sources indicate a surprising willing- 
ness to envisage both the fall of a miles to the state of a pedes and the 
possibility that through the acquisition of wealth pedites could become 
milites. One interpretation of this could be that the terms were purely 
functional for the author and thus the status of the miles or the pedes 
simply reflected whether they were mounted or not. Thus the relative 
rapid transformation of their fortunes is easily explained. This view, 
however, jars with the previous conclusion that the sources generally 
did mean to include an aspect of status in their use of the terms milites, 
equites and equestres. 

Moreover, when the particular passages in which the issue of 
change in status arises are looked at closely, the information given is 
more complex than the ‘functional’ explanation can encompass. It is 
not the offer of horses, but land and cities, which all the sources see 
as essential in making pedites into equites. There are several examples 
where the historian saw milites as being ‘numbered among’ or ‘fighting 
with’ the pedites, suggesting that they retained some aspect of a former 
status despite the loss of their mount. A second explanation is therefore 
preferred here, that the early crusading histories reveal a willingness to 
accept rapid changes of social status, particularly with the downward 
movement of milites to pedites. The problem with milites becoming pedites 
is a great one if those terms have a social content and society at large 
has a strict understanding of that content. But if the lower level of 
knighthood was still relatively undefined, then such social fluidity seems 
less remarkable. 


191 RA 116 (258): Plerique milites sanguine suorum equorum vivebant; exspectantes Dei miseri- 
cordiam, nolebant eos occidere adhuc. 

192 RA 188 (273). 

19 J, France, Victory in the East, pp. 122-142. 


186 CHAPTER FIVE 


Having abandoned their lands, the less distinguished knights were 
no longer anchored in a lordly social position; furthermore they could 
easily lose their distinguishing accoutrements during the periods of 
great hardship experienced by the Christian forces of the First Crusade: 
the horse and their arms. Then all that would distinguish them from 
the footsoldiers was their previous training and their desire to regain 
their lost status. The force of Kerbogha’s offer should be understood 
as being particularly directed at these former knights, rather than 
pedites in general. A pedes who gained a horse or temporary wealth did 
not become a knight (although Guibert was willing to write about the 
exceptional case of Robert Guiscard in that manner); a miles who fell 
to becoming a pedes, however, ran the risk that this loss of status could 
become permanent. 

Milites, equites and equestres in the early crusading histories were, by 
and large, members of the social class of knights; membership of this 
class, however, was not firmly fixed, particularly in the context of a 
three-year expedition. For the poorer knight their status was at times 
a precarious one. 


CHAPTER SIX 


IUVENES: 
THE GLORY-SEEKING KNIGHTS OF THE CRUSADE 


The epitome of the medieval warrior, the hero of the chanson, the glo- 
rious competitor in the sports of the tournament, was the zuvenzs. The 
‘youth’ was a knight whose career was still unsettled. In what remains 
the most important study of the subject, Georges Duby offered the 
definition that ‘youth’ can be defined ‘as the period in a man’s life 
between his being dubbed a knight and his becoming a father.’ In 
other words, the condition of a iuvenis was not necessarily that they 
were young, what mattered was that although knighted, they had yet 
to establish themselves as the head of a family of their own. 

Such knights in search of reputation, family and career often grouped 
together in bands and commenting on this Duby drew an interesting 
conclusion with regard to the crusades. ‘It is obvious that it was the 
bands of “youths”, excluded by so many social prohibitions from the 
main body of settled men, fathers of families and heads of houses, with 
their prolonged spells of turbulent behaviour making them an unstable 
fringe of society, who created and sustained the crusades.” 

It is certainly overstating the case with regard to the First Crusade to 
say that iuvenes created the expedition and sustained it. Duby’s observa- 
tion does, however, raise an important question. The Latin term tuvenis, 
or collective substantive iuventus, is typically used to mean a young 
person, or body of young persons, not a subcategory of knights. It is 
therefore natural enough that as historians have encountered this term 
in the sources for the First Crusade they have assumed its common 
meaning, But is it always correct to make this assumption? Or were the 
sources drawing attention to knights on the First Crusade who were 
‘youths’ in the sense of such turbulent glory-seeking warriors? 


' Georges Duby, The Chivalrous Society, trans. C. Postan, University of California 
Press (Berkely, 1977), p. 113. Originally published as ‘Les “jeunes” dans la société 
aristocratique dans la France du Nord-Ouest au XII‘ siècle, Annales: Economies, Sociétés, 
Civilisations 19 (5), 1964, pp. 835-846. 

° Ibid., p. 120. 


This is an open access chapter distributed under the terms of the CC-BY-NC License. 


188 CHAPTER SIX 


The historian of the First Crusade who had the most definite sense 
of the wvenes being a body of militant knights in search of fame was 
Robert the Monk. As noted above in Chapter Two Robert, apart from 
his testimony that he was present at the famous Council of Clermont, 
18-28 November 1095, which launched the crusade, was not an eye- 
witness to the events he described.* For the purposes of investigating 
the appearance of tuvenes in Robert’s work, it is important issue to try 
and assess the extent to which Robert was simply employing the term 
because it seemed an appropriate literary flourish for anyone at the 
forefront of battle, or whether he had a particular sociological idea 
of what a iuwvenis was, and which of the crusaders properly deserved 
the title. 

A key passage in this regard is Robert’s description of an Egyptian 
embassy sent by al-Afdal, the vizier of the boy Caliph, al-Mustali, 
which arrived at the crusader camp at the siege of Antioch early in 
March 1098. Robert wrote that the Christian army made a great 
effort to impress the legation. ‘The tents were beautified with various 
kinds of ornaments; shields were attached to stakes in the ground on 
which the knight’s game of quintain was to be played out the next day. 
There were not absent games of dice, chess and the rapid charges of 
horses, turning in a circle with taut reins, there were warlike charges 
and there were the shakings of spears by both sides, by which acts they 
demonstrated that those who performed such deeds did not fear. Indeed 
it was the iventus who so participated but those who were elder and 
experienced sat together as one and discussed the matter with good 
sense and prudence.”* 

The reference to quintain is significant. This was a sport of knights, in 
which the rider tilted at a target that could swing around on a counter- 
weighted arm. It was an activity that would be consistently associated 
with zuvenes throughout the medieval period. Even a hundred and fifty 
years later, the chronicler Matthew Paris assumed that quintain was 


3 RM 725. 

+ RM 791: Tentoria variis ornamentorum generibus venustantur; terrae infixis sudibus scuta 
apponuntur, quibus in crastinum Quintanae ludus, scilicet equestris, exerceretur. Aleae, scaci, veloces 
cursus equorum flexis in gyrum frenis non defuerunt, et militares impetus; hastarumque vibrationes 
in alterutrum ibi celebratae sunt. In quibus actibus monstrabatur quia nullo pavore treidabant qui 
talia operabantur. Talia quippe iuventus excolebat; sed aetate sensuque seniores in unum consederant, 
causaque consili et prudentiae conferebant. 


IUVENES: THE GLORY-SEEKING KNIGHTS OF THE CRUSADE 189 


the sport of zuvenes, as in his annal he wrote that in 1253 the London 
quvenes tested their bravery and the pace of horses at the exercise called 
quintain, a peacock having been established for a prize.’ The descrip- 
tion by Robert of the less prudent knights showing their prowess before 
the Egyptian delegation seems to be the earliest medieval writing to 
mention the exercise explicitly.° Thus the scene was not simply a liter- 
ary topos, it probably reflects Robert’s knowledge of the activities of 
quvenes in France rather than his literary background. 

Even supposing the details of the incident to be entirely fanciful on 
Robert’s part, in other words, that he was using his imagination to create 
a vivid scene, there still remains a clear sense that those described as 
iuventus here are not simply young. What defines them is very charac- 
teristic of the term in its social sense: they are fearless knights, skilled at 
riding and jousting. ‘The passage also establishes that Robert saw these 
knights as a distinct group whose behaviour contrasted with the more 
experienced crusader. Whilst the report does not prove the presence of 
wvenes on the First Crusade, much less their importance to sustaining the 
expedition, it does demonstrate that Robert and his readers expected 
there to be such vainglorious knights in the Christian camp. 

Shortly before this incident, on 6 March 1098, the Christian army 
had won an important victory against a sortie from the Turkish garrison 
of Antioch. The following day, wrote Robert, the Turks left the city 
at dawn and buried those bodies they could find. On hearing this, the 
tuvenes of Christ’s army hastened to the cemetery. At the cemetery they 
dug up the bodies and cut the heads off.’ There is little information 
here to clarify who were meant by the term zuvenes, other than a certain 
sense of disapproval at their behaviour, indicated either by Robert or 
a later scribe, whose title for the section referred to the grave of the 
Turks being disgracefully (turpiter) destroyed by the Christians. 

Antioch eventually fell due to the betrayal of Firuz, a commander 
of three towers along a stretch of the city wall. Disillusioned with 


° Mathew Paris, Chronica Maiora, V, Rerum Britannicarum medii aevi Scriptores (London, 
1880), 1253. 

€ C. F. Du Cange, Glossarium mediae et infimae Latinitatis, VI, (Paris, 1938), 
p. 614. See also, L. Clare, La quintaine, la Course de Bague et le Jue des Têtes (Paris, 1983), 
pp. 37-41, 170-1; G. Duby, William Marshall (London, 1986) p. 70; J. Barker, The 
Tournament in England 1100—1400, (Woodbridge, 2003). 

7 RM 788. 


190 CHAPTER SIX 


Yaghi-Siyan, the ‘Turkish ruler of the city, Firuz had entered into secret 
negotiations with Bohemond, whom he saw as the most famous of the 
crusading princes. According to a relatively late Muslim source, Firuz 
was bitter, having been punished for hoarding." Ralph of Caen, much 
closer to events, corroborates the spirit of this idea from the Christian 
perspective. He wrote that Firuz had kept back a certain amount of 
grain to feed his large family, but that on learning of this Yaghi-Siyan 
had it confiscated and redistributed, leaving Firuz feeling as though 
injury had been added to loss.? 

After reaching agreement with Bohemond, Firuz allowed sixty 
men (homines) to climb the city wall on the morning of 3 June 1098, 
so reported the Gesta Francorum.'° Robert’s version of the storming of 
Antioch was more detailed than that of his source; he reported that it 
was Fulcher of Chartres and sixty armed iwenes, who first climbed the 
walls of the city.'' The appearance of the name Fulcher was a diver- 
gence from the Gesta Francorum by Robert, but it is accurate in that the 
eyewitness Raymond of Aguilers also mentions Fulcher as being first 
on to the walls of Antioch.'* 

At some point, possibly before the storming of the city, Fulcher had 
joined with other knights who had a reputation for bravery. By August 
1098, when a plague broke out in Antioch, causing many knights to 
leave the city, Fulcher was in the company of Drogo of Nesle, Rainald 
of Toul and Gaston of Béarn." These four knights were described 
as departing Antioch together, to seek service with the Lotharingian 
prince, Baldwin of Boulogne, who by this time had managed to establish 
himself as lord of the city of Edessa. Drogo and Rainald, along with 
Clarembald of Vendeuil and Ivo of Grandmesnil, had earlier been 
singled out as the unanimous choice of the captains of the army when 
riders were required to investigate reports that Kerbogha, atabeg of 
Mosul, was arriving with a great army.'* 

Drogo seems to have been at the centre of a distinct group of 
celebrated warriors, certainly that is the impression given by another 


® Kemal ad-Din, Chronique d’Alep, RHC Oc. 3, 577-690, here 581-2. 

° RC 651-2. 

' GF 46. 

1! RM 800. Fulcher of Chartres in this incident is not to be confused with the chroni- 
cler of the same name. See C. Sweetenham, Robert the Monk’s History, p. 145 n. 24. 

RA 80 (252). 

13 AA v.16 (356). 

1 AA iv.13 (268). For Rainald of Toul see J. Riley-Smith, First Crusaders, p. 218. 


IUVENES: THE GLORY-SEEKING KNIGHTS OF THE CRUSADE 191 


significant description of zuvenes in the work of Robert the Monk: his 
account of the critical battle against Kerbogha, 28 June 1098. In his 
version of the conflict, Robert praised the famous feats of the illustrious 
iuventus” before going on to identify by name a particular grouping of 
quvenes in the contingent led by Hugh the Great, count of Vermandois: 
‘because they saw that they were closing on [the enemy force], Everard 
[II] of Le Puiset, Payen of Beauvais, Drogo [of Nesle], Thomas [of 
Marle] and Clarembald [of Vendeuil], and the rest of the zaventus of 
Hugh the Great, did not hesitate to dash in amongst them.’!® 

Those here identified as iuvenes were significant nobles with some- 
thing of a career behind them already, thus indicating Robert was not 
using the term zvenes to make a statement about their age. As noted 
above, Drogo was subsequently associated with Fulcher of Charters 
and again with Clarembald. But he was also strongly connected to 
Thomas of Marle. Thomas, Drogo and Clarembald had once been 
part of the contingent of Count Emicho of Flonheim, one of the few 
magnates associated with the People’s Crusade of 1096. This army 
was notorious for its attacks on the Jewish communities of Speyer, 
Worms, Mainz and Cologne. Albert of Aachen, described them as an 
‘intolerable company." 

Emicho’s army had been dispersed as it entered Hungary, following 
its failure to take Wiesselburg, September 1096, but some of the knights 
continued with the expedition, and Robert was not the only historian 
to indicate that ‘Thomas, Drogo and Clarembald subsequently attached 
themselves to Hugh the Great. They seem to have met as captives of 
the Greek Emperor, Alexios I Comnenus, who, reported Albert of 
Aachen, kept Drogo, Clarembald and Hugh in prison." 

Returning to an examination of the portrayal of crusading iuvenes 
in Robert the Monk, the next mention of the tuventus was when the 


© RM 831-2. 

16 RM 833: Quod ut viderent qui eum vicinius subsequebantur, Edwardus scilicet de 
Puteolo, Paganus Belvacensis, Drogo et Thomas, et Clarenbaldus, ceteraque juventus Hugonis 
Magni, nil haesitantes in illos irruunt. For these knights see J. Riley-Smith, The First 
Crusaders, 1095-1131 (Cambridge, 1997), p. 203 (Clarembald), p. 205 (Everard), 
p. 205 (Payen). For Drogo of Nesle see A. V. Murray, The Crusader Kingdom of Jerusalem 
(Oxford, 2000), p. 191. For Thomas of Marle, lord of Coucy, count of Amiens see 
D. Barthélemy, Les Deux Ages de la seigneurie banale: Pouvoir et société dans terre des 
sires de Coucy (milieu Xi°—nulieu XIII siècle), (Paris, 1984) Chapters 1—2. See also 
J. Riley-Smith, First Crusaders, p. 223. 

17 AA, 1.28 (52): intolerabilis societas. For Emicho of Flonheim see AA p. 51 n. 66. 

'8 AA ii.7 (72). 


192 CHAPTER SIX 


expedition attacked the city of Ma’arra, a well-defended city that 
had been gathering Turkish forces for some time. With great risk a 
breakthrough was gained for the crusading forces when, 11 December 
1098, Gouffier, lord of Las ‘Tours, was the first to climb a ladder onto 
the walls of the town. Robert described how when the famous iwventus 
saw Gouffier with a few men fighting on the top of the city walls they 
climbed up forthwith and overwhelmed part of the wall with their 
weight of numbers. ° 

The last reference to the iwvenes by Robert occurred in his descrip- 
tion of what was a critical moment in the direction of the crusade. 
Around Christmas 1098 a bitter conflict broke out between two of 
the most important crusading princes over the ownership of Antioch. 
By this stage in the crusade, Bohemond had proven to be an effective 
military and political leader, above all in the capture of Antioch. Count 
Raymond IV of ‘Toulouse was the elderly leader of the very large 
Provencal contingent. Both held a different perspective on the future 
of Antioch now it was back in Christian hands: Bohemond wanting 
to rule the city as an independent principality, Raymond as a fief of 
the Byzantine Empire. As a result of their conflict, the crusade had 
stalled entirely. 

A meeting of knights and princes at Chastel-Rouge, probably on 
4 January 1099, was unable to resolve the differences between the 
rival princes, the news of this failure triggering a mutiny of the lower 
social orders at Ma’arra. The ‘poor’ Christians dismantled the walls 
of the recently captured city, making it defenceless and obliging Count 
Raymond to continue the expedition.” The Gesta Francorum and Robert 
the Monk skip the events at Ma’arra, and follow the perspective not 
of the pauperes, but of those who remained at Chastel-Rouge. Robert 
wrote that many twvenes were present who were on fire to complete the 
journey.”’ In Robert’s eyes the iuvenes were a social grouping that were 
among the most fervent in wishing to press on to Jerusalem. 

In Robert the Monk’s Historia [herosolimitana then, it is clear that the 
historian had a strong sense that a ivenis was a brave knight of illus- 
trious background, although not an established prince; the iuvenis was 
inclined to be intemperate, but equally, he was brave to the point of 


19 RM 847. 
» RA 180 (271). 
21 RM 837. 


IUVENES: THE GLORY-SEEKING KNIGHTS OF THE CRUSADE 193 


recklessness; nor was there any doubting his skill in the military arts. 
Robert’s application of this idea to his history of the First Crusade led 
him to portray certain knights as iuvenes and certain incidents as being 
the work of that grouping. Through his employment of the idea it is 
possible to discern the beginnings of a pattern, one that suggests that 
a band of knights fulfilling Robert’s criteria for being iuvenes coalesced 
as a grouping on the First Crusade. This pattern becomes clearer by 
consideration of the other early crusading histories. 

The Historia Vie Mierosolimitane of Gilo of Paris is a poetic reworking 
of the Gesta Francorum that has a close connection with the narrative 
history of Robert the Monk. The exact relationship between the two 
has not been decisively established, but the generally accepted view is 
that they share a now missing common source.” Gilo was a Cluniac 
monk from ‘Toucy in Auxerre who subsequently became cardinal-bishop 
of Tusculum.” His metrical history was written at some point before 
1120, the suggestion of his most recent editors being that it was written 
in the first decade of the century.” 

The tuventus first appear in Gilo’s account of the winter of 1097—1098, 
at a point where the participants in the First Crusade were besieging 
Antioch. Gilo wrote that he ought to enumerate the deeds of the famous 
iuventus of Gallia, but no one could narrate so many bitter battles, nar- 
row escapes, fasting, cold and anxieties.” On the 5 April 1098, during 
the siege, a fort was built opposite the Gate of St George. A young 
southern Italian Norman prince, Tancred, the nephew of Bohemond 
and important military commander in his own right, took charge of 
this fortification in return for a payment of four hundred marks. Of 
this event Gilo stated that a certain fortress was renovated and an old 
rampart was repaired where the iwenes could keep their plunder.” The 
implication of this statement is that there was a distinct body of zuvenes 
willing to serve under Tancred at the fort and that they had sufficient 
plunder from raids and forays to require it as a holding place. 


2 C, W. Grocock and J. E. Siberry eds., The Historia Vie Hierosolimitane of Gilo of 
Paris and a second anonymous author, Clarendon Press (Oxford, 1997) [hereafter GP], 
p. lx. Sweetman, Robert the Monk’s History, p. 34. 

233 GP xviii. For further discussion of Gilo’s career see GP xix-xxii and R. Hills, 
Kardindle, Klerus and Kirchen Roms (Tubingen, 1977), pp. 142-3. 

2! GP xxiv. 

* GP 102. 

æ GP 123. 


194 CHAPTER SIX 


Like Robert, Gilo attributed to the zwvenes a major role in the capture 
of Antioch. The poet composed the following address by Bohemond to 
those assembled for the assault on the walls, betrayed to him by Firuz: 
‘And you, swift iuvenes, climb the walls at once.”’ In Gilo’s account 
Bohemond waited anxiously, while the zwwenes rushed into action, led by 
Fulcher of Chartres.” Fulcher here again was identified as the foremost 
of the zuvenes who responded to the appeal. 

Gilo continued his description of the fall of Antioch to the crusad- 
ers by describing how once the gates of the city had been opened, the 
rest of the army was spurred to action, the horses were bridled and 
the iwventus clamoured for arms.” The very next day, some advance 
forces from Kerbogha’s army arrived before Antioch. A rash sortie by 
Roger of Barneville, a knight who was famous both among Christians 
and Muslims,” eventually saw him chased back to the gates of the city 
where he was killed and beheaded in full sight of those on the walls. 
This was a particularly difficult moment for the zuvenes who were watch- 
ing, wrote Gilo, the iuventus on the walls were assailed by confusion and 
shame.*! Subsequently trapped by Kerbogha’s army inside Antioch, the 
crusading army suffered from starvation, and the poet illustrated this 
by reporting that even a dying horse was devoured by the iuventus.” 

In a manner very similar to Robert’s account of the battle with 
Kerbogha, Gilo wrote of the vigorous role played in this conflict by 
the zuvenes in the contingent of Hugh the Great: ‘Everard of Le Puiset 
and the impetuous tuventus, looked for a battle in the battle itself, and 
raised their swords... Then [Hugh the Great] said: “What you desire, 
iuvenes, is here! ‘The iron field bristles with spears, let us turn to them 
and lay on with huge strength.” ° In his description of the same battle 
Gilo added that after the death of Odo of Beaugency, standard-bearer 
to Hugh the Great the zvenis William of Benium immediately took his 


GP 162: Vosque, citi iuuenes, muros superate repente. 

*® GP 164-6. 

2° GP 168. 

0 AA ii.61 (234). 

31 GP 178. 

2 GP 180. 

GP 188: Eurardus de Puteolo fervensque iuuentus, In bello querunt bellum, gladiosque 
leuabant... Tunc ita fatur: ‘Quod iuvenes optatis adest! Huc ferreus hastis Horret ager, uertamur ad 
hos, incumbite uastis Viribus” 


IUVENES: THE GLORY-SEEKING KNIGHTS OF THE CRUSADE 195 


place, and raised the standard.** As will be seen, the association between 
iuvenes and the action of defending a standard was a recurrent one. 

Gilo’s next reference to the iuventus occurred in his description of 
a substantial raiding expedition led by a senior Provencal knight, 
Raymond Pilet. After some initial successes Raymond Pilet’s forces were 
defeated in an attempt to storm Ma’arra, 27 July 1098, leading Gilo to 
sympathise with the plight of retreating iuvenes.” The united expedition 
was more successful on its approach to the city and Gilo wrote of the 
renewed siege of Ma’arra that the honourable iuvenes were awoken by 
the loud noise of the trumpets and ran to the walls.” When the city 
fell, 11 December 1098, Gilo attributed the success of the assault to the 
destruction of a wall by the zuvenes, in doing so he again agreed with 
Robert the Monk.” The final appearance of the iwenes in Gilo of Paris 
was a reference to the expedition as it made its way towards Jerusalem, 
May 1099, where he reported that from al-Batriin, the zventus, afflicted 
by the heat, followed the shore.*® 

Clearly the poet shared with Robert an understanding of the main 
characteristics of the zuvenes. They were knights who sought battle and 
could be shamed by appeals to their desire for glory. When rewriting 
the Gesta Francorum, Gilo, like Robert, thought it appropriate to term 
those first onto the walls of Antioch as zuvenes, for those who fought in 
the contingent of Hugh the Great against Kerbogha and for the knights 
who broke through at Ma’arra. In addition to echoing Robert’s version 
those scenes, Gilo indicated that among the knights associated with the 
Norman prince ‘Tancred were a body of warriors whom he felt it was 
appropriate to regard as twvenes. 

Another early crusading historian to refer to iuvenes on the First 
Crusade was Guibert, abbott of Nogent. As discussed in Chapter Two, 
Guibert had a sophisticated social vocabulary. His rich depictions of the 


3 GP 190. For Odo of Beaugency see J. Riley-Smith, The First Crusaders, p. 205. 
Benium is given as Bény-su-Mer by the editors of Gilo (GP 190), Robert describes the 
same person as William of Belesme (RM 831), J. Riley-Smith lists him as William of 
Bohemia, The First Crusaders p. 225. 

3 GP 198: Tinnitum reddunt clipei galee que sonore, 

Obtenebrant oculos lapsi de uertice cont, 
Loricas odiunt tuuenes ad uerbera promi. 

3 GP 204. 

37 GP 210. 

38 GP 232. 


196 CHAPTER SIX 


events of the First Crusade were not those of an eye-witness, except in 
regard to the preaching of the crusade and the movement of crusading 
contingents through his region. It was in writing about the departure 
of the expedition that Guibert first wrote of the zuventus, in verses 
composed to illustrate the perspective of the many non-combatants 
who joined the expedition. ‘Everyone sang of warfare, but did not say 
that they would fight. ‘They promised martyrdom, being about to give 
their necks to the sword, “You wuvenes,” they said, “will draw swords 
with your hands, but we are permitted to deserve Christ by support- 
ing this.” Juvenes were here used to encapsulate the perspective of 
crusading combatants as opposed to that of the non-combatants of the 
expedition; it is good evidence that for a contemporary the image of a 
iuvenis was one considered to be appropriate for someone at the heart 
of the fighting body of the First Crusade. 

Guibert described a three-fold hierarchy in the Lotharingian army 
of Duke Godfrey as it departed on the crusade: the senior princes, 
knights and a notable throng of very brave iwenes.*” This distinction is 
a much less literary one than that in which the poor crusaders spoke 
to the combatants and it probably reflected Guibert’s own perception 
of the layers present among the warriors of the nobility, a class that he 
was very familiar with through his relatives and his experiences before 
becoming a monk." 

When Guibert turned to writing about Tancred, he stated that the 
Norman prince had earned and deserved the title of most sagacious 
iuvenis.” Tancred was a major figure in the events of the First Crusade: 
he took command of Bohemond’s contingent in the absence of their 
lord in Greece; he led a sizeable Norman force into Cilicia, around 
10 September 1097, and he led a group of Norman knights in the 
later stages of the crusade. It might seem inconsistent with the other 
examples given that so prominent a leader was termed a tuvenis, not just 


3° GN 120: Bella canunt omnes; nec se pugnare fatentur, 
Martirium spondent, gladiis vel colla daturos: 
“Vos iuvenes’, aiunt, manibus tractabitis enses 
At nos hic liceat Christum tolerando mereri.’ 
© GN 129. 
Jay Rubenstein, Guibert of Nogent: Portrait of a Medieval Mind (New York, 2002), 
pp. 17-18. 
2 GN 194. 


IUVENES: THE GLORY-SEEKING KNIGHTS OF THE CRUSADE 197 


by Guibert but also, as noted below, by Albert of Aachen and Ralph 
of Caen. But until his establishment of a principality in Galilee, late 
1099, Tancred was an unmarried knight still in search of his fortune 
and position, acting largely under the direction of Bohemond.* It is 
perhaps in this regard that Guibert considered ‘Tancred the epitome 
of a tuvenis during the expedition. 

Guibert entitled Tancred a iuvenis in connection with his leading of 
the garrison of the castle that was built during the siege of Antioch 
opposite the Gate of St George. Here there is a connection with Gilo’s 
report of the same initiative, with both authors indicating that the 
hazardous task of forming the garrison of this castle was one associ- 
ated with the zuwenes. A third author, Tancred’s biographer Ralph of 
Caen also found the term iwenes appropriate for some of those who 
joined with the Norman prince, for he wrote that anticipating future 
successes, iuvenes from Bohemond’s army had earlier transferred their 
allegiance to Tancred.“ 

The next use of tuvenis by Guibert was for a person who also does 
not seem to fit well with the definition provided by Duby. During the 
siege of Antioch, c. May 1098, Guibert reported the death of an excel- 
lent zwenis, who had been constable for the King of France: Walo II 
of Chaumont-en-Vexin.* Walo was married to Humberge, the sister 
of Everard of Le Puiset. As noted above, Everard was identified by 
Robert and Gilo as a prominent zvenis among the band that included 
Thomas of Marle and Drogo of Nesle. Unlike the case of Tancred, 
Walo was married and already had a notable role at the French court. 
But he and Humberge, who accompanied him on the expedition, were 
without children. ‘This, together with his leaving of a settled position at 
the court of the Phillip I of France, and Walo’s association with other 
turbulent and glory-seeking knights through his brother-in-law, seems 
to have led Guibert to describe Walo as a iwenis. 

Thereafter the term zwenis does not appear in the Gesta Det per Francos 
until Guibert’s account of the storming of Jerusalem, 15 July 1099. 


R. L. Nicholson, Tancred: a study of his Career and Work in their Relation to the First 
Crusade and the Establishment of the Latin States in Syria and Palestine (Chicago, 1940), pp. 
3-15. 

“ RC 610. 

5 GN 332. For Walo I of Chaumont-en-Vexin see J. Riley-Smith, The First Crusaders, 
p: 224. 


198 CHAPTER SIX 


‘Several of the Frankish iuvenes, whom pious audacity had already 
made more pre-eminent, threw themselves forward...and together 
they climbed to the top of the wall. I would identify them by name 
on this page, if I had not know that after their return they incurred 
the infamy of wickedness and crime.’*° 

A clue to the identity of the unnameable persons is to be found in 
Guibert of Nogent’s autobiography. Here, Thomas of Marle looms 
large as a rebellious and sadistic lord in the 1110s, termed by Guibert 
the most wicked man of his generation,” making it likely that he and 
his troublesome associates were among those indicated by Guibert’s 
use of the term zwenes at this point. 

Guibert may also have been familiar with the case of Raimbold 
Croton, who Ralph of Caen described as a iuvenis, and who was one 
of those to lead the breakthrough in to Jerusalem.“ On his return 
to Chartres, Raimbold Croton became embroiled in a dispute with 
Bonneval abbey in the course of which he castrated a monk. As a 
result Raimbold was given fourteen years’ penance by Bishop Ivo of 
Chartres. Raimbold and Thomas were connected on the crusade by 
their association with Everard of Le Puisset. After 3 June 1098 the 
Christians were inside city of Antioch but still had to defend a rampart 
against attacks from the citadel, which was still in Turkish hands. ‘Those 
knights who were prominent in doing so were named by Albert of 
Aachen and the list included Ivo, Everard and Raimbold Croton.*” 

Even more interestingly, but less reliably, the Chanson d’Antioche, an 
epic poem with considerable historical detail embedded in its dramatic 
account of the fall of Antioch, lists Ratmbold Croton, Thomas of Marle, 
Everard of Le Puisset and Engelrand of Saint-Pol among those joining 
Fulcher of Chartres in the first group of knights to climb the walls of 


© GN 278: Quique iuvenum Francicorum, quos pia jam dudum reddiderat illustriores audacia, 


sese proripiunt. . . murorum pariter suprema conscendunt. Quos etiam nominatim huic insererem paginae, 
nisi scirem post reditum tantorum eos flagitiorum ac scelerum infamiam incurrisse. 

"1 Guibert of Nogent, Monodiae, ed. E.-R. Labande (Paris, 1981), 3.VII. See also 
3.XI, 3.XIV. 

+ RC 689. 

+ Ivo of Chartres, Letter 135 to Paschal II, Patrologiae cursus completus. Series Latina 
162 col. 144D. 

5 AA iv.30 (294). For Raimbold Croton see J. Riley-Smith, First Crusaders, 
p. 218. 


IUVENES: THE GLORY-SEEKING KNIGHTS OF THE CRUSADE 199 


the city’! Regardless of the authenticity of that particular informa- 
tion, it is significant that the composer of the chanson considered these 
knights as being associates. 

Jonathan Riley-Smith has briefly examined the later turbulent careers 
of these two members of the First Crusade, but it is worth noting that 
both these knights participated in the expedition in such a way as to earn 
the epithet zuvenis, suggesting a connection between the more rebellious 
of returnees and those whom the early historians considered iuvenes.” 
The knight who departed on the expedition motivated primarily by 
spiritual considerations is likely to have found favour from the Church 
on his return. Those, however, who primarily set out with a desire to 
prove themselves in battle, seem to have returned with a contempt for 
secular and ecclesiastical authority, as, for example, was shown by the 
actions of Raimbold Crotton, but is even more evident in the career 
of the notorious ‘Thomas of Marle. 

Thomas returned from the First Crusade to live a life of abandon and 
insubordination. At least such was the view of the clerical authors who 
wrote about him. All around the vicinity of Laon, Reims and Amiens 
he laid waste to the whole country ‘with the frenzy of a wolf’, wrote 
Abbot Suger of St Dennis.” From his devil’s pit, a den of robbers, 
Thomas was a ‘common enemy of pilgrims and all humble folk,’ wrote 
the Anglo-Norman monk, Orderic Vitalis, in a passage relating the 
words of King Louis VI.** Henry of Huntington seems to have been 
well informed about Thomas’ career and described how his reputation 
was known throughout all Gaul. ‘Human slaughter was his passion and 
glory.” Thomas died 9 November 1130 as a result of injuries sustained 
when he was captured by Raoul, count of Vermandois, acting on behalf 
of the king of France. 

There has long been a revision of the enlightenment inspired image 
of the knights of the First Crusade being violent and troublesome 
characters, in favour of a view that emphasises the piety and spiritual 


5! CA 6130-6135. 

> J. Riley-Smith, The First Crusaders, p. 156. 

5 Abbot Suger of St Denis, Vita Ludovici Regis VI, Qui Grossus Dictus, PL 186, 
[Col.1304B]: furore lupino devoraverat. 

5t OV, 6, 258: inimicum peregrinorum et omnium simplicium. 

5 Henry of Huntingdon, Historia Anglorum, ed. D. Greenway (Oxford, 1996), 
p. 602: cedes humana uoluptas etus et gloria. 


200 CHAPTER SIX 


motives of the crusaders.*° In the case of Thomas, and perhaps those 
associates of his also termed zuvenes, the eighteenth century depiction 
seems to be not so wide of the mark. While the enlightenment historians 
and their followers attributed the source of crusader aggression to their 
desire for plunder, here it is presented as a characteristic arising from 
the esprit de corps of a particular layer of knights keen to demonstrate 
their military prowess. 

There are a handful of other references to tuvenes in the history 
of Guibert of Nogent. In his description of the battle of Ascalon, 
12 August 1099, Guibert imagined the reaction of al-Afdal, vizier 
of Egypt, on seeing the weary crusader forces: ‘And he looked upon 
the... iuventa weakened by long hunger, swords turned rusty, lances 
darkened, the slender military equipment of milites, their strength 
worn out; all those who seemed to be more distinguished than the rest 
rendered inactive by the bitterness of want.” Here again, as with his 
account of the departing expedition, Guibert drew a tripartite picture 
of the crusader fighting forces: ‘youths’ (Guibert used the collective term 
twventa), knights (milites) and princes. Finally, Guibert gave the choicest 
of the iuvenes a role in the vanguard of the army in the storming of 
Caesarea by Baldwin I, 17 May 1101. 

The examples of Walo and Tancred being termed tuvenes in the Dez 
gesta per Francos suggest that Guibert did not use it in strict sense, like 
a legal definition. Rather he understood a tuvems to be a knight with 
a certain quality, not necessarily ‘youth’ so much as valour. Despite a 
certain looseness in his employment of the term iwvenes, Guibert never 
went so far as to apply it to the very senior princes of the crusade: it 
was not simply a fanciful adjective for any champion. Overall Guibert’s 
use of the term was not dissimilar to that of Robert and Gilo. He 
too employed the term for magnates who led the way in battle and in 
storming cities. 

Thus far the discussion has focused on the works of those who 
sought to embellish the eyewitness text the Gesta Francorum. Their writ- 
ings demonstrate how French historians projected their own notions of 


°° J. Riley-Smith, ‘Crusading as an Act of Love’ in The Crusades, edited by T. F 
Madden, (Oxford, 2002), pp. 32-50. 

5 GN 299: At intuebatur... profligatam diutina fame iuventam, rubiginosis ensibus, lanceis 
nigrantibus, exilem destitutis militum viribus armaturam, cunctis qui pre ceteris videbantur insignes 
acri egestate torpentibus. 


58 GN 347. 


IUVENES: THE GLORY-SEEKING KNIGHTS OF THE CRUSADE 201 


what it was to be a twenis on to the knights of the First Crusade. ‘To 
turn to other sources independent of the Gesta Francorum tradition, to 
find that they also had a similar use of the term and that they applied 
it to the same individuals, considerably strengthens the possibility there 
were indeed a body of knights on the First Crusade whose behaviour 
matched a widely understood notion of what it was to be a iwenis. 

The Historia [herosolmitana of Albert of Aachen is a crucial text for 
this discussion. As Albert was a cleric at Aachen in Lotharingia he had 
a great deal of information and interest in the German contingents and 
therefore considerably supplements the overall picture of the crusade 
as portrayed by the French sources. 

‘Two terms occured in Albert’s work that were nearly always used to 
indicate someone from the same social grouping as a tuvenis, namely 
adolescens and tyro. There were two crusaders described by Albert as 
adolescens, both fully-formed knights. The first was Gerard of Avesnes, 
a knight of Hainault who was given as a hostage to the rulers of Arsuf 
by Duke Godfrey as part of an agreement that was subsequently bro- 
ken. When Duke Godfrey besieged Arsuf, early in December 1099, 
Gerard was held spread-eagled on ropes outside of the battlements of 
the town. Undeterred, Duke Godfrey pressed the siege and Gerard was 
eventually pulled back up riddled with the arrows of his own compan- 
ions. Surprisingly, Gerard reappeared on 25 March 1100, released as 
a peace offering from the townspeople. Albert wrote that, ‘when the 
duke, saw and received the beloved miles and excellent adolescens Gerard 
unharmed, he rejoiced exceedingly.’ The fact that Gerard was then 
given a castle and great fiefs suggests both that he was not an adolescens 
in the sense of being immature and that his trials had earned him a 
change in status to becoming a lord, exactly the social progress striven 
for by the tuventus. 

The other adolescens in Albert’s work was the less fortunate Arnulf 
II of Oudenaarde, killed while searching for his horse on the return 
of a raiding expedition to Jerusalem in 1106. Arnulf was described 
at various times as a very noble tuvenis, a prince, an illustrious knight 
and adolescens.”” 


5 AA vii. 15 (506): Dux itaque, viso et incolumi recepto Gerardo dilecto milite, et egregio 
adolescente, gavisus est vehementer. 


© AA ix.52 (714-17). 


202 CHAPTER SIX 


Another apparent synonym for tuvenes in the Historia Lherosolimitana was 
tirones. The classical meaning of the term was for a recruit, a soldier 
newly enlisted, without sufficient training. The tones of the classical era 
were mostly 17 to 20 years of age.®' By the medieval period the fact 
that there was a similarity of meaning of tuvenis and tiro is suggested by 
the noun tvocinium, which came to mean a joust or tournament, and 
the verb tirocinare, to be in training as a knight. Moreover, Albert was 
not given to classical allusion and it is clear that those he applied the 
term were fully trained knights. ‘Those who were named and described 
as a tiro were: Tancred, his brother William, Guy of Possesse, Rainald 
of Beauvais, Engelrand, son of count Hugh of Saint-Pol, Franco I and 
Sigemar of Maasmechelen on the river Meuse, blood relations, and 
Otto surnamed Altaspata, son of the sister of Albert of Biandrate. 
A Venetian was termed tivo by Albert at the siege of Haifa, 25 July 
1100, when he was the only one of his companions not to abandon 
a siege machine.” Of these William and Engelrand were also termed 
iuvenes by Albert.” In fact the description of William makes the close 
connection between iuwenes and tirones clear. ‘William, most audacious 
iuvenis, and most beautiful tiro, brother of ‘Tancred.’°° 

With regard to Albert’s description of Rainald of Beauvais as a tiro 
there is a valuable agreement between the sources discussed so far. 
Albert invariably referred to Rainald in association with Walo II of 
Chaumont, whom, as noted above, was termed a wvenis by Guibert of 
Nogent and who was brother-in-law to the prominent ivenis Everard 
of Le Puiset.” Furthermore, at the battle of Dorylaeum, 1 July 1097, 
Rainald of Beauvais was mentioned as being in the company of both 
Walo and Thomas of Marle as well as two other knights described 
elsewhere as tuvenes by Albert of Aachen: Baldwin of Bourcq and 


ĉl A. Berger, ‘Encyclopaedic Dictionary of Roman Law’, Transactions of the American 
Philosophical Society 43:2 (1953), 333-809, here 737. 

© J. E Niermeyer, Mediae Latinitatis Lexicon Minus, 2 (Leiden, 2002) IL, 1342. 

® Tancred, AA ii.22 (94); William, AA ii.39 (130); Guy, AA ii.22 (96); Rainald, AA 
11.35 (194); Engelrand, AA i11.48 (212); Franco and Sigemar, AA iv.35 (302); Otto, AA 
ix. 30 (674). For other references to these knights see J. Riley-Smith, The First Crusaders, 
p. 210 (Guy); p. 225 (William); p. 218 (Rainald). For Sigemar see A. V. Murray, The 
Crusader Kingdom, p. 228. 

oF AA vii.24 (518). 
5 William, AA ii.39 (130); Engelrand, AA v.30 (376). 
% AA ii.39 (130): Willelmus iuvenis audacissimus et tyro pulcherrimus, frater Tancradh. 
7 AA ii. 23 (98); AA 11.42 (134); AA iii.35 (194), AA iv.47 (322). 


IUVENES: THE GLORY-SEEKING KNIGHTS OF THE CRUSADE 203 


Rothard, son of Godfrey." Rainald was listed by Gilo of Paris as being 
among the group of knights who were attached to the contingent of 
Hugh the Great for the battle against Kerbogha, the same group (that 
which included ‘Thomas of Marle and Drogo of Nesle) whom Robert 
the Monk included under the label iwentus.® Albert, who had twice as 
many divisions of crusaders marching from Antioch for the battle as 
Robert, listed Rainald in an ad-hoc division that also included ‘Thomas 
of Marle, Drogo of Nesle, Rothard and Baldwin of Bourcq.”” 

In order to reach Antioch, the crusade had to cross the ‘Iron Bridge’,’’ 
which they arrived at on 19 October 1097, to find it firmly defended. 
Robert of Normandy was the leader of the vanguard of the army 
at this point and with him was Roger Barneville and Everard of Le 
Puiset, who, as noted above, was several times termed a tuvenis by the 
French sources. In this instance Everard was described as being a miles 
praiseworthy in military affairs, and with the other leaders, he directed 
the movement of the cavalry with banners.” Resistance from the 
Turkish garrison at the bridge was severe but once the ‘Turks began to 
withdraw some knights, “out of a desire to begin battle’ recklessly swam 
their horses across the river.” Albert named two knights here: Walo of 
Chaumont and Rainald of Beauvais, ‘a most savage tiro’.”* 

Another important example of a grouping together of individuals 
elsewhere described as iuevenes is Albert’s list of those were located beside 
each other in the siege of Nicea: Guy of Possesse, ‘Thomas, Drogo, 
Baldwin of Bourcq and Engelrand of Saint-Pol.” 

The interconnections and associations between the knights mentioned 
in all these incidents is quite striking. A coalescing of a certain type 
of crusading warrior seems to have taken place during the crusade. 
Having come to the attention of those who wrote about the crusade, 
both Albert and the French historians independently found that the 
term zuwwenes was a suitable one for these knights. Was there something 
characteristic of the behaviour or social position of ‘Thomas, Drogo and 


% AA ii.42 (134). Rothard is otherwise unknown, as is his father Godfrey, not to be 
confused with Godfrey, Duke of Lotharingia. 

° GP 190-2. 

7 AA iv.47 (322). 

7 A misnomer by the Latins, see WT 4, 8 (243). 

7? AA iii.33 (191). 

™ AA iii.35 (195): ex desiderio bellum committendi. 

™ AA iti.35 (195): tiro asperrimus. 

3 AA ii.22 (96). 


204 CHAPTER SIX 


Everard et al. that led early crusading historians in Northern Europe 
to see them in this light? 

What this quality was cannot have been one that was strictly in 
keeping with the definition of Georges Duby: Walo was married, as 
was Thomas. But in both cases their domestic position was unsettled, 
with ‘Thomas in conflict with his father, Enguerrand of Coucy, who had 
divorced Thomas’s mother and, doubting the legitimacy of ‘Thomas, 
strove to disinherit him.” One feature that does seem to have been 
important in the early crusading historians use of the term zuvenes was 
that it was applied to those who were not lowly knights; these were 
knights who were potentially lords of castles or towns. 

During the crusade itself, however, these nobles were not prominent 
enough figures to command a leadership role; rather they acted inde- 
pendently or else attached themselves to the senior princes. To judge 
by the fluidity of their associations these attachments seem not to have 
been tight ones, such as that created by vassalage. Clarembald, for 
example, seems to have set out on crusade under his own resources, 
been held in captivity with Hugh the Great, whom he fought under 
at Antioch, then travelled to Edessa to serve Baldwin of Boulogne.” 
Similarly, when Ralph of Caen reported that certain zuvenes left the fol- 
lowing of Bohemond for that of Tancred, in the expectation of future 
success, the impression given is of a less formal relationship than that 
between vassal and lord. 

With regard to the common qualities of behaviour that these knights 
might have displayed, Albert seems to have shared with the northern 
French writers a sense that the iuvenis was associated with indiscipline. 
Albert commented that while Bohemond prudently portrayed himself 
as loyal to the Byzantine Emperor, Alexios I Comnenus, ‘Tancred’s 
attempt to avoid having to take an oath to the Emperor by crossing the 
Bosphorous in secret was an act of audacity.” There is also a suggestion 
of rashness in the action of the abovementioned Arnulf of Oudenaarde 
for leaving the army in order to search unknown territory for his horse.” 
On a raid of Baldwin Ps near Hebron, November 1100, forty zuvenes 


76 J. Riley-Smith, The First Crusaders, pp. 156-7. See also J. F. Benton, Self and Society 
in Medieval France (New York, 1970), p. 184. 

7 AA i.28 (52); AA ii.7 (72); RM 833; AA v.16 (356). 

7 AA ii.19 (90). 

3 AA ix.52 (714). 


IUVENES: THE GLORY-SEEKING KNIGHTS OF THE CRUSADE 205 


were described as secretly forming a plan to hasten ahead in order to 
obtain money and booty.®? 

As with Robert, Gilo and Guibert, this negative aspect of the zwwvenes 
is only one part of the picture, for Albert frequently praised them as a 
body and individually for their warlike prowess. Juvenis was clearly not 
a negative term in the description of Rothold son of Godfrey, ‘a most 
famous iuvenis. ®! A similar positive description was given for Baldwin 
of Le Bourcq, ‘a splendid tuvenis,®? as well as for William and Engel- 
rand above. When Engelrand died in Ma’arra, 10 December 1098, he 
was described as ‘an uncommonly daring iuvenis. ® Among the many 
favourable epithets for Tancred was the phrase, ‘illustrious tyro.”** At 
the first battle of Ramleh, 6 September 1101, where he was charge of 
the third division, Hugh of Saint-Omer was called ‘a warlike iuvenis. ”® 
Roger of Salerno, before he became prince of Antioch, December 
1112, was described as an, ‘illustrious cwenis and knight.’ To be a 
quvents was not to detract from a knight’s valour. 

Although many of the knights named individually in his history were 
termed iwvents, as a collective body influencing events the zuventus appear 
less in Albert’s work than the other histories under discussion. ‘There 
are examples from descriptions of forces of the People’s Crusade, but, 
given the large numbers involved and the lack of magnates in such 
armies, in these instances the group described are probably simply 
those young in age. Tyrones, on the other hand, are more likely to be 
a collective body of those individuals whom Albert considered to be 
iwvenes in its more social meaning. Tyrones are described as participating 
in battle in the following of Hugh the Great and that of Duke Godfrey 
against the forces of Kerbogha;*’ as a body of scouts sent ahead when 
the First Crusade approached Ramleh, 3 June 1099; as the Latin 
garrison of the Armenian town of Melitene in 1100;® and as those 


8 AA vii.41 (548). 

5! AA 11.23 (98): Rothardus filius Gosfridi, iuvenis clarissimus. 

8 AA iii.6 (148): Baldwinus de Burch iuvenis preclarus. 

88 AA v.30 (376): iuuenis mire audacie. 

8 AA 11.22 (94): tyro illustris. 

8 AA vii.65 (576): iuuenis bellicosus. For Hugh of Saint-Omer, also known as Hugh 
of Faquesmberques see A. V. Murray, The Crusader Kingdom, pp. 211-12. 

3 AA xii.29 (836): illustrissimum iuuenem et militem. 

8 AA iv.51 (328-30). 

88 AA v.42 (396). 

89 AA vii.29 (526). 


206 CHAPTER SIX 


picked to occupy siege towers at the unsuccessful siege of Tyre by King 
Baldwin I, November 1111.°° 

Introducing the evidence from Albert of Aachen helps develop the 
impression that certain knights who shared a characteristic reputation 
for bravery and a willingness to be to the fore in battle banded together 
during the course of the crusade. That Albert was willing to apply the 
terms tyro and iwvenis to these knights suggests that there was already, 
at the very start of the twelfth century, a shared understanding from 
France to Lotharingia of the vocabulary appropriate for distinguishing 
‘young’ champions from the broader body of knights. 

A further useful source for shedding more light on this subject is the 
Gesta Tancredi of Ralph of Caen. Ralph had served with Bohemond in 
1107 before journeying to Syria, where he took service with Tancred. 
Shortly after Tancred’s death, 12 December 1112, Ralph wrote a history 
in the form of a panegyric to his former lord. The text is independent 
of the Gesta Francorum tradition and its value is enhanced by the fact that 
it was written in the knowledge that it would be read by participants in 
the First Crusade, and in particular by its editor, Arnulf, the chaplain 
to Robert I, duke of Normandy who became patriarch of Jerusalem 
in 1099 and again from 1112 until his death in 1118.” 

Ralph’s first reference to the iuventus as a distinct social group 
occurs in a speech of Duke Robert II of Normandy rallying those 
who, including Bohemond, were described as wavering at the battle 
of Dorylaeum. Robert appealed to the iwvenes to charge with him into 
the middle of the enemy force and die. Admonished by these words, 
the iuvenes joined themselves to the leaders and were more ready for 
death than for flight.” Once battle was joined, Ralph described the 
wventus as being intemperate and a dangerously undisciplined force. 
The minds of the zwenes boiled over in passion but Bohemond forbade 
them to charge in case the rashness of a few threw the whole battle 
order into confusion.” 

Ralph was yet another source who associated a following of iuvenes 
with the contingent of Hugh the Great, in this instance at the battle 


9 AA xii.6 (832). 

9! RC 604. See also B. S. Bachrach and D. S. Backrach, eds., The Gesta Tancredi 
of Ralph of Caen (Ashgate, 2005), pp. 2—4. 

%2: RC 622. 

3 RC 623. 


IUVENES: THE GLORY-SEEKING KNIGHTS OF THE CRUSADE 207 


of Dorylaeum: in other words, a year earlier than the battle against 
Kerbogha in which they are grouped with Hugh by Robert and Gilo. 
The historian wrote that under Hugh’s leadership the supporting tuventus 
ardently smote whatever fell before them.” 

According to Ralph, Tancred was accompanied by zuvenes during his 
expedition through Cilicia. At a battle outside Tarsus c. 20 September 
1097, the faithful iuventus were described as following Tancred in a 
charge.” Count Baldwin of Boulogne was able to attract some Norman 
iuvenes to his following, on or around 15 September 1097, by obtaining 
the services of their leader, Cono of Montaigu.”° 

As with the other sources under discussion, Ralph assigned to the 
iuventus the key role in the capture of Antioch on the morning of 
3 June 1098. “The flying winged zwwentus, well girded with swords, flew 
by means of the ropes. Gouel of Chartres was the first, like an eagle 
calling forth its young to fly, and flying over them. This noble man since 
boyhood desired and thirsted for nothing more eagerly than praise.” 
Gouel of Chartres has been understood to be that Fulcher of Chartres 
described by Robert and Gilo who led the zuvenes on to the walls of 
the city.” Ralph’s version of the event supplements that of the French 
sources discussed here; they all shared a view that it was appropriate 
to term those willing to risk their lives in the climb as iuvenes and, if 
the sources are being consistent about who they applied the term to, 
it can be speculated that the Chanson d’Antioche might have been correct 
in including figures like Thomas of Marle and Everard of Le Puisset 
among the company who climbed up with Fulcher to be first on to 
the walls of Antioch. 

Ralph next mentioned the fiery iuventus as coming up to join the 
advance forces of the crusade, before the city of Jerusalem, probably 
on 7 June 1099. On 15 July 1099 the crusaders stormed Jerusalem. 
Ralph’s description of the day’s events included phases of the struggle 


* RC 625. 

°°” RC 631. 

° RC 632-3. 

7 RC 654-5: juventus volucris pennata corpora accincti gladiis per funes volant: Gouel Carnotensis 
primus, ‘sicut aquila provocans pullos suos ad volandum, et super eos volitans’ [Deut 32:2], vir 
ille nobilis, et a puero nihil esuriens ut laudem neque sitiens, non propter vitam laudari, sed propter 
laudem vivere cupiebat. 

2 C. Sweetenham, Robert the Monk’s History, p. 145; J. Riley-Smith, First Crusaders, 
p. 206. 

” RC 686. 


208 CHAPTER SIX 


where the attackers became weary and disheartened. It was during the 
storming of the city that Ralph assigned the epithet zuvenis to Tancred, 
the hero of his poem.'” 

Ralph further wrote that the first on to the wall of Jerusalem was 
the brave knight and wwvenis, Raimbold Croton.'*! According to Ralph, 
Raimbold’s lead was followed up by other iuvenes.' Ralph named 
another knight as leader of this party, Bernard of St Valéry." Ralph 
also praised Everard of Le Puiset for a battle inside the city, where a 
rally of the inhabitants threatened to turn back the Christian attack. 
Everard, however, engaged a thousand and moved the iuventus to fol- 
low him.'* All in all, Ralph’s account of the fall of Jerusalem fits very 
well with the conjecture that when Guibert of Nogent refused to name 
those zuvenes who played a prominent role in the taking of the city, the 
abbot was thinking of a grouping of knights that included Raimbold, 
Everard and Thomas of Marle. 

If the historians who wrote in the aftermath of the First Crusade 
employed a vocabulary that distinguished those who they understood 
to be iuvenes from the other fighting forces of the Christian army, can 
the same be said of the eyewitness accounts? 

The Gesta Francorum is a complicated text, sharing a great deal of 
material with another eyewitness account, that of the Poitevin priest, 
Peter Tudebode, but for the purposes of this discussion they can be 
considered as one as their variations do not bear on the question of 
' The text is relatively crude in its depiction of the social layers 
of the Christian army and typically the author simply writes of ‘us’ 
rather than differentiate among the various classes present. It also has an 
Italian bias in its language.'°° 
that there is no mention of ivenes in this text. It is, however, curious 
that one of those knights who were first on to the walls of Antioch is 
described in the Gesta Francorum as a serviens and that this term, which 


tuvenes. 


It is therefore perhaps not too surprising 


10 RC 688. 

101 RC 689. 

102 RC 693. 

10 RC 693. For other references to Bernard of St Valéry see J. Riley-Smith, First 
Crusaders, p. 202. 

104 RC 698. 

105 For a discussion of the relationship between the two texts see above pp. 23-4. 

106 J. G. Gavigan, “The Syntax of the Gesta Francorum, Language 19, ITI (1943), pp. 
10-102, here p. 11. 


IUVENES: THE GLORY-SEEKING KNIGHTS OF THE CRUSADE 209 


encompassed a very wide range of contemporary meanings, was else- 
where used in the Gesta Francorum in a passage where Gilo of Paris 
preferred the term wwenes.'°’ 

Rather more disappointing is Fulcher of Chartres’s Historia Hiero- 
solymttana. Although Fulcher had a richer social vocabulary than the 
anonymous author, this tended to be manifest in his more theologically 
inspired passages. In detailing the narrative of events Fulcher tended to 
be direct, terse and far less florid than the later historians. As a conse- 
quence, he did not employ the term zvenes or its equivalents. 

Lastly, the Historia Francorum qui ceperunt Iherusalem of Raymond of 
Aguilers had a very distinct theological perspective that saw the lower 
social orders as especially meritorious in the eyes of God, because of 
the hardship that they had to endure during the expedition. Raymond 
did, however, also write about knights and here are four references 
iuvenes in his history that seem to be references to a certain type of 
combatant rather than simply those young in age. 

The first possible mention of such a iuvenis occurs in Raymond’s 
description of a skirmish during the siege of Antioch, 29 December 
1097, in which the standard bearer of the papal legate, bishop Adhé- 
mar of Le Puy was killed, and his standard was captured. Raymond 
wrote that there also perished at that time a certain most noble iwwvenis, 
Bernard Ato, viscount of Béziers." As with Gilo’s reference to William 
of Benium’s raising of the banner of Hugh the Great, there seems to 
be a connection between defending the standard and being a iuvems 
and it is this military context and the phrase nobilissimus tuvenis that 
suggests Raymond meant something other than simply the adjective 
‘youth’ here. 

A further very striking example of a tuvenis who was also a standard 
bearer occurred in the next reference to the iuventus given by Raymond 
of Aguilers, namely his account of a vision of St George. Raymond 
wrote that when the priest and visionary Peter Desiderius discovered the 
relics of an unknown saint, the crusading clergy decided to leave them 


107 GF 46; 43, compare with GP 123. 

8 RA 40-1 (244). For Bernard Ato see J. Riley-Smith, The First Crusaders, p. 201. 
The standard bearer mentioned here was not the better-known Heraclius I of Polignac 
who bore Adhémar’s standard at the battle against Kerbogha, for whom see J. Riley- 
Smith, The First Crusaders, p. 211. 


210 CHAPTER SIX 


behind, but in the night which followed a certain tuvems, about fifteen 
years old, most beautiful, was present with him as he kept vigil." In 
seeking the identity of this zwenis, Peter Desiderius was asked by the 
vision to name the standard bearer of the army and learned that he 
was in the presence of St George. 

The fact that Raymond reported the age of the saint as fifteen means 
that the term zwwenis might have simply meant ‘youth’ here. On the 
other hand, the cult of St George was to grow, considerably acceler- 
ated by the success of the First Crusade, until by the fifteenth century 
he was the personification of chivalry. From Raymond’s theological 
perspective the embodiment of the highest ideal of a crusading warrior 
and standard-bearer of the whole expedition was St George, whose 
prowess was assisting the Christian army. Raymond’s employment of 
the term zwvenis for the warrior saint might have been to intentionally 
evoke some of the qualities associated with the term in its social sense: 
bravery, eagerness for battle, willingness to take the most dangerous 
place by carrying the standard. Another eyewitness, the anonymous 
author of the Gesta Francorum, provided evidence that on the crusade it 
was popularly believed that St George was offering military assistance 
to the Christians, in his description of the battle against Kerbogha, 
where St George was described as being among the resplendent saints 
who rode into battle with the crusading forces.''® 

The third mention of a iuvenis in Raymond of Aguiler’s history is 
made with regard to a detachment of knights under Count Galdmar 
Carpenel of Dargoire, who were sent from the siege of Jerusalem, 
18 June 1099, to make contact with six Christian vessels that had arrived 
at Jaffa. This expedition ran into a troop of Arab and ‘Turkish riders, 
dispersing them after some losses, including three or four knights of 
the following of Geldemar and Achard of Montmerle, a most noble 
tuvenis, and renowned knight.''' This last example is an important one 
for demonstrating that the term tuvenis could be used by Raymond of 
Aguilers in different sense than that of a young person, for he would 
have known Achard was a mature man. Albert of Aachen described 


109 RA 291-3 (290). 

110 GF 69. For further discussion of St George and the First Crusade see C. Erdmann, 
The Origin of the Idea of Crusade, trans. M. W. Baldwin and W. Goffart (Princeton, 1977), 
pp. 6, 54, 87, 135, 273-81. 

1! RA 318-9 (294). 


IUVENES: THE GLORY-SEEKING KNIGHTS OF THE CRUSADE 211 


Achard as being ‘white-haired’.'"? The former castellan of Montmerle 
had mortgaged his patrimony to the monastery of Cluny in return for 
2,000 solidi and four mules in order to join the crusade and his dona- 
tion charter included a clause covering the case he might stay in the 
Levant.''* While the later stories that sprang up about Aachard, such 
as those in the La Gran Conquista de Ultramar, were clearly legendary, it 
is significant that local traditions indicated that he had already some- 
thing of a career and reputation for bravery before departing on the 
First Crusade.''* Again, also, the context is an appropriate one for a 
tuvems in the social sense of the term. Achard was nobilissimus and died 
bravely, fighting against the odds. 

The last possible reference to iuvenes in the work of Raymond of 
Aguilers occurs with regard to the storming of Jerusalem, 15 July 
1099. Although Raymond did not describe them as being first on to 
the wall, he described a iwenis as playing a key role at the point where 
the breakthrough occurred: this zuvenis devised arrows, firing at the 
coverings which protected ramparts that the Saracens had made to 
face the wooden tower of Duke Godfrey of Lotharingia and Count 
Eustace of Boulogne." 

Lacking decisive examples from the eyewitness accounts, there has 
to remain a certain element of speculation about the role of iuvenes 
in the First Crusade. Certainly there seem to have existed a distinct 
stratum of the nobility to whom later authors found it appropriate to 
apply the language of ‘youth’. A band of a particular sort of knight 
appears to have formed during the crusade, at the core of which were 
Thomas of Marle, Rainald of Beauvais, Drogo of Nesle, Clarembald 
of Vendeuil and Everard of Le Puiset. What they had in common was 
an illustrious, if not quite princely background, an unsettled career 
and a reputation for bravery. Their behaviour was characteristic of 
those who from the latter half of the ‘Twelfth Century, perhaps more 
precisely, fitted George Duby’s definition of the ‘young’. 

It might well have been this faction that Guibert of Nogent had in 
mind when he wrote that Hugh the Great was ‘supported by certain 
proceres so that if, by right of battles, the Gentiles were conquered and 


12 AA 11.23 (100). 

113 Recueil des chartes de Vabbaye de Cluny, ed. A. Bernard and A. Bruel, 6 (Paris, 
1876-1903), v. 51-3. 

14 See C. Sweetenham, Robert the Monk’s History, p. 193, n. 3. 

15 RA 343 (300). 


212 CHAPTER SIX 


it came to pass that they occupied [the land] they planned to make 
him king.’''® Following the victory over Kerbogha, however, Hugh 
was sent as a messenger to Alexios but did not return, causing his 
potential supporters to disperse. Some of this band sought work with 
Baldwin of Edessa in the plague-filled summer months at Antioch in 
1098. They also seem to have been to the fore in pushing the expedi- 
tion on to Jerusalem. After completing the pilgrimage, ‘Thomas and 
Raimbold Crotton returned to France where they pursued very violent 
and troublesome careers. 

The most important turning points of the expedition were the battle 
at Dorylaeum; the capture of Antioch; the battle against Kerbogha; the 
decision to leave Ma’arra and push on to Jerusalem and the storming 
of Jerusalem. From the descriptions of these early crusading historians 
a picture emerges that has these knights and others termed tuvenes to 
the fore at each of these moments, seeking glory in being the first into 
battle and the first on the walls in the storming of cities. They were 
a small layer of crusaders, but distinct enough to catch the eye of the 
historians and be identified with a vocabulary that contemporary read- 
ers would have understood not so much as meaning young knights, but 
as champions out to prove their worth. 


16 GN 131: Huic quidam procerum innitebantur; et si quid bellorum jure evictis gentilibus: eos 


obtinere contingeret, ipsum sibi regem praeficere meditabantur. 


CHAPTER SEVEN 


PRINCIPES AND THE CRUSADING NOBILITY 


As with their vocabulary for the lower social orders, the early Latin 
historians for the First Crusade differed from one another in the terms 
they employed for the upper layers of society. Principes, optimates, seniores, 
maiores, proceres and so forth had, in the classical era, held very distinct 
social or legal meanings.' By the early twelfth century, however, there 
was much less appreciation of their former nuances. Furthermore, the 
usage of such terms was still evolving, as can be seen by the various 
ways in which these historians made use of them. 

One fairly consistent feature of the works examined here was their 
notion of nobility. By the early twelfth century the concept of nobilitas 
had come a long way from its origins as a term for the consular families 
(descendents of men who had held the consulship) of the Late Roman 
Republic.’ As discussed in Chapter Five, on the whole the evidence of 
the sources for the First Crusade shows that they considered nobility to 
a be a honoured social status possessed not only by the very uppermost 
members of the expedition, but also for the far more numerous milites, 
the knights. The most important examples in this regard comes from 
Guibert of Nogent. He described the relatively lowly knight Matthew as 
being of ‘noble birth’ ( genere nobilis) and the entire body of knights on 
the crusade as the ‘flower of the nobility’ ( flos nobilitatis) of the Franks.” 

In one of his—rare—substantial additions to the Gesta Francorum, 
Peter ‘Tudebode described an incident in which the knight Rainald 
Porchet, himself a miles nobilis,‘ was displayed to the Christians on the 
walls of Antioch by the besiegers before being executed. Brave in the 
face of death, Rainald shouted out to encourage the Christian leaders, 
letting them know that in a recent battle they had killed all the maiores 


' A. Berger, ‘Encyclopaedic Dictionary of Roman Law’, Transactions of the American 
Philosophical Society 43:2 (1953), 333-809. 

2 G. E. M. de Ste. Croix, The Class Struggle in the Ancient Greek World (London: 
Duckworth, 1981), p. 338. 

3 GN 198, 147. 

+ PT 79. For Rainald Porchet see J. Riley-Smith, First Crusaders, p. 219. 


This is an open access chapter distributed under the terms of the CC-BY-NC License. 


214 CHAPTER SEVEN 


and the bolder men of the city, namely twelve emirs and 1,500 nobiles.’ 
Although the society being described here is that of the Muslim army 
in Antioch and the numbers are exaggerated, it gives a sense that Peter 
‘Tudebode saw the category of nobiles as a very broad one. 

Another crusading historian who used the term nobiles with regard 
to Muslim society was Raymond of Aguilers.® The passage of great- 
est interest from Raymond’s history in this regard is his comment that 
bodies of Arabs, both of the nobiles and the vulgus, outside ‘Tripoli were a 
delightful sight to the Christian army, following fighting early in March 
1099.’ This example suggests that Raymond of Aguilers understood 
the couplet, nobiles and vulgus, expressed the entire body of society: that 
the basic social division was between noble and commoner. 

The image of a society that consisted of two basic orders, the nobil- 
ity and the commoners, was a commonplace for Albert of Aachen. 
At the siege of Antioch, sometime during the spring of 1098, Count 
Hugh of Saint-Pol and his son Engelrand led a successful foray against 
those Turks who were preventing his followers bringing forage to the 
camp. As a result of their victory nobiles et nobiles came running up 
from every side.” Despite this victory, famine soon pressed hard on 
many nobiles et ignobiles.” Soon after the flight of Count Stephen of 
Blois from Antioch, 2 June 1098, a vision of the Church Father, Bishop 
Ambrose of Milan was reported to the Christian army. Albert wrote that 
Ambrose’s speeches produced great comfort to clerics and lay people, 
nobiles et ignobiles.'° Similarly, on the death of Bishop Adhémar of Le 
Puy, nobiles et ignobiles mourned with extreme lamentations.'! When, in 
August 1098, plague struck the Christian forces in Antioch, ‘both nobiles 
et ignobiles gave up the spirit of life.’'? Furthermore ‘whether equites or 
pedites, nobiles et ignobiles, monachi et clerici, parvi et magni, to say nothing of 
the female gender, more than 100 thousands were laid waste by death 
without being struck down by swords.’ 


> PT 79. 

ê RA 23 (240), 125 (260), 186 (272), 262 (286). 

7 RA 262 (286). 

? AA ii.48 (214). For Hugh of Saint-Pol, aged vassal of Count Eustace HI of 
Boulogne, see A. V. Murray, The Crusader Kingdom, p. 213. 

° AA iii.53 (220). 

10 AA iv.38 (306). 
' AA v.4 (342). 

AA v.4 (342): Tam nobilies quam ignobiles spiritum vite exalarent. 

13 AA v.4 (344): ... dam equites quam pedites, nobiles et ignobiles, monachi et clerici, parvi et 
magm, quin sexus femineus supra centum milia sine ferro morte vastati sunt. 


PRINCIPES AND THE CRUSADING NOBILITY 215 


Again, the three thousand troops that accompanied Duke Godfrey, 
now ruler of Jerusalem, to Arsuf in the late autumn of 1099, were 
divided into nobiles et ignobiles, equites et pedites.'* Albert’s description of the 
defeat of the crusade of 1101 in July of that year, stated that everyone 
made haste to flight, magni et parvi, nobiles et ignobiles.” A final appearance 
of the couplet nobiles et ignobiles in the Historia Therosolimitana was for a 
great number of Christians who drowned off the island of Cyprus in 
a storm, 20 September 1113.'° 

Albert used the term nobilis for a number of individuals. Count 
Emicho of Flonheim, leader of one of the contingents of the People’s 
Crusade, was a vir nobilis,” Duke Godfrey also was a vir nobilissimus.'® 
Gilbert of Traves and Achard of Montmerle, together ‘mighty leaders 
of the Christians and viri nobiles; ? Geldemar Carpenel, a miles egregius 
et nobilis”? and William of Wanges, a miles gloriosus et nobilis? Baldwin of 
Bourcq, was a vir nobilis of the family of Baldwin of Boulogne.” Albert 
twice used the term nobilitas, ‘nobility, in connection with prominent 
figures of the First Crusade. He wrote of Robert of Flanders, Robert, 
count of Normandy, Cono of Montaigu, Count Raymond of ‘Toulouse 
and all the nobilitas of Gallia.” He described Ralph of Scegones, a rela- 
tive of Duke William IX of Aquitaine, as a vir magne nobilitatis.” 

Another of the crusading historians who saw noble and commoner to 
be a basic division of society was Baldric of Dol. As noted in Chapter 
‘Two, Baldric wrote a very interesting elaboration of a speech by Bohe- 
mond that he found in his fons formalis, the Gesta Francorum. Baldric had 
Bohemond appeal to the other leaders of the expedition to give good 
example and ride forth to battle, for “how does a dominus differ from a 
servus, a nobilis from a plebeius, dives from pauper miles from pedes, if not 
that the counsel of us who rule over them should be useful, and our 


1 AA vii.l (486). 

8 AA viii. 18 (610). 

16 AA xii.16 (848). 

V AA i.27 (50). 

!8 AA ii] (60). 

' AA vi.4 (408): Gisilbertus de Treva et Achart de Montmerla, fortes Christianorum duces et 
viri nobiles. For Gilbert of Traves see J. Riley-Smith, First Crusaders, p. 208. 

2 AA vii.22 (516). 

21 AA xii.5 (830). 

» AA vii.31 (528). 

23 AA ii.65 (244). 

*! AA viii.35 (626). This is the only known reference to Ralph of Scegones. 


216 CHAPTER SEVEN 


help should protect them?” Lord and servant, noble and commoner, 
rich and poor, knight and footsoldier. For Baldric a fundamental divi- 
sion ran through society, separating the elite from the masses, creating 
a responsibility for those at the top to aid those at the bottom. 

The division of nobiles and plebs occurred a second time in the Historia 
EMerosolymitana. During the spring of 1098 the Christian forces outside of 
Antioch decided to build a castle at a mosque, which was subsequently 
garrisoned by the followers of Count Raymond. The Gesta Francorum 
simply has the report that this was a decision of the maiores.”® In Baldric’s 
version the motive for the decision was elaborated, he wrote that the 
nobility were mercifully concerned to look after the plebs.” 

Other than this use of the term as the upper half of a bipartite 
division of society, there are two examples in Baldric’s history in which 
nobiles appear, both in a context that indicates he was writing about 
a relatively large number of people. In his account of the council of 
Clermont, Baldric wrote that after Bishop Adhémar of Le Puy had been 
appointed the commander of the army of God ‘the great multitude 
of nobiles offered their assent.” Secondly, Baldric’s amendment of the 
eulogy to Adhémar in the Gesta Francorum, changed the description of 
the papal legate from having been counsellor of the divites*® to counsel- 
lor of the nobiles.*° 

Although Guibert of Nogent had the most acute sense of social 
status of the early crusading sources, he generally preferred other terms 
to nobiles in commenting on the upper class. Apart from the examples 
above with regard to milites, the Gesta Dei Per Francos provides only one 
other interesting example where the term nobiles was used. Guibert was 
disturbed by accounts of the shortages of food and water among the 
Christians at the siege of Jerusalem. Having explained that the water 
had to be brought six miles in the rotten skins of makeshift hide bags, 
he gave vent to his sympathy for the nobles undergoing such an experi- 
ence. The roughness of the bread must have worn away the jaws and 
throats of the viri nobiles; their elegant stomachs must have been twisted 
by the bitterness of the putrid liquid. They doubtless remembered with 


°° BD 45-6: Quid differt dominus a servo, nobilis a plebeio, dives a paupere, miles a pedite, nisi 
nostrum qui praesidemus eis prosit consilium, et patrocinetur auxilium? 

3% GF 39. 

27 BD 48. 

° BD 16: ... praebuit assensum multitudo multa nobilium. 

2 GF 74. 

*° BD 82. 


PRINCIPES AND THE CRUSADING NOBILITY 217 


suffering the pleasures of their former lives.*! This is vivid sociological 
evidence for the lifestyle of the nobility and although it does not define 
those termed nobiles with any precision, the incident illustrated a basic 
social division on the crusade, since while the higher social class were 
suffering from rough bread and foul water, some of the poor were 
drinking water so filthy that they died of the swelling that resulted from 
having ingested leeches. 

Thus far the sources are fairly consistent with regard to their portrayal 
of the nobility: it was a relatively large social grouping, not simply 
confined to those princes at the very top of the social structure. The 
evidence from one eyewitness, however, is less straightforward and it 
might well have been that for Fulcher of Chartres the idea of nobil- 
ity was more restricted than for the other historians. Certainly very 
few individuals in his work were described by the adjective nobilis, all 
very senior figures indeed. These were Matilda, countess of Tuscany, 
a nobilissima matrona; Count Stephen of Blois, a vir probissimus et valde 
nobilis,** and a vir prudens et nobilis; Duke Godfrey of Lotharingia, who 
on his election as ruler of Jerusalem, was described as having nodilitas*® 
and Stephen, count of Burgundy.*’ 

When Fulcher of Chartres described the journey of the contingent 
of Duke Robert of Normandy through France in 1096, he stated that 
this army was accompanied by Stephen, count of Blois, and Robert, 
count of Flanders and many other nobiles.” Clearly, Stephen and Robert 
shared their status as nobles with many others: the term nobiles was not 
being restricted by Fulcher to just the handful of very senior princes. 
But how many more nobles were present? A very large number such 
as given in the example by Peter Tudebode, or by the writers who used 
nobiles to indicate all of the upper half of a bipartite society, does not 
fit the spirit of the formulation, which seems to refer to only the most 
prominent people present. 


1 GN 274. 

® AA vi.6 (412). 

3 FC Lv.5 (149). Matilda, margravine of Tuscany (1046-1114), daughter and heiress 
of the Marquess Boniface of ‘Tuscany, m. Godfrey II, duke of Lower Lotharingia, 
supporter and patron of Gregorian reformers. See also I. S. Robinson, The Papal Reform 
of the Eleventh Century (Manchester, 2004), pp. 45-50. 

3t FC Lxvi.7 (228). 

3 FC ILxix.4 (443). 

æ FC Lxxx.1] (307). 

7 FC ILxvi.1 (430). 
® FC I.vi.8 (161). 


218 CHAPTER SEVEN 


Yet, to balance against these tentative suggestions of a restrictive 
use of the term nobiles in the Historia Hierosolymitana, there is Fulcher’s 
eyewitness report that during the march of Baldwin of Edessa and 
Bohemond of Antioch to Jerusalem in the autumn of 1099 milites nobiles 
became pedites, having lost their horses.” Similarly, Fulcher lamented for 
the loss of many nobiles and probi milites at the second battle of Ramleh, 
17 May 1102.*° In both cases he probably did so to emphasise that 
among the milites so described were figures of particularly high status, 
but it is clear that the term nobiles was, for Fulcher, broad enough to 
extend to at least some, if not all the milites. 

The fact that the modern historian has access to both the early and 
later versions of Fulcher’s work (see Chapter One) allows a useful inves- 
tigation of an interesting passage in regard to the question of his use of 
the term nobiles and composition of the higher social orders present on 
the First Crusade more generally. This was Fulcher’s enumeration of the 
divisions that formed up for the battle against Kerbogha, 28 June 1098. 
In his first version of the Historia Hierosolymitana (1101-5), Fulcher wrote 
that the optimates of the Franks at the battle were Hugh the Great, Robert, 
duke of Normandy, Robert, count of Flanders, Duke Godfrey, Count 
Raymond of Toulouse, Bohemond and many other nobiles.*! In his sec- 
ond redaction (1124), with hindsight, Fulcher preferred to write that the 
principes at the battle were Hugh, Robert, Robert, Godfrey, Raymond, 
Bohemond and ‘many other lesser [ princes].’” 

The effect of this change was twofold. ‘The latter version made it clear 
that Fulcher, unlike for his comment about the departure of Robert of 
Normandy’s contingent, now saw a distinct gap in status between the 
named senior princes and other nobles of the First Crusade. It also 
meant that his use of the term optimates was restricted to the prominent 
nobles of the Kingdom of Jerusalem who were involved in the decision 
making of the kingdom.* ‘Tempting as it is to conclude that the substi- 
tution of lesser princes for nobiles here means that for Fulcher they are 
synonymous, it might be that when he came to redraft his formulation 


3 FC Lxxxiii.13 (331): Videretis milites nobiles, equis quoquomodo amissis, pedites effici. For 
a discussion of this passage see above p. xxx. 

* FC ILxix.4 (443). 

4 FC Lxxii.] (251). 

® FC 251 n. a; n. g: multi alii minores tamen horum. 


® FC ILxxviii.5 (481); M.xi.2 (648); HI.xvi.2 (660); II.lvii.2 (807); I.lxi.5 (822). 


PRINCIPES AND THE CRUSADING NOBILITY 219 


to make explicit the point about great and lesser princes, he found the 
word nobiles unsatisfactory precisely because it was too broad. 

Overall then, there is a very strong case for accepting that these 
sources saw the nobles as a wide group, encompassing the entirety of 
the upper part of the social structure of the First Crusade. ‘The ‘nobles’ 
were more than the princely elite, they were all those above the social 
status of the middle ranks—the footsoldiers, artisans, sailors and siege 
engineers—who shared a non-noble status and the fact they went on 
foot with those below them, the pauperes. Looked at from this perspec- 
tive, thousands of nobles were present on the First Crusade, contrasted 
with the commoners in their tens of thousands. 

Within this broad upper class of nobles were, of course, consider- 
able gradations. In Albert of Aachen’s account of Pope Urban IP’s call 
to the crusade at Clermont, he noted that great principes, of every ordo 
and gradus, vowed to join the expedition.“ The comment is interesting, 
revealing Albert’s conscious awareness of many gradations within the 
upper layers of society, gradations that were reflected in his very broad 
range of terms for them. At various times and in various contexts Albert 
wrote of nobiles, magni, matores, optimates, primores, potentes, principes, proceres, 
capitales, capitanei and domini. 

The diffculty in focusing on what exactly distinguished the various 
layers of the upper class is that such terms were used rather loosely in 
all the sources and not always consistently. Perhaps this is not surprising 
for the early twelfth century, when even titles such as ‘count’ had yet 
to become clearly delineated from other grades of the senior nobility. * 
A helpful contemporary model for analysing the social structure of the 
crusading elite is that derived from the work of Guibert of Nogent, the 
most linguistically innovative of our sources. In describing the differ- 
ent social orders that participated in the First Crusade, Guibert wrote 
a very important passage in which he identified a sub-stratum of the 
principes, the mediocres principes and gave a very specific definition of the 
group. He observed that along with those from the illustrious orders 
(inclyti ordines), a multitude of the mediocres principes marched forth who 
could not be counted, because who could enumerate the lords of one, 
two, three or four towns?*® An examination of the texts in the Patrologia 


4 AA i5 (8). 

® I, S. Robinson, ‘Eine unbekannte Streitschrift über die Salevamento von Ex- 
kommuniziesten im Münchener Kodex lat. 618’, Studi Gregoriani 11 (1978), p. 311 n. 30. 

© GN 133. 


220 CHAPTER SEVEN 


Latina shows that the phrase mediocres principes was unique to the Gesta 
Dei per Francos. 

Unlike the other early crusading historians, who struggled to match a 
vocabulary inherited from the past to their contemporary experiences, 
Guibert was willing to coin new phrases to express his ideas. In this 
case it is clear that Guibert held a pyramid-like image for hierarchy of 
knights on the First Crusade. At the top were a handful of very illustri- 
ous princes, below them a large number of others also encompassed by 
the term principes, but of more modest means, being the lords of between 
one and four towns. Below these were immense numbers of knights, 
owners of at least their armour and a horse and probably, before they 
departed, a fief, but not a town or castle. The same kind of schema is 
suggested by another original phrase of Guilbert’s: mediocritas equestrium 
virorum, the ‘middle rank of equestrian men’. It appeared in his report 
that as news spread of the events of the Council of Clermont, counts 
palatine and the middle ranks of equestres besides were enthused to join 
the expedition.“ 

Taking Guibert’s model as the most useful contemporary one, is 
it possible to obtain a sense of the proportions between these three 
layers? The senior princes were a few specific individuals who can be 
easily identified and they are discussed further below. The numerical 
relationship between the other two layers, the mediocres principes and 
the broader body of knights, is suggested by the description in the 
Gesta Francorum of how, early in October 1097, soon after leaving the 
town of Coxon, Count Raymond of ‘Toulouse decided to send some 
of his men ahead in the hope of catching the defenders of Antioch 
by surprise.*® He therefore assigned four named leaders to accompany 
500 milites in the undertaking. Guibert’s version of the same incident 
was that Count Raymond chose four men from among the primores 
of his own army, one of whom was William VI of Montpellier and 


7 GN 118. Comites Palatinorum: in the earliest Merovingian times the title comes 
palatu was a technical one for the assessor who prepared cases for presentation to 
the king. Thereafter it evolved to becoming a title given to senior figures at the royal 
court who had no particular office and in the Germanic Empire a territorial prince 
(J. Niermeyer, Medwal Latin Dictionary, 1, 268-9). Guibert’s use of the phrase might have 
been intended as a reference to those senior nobles around the court of King Philip I 
of France who joined the First Crusade, figures such as his brother, Hugh the Great, 
count of Vermandois and Walo II of Chaumont-en-Vexin, constable to the king. 

8 GF 26. 


PRINCIPES AND THE CRUSADING NOBILITY 221 


assigned to them 500 equites. Later, at the siege of Jerusalem, Guibert 
described Raymond Pilet and two other proceres, as leading 100 equites 
from the army of his lord, Count Raymond of ‘Toulouse to the port 
of Jaffa. These rephrasings of the Gesta Francorum not only indicate 
that primores and proceres were distinctly higher up the social pyramid 
than equites but they also, perhaps, give a rough indication of their 
relative proportions. 

Guibert’s examples of small numbers of primores being juxtaposed to 
large numbers of milites suggest that the social gap between them was 
huge. In fact, numerically, there was more of a division between senior 
nobles and knights than between knights and footsoldiers. Not that 
contemporaries would have considered the issue in such a numerical 
light. For them, as we have seen in Chapter Five, the different between 
riding and walking was of such importance that knights would take to 
oxen and mules rather than risk losing their social status by travelling 
on foot with the commoners. 

There were, very approximately, seven thousand knights on the First 
Crusade if the estimate of John France, probably the most convinc- 
ing writer on the subject, is accepted.°! Using the figures given above 
as a very rough guide to the proportions between the knights and the 
higher nobility above them, this would suggest that there were some 
150-200 ‘middle-ranking’ princes on the expedition. Is this plausible? 
In an immensely valuable and impressive prosopographical study, 
A. V. Murray has provided a catalogue of the individuals who were 
companions to Godfrey IV of Bouillon during the course of the First 
Crusade.” Examining this catalogue for senior clergy, advocates, castel- 
lans, counts, lords of towns or their close relatives, reveals that some 35 
such individuals can be identified as forming part of the Lotharingian 
contingent on the First Crusade.” This figure will be an underestimate, 


* GN 168. For William VI of Montpellier see J. Riley-Smith, The First Crusaders, 
p. 226. 

°° GN 272-3. For Raymond Pilet see n. 121. 

5! J. France, Victory in the East, pp. 122-142. 

5 A. V. Murray, The Crusader Kingdom of Jerusalem (Oxford, 2000), pp. 176-238. 

5 Adalbero of Luxembourg; Arnulf of Oudenaarde; Baldwin, archbishop of 
Caesarea; Baldwin, bishop of Beirut; Baldwin of Bourcq; Baldwin I of Mons, count 
of Hainaut; Berwold; Cono, count of Montaigu; Drogo of Nesle; Dudo, lord of Cons; 
Engelrand of Saint-Pol; Eustace III, count of Boulogne; Franco of Maasmechelen; 
Fulcher of Chartres, lord of Saji; Fulk of Guînes; Gerard of Avesnes; Gerard, lord of 
Quierzy; Gerbod, lord of Scheldewindeke; Giselbert of Clermont; Godfrey of Esch; 
Gozelo of Montaigu; Hartmann I, count of Dillingen and Kyburg; Henry of Esch; 


222 CHAPTER SEVEN 


due to the titles and even names of some prominent crusaders escap- 
ing the notice of the sources. Given the Lotharingians made up about 
a quarter of the united Christian army, it does seem that the estimate 
that there were 150—200 senior members of the nobility on the First 
Crusade is a reasonable one. 

Although Guibert decided it would be tiresome to list all of these 
middle-ranking princes, modern historians, were they to follow the work 
of A. V. Murray and extend it to the other contingents might be able 
to account for a high proportion of them. J. Riley-Smith has laid a 
foundation for such an investigation in his establishment of a very valu- 
able database that in 2003 consisted of 791 identified crusaders.”* 

This tri-partite model for the upper class, of a handful of princes, 
some 200 senior nobles and 7,000 knights, is consistent with the sources, 
albeit that an examination of their language and phrases only rarely 
addresses the issue with clarity. In part this is because, with the excep- 
tion of Guibert, they were using terms derived from antiquity that no 
longer applied directly to their own experience and, perhaps related 
to this point, there does not seem to have been a consensus across the 
authors as to the exact meaning of the terms they were using. For the 
remainder of this discussion, an examination of the language and per- 
spective of each of the sources with regard to the upper social orders 
of the First Crusade, the tri-partite division will be referred to as that 
between princes, magnates and knights. 


The Gesta Francorum 


In the Gesta Francorum the term princeps is only ever used for a handful 
of named, very senior, figures. It is also a rare term, appearing in the 
text only six times in total. When the leaders of the various crusading 
contingents gathered in Constantinople and argued with Count Ray- 
mond that he should take the oath to Alexios, which he did on 26 April 
1097, the author described how Duke Godfrey, Robert of Flanders 


Heribrand of Bouillon; Hugh II, count of Saint-Pol; Lambert of Montaigu; Louis, 
count of Mousson; Louis, archdeacon of ‘Toul; Peter of Dampierre, count of Astenois; 
Rainald III, count of Toul; Ralph of Aalst; Sigemar of Maasmechelen; Walter of 
Domart; Warner, count of Grez; William, count of Dülük. For all these crusaders see 
A. V. Murray, The Crusader Kingdom, pp. 176-238. 

` M. Bull and N. Housley ed., The Experience of Crusading 1: Western Approaches 
(Cambridge, 2003), p. 7. J. Riley-Smith, The First Crusaders, passim. 


PRINCIPES AND THE CRUSADING NOBILITY 223 


and other principes spoke to Raymond.” Duke Godfrey was described 
as princeps of Jerusalem on his election as ruler of the city, 23 July 
1099.°° Soon afterwards, Tancred was described as sending a message 
to Duke Godfrey, the patriarch, and all the principes at Jerusalem.” 
The term principes was used to describe Count Raymond and Robert 
of Normandy on the 10 August 1099, two days before the battle at 
Ascalon.” Another appearance of the term principes was for those lead- 
ers who after the victory over Kerbogha and the decision to halt the 
expedition for five months, offered to provide gold and silver in return 
for the services of the active poor. 

One important example for identifying those who the Gesta Fran- 
corum considered to be a princeps occurred in the description at battle 
near Antioch, between the Christian army and the relieving forces of 
Ridwan, emir of Aleppo, and Suqman ibn Ortugq, 9 February 1098. 
Bohemond ordered that each of the principes should form up their battle 
lines, one after the other. There were five battle lines and a reserve led 
by Bohemond himself.” Is it possible to identify the other ‘princes’ to 
whom Bohemond issued his orders? Stephen of Blois wrote a letter 
which indicated he was present at this battle®? and Ralph of Caen, who 
claimed to have visited the site, mentioned Duke Godfrey of Lotharin- 
gia,°' but the sources are inconsistent as to which other senior figures 
were present at this battle. John France reasonably suggests that Tancred 
would have been present in company with Bohemond and Hugh the 
Great with Stephen. ‘This leaves one division with an unnamed leader. 
Given that Bishop Adhémar of Le Puy, Duke Robert of Normandy and 
Count Raymond of ‘Toulouse were probably not present, John France’s 
proposition that it was Count Robert of Flanders who was the sixth 
princeps who formed a battle line seems entirely plausible.” 

A much more frequent term in the Gesta Francorum for the leaders 
of the crusade was seniores. The anonymous author probably employed 
the term to encapsulate not only the most prominent figures but also 


5 GF 13. 
5 GF 92. 
7 GF 93. 
58 GF 94. 
5 GF 36. 
° H. Hagenmeyer, Die Kreuzzugsbriefe aus den Jahren 1088-1100 (Innsbruck, 1901), 
. 150. 
Pa RC 647. 
® For a full discussion of this battle see J. France, Victory in the East, pp. 245-51. 


224 CHAPTER SEVEN 


others who deserved to be distinguished from the larger body of nobles. 
The use of the term seniores also probably reflects an overall Italian 
bias in the language of the Gesta Francorum,® which contrasts with the 
vocabulary of the French sources, whom invariably replaced it (for Peter 
‘Tudebode and the term seniores see Chapter One). 

One clear instance of senior being applied to a lord who was not 
one of the very greatest princes was the use of the term for one of 
the leaders of the People’s Crusade. This was a certain Rainald, leader 
of the German fragment of the People’s Crusade that was besieged 
in Xerigordo. Rainald eventually surrendered to the Turkish forces of 
the Seldjuk Sultan of Ram, Qilij Arslan, 7 October 1096." The term 
seniores also seems to have a slightly broader connotation in the several 
speeches attributed to Bohemond in the Gesta Francorum. Speaking to 
all the milites before the battle of Dorylaeum, 1 July 1097, Bohemond 
began: seniores et fortissimi milites Christ. Telling a council of seniores that 
he was willing to go on a foraging expedition around Christmas 1097, 
while the expedition was besieging Antioch, Bohemond began: seniores et 
prudentissimt milites. Bohemond again spoke to the seniores et prudentissimt 
milites at a council of leaders, 8 February 1098.°’ Before the ‘Lake Battle’ 
the next day, Bohemond addressing the other leaders once more began: 
seniores et invictissimi milites.® It is not at all clear where the line is being 
drawn between the magnates and the brave knights, but the impression 
is that the author means the leaders of the army in a slightly broader 
sense than for those whom he elsewhere terms principes. 

A key term in discussing the leadership of the First Crusade is 
maiores. The anonymous author of the Gesta Francorum repeatedly used 
it for those who gathered together in councils to direct the expedition 
and the historians who based their work on the Gesta Francorum often 
retained the term maiores in that context. At times the term maiores was 
used synonymously with seniores, such as in the report that when the 
priest and visionary Stephen of Valance came to the worried maiores 
while the Christian army was trapped inside of Antioch by Kerbogha, 


% J. G. Gavigan, “The Syntax of the Gesta Francorum, Language 19, ITI (1943), pp. 
10-102, here p. 11. 

H GF 3-4, 

5 GF 18. 

°° GF 30. 

& GF 35. 

GF 36. 


PRINCIPES AND THE CRUSADING NOBILITY 225 


Stephen began his address to them by saying, ‘seniores.’ ‘Those leaders 
who promised Antioch to Bohemond and whom he urged to keep that 
promise were omnes maiores and omnes seniores. 

There is a difficulty, however, in assuming that in the Gesta Francorum 
maiores was always synonymous to seniores, as the anonymous author 
used the former term rather loosely. Three times matores was used in 
a simple juxtaposition to minores to mean the upper part of the entire 
population.® Much more often the author wrote of nostri maiores, con- 
veying a sense that they were a layer of leaders above the knights, but 
failing to distinguish whether it was confined to the princes or was 
inclusive of magnates also. One passage that does offer a little hght on 
the issue is that in which, in spring 1096, all the Byzantine maiores natu 
who were in Constantinople were described as meeting and agreeing 
that the duces, comites and all the maiores of the arriving armies ought 
to swear an oath faithfully to the emperor.” 

As an aside, the phrase maiores natu has classical antecedents for elders, 
especially those who founded customs, legal opinions or institutions, but 
to the anonymous author it probably meant something more like ‘baron- 
age’.’' It is interesting that a slightly different term is employed for the 
Byzantine courtiers and the Latin military leaders, but the main point 
here is that the maiores seem to be not only the individual princes but 
a wider layer of dukes and counts. ‘This impression is strengthened by 
consideration of the fact that those who took the oath to the emperor 
were not only the princes of the expedition but also the magnates with 
them.” Given that the anonymous author often attributed the direction 
of the crusade to a council of maiores, this has important implications 
for assessing how the crusade was led, discussed in Chapter Eight. 


Raymond of Aguilers 


By contrast with the author of the Gesta Francorum, Raymond of Aguilers 
did not restrict his employment of the term princeps to the individuals 
who led each of the crusading contingents. That his use of the term 


© GF 44, 53, 75. 

” GF 11. 

7! Niermeyer, Medial Latin Dictionary, II, 822. 
” AA ii.16 (86). 


226 CHAPTER SEVEN 


also encompassed a wider group of magnates can be seen from the fact 
that Count Raymond was twice described as holding a council with 
his principes.” In other words, there were principes within the contingents 
of each of the most senior leaders. In one instance the historian gave 
the names of two knights whom he considered to be principes in the 
Provençal contingent: Pontius Rainaud and his brother Peter, who were 
principes noblissimi.™ 

One other named princeps from outside the ranks of the most promi- 
nent leaders was a noble from the central Pyrenees, Gaston of Béarn, 
who was put in charge of workers making siege equipment for the 
storming of Jerusalem and featured in lists of the magnates in the fol- 
lowing of Count Raymond of Toulouse.” To distinguish the individual 
leaders Raymond qualified the term principes, terming the most promi- 
nent individuals, principes maiores. He also referred to Bohemond and 
Raymond as the ‘two greatest principes in the army.” It is a reflection 
of Raymond’s greater interest in the lower social orders than the upper 
ranks of the First Crusade that his vocabulary was extremely limited in 
regard to the nobility and sheds no further light on the discussion. 


Fulcher of Chartres 


Fulcher of Chartres, on the other hand, had a relatively rich vocabulary 
for the nobility. Although his style of writing was terse, his phrasing is 
revealing. One term, for example, that seems to have quite a precise 
function for Fulcher was optimates. After redrafting his work, Fulcher’s 
use of the term optimates became one that was employed consistently for 
the prominent nobles of the Kingdom of Jerusalem who were involved 
in the decision making of the kingdom.” 

The term proceres was a popular one for Fulcher. He seems to have 
favoured using the term in a military context. At the battle of Dory- 
laeum, Fulcher wrote of proceres nostri resisting until support could arrive. 


™ RA 49 (245), 157 (266). 

™ RA 10 (236): For Pierre and Pons de Fay see RA 10 n. c; see also J. Riley-Smith, 
First Crusaders, p. 217 (Pierre), p. 218 (Pons). 

3 RA 332 (295). PT 78. 
° RA 183 (272). 
7 RA 64 (248): Duo maximi principes in exercitu. 
® FC ILxxviii.5 (481); M.xxxii.l1 (495); MI.xi.2 (648); I.xvi.2 (660); HI.Ivii.2 (807); 
FC HMl.lxi.5 (822); IH.xxxii.l (495). 


PRINCIPES AND THE CRUSADING NOBILITY 227 


Those senior princes so termed were Duke Robert of Normandy, 
Stephen of Blois, Robert of Flanders and Bohemond.” Fulcher com- 
mented on the banners of the proceres at the battle against Kerbogha.” 
It was on the signal of the proceres, said Fulcher, that the Christian forces 
attempted to storm Jerusalem in their initial, unsuccessful, assault, 
13 June 1099).* At the battle of Ascalon, 12 August 1099, Fulcher 
wrote that Duke Godfrey and the other proceres advanced, some in the 
first line, others in the second. The one other use of the term proceres 
in the Historia Hierosolymitana with regard to the First Crusade was not 
in a direct military context, although it was concerned with the conse- 
quence of military action. Fulcher reported that on the fall of Nicea, 
19 June 1097, the Byzantine Emperor, Alexios I Comnenus, gave gifts 
to nostri proceres.®* 

Whereas optimates seems to be have been a term for magnates in the 
Historia Hierosolymitana, the term proceres appears to denote a much more 
exclusive social group. ‘This is borne out by an examination of Fulcher’s 
use of the term princeps. When he reported on the first contingents to 
depart on the ‘pilgrimage’ he listed a number of principes. These were 
Hugh the Great, Bohemond, Godfrey, duke of Lotharingia, Count 
Raymond of Toulouse and Bishop Adhémar of Le Puy.” When Flucher 
described the arrival of Robert, duke of Normandy and Stephen of 
Blois at the siege of Nicea, early in May 1097, he called them as nostri 
principes. The leaders of the expedition resolving upon co-operation 
for the siege of Antioch, which began on 21 October 1097, were also 
termed nostri principes.® In the battle against Kerbogha, Fulcher twice 
referred to the banners of the leaders, the first time describing them 
as signa procerum nostrum,” the second vexilla principum nostrum.®’ The 
change was made simply for Fulcher to avoid repetition, but is helpful 
in showing that for the historian proceres and principes were synonymous. 
Fulcher again referred to all the leaders of the First Crusade as principes 
with regard to their movements in and around Antioch in November 


79 


FC Lxi.10 (197). 
FC Lxxii.4 (253). 
FC Lxxvii.2 (294). 
® FC Lx.10 (188). 
8 FC Lvi.3 (154). 
FC Lx.1 (181). 
FC Lxv5 (218). 
FC Lxxii.4 (253). 
FC Lxxii.6 (253). 


80 


8 


8 


85 


86 


8 


a 


228 CHAPTER SEVEN 


1098.°* Those leaders of the expedition at the time of its arrival at 
Jerusalem, 6 June 1099, who ordered the construction of ladders were 
termed principes. Baldwin of Edessa and Bohemond of Antioch on 
their march to Jerusalem, January 1100, were termed principes.” It is 
noteworthy that Baldwin was not described as a princeps before his 
becoming ruler of Edessa. 

Fulcher described the departure of the First Crusade from Nicea at 
the end of June 1097 by writing that ‘nostri barones’ received permission 
from the Byzantine Emperor Alexios I to depart.” Quite apart from 
the interesting implication that Fulcher saw Alexios as having author- 
ity over the expedition at this point, his use of the term barones for the 
crusading princes was unusual. Its use was not particularly common 
in the early twelfth century and none of the other early crusading 
historians employed the term. Fulcher himself used barones only this 
once, in his first redaction of the Historia Hierosolymitana, although he 
clearly found the term unproblematic as he retained it in the later 
version of his work.” 

The term barones does not appear in any other of the early histories, 
nor again in the work of Fulcher of Chartres. ‘This is why, when modern 
historians distinguish the contingents led by princes from the People’s 
Crusade of Peter the Hermit, it is probably more in keeping with the 
sources to refer to the Princes’ Crusade rather than, as is sometimes 
used, the Barons’ Crusade. In general at this time, the collective group, 
barones, were the great men of a realm, generally vassals to a king or 
emperor.” It could be that in writing about the crusading princes in 
the aftermath of their having taken the oath to the Emperor, Fulcher 
was indicating a stronger sense of vassalage to the Greek Emperor than 
subsequently existed on the crusade. 


88 FC Lxxv.1 (266). 

8 FC Lxxvii.1 (293). 

” FC Lxxxiv.2 (335). 

” FC Lxi.1 (189). 

2 FC 189 n. e. 

% J. E Niermeyer, Medival Latin Dictionary, I, 114-5. 


PRINCIPES AND THE CRUSADING NOBILITY 229 
Albert of Aachen 


Albert of Aachen generally used the term princeps for those at the 
very apex of society, particularly the leaders of the First Crusade and 
the senior Muslim leaders. He tended to provide additional adjectives 
when emphasising the pre-eminence of a select few; Duke Godfrey in 
particular was referred to variously as egregius princeps,°* nominatissimus 
princeps,” magnificus princeps,°° clarissimus princeps,” on becoming ruler of 
Jerusalem, ‘highest princeps of Jerusalem,’ and on his death, gloriosis- 
simus and nominatissimus princeps”? Baldwin of Boulogne was termed a 
praeclarus princeps when Albert was emphasising how important a hostage 
he was for the good behaviour of the Lotharingians as they crossed 
Hungary in October 1096.'°° Thereafter, Baldwin was termed an egre- 
gius and nominatissimus princeps when he arrived at Edessa, a city he was 
shortly to become ruler of, 10 March 1098.'°' Later, on his arrival at 
Jerusalem, to take over the kingdom, he was an egregius princpeps and 
after his coronation as King Baldwin I, 11 November 1100, he was 
referred to as magnificus princeps.' 

The most common term for the upper class of a bipartite division of 
society in the Historia [herosolimitana was maiores. As discussed in Chapter 
‘Two, it was several times coupled with minores to encompass the whole 
of a population. But it was also Albert’s term of choice for the general 
activities of the ‘greater’ people. It was the social group maiores that for 
Albert, as with the anonymous author of the Gesta Francorum, were the 
leaders of the First Crusade.” Given these references were typically 
to maiores offering counsel and advice, Albert clearly was applying the 
term to those magnates beyond the narrow group of princes. Only one 
individual was specifically named as a maior in the Historia [herosolimitana. 


% AA vii.30 (528); AA vi.37 (450). 
1.31 (530). 
% AA vi.48 (466): Dux Godefridus summus princeps Iherusalem. 


102 AA vij.42 (548). 
w3 AA ii.37 (126); AA ii.9 (152); AA ii.13 (156); AA ii.16 (164); AA iii 58 (228); 
AA iv9 (262); AA vi.29 (440); AA vi.30 (440). 


230 CHAPTER SEVEN 


Richard of the Principate, count of Salerno, was described as one of 
the maiores of the household of Bohemond.'" 

In a speech that Albert imagined taking place between Peter the 
Hermit and the Patriarch of Jerusalem, he had Peter say that ‘I will 
search out all the primates of Christendom, reges, duces, comites and those 
who hold the foremost place of royal power, to destroy the yoke of 
slavery and the impatience of your difficulties.”'® This passage provides 
a useful definition of the way in which Albert used the term primates, 
namely for those senior nobles in positions of authority. King Coloman 
of Hungary was described as having received the advice of his primates 
concerning Duke Godfrey.'°° Similarly, Emperor Alexios I Comnenus 
was described as taking advice from his primates before turning back 
from his march towards Antioch.'°’ Alexius extended his kiss of peace 
to Duke Godfrey’s primates.' In reporting the election of Duke God- 
frey as ruler of Jerusalem, Albert wrote that the Lotharingian prince 
was more blessed than all other primates. Four of the knights on the 
First Crusade were explicitly termed primates: Drogo of Nesle, Rainald 
III, count of Toul, Gaston of Béarn and Fulcher of Chartres.!!° This 
group, important for a discussion of iuvenes on the First Crusade, were 
here identified as going to Edessa after Baldwin had been made ruler 
there 

Although the speech attributed to Peter the Hermit above and the 
example of the promotion of Duke Godfrey made it clear that for 
Albert even a king could be numbered among the primates, he typically 
preferred to use the term for the leading followers of a prince rather 
than the princes themselves. So, in addition to the examples above, 
he wrote of how Adhémar took counsel with all his primates at the 
siege of Antioch and they decided to try to destroy a bridge that was 
allowing the garrison to cross and attack their camp.''? King Baldwin 
I was described as holding a council with all his primates shortly after 


10¢ AA vii.27 (524). 


105 AA 1.3 (4): ... omnes primates Christianorum, reges, duces, comites, et principa- 
tum regni tenentes, iugum servitutis vestre reserans, et angustiarum vestrarum tintolerantiam. 
106 AA ii.3 (64). 


107 AA iv 41 (312). 

108 AA ii.16 (84). 

109 AA vi.33 (446). 

10 AA v.15 (356). 

1! See below pp. 202-4, 211-12. 
12? AA iii.40 (202). 


PRINCIPES AND THE CRUSADING NOBILITY 231 


his coronation and it was the king and his primates who advocated to a 
visiting Venetian fleet that there should be an attack on Sidon.'!’ Albert 
used a similar formulation for Baldwin’s proposals to King Sigurd 
Magnusson of Norway.'!* 

That Albert was occasionally willing to use the term primates in such 
a way as to make the it inclusive of the princes as well as magnates, 
is evident in a reference to Duke Godfrey and Bishop Adhémar of Le 
Puy ‘and the other primates’,!!° as well as a reference to the primates of 
the Christian army deciding to consult a local hermit before assaulting 
Jerusalem." 

Another of Albert’s frequently used terms for magnates was primores. 
He used it for the leaders of the People’s Crusade, the Princes’ Crusade 
as well as Greek, Hungarian and Muslim princes. In several instances 
the primores were indicated as being involved in decision-making. During 
the siege of Antioch Godfrey and Bohemond fell out over a tent that 
mistakenly came to Bohemond although the Armenian prince Nicusus 
had sent it to Godfrey. Finally, wrote Albert, Bohemond, on the advice 
of the comprimores of the army, restored the tent to the duke.'”” 

This emphasised version of primores, comprimores, was a term that seems 
to have suggested a body of equals or ‘fellow primores.’ Albert wrote three 
times of Duke Godfrey ‘and the other comprimores’, the last example 
being of a manuscript tradition which used the term as a substitute for 


compares, ‘equals’;''!® once of Godfrey, Robert of Normandy ‘and the 


other comprimores’;''® once of ‘Bohemond and the other comprimores’;'*° 


and once also for Count Raymond ‘and his comprimores’.'*' Thus, more 
than primores, coprimores could be applied to just the more prominent 
princes. Similarly when Albert reported that Bohemond was promised 
Antioch if he could capture it by Robert of Flanders, Duke Godfrey 
‘and the other comprimores’, he was probably referring to the other princes 
rather than a wider body of magnates.'*? By contrast, to emphasise 


13 AA vii.43 (550); x.3 (720). 

1t AA xi.30 (804). For Sigurd Magnusson see AA 798 n. 37. 

15 AA iii.60 (232): ceterorumque primatum. 

16 AA vi.7 (412). 

17 AA iv.9 (262). 

18 AA iv.32 (296): ceterique comprimores; AA v.12 (352): ceteri comprimores; v.34 (382): 
ceterique comprimores [H]. 

119 AA iv.21 (280): ceterosque comprimores. 

120 AA ii.63 (240): Boemundus ceterique comprimores. 

121 AA v.29 (374): et suorum comprimorum. 

122 AA iv.15 (272): ceteros comprimores. 


232 CHAPTER SEVEN 


how even very prominent magnates were afraid and preparing to flee 
Antioch after the arrival of Kerbogha, Albert did use the term for a 
broader layer of nobles. '** 

Primi appear in the Historia Iherosolimitana much as do primores, as the 
‘foremost’ people. In his account of Duke Godfrey’s making his oath 
to the Byzantine emperor, Albert wrote an interesting depiction of 
the ceremony of vassalage in which Godfrey ‘surrendered himself to 
[Alexios] not only as a son but also as a vassal with clasped hands, along 
with all the primi who were present.’!** The term was evidently used 
both for the princes as well as for a wider layer of leading nobles. 

Another term for the magnates, optimates, entered Albert’s vocabu- 
lary only in later life, to judge by the fact that it appears only in books 
seven to twelve of the Historia Lherosolimitana, mostly in a distinct cluster 
in book seven. This book marks Albert’s return to the history that he 
began, probably with the intention of completing with Godfrey’s rule of 
Jerusalem. Did the intervening time consolidate the meaning of optimates? 
Fulcher of Chartres, when (after 1105), returning to his own history 
made optimates his term of choice for the new Christian magnates of 
Jerusalem, in particular the advisors to the king. Albert seemed to have 
had the same fixed stylistic idea of how to use the term, as optimates 
always appeared in connection with a person or a kingdom, generally 
through the the expression King Baldwin I ‘and his optimates.’’”? Once 
it was used for the senior nobles of the Kingdom of Jerusalem, who 
were distinguished from the knights. After the first battle of Ramleh, 
6 September 1101, Albert attributed to Baldwin I the report that ‘our 
optimates and all our equites except for ourselves were killed.’!*° 

There are a number of usages of potentes and the more emphatic 
form praepotentes in the Historia Lherosolimitana that show the term some- 
times functioned as a noun for magnates in addition to its more general 
use as an adjective for ‘powerful’. In one sentence, where the term is 
coupled with principes it seems to have a more restricted application to 
very senior figures. After praising the qualities of Duke Godfrey on his 


123 AA iv.40 (310). 

14 AA ii.16 (86): Non solum se ei in filium, sicut mos est terre, sed etiam in vassallum iunctis 
manibus reddidit, cum unwwersis primis qui tunc aderant. 

® AA vii.39 (544); vii.43 (550); vii.46 (554); vii.51 (560); vii.53 (562); vii.54 (562); 
vii.60 (570); x.2 (718); xii.7 (834). 

12 AA vii.69 (582): Optimates nostri et equites universi preter nos ceciderunt. 


PRINCIPES AND THE CRUSADING NOBILITY 233 


election as ruler of Jerusalem Albert listed categories of leading nobles 
who undertook the crusade, before or since: principes and potentes, bishops 
and counts, and sons of kings.'”’ 

Proceres was yet another term in the Historia Therosolimitana used for 
the magnates of the Christian army. When Albert wanted to emphasise 
how the plague at Antioch killed both the higher and lower social order, 
he wrote that it destroyed an uncountable multitude, whether nobiles 
proceres or humile vulgus.'2° When, 4-28 June, the crusade was trapped 
in Antioch by the arrival of Kerbogha, Albert emphasised that even 
egregii proceres had fled the city.” After the capture of Nicea, a nun 
who had been held prisoner called out to the proceres et milites Christi.'°° 
To distinguish the princes from the magnates, although they were all 
proceres, Albert qualified the term with a suitable adjective. Bohemond, 
Count Robert of Flanders, Duke Godfrey, Robert of Normandy were 
collectively termed by Albert magnifici proceres.'*' 

A rare term in Albert’s work used for both the princes and senior 
nobles was capitanet, a term with a considerable range of meaning in the 
twelfth century: from a dependent subject, prominent vassal or citizen 
to a military commander or baron.'* By and large, Albert seems to 
have used it for those from the class of princes. In commenting that 
the great princes brought along with them very lowly figures of every 
ordo, the phrase he used for the upper class was capitanei primi.'** Duke 
Godfrey and Bohemond were described as bring among the capitanei 
exercitus on the approach to Antioch.'** Similarly Godfrey, Bohemond, 
Robert, Raymond, were together the capitanei exercitus. In Albert’s 
report on the election of a ruler for Jerusalem he wrote that only after 
Count Raymond and all the other capitanei who were offered the honour 
had declined did Duke Godfrey finally accept it.'°° There is one pas- 
sage in which the person named was probably a magnate rather than 
a prince. Because of evil rumours concerning the People’s Crusade in 


27 AA vi.35 (448). 

28 AA v4 (342). 

129 AA iv.37 (306). 

130 AA ii.37 (126). 

131 AA iv.31 (294). 

132 See J. E Niermeyer, Medival Latin Dictionary, I, 177-8. 
133 AA ii.23 (100). 

13t AA iii.36 (196); 316. 

135 AA iv.13 (268). 

136 AA vi.33 (446). 


234 CHAPTER SEVEN 


Hungary, Albert reported that Duke Godfrey decided to send ahead 
no one from the nominatissimi et capitanei viri except an envoy, Henry of 
Esch.'*’ Though, as discussed below, at this point Henry of Esch was 
a powerful figure with considerable financial resources of his own and 
his social status was borderline between being considered a prince in 
his own right and one of the magnates of Duke Godfrey. 


Robert the Monk 


When it came to writing about the magnates, Robert the Monk’s prefer- 
ence was for the term optimates. In a passage that has been discussed in 
Chapter Two, for his report of the gathering of Bohemond’s forces for 
the expedition, Robert used the term optimates to emphasise the senior- 
ity of some of those who joined the Norman prince.'** Another useful 
passage, which confirms the optimates to be a wider grouping than the 
princes was that in which Robert wrote that accompanying Bohemond 
were nobilissimi principes, namely Tancred, Richard of the Principate, 
count of Salerno, and all the optimates of Apulia.'** Again, a layer of 
magnates is indicated in Robert’s report that Bohemond was greeted 
at Constantinople by a great number of consules, duces and optimates.'*° 
These optimates of the crusade were those who were involved in decision 
making alongside the senior princes.'*! 

Consules was a term with a wide range of meanings by the time of 
the First Crusade, its classical meaning evoked the powerful image of a 
consul of the Roman Republic, but a relatively recent evolution of the 
term had occurred through its adoption by the leaders of communes 
of Italian cities.' It appears in the history of the First Crusade writ- 
ten by Robert the Monk. Fortunately, Robert gave a definition of emir 
(admiraldus) in the Historia Therosolimitana that also conveyed something 
of his meaning of the term consules. ‘And those who they call emirs are 
kings, who are in charge of the provinces of the regions. A province 


37 AA ii.2 (62). 

138 RM 742. 

139 RM 744. 

1 RM 747. 

41 RM 776, 840. 

12 J, F Niermeyer, Medival Latin Dictionary, 1, 342-3. 


PRINCIPES AND THE CRUSADING NOBILITY 239 


is that which has a metropolitan, twelve consules and one king.”'* This 
seems to indicate Robert used consules for senior nobles, akin perhaps 
to counts, another possible meaning of the term. They also seem to 
be appointees, which was consistent with both the classical and con- 
temporary use of the term. 

When Robert described the departure of the contingent of Robert 
of Normandy and Robert of Flanders he wrote of optimates and ‘consules 
of lesser repute’ joining with them, from France, Britain and Brittany. '** 
The consul then, for Robert, was of a lower social status than the optimas. 
With Robert the Monk we have therefore an indication of a further 
gradation in the ranks of the nobility. For him there are four layers: 
princes, magnates, consules of lesser repute and then knights. 

By contrast with his fons formalis Robert was not given to using maiores 
to indicate the higher social orders. He used the term once to contrast 
with the plebeia multitudo, who rejoiced that the maiores swore not to 
abandon Antioch in the face of Kerbogha’s arrival.'? The only other 
use of the term as a social order occurred in Robert’s description of 
an invented letter from Kerbogha, which was addressed to the caliph, 
the king and the maiores proceres of the kingdom of Persia.'*° 

A more common term used by Robert for the magnates was proceres. 
That they were a social layer distinct from the princes is evident from 
the report that as a result of Bohemond and Count Raymond being 
ambushed on 6 March 1098, the report of the slaughter reached the 
camp and shook all the principes and proceres.” Several times the proceres 
made important decisions with regard to the direction of the crusade.“ 
In a short but very significant comment, Robert wrote that the wife 
of Walo II of Chaumont-en-Vexin, had been ‘born with the blood of 
proceres? This is very clear evidence for Robert’s adherence to the 
belief that high social rank was inherited. 

A favoured term for the senior figures of the First Crusade in the 
Gesta Francorum was seniores. Robert was clearly uncomfortable with 
the term and consistently replaced it with the terms discussed above, 


"SRM 788: Et quos admiraldos vocant, reges sunt, qui provinciis regionum praesunt. Provincia 
quidem est, quae unum habet metropolitanum, duodecim consules et unum regem. 

™ RM 739: ...minoris famae consules... 

45 RM 823. 

“6 RM 811. 

47 RM 785. 

“8 RM 783, 785, 793, 825, 857, 866. 

“9 RM 795: Procerum sanguine procreata. 


236 CHAPTER SEVEN 


probably indicating a difference in vocabulary between the northern 
French monk and the southern Italian crusader. Robert did have a lim- 
ited use for the seniores; he twice referred to the leadership of the First 
Crusade as seniores.” Other than those examples, the term appeared 
just once in the Historia Lherosolinutana, for those leaders of Kerbogha’s 
forces who lost heart after a meteor appeared to fall from the sky into 
their camp.'*' All three examples are clustered very closely together, 
suggesting a temporary, unconscious, adoption of the vocabulary of 
his source. 


Baldric of Dol 


Baldric’s preferred term for the leading nobles of the First Crusade 
was optimates. It was applied not just to the princes but a broader group 
of magnates. Bohemond, for example, was described as crossing the 
Adriatic cum optimatibus suis.” Again, Bohemond was described as 
addressing his following as optimates et commilitones nostri.'°? The fact that 
for Baldric the optimates could be synonymous with ‘the nobility’ was 
indicated in his account of the meeting that agreed to the departure of 
Bohemond and Robert of Flanders on a foraging expedition. Baldric 
described those who met together as ‘the nobility’ nobilitas, soon after 
terming them ‘the aforementioned optimates.’!”* 

At other times Baldric clearly meant only the most senior princes, as 
when he described the optimates, together with their armies, as entering 
the land of the Armenians.’ Baldric imagined the citizens of Tarsus 
surrendering their city to Baldwin and Tancred, with the two Christian 
leaders being addressed as illustrious optimates.” The Gesta Francorum 
reported a speech of Bohemond to the other Christian princes as begin- 
ning: Seniores et prudentissimi milites.” Baldric adjusted the same speech 
to begin: Optimates et domini.'** In general Baldric edited out the term 


150 RM 824, 825. 
51 RM 824. 

2 BD: 21; 

8: BD: 22; 

154 BD 45. 

5 BD 38. 

156 BD 38. 

87 GF 30. 

8 BD 42. 


PRINCIPES AND THE CRUSADING NOBILITY 237 


seniores, from his version of the episodes reported in the Gesta Francorum. 
Seniores appears just once in the Historia Hierosolymitana, surviving in the 
address of Bohemond to the other princes shortly before the capture of 
Antioch.” Baldric’s preference for optimates over seniores almost certainly 
reflected a geographical difference between the terminology used for 
magnates in northern France and southern Italy. 

Baldric commonly used another term for nobles, proceres, again 
sometimes in order to replace the term seniores. That proceres could also 
refer to magnates outside the ranks of the most senior princes is shown 
by another speech of Bohemond, given to his followers, in which he 
addressed his proceres.'°° 

A less favoured term for senior nobles in the Historia Hierosolymitana 
was maiores. It was used three times for the leaders of the First Crusade 
and once in the rather more classical sense of ‘elders’, for a wider body 
of nobles, when, in November 1098, omnes maiores natu assembled in 
Antioch.'*! 

Baldric used the term primores twice, both times as a substitute for 
the use of seniores in the Gesta Francorum. When, 5 April 1098, Tancred 
offered to garrison a castle to assist with the siege of Antioch, Baldric 
reported that the Norman prince made a pact with the primores of the 
Franks.'® The Christian princes who gathered for the battle of Ascalon 
were described by Baldric as primores.'°? 

The term princeps was reserved by Baldric for very senior figures. Sev- 
eral times he referred to the collective leadership of the First Crusade 
by the term, curiously in a cluster of usages towards the end of his 
work (which might have a relevance to the construction of a modern 
edition of the Historia Hierosolymitana).'®* In describing the conflict of 
Bohemond and Count Raymond of ‘Toulouse over the ownership of 
Antioch during the winter of 1098, Baldric three times referred to the 
two protagonists as principes.'® Tancred was twice termed a princeps,'°° 
as was Duke Godfrey on his becoming the ruler of Jerusalem.'°’ 


15 BD 54. 

160 BD 99. 

16i BD 83. 

1&2 BD 52. See GF 43. 

16 BD 107. See GF 94. 

6 BD 89, 89, 98, 99, 104, 106, 107. 
1 BD 89, 89, 87. 

166 BD 24, 76. 

17 BD 105. 


238 CHAPTER SEVEN 


Dominus was coupled with servus in the list of several couplets that 
expressed a bipartite view of society.’ That Baldric sometimes used 
the term in a social sense and not simply to express those exercising 
the function of lordship is shown by its appearance in other speeches, 
where the domini were being addressed as the leading princes. The priest 
and visionary, Stephen of Valence, was described as speaking to fratres 
et domini mei...'°° Similarly, the priests of the Christian army addressed 
its leaders as fratres et domini before the storming of Jerusalem.'”° 


Guibert of Nogent 


The most common term for leaders of troops and for those in the 
upper part of society in the Gesta Det per Francos was princeps. Very often 
it was the term used for the leaders of the First Crusade. In a passage 
on the high price of food during a period of famine at the siege of 
Antioch, during the winter of 1097, Guibert observed that when even 
the principes began to experience a contraction of their wealth, hardship 
must have been severe on those whose wealth had been used up." The 
princes here being those with the greatest resources, presumably those 
able to obtain revenues from the towns captured during the course of 
the crusade. 

In one of the few passages in which the leaders were named Guibert 
wrote that the principes, Duke Godfrey, Gount Raymond of ‘Toulouse, 
Bohemond, Count Robert of Flanders and all the others, held a council 
together.'” It is clear, however, that Guibert was willing to employ the 
term to indicate ‘leaders’ without necessarily meaning persons of noble 
status. In his account of the behaviour of young boys who had come 
on crusade Guibert was struck by the fact that they formed themselves 
into an army of children with principes of their own named after the 
senior princes: Hugh the Great, Bohemond, Flanders, Normandy.!” 

One of Guibert’s favoured terms for the collective leadership of the 
senior princes of First Crusade was primores.'’* The leaders of the Cru- 


PRINCIPES AND THE CRUSADING NOBILITY 239 


sade of 1101 were also termed primores.'” Guibert also used the term 
for a slightly broader grouping of magnates than the most prominent 
princes. Early in October 1097, soon after leaving the town of Coxon, 
Count Raymond of ‘Toulouse decided to send some of his men ahead 
in the hope of catching the defenders of Antioch by surprise. According 
to Guibert, Count Raymond therefore chose four men from among the 
primores of his own army, one of whom was William VI of Montpellier 
(the Gesta Francorum gives the other three names: Peter of Castillon, Peter 
of Roaix, Peter Raymond of Hautpol).'”° Here the primores were leaders 
among a particular contingent rather than the whole army. The same 
sense of the term was present in the description of Raymond Pilet as 
being one ‘of the primores of Count Raymond.’'”” 

Other examples of primores in the Gesta Dei per Francos do not apply 
to Christian forces, but they do show the term being used consistently 
for relatively senior figures, albeit not individual princes. Those who 
surrendered the town of ‘Tarsus to Tancred and Baldwin, a few days 
after 15 September 1097, were the primores of the city.'”* Similarly the 
leaders of the city of Edessa were termed primores.'” Firuz, the officer 
who betrayed Antioch to the Christians, was described as one of the 
primores of the city.'®° A sortie from the garrison of Antioch against 
the Christians, 6 March 1098, resulted in heavy losses for the ‘Turkish 
forces and Guibert reported that twelve of their primores were killed.'*' 
Finally, during the storming of Ma’arra, 11 December 1098, Bohemond 
sent an interpreter to the Saracen primores, in order to negotiate their 
surrender to him.'®? 

Another common term for both the magnates and princes of the 
First Crusade in the Dei Gesta per Francos was proceres. Guibert wrote 
that after the Byzantine emperor, Alexios I Comnenus, saw proceres of 
such great dignity gathering he envied the size of their forces and their 
wisdom. '® In his account of the departure of the various contingents of 


13 GN 314. 

© GN 168. GF 26. For these leaders see J. Riley-Smith, The First Crusaders, p. 217 
(Peter of Castillon, Peter of Roaix and Peter Raymond of Hautpol), p. 226 (William 
VI of Montpellier). 

"7 GN 244: ...de primoribus comitis Sancti Egidi. 


G 
178 G 
179 G 
180 G 
181 G 
182 G 

G 


D A A AA A 


183 


240 CHAPTER SEVEN 


the expedition Guibert wrote of the proceres of central France.'** These 
leaders were the papal legate, Bishop Adhémar of Le Puy, Hugh the 
Great, Count Stephen of Blois, Duke Robert of Normandy and Count 
Raymond of ‘Toulouse. On many other occasions Guibert used the term 
proceres for the Christian princes who led the expedition. 

As with principes, potentes and primores, Guibert did not confine his use 
of the term to the most prominent leaders of the First Crusade. He 
described how ‘certain proceres were supported by [Hugh the Great] 
and if the pagans had been justly driven out through war, and they 
obtained that which they strove for, they planned to make him their 
king.”'® Geoffrey of Montescaglioso, and William Marchius, brother 
of Tancred were termed proceres.'*° 

Potentes was an uncommon term for princes in the Gesta Det per Francos. 
It did occur, however, in an important passage concerning an offer of 
those whom Guibert also termed the seniores of the Christian army, after 
the defeat of Kerbogha, that insofar as there was anyone who needed a 
gift of money, they should adhere to the potentes through a pact.'*’ This 
was Guibert’s version of the passage in the Gesta Francorum in which 
the princes offered to make a compact with the egentes within the city 
of Antioch and retain them.'® It indicates that Guibert understood 
potentes to apply to those leading nobles of the First Crusade who were 
in a position to offer lordship to the lower social orders. He also used 
the term for the leaders of the Crusade of 1101, referring to Count 
Stephen of Blois and many other /otentes.'*’ In one further example, 
Guibert provided a comment on the depth of the famine that preceded 
the departure of the First Crusade, saying that the extent of the hard- 
ship was threatening even to the potentes. '™ In other words, as Guibert 
himself put it, the time of famine reduced the wealth of all.'”! 

Guibert used the term optimates only once in the Gesta Dei per Francos. 
He described the arrival of Arab ambassadors at the camp of the Chris- 
tians during the siege of Antioch, early in March 1098. ‘These envoys 


1 GN 131. 


18 GN 131: Huic quidam procerum innitebantur et, si quid bellorum iure, evictis gentilibus, eos 
obtinere contingeret, ipsum sibi regem preficere meditabantur. 
1 GN 158. 
187 GN 244. 
188 GFE 72-3 
189 GN 315. 
190 GN 118. 
GN 119. 


PRINCIPES AND THE CRUSADING NOBILITY 241 


dismissed the Christians as possible allies against the ‘Turks, after they 
had learned that the optimates, through lack of horses, had now become 
pedites.” Other than the fact that optimates here were evidently knights 
the precise meaning of the term for Guibert cannot be established. In 
his Five Books of Tropologiae on Hosea, Amos and the Lamentations, Guibert 
discussed Amos 6:1 in which the term optimates was defined as the ‘heads 
of the people’.!%? It is likely therefore that Guibert employed the term 
optimates in that sense and it might not have been an exaggeration to 
depict the leaders of the Christian forces on the First Crusade as having 
lost their mounts. There was a desperate shortage of horses at that time 
and even Duke Godfrey of Lotharingia had to borrow a horse from 
Count Raymond of Toulouse for the battle against Kerbogha,'** while 
a bowl was carried from inn to inn on behalf of Robert of Flanders 
whose constant fighting had seen him lose all his own horses.!” 

This examination of the vocabulary of the sources with regard to 
the upper strata of the First Crusade suggests one thing above all: that 
it might be a mistake to assume that the direction of affairs was solely 
in the hands of a very few prominent princes. Very often the historians 
used terms that applied to magnates for those involved in the decision- 
making, rather than employ the terms that they used exclusively for 
princes. When John France wrote about one particular example of a 
broad council of the leaders, he made the observation that ‘it warns 
us against being hypnotised by the princes.” That this statement is 
more than justified is demonstrated in Chapter Eight. 


192 GN 971. 

193 PL 156, col. 436A: capita populorum. 

iM AA iv.55 (334). See also J. France, Victory in the East, pp. 122-42. 
85 RC 646. 

196 J. France, Victory in the East, p. 21. 


CHAPTER EIGHT 


THE LEADERSHIP OF THE FIRST CRUSADE 


The historians of the First Crusade were struck by the fact that the 
expedition had no sole commander to lead it. For Guibert of Nogent 
and Baldric of Dol, this fact was turned into a source of religious pride. 
It was precisely because the crusaders were humble that they earned 
God’s favour. Like the Children of Israel, who would be without king, 
without prince before returning to God (Osee 3: 4—5), the Christian 
forces were ‘without king, without emperor’ (Baldric);' ‘without prince, 
without king’, under God alone (Guibert).? Similarly, for Robert the 
Monk it was extraordinary that while those princes who normally ruled 
and supported their people were far off back in Europe, a few humble 
individuals had seen the defeat of kings.’ In reporting a speech by 
Bohemond, which tells us more about his own views than that of the 
Norman prince, Robert the Monk had Bohemond compare the inspira- 
tion that had led so many nobles to gather at Constantinople for the 
expedition with that which led the Children of Israel from Egypt.* 
The biblical parallel with the Children of Israel being led out of 
Egypt occurred to the participants of the crusade as well as to the 
Benedictine historians. Fulcher, in a prologue to his work written 
c. 1118, thought that the Frank’s suffering for Christ and their will- 
ingness to undergo martyrdom did not differ from the Israelites and 
Maccabees (the followers of Judas Maccabeus who, c. 170-160 B.C. 
led a Jewish following against Antiochus IV Epiphanes of the Seleuc- 
ids). Another crusading cleric, Arnulf of Chocques, evoked the legend 
of the Israelites to a large assembly of the Christian army. After the 
Holy Lance had been discredited by the death of Peter Bartholomew, 
20 April 1099, Arnulf of Ghocques and another Arnulf, the bishop of 
Mirtirano, advocated that a golden image of the saviour made, so that 


' BD 9. 

2 GN 312. 

> RM. 

* RM 747. 

5 FC Prologus (116-7). 


This is an open access chapter distributed under the terms of the CC-BY-NC License. 


244 CHAPTER EIGHT 


they should spend as much on their devotion as did the Israelites. This 
might well have been the golden cross and image of Christ that was 
placed as a talisman in the siege tower of Duke Godfrey during the 
final assault against Jerusalem.’ If the clergy of the First Crusade and 
those writing about the expedition soon afterwards saw the movement 
as analogous with that of the Children of Israel from Egypt, who did 
they see as the equivalent to the figure of Moses, the divinely inspired 
religious and military leader of the Israelites? The obvious candidate 
was Adhémar, bishop of Le Puy and papal legate. As far as it is possible 
to tell, the initial model of the crusade held by Pope Urban II was that 
the enterprise was to be directed by the papacy, with Adhémar acting 
in place of Urban himself.® This perspective was echoed, faithfully, by 
the clerical sources. 

Robert the Monk, an eyewitness, reporting the meeting of the clergy 
at Clermont after the departure of the laity, wrote that Urban sought 
their view as to who should be at the head of so many pilgrims, given 
that they had no notable princes. All unanimously chose the Bishop of 
Le Puy, as someone very suitable both in secular and divine matters. 
‘Although reluctant, he undertook, like a second Moses, the general- 
ship and direction of the people of the Lord.’? Raymond of Aguilers 
also described Adhémar as being a second Moses,” as did the Norman 
historian, Ralph of Caen."! 

Early in his work, Fulcher described Adhémar as wisely ruling (regere) 
the entire army of God.!? But all the sources, including Fulcher later 
in his history, indicate that the role played by the papal legate was a 
more ambiguous one than simply being the leader of the crusade. In 
practice, while Adhémar seems to have been in charge of religious 
matters, he was by no means the overall commander of the expedition, 
rather he was seen as one prince among several. In fact, very soon after 
the Council of Clermont, as soon as it emerged that several princely 
contingents were embarking on the crusade, it seems that even pope 


ë RC 683. 

7 AA vi.l6 (422). 

8 Urban II, To the faithful in Flanders: Hagenmeyer, Epistulae et Chartae, pp. 
136-7. 

° RC 731: Ile itaque, licet invitus, suscepit, quasi alter Moyses, ducatum ac regimen dominici 
populi. 

10 RA 351 (301). 

"RC 673. 

"FG Liv.1 (138-9). 


THE LEADERSHIP OF THE FIRST CRUSADE 245 


Urban II found it necessary to appoint two other legates for the other 
armies leaving France. Arnulf of Chocques and Alexander, the chap- 
lains of Robert of Normandy and Stephen of Blois both appear to 
have been legatine authority." This indicates, as I. S. Robinson points 
out, that the crusading princes from a very early stage did not accept 
Urban’s original model of an undertaking consisting of a single army 
led by the pope’s representative. '* 

Guibert of Nogent wrote that Urban entrusted the care (cura) of the 
expedition to the bishop of Le Puy.” This formulation is in keeping 
with that in the Gesta Francorum regarding those people who remained 
in Antioch following the defeat of Kerbogha, rather than disperse to 
nearby cities. Adhémar was described as being their rector et pastor: both 
terms for a leader in an ecclesiastical sense.'° Similarly, Ralph of Caen 
described the dying Adhémar as saying ‘Pope Urban handed me to 
you to give instruction.’ The letter of the crusading princes to pope 
Urban after the death of Adhémar described him as ‘the father com- 
mitted to us’ and ‘vicar’ of the pope.'® The formulation of Adhémar 
himself was that the pope had given to him the cura of the Christian 
army.” In all these cases the language emphasises the spiritual side 
of Adhémar’s leadership role, while leaving ambiguous the extent to 
which he was considered a secular ruler. The obscurity of the precise 
meaning of these formulations has, as a consequence, given rise to a 
debate among modern historians as to the importance of Adhémar’s 
leadership role.”° 


!3 I. S. Robinson, The Papacy 1073-1198 Continuity and Innovation (Cambridge, 1990), 
p. 351 n. 154. 

1 Ibid., p. 351. 

5 GN 117. 

'© GF 74. 

17 RC 673: 

‘Sic me doctrinae vobis quum papa ministrum 
‘Tradit Urbanus’? 

18 Letter of Bohemond and the other princes to pope Urban II: Hagenmeyer, 
Epistulae et chartae, p. 164. 

19 Letter of Patriarch Simeon and Adhémar of Le Puy: Hagenmeyer, Epistulae et 
chartae, p. 141. 

20 J. H. Hill and L. Hill, ‘Contemporary accounts and the later representation of 
Adhémar, Bishop of Puy’, Medievalia et Humanistica 8 (1955), pp. 30-8. J. A. Brundage, 
‘Adhémar of Puy: The Bishop and his Critics,’ Speculum 34 (1959), pp. 201-212. H. 
E. Mayer, ‘Zur Beurteilung Adhémars von Le Puy’, Deutsches Archiv für Erforschung des 
Mittelalters 16 (1960), pp. 547-52. 


246 CHAPTER EIGHT 


There is little question that the legate reigned supreme in ecclesiastical 
matters, some of which would have had quite a strong impact on the 
overall direction of the crusade. If there was one contingent that was 
likely to baulk at Adhémar’s authority, it was that of Duke Godfrey. 
The Lotharingian clergy included figures who had been supporters of 
the imperial side of the conflict between Pope Gregory VII and King 
Henry IV, most notably Bishop Otto of Strasbourg.*! Otto was brother 
of Henry IV’s son-in-law, Duke Frederick I of Swabia. His adherence 
to the crusade seemed to represent a submission to the Gregorian 
party.” Otto’s obituary notice by Bernold of St Blaisen (Constance) in 
1100 suggests, however, that this was temporary: ‘the schismatic Otto 
of Strasburg, having returned from the journey to Jerusalem, but, it 
was believed, still with his schism uncorrected, reached the end of his 
life.” 

That Adhémar’s authority in spiritual affairs was, regardless of the 
former loyalties of the Lotharingian clergy, nevertheless deferred to is 
evident from an incident where a nun from the convent of St Maria 
in Oeren (Trier) was released from a period of captivity in Nicea, dur- 
ing which time she had been ravished. Seeking ‘purification’, she had 
initially appealed to Henry of Esch, a Lotharingian nobleman whom 
she had recognised, who in turn took her case to Duke Godfrey. God- 
frey sought for advice from Adhémar, who gave instruction as to the 
necessary penance.” 

There are several other clear examples that indicate Adhémar’s eccle- 
siastical authority on the crusade. Firstly, after an earthquake took place 
during the siege of Antioch, 30 December 1098, Adhémar announced 
three days of fast, with a procession, prayers and alms-giving to the 
people. He ordered that the priests perform mass and prayers, and the 
clergy, psalms.” This was probably the occasion described by Guibert 
of Nogent and Albert of Aachen, as being one where a council of 


2! For references to Otto, bishop of Satsbourg see J. Riley-Smith, The First Crusaders, 
p. 216. 

2 J. S. Robinson, Henry IV of Germany, 1056-1106 (Cambridge, 1999), p. 292. 

3 Bernold of St Blaisen (Constance), Chronicon, ed. I. S. Robinson, Die 
Chroniken Bertholds von Reichenau und Bernolds von Konstanz, MGH Scriptores Rerum Ger- 
manicorum nova series 14 (Hanover, 2003), p. 540: Otto Strazburgensis scismaticus, de 
Lerosolimitano itinere reversus, sed de scismate, ut putabatur, non emendatus, diem clausit extremum. 

% AA ii.37 (127). 

> RA 48 (245): Praedicavit eo tempore episcopus triduanum [Col.0602B] jejunium, et cum 
processione, orationes, et eleemosynas ad populum; ad presbyteros autem mandavit ut vacarent missis 
et orationibus, et clerici, psalmis. 


THE LEADERSHIP OF THE FIRST CRUSADE 247 


the clergy was held to regulate the spiritual conduct of the Christian 
army. The council appointed judges to flog, brand and shave the heads 
of miscreants.” A couple found guilty of adultery were subsequently 
whipped through the whole camp as an example, by order of Adhé- 
mar.” Writing approvingly of this incident, Guibert of Nogent added 
that the legate let no Sunday or holiday go by without preaching and 
enjoining every cleric to do the same.” 

Secondly, because there was a danger that Christians would attack 
each other on the fall of Antioch, Adhémar ordered everyone to shave 
and to wear a cross.” Thirdly, before the battle against Kerbogha, Adhé- 
mar led the way in attempting to earn God’s approval for the Christian 
army.” The ecclesiastical activity which was organised at that time was 
described in the Gesta Francorum: three days fasting; processions from one 
church to another; confession; absolution; communion; the giving of 
alms and the celebration of masses.*' It has seemed strange to modern 
historians that soldiers were asked to fast before battle, but the practical 
side of the idea was to give as much grain as possible, no matter how 
precious, to strengthen the mounts of the Christian army.*? 

Adhémar was responsible for leading services, such as the burial 
rituals for the much-admired knight Roger Barneville.” The legate 
also took responsibility for the distribution alms and tithes of captured 
booty to the poor.” Rather gruesomely, at the siege of Antioch he 
offered a reward for Turkish heads and, after Tancred presented him 
with a ‘tithe’ of heads, had them mounted on long poles facing the 
city.” To demoralise the garrison in Antioch, Adhémar organised the 
Christian farmers to demonstratively plough and seed the land around 
the Christian camp.” The legate also played the central role in oath- 
taking ceremonies, such as that of the Christian princes who swore 
that Bohemond would be ruler of the city if he could find a way to 


2 AA iii.58 (228). 

? GN 196; AA iii.58 (228). 

2 GN 196-7. 

°° GN 206. 

3 FC Lxxii.l (201-2). 

5! GF 67-8. 

%2 FC Lxxii.2 (202). For the desperate state of horses at this time see J. France, 
Victory in the East, pp. 286-7. 

*® AA iv.28 (290). 

* PT 100. 

3 GN 311-12; RC 644. 

s GN 312. 


248 CHAPTER EIGHT 


capture it.*’ Similarly, when the leaders took an oath not to abandon 
the expedition in the face of the arrival of Kerbogha with an appall- 
ingly large army, Adhémar was central to the occasion.** Naturally, also, 
he was the judge of the validity of visions and miracles, such as those 
presented by Stephen of Valance and Peter Bartholomew.” With regard 
to the latter and the Holy Lance, Adhémar initially voiced his disbelief 
in the relic, but appreciating the connection between the discovery of 
the Lance and the heightened desire for battle with Kerbogha among 
the Christians, he later went so far as to have the relic associated with 
his Provengal following as they marched out to the conflict. 

In all these matters, Adhémar was the most prominent leader by far. 
But some modern historians have questioned whether, outside of clerical 
affairs, he played much of a role at all.*° In the context of the crusade, 
it is probably mistaken to underestimate the importance of Adhémar’s 
direction of the religious rituals of the entire army in creating a sense 
of authority around the legate. But it is true that in the more secular 
and military decision-making of the crusade, Adhémar was clearly not 
the overall leader of the expedition. He was, nevertheless, a prominent 
figure, one among several princes. 

As the various contingents set out, Fulcher wrote a list of their respec- 
tive leaders and included Adhémar among them.*! When the Christian 
army neared Antioch, Albert of Aachen wrote that Duke Godfrey of 
Lotharingia, Bohemond, Count Raymond of ‘Toulouse, Count Robert 
of Flanders, Duke Robert of Normandy and Adhémar governed it 
equally.” They may have been equals in authority, but Adhémar seems 
to have been seen as something of a co-ordinator for the leadership of 
the crusade, because at least one council of the princes at the siege of 
Antioch took place in his ‘house’.** 

The legate was described as playing a leading role in a number 
of military affairs: he lead his men to outflank the ‘Turkish army at 


37 RC 653. 

2 GF 58-9, 

3° GN 100. GF 58. See Chapter Three. 

” Especially J. H. Hill and L. Hill, ‘Contemporary accounts and the later repre- 
sentation of Adhémar’ passim; see also H. E. Mayer, ‘Zur Beurteilung Adhémars von 
Le Puy’. 

"FC Lvi.3-8 (154-161). 

® AA iii.27 (180). 

® RA 54 (246): domo. 


THE LEADERSHIP OF THE FIRST CRUSADE 249 


Dorylaeum;" he advised the whole army that there should be no fur- 
ther breakaway detachments as they approached Antioch; he ordered 
a shield-roof formation to be drawn up to cope with the resistance of 
archers at the ‘Iron Bridge’, 20 October 1098; he planned the order 
of march by which the Christian army arrived and took up positions 
at Antioch” and, due to Count Raymond being ill and left in Antioch 
to guard against a sortie from the Muslim held citadel, he led the 
Provençal troops in the battle against Kerbogha.”° 

Probably the most accurate assessment of Adhémar’s overall role is 
that given by Raymond of Aguilers in the historian’s account of the 
vision of Stephen of Valance. Christ was reported as appearing to 
Stephen and among other questions asked, ‘who is the commander of 
the Christian army?’ To this Stephen replied, ‘Lord, there was never 
one sole lord, but rather they trust in the bishop [Adhémar].”*” In 
other words, Adhémar was one among several princes, but the person 
with the most respect across the whole of the various contingents of 
the Christian army. 

Duke Godfrey of Lotharingia was another crusading prince to 
whom the analogy of Moses was applied. But this was in the very 
specific context of his election as ruler of Jerusalem, where it seemed 
appropriate for Albert of Aachen to recall the dream of a local knight, 
whose spirit was transported to Mount Sinai, from where he saw the 
Duke ascending the mountain, to be met by two bishops dressed in 
white. These mysterious figures blessed Godfrey by praying that he 
be appointed commander of the Christian people, like Moses.*® The 
conclusion that Albert drew from this vision was that, in the spirit of 
Moses, Godfrey was the preordained prince of the people.” 

The role of Moses was attributed to Godfrey by a distant author, 
after the Duke had successfully obtained the sole authority of Jerusalem. 
There was, however, one other contender for the position of divinely 
approved leader who self-consciously sought to be seen as such from 
the very beginning of the expedition. This was Count Raymond IV 
of ‘Toulouse. Baldric of Dol’s eyewitness account of the speech of the 


“ GF 20. 

® AA ii.33 (190); 1.35 (190-2); 111.36 (198). 

© GF 68. 
RA 104 (256): Domine no fuit ibi unus solus dominus unquam, sed magis episcopo credunt.’ 
8 AA vi.34 (446). 
1 AA vi. 35 (448). 


250 CHAPTER EIGHT 


envoys of the count at the Council of Clermont has been examined 
in Chapter Two for what it reveals of Baldric’s sociology. But it also 
offers a very interesting perspective on the leadership of the crusade. 
The count’s envoys are reported as responding to fact that Adhémar 
had volunteered to go by saying: ‘Behold! God be thanked, two men 
voluntarily offered to proceed with the Christians on their journey. 
Behold! Religious and secular power, the clerical ordo and the laity, 
harmonise in order to lead the army of God. Bishop and count, we 
imagine ourselves like another Moses and Aaron.”” 

Aaron was the elder brother of Moses and, as high priest of the 
Israelites, was nearly as important to their journey from Egypt as the 
prophet. It was a commonplace of medieval writing to refer to them 
both as the leaders of the Children of Israel.°! It is quite possible that 
Baldric was accurately recalling the theme of the followers of Count 
Raymond. At the time of their address it would not have been clear that 
several other major contingents would participate in the crusade and the 
analogy with the divinely inspired biblical brothers might have seemed 
appropriate to the count. The fact that Urban had met with Adhémar 
before the Council of Clermont and had travelled through Languedoc, 
both before and after the council, meeting Count Ryamond at Nimes, 
has been cited as evidence that there had been an early understanding 
that the leadership of the expedition would be assigned to the legate and 
the count.” In this light it would make sense that Raymond would try 
to portray himself as a divine appointee. In the course of the expedition 
the count went to great lengths to portray himself as spiritually devout 
and especially chosen for the enterprise, with a pattern of behaviour 
that was quite distinct from the other princes. 

During the difficult crossing of Anatolia after the crusaders’ victory at 
Doryleaum, Count Raymond was so sick that he thought he was dying 
and, indeed, the Bishop of Orange administered the last rites. A Saxon 
count in the Provencal contingent comforted the Count Raymond, say- 
ing that he would not die of this illness. The Saxon claimed to know this 
directly from having interceded with God on behalf of the Raymond 


5 BD 16: Ecce, Deo gratias, jam Christianis ituris, duo ultronei processere viri; ecce sacerdotium 
et regnum; clericalis ordo et laicalis ad exercitum Dei conducendum concordant. Episcopus et comes, 
Moysen et Aaron nobis reimaginantur 

5! For example, they are listed together among the known Biblical ‘princes of the 
people’ by Bruno de Segni, Commentaria in Mattheum, PL 165, Col. 0152C. 

5 J. H. Hill, ‘Raymond of Saint Gilles in Urban’s Plan of Greek and Latin 
Friendship’, Speculum, 26, 2 (1951), pp. 265-276, here p. 266. 


THE LEADERSHIP OF THE FIRST CRUSADE 251 


and promised to always be beside the Provengal count. Count Raymond 
believed this divine intervention to be true and, reported his chaplain, 
‘divine mercy, which had made him leader of his army, immediately 
relieved him from death and restored him to health.” 

In a public display of piety, Count Raymond walked barefoot from 
Ma/’arra when the crusade departed that city, 8 January 1099.°* He 
was accompanied by the recently appointed Bishop of Albara and his 
clerics, who were also barefoot. In a similar spirit of devotion, when the 
Count reached the river Jordan, he did not rush to immerse himself in 
it, as did the other crusaders, but first rowed across in a boat, wearing 
a linen shirt and breeches, after which he was splashed with water from 
the river, the garments dried and kept with the Holy Lance. Raymond 
of Aguilers, the chaplain of the Count who reported this, did not know 
the significance of these rituals, but they were adhered to as having 
been the instruction of the visionary, Peter Bartholomew.” 

In a further demonstration of his spiritual convictions, this time with 
an initiative all of his own, Raymond made himself guardian of the 
Church of Mount Zion his arrival at the walls of Jerusalem, 6 June 
1099. ‘This was perhaps a conscious echo of the deeds of Judas Macca- 
beus, who restored the sanctuary on Mount Zion and built a sanctuary 
there.°° As noted above, Judas Maccabeus was a Jewish commander 
who campaigned on behalf of his people against the Seleucid Empire; 
he was seen by papal reformers of the eleventh century as a model 
miles Christi.” Even the count’s own army were less than impressed by 
this undertaking; most of them refused to follow Raymond up the hill 
and remained in an earlier camp, those that did attend him having to 
be paid with large sums of money.”* 

Count Raymond’s championing of the Holy Lance was perhaps the 
most striking example of his attempt to associate himself with miracu- 
lous and divinely ordained events. Despite the fact that Adhémar’s 
first response to the approach of Peter Bartholomew was to ‘reckon 


5 RA 28 (241): Sed divina clementia quae eum ducem praefecerat exercitus sui, de morte eum 
illice relevavit, et sospitali reddidit. 

5% GF 81; RA 185 (272). 

5 RA 356-7 (301-2). 

5 I Machabees 4: 36-61. 

5 C. Erdmann, The Origin of the Idea of Crusade, trans. M. W. Baldwin and 
W. Goffart (Princeton, 1977). Also I. S. Robinson, The Papal Reform of the Eleventh Century 
(Manchester, 2004), p. 45. 

5 RA 307 (293). 


252 CHAPTER EIGHT 


the words to be nothing’, Count Raymond believed the lowly servant 
and brought him in to his chaplaincy.*® The count himself joined the 
group of twelve clerics and nobles who, with everyone else locked out 
of the church of St Peter, dug all day to try to find the promised relic. 
It was after Count Raymond’s departure that Peter Bartholomew leapt 
down into what must have been quite a deep pit to discover the Lance." 
No doubt appreciating St Andrew’s message on the night following 
the discovery of the Lance, that God had reserved the relic for Gount 
Raymond and decreed him standard-bearer (vexilliferum) of this army,” 
the count had the relic wrapped in precious purple cloth and it was 
displayed with great enthusiasm to the Christian army.” 

The seemingly miraculous victory of the Christian forces over Ker- 
bogha enhanced the authority of the visionaries and, as discussed in 
Chapter Four, Peter Bartholomew in particular. But it also brought a 
new surge of popular approval for Count Raymond, whose purse filled 
from gifts to the Lance, whose spirit rose and whose army became 
overbearingly proud.” This renewed sense of divine purpose seems 
to have evoked a desire in the count to assert himself as leader of the 
entire expedition, because at a council at Chastel-Rouge on 4 Janu- 
ary 1099, part way between Antioch and the recently captured town 
of Ma’arra, he offered Duke Godfrey and Robert of Normandy ten 
thousand solidi each to join his following; Robert of Flanders six thou- 
sand, Tancred five thousand and smaller amounts proportionate to the 
strength of other leaders. Again at Tripoli, 19 May, Count Raymond 
once more offered the nobles of the army entreaties and rewards, this 
time to attack the city.” 

Brought back down to earth with a bump by the mutiny described in 
Chapter Four, Count Raymond discovered that his attempts to utilise 
popular religious enthusiasm in support of the idea he was a divinely 
appointed figure to lead the expedition had failed. He had unleashed 
social forces, which he could not control. 

Other than an incident reported by Albert of Aachen, of Duke Godfrey 
taking a barefoot walk around the city after the fall of Jerusalem,” Count 


5 RA 100 (247): Episcopus autem nihil esse, praeter verba putavit. 
&© RA 109-10 (257). 

& RA 110 (257). 

& AA iv.44 (316). 

® RC 677. 

& RA 282 (289). 19 May, FC 271 n. 25. 

AA vi.26 (437). 


THE LEADERSHIP OF THE FIRST CRUSADE 253 


Raymond’s pattern of behaviour was exceptional among the princes. 
He went to greater lengths than any of the others to publicly demon- 
strate his piety and belief in God’s miraculous interventions. In this 
context it is worth looking again at Count Raymond’s obduracy in 
resisting making an act of homage to the Greek Emperor. The report 
of Raymond of Aguilers, the chaplain of the count, was that the oath 
was refused on the ground that Raymond had not taken the cross to pay 
allegiance to any other lord or be in the service of any other than He 
for whom he had abandoned his native land. This has been dismissed 
as a ‘pretty phrase’ composed by the historian based on what the count 
would be expected to say,” but it might well have formed the substance 
of the reply by someone who did genuinely did see themselves as a 
potential Moses (or Aaron) for the expedition. 

Another prince whose role as a possible overall leader of the First 
Crusade deserves attention is Stephen, count of Blois and Chartres, 
husband of Adela, daughter of William the Conqueror.” In a letter to 
Adela, Stephen reported that he had been made dominus and director 
and governor of all the acts of the princes." That he had been given 
a special leadership role is confirmed by Raymond of Aguilers, who 
wrote that before Stephen abandoned the expedition, he had been 
chosen as dictator of the other princes.” Similarly, the Gesta Francorum 
confirms that Stephen was elected ductor nostrum by all the maiores.” 
Again, Albert of Aachen described him as caput et primus consilio in the 
whole army.” 

Just when this decision had been reached cannot be ascertained with 
any precision, it took place sometime after the victory of the Christian 
forces at Dorylaeum, 1 July 1097, and before Stephen abandoned the 
crusade, around 3 June 1098. The information about Stephen being 


& Raymond of Aguilers, Historia Francorum qui ceperunt Jherusalem, trans. J. H. Hill 
and L. L. Hill (Philadelphia, 1968), p. 23, n. 7. For the substance of the oath that 
Count Raymond did swear to, see J. H. Hill and L. L. Hill, “The Convention of 
Alexius Comneus and Raymond of Saint—Giles’, American Historical Review, 58 (1953), 

. 322-7, 

Pe For Stephen of Blois, see J. A. Brundage, ‘An Errant Crusader, Stephen of Blois’, 
Traditio 16 (1960), pp. 380-95. 

® Letter II of Stephen of Blois to his wife Adela: Hagenmeyer, Epistulae et Chartae, 
p. 149. 

® RA 117 (258). 

” GF 63. 

7! AA ii.23 (96). 


254 CHAPTER EIGHT 


lord of the army is, as John France puts it, ‘very odd.’” Stephen played 
no particularly prominent role in any of the military events, nor in any 
of the appointments decided upon by the leaders of the crusade, or 
in the deployment of the army at Antioch. The conclusion that John 
France reached, was that perhaps Stephen functioned as chair of the 
meetings of the leaders.” That this might well have been the sense in 
which Stephen was leader of the princes is suggested by Guibert of 
Nogent’s comment that Stephen’s performance in council was sober, 
steady and mature, thus placing his leadership qualities in the context 
of councils.” 

Despite the initial model of Urban II, the spiritual efforts of Count 
Raymond and the diplomatic skills of Stephen of Blois, the crusade 
lacked an overall commander. Or rather, for most of the expedition 
there was never such a figure. The qualification is needed because for 
a period of about two months, May and June 1097, Alexios I, the 
Byzantine Emperor, does seem to have managed to direct affairs. After 
the various regional armies arrived at Constantinople and the respective 
leaders, with the exception of Count Raymond, swore homage to him, 
the Bzyantine emperor exerted a certain authority over the combined 
forces of the Latin princes. Albert of Aachen described 'Tatakios, the 
general appointed to the Christian forces by Alexios, as being ductor 
Christiani exercitus at the time of the siege of Nicea, because he was 
familiar with the region.” When Fulcher described the departure of the 
First Crusade from Nicea at the end of June 1097, he wrote that ‘nostri 
barones’ received permission from the Byzantine Emperor to leave.”® 

Clearly Alexios was exerting a certain degree of hegemony over the 
magnates of the expedition in this period, but it was unlikely that his 
authority extended far beyond the elite to the wider body of crusaders. 
When, 19 June 1097, the city of Nicea had fallen to the combined 
crusader army and Byzantine fleet, the middle ranks, mediocres exercitus 
personae, of the Latin forces had expressed envy and enmity towards 
the Alexios and the princes.” Unlike the very poor and the princes, to 


” J. France, Victory in the East, p. 255. 
73 Thid. 

™ GN 131-2. 

AA ii.22 (94-6). 

3 FC Lxil (189). 

” GN 153. 


THE LEADERSHIP OF THE FIRST CRUSADE 255 


whom Alexios had made generous donations, the knights, footsoldiers 
and siege specialists who had exerted themselves the most and taken 
all the risks, had got nothing. They had been anticipating a share of 
the loot from the city, but the transition from Seljuk to Byzantine rule 
was skilfully managed by negotiation just at the point where it seemed 
as though the crusading army might break in. 

The anonymous author of the Gesta Francorum was one of those 
knights who were furious with their leaders for playing a subordinate 
role to the Byzantine Emperor. He questioned why their own princes 
had felt it necessary to mislead the army with regard to Alexios.” 
Thus, even at his height of influence, the ability of the Emperor to 
direct affairs was limited and once clear of the immediate influence of 
Constantinople, the leadership of the crusade had to be created from 
rival geographical contingents and from those at the top of a social 
hierarchy whose boundaries were not clearly defined. 

There was another brief period when one source claims the crusade 
was under the overall direction of one person. ‘This was for two weeks 
in June 1098 when the Christian forces closed ranks to face the army 
of Kerbogha, atabeg of Mosul. Raymond of Aguilers reported that 
because Adhémar was sick, as was Count Raymond, and Stephen of 
Blois had fled, everyone promised to follow Bohemond’s leadership 
for the coming battle and for fifteen days afterwards so that he could 
manage the custody of the city.” 

Bohemond was the commander for the battle of 28 June 1098,°° but 
it is clear that Count Raymond, at least, was not one of those who 
subscribed to Bohemond’s authority thereafter, for he resolutely refused 
to yield full control of Antioch to the Norman prince. Although he 
was general of the united Christian army for that one particular battle, 
Bohemond did not prove able to subsequently order the direction of 
the crusade, not least due to the rivalry of Count Raymond. 


8 GF 12, 
RA 116 (258). 
80 J. France, Victory in the East, pp. 295-6. 


256 CHAPTER EIGHT 
The Councils of the First Crusade 


With no one person able to assert overall leadership, in practice the 
crusade was directed by councils and assemblies. Each of the regional 
contingents seems to have held its own councils, that, at least, is 
the impression given by the sources. In describing the journey of 
Bohemond’s contingent through Byzantine territory the Gesta Francorm 
reported that Bohemond called a council of his people to restrain 
his forces from engaging in plunder.*! Similarly, Duke Godfrey held a 
council with the other primores of his army, in December 1096, before 
agreeing to the proposal of a legation of the Byzantine Emperor that 
he ride ahead to Constantinople.” Shortly before the crusade reached 
Antioch, Count Raymond held a council of his own people before 
deciding to send five hundred knights ahead to see the rumour that the 
Turkish garrison had fled was true." To encourage knights to defend 
those going on foot in search of forage at the siege of Antioch, Count 
Raymond again called together his magnates and the Bishop of Le Puy. 
They held a council at which it was agreed to establish a fraternity with 
a common pool of silver from which any knight who lost their horse 
could draw enough funds for a replacement.** When the Provençals 
were at ‘Arqa and wanted the support of Duke Godfrey and Robert 
of Flanders, Count Raymond took counsel with his followers at ‘Arqa, 
reported the author of the Gesta Francorum, and decided to summon 
them because of the rumour that an immense number of pagans were 
gathering to attack.” 

There was nothing exceptional about councils of this nature; they 
did not reflect any kind of shared command. Rather, it was customary 
for those at the apex of the feudal structure to take advice from their 
vassals. By contrast, when assemblies took place for the sake of deci- 
sions affecting the entire crusade, they were meetings of people with 
more or less equal authority. 

A number of princes were clearly at the core of the decision-mak- 
ing of the crusade. ‘Those named at various times as being among the 


8! GF 8. 

2 AA ii.9 (74). 

8 GF 26. 

8 RA 49 (245). See also J. Richard, ‘La confrérie de la première croisade’, Etudes 
de civilisation médiéval: mélanges offerts à E. R. Labande, ed. B. Jeannau (Poitiers, 1974), pp. 
617-22. 

5 GF 84. 


THE LEADERSHIP OF THE FIRST CRUSADE 257 


leaders are relatively well known and can be listed briefly: Hugh of 
Vermandois, known as Hugh the Great, brother of King Philip I of 
France; Robert Curthose, the eldest son of Duke William I of Nor- 
mandy, the conqueror of England;*° Robert, H of Flanders count from 
1093, having been regent of Flanders between 1085 and 1091 when 
his father, Robert I of Flanders had been on pilgrimage; Godfrey IV, 
duke of Lower Lotharingia, lord of various territories in that region; 
Bohemond I, lord of Taranto, son of Robert Guiscard the duke of 
Calabria and Apulia; Stephen of Blois; Count Raymond IV of Tou- 
louse and Bishop Adhémar of Le Puy. To these Latin princes, although 
he was never mentioned specifically as being present at a council, it is 
probably sensible to assume that Tatikios, the Byzantine general and 
commander of two thousand was present for so long as he participated 
in the expedition. 

These nine princes were almost certainly those meant when the 
sources described how decisions that concerned the whole enterprise 
were taken. ‘The examples from the Gesta Francorum are, however, char- 
acteristically vague. After the Anatolian town of Plastencia had given 
itself to the Christian army, Peter of Aups was given made governor by 
omnes seniores.*’ At the siege of Antioch nostri seniores sent some knights 
to reconnoitre a castle near Antioch called Harem.” It was omnes maio- 
res who gathered at the siege, 17 November 1097, to decide to build 
a castle later called Malregard on a hill near Bohemond’s camp” and 
again, in March 1098, to decide upon building another castle at a for- 
mer Muslim mosque.” Bohemond sought agreement from omnes seniores 
that whoever led the way into Antioch should keep the city” and omnes 
maiores eventually came together in council to agree this.” Finally, omnes 
maiores held a council before sending a message to Kerbogha, 25 June 
1098.” Stephen of Blois and Tatikios, having abandoned the crusade 
earlier in the month, would not have been present at this last council 
and, given his predilection for ‘slumber and idleness’ at Latakia in the 


8° For Robert II of Normandy see C. W. David, Robert Curthose, Duke of Normandy 
(Cambridge, 1920). 

87 GF 25-6. 

8 GF 29. 

8 GF 30. 

W GF 39. 

°! GF 44. 

2 GF 45. 

^ GF 65-6. 


258 CHAPTER EIGHT 


winter of 1097/8, Robert of Normandy was probably not present at 
the meetings that commissioned the construction of castles.** 

The material examined in Chapter Eight, however, serves as a warn- 
ing not to assume that those present at such councils were limited to 
those these nine princes. Not only did the author of the Gesta Francorum 
tend to use maiores and seniores for the magnates in a broader sense 
than the princes, but the sources attest to a number of councils where 
there evidently was participation by members of this broader layer of 
nobles. After the victory over Kerbogha, the Gesta Francorum reported 
that ‘all our seniores, namely Duke Godfrey, Count Raymond of St-Giles, 
Bohemond, the Count of Normandy, the Count of Flanders and et ali 
omnes, sent the most noble knight Hugh the Great to the Emperor of 
Constantinople.’ The interesting phrase here is, ‘and all the others’. 
Who was the anonymous author pointing to by this? As Stephen of 
Blois and Tatikios had abandoned the crusade by this time, the only 
missing person from the list of nine princes was Adhémar of Le Puy, 
who was almost certainly present, but clearly there were others also. 

For some councils the additional figures included other senior cler- 
ics. An important council was held in Antioch on 5 November 1098 
to try and resolve the future of the expedition and the ownership of 
the city. This was something of an exceptional meeting, being prob- 
ably the most formal gathering of the entire expedition. It took place 
in the Church of St Peter. Omnes maiores, says the author of the Gesta 
Francorum, returned to Antioch for this assembly, which dragged on over 
several days, as Bohemond referred again and again to the agreement 
the others had made to make him lord of Antioch if he could gain 
the city, while Count Raymond insisted that they remember the oath 
they had taken to the Byzantine Emperor, an oath, which he pointed 
out, that Bohemond had advised that they all take.” 

Eventually, ‘the bishops’, Duke Godfrey, Robert of Flanders and 
Robert of Normandy and other seniores went apart from the rest, to 
the part where St Peter’s chair stood, to give judgement.” Here, it is 
evident that bishops were an important part of the council. There 


% RC 649. 

5 GF 72: Omnes nostri seniores, videlicet dux Godefridus, comes Sancti Egidii Raimundus, 
Boamundus, et comes Nortmanniae, comesque Flandrensis, et alii omnes miserunt nobilissimum militem 
Hugonem Magnum imperatori Constantinopolim. 

% GF 75-6. 

” Thid. 


THE LEADERSHIP OF THE FIRST CRUSADE 259 


were, perhaps, nine bishops on the crusade at this point. Eight who 
had travelled from Western Europe” and one, Peter of Narbonne, who 
had recently been raised to Bishop of Albara after the capture of the 
city or about 25 September 1098. 

John France has drawn attention to the phrase aluque seniores here 
as showing that there were many parties to the judgement,” and it is 
possible some of these other seniores were drawn from a wider layer of 
clergy than the Bishops present at this meeting. Robert the Monk wrote 
that it was ‘bishops, abbots, dukes and counts’ who went to St Peter’s 
chair.'"° This provides an insight into the social position of those who 
Robert thought ought to have been involved in decision-making on the 
crusade, but his distance from the events means his report cannot be 
used as definitive proof that abbots also took part in the council. 

Another council in which the clergy participated to a large extent 
took place much later on, when the crusade approached Jerusalem. 
When Tancred placed his banner over the Church of the Nativity at 
Bethlehem, 6 June 1099, he precipitated a debate about whether a 
secular prince should be lord over ecclesiastical properties, as if it were 
merely a temporal possession. In particular, did this mean that one of 
the princes would become king of Jerusalem? Because the princes at 
this point were in dispute, ‘we’ reported Raymond of Aguilers, rather 
vaguely, ‘had an assembly convened’. At this meeting the ‘bishops and 
clergy’ objected to the prospect of any prince being elected with the 
title ‘king’ of Jerusalem.'°! 

For the final attack on Jerusalem, William Hugh of Monteil, Isoard, 
count of Die and some of the clergy convened a council of the princes 
and omni populus to announce the plan of attack on Jerusalem and that 
it would be preceded by a bare foot procession. William Hugh was 
the brother of Bishop Adhémar of Le Puy and, as discussed in Chapter 
Four, along with the other former followers of the legate, had earlier 
broken from Count Raymond of ‘Toulouse to pursue an independent 
policy. Both these councils took place in the context of a political 
vacuum at the head of the crusade due to a growing hostility to Count 


% J. Riley-Smith, The First Crusade and the Idea of Crusading (London, 1986), 
p. 76. 

% J. France, Victory in the East, pp. 20-1. 

10 RM 843. 

10! RA 322 (295): Habuimus eo tempore conventus, quia principes male inter se conveniebant. 


102 RA 326-9 (296-7). 


260 CHAPTER EIGHT 


Raymond, yet where no other leader, not even Duke Godfrey, was 
prominent enough to exert hegemony over the other princes. 

The presence of ‘all the people’ at this latter council does not nec- 
essarily mean it was a mass assembly of the entire Christian army. 
Populus in this era was a term that often had a more limited meaning 
than the translation ‘the people’ suggests. It was frequently used in a 
legalistic context to indicate those involved in elections. ‘Thus Raymond 
of Aguilers described the election of Robert of Rouen as bishop of 
Ramleh, 3 June 1099, as being a decision of the maiores and the popu- 
lus.” Clearly a much broader body than the princes, in these kind of 
contexts populus has the sense of the more respectable members of the 
community rather than a crowd of the entire people. 

A more clear case for mass participation in an assembly is that of 
a council held in Antioch on 2 February 1099, where the decision to 
leave for Jerusalem was taken by all, magni et parvi.'°° Because of the 
context it seems reasonable to accept the testimony of Albert of Aachen 
that the ‘great and small’ took part. At this point, Count Raymond of 
‘Toulouse was engaged in an arduous siege of Ma’arra and those left 
in Antioch were becoming so suspicious that Duke Godfrey, Robert of 
Flanders and Bohemond did not intend to continue on to Jerusalem 
that they were already leaving these lords. A guard had to be placed 
on the seaports to prevent the many departures.'°’ The point of the 
council was to reassure the broader followings of these princes, which 
they did by resolving to assemble in March at Latakia in order to 
continue on to Jerusalem. 

The nature of more important decision-making councils on the First 
Crusade then, does not seem to have ever become fixed. Depending on 
which princes were present, the strength of the disagreements between 
them, and the extent to which the decision was a religious matter, coun- 
cils of differing size and composition were convened. Similarly, even 


103 For a summary of the situation at this time see J. France, Victory in the East. A 


military history of the First Crusade (Cambridge, 1994), pp. 233-4. 

104 For references to Robert of Rouen see J. Riley-Smith, The First Crusaders 1095-1131 
(Cambridge, 1997), p. 221. For the early history of the bishopric of Ramla see H. E. 
Mayer, “The Origins of the Lordship of Ramla and Lydda in the Latin Kingdom of 
Jerusalem’, Speculum 60.3 (1985), pp. 537-552. 

105 For the nuances of populus in the work of, for example, William of Tyre, see 
C. Kostick, ‘William of Tyre, Livy, and the Vocabulary of Class,’ Journal of History of 
Ideas, 65.3 (2004), pp. 353-368, here pp. 360-1. 

106 AA v, 28 (342). 

107 Thid. 


THE LEADERSHIP OF THE FIRST CRUSADE 261 


the smaller councils, held to direct day-to-day military affairs, turn out 
on closer inspection, to have something of the same fluidity. 

Following the return of scouts sent to investigate the news of 
Kerbogha’s impending arrival, the leaders of the army met to hear 
the report, 3 June. Those listed by Albert of Aachen as being among 
omnis primatus for that assembly were Duke Godfrey, Robert of Flan- 
ders, Robert of Normandy, Count Raymond of ‘Toulouse, Bohemond, 
Eustace and Tancred.” Even if Albert was not accurately informed 
about this particular council, his inclusion of Eustace III, count of 
Boulogne, elder brother of Godfrey, 
others echoes the earlier example from the Gesta Francorum above, of 
the council that sent Hugh the Great on his embassy to Alexios. In 
both cases there were other magnates from outside the princely elite 
in attendance. 

That Eustace was considered one of the leaders of the crusade, even 
though it was his was his younger brother Godfrey who was the more 
dominant figure among the Lotharingian contingent, is evident from 
a letter written by the princes of the First Crusade to Pope Urban II, 
11 September 1098.'!° Those whose names are appended to it are six 
from the group of nine princes (Stephen of Blois and Tatikios had left 
the crusade and Adhémar was dead at the time of its composition) plus 
Eustace. It is quite likely that Tancred was also regularly one of the 
‘others’ at the councils of the leaders as he is specifically mentioned 
as being in two assemblies reported in the Gesta Francorum. When ‘our 
mew (nostri) held a council to deal with raids from the Turks in Antioch, 
reported the Gesta Francorum, Tancred came forward from among the 
others (ante alios) to volunteer to garrison a castle with just his own men, 
providing he received payment. The council offered him four hundred 
marks of silver.''' The impression here is of a meeting of the senior 
princes, at which other prominent magnates, including ‘Tancred, were 
present but were not playing the same decision-making role. He could 
come forward and speak but, perhaps, not quite with equal weight as 
the senior princes who made him the offer of silver. 


and Tancred, as well as unnamed 


108 AA iv.14 (268). 

109 For Eustace II, count of Boulogne see A. V. Murray, The Crusader Kingdom of 
Jerusalem, A Dynastic History 1099-1125 (Oxford, 2000), p. 193. 

110 Letter of Bohemond and the Other Princes to Pope Urban Il: Hagenmeyer, 
Epistulae et Chartae, pp. 161-5. 

nl GF 43. 


262 CHAPTER EIGHT 


Later, after the fall of Antioch but before the battle with Kerbogha, 
when the maiores held a council at which they decided to swear an 
oath not to flee from the city, Tancred added the qualification that he 
would stay so long as he had forty knights." Here, he seems to be on 
an equal footing with the other mazores, but this may reflect the broad 
nature of the council rather than a status accorded to Tancred that 
was equal to the senior princes. 

Tancred’s career on the crusade provides the most interesting example 
of the presence of a layer of lords who might best be described as 
‘semi-princes’. These were magnates with an independent following 
who might aspire to become fully equally with the princes, or, if their 
affairs went badly, could sink back into a more dependent position. 
To some extent this reflected the careers of magnates all over West- 
ern Europe. Success in political and military affairs could make dukes 
out of knights, kings out of dukes. Three years of campaigning on 
the First Crusade provided opportunities for the aspiring prince to 
establish himself as an independent lord and it has to be taken into 
consideration that such figures may have participated in the councils 
that directed the crusade. 

Tancred was the son of Bohemond’s sister Emma. As they shared 
wine together and discussed the coming crusade, Bohemond urged his 
nephew to participate as his second-in-command, ‘as though a duke 
under a king’.''? After many promises, Tancred agreed and came on 
the First Crusade with the South Italian Normans, where he did indeed 
command the army in Bohemond’s absence.'"* In anticipation of his 
future successes, many people transferred their allegiance to Tancred, 
including, so long as they were paid, tuvenes. Tancred borrowed from 
his richer supporters to pay those who were poorer. 

A dramatic illustration of Tancred’s ambition took place when he 
was finally brought before Alexios, at the end of June 1097, having tried 
up until then to avoid performing homage to the Byzantine emperor. 
Submitting angrily to the required act, Tancred was offered the chance 
to ask for a treasure by the conciliatory emperor. The Norman prince 
had the temerity to ask for the tent that Alexios used when campaign- 
ing. This was an enormous affair, requiring twenty camels to move it, 


"e GF 59. 

13 RC 607: quasi dux sub rege. 
"ne GF 11. 

1 RG 610. 


THE LEADERSHIP OF THE FIRST CRUSADE 263 


and which had a turreted atrium when assembled. It could hold ‘a 
multitude’.'!° The message was clear and prescient: Tancred sought 
royal dwellings, suitable for the magnificent lord that he intended to 
become. 

When, around 10 September 1097, Tancred left the main army 
with a detachment of troops to make for Tarsus, he was nevertheless 
clearly a follower of Bohemond, as he negotiated for the surrender of 
Cilician cities in the name of his lord.''’ On leaving Cilicia to rejoin 
the main army, having left troops to garrison a number of towns and 
cities, he was reported as leading a hundred knights and two hundred 
archers. |" 

During the siege of Antioch, as noted above, Tancred undertook to 
defend a castle for pay and, with Bohemond’s support, he also obtained 
land near Hamah and Harenc. ‘Tancred’s total revenues during the 
worst of the famine at Antioch, over the winter of 1097/8, meant 
that he not only kept his followers but was able to recruit to his table 
‘many excluded by others’.''? As noted above, Tancred agreed to stay 
committed to the crusade so long as he had forty knights and curiously 
this was the number attributed to him when he brought up the rearguard 
of the troops heading towards Jerusalem under Count Raymond.!”” 

For this period of the crusade, Tancred had become the follower of 
Count Raymond, for a payment of five thousand solidi and two fine 
horses, presumably transferring his allegiance while Bohemond con- 
solidated his position as prince of Antioch. Although R. L. Nicholson 
believes that Tancred was encouraged by Bohemond to join with Count 
Raymond in order to monitor the affairs of the Provengal lord and get 
him away from Antioch, there is no direct evidence for this. '® 

In any case, Tancred soon chaffed at his relationship with Count 
Raymond and, contriving a quarrel, he ‘wickedly’ abandoned Raymond 
for Duke Godfrey,'”? whom he followed with a great deal of autonomy. 
With trickery that his grandfather, Robert Guiscard, would have been 
proud of, Tancred sent his banner to a number of Arab towns, claiming 


"6 RC 619. See also AC 11.3 (340). 
17 AA ii.6 (146). 

118 RC 630. 

119 RC 650: multos ab aliis exclusos. 

20 RA 186 (272). 

2! R. L. Nicholson, Tancred, pp. 76-7. 
2 RA 218 (278): male. 


264 CHAPTER EIGHT 


to be leader of the crusade and demanding tribute. He led frequent 
raids; was the first to Bethlehem, which he tried to claim;!** and, on 
the fall of Jerusalem, first to the Temple of the Lord, where he took 
a fortune in silver to increase the numbers of his military force and to 
pay the foreign soldiers who had joined up with him.'* Tancred also 
gave a banner to the Muslims who had taken refuge there, probably 
intending to sell them on the slave market, but was furious that instead 
they were slain in the massacres. When he left Jerusalem, ‘Tancred had 
eighty knights as followers.!° 

Throughout the crusade then, Tancred led a following of his own, 
which varied between some forty to eighty knights. He conducted him- 
self with a great deal of independence, but nevertheless was subject to 
Bohemond as far as the capture of Antioch, and later, more nominally, 
Count Raymond and Duke Godfrey. It is significant that after Tancred 
was sent for in March 1101 by the Normans of Antioch to be ruler of 
the city, because Bohemond had been captured by the Danishmend 
ruler Malik Ghazi, his biographer, Ralph of Caen reported that he 
felt burdened by the suspect nature of the dignity, because in the event 
of Bohemond’s return, he would have been more of a host than a 
prince.'’’ By 1105 though, there was no doubting that Tancred was a 
most illustrious prince in his own right, having obtained full authority 
over Antioch when Bohemond left the city to recruit an army to fight 
against the Byzantine empire. In that year also, Tancred was regent of 
Edessa while its lord, Baldwin of Bourcq was a prisoner. 

Another example of a young relative of one of the senior princes 
striving to become a lord and leader in his own right is that of Baldwin 
of Boulogne, younger brother of Eustace and Duke Godfrey.'** As with 
Tancred, Baldwin had his own following, but served under Godfrey and 
captured cities in Cilicia under his older brothers’ name.'”’ Notoriously, 
the two young aspirant princes came to blows during this campaign, 


23 RA 218 (278). 
12 RA 322 (295). 
25 RC 696. 


28 For Baldwin of Boulogne see H. E. Mayer, Mélanges sur Phistoire du royaume latin de 
Jérusalem, Mémoires de l’Académie des Inscriptions et Belles-Lettres, n.s. 5 (Paris, 1984), 
see also A. V. Murray, The Crusader Kingdom of Jerusalem, A Dynastic History 1099-1125 
(Oxford, 2000). 

129 AA iii.10 (152). 


THE LEADERSHIP OF THE FIRST CRUSADE 265 


their conflict fuelled not only by rivalry between the Lotharingian and 
Norman contingents, but the implications for their status as princes. 
Baldwin got the upper hand, driving ‘Tancred’s troops from ‘Tarsus, but 
this led to the low point of his career. Around 20 September 1097 some 
three hundred Norman soldiers arrived at Tarsus, looking for Tancred. 
Ignoring the pleas of his own men, Baldwin mistrusted the Normans 
and refused to let them into the city. During the night these troops were 
slaughtered by the local ‘Turkish forces, leading to a mutiny in which 
the enraged lower ranks sought out Baldwin, intending to harm him 
for his guilt in the death of these fellow Christians. He survived the 
arrows aimed his way from his own men by taking to a tower until the 
tumult died down.'° 

Thereafter, though, Baldwin saw a dramatic turn in his fortunes. A 
fleet arriving in the region to join the crusade turned up only a few 
days later. It had, as one of its leaders Winemer of Boulogne, a mem- 
ber of the household of Count Eustace, Baldwin’s brother.'*! These 
reinforcements augmented Baldwin’s forces considerably, allowing him 
to garrison a number of towns. Even more fortunately, Baldwin thus 
attracted the attention of the Christian rulers of Edessa, who saw in 
him the possibility of emancipating themselves from pressure of the 
local Muslim princes. Marching to Edessa with between sixty and two 
hundred knights,'*’ he was disappointed to learn that the ruler there, 
Thoros, wished only to hire his services for coin. Refusing to be treated 
like a mere mercenary, Baldwin’s supporters among the elders of the 
town obliged Thoros to adopt the Lotharingian as his son, c. 6 February 
1098.'*8 A coup by the townspeople on Sunday 7 March 1098 killed the 
elderly Thoros and installed Baldwin as lord of Edessa. ‘Thereafter his 
status as a prince was never in doubt, and indeed, his feet were firmly 
set on the path that would take him to Jerusalem and a crown. 

Baldwin’s elevation was reflected in the writings of his chaplain, 
Fulcher of Chartres, who thereafter included him amongst the very 
few whom were designated princeps by the historian.'** For Raymond 
of Aguilers too, there was no doubt that Baldwin was now one of the 


130 AA iii.12-3 (156-8). 

11 AA iii.15 (160). Winemer is otherwise unknown. 

12 200 in AA iii.19 (168); 80 in FC, Lxiv.7; 60 in Matthew of Edessa, Chronique, 
RHC Arm. 1, 36. 

83 AA iii.21 (170). William of Tyre, Chronicon 4.3 (236). 

13 FC Lxxxiv.2 (335). 


266 CHAPTER EIGHT 


leaders of the crusade, although his occupancy of Edessa meant that 
he could not help direct affairs. Raymond reported that omnes principes 
with the exception of Baldwin, met in Antioch for the assembly of 
5 November 1098 described above.” 

In the drawn out expedition that was the First Crusade the bonds of 
vassalage and obligation were weakened, allowing considerable fluid- 
ity as knights changed allegiance according to which prince had the 
means to support them. To maintain a place at the council of princes 
and a measure of leadership over events, it was desirable to have a 
reputation for good generalship, for piety and for bravery. But what a 
lord required, above all, was control of revenues from captured cities. 
It was control of tribute, redistributed to followers, which ensured a 
lord of a following. When Arnulf of Chocques was elected Patriarch 
of Jerusalem, he drew attention to this particular aspect of lordship 
as being the one that set the princes apart from all others. “You have 
promoted me from my humble position. You have made me famous, 
who was unknown. As if one of you, you bring about my sharing in 
tribute. ?!3® 

Baldwin’s success in becoming lord of Edessa allowed him to attract 
considerable numbers of followers, including the iuvenes grouped with 
Drogo of Nesle discussed in Chapter Six. As supplies dwindled at 
the siege of Antioch, Baldwin settled all the revenues of Turbessel on 
Duke Godfrey. The value of the corn, barley, wine and oil amounted 
to 50,000 bezants a year, reported Albert of Aachen.'*’ Their relation- 
ship had changed from one in which Baldwin served his older brother, 
to one of equals. 

If Baldwin and Tancred provide the examples of those ‘semi-princes’ 
whose careers and status rose during the course of the crusade, there 
were several others who strove in the same direction with less success. 
At the start of the crusade, the Lotharingian nobles Henry of Esch and 
Hartmann, count of Dillingen and Kyburg had considerable resources, 
enough to finance the building of a siege engine at Nicea at their own 
expense. They were so destitute by the siege of Antioch, however, 
that they became dependent on a stipend of bread, meat and fish from 


135 RA 159 (267). 

136 RC 699: ‘Vos me de humili promovistis, vos de ignoto celebrem reddidistis, vos quasi unum 
ex vobis, et comparticipem tributorum creastis’. 

137 AA iv.9 (262). 

138 AA ii.30 (112). 


THE LEADERSHIP OF THE FIRST CRUSADE 267 


Duke Godfrey. Hartmann was obliged to enter battle against Kerbogha 
on a donkey, holding only a Turkish round shield and sword, having 
sold all his arms and weapons a long time earlier.'*” 

Emerging from the Provençal contingent as a figure of prominence 
towards the end of the crusade, Gaston IV, viscount of Béarn, was 
somewhat more successful a contender for a place among the princes. 
He rode with his own knights alongside Robert of Flanders in the 
vanguard of the Christian army as it marched towards Jerusalem.'*° In 
distinct rivalry to the activities of Count Raymond of ‘Toulouse, who 
funded his own siege equipment, Gaston was the choice of the other 
princes to be appointed to oversee operations in the crucial task of 
constructing their towers and mangonels for the siege of Jerusalem.'*! 
Gaston had a following of thirty knights who seem to have formed an 
alliance with those of Tancred. Both troops engaged in raiding the 
outskirts of Jerusalem as the crusading forces arrived at the city.'” At 
the fall of Jerusalem Gaston and Tancred together placed their banners 
on the Temple of the Lord in their vain effort to signal that the non- 
Christians who had sought refuge on the roof of the Temple were their 
prisoners. !* “Tancred and Gaston’ were also listed together in the Gesta 
Francorum’s description of the marshalling of the various contingents 
of troops for the battle of Ascalon, 12 August 1099.'** 

Another Provengal noble who was an important figure and for a time 
a leader in his own right was Raymond Pilet, lord of Alès. Raymond 
Pilet came on the crusade in the army of Count Raymond of ‘Toulouse. 
At one point, after Kerbogha had been defeated and while the senior 
princes were dispersing to the nearby regions to avoid the heat and 
plague of the summer of 1098, Raymond Pilet led an army of his own. 
He ‘retained’ (retinere) many knights and footsoldiers and set off south 
east, so reported the anonymous author of the Gesta Francorum, using 
his preferred verb for the establishment of the relationship between lord 
and vassal.'*° After some initial successes Raymond Pilet’s forces were 
defeated in an attempt to storm Ma’arra, 27 July 1098.'*° Thereafter 


139 AA iv.54 (332-4). 
40 AA v.42 (396). 

41 RA 331-2 (297). 
12 AA v.45 (402). 

43 GF 92. 

1 GF 95, 

45 GF 73. 

46 GF 74. 


268 CHAPTER EIGHT 


Raymond Pilet resumed a place among the army of Count Raymond; 
although he was the commander given the responsibility of leading 
Provencal troops when they were detached from the main army. In the 
company of Raymond vicecomes of Turenne he took Tortosa; again 
with Raymond of Turenne he left the siege of Jerusalem in search of 
battle and was victorious against two hundred Arabs.'** When a con- 
tingent of knights was required for the hazardous journey to Jaffa to 
meet with recently arrived ships, a hundred knights of the Provençal 
army set out, with Raymond of Pilet a prominent leader.'** 

Other important magnates whose prominence might have warranted 
their presence as being among the ‘others’ at the councils of princes 
were Anselm II of Ribemont, Baldwin of Bourg, Baldwin II of Mons, 
count of Hainaut, Geldemar Carpenel, Hugh I, count of Saint-Pol 
and Roger Barneville. There were ecclesiastical magnates of some 
distinction too. In addition to the bishops referred to in the council 
at Antioch on 5 November, both Arnulf of Chocques and Robert of 
Rouen became important voices at the head of the clergy, the former 
eventually becoming the Patriarch of Jerusalem, the latter bishop of 
Lydda. 

There is one person from outside the ranks of the nobility who must 
also be taken into consideration in a discussion of the leaders of the 
First Crusade: Peter the Hermit. Peter was considered a leader in the 
same light as the senior princes by Fulcher of Chartres, when he listed 
those who led armies on the expedition.’*' After the catastrophic defeat 
of the People’s Crusade, Peter must have lost a great deal of author- 
ity. He does not feature in any of the sources as directing troops and 
this, combined with his lowly background, makes it unlikely that he 
participated in many of the day-to-day councils of the leaders. In one 
capacity, though, Peter the Hermit continued to play a leading role, 
sometime after the death of Adhémar he had been put in charge of 
the pauperes, the clergy, and the people.'” 

When the Christian forces had been united at the siege of ‘Arqa in 
March 1098 by the arrival of Duke Godfrey and Robert of Flanders 


GF 83-4. 

M8 GF 87-8. 

119 GF 88. 

150 For Anselm of Ribemont see J. Riley-Smith, The First Crusaders, p. 199. 
151 FC I.vi.3—8 (154-161). 

2 RA 214 (278). 


THE LEADERSHIP OF THE FIRST CRUSADE 269 


a tithe was taken for the sake of the poor. A quarter of the collection 
went to Peter of Narbonne as the bishop of Albarra, another quarter 
went to the priests of the army, but half came to Peter the Hermit. 
He, in turn, split this fund equally between the remaining clergy and 
the laity.’ Peter had always had a special responsibility for women,'™* 
and this seems to have continued all the way down to Jerusalem. When 
the military forces marched out to fight at the battle of Ascalon, Peter 
moved about in procession from church to church with the women, 
the clergy and the thin crowd of feeble people who remained in the 
city.’ This prominent role among the non-combatants suggests that 
Peter would have been present at those broader assemblies discussed 
above, which dealt with the concerns of the clergy and the poor. 

The leadership of the First Crusade was carried out by a core group 
of princes who were, depending on circumstances, joined in their deci- 
sion-making assemblies by other prominent magnates and ecclesiastical 
figures. As the examples in Chapter ‘Three and Four show, however, 
it would be a mistake to envisage such councils to have always been 
authoritative bodies. The instructions coming from the council were 
not always obeyed and there was more than one instance of popular 
mutiny against the princes. Narrative histories of the First Crusade have 
therefore tended to describe events a little too neatly as flowing from the 
initiative of nine or so very senior princes. Even among themselves the 
princes did not manage to stabilise a formal structure of authority for 
very long. The composition of their councils was constantly changing 
as prominent nobles died, or left the crusade and as other magnates 
emerged as important leaders. 


153 Thid. 
154 See below, pp. 280-1. 
15 BD 107. 


CHAPTER NINE 


WOMEN AND THE FIRST CRUSADE: 
PROSTITUTES OR PILGRIMS? 


‘Women’, mulieres, or, more rarely, feminae, are not a social stratum in 
the sense of pauperes, milites or principes. From the very large numbers of 
women on the First Crusade who could be ranked among the pauperes 
through to the much smaller number of women who came with their 
relatives and guardians among the male magnates, the women of the 
crusade could, in fact, be distributed among these social layers and be 
considered as a component part of them. ‘To divide the women of the 
movement in this way would be reasonable and reflect the very dif 
ferent experiences of women from different social backgrounds. Can, 
say, Elvira, wife of Count Raymond of ‘Toulouse have had much in 
common with a runaway female serf? But the women of the First 
Crusade were also, in several instances, identified collectively by the 
sources and treated as a coherent grouping; consequently any discussion 
of their presence on the expedition and their contribution to the social 
dynamics of the crusade has to examine this sense that women were 
a distinct category of those persons present. 

A striking comment occurs in the history of Albert of Aachen, as 
he described the popular enthusiasm for the crusade to which he was 
an eyewitness: ‘crowds from different kingdoms and cities gathered 
together, but in no sense turning away from illicit and sexual intercourse. 
There was unbridled contact with women and young girls, who with 
utter rashness had departed with the intention of frivolity; there was 
constant pleasure and rejoicing under the pretext of this journey.” This 
comment and others of a similar nature have, at times, led modern 
historians to assume that when the sources referred to the women of 
the First Crusade, they were indicating the presence of ‘camp followers’, 


' AA i.25 (48): Hiis itaque per turmas ex diuersis regnis et ciuitatibus in unum collectis, sed 
nequaquam ab illicitis et fornicarus comnuxtionibus auersis, inmoderata erat commessatio cum muli- 
ertbus et puellis, sub eiusdem leuitatis intentione egressis, assidua delectatio, et in omni temeritate sub 
huius uie occasione gloriatio. 


This is an open access chapter distributed under the terms of the CC-BY-NC License. 


272 CHAPTER NINE 


prostitutes. After all, women dependent for their living on soldiers have 
travelled in the wake of European armies for centuries. 

This natural assumption is, however, mistaken with regard to the First 
Crusade. Albert of Aachen was a monk and this affected his percep- 
tion of women joining the crusade in two ways. Firstly, a pilgrimage is 
a time of abstinence, a time for penitence. Given that Albert saw the 
expedition as a pilgrimage, it was entirely inappropriate in his eyes for 
men and women to undertake the journey together without adhering 
to a spirit of abstinence. Secondly, for a medieval monk to leave their 
monastery without the agreement of their abbot was an extremely 
serious breach of discipline. Gases of ‘wandering monks’ were treated 
with a sense of outrage that proper social order had been undermined. 
There is something of this same outrage in Albert’s comment about 
women using the crusade as a pretext to leave their former lives. In 
other words, this passage is not about prostitution, it is about women 
who may have had perfectly respectable careers, indeed may have 
been married. Neverheless, they were upsetting the proprieties of the 
enterprise by their unregulated presence among the pilgrims. 

There is another aspect to the report made by Albert that deserves 
attention. He described how there was a sense of rejoicing among the 
women who joined the crusade. This observation might well reflect an 
important feature of their involvement. Did some women seize upon 
the opportunity presented by the expedition to cast aside roles and 
circumstances that oppressed them, to obtain a new form of freedom? 
Albert’s report is echoed by another eyewitness to the gathering of the 
crowds who set forth on the expedition, Ekkehard, abbot of Aura and 
member of the crusade of 1101. Ekkehard wrote that a great part of 
the common people set out with wives and children, laden with the 
whole household.’ These included ‘degraded women’ who had joined 
the Lord’s host under the guise of religion.* 

Certainly there were women who, when they learned of the cru- 
sade, emerged from obscurity to be local leaders of pilgrims. The 
most notorious example of this, seized upon by contemporary writers 
across Europe, was the woman who claimed to be the mistress of a 
goose that was divinely inspired. Guibert of Nogent was amused rather 
than outraged at the ‘wretched woman’ whose fame spread through 


2 EA 140. 
3 EA 144: inhonestas feminei sexus. 


WOMEN AND THE FIRST CRUSADE 273 


castles and towns. When she reached Cambrai it was an occasion for 
a major assembly. That, at least, seems to be the impression created 
by Guibert’s description of the full church through which the woman 
and goose walked to reach the alter. Having learned that the woman 
died in Lotharingia, Guibert couldn’t resist joking that she would have 
more displayed greater sanity on her journey to Jerusalem if she had 
eaten the goose the day before she departed.° 

Behind the mockery lies a significant movement, the crowds that 
followed the goose were noted with hostility by Albert of Aachen and 
the Jewish chroniclers of the era, not least because they merged with 
those who had attacked the Jewish communities of the Rhineland.° 
Another popular movement with women at the head of it is discern- 
able in the report of Baldric of Dol that he saw may of the common 
people setting out behind a cross that, due to the presumption of certain 
foolish women, they believed had been created from heaven.’ Again, 
the disdain cloaks a report of popular enthusiasm for the crusade being 
focused by women. 

Very many women desired to take up the crusading message. Orderic 
Vitalis, who wrote his Ecclesiastical History between 1123 and 1141, noted 
that the determination to either go to Jerusalem or to help others who 
were going there affected ‘rich and poor, men and women, monks and 
clerks, townspeople and peasants alike. Husbands arranged to leave 
beloved wives at home, the wives, indeed, sighing, greatly desired to 
journey with the men, leaving children and all their wealth.” 

That thousands of women acted on this inclination is clear. Guibert 
of Nogent described how ‘the meanest most common men and even 
unworthy women were appropriating to themselves this miracle [the 
mark of the cross].”” The Anglo-Saxon chronicler, writing in Peter- 
borough, had very little to say about the Crusade, but he did think 
it noteworthy that countless people set out, with women and children 


+ GN 331: mulieri miserae. 

` Ibid. 

ê AA i.30 (58); The Chroncile of Soloman bar Simson in S. Eidelberg ed., The Jews and the 
Crusaders: the Hebrew chronicles of the first and second crusaders (New Jersey, 1996), p. 27. 

’ BD 17. 

8 OV 5, 17: Diuitibus itaque et pauperibus, uiris et mulieribus, monachis et clericis, urbanis et 
rusticis, in Terusalem eundi aut euntes adiuuandi inerat voluntas mirabilis. Mariti dilectas coniuges 
domi relinquere disponebant, illae uero gementes relicta prole cum omnibus diuitus suis in peregrinatione 
uiros suos sequi ualde cupiebant. 

° GN 330:... quilibet extremae vulgaritatis homines et etiam muliebris indignitas hoc sibi tot 
modis, tot partibus usurpavere miraculum. 


274 CHAPTER NINE 


(wifan and cildan).'° The near contemporary Annals of Augsburg say that 
along with warriors, bishops, abbots, monks, clerics and men of diverse 
professions, ‘serfs and women’ (coloni et mulieres) joined the movement. '' 
The Monte Cassino Chronicle reported that the desire to join the Holy 
Journey seized men and women and that, together with noble people, 
‘ignoble men and women’ carried crosses on their shoulders." 

The epic poem, the Chanson d’Antioche, which, it is generally accepted, 
contains eyewitness material, has the lines: “There were many ladies 
who carried crosses, and the (freeborn) French maidens whom God 
loved greatly went with the father who begat them.’!? Anna Comnena, 
the daughter of the Byzantine Emperor, Alexios I, writing in the 1140s 
gave a brief description of the People’s Crusade whose unusual make- 
up must have been a striking feature. She remembered seeing ‘a host 
of civilians, outnumbering the sand of the sea shore or the stars of 
heaven, carrying palms and bearing crosses on their shoulders. ‘There 
were women and children too, who had left their countries.’'* In his 
description of the disastrous aftermath of the battle of Civetot, 21 
October 1096, Albert of Aachen wrote of the Turks who came to the 
camp of the crusaders: ‘entering those tents they found them contain- 
ing the faint and the frail, clerks, monks, aged women, young boys, all 
indeed they killed with the sword. Only delicate young girls and nuns 
whose faces and beauty seemed to please the eye and beardless young 
men with charming expressions they took away.’!” This description by 
Albert is particularly important in that it draws attention to the, often 
overlooked, presence of nuns on the crusade. 

Even after the slaughter at Civetot, many women were assimilated 
into the Princes’ Crusade. It is clear, indeed, that large numbers of 
women were travelling with the Princes’ contingents. In Brindisi, 5 April 
1097, the first ship of those sailing with Robert of Normandy capsized. 


10 The Anglo-Saxon Chronicles, ed. Michael Swanton (London, 2000), p. 323. 

1! Annales Augustani, MGH SS 3, 134. 

"MC 174: ignobilis viris ac mulieribus. 

13 CA 844-846: Des dames i ot maintes qui les crois ont fermees; Et les frances puceles, que 
Deux a tant amees Od lor pères en vont qui les ont engenrees. See also S. B. Edgington, ‘Sont çou 
ore les fems que jo voi la venir? Women in the Chanson d’Antioche’, in Gendering the Crusades, 
ed. S. B. Edgington and S. Lambert (Cardiff, 2001), pp. 154-62, here p. 155. 

"AC x.5 (309). 

15 AA 1.21(42): tentoria vero illorum intrantes quosquos repererunt languidos ac debiles, clericos, 
monachos, mulieres gradeuas, pueros, sugentes, omnem vero etatem gladio extinxerunt. Solummodo 
puellas teneras et moniales quarum facies et forma oculis eorum placere videbatur, tuvenesque inberbes 
et vultu venustos abduxerunt. 


WOMEN AND THE FIRST CRUSADE 275 


Fulcher of Chartres wrote of the incident that four hundred ‘of both 
sexes’ perished by drowning.'® Fulcher described the united army at 
Nicea as containing women and children.'’ The Chanson d’Antioche indi- 
cated that the camp of the crusaders had a particular women’s section, 
which was raided by the ‘Turks shortly after the siege of Nicea: 


Firstly, turning their violence on the ladies, 

Those who attracted them they took on horseback, 

And tearing the breasts of the old women, 

When the mothers were killed their children cried out, 
The dead mothers suckled them, it was a very great grief, 
They climbed up on them seeking their breasts, 

They must be reigning [in heaven] with the Innocents."* 


The anonymous author of Gesta Francorum reported that at the battle of 
Dorylaeum, | July 1097, the women in the camp were a great help, for 
they brought up water for the fighting men to drink and bravely always 
encouraged them, fighters and defenders.'” The Chanson d’Antioche has 
a description of the same scene: 


The baronage was thirsty, it was greatly oppressed; 

The knights of Tancred strongly desired water. 

They were greatly served by them who were with them. 

The ladies and maidens of whom there were numerous in the army; 
Because they readied themselves, they threw off their cloaks, 

And carried water to the exhausted knights, 

In pots, bowls and in golden chalices. 

When the barons had drunk they were reinvigorated.”” 


During the battle, Turkish horsemen were sent to cover a possible line 
of retreat, and the near contemporary Historia Vie Hierosolimitane recorded 
that they ‘cruelly put to the sword almost a thousand men, women, and 


16 FG Lyviii.2 (169). 

1 FG Lx.4 (183). 

18 CA 2034-2040: Premierement as dames vont les resnes tornant; celes qui lor contekent es 
seles vont montant. Et as toibles vielletes les mameles torgant. Quant les meres sont mortes, si crient 
li enfant, Sor les pis lor montovent, les mameles querant, La mère morte alaitent, ce est dolor molt 
grant! El rene as Innocens doivent estre manant. See also Susan B. Edgington, ‘Women in 
the Chanson d'Antioche’, p. 155. 

GF 19. 

2 CA 2144-2152: Li bornages ot soi, si est molt esgorés, Molt desirott de Vaigue li chevaliers 
Tangrés. Mestier lor ont eü celes de lor regnés, Les dames, les puceles dont il i ot assés. Quar eles se 
rebracent, sont lor dras jus jetés, S aporterent de Vaigue les chevaliers membrés As pos, as escuieles 
et as vaisiaus dorés. Quant ot but li bornages, si est resvigorés. See also Susan B. Edgington, 
‘Women in the Chanson d'Antioche’, p. 155. 


276 CHAPTER NINE 
unarmed, common folk.”?! Further along the march in the arid stretches 
of Asia Minor, in July 1097, Albert of Aachen noted with sympathy 
the suffering of very many pregnant women, who miscarried or gave 
birth to premature babies.” Again, Albert of Aachen was attentive to 
the presence of ‘many thousands’ of women and children at the siege 
of Antioch that began 21 October 1097.” The Gesta Francorum had a 
description of a woman in the camp of Bohemond being killed by an 
arrow during that siege.** In the plague that followed the capture of the 
city women were notably more likely to be victims.” At the climactic 
denouement of the First Crusade, the capture of Jerusalem, women 
were still present in considerable numbers, sharing the work and bring- 
ing water and words of encouragement to the men. Indeed, according 
to Wiliam of ‘Tyre, who although writing some three generations after 
the events had access to local traditions in Jerusalem, the women even 
presumed to take up arms.”° 

This, by no means exhaustive selection of references to women on 
the Crusade, from a range of sources, establishes without a doubt 
that women were present in large numbers. But is it possible to focus 
more closely on the women present in the First Crusade and indicate 
something of their motivation? 

One group of women whose presence and role is most easily 
understood are those who were members of the aristocracy.” Because 
the sources were largely written for the benefit of the aristocracy 
and because historians such as William of ‘Tyre were interested in 
the genealogy of the leading noble families in Outremer, we are in a 
position to name some of the aristocratic women involved in the First 
Crusade. Raymond of Toulouse brought with him on the Crusade his 
third wife, Elvira, daughter of Alfonso VI of Castile by his mistress, 
Ximene.” Baldwin of Boulogne, later lord of Eddessa, also brought 
his wife, Godvere of ‘Tosni, ‘a most noble’ lady from the Kingdom of 


GP 86-7: crudeliter ense necauit, Mille viros ferme, mulieres, vulgus inerme. 

» AA iii.2 (138-140). 

° AA iii.38 (198). 

** GF 29. 

5 WT 7.1 (344). 

°° WT 8.13 (403). 

7 For a full discussion of their presence on the crusade see S. Geldsetzer, Frauen Auf 
Kreuzziigen 1096-1291 (Darmstadt, 2003) esp. Appendix 2, pp. 184-7. 

*® FC Lxxxiil (320); GN 134. 


WOMEN AND THE FIRST CRUSADE 277 


England.** Godvere’s first cousin, Emma of Hereford came on the 
crusade with her husband Ralph I of Gael.” It is likely that Count 
Baldwin of Bourcq brought at least one of his sisters with him as she 
later, 12 September 1115, married Roger, prince of Antioch.*! Walo 
II, lord of Chaumont-en-Vexin brought his wife, Humberge, daughter 
of Hugh Le Puiset and sister of the crusader Everard.” On the death 
of Walo, Humberge was described as being supported by a band of 
mature ladies (matres).* 

In all likelihood the wives and sisters of many other lesser nobles 
intending to stay in the newly won crusader states were present, but 
by and large they did not come to the attention of the chroniclers of 
the Crusade. We know that Hadvide of Chiny, for example, journeyed 
with her husband Dodo of Cons-la-Grandville only due to charter 
evidence.** An unnamed woman of great nobility and beauty was 
unfortunate enough to be captured during the siege of Antioch, while 
playing dice in an orchard with Adelbero, son of Count Conrad of 
Luxembourg and archdeacon of the Church of Metz. After being 
taken back to Antioch, raped and tortured, the head of this woman 
was placed in a catapult with that of Adelbero and flung back towards 
the Christian army.” 

Emeline, wife of Fulcher a knight of Bullion, only appears in the 
historical record as a crusader due to Albert of Aachen taking an interest 
in the story that although she was captured, because of her beauty an 
illustrious Turkish knight, a general of Omar, lord of Azaz fell in love 
with her. At the suggestion of Emeline, this Turkish general contacted 
Duke Godfrey of Lotharingia with a view to leading a revolt against Rid- 
wan of Aleppo.” Other than this example, aristocratic women seem to 
have played no independent role in the course of the expedition. ‘Their 
actions or words are not mentioned. ‘This is hardly surprising given that 
for an aristocratic woman to have a measure of authority c. 1100 she 


°% AA ii.27 (182): nobilissima, WT 3. 18 (453). See also S. Geldsetzer, Frauen Auf 
Kreuzziigen, p. 186. 

3 OV 2, 4 (318). See also S. Geldsetzer, Frauen Auf Kreuzziigen, p. 185. 
' WT 12. 9 (498). 

32 RM 794-6; GP 127. See also S. Geldsetzer, Frauen Auf Kreuzziigen, p. 186. 

3 GP 126. 

34 Chartres de Pabbaye de St-Hubert-en-Ardenne, ed. G. Kurth, I (Brussels, 1903), 
p. 81. For Dodo of Cons-la-Grandville see J. Riley-Smith, The First Crusaders, p. 203. 

3 AA iii.46 (208-10). For Adelbero see A. V. Murray, Crusader Kingdom, pp. 178-9. 

38 AA v.7 (346). See also S. Geldsetzer, Frauen Auf Kreuzzügen, p. 185. 


278 CHAPTER NINE 


would have had to be a widow with a sizeable patrimony or a mother 
with significant influence over powerful sons. 

It was the next generation of aristocratic women who controlled 
property in the Kingdom of Jerusalem, who were able to wield some 
political power, or indeed those women left behind by their noble 
husbands. ‘The women of the nobility present on the initial expedition 
were brought to generate families should the conquest be successful 
and were not in a position to play an independent political role during 
the campaign. Indeed if their male guardian died on the crusade such 
aristocratic women could be placed in a difficult position; Humberge 
was given a speech on the death of Walo that includes the question: 
‘other than with a man, can a woman live following the camp?’ 
Although dependent on Ovid for the phrase, Gilo posed the question 
in the contemporary setting of the Crusade, using the classical refer- 
ence to indicate the dependency of the position of aristocratic women 
on their guardians. 

Beyond the aristocratic women there were far greater numbers of 
women of the other social orders. There is no possibility of finding out 
their names or much detail concerning their backgrounds. Eyewitness 
descriptions of the gathering of forces for the First Crusade, however, 
have important information to offer. It is clear, first of all, that many 
women from the social order of pauperes, both urban and rural ‘poor’, 
came with their husbands and children on the crusade. Guibert of 
Nogent’s passage about the poor families who put all these possessions 
in a cart and came on the expedition has been noted in Chapter Three, 
with regard to the pauperes, but it also important evidence for the pres- 
ence of large numbers of women.*® 

From Pope Urban II’s letter to the clergy and people of Bologna 
of September 1096, it is clear that the unexpected departure of large 
numbers of non-combatant forces was a concern and a development 
to be restrained.” But it is hardly surprising that peasants undertak- 
ing the crusade with the expectation of finding a better life moved in 
entire families. As Ekkehard disapprovingly observed, ‘the farmers, 
the women and children, roving with unheard of folly, abandoned the 
land of their birth, gave up their own property and yearned for that 


37 GP 128-9. 

°° GN 120. 

*° Urban II, letter to the clergy and people of Bologna: Hagenmeyer, Epistulae et 
Chartae, pp. 137-8. 


WOMEN AND THE FIRST CRUSADE 279 


of foreigners and go to an uncertain promised land.” There can be 
no question of describing such women as prostitutes or camp follow- 
ers. ‘These married women were non-combatant participants like the 
elderly, the clergy and the children on the crusade. 

In addition to married women of urban and rural poor families, 
there is also evidence that unattached women participated in the Cru- 
sade. Albert of Aachen’s anger that what should have been a chaste 
undertaking in the manner of all pilgrimages was contaminated by 
licentiousness 1s perhaps the most striking example, but a less hostile 
observation to the same effect comes from the history of Raymond 
of Aguilers. Raymond gave very detailed accounts of the speeches of 
peasant visionaries, from which it is possible to detect elements of the 
political programme of the poor crusader. In one vision of St Andrew 
to Peter Bartholomew, 30 November 1098, evidence that the body of 
unmarried women was still a cause for concern is presented, as the 
saint was reported as saying that ‘amongst your ranks is a great deal 
of adultery, though it would please God if you all take wives.”*! 

A more precisely observed episode of relevance occurred at a moment 
of great strain for the Crusade, January 1098, during the siege of Antioch, 
when famine was causing the movement to disintegrate. During this cri- 
sis the higher clergy managed to gain an influence over the movement, 
which they were not subsequently able to maintain. Their argument that 
to weather the crisis, particularly devout behaviour was required carried 
the day and therefore their hostility to the presence of unmarried women 
on the crusade surfaced in the form of a decision that women should 
be driven from the camp. Fulcher—at the time in Edessa—wrote that 
‘the Franks, having again consulted together, expelled the women from the 
army, the married as well as the unmarried, lest perhaps defiled by 
the sordidness of riotous living they should displease the Lord. ‘These 
women then sought shelter for themselves in neighbouring towns.’” 
William of ‘Tyre described the same incident as being a more limited 
purge of solely ‘light foolish women’ (leves mulierculae).** 


© EA 140. 

# RA 171 (269): Inter vos caedes et... plurima adulteria: quum Deo placitum sit, si uxores 
vos omnes ducatis. 

® FC Lxv.14 (223): tunc facto deinde consilio, eiecerunt feminas de exercitu, tam maritatas quam 
immaritatas, ne forte luxuriae sordibus inquinati Domino displicerent. Illae vero in castris adfinibus 
tunc hospitia sibi adsumpserunt. 


8 WT 4, 22 (264). 


280 CHAPTER NINE 


This incident reveals the presence of significant numbers of unmar- 
ried women on the crusade, but also that in times of crisis, they were a 
body of people who became scapegoats for the hardships experienced 
by the Christian army. The clergy of the First Crusade, as supporters 
of Pope Urban II, would have subscribed to notions of pilgrimage that 
were closely related to the ‘Truce of God, a clerically led peace move- 
ment that emphasised chastity and abstinence. ‘This would inevitably 
have led to tensions between them and the women of the First Crusade, 
tensions that in at least one instance erupted in the forced expulsion 
of the women from the crusade. 

There is a contrast between the disapproval of the presence of women 
expressed by the regular clergy and a more sympathetic position taken 
by the spokespeople of the poor. That is the impression created not 
only by the report of the vision of Peter Bartholomew, but also in the 
eyewitness report of the recruiting activities of Peter the Hermit by 
Guibert of Nogent. ‘[Peter the Hermit] was liberal towards the poor 
showing great generosity with the goods that were given to him, mak- 
ing wives of prostitutes [prostitutae mulheres] through his gifts to their 
husbands.’** Again, the message is one that the position of unattached 
women should be regularised by marriage, not that they should be 
turned away altogether. 

In an article unrelated to the crusades, Georges Duby made a com- 
ment that is extremely helpful in analysing the description given by 
Guibert of the activities of Peter the Hermit. In discussing the con- 
sequences of the drive to reform the church from 1075-1125, Duby 
wrote: ‘Prostitution flourished in the rapidly expanding towns, thronging 
with uprooted immigrants. Above all, there were those women without 
men that the reform movement had itself thrown out onto the street, 
the wives abandoned by husbands because they were priests, or if 
laymen, because they were bigamists or had contracted an incestuous 
union. These women were to be pitied, but they were also dangerous, 
threatening to corrupt men and lead them astray.’*° 

The fact that Peter the Hermit was providing dowries to ‘prostitutes’ 
has been noted by E. O. Blake and C. Morris as showing that his was 


“GN 121:...dilargitione erga pauperes liberalis, prostitutas mulieres non sine suo munere 
maritis honestans. 

*® G. Duby, Women of the Twelfth Century, I: Eleanor of Aquitaine and six others, trans. J. 
Birrell (Cambridge, 1997), p. 36. 


WOMEN AND THE FIRST CRUSADE 281 


an urban audience." But it seems possible to draw a further conclusion, 
that Peter the Hermit was using his gifts to gather a following amongst 
marginalised women. Those who accompanied him on crusade should 
therefore not be considered camp followers in the conventional sense. 

Guibert’s use of the term prostitutae needs to be examined. Particularly 
as he wrote a very important passage on the relationship between men 
and women during the First Crusade in which the term reappears. Guib- 
ert reported that the measures taken on the crusade against unmarried 
women were far more severe than desiring they be married off Having 
made the point that those requiring the protection of God should not 
be subject to lustful thoughts, he wrote that: 


It happened there that neither a mention of harlot nor the name of 
a prostitute was tolerated...because if it was found that any of those 
woman was found to have become pregnant, who was proven to be 
without a husband, she and her procurer were surrendered to atrocious 
punishments.... Meanwhile it came to pass that a certain monk of the 
most famous monastery, had left the cloister of his monastery and under- 
taken the expedition to Jerusalem, being inspired not by piety but by 
shallowness, was caught with some woman or other. If I am not mistaken 
he was found to be guilty by the judgement of red-hot iron, and finally 
the Bishop of Le Puy and the others ordered that the miserable woman 
with her lover be led naked through all the corners of the camps and be 
most fearfully lashed by whips, to the terror of the onlookers.“ 


That Guibert is particularly vehement on this point is unsurprising 
given his purpose, which in part, would have been the edification of his 
readers and the monks for whom he was responsible as abbot. But the 
substance of the incidence is supported by a similar report by Albert of 
Aachen. The context was that of a heightened religious feeling in the 
Christian camp at Antioch. Christmas had just been celebrated when, 
30 December 1098, a serious tremor shook the land. A devastating 
famine along with disease was killing thousands. Therefore a special 
assembly took place with all the bishops and clergy, discussed with 


46 


E. O. Blake and C. Morris, ‘A hermit goes to war: Peter and the origins of the 
First Crusade’, Studies in Church History 22 (1984), pp. 79-107. 

1 GN 196: Unde fiebat ut ibi nec mentio scorti nec nomen prostibuli toleraretur haberi... quod 
si gravidam inveniri constitisset aliquam earum mulierum, quae probantur carere maritis, atrocibus 
tradebatur cum suo lenone supplicus. Contigit interea quemdam predicatissimi omnium coenobii mona- 
chum, qui monasteri sui claustra fugaciter excesserat et Iherosolimitanam expeditionem non pietate sed 
levitate provocatus imerat, cum aliqua femina ibi deprehendi, igniti, nisi fallor, ferri tudicio convinci 
ac demum Podiensis episcopi ceterorumque precepto per omnes castrorum vicos miseram illam cum suo 
amasio circumduci et flagris nudos ad terrorem intuentium dirissme verberari. 


282 CHAPTER NINE 


regard to the role of Adhémar in Chapter Eight. The council passed 
very many laws for the regulation of the army and these concerned 
theft and other crimes as well as an injunction against fornication and 
adultery. It was in the aftermath of this council that Albert reported 
that a man and woman were caught in the act of adultery, stripped 
and whipped through the whole army.” 

The important question to resolve is whether the sanctions were 
directed against prostitutes or women participants of the crusade? 
Albert, better informed about the details of the expedition than Guib- 
ert, does not mention the term prostitutae. Moreover, when a scholarly 
clerical writer of the era like Guibert employed the term, they did so 
with a sense that is quite different to the modern term ‘prostitute’. In 
contemporary clerical thought, for a woman to fail to give an appear- 
ance of modesty, let alone for her to engage in sexual activity outside 
the bonds of marriage, meant she was considered a prostitute.” 

The application of the term to such a broad pattern of behaviour 
meant that canonists found it very difficult to define prostitution. A 
letter by Jerome (ca. 342—420) contained the definition that ‘a whore is 
one who lies open to the lust of many men’. In the same letter Jerome 
clarifies this by saying that ‘a woman who has been abandoned by many 
lovers is not a prostitute.’ It was the first formulation that was to be 
used by Gratian for his widely distributed Decretum (ca. 1140).°' In other 
words, the early twelfth-century concept of prostitutae was far wider and 
much more detached from financial exchange than the modern term 
prostitute. The term was used by Church reformers to refer to priests’ 
wives, women who would have considered themselves entirely respect- 
able. Given this context, it seems reasonable to understand Guibert’s 
prostitutae mulieres as unattached women—his sense of proper place 
being offended in a manner similar to his attitude towards runaway 
monks—rather than their literally being ‘prostitutes’. In the period of 
the First Crusade these women were prostitutae only in the sense that 
they were unmarried and as such a cause for concern, particularly to 


8 AA iii.57 (228). 

* As summarised in J. A. Brundage, Sex, Law and Marriage in the Middle Ages (Aldershot, 
1993) I, 378. 

5 Jerome, Epistula, 64.7, PL 22, col. 611: Meretrix, quae multorum libidini patet, col. 612: 
Non meretricem, quae multis exposita est amatoribus. 

5! Gratian, Decretum, C.XVI. See J. A. Brundage, Sex, Law and Marriage in the Middle 
Ages, XIV, 827. 


WOMEN AND THE FIRST CRUSADE 283 


the clergy who were anxious at the potential social disorder they might 
cause and the contamination of the purity of the pilgrimage. 

A further piece of direct evidence for the presence of large numbers 
of unmarried women on the crusade, an excerpt from the chronicle of 
Bernold of St Blaisen (Constance), sheds more light on the issue: 


At this time a very great multitude from Italy and from all France and 
Germany began to go to Jerusalem against the pagans in order that they 
might liberate the Christians. The Lord Pope was the principal founder of 
this expedition...an innumerable multitude of poor people leapt at that 
journey too simple-mindedly and they neither knew nor were able in any 
way to prepare themselves for such danger... It was not surprising that 
they could not complete the proposed journey to Jerusalem because they 
did not begin that journey with such humility and piety as they ought. For 
they had very many apostates in their company who had cast off their 
monastic habits and intended to fight. But they were not afraid to have 
with them innumerable women who had criminally changed their natural 
clothing to masculine clothing with whom they committed fornication, by 
doing which they offended God remarkably just as had also the people of 
Israel in former times and therefore at length, after many labours, dangers 
and death, since they were not permitted to enter Hungary they began 
to return home with great sadness having achieved nothing.” 


The importance of Bernold’s work is that it is the most contemporary 
eyewitness account of the setting forth of the Crusade. He did not 
wait for the end of the year to write up his chronicle and therefore it 
is particularly valuable in recording the immediate response to events. 
It is notable that he shared with Guibert of Nogent and Albert of 
Aachen a sense that women leaving their allocated social position were 
similar to monks casting off their habits. Bernold’s description of women 
dressing as men in order to go on crusade is supported by an entry in 
the Annals of Disibodenberg which states that news of the expedition 


5 Bernold of St Blaisen (Constance), Chronicon, 1096, pp. 527-9: His temporibus maxima 
multitudo de Italia et omni Gallia et Germania Ierosolimam contra paganos, ut liberarent christianos, 
we cepit. Cuius expeditionis domnus papa maximus auctor fuit... Nimium tamen simpliciter innu- 
merabilis multitudo popularium illud iter arripuerunt, qui nullomodo se ad tale periculum praeparare 
noverunt vel potuerunt. .. Non erat autem mirum, quod propositum iter ad Terosolimam explere non 
potuerent, quia non tali humilitate et devotione, ut deberent, illud iter adorsi sunt. Nam et plures 
apostatas in comitatu suo habuerunt, qui abiecto religionis habitu cum illis militare proposuerunt. 
Sed et innumerabiles feminas secum habere non timuerunt, quae naturalem habitum in virilem nefarie 
mutaverunt, cum quibus fornicati sunt; in quo Deum mirabiliter, sicut et Israheliticus populus quondam 
offenderunt. Unde post multos labores, pericula et mortes, tandem, cum Ungariam non permitterentur 
intrare, domum inacte cum magna tristicia ceperunt repedare. 


284 CHAPTER NINE 


depopulated ‘cities of bishops [and] villages of dwellers. And not only 
men and youths but even the greatest number of women undertook 
the journey. Wonderful indeed was the spirit of that time in order that 
people should be urged on to this journey. For women in this expedition 
were going forth in manly dress and they marched armed.’”* 

It is possible to see women taking men’s clothing as a form of pro- 
tection for their journey. Their action could also be a form a social 
statement, indicating a desire to be considered pilgrims. Both ideas 
are present in a twelfth century saint’s life, that of St Hildegund, who 
is disguised by her father, a knight, during their travels on crusade to 
Jerusalem and who retains her garb to become a famous monk whose 
secret is only revealed upon her death.** 

The prescriptions against women wearing men’s clothes would have 
been well known at the time of the First Crusade, for example that in 
Burchard of Worms’ widely disseminated Decretum: ‘if a woman changes 
her clothes and puts on manly garb for the customary female clothes, 
for the sake, as it is thought, of chastity, let her be anathema.’ Guibert 
of Nogent also told an interesting story in his autobiography in which 
men and women overcame their fear and distaste of cross-dressing in 
order to disguise themselves for an escape.” Nevertheless, by this time 
there was an almost respectable tradition of pious women disguising 
themselves as men to escape persecution or to live like monks, for 
example, Pelagia, Thecla, Anastasia, Dorothea, Eugenia, Euphrosyne, 
Marina and Theodora.’ Whether these tales had any influence over the 
cross-dressing crusaders is entirely speculative, but it is possible to draw 
at least one unambiguous conclusion from the description in Bernold 
and the Annals of Disibodenberg, which is that these women did not 


Annales S. Disibodi, MGH SS 17, 16: regna rectoribus, urbes pastoribus, vici vastantur 
habitatoribus; et non tantum viri et pueri, sed etiam mulieres quam plurimae hoc iter sunt aggressae. 
Mirabilis enim spiritus illius temporis homines impulit ad hoc iter aggrediendum. Nam feminae in 
hanc expeditionem exeuntes virili utebantur habitu et armatae incedebant. 

A. Butler, Butlers Lives of the Saints, April (London, 1999), pp. 141-2. See also V. L. 
Bullough and B. Bullough, Cross Dressing, Sex and Gender (Philadelphia, 1993), p. 54. 

5 Buchard of Worms, Decretum, VUI.60, PL 140, col. 805A: Si qua mulier propter con- 
tinentiam quae putatur, habitum mutat, et pro solito muliebri amictu virilem sumit, anathema sit. 

5 Guibert of Nogent, Monodiae, II.9. 

`” D. Farmer, Oxford Dictionary of Saints (Oxford, 1997), p. 396 (Pelagia), p. 462 
(Thecla). J. Coulson ed., The Saints—a concise biographical dictionary (London, 1958), p. 28 
(Anastasia), p. 160 (Eugenia), p. 177 (Euphrosyne), p. 300 (Marina), p. 428 (Theodora). 
See also V. L. Bullough and B. Bullough, Cross Dressing, Sex and Gender, p. 51. 


WOMEN AND THE FIRST CRUSADE 285 


attach themselves to the movement as prostitutes: male attire and the 
bearing of arms being completely inappropriate for such a role. 

Insofar as historians have considered the role of women on the First 
Crusade they have tended to make the assumption that the majority of 
women were associated with the movement as camp followers, prosti- 
tutes. A closer examination of the evidence suggests that this is an error 
and that the thousands of women who went on the crusade—to find a 
promised land, or to get away from the towns in which many of them 
had been abandoned—did so as participants, as pilgrims. 


CONCLUSION 


The social structure of the First Crusade shown diagrammatically would 
resemble a diamond sitting on a flattened base. 

Even though no Christian who participated in the journey remained 
a slave, or even a serf, non-Christians captives were enslaved during 
the course of the expedition, usually for sale, such as those whom 
Bohemond spared at the fall of Ma’arra,' but some, at least, were pres- 
ent at Jerusalem and made to work on the siege towers.” These, a few 
hundred people perhaps, were the very bottom of the social hierarchy: 
they were human chattel. 

The pauperes, discussed in Chapter Three in their various and hetero- 
geneous character, formed the next social layer and were a substantial 
part of the crusading army. They were possibly the largest ordo present 
on the crusade, the swelling of their ranks with respect to the footsol- 
diers during the siege of Antioch led Walter Porges to see them even as 
becoming the overwhelming majority of those present at the siege.’ 

Above the poor were a sizeable body of the middle ranks; defined 
above all by the fact they fought on foot. Associated with the footsoldiers 
proper were also sailors who fought and provided garrisons for towns, 
slege engineers and those free farmers wealthy enough to provide 
themselves with weapons. 

Higher still were the knights, who, as discussed in Chapter Five, were 
not entirely distinct from the social groupings below them and were 
acutely sensitive to the possibility that they might fall to the ranks of 
the footsoldiers. Nonetheless, on the whole the milites were of a much 
higher social status than those on foot and were present in much fewer 
numbers. 

Above the knights, indeed, a long way above them, were the mag- 
nates, the counts and dukes of territories. These were the lords, as 


' GF 80. 

? RA 332-3 (297). 

3 W. Porges, “The Clergy, the Poor and the Non-Combatants on the First Crusade,’ 
Speculum 21 (1946), pp. 1-21, here p. 4. 


This is an open access chapter distributed under the terms of the CC-BY-NC License. 


288 CONCLUSION 


Guibert of Nogent put it, of between one and four castles.* If the top 
of diamond narrows abruptly between the knights and the magnates, 
it does so even more so for the jump between the magnates and those 
at the top of the structure, a handful of princes. 

Is it possible to put figures into the diagram? Not without consider- 
able speculation, even with regard to the princes. With Adhémar dying, 
Stephen of Blois and ‘Tatikios leaving and with Baldwin of Boulogne 
and Tancred rising in prominence, even that very small body at the 
apex of the movement was fluid and evolving. But, for the sake of 
offering at least a rough sense of proportion between the various social 
groupings, an estimate will be offered here. 

The most thorough discussion of the number of combatants on 
the First Crusade is that offered by John France and this study can- 
not improve on his painstaking assembly of the relevant data and the 
plausible manner in which it assessed.° At its height, gathered together 
at Nicea, John France estimates the Christian army to have been com- 
posed of some 50,000 combatants, of whom 7,000 were knights. Using 
these figures as a guide, the overall composition of the crusade would 
have, very approximately, been as follows. Nine princes, 200 magnates, 
7,000 knights, 40,000 footsoldiers, and 40,000 pauperes. 

This overall figure of around 90,000 people differs from France’s 
estimate of 50-60,000 inclusive of non-combatants and it is at the 
high end of estimates by other modern historians, even though most 
have revised upwards the estimate in Steven Runciman’s discussion of 
the subject, that there were 4200 to 4500 cavalry and 30,000 infantry.’ 
Jonathan Phillips offers the figure of 60,000, although somewhat con- 
fusingly these are divided between 6,000 knights and the rest ‘servants, 
pilgrims and hangers-on.’ In other words, the footsoldiers are absent.® 
Peter Lock echoes the figure of 60,000 without breaking it down fur- 
ther beyond a comment that of these 6-7,000 were knights.’ Thomas 
Asbridge’s estimate is 75,000, and, assuming his figure of 5,000 for 
footsoldiers is a misprint for 50,000, this implies that his estimate for the 
non-combatants is about 18,000 as he estimated the number of knights 


+ GN 133. 


5 J. France, Victory in the East, pp. 122-142. 
6 Thid., p. 142. 


7 S. Runciman, A History of the Crusades, 3 (fifth edition: London, 1991), I, 339. 
8 J. Phillips, The Crusades 1095-1197 (London, 2002), p. 18. 
° P. Lock, The Routledge Companion to the Crusades (Abingdon, 2006), p. 140. 


CONCLUSION 289 


as 7—-7,500.'° The most original approach to this issue has been that of 
Jean Flori, who approached the subject with an interesting analysis of 
the vocabulary of number in the crusading sources, to try and discern 
between their use of biblical and classical numerical conventions and 
genuine estimates. By contrast with the cautious figures of the English 
historians, Flori arrives at figure of 120,000." 

The huge variation of the various estimates is a fair reflection of the 
difficulty of the sources in regard to the reporting of numbers and this 
study claims no great authority on the matter. It does seem inconsistent 
of France, though, to assess the number of combatants of the First 
Crusade at 50,000, yet the overall number, including non-combatants, 
at 50-60,000. The discussion in Chapter Three shows that when the 
People’s Crusade departed and, indeed, the various contingents of the 
princes, the movement had something of a mass emigratory character. 
The People’s Crusade was overwhelmingly made up of pauperes, but 
they were also present in substantial numbers among those marching 
with the princes. Even after the destruction of the People’s Crusade, 
thousands of survivors (and later, returned prisoners) jomed up with 
the united army. That is why it seems reasonable to push the overall 
figure for the expedition to the higher one of 90,000 by including some 
40,000 non-combatants with the 50,000 soldiers. 

While estimating the numbers present on the First Crusade is 
extremely difficult, analysing the social structure of the movement is a 
much more achievable task, thanks to the richness of the sources. The 
crusade had a common goal and a common theology. But it within 
that, it was riven into different social groupings, whose outlook varied 
considerably. ‘The princes strove with each other and with the rest of 
the crusade to establish a dominant position of leadership; the mag- 
nates to become princes; the zuvenes to prove their worth as magnates 
deserving of praise and glory. For the knight, what mattered was to 
find a lord who could provide the payments that could keep them 
mounted and armed, in other words to secure their status above the 
footsoldiers. For the latter, and even more for the pauperes below them, 
the priority was simply survival. But to achieve that basic goal neces- 
sitated political activity by the commoners. They had to insist upon a 
proper share of the captured booty and they had to stop the magnates 


10 T. Asbridge, The First Crusade (London, 2004), p. 122. 
"J. Flori, Pierre ’Ermite et la Première Croisade (Paris, 1999), pp. 425-458. 


290 CONCLUSION 


abandoning them in the face of the arrival of Kerbogha’s army. If the 
commoners had been entirely passive during the crusade, they would 
have suffered starvation, massacre and enslavement on an even greater 
scale than that which they experienced. Moreover, the expedition as a 
whole may have had quite a different outcome, either in a victory by 
Kerbogha over a demoralised and disintegrating army, or in a failure 
of the Christian army to continue on to Jerusalem. 

The First Crusade should be understood as having a vibrant internal 
dynamic between all its component social groupings. In this regard it 
was not just the papal leadership and the spiritual beliefs of the par- 
ticipants that set the expedition apart from all other medieval armies: 
unlike a conventional medieval army, the First Crusade was something 
of a slice of European society on the march. 

The social structure of the First Crusade presented here places a 
great deal of emphasis on the internal dynamics of the expedition. The 
implications of this for a narrative of events are probably made most 
explicit in Chapter Four. And while this study is primarily concerned to 
establish an understanding of the basic social structure of the Crusade, 
it also has something to offer with regard to the much-debated question 
of the motivation of those who participated in the First Crusade. 

In popular culture, certainly in the Muslim world, but even in the 
West, the crusades are largely viewed as disreputable adventures in 
which, under the guise of piety, Christian knights slaughtered and 
plundered their way through the lands of non-Christians and heretics. 
This was essentially the view of the crusades created by enlightenment 
historians, especially Voltaire, Gibbon and Hume. For these authors the 
crusades were useless expeditions, organised by popes and the Catholic 
Church to satisfy an instinct for domination. ‘They were cruel displays of 
fanaticism whose achievements were performed by strength, described 
by ignorance. Gibbon considered it absurd that ‘six succeeding genera- 
tions should have rushed headlong down the precipice that was open 
before them; and that men of every condition should have staked their 
public and private fortunes on the desperate adventure of possessing or 
recovering a tombstone two thousand miles from their country.’!” 

A consensus that the crusades were a negative phenomena lasted until 
the 1960s, with Steven Runciman concluding his famous work on the 


2 E. Gibbon, The Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire, 6 (Everyman’s Library reprint: 
London, 1994), p. 116. 


CONCLUSION 291 


subject with the summation that ‘in the long sequence of interaction 
and fusion between Orient and Occident, out of which our civilization 
has grown, the crusades were a tragic and destructive episode. High 
ideals were besmirched by cruelty and greed, enterprise and endurance 
by a blind and narrow self righteousness, and the Holy War itself was 
nothing more than a long act of intolerance in the name of God.’ 

This consensus has broken down. Many of the dominant writers in 
the field and the most prominent members of the Society for the Study 
of the Crusades and the Latin East now hold to what is, essentially, a 
positive view of the crusades. Famously, it has been argued that cru- 
sading should be seen as ‘an act of love.’'* Jonathan Riley-Smith, the 
author of this formulation and Dixie Professor of Ecclesiastical His- 
tory at Cambridge University is quite open about the fact he is writing 
from a Christian, indeed Catholic, perspective. He is a member of 
two religious orders that have their roots in the crusading era, being 
a Knight of the Sovereign Military Order of Malta and of the Most 
Venerable Order of St John. He is the standard bearer for a certain 
group of Western historians, for whom the crusades are to be seen in 
a favourable light. 

What Jonathan Riley-Smith and his students have brought to the 
motivation debate is new source material and in historical debate such 
material is decisive. Upon leaving for the crusade, very many property 
owners made substantial donations to the church, in return for ready 
coin with which to finance their involvement on the expedition. ‘These 
transactions were recorded and churches and monasteries preserved 
the charters throughout the centuries, being ever diligent on such 
matters. 

Methodologically, the inclusion of such charters in a discussion 
of the First Crusade is unfaultable; the database created as a result 
of research into donation charters is extremely valuable. By the mid 
1990s, for the period 1095-1131, it comprised 549 men and women 
who definitely took the cross, 110 who probably did so, and 132 who 
might have become crusaders.'° Insofar as such a database helps reveal 
the geographical and familial networks of the nobles who participated 


13 S. Runciman, A History of the Crusades, 3 (fifth edition: London, 1991), III, 480. 

1" J. Riley-Smith, ‘Crusading as an Act of Love’ in T. F Madden ed., The Crusades, 
(Oxford, 2002), p. 38. 

'M. Bull and N. Housley ed., The Experience of Crusading 1: Western Approaches 
(Cambridge, 2003), p. 7. 


292 CONCLUSION 


in the First Crusade, charter evidence is a welcome addition to the 
crusading sources. But their use as the key evidence in refuting the 
popular notion that crusaders were greedy knights, who cloaked their 
desire for booty in a pretended piety, is problematic. 

Essentially, the argument in favour of seeing the motivation of the 
crusaders as primarily spiritual consists of three observations based 
on the charter evidence. Firstly, the cost of going on the crusade was 
shown to be extremely high; four times a knight’s annual income. The 
enterprise was not ‘cost effective’. Secondly, the proportion of second 
sons going on the crusade was demonstrably low. Therefore the theory 
that those who had no other prospects were the main driving force 
behind the crusade was rejected. Thirdly, the charters are consistent 
in expressing a deep concern for the salvation of their soul and a love 
of Christ. The core of the ‘act of love’ position rests on the point that, 
in the absence of material motivations, the professed piety of the first 
crusaders must be considered to be the best guide to their outlook. 
Those who set forth on the First Crusade did so out of love of Christ 
and their neighbour. 

So powerful was this argument, presented above all in Jonathan 
Riley-Smith’s The First Crusaders, 1095-1131 (1997), that it gathered a 
seemingly irresistible momentum, to the point where alternative per- 
spectives have been swept aside. Not only have the notions of ‘profit’ 
and ‘second sons’ been considered to have been refuted, but so too the 
sophisticated and strongly sourced arguments of Carl Erdmann and 
George Duby. Carl Erdmann saw the First Crusade as an evolving from 
new notions of knightly vocation developed by the papal reformers 
of the eleventh century, in particular by Pope Gregory VII.” George 
Duby’s contention, not necessarily in contradiction to Erdmann, was 
that the great popular peace movements of the eleventh century formed 
the most important context for the launching of the First Crusade. Both 
these theories have important implications for the motivations of the 
First Crusader and, to a certain degree, both are uncomfortable for the 
school of thought that emphasises piety. The first, because it places an 
emphasis on the political, rather than spiritual, goals of the papacy and 
its followers; the second because of its portrayal of the knightly class 


'© J. Riley-Smith, The First Crusade and the Idea of Crusading (London, 1986), p. 43. 
17 C. Erdmann, The Origin of the Idea of Crusade, trans. M. W. Baldwin and 
W. Goffart (Princeton, 1977), passim. 


CONCLUSION 293 


of France as coming into conflict with the Church for their turbulent, 
exploitative and unruly behaviour. 

The divergence between Erdmann, Duby and the Riley-Smith school 
is a relatively subtle one that will not be developed further here. Rather, 
it is necessary to address the core argument: is the ‘act of love’ conten- 
tion with regard to the motivation of the First Crusaders as strong as 
its popularity at the time of writing would suggest? 

One obvious point that seems to have been lost in the debate, 1s that 
any discussion based upon the charters of departing crusaders can only 
concern a small minority of those who participated. Whilst the knights 
formed the key fighting forces of the expedition and their military role 
was out of all proportion to their numbers, it is important to remember 
that they formed a relatively small part of the whole expedition. The 
others on the First Crusade—the footsoldiers, artisans, former peasants 
and townspeople, women and clergy—made up the overwhelming 
majority of the army. To discuss the motives of those knights who 
made donations to the church before departing, therefore, is not the 
same thing as discussing the motives of the majority of crusaders. 
What was the outcast woman thinking, who having been renounced 
by her husband in the name of clerical reform, attached herself to the 
crusade through the following of Peter the Hermit? What interpreta- 
tion was put on the crusading message by the farmer who despaired 
of managing his land following a year of famine and the death of his 
relatives by plague? Or the serf, against the will of her owner, who ran 
away to join the expedition? Can the donation charters of departing 
nobles speak for them? 

Moreover, even for those who did append their names to donation 
charters, it cannot be assumed that the spiritual outlook documented 
was theirs. Jean Flori has drawn attention that these charters invariably 
contain statements that are legal formula belonging to a tradition that 
predates the crusades by several centuries. ‘The emphasis of the charter 
documents is generally on the act of donation being meritorious, not 
the fact that the knight was departing on crusade. Furthermore, as 
Flori puts it, ‘the need for money and support of all kinds would have 
led some crusaders to allow themselves to be depicted as repenting 
and penitent.’!® 


!8 J. Flori, ‘Ideology and Motivations in the First Crusade’ in H. Nicholson ed., The 
Crusades (Basingstoke, 2005), pp. 15-36, here p. 21. 


294 CONCLUSION 


There is a methodological weakness in the first strand of the argu- 
ment, that based on cost-effectiveness. Suppose future historians were to 
debate the US and UK-led invasion of Iraq in 2003 and ask whether 
the motives of those involved were self-interested or not. A short-term 
cost-benefit analysis would clearly point away from avariciousness as the 
motive. ‘The enormous outlay of expenditure on the invasion will not 
be regained by those states in the foreseeable future, if at all. Should 
the future historians therefore conclude that the ostensible, documented, 
reasons for the invasion therefore be taken at face value? That those 
who initiated the invasion sincerely believed that it was a matter of 
urgency to deprive Saddam Hussein of weapons of mass destruction? 
Or would these future historians be better advised to look at a variety 
of pressures on those who launched the war, to try to build up a more 
complex picture that included the state of domestic political affairs and 
the strategic importance of oil resources. 

The point of this analogy is not in any way to cast the nobles of the 
First Crusade as some kind of imperialist force. It is a methodological 
one. ‘To rule out immediate financial gain as a motive for war, does not 
rule out other material and strategic considerations. In the case of the 
First Crusade, to add up the costs incurred by those knights who went 
on the expedition and compare it to the booty they returned with does 
not tell us a great deal about their motives on setting out. It does not 
even rule out the possibility that knights did anticipate considerable 
material reward, but that most of them were disappointed. Nor can the 
cost-benefit approach take into account the unquantifiable value to a 
knight’s reputation of having been a crusader. What historians can see, 
however, is the reverse: opprobrium heaped on those who abandoned 
the crusade. A generation after the event those writing about the First 
Crusade were well aware of the ‘rope-dancers’, the scathing nickname 
for those knights who let themselves down from the walls of Antioch 
at a time when it looked like the expedition was doomed.’ In an era 
where a reputation played an important political role in the manoeu- 
vres of the nobility, self-interest may have played a part in the thinking 
of the first crusaders, not necessarily in the form of their anticipating 
a return laden with booty, so much as the prospect of glory and the 
approval of the church. 


' AC xi.6 (348); OV 6, 18. 


CONCLUSION 295 


In any case, not all modern historians have given up the thought that 
considerations of plunder might well have made up part of the attrac- 
tion of the crusade for the nobility. So, for example, John France has 
seen the First Crusade as offering ‘something for everyone—salvation, 
cash, land, status. After pointing out that one of the leading crusader 
princes, ‘Tancred, treated the Church of the Nativity at Bethlehem as 
a mere prize of war, France concluded ‘the lure of booty, the hope 
perhaps of land or position in the exotic east, personal or institutional 
advantage, a whole spectrum of motives drove men to the east.” 
He pointed out that piety and material aspirations are not mutually 
exclusive with a very convincing example. Famously, the author of the 
Gesta Francorum reported the rallying cry of Bohemond at the battle of 
Dorylaeum, 1 July 1097: ‘stand fast all together, trusting in Christ and 
in the victory of the Holy Cross. Today, please God, you will all gain 
much booty.’” 

The cost-effectiveness argument also ignores evidence that not all 
departing crusaders financed themselves in a suitably pious manner: 
that of making a donation to the church. Some used the opportunity 
provided by the expedition to raise funds by increasing local levels of 
exploitation. At the peak of the social structure there is the example 
of Duke Robert II of Normandy who mortgaged his duchy to his 
brother, King William II of England. The ten thousand silver marks 
were raised from the English population by a harsh and much resented 
tax.” Guibert of Nogent, an eyewitness, provided evidence that at a 
more lowly level the departure of knights on crusade could be paid 
for by fierce extractions from the poor. William Carpenter, one of the 
knights active in the People’s Crusade who eventually abandoned the 
expedition at Antioch, plundered from the pauperes of his region to 
obtain his provisions for departure.** Guibert also wrote about other 
unnamed knights from France, who before setting out on the expedi- 
tion had been fighting unjustly and were creating poverty by their 


20 J, France and W. G. Zajac ed., The Crusades and their sources: Essays Presented to Bernard 
Hamilton (Aldershot, 1998), p. 19. 

2! J, France, Victory in the East. A military history of the First Crusade (Cambridge, 1994). 
p. 16. 
2 GF 19-20. 

° The Anglo-Saxon Chronicles, ed. and trans. Michael Swanton (London, 2000), 
p. 233. 

” GN 178-9. 


296 CONCLUSION 


criminal plundering.” The cost-benefit argument does not apply to such 
figures. Their departure for Jerusalem cost them nothing of their own 
resources. By going on crusade these knights were simply transferring 
their depredations from the local peasantry to those they encountered 
en route. 

There were another body of crusaders, outside the knightly class, to 
whom it is worth turning in any discussion of the economic gains and 
losses of the First Crusade. By the end of the eleventh century a growing 
social milieu was beginning to assert itself in parts of Europe: the urban 
manufacturer and merchant. In France, Germany and Italy, a number 
of major towns had formed communes and in some instances fought 
for control of the town against the previous, often clerical, authorities. 
Notable examples were the effort of the citizens of Worms to throw 
off the rule of their bishop in 1073, and the less successful attempt the 
following year in Cologne.” In Italy, a number of cities were beginning 
to emerge as independent powers; importantly for the history of the 
First Crusade, Genoa was already organising itself into a commune 
in 1052 and by 1095 was governed by elected consuls. Sources nearly 
contemporary with the First Crusade noticed the consules of Genoa 
as the leading figures of city.” The significance of this development 
for the motivation of the first crusaders has not yet been explored in 
depth, but Abram Leon, who during the course of his classic work The 
Jewish Question observed that the crusades were the expression of the 
will of city merchants to carve a road to the Orient, has pointed to a 
potentially very fertile line of investigation.” 

Working very firmly within the ‘act of love’ framework, a former 
pupil of Jonathan Riley-Smith, Christopher Marshall, has examined 
the question of the motivation of the Italian city republics with regard 
to crusading. Marshall drew the conclusion that since the speech of the 
bishops of Grenoble and Orange to the citizens of Genoa (1097) to 
encourage them to participate in the First Crusade made no mention 
of material gain ‘it is therefore safe to assume that the recorded Geno- 
ese response reflected their religious fervour.”** Marshall examined the 


3 GN 179. 

2 For the context of these revolts see Robinson 1999, pp. 93-4. 
27 CAT, 5; FC IL.viii.2 (396-7). 
A. Leon, The Jewish Question (New York, 1970), p. 138. 
° C, Marshall, “The crusading motivation of the Italian city republics in the Latin 
East, 1096-1104, in M. Bull and N. Housley eds., The Experience of Crusading 1: Western 
Approaches (Cambridge, 2003), pp. 60-79, here p. 67. 


N N A 
© 


CONCLUSION 297 


sources for the First Crusade to show that many contemporary authors 
treated the Genoese fleet as fellow crusaders. But no one, even the 
crudest advocate of the ‘booty’ position, would expect eleventh century 
sources to do otherwise. The point here, as with the argument about 
motivation in general, is to ask whether there were contemporary social 
and economic trends which would contribute to an enthusiasm, sincere 
or otherwise, for the First Crusade among the consules of Genoa? In 
other words, whatever the formulations of the preaching by the Bish- 
ops, was the city predisposed to support the crusade? If the sailors of 
the commune were acting out of a love of Christ that was detached 
from the strategic benefits that accrued to their city through control- 
ling a greater share of trade to and from the east, then why, with the 
pilgrimage complete, did they insist upon trading privileges in return 
for their assistance for the newly founded Principality of Antioch and 
Kingdom of Jerusalem?*? 

When, in 1101, a fleet from Genoa made a convention with King 
Baldwin I of Jerusalem, the agreement is another good illustration of 
how contemporaries had no difficulty combining their religious beliefs 
with their own material interests. ‘The treaty was made, reported Fulcher, 
with the consuls of the fleet. If, out of the love of God and with His 
assistance, they and the king could take any of the cities of the Saracens, 
a third of the wealth of the inhabitants would go to the Genoese, the 
other two thirds to the king. Additionally, a section in each captured city 
would be given to the Genoese in perpetuity.*! This agreement became 
a standard one for relations between Italian cities and the Kingdom 
of Jerusalem, leading to considerable long-term benefit for the cities. 
Is it plausible to deny that the prospect of such arrangements formed 
part of the considerations of the Italian republics when they heard and 
accepted the crusading message? 

The second strand of the idealist argument, the refutation of the 
‘second son’ contention, is much stronger, as the evidence of the char- 
ters does not provide evidence for it being the younger sons of noble 
families who departed on the First Crusade. Not all modern historians, 
however, have dismissed the contention as being a consideration for 
some crusaders. H. E. Mayer, for example, has cited the case of the 
Maconnais family of La Hongre, which successfully avoided the frag- 
mentation of their allodial wealth through the participation of two males 


32 H, Hagenmeyer, Epistulae et Chartae pp. 155-6; FC ILviii.2 (396-7). 
%1 FC ILviii.2 (396-7). 


298 CONCLUSION 


in the First Crusade and one in the Second Crusade.*? Nevertheless, 
it is generally accepted that the numbers of noble crusaders who had 
nothing to lose and everything to gain from the expedition was nothing 
like the size portrayed in the nineteenth century sources. The ‘act of 
love’ school of thought therefore concludes that the crusading image 
of the spirited young warrior, more interested in fame and glory than 
the salvation of their soul, is a fictional one. They have consistently 
overlooked, however, the significant presence of those knights who were 
described as iuvenes and the pattern of behaviour they displayed which 
earned them such an epithet. 

Chapter Six of this work draws attention to a number of these 
magnates, not always young in age, who were described by the early 
crusading sources as iuvenes.” These warriors were brave, but extremely 
violent. ‘They sought glory in battle, slaughtered both combatants and 
civilians and revelled in displays of their riding ability. Their motiva- 
tion for joining the crusade was not strictly material, in the sense of 
a search for land and booty. But there was nevertheless a structural 
consideration at work in their behaviour. Georges Duby explored the 
position of the unmarried sons of the magnates of a slightly later era 
and he drew attention to the way that bands of ‘youths’ would draw 
together to fight in tournaments and in the wars of their elders, in 
order to win fame, followers and if possible, the biggest prize of all, 
an heiress whose lands would allow them to become magnates in their 
own right.** 

The violence of these bands of knights in search of the opportunity 
to prove their military prowess was destabilising and more than one 
clerical author breathed a sigh of relief that the destructive energy of 
the knightly order had been deflected by the idea of crusading onto 
an external non-Christian enemy.” For the iuvenes who took the cross, 
they not only had the opportunity to earn salvation without having to 
give up their customary military lifestyle: but they could advance their 
fame while simultaneously winning the approval of the church. One 


2 H. E. Mayer, The Crusades (seventh edition: Oxford, 1993), p. 24. 
3 AA ii.23 (100). 

3t ‘Les “jeunes” dans la société aristocratique dans la France du Nord-Ouest au XII? 
siècle, Annales: Economies, Sociétés, Civilisations 19 (5), 1964, pp. 835-846. Reprinted in 
Georges Duby, The Chivalrous Society, trans. C. Postan, University of California Press 
(Berkely, 1977). Also G. Duby, William Marshal—The Flower of Chivalry, trans. R. Howard 
(London, 1986), passim. 

5 GN 87; RM 748. 


CONCLUSION 299 


of the results of the investigation in this book then, is to put back into 
an understanding of the mentality of those participating in the First 
Crusade the presence of the worldly and ambitious knight, having 
reinterpreted their behaviour as arising out of their particular social 
situation rather than it being a simple reflection of a desire for booty 
or the ‘second son’ syndrome. 

Overall, the motivation of those on the First Crusade was as hetero- 
geneous as the various social classes who took part. Not only did the 
balance between spiritual and material considerations vary consider- 
ably from social group to social group, within each stratum could be 
found figures displaying considerable devotion to the spiritual goals 
of the expedition and those of a more cynical disposition. And no 
doubt there were those whose outlook changed during the course of 
the expedition. 

Methodologically, the school of crusading historiography that 1s 
currently dominant in the Western world can appropriately be termed 
‘idealist’: as a result of its philosophical approach, its attribution of pious 
ideals to early crusaders and a quite conscious rejection of materialism. 
Marcus Bull has written the following explanation of why historians 
with a Marxist background have been incapable of analysing the cru- 
sades: ‘there is no serious Marxist interpretation of the crusade and 
its motivations—perhaps because problems of human agency obtrude 
a little too disconcertingly when large numbers of people consciously 
engage in something that on the surface appears so eccentric in rela- 
tion to the broad trends of social change. Perhaps, too, because the 
“poor” are seldom more than a shadowy presence in the dynamics of 
a crusade, cultural Marxist analysis is a lost cause.’*° 

Bull’s portrayal of the methodology of Marxist historical writings 
here seems rather narrow. If everybody’s behaviour always conformed 
to the broad trends of social change, there would be no political 
conflict. Human history would be very simple, smooth and mechani- 
cal. There certainly are historical works in the Marxist tradition that 
reduce the complexities of a historical phenomenon to overly crude 
economic generalisations. But equally, it is often the subtle dynamics 
and peculiarities of certain periods of history that has stimulated the 


% M. Bull, ‘Muslims and Jerusalem in miracle stories,’ in Marcus Bull and Norman 


Housley eds., The Experience of Crusading 1: Western Approaches (Gambridge, 2003), pp. 
13-38, here p. 18. 


300 CONCLUSION 


more important investigations in the Marxist tradition, not least those 
of Marx himself. For example, Marx’s study of Louis Bonaparte is 
an appraisal of the colourful events of 1848-52 in France, many of 
which seemed extremely eccentric in relationship to the broad trends 
of social change, but which still leant themselves to an analysis rooted 
in an assessment of the material position of the various classes of the 
era.’ 

Moreover, Bull’s assertion about the ‘poor’ is exaggerated. It has been 
shown here that for the First Crusade at least, pauperes played a significant 
and notable role in the dynamics of the movement. The statement about 
the ‘poor’ also indicates that for Bull, a Marxist approach is one that 
focuses narrowly on the lower social orders. In most Marxist historical 
works, however, while the writers are indeed often interested in the 
classes at the bottom of society, their studies are typically attempts to 
understand the totality of a particular historical phenomenon. 

For Norman Housely, the absence of a materialist tradition of analysis 
with regard to the crusades is something to be regretted, but even if 
it did exist, it would probably not lead to a challenge to the current 
consensus. ‘It is unlikely that the emphasis placed by recent research on 
devotional motivations will be overturned and that a materialist inter- 
pretation will be put forward with authority. This is not because it is 
inherently misguided to explain crusading in materialist terms.. . rather, 
it is because the devotional motivations that have been put forward are 
both appropriately nuanced and firmly embedded in broader contexts, 
cultural as well as economic and social.” 

It is regrettable that the great medievalists best equipped to put 
forward a materialist interpretation of the crusades, figures such as 
Georges Duby or Rodney Hilton, never did so. Regrettable, because 
approaching the subject with an interest in social dynamics unlocks a 
great deal of unappreciated content in the source material. There is 
a rich, stimulating, wealth of information to be studied from such a 
perspective. Looking at the sources with an eye for what they reveal 
about social structure can bring a fresh approach to old debates, even 
ones that seemed to have been resolved, and stimulate new ones, to 
the benefit of all those interested in the crusades. Hopefully, the value 
of such an approach is evident in this study. 


5 K., Marx, ‘The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte’ in K. Marx and FE 
Engels, Collected Works (London, 1979) XI, 99-197. 
3 N. Housely, Contesting the Crusades (Oxford, 2006), p. 79. 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Primary Sources 


Albert of Aachen, Historia [herosolimitana. 

Historia Therosolimitana, RHC Oc. 4, 265-713. 

Historia Terosolimitana, ed. S. B. Edgington (Oxford, 2007). 
Albric of Trois-Fontaines, Chronicon, MGH SS 23, 631-950. 
The Anglo-Saxon Chronicles, ed. and trans. Michael Swanton (London, 2000). 
Anna Comnena, The Alexiad, trans. E. R. A. Sewter, (Middlesex, 1979). 
Annales Altahenses maiores, MGH SS, 4, 38. 

Annales Aquenses, MGH SS 24, 33-9. 

Annales Augustam, MGH SS 3, 123-36. 

Annales Blandinenses, MGH SS 5, 20-30. 

Annales Brunwilarenses, MGH SS 16, 724-8. 

Annales Colonienses, MGH SS 17, 723-847. 

Annales Dorenses, MGH SS 27, 514-31. 

Annales Laubienses, continuatio, MGH SS 4, 20-8. 

Annales Leodienses, continuatio, MGH SS 4, 28-30. 

Annales Mellicenses, continuatio auctarium Gerstense, MGH SS 9, 541—569. 
Annales Neresheimenses, MGH SS 10, 19-25. 

Annales Ottenburani, pars altera genuina, MGH SS 5, 6-9. 
Annales Porchensis, MGH SS 16, 598-608. 

Annales Ratisbonensis, MGH SS 17, 570-90. 

Annales Sancti Blasu, MGH SS 17, 276-8. 

Annales Sancti Disibodi, MGH SS 17, 4-30. 

Annales Sancti Petri Erphasturdenses, MGH SS 16, 15—25. 
Annales Sancti Trudperi, MGH SS 17, 285-94. 

Annales Veronenses, MGH SS 19, 1-8. 

Annales Wirziburgenses, MGH SS 2, 238-247. 

Annales Kwifaltenses, MGH SS 10, 53-4. 

Annales Kwifaltenses maiores, MGH SS 10, 54-5. 

Annalista Saxo, MGH SS 6, 542-777. 

Annals of the Four Masters, ed. J. O’ Donovan (Dublin, 1856). 
Anonymous, Principia Rhetorices, PL 32, cols. 1439-1449. 


Anonymous, Syriac Chronicle, trans. A. S. Tritton, The Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society, 


92 (1933), pp. 69-103 and 273-306. 
Arnold of Lübeck, Chronica Slavorum, MGH SS, 21, 101—250. 


Baha al-Din Ibn Shaddad, The Rare and Excellent History of Saladin, trans. D. S. Richards 


(Aldershot, 2002). 
Baldric of Dol, Historia Hierosolymitana, RHC Oc. 4, 1-111. 


Bernold of St Blaisen (Constance), Chronicon, ed. I. S. Robinson, Die Chroniken Bertholds 
von Reichenau und Bernolds von Konstanz, MGH Scriptores Rerum Germanicorum nova series 


14 (Hanover, 2003), pp. 383-540. 


Berthold of Zwiefalten, Liber de Constructione Monasterii Kwivildensis, MGH SS 10, 


93-124. 
J. Bongars, Gesta Dei per Francos (Hanover, 1611). 
Bonizo of Sutri, Liber ad Amicum. 
Liber ad Amicum, MGH Libelli de Lite Imperatorum et Pontificum I, 568-620. 


302 BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Bonizo of Sutri, ‘to a friend’, trans. I. S. Robinson, The Papal Reform of the Eleventh 
Century (Manchester, 2004), pp. 158-261. 
Burchard of Worms, Decretum, PL 140, cols. 337A-1058C. 
Caffaro, Annales Ianuenses, ed. L. T. Belgrano, Annali Genovesi di Caffaro e de’ suoi continu- 
atori (Rome, 1890). 
Canso d'Antioca, ed. C. E. Dewberry (unpublished PhD. thesis: University of Oxford, 
1988). 
La Chanson d'Antioche 
P. Paris, ed. 2 (reprint: Geneva, 1969). 
S. Duparc-Quioc, ed. 2 (Paris, 1977). 
La Chanson de Jérusalem, ed. Nigel R. Thorpe, (Tuscaloosa, 1991). 
Charta Pacis Valencenensis, MGH SS 21, 605-6. 
Chartres de Vabbaye de St-Hubert-en-Ardenne, ed. G. Kurth, I (Brussels, 1903). 
Chronica Reinhardsbrunnensis, MGH SS 30, 490-656. 
Chronica Sancti Petri Erfordensis moderna, MGH SS 30, 335—437. 
Chronica Sigeberti Gemblacensis continuatio auctorium Aquicinense, MGH SS 6, 392-8. 
Chronicon Elwacense, MGH SS' 10, 34-51. 
Chronicon St Andreae Castri Camaracensu, MGH SS 7, 526-550. 
Cicero, In Catilinam I-IV. Pro Murena. Pro Sulla. Pro Flacco, ed. and trans. C. Macdonald 
(Cambridge Mass., 1976). 
Cosmas of Prague, Chronica Boemorum, MGH SS 9, 1-209. 
Decrees of the Ecumenical Councils, 1. Nicea to Lateran V, ed. N. P. Tanner (London, 
1990). 
Decreta eines ed. R. Somerville, The Councils of Urban II, I (Amsterdam, 
1972). 
Eadmer, Historia Novorum in Anglia, ed. Martin Rule, Rolls Series (London, 1884). 
Ekkehard of Aura, Chronicon. 
Hrierosolymita, RHC Oc. 5, 1—40. 
Chronicon Universale, MGH SS 6, 33-231. 
Frutolfs und Ekkehards Chroniken und die Anonyme Kaiserchronik, ed. F-J. Schmale and I. 
Schamle-Ott (Darmstadt, 1972). 
Eusebius, The History of the Church from Christ to Constantine, trans. G. A. Williamson 
(London, 1965). 
Frutolf, Chronicon, Frutolfs und Ekkehards Chroniken und die Anonyme Kaiserchronik, ed. F.-J. 
Schmale and I. Schmale-Ott (Darmstadt, 1972). 
Fulcher of Chartres, Historia Hierosolymitana. 
Gesta Francorum Iherusalem Peregrinantium, RHC Oc. 3, 311—485. 
Fulcher of Chartres, Historia Hierosolymitana (1095-1127), ed. H. Hagenmeyer 
(Heidelberg, 1913). 
Fulcher of Chartres, A history of the expedition to Jerusalem 1095-1127, trans. F. R. 
Ryan, introduction and notes H. S. Fink (Knoxville, 1941). 
Fulcher of Chartres: Chronicle of the First Crusade, trans. M. E. McGinty (Philadelphia, 
1941). 
Gellius, Les Nuits Attiques, ed. and trans. R. Marache (Paris, 1978). 
Gerhoch, De Investigatione Antichristi Liber I MGH Historica Libelli de Lite Imperatorum et 
pontificum, Saeculis XI et XII conscripti, 3 (Hanover, 1897). 
Gesta Abbatum Lobbtensium, MGH SS, 21, 307-33. 
Gesta Francorum et aliorum Hierosolimitanorum. 
Anonymi Gesta Francorum et aliorum Hierosolimitanorum, ed. H. Hagenmeyer (Heidelberg, 
1890). 
Histoire Anonyme de la première Croisade, ed. L. Bréhier (Paris, 1924). 
Anonymi Gesta Francorum, ed. B. A. Lees (Oxford, 1924). 
Gesta Francorum et aliorum Hierosolimitanorum, ed. and trans. R. Hill (London, 1962). 
Gilo of Paris and a second, anonymous author, Historia Vie Hierosolimitane, ed. C. W. 
Grocock and J. E. Siberry (Oxford, 1997). 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 303 


Godshalk of Gembloux, Gesta Abbatum Gemblacensium continuatio, MGH SS 8, 542-557. 
Gregory VII, Registrum, ed. E. Caspar, MGH Epistolae selectae 2 (Berlin, 1920, 1923). 
Guibert of Nogent, Gesta Dei per Francos, ed. R. B. C. Huygens, CC LXX VIIa (Turnhout, 
1996). 
Guibert of Nogent, Monodiae. 
Guibert of Nogent, Monodiae, ed. E.—R. Labande (Paris, 1981). 
Guibert of Nogent, The autobiography of Guibert, Abbot of Nogent-Sous-Coucy, trans. 
C. C. Swinton Bland (London, 1926). 
J. Benton, Self and Society in Medieval France: The Memoirs of Abbot Guibert of Nogent 
(1064c. 1125) (New York, 1970). 

H. Hagenmeyer ed., Epistulae et Chartae ad Historiam Primi Belli Sacri Spectantes Quae 
Supersunt Aevo Aequales ac Genuinae: Die Kreuzzugsbriefe aus den Jahren 1088-1100 (Inns- 
bruck, 1901). 

Henry of Heimburg, Annales, MGH SS 17, 711-18. 

Henry of Huntingdon, Historia Anglorum, ed. D. Greenway (Oxford, 1996). 

Herman of Reichenau, Chronicon, MGH SS 5, 67-133. 

Herman of Tournai, Liber de Restauratione Monasterii S. Martini Tornacensis, MGH SS 14, 
274-317. 

Hugo Falcandus, Z Regno di Guglielmo I in Sicilia. 

Il Regno di Gughelmo I in Sicilia, ed. G. B. Siragusa (second edition: Palermo, 1929). 
The history of the Tyrants of Sicily, trans. G. A. Loud and T. Wiedemann (Manchester, 1998). 

Ibn al-Athir, al-Kamil fil-ta’kh, Part 1, trans. D. S. Richards (Aldershot, 2006). 

Ibn al-Qalanist, The Damascus Chronicle of the Crusades, trans. H. A. R. Gibb (New York, 
2002). 

Joannes Cinnamus, Epitome rerum ab Ioanne et Alexio Comnenis gestarum. 

Ioannis Cinnami Epitome rerum ab Ioanne et Alexio Comnenis gestarum. 
Corpus Scriptorum Historiae Bzyantinae (Bonn, 1836). 

Joannes Cinnamus, Deeds of John and Manuel Comnenus by John Kinnamos, trans. 
C. M. Brand (New York, 1976). 

John of Salisbury, Metalogicon, ed. J. B. Hall and K. S. B. Keats-Rohan, CC 98 (Brepols, 
1991). 

John of Salisbury, Historia Pontificalis, ed. and trans. M. Chibnall (Oxford, 1986). 

Kemal al-Din, Extraits de la Chronique @Alep, RHC Or. 3, 577—690. 

Lambert of Hersfeld, Opera, ed. O. Holder-Egger (Hanover, 1894). 

Livy, Ab Urbe Condita Tome I and II, ed. and trans. B. O. Foster (Cambridge Mass., 
1976). 

Livy, Ab Urbe Condita Tome IV, ed. J. Bayet, trans. G. Baillet (Paris, 1946). 

Matthew of Edessa, Chronique, RHC Arm. 1, 1-150. 

Mathew Paris, Chronica Matora, V, Rerum Britannicarum medi aevi Scriptores (London, 
1880). 

Odo of Deuil, De Profectione Ludovici VII in Orientem, ed. and trans. V. G. Berry (New 
York, 1948). 

Orderic Vitalis, The Ecclesiastical History, ed. and trans. M. Chibnall, 6 (Oxford, 
1969-79). 

Otto, Bishop of Freising, The Two Cities—a chronicle of universal history to the year 1146 A. 
D. ed. A. P. Evans and C. Knapp, trans. C. C. Mierow (New York, 2002). 

Ovid, Fasti, ed. F Bomer 2 (Heidelberg, 1957-8). 

Ovid, Metamorphoseon, ed. D. E. Bosselaar (Leiden, 1959). 

Paul of Bernried, Vita Gregorii VII papae. 

Vita Gregorù VII papae, ed. J. M. Watterich, Pontificum Romanorum Vitae 1 (Leipzig, 
1862), pp. 474-545. 
Paul of Bernried, The Life of Pope Gregory VII, trans. I. S. Robinson, The Papal Reform 
of the Eleventh Century (Manchester, 2004). 
Peter ‘Tudebode, Historia de Mierosolymitano Itinere. 
Historia de Hierosolymitano Itinere ed. J. H. Hill and L. L. Hill (Paris, 1977). 


304 BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Peter Tudebode, Historia de Hierosolymitana, trans. J. H. Hill and L. L. Hill (Philadelphia, 
1968). 
Ralf of Caen, Gesta Tancredi, RHC Oc. 3, 587-716. 
The Gesta Tancredi of Ralph of Caen, trans. B. S. Bachrach and D. S. Bachrach 
(Aldershot, 2005). 
Raol, De Expugnatione Lyxbonensi, ed. and trans. C. W. David (New York, 2001). 
Raymond of Aguilers, Historia Francorum qui ceperunt Iherusalem. 
Raymond of Aguilers, Historia Francorum qui ceperunt Iherusalem, RHC Oc. 3, 235- 
309. 
Historia Francorum qui ceperunt Iherusalem, ed. John France (unpublished PhD. thesis: 
University of Nottingham, 1967). 
Le ‘Liber’ de Raymond d?Aguilers, ed. J. H. Hill and L. L. Hill (Paris, 1969). 
Raymond of Aguilers, Historia Francorum qui ceperunt Jherusalem, trans. J. H. Hill and 
L. L. Hill (Philadelphia, 1968). 
Robert the Monk, Historia Lherosolimitana. 
Historia Therosolimitana, RHC Oc. 3, 717-882. 
Robert the Monk, History of the First Crusade, trans. C. Sweetenham (Aldershot, 
2005). 
Rudolf of St Trond, Gesta abbatum Trudonensium, MGH SS 10, 227-72. 
Sallust, The War With Jugurtha, ed. and trans. J. C. Rolfe (Cambridge, Mass., 1921). 
Seneca, Ad Lucilium Epistulae Morales, ed. and trans. R. M. Gummere (London, 1920). 
S. Eidelberg ed., The Jews and the Crusaders: the Hebrew chronicles of the first and second 
crusaders (New Jersey, 1996). 
Snorri Sturlason, Heimskringla, ed. E. Monsen, trans. A. H. Smith (New York, 1990). 
Sigebert of Gembloux. Chronographia, MGH SS 6, 300-374. 
A. Thiel, Epistolae Romanorum pontifcum genuinae, | (Braunsberg, 1868). 
Usamah Ibn-Munqidh, Memoirs of an Arab-Syrian Gentleman, trans. P. K. Hitti (Beruit, 
1964). 
Wace, Roman de Rou, trans. G. S. Burgess (Suffolk, 2004). 
Walter the Chancellor, Bella Antiochena. 
Galteru Cancellaru, Bella Antiochena, ed. H. Hagenmeyer (Innsbruck, 1896). 
The Antiochene Wars, ed. and trans. T. S. Asbridge and S. B. Edgington (Aldershot, 
1999). 
William of ‘Tyre, Chronicon. 
Historia Rerum in Partibus Transmarinis Gestarum, RHC Oc. 1, 3-702. 
William, Archbishop of ‘Tyre, A history of deeds done beyond the sea, trans. E. A. Babcock 
and A. C. Krey 2 (New York, 1943). 
Chronicon, ed. R. B. C. Huygens CC 63 (Turnhout, 1986). 
William of Malmesbury: Gesta Regum Anglorum I, ed. and trans. R. A. B. Mynors 
(Oxford, 1998). 


Secondary Works 


P. Alphandeéry, L’Europe et L'idée de Croisades, 2 (Paris, 1954). 

P. Alphandéry and A. Dupront, La Chrétienité et Vidée de croisade, 2 (Paris 1954—9). 

J. C. Andressohn, The Ancestry and Life of Godfrey of Bouillon (Bloomington, 1947). 

L. Arbusow, Liturgie und Geschichtsschrebung im Mittelalter (Bonn, 1951). 

B. Arnold, German Knighthood 1050-1500 (Oxford, 1984). 

T. Asbridge, The First Crusade: A New History (London, 2004). 

N. K. Avallone, Graindor de Douai and reliquary literature of the First Crusade (France), (unpub- 
lished Ph.D. thesis: University of Michigan, 1995). 

D. Baker ed., Medieval Women (Oxford, 1978). 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 305 


M. Balard, B. Z. Kedar and J. Riley-Smith ed. Dei Gesta Per Francos (Aldershot, 
2001). 

P. Bange, ‘The image of women of the nobility in the German chronicles of the tenth 
and eleventh centuries’, A. Davids ed., The Empress Theophano Byzantium and the West 
at the turn of the first millennium (Cambridge, 1995), pp. 150-169. 

M. Barber, Crusaders and Heretics, 12th-14th Centuries (Aldershot, 1995). 

R. Barber, Knight and Chivalry (London, 1970). 

J. Barker, The Tournament in England 1100-1400 (Woodbridge, 2003). 

D. Barthélemy, Les Deux Ages de la seigneurie banale: Pouvoir et société dans terre des sires de 
Coucy (milieu Xie-milieu XII siècle), (Paris, 1984). 

R. Bartlett, Trial by Fire and Water (Oxford, 1986). 

J. S. Beddie, “The Ancient Classics in the Medieval Libraries’, Speculum 5, I (1930), 
pp. 3-20. 

J. Benton, “The Personality of Guibert of Nogent, Pyschoanalytical Review, 57, 4 (1970), 
pp. 563-86. 

A. Berger, Encyclopedic Dictionary of Roman Law (Philadelphia, 1953). 

W. Bernhardi, Konrad II (Leipzig, 1883). 

T. N. Bisson, ‘Nobility and Family in Medieval France: A Review Essay’, French Historical 
Studies 16:3 (1990), 597-613. 

R. Black, Humanism and Education in Medieval and Renaissance Italy, Cambridge University 
Press, (Cambridge, 2001). 

E. O. Blake and C. Morris, ‘A hermit goes to war: Peter and the origins of the First 
Crusade’, Studies in Church History 22 (1984), pp. 79-107. 

M. Bloch, Feudal Society (Chicago, 1961). 

G. Bois, The transformation of the year one thousand (Manchester, 1992). 

R. R. Bolgar, The Classical Heritage and its Beneficiaries (Cambridge, 1954). 

, ed., Classical Influences on European Culture (A.D. 500-1500) (Cambridge, 1971). 

A. Borst, ‘Das Ritterum im Hochmittelalter. Idee und Wirklichkeit, Saeculum 10 (1959), 
pp. 213-231. 

, ed., Das Rittertum im Mittelalter (Darmstadt, 1976). 

J. Brisco, A commentary on Livy books XXXI-XXXIII (Oxford, 1973). 

J. A. Brundage, ‘Adhémar of Puy: The Bishop and his Critics,’ Speculum 34 (1959), 
pp. 201-212. 

—, ‘An Errant Crusader: Stephen of Blois’, Traditio 16 (1960), pp. 380-95. 

——, The Crusades, a documentary survey (Milwaukee, 1962). 

——, ‘The army of the First Crusade and the crusade vow’, Medieval Studies 33 (1971), 
pp. 334-343, 

——., ‘Prostitution, miscegenation and sexual purity in the First Crusade’, Crusade and 
Settlement, ed. P. W. Edbury (Cardiff 1985), pp. 57-65. 

, The Crusades, Holy War and Canon Law (Aldershot, 1991). 

—, Sex, Law and Marriage in the Middle Ages (Aldershot, 1993). 

——, Medieval Canon Law (Harlow, 1995). 

M. Bull, Knightly Piety and the Lay Response to the First Crusade: The Limousin and Gascony, c. 
970-. 1130 (Oxford, 1993). 

, ‘The roots of lay enthusiasm for the First Crusade’, History 78 (1993), pp. 
353-72. 

——., ‘The Capetian monarchy and the early crusade movement: Hugh of Vermandois 
and Louis VIP, Nottingham Medieval Studies 50 (1996), pp. 25—46. 

M. Bull and N. Housley ed., The Experience of Crusading 1: Western Approaches (Cam- 
bridge, 2003). 

V. L. Bullough and B. Bullough, Cross Dressing, Sex and Gender (Philadelphia, 1993). 

M. L. Bulst-Thiele, Sacrae Domus Militiae Templi Hierosolymitani Magistri: Untersuchungen zur 
Geschichtes des Templeordens 1118/9-1314 (Göttingen, 1974), pp. 30—40. 


306 BIBLIOGRAPHY 


J. Bumke, Studien zum Ritterbegriff im 12. und 13. Jahrhundert (Heidelberg, 1977). 

, The Concept of Knighthood in the Middle Ages, trans. W. T. H. and E. Jackson (New 
York, 1982). 

A. Butler, Butler’s Lives of the Saints, April (London, 1999). 

F. Cardini, ‘Profilo d’un crociato, Guglielmo Embriaco’, Archwio Storico Italiano, 136 
(1978), pp. 417-8. 

J. L. Cate, ‘A Gay Crusader,’ Byzantion 16 (1942-3), 503-26. 

J. Charaud, ‘La conception de Phistoire de Guiber de Nogent’, Cahiers de cwilisation 
médiévale, 8 (1965), pp. 381-95. 

R. Chazan, European Jewry and the First Crusade (Berkeley, 1987). 

—, In the year 1096: The First Crusade and the Jews (Philadelphia, 1996). 

C. R. Cheney, A Handbook of Dates (Cambridge, 2000). 

M. Chibnall, The World of Orderic Vitalis (Oxford, 1984). 

L. Clare, La Quintaine, la Course de Bague et le Jue des Tétes (Paris, 1983). 

R. Cohen, ‘An introduction to the First Crusade’, Past and Present 6 (1954), pp. 6-30. 

N. Cohn, The Pursuit of the Millennium (fifth edition: London, 1970). 

G. Constable, “The structure of medieval society according to the dictatores of the twelfth 
century’, Religious Life and Thought XIII (London, 1979), pp. 253-296. 

G. Constable, “he Place of the Magdeburg Charter of 1107/08 in the History of 
Eastern Germany and of the Crusades,’ Vita Religiosa im Mittelalter. Festschrift far Kaspar 
Elm zum 70 Geburtstag ed. F. J. Felten and N. Jaspert (Berlin, 1999), pp. 283-300. 

R. F Cook, ‘Chanson d’Antioche’, Chanson de Geste: le Cycle de la Croisade est-il épique? 
(Amsterdam, 1980). 

Capt. C. Costello, ‘Ireland and the Crusades’, Irish Sword 9, XX XVII (1970), pp. 
263-277. 

J. Coulson ed. The Saints—a Concise Biographical Dictionary (London, 1958). 

M. D. Coupe, “The Personality of Guibert of Nogent Reconsidered,’ Journal of Medieval 
History, 9 (1983), pp. 317-29. 

, ‘Peter the Hermit—A Reassessment’, Nottingham Medieval Studies 31 (1987), pp. 
37-45. 

D. Crouch, The Birth of Nobility (Harlow, 2005). 

E. Curschmann, Hungersnote im Mittelalter (Leipzig, 1900). 

N. Daniel, The Arabs and Mediaeval Europe (London, 1979). 

H. Darnley Naylor, Latin and English idiom—an object lesson from Lwy’s Preface (Cambridge, 
1909). 

C. W. David, Robert Curthose Duke of Normandy (Cambridge, Mass., 1920). 

R. H. C. Davis, The Medieval Warhorse (London, 1989). 

A. Di Berardino ed., Encyclopaedia of the Early Church, 1 (Cambridge, 1992). 

T. A. Dorey ed., Liwy (London, 1971). 

G. Duby, La Société aux XT" et XIT siècles dans la région maconnaise (Paris, 1953). 

—, ‘La Noblesse dans la France médiévale. Une enquête a poursuivre, Revue Hisorique 
226 (1961), pp. 1-22. 

——., ‘Les “jeunes” dans la société aristocratique dans la France du Nord-Ouest au 
XIF siècle, Annales: Economies, Sociétés, Civilisations 19, V (1964), pp. 835-846. 

——, ‘Les Origines de la chevalerie, Ordinamenti militari in occidente nell’alto medioevo, 2 
(Spoleto, 1968). 7 

——, Hommes et Structures du Moyen Age (Paris, 1973). 

——., The Chivalrous Society, trans. C. Postan (Berkley, 1977). 

——., The Three Orders, Feudal Society Imagined (London, 1980). 

——., Women of the Twelfth Century, 1: Eleanor of Aquitaine and six others, trans. J. Birrell 
(Cambridge, 1997). 

, Women of the Twelfth Century, 3: Eve and the Church, trans. J. Birrell (Cambridge, 
1998). 

—, William Marshal—The Flower of Chivalry, trans. R. Howard (London, 1986). 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 307 


C. Duggan, Twelfth Century Decretal Collections (London, 1963). 

F Duncalf, ‘The Peasants’ Crusade’, American Historical Review 26 (1920/1), pp. 
440-453. 

——, ‘The councils of Piacenza and Clermont’, A History of the Crusades, ed. Setton, 
1 (Madison, 1969), pp. 220-52. 

C. EF Du Cange, Glossarium mediae et infimae Latinitatis, V1, (Paris, 1938). 

S. Duparc-Quioc, ‘La Composition de la Chanson d’Antioche’, Romania 83 (1962), pp. 
1-29 and 210-47. 

P. Edbury and J. Phillips, The Experience of Crusading 2: Defining the Crusader Kingdom 
(Cambridge, 2003). 

P. W. Edbury and J. G. Rowe ed., William of Tyre, Historian of the Latin East (Cambridge, 
1988). 

P. W. Edbury ed., Crusade and Settlement (Cardiff, 1985). 

S. B. Edgington, ‘Albert of Aachen reappraised’, From Clermont to Jerusalem ed. A. V. 
Murray (Turnhout, 1998), pp. 55-68. 

, ‘The First Crusade: Reviewing the Evidence’, The First Crusade, Origins and Impact, 

ed. J. Phillips (Manchester, 1997) pp. 55-77. 

, ‘Sont cou ore les fems que jo voi la venir? Women in the Chanson d’Antioche’, in Gendering 
the Crusades, ed. S. B. Edgington and S. Lambert (Cardiff, 2001), pp. 154-62. 

S. B. Edgington and S. Lambert ed., Gendering the Crusades (Cardiff, 2001). 

L. G. Edwards, ‘Joan of Arc: Gender and Authority in the text of the Trial of Con- 
demnation’, Young Medieval Women ed. K. J. Lewis, N. J. Menuge and K. M. Phillips 
(Stroud, 1999), pp. 133-152. 

R. Ellenblum, Frankish Rural Settlement in the Latin Kingdom of Jerusalem (Cambridge, 
1998). 

V. Epp, Fulcher von Chartres (Dusseldorf, 1990). 

C. Erdmann, The Origin of the Idea of Crusade, trans. M. W. Baldwin and W. Goffart 
(Princeton, 1977). 

A. Ernout and A. Meillet ed., Dictionnaire étymologique de la langue Latine (third edition: 
Paris, 1951). 

D. Farmer, Oxford Dictionary of Saints (Oxford, 1997). 

S. Farmer, ‘Persuasive Voices: Clerical Images of Medieval Wives’, Speculum, 61, IH 
(1986), pp. 517-543. 

S. C. Ferruolo, The Origins of the University (Standford, 1985). 

J. Fleckenstein, ‘Zum Problem der Abschliessung des Ritterstandes,’ Historische Forschungen 
Jür Walter Schlesinger, ed. H. Beumann (Koln, 1974), pp. 252-71. 

D. Fleming, ‘Landholding by milites in Domesday Book: A Revision’, Anglo-Norman 
Studies 13 (1990), 83-98. 

H. S. Fink, “The Foundation of the Latin States, 1099-1118,’ K. M. Setton ed. A 
History of the Crusades | (Philadelphia, 1955), pp. 368-409. 

J. Flori, Pierre ’Ermite et la Premiére Croisade (Paris, 1999). 

, Knightly Society’, The New Cambridge Medieval History IV c. 1024-1198, ed. D. Lus- 

combe and J. Riley-Smith, 2 (Cambridge, 2004), I, 148-184. 

, Ideology and Motivations in the First Crusade’ in H. Nicholson ed., The Crusades 
(Basingstoke, 2005), pp. 15-36. 

J. Folda, The Art of the Crusaders in the Holy Land 1098-1187 (Cambridge, 1995). 

R. Foreville, ‘Un chef de la première croisade: Arnulf Malecouronne,’ Bulletin Philologique 
et Historique du Comité des Travaux Historiques et Scientifiques (1953-4), pp. 377-90. 

J. France, “The crisis of the First Crusade: from the defeat of Kerbogha to the departure 
from Arqa’, Byzantion, 40 (1970), pp. 276-308. 

, An Unknown Account of the Capture of Jerusalem’, English Historical Review 
87 (1972), pp. 771-783. 

——, ‘The election and title of Godfrey de Bouillon’, Canadian Journal of History 18 
(1983). 


308 BIBLIOGRAPHY 


——, Victory in the East. A military history of the First Crusade (Cambridge, 1994). 

——, ‘The Use of the Anonymous Gesta Francorum in the Early ‘Twelfth—Century 
Sources for the First Crusade’, From Clermont to Jerusalem. The Crusades and Crusader 
Societies 1095-1500, ed. A. V. Murray (Turnhout, 1998), pp. 29-42. 

, Western Warfare in the Age of the Crusades, 1100-1300 (London, 1999). 

J. France and W. G. Zajac ed., The Crusades and their sources: Essays Presented to Bernard 
Hamilton (Aldershot, 1998). 

H. Fuhrmann, Germany in the High Middle Ages c.1050—1200, trans. T. Reuter, Cambridge 
University Press (Cambridge, 1986). 

E Gabrieli, Arab Historians of the Crusades (London, 1969). 

J. G. Gavigan, “The Syntax of the Gesta Francorum, Language 19, III (1943), pp. 10-102. 

S. Geldsetzer, Frauen auf Kreuzziigen, 1096-1291 (Darmstadt, 2003). 

M. Gervers and J. M. Powell ed., Tolerance and Intolerance—Social Conflict in the Age of the 
Crusades (New York, 2001). 

E. Gibbon, The Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire, 6 (Everyman’s Library reprint: 
London, 1994). 

J. Gillingham, “Thegns and Knights in Eleventh Century England: Who then was the 
Gentleman?’ Transactions of the Royal Historical Society 6:5 (1995), 129-153. 

S. D. Goitein, “Contemporary Letters on the Capture of Jerusalem by the Crusaders’, 
The Journal Of Jewish Studies, 3, No. 4 (1952), pp. 162-177. 

M. Goodich, S. Menache and S. Schein, ed. Cross Cultural Convergences in the Crusader 
Period (New York, 1999). 

A. Grabois, ‘Anglo-Norman England and the Holy Land’, Anglo-Norman Studies 7, ed. 
R. Allen Brown (Woodbridge, 1985), pp. 132-141. 

A. Gransden, Historical Writing in England c. 550-1307 (London, 1974). 

A. Gywnn, ‘Ireland and the continent in the eleventh century’, Irish Historical Studies 
9, XXXI (1953), pp. 193-216. 

H. Hagenmeyer, Peter der Eremite (Leipzig, 1879). 

—, Chronologie de la Premiére Croisade 1094-1100, (Hildesheim, 1973). 

B. Hamilton, “The Elephant of Christ: Reynald of Chatillon’, Studies in Church History 
15 (Oxford, 1978), pp. 97—108. 

——,, ‘Women in the Crusader States: the Queens of Jerusalem (1 100-1190)’, Medieval 
Women, ed. D. Baker (Oxford, 1978). 

, Monastic Reform, Catharism and Crusades (London, 1979). 

—, The Latin Church in the Crusader States (London, 1980). 

—, Religion in the Medieval West (London, 1986). 

——., The Leper King and His Heirs (Cambridge, 2000). 

—, The Christian World of the Middle Ages (Stroud, 2003). 

N. M. Haring, ‘Hilary of Orleans and his letter collection’, Studi Medievali, Series 3a 
XIV (1973), pp. 1069-1122. 

A. Havercamp ed., Juden und Christen zur eit der Krezziige (Sigmaringen, 1999). 

D. Hay, ‘Gender Bias and Religious Intolerance in Accounts of the “Massacres” of 
the First Crusade’, in Tolerance and Intolerance—Social Conflict in the Age of the Crusades, 
ed. M. Gervers and J. M. Powell (New York, 2001), pp. 3—10. 

J. H. Hill and L. L. Hill, “The Convention of Alexius Comneus and Raymond of 
Saint—Giles’, American Historical Review, 58 (1953), pp. 322-7. 

, Raymond IV, Count of Toulouse (Syracuse, 1962). 

N. Hodgson, “The Role of Kerbogha’s Mother in the Gesta Francorum and Selected 
Chronicles of the First Crusade’, Gendering the Crusades, ed. S. B. Edgington and 
S. Lambert (Cardiff, 2001), pp. 163-176. 

—, ‘Nobility, Women and Historical Narratives of the Crusades and the Latin East’, 
Al-Masaq, 17, 1, (2005), pp. 61-85. 

P. M. Holt, The Crusader States and Their Neighbours (Harlow, 2004). 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 309 


N. Housely, Contesting the Crusades (Oxford, 2006). 

E. Van Houts, The Normans in Europe (Manchester, 2000). 

R. Hiils, Aardinéle, Klerus and Kirchen Roms (Biblothek des Deutschen Historischen Instuits 
in Rom 48: Tubingen, 1977). 

R. B. C. Huygens, ‘Guillaume de Tyre étudiant. Un chapitre (xix.12) de son Histoire 
retrouvé’, Latomus xxi (1962), pp. 811-829. 

, Editing William of Tyre’, Sacris Erudiri 27 (1984), pp. 461—473. 

P. Ch. Jacobsen, Albert von Aachen, Lexicon des Mittelalters 1, (Munich, 1977), pp. 286-7. 

C. S. Jaeger, The Envy of Angels: Cathedral Schools and social ideals in Medieval Europe 
950-1200 (Philadelphia, 1994). 

P. Jaflé, ed., Regesta Pontificum Romanorum (second edition: Leipzig, 1885). 

C. Jockle, Encyclopaedia of Saints (London, 1997). 

J. Johrendt, Milites und Militia im 11. Jahrhundert. Untersuchung zur Frühgeschichte des Ritter- 
tums in Frankreich und Deutschland (unpublished Ph.D. dissertation: Erlangen-Nürnberg, 
1971): 

A. Jotischky, Crusading and the Crusader States (Harlow, 2005). 

Karl Marx, ‘The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte’ in Karl Marx and Frederick 
Engels, Collected Works (London, 1979) XI, 99-197. 

R. M. Karras, From Boys to Men (Philadelphia, 2003). 

B. Z. Kedar ed., The Horns of HattUn (Jerusalem, 1992). 

H. Kennedy, Crusader Castles (Gambridge, 1994). 

M. M. Knappen, ‘Robert I of Flanders in the First Crusade,’ The Crusades and Other 
Historical Essays Presented to Dana C. Munro, ed. L. J. Paetow (New York, 1928), pp. 
79-100. 

P. Knoch, Studien zu Albert von Aachen (Stuttgart, 1966). 

V. A. Kolve, ‘Ganymede/Son of Getron: Medieval Monasticism and the Drama of Same- 
Sex Desire’, Speculum, 73, IV, (Oct. 1998), pp. 1014-1067. 

C. Kostick, ‘William of Tyre, Livy, and the Vocabulary of Class,’ Journal of History of 
Ideas, 65, 3 (2004), pp. 353-368. 

, ‘Women and the First Crusade: prostitutes or pilgrims?’ Studies on Medieval and 
Early Modern Women 4: Victims or Viragos? ed. C. Meek and C. Lawless (Dublin, 2005), 
pp. 57-68. 

——, “The terms milites, equites and equestres in the early crusading histories’, 
M. Jones (ed.), Nottingham Medieval Studies, 50 (2006), pp. 1-21. 

A. C. Krey, The First Crusade: The Accounts of Eyewitnesses and Participants (Princeton, 
1921). 

——., ‘A neglected passage in the Gesta and its bearing on the literature of the First 
Crusade’, The Crusades and other historical essays presented to Dana C. Munro, ed. L. J. 
Paetow (New York, 1928), pp. 57—76. 

, William of Tyre, the making of an historian in the Middle Ages’, Speculum, 16, 
II (April 1941), pp. 149-166. 

B. Kugler, Studien zur Geschichte des weiten Kreuzzuges, Adolf M. Hakkert (reprint of 1866 
edition: Amsterdam, 1973). 

M. Lambert, Medieval Heresy—Popular Movements from the Gregorian Reform to the Reformation 
(third edition: Oxford, 1992). 

J. L. La Monte, Feudal Monarchy in the Latin Kingdom of Jerusalem 1100-1291 (Cambridge 
Mass., 1932). 

, ‘The Lords of Le Puiset on the Crusades’, Speculum, 17, I (1942), pp. 100— 
118. 

J. Le Goff} Time, Work and Culture in the Middle Ages, trans. A. Goldhammer (Chicago, 
1980). 

A. Leon, The Jewish Question (New York, 1970). 

C. T. Lewis and C. Short, A Latin Dictionary (new impression: Oxford, 1987). 


310 BIBLIOGRAPHY 


K. J. Lewis, N. J. Menuge and K. M. Phillips ed., Young Medieval Women (Stroud, 
1999). 

K. Leyser, ‘Money and Supplies on the First Crusade,’ Communications and Power in 
Medieval Europe: the Gregorian Revolution and beyond, ed. and trans. T. Reuter (London, 
1994), pp. 77-96. 

Peter Lock, The Routledge Companion to the Crusades (Abingdon, 2006). 

G. A. Loud, The Age of Robert Guiscard: Southern Italy and the Norman Conquest (Harlow, 
2000). 

D. Luscombe and J. Riley-Smith ed., The New Cambridge Medieval History IV c. 1024- 
1198, 2 (Cambridge, 2004). | 

P. Van Luyn, ‘Les Milites du XI* Siècle’, Le Moyen Age, 77, 1 and 2 (1977), pp. 5-51 
and 193-238. 

A. Maalouf, The Crusades through Arab Eyes (London, 1984). 

T. F Madden, The Crusades—The essential readings (Oxford, 2002). 

C. T. Maier, “The role of women in the crusade movement: a survey,’ Journal of Medieval 
History, 30, I (2004), pp. 61-82. 

D. Malkiel, ‘Destruction and Conversion: Intention and Reaction, Crusaders and Jews 
in 1096’, Jewish History, 15, (2001), pp. 257-80. 

, “The underclass in the First Crusade: a historiographical trend,’ Journal of Medieval 

History, 28, II (2002), pp. 169-197. 

, Jewish—Christian relations in Europe, 840-1096’, Journal of Medieval History 
29, I (2003), pp. 55-83. 

C. Marshall, “The crusading motivation of the Italian city republics in the Latin East, 
1096-1104, in M. Bull and N. Housley ed., The Experience of Crusading 1: Western 
Approaches (Cambridge, 2003), pp. 60-79. 

E. Matthews Sanford, “The Study of Ancient History in the Middle Ages’, Journal of 
the History of Ideas, 5, I (Jan. 1944), pp. 21-43. 

H. E. Mayer, Mélanges sur Vhistoire du royaume latin de Jérusalem, Mémoires de l’Académie 
des Inscriptions et Belles-Lettres, n.s. 5 (Paris, 1984). 

, ‘The Origins of the Lordship of Ramla and Lydda in the Latin Kingdom of 

Jerusalem’, Speculum 60.3 (1985), pp. 537-552. 

, The Crusades (seventh edition: Oxford, 1993). 

W. FE Marmion, ‘Were there any Irish Names among the First Crusaders?’, Jrish Roots 
29 (1999), pp. 18-19. 

M. McMullen and C. Stoltenow, Ergot (Fargo, 2002). 

C. E. Meek and M. K. Simms ed., The fragility of her sex?-—Medieval Irish Women in their 
European Context (Dublin, 1996). 

C. E. Meek and C. Lawless ed., Studies on Medieval and Early Modern Women 4: Victims 
or Viragos? (Dublin, 2005). 

H. Melberg, Origin of the Scandinavian Nations and Languages (Halden, 1951). 

G. Miccoli, ‘Ecclesiae primitivae forma’ Studi Medievali, II, 3a (1960), pp. 470—498. 

J. S. Moore, ‘Domesday Slavery’, Anglo-Norman Studies XI (1989), pp. 191-220. 

R. I. Moore, The Birth of Popular Heresy (London, 1975). 

—, The formation of a persecuting society (Oxford, 1987). 

—, The First European Revolution (Oxford, 2000). 

M. R. Morgan, The Chronicle of Ernoul and the Continuations of William of Tyre (Oxford, 
1973). 

C. Morris, The Discovery of the Individual 1050-1200 (London, 1972). 

——., ‘Equestris Ordo: Chivalry as a Vocation in the Twelfth Century’, Studies in Church 
History 15 (1978), pp. 87-96. 

, ‘Policy and Visions—The case of the Holy Lance at Antioch’ War and Government 

in the Middle Ages: essays in honour of J. O. Prestwich, ed. J. Gillingham and J. C. Holt 

(Woodbridge, 1984), pp. 33-45. 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 311 


——., ‘The aims and spirituality of the crusade as seen through the eyes of Albert of 
Aix’, Reading Medieval Studies, 16 (1990), pp. 99-117. 

, “The Gesta Francorum as narrative history’, Reading Medieval Studies, 19 (1993), 
pp. 55-71. 

D. C. Munro, “The speech of Pope Urban II at Clermont, 1095’, American Historical 
Review 11 (1905-6), pp. 231-42. 

, A Crusader’, Speculum 7 (1932), pp. 321-335. 

—, ‘Papal Proclamation of the Crusade’, The Crusades ed. J. A. Brundage, (Milwau- 
kee, 1964), pp. 7-11. 

——, Urban and the Crusaders, Translations and Reprints from the Original Sources of European 
History, 1, II (Philadelphia, 1985). 

B. Munk Olsen, L’Etude Des Auteurs Classiques Latins Aux XT Et XIT Siècles (Paris, 1985). 

P. Munz, Frederick Barbarossa—A Study In Medieval Politics (New York, 1969). 

A. V. Murray, “The Title of Godfrey of Bouillon as Ruler of Jerusalem,’ Collegium 
Medievale, 3 (1990). 

, ‘The Army of Godfrey of Bouillon’, Revue Belge de Philologie et d'Histoire, 70 (1992), 
pp. 301-29. 

——, ‘Bibliography of the First Crusade’, From Clermont to Jerusalem. The Crusades and 
Crusader Societies 1095-1500, ed. A. V. Murray (Turnhout, 1998), pp. 267-310. 

, ed., From Clermont to Jerusalem. The Crusades and Crusader Societies 1095-1500 
(Turnhout, 1998). 

——., The Crusader Kingdom of Jerusalem, A Dynastic History 1099-1125 (Oxford, 2000). 

M. Nader, Burgesses and the burgess law in the Latin Kingdom of Jerusalem and Cyprus 
(1099-1325) (Aldershot, 2006). 

H. Nicholson ed., The Crusades (Basingstoke, 2005). 

R. L. Nicholson, Tancred: a study of his Career and Work in their Relation to the First Crusade 
and the Establishment of the Latin States in Syria and Palestine (Chicago, 1940). 

J. E Niermeyer, Medwal Latin Dictionary, 2 (second edition: Leiden, 2002). 

D. Nirenberg, Communities of Violence (Princeton, 1996). 

P. Noble, ‘Attitudes to Social Class as Revealed by Some of the Older Chansons de 
Geste, Romania 94 (1973), 359-85. 

S. P. Oakely, A Commentary on Livy books 6-10, Oxford University Press (Oxford, 1997). 

Hans Oehler, ‘Studien zu den Gesta Francorum’, Mittellateinisches Jahrbuch, 6 (1970), 
58-97. 

R. M. Ogilvie, A Commentary on Livy books 1—5, Clarendon Press (Oxford, 1965). 

M. Pacaut, Frederick Barbarossa, trans. A. J. Pomerans (London, 1970). 

L. J. Paetow ed., The Crusades and Other Historical Essays presented to Dana C. Munro by his 
Former Students (New York, 1928). 

D. W. Packard, A concordance to Livy (Cambridge Mass., 1968). 

N. L. Paul, “Crusade, memory and regional politics in twelfth-century Amboise’, Journal 
of Medieval History, 31.2 (June 2005), pp. 127-41. 

Jean—Pierre Poly and E. Bournazel, The Feudal Transformation, 900-1200 (London, 
1991). 

E. Peters ed., The First Crusade: The Chronicle of Fulcher of Chartres and other source material 
(Pennsylvania, 1998). 

J. Phillips ed., The First Crusade: Origins and impact (Manchester, 1997). 

, Defenders of the Holy Land—Relations between the Latin East and the West (1119-1187) 
(Oxford, 1996). 

——., The Crusades, 1095-1197 (Edinburgh, 2002). 

J. Phillips and M. Hoch, ed., The Second Crusade—Scope and Consequences (Manchester, 
2001). 

W. Porges, “The Clergy, the Poor and the Non-Combatants on the First Crusade,’ 
Speculum 21 (1946), pp. 1-21. 


312 BIBLIOGRAPHY 


J. Prawer, The Latin Kingdom of Jerusalem: European Colonisation in the Middle Ages (London, 
1972). 

——, Crusader Institutions (Oxford, 1980). 

——, ‘Social classes in the crusader states: the “minorities”’, A history of the crusades ed. 
K. M. Setton, 5: The impact of the Crusades on the Near East ed. N. P. Zacour and H. 
W. Hazard (second edition: Madison 1985), pp. 59-115. 

——, ‘Social classes in the Latin Kingdom: the Franks, A history of the crusades ed. K. 
M. Setton, 5: The impact of the Crusades on the Near East ed. N. P. Zacour and 
H. W. Hazard (second edition: Madison 1985), pp. 116-192. 

J. O. Prestwich, ‘War and Finance in the Anglo-Norman State,’ Transactions of the Royal 
Historical Society, 5th Series, 4 (1954), pp. 19-44. 

E J. E. Raby, A History of Secular Latin Poetry in the Middle Ages, 2 (Oxford, 1997). 

R. S. Rail, Life in the Medieval Unwersity (Cambridge, 1912). 

W. M. Ramsay, The Historical Geography of Asia Minor (London, 1890). 

T. Reuter ed., The Medieval Nobility: Studies in the Ruling Classes of France and Germany fiom 
the Sixth to the Twelfth Centuries (Amsterdam, 1979). 

S. Reynolds, Medieval Reading (Cambridge, 1996). 

J. Richard, ‘La confrérie de la première croisade’, Etudes de Civilisation Médiéval: Mélanges 
Offerts à E. R. Labande, ed. B. Jeannau (Poitiers, 1974), pp. 617-22. 

—, The Latin Kingdom of Jerusalem, trans. J. Shilley (Amsterdam, 1979). 

——., The Crusades c. 1071-c. 1291 (Cambridge, 1999). 

H. de Ridder—Symoens, ed., A History of the University in Europe, 1, Unwersities in the 
Middle Ages (Cambridge, 1992). 

S. J. Ridyard ed., The Medieval Crusade (Woodbridge, 2004). 

S. H. Rigby, ‘Historical Materialism: Social Structure and Social Change in the Middle 
Ages’, The Journal of Medieval and Early Modern Studies 34, ITI (2004), pp. 473-522. 

J. Riley-Smith, The Feudal Nobility and the Kingdom of Jerusalem 1174-1277 (London, 
1973). 

——, What were the crusades? (London, 1977). 

——, ‘The title of Godfrey of Bouillon’, Bulletin of the Institute of Historical Research 52 
(1979). 

——., ‘The motives of the earliest crusaders and the settlement of Latin Palestine, 
1095-1100’, English Historical Review 98 (1983), pp. 721-736. 

——, ‘The First Crusade and the Persecution of the Jews’, Studies in Church History 21 
(1984), pp. 51-72. 

—, The First Crusade and the Idea of Crusading (London, 1986). 

——., The First Crusaders 1095-1131 (Cambridge, 1997). 

——., The Oxford History of the Crusades (Oxford, 1999). 

——, ‘Christian Violence and the Crusades,’ A. Sapir Abulafia, ed., Religious Violence 
between Christians and Jews: Medieval Roots, Modern Perspectwes (New York, 2002), pp. 
3-20. 

——., ‘The Crusades 1095-1198’, The New Cambridge Medieval History IV c. 1024- 
1198, ed. D. Luscombe and J. Riley-Smith, 2 (Cambridge, 2004) I, 534-563. 

L. and J. Riley-Smith, The Crusades, Idea and Reality, 1095-1274 (London, 1981). 

I. S. Robinson, ‘Gregory VII and the Soldiers of Christ’, History LVIII (1973), pp. 
169-192. 

——, Authority and resistance in the Investiture Contest (Manchester, 1978). 

——., ‘Eine unbekannte Streitschrift über die Salevamento von Exkommuniziesten im 
Münchener Kodex lat. 618’, Studi Gregoriani 11 (1978), pp. 297-395. 

—, The Papacy 10738-1198 Continuity and Innovation (Cambridge, 1990). 

——, Henry IV of Germany, 1056-1106 (Cambridge, 1999). 

—, The Papal Reform of the Eleventh Century (Manchester, 2004). 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 313 


R. Rogers, ‘Peter Bartholomew and the Role of “The Poor” in the First Crusade’, 
Warriors and Churchmen in the High Middle Ages, ed. T. Reuter (London, 1992), pp. 
109-122. 

L. Roos, ‘God Wants It’, The Ideology of Martyrdom of the Hebrew Crusade Chronicles and Its 
Jewish and Christan Background (Uppsala, 2003). 

M. Rouche, ‘Cannibalisme sacré chez les croisés populaires’, Y. M. Hilaire ed. in la 
Réligion Populaire (Paris, 1981), pp. 56-69. 

P. Rousset, Les Origines et Les Caractéres de la Premiere Croisade (Geneva, 1945). 

J. Rubenstein, Guibert of Nogent: Portrait of a Medieval Mind (New York, 2002). 

, ‘How, or How Much, to Reevaluate Peter the Hermit’, in S. J. Ridyard ed., The 

Medieval Crusade (Woodbridge, 2004), pp. 53-70. 

, ‘Putting History to Use: Three Crusading Chronicles in Context’, Viator 35 
(2004), pp. 131-168. 

——., ‘What is the Gesta Francorum, and who was Peter Tudebode?’ Revue Mabillon 16 
(2005), 179-204. 

S. Runciman, A History of the Crusades, 3 (fifth edition: London, 1991). 

——,, ‘The Holy Lance Found At Antioch’, Analecta Bollandiana 68 (1950), pp. 197— 
205. 

J. Scammell, “The Formation of the English Social Structure: Freedom, Knights and 
Gentry, 1066-1300’, Speculum 68:3 (1993), 591-618. 

J. G. Schenk, The Use of Rhetoric, Biblical Exegesis and Polemic in Guibert of Nogent’s ‘Gesta 
Dei per Francos’ (unpublished Masters thesis: TCD, 2001). 

K. M. Setton gen. ed., A History of the Crusades, 6 (second edition: Madison, 1969—1989). 

S. Shahar, Childhood in the Middle Ages (London, 1992). 

A. N. Sherwin-White, The Roman Citizenship (Oxford, 1939). 

E. Siberry, Criticism of Crusading, 1095-1274 (Oxford, 1985). 

M. A. Signer and J. Van Engen ed., Jews and Christians in Twelfth Century Europe (Notre 
Dame, 2001). 

B. Smalley, Historians in the Middle Ages (London, 1974). 

R. Somerville, The Councils of Urban IT, 1, Decreta Claromontensia (Amsterdam, 1972). 

, ‘The council of Clermont and the First Crusade’, Studia Gratiana 20 (1976), pp. 
323-37. 

——, Pope Alexander III and the Council of Tours (Los Angeles, 1977). 

L. A. M. Sumberg, “The “Tafurs” and the First Crusade’, Mediaeval Studies 21 (1951), 
pp. 224-246. 

J. Sumption, Pilgrimage (paperback edition: London, 2002). 

R. Syme, The Roman Revolution (Oxford, 1939). 

G. Tellenbach, The Church in Western Europe From the Tenth to the Early Twelfth Century 
(Cambridge, 1993). 

R. Thomson, ‘William of Malmesbury, historian of Crusade’, Reading Medieval Studies 
23 (1997), pp. 121-134. 

H. Tillmann, Pope Innocent II (Amsterdam, 1980). 

C. Tyerman, ‘Who Went on the Crusades?’ in B. Z. Kedar ed., The Horns of Hattin 
(Jerusalem, 1992), pp. 14—26. 

, The Invention of the Crusades (London, 1998). 

——., Fighting for Christendom (Oxford, 2004). 

W. Ullmann, The Papacy and Political Ideas in the Middle Ages (London, 1976). 

D. W. T. C. Vessey, ‘Wiliam of Tyre and the Art of Historiography’ Mediaeval Studies, 
35 (1973), pp. 433-455. 

W. Wattenbach, Deutschlands Geschichtsquellen im Mittelalter, 1 (Tübingen, 1948). 

C. C. J. Webb, John of Salisbury (New York, 1971). 

J. M. van Winter, Ridderschap. Ideal en werkelykheit (Bussum, 1965). 


314 BIBLIOGRAPHY 


I. Wood and G. A. Loud ed., Church and Chronicle in the Middle Ages (London, 1991). 

K. B. Wolf, ‘Crusade and narrative: Bohemond and the Gesta Francorum’, Journal of 
Medieval History 17, TI (1991), pp. 207-216. 

R. B. Yewdale, Bohemond I, Prince of Antioch (New York, 1924). 

W. G. Zajac, ‘Captured property on the First Crusade’, The First Crusade, Origins and 
Impact, ed. J. Phillips (Manchester 1997), pp. 153-180. 

B. Z. Zedar, J. Riley-Smith & R. Hiestand ed., Montjoie: Studies in Crusade History in 
Honour of Hans Eberhard Mayer (Aldershot, 1997). 


INDEX 


Aachen 51, 92, 201 

Aaron 56, 250, 253 

Achard of Montmerle 
210-11, 215 

Adela of Blois 253 

Adelbero, archdeacon of the Church of 
Metz 277 

Adémar, bishop of Le Puy 14, 15, 
19, 20, 27, 29, 35, 56, 96, 119, 120, 
122, 123, 134, 145, 147, 148, 152, 
169, 209, 216, 223, 227, 230-1, 240, 
244-8, 255, 257, 258, 259, 261, 268, 
281, 282, 288 
death 1 August 1098 14, 26, 71, 75, 

79, 83, 87, 99, 128, 133-4, 214 

adolescentes 201-6 

Advocate of the Holy Sepulchre 11 

agricolae 46, 156 

al-Afdal, vizier of Egypt 10, 22, 32, 
35, 47, 68, 71, 85, 165, 182, 188, 200 

Albara 136, 163, 259 
bishop of, see Peter of Narbonne 

al-Batrin 195 

Alberic of Normandy 13 

Albert Apostle, knight 177 

Albert of Aachen 5, 8, 13, 84-93, 95, 
106, 107, 108, 109-110, 111-2, 114, 
116, 118, 119, 125, 127, 128, 129, 
133, 135-6, 142, 145, 146, 149-50, 
153, 174-80, 191, 197, 198, 201-6, 
210-11, 214-5, 219, 229-34, 246, 
248, 249, 250-2, 253, 254, 260, 261, 
266, 271-2, 273, 274, 276, 277, 279, 
281, 282, 283 

Albert of Biandrate 202 

Alexander, chaplain to Stephen of 
Blois 245 

Alexios I Comnenus, Byzantine 
emperor 18, 31, 59, 61, 70, 72, 84, 
111, 112, 113, 117, 118, 135, 138, 
147, 161, 191, 204, 212, 222, 227, 
232, 239, 254-5, 258, 261, 262 

al-Farama 161 

al-Mustali 32n, 188 

Amalfi 21, 77 

Amboise, family 52 

Ambrose, bishop of Milan 76, 90, 
107, 125, 214 


18, 63, 150, 


Amiens 199 
Anastasia, saint 284 
ancillae 86, 87, 112 
Anderson, Perry 2 
Andrew, saint 26, 34, 122, 123, 134-5, 
137, 139, 143-4, 146, 149, 252, 279 
Anglo-Saxon Chronicle 101, 105, 273-4 
Anna Comnena 120, 274 
Annals of Augsburg 105, 274 
Annals of Disibodenberg 283-5 
Annals of Genoa 55 
Annals of Hildesheim 101 
Annals of Prague 101 
Annals of Rosenfeld 101 
Annals of St Blaisen 101 
Annals of the Four Masters 
Annals of Würzburg 101 
Anselm II of Ribemont 268 
Antioch 5, 9, 10, 22, 25, 26, 29, 30, 
37, 49, 59, 62, 67, 77, 79, 82, 87, 
89, 92, 109, 110, 113, 120, 125, 126, 
128, 131, 132, 134, 136, 138, 141, 
143, 145, 147, 157, 162, 168, 171, 
183, 190, 192, 198, 203, 212, 220, 
225, 230, 232, 233, 235, 239, 248, 
249, 252, 254, 256, 258, 260, 261, 
263, 264, 266, 268, 294, 295 
battle 6 March 1098 5, 32, 189 
battle 28 June 1098 10, 20, 61, 80, 
90, 96, 128-30, 131, 162, 169, 
180, 182, 191, 194-5, 203, 204, 
205, 207, 210, 212, 218, 223, 227, 
247, 249, 255, 262, 267 
capture 3 June 1098 65, 67, 114, 
115, 117, 118, 119, 168, 169, 184, 
189, 190, 194, 195, 207, 208, 212, 
237, 247, 262 
siege 17, 21, 25, 32, 46, 48, 55, 
58, 60, 63, 65, 68, 71, 76, 88, 90, 
92, 96, 113-7, 121, 126, 127, 138, 
180, 182, 184, 188, 193, 197, 209, 
213, 214, 216, 223, 224, 227, 231, 
237, 239, 240, 246, 247, 257, 263, 
266, 276, 277, 279 
Antiochus IV Epiphanes 
Apt, bishop of 136, 145 
armigeri 47, 48, 73, 166, 168, 182 
Arm of St George 11 


100-1 


243 


316 INDEX 
Arnulf, bishop of Mirtirano 243-4 Bethlehem 259, 264 
Arnulf of Choques, chaplain to Robert Blake, E. O. 106, 280 


of Normandy, later Patriarch of 
Jerusalem 12, 124, 145-6, 154, 206, 
243-4, 245, 266, 268 
Arnulf II of Oudenaarde 
204 
Arpin, knight 177 


177, 201, 


‘Arqa 97, 142-9, 157, 256 
Arsuf 201, 215 

artifices 36, 151 

artisans 1, 36-7, 151 
Asbridge, Thomas 288 
Ascalon 49 


battle 12 August 1099 10, 22, 28, 
30, 35, 72, 85, 90-1, 143, 168, 
200, 223, 227, 237, 267, 268 

Aubrey of Grandmesnil 119 
Augustine of Hippo 76 


Bagrat 136 

Baldric of Dol 5, 52-65, 67, 74, 75, 
91, 107, 111, 113, 115, 117, 132, 
143, 151, 153, 155, 162, 171, 180-1, 
215-6, 236-8, 243, 249-50, 273 

Baldwin of Boulogne (Baldwin I of 
Jerusalem) 13, 40, 42, 43, 46, 47, 
48, 55, 76, 87, 91-2, 126, 136, 161, 
164, 174, 177, 178, 182, 190, 204, 
206, 207, 212, 215, 218, 228, 229, 
230-1, 232, 239, 264-6, 276, 288, 
297 

Baldwin of Bourcq (Baldwin II of 
Jerusalem) 42, 43, 48, 49, 50, 161, 
177, 180, 202-3, 205, 215, 264, 268, 
277 

Baldwin of Grandpré 177 

Baldwin I of Mons, count of Hainault 
48, 268 

Baldwin of Tahun 176 

Barabas 36 

barones 228, 254 

‘Barons’ Crusade’ 228 

Bartolf of Nangi 41 

Basle 66 

Beauvais 74 

Beit-Jibrin 155 

Belek see Nir al-Daulah Belek 

Bernard Atto, viscount of Béziers 209 

Bernard of St Valéry 208 

Bernold of St Blaisen (Constance) 93, 
100, 246, 283-5 

Berwold, knight 176 

Besly, Jean 23 


Bohemond I of Taranto 9, 11, 16, 20, 
21, 22, 29, 35, 39, 51, 55, 57, 59, 60, 
61, 63, 64, 65, 67, 76, 77, 83, 111, 
115, 119, 124, 125, 127, 134, 136, 
138, 147, 162, 164, 168, 169-70, 
173, 182, 183, 190, 194, 196-7, 204, 
206, 216, 218, 223, 224-5, 226, 227, 
228, 230, 231, 233, 234, 235, 236-7, 
238, 239, 243, 247-8, 255, 256, 257, 
258, 260, 261, 262, 263, 264, 276, 
287, 295 

Bologne 278 

Bonaparte, Louis 300 

Bongars, Jacques 23, 39, 52, 66 

Bonneval abbey 198 

Bosphorous 204 

Bourgeuil monastery 52 

Bréhier, Louis 10, 12 

Brindisi 274 

Bruno of Lucca 131 

Bull, Marcus 52, 299-300 

Bumke, Joachim 163, 171-2 

Burchard of Worms 284 

burgenses 47 


Caesarea 45, 46, 170, 185, 200 

Caffaro 55 

Cairo 50 

Cambrai 273 

cannibalism 26, 53, 54, 83, 116, 
140-1 

capitales 8, 219 

capitanei 8, 86, 219, 233 

Castle Imbert (Akhzib) 155 

Chanson @’Antioche 54, 83, 116, 141, 
198, 207, 274, 276 

Chanson de Jérusalem 83, 116 

Charlemagne 2 

Chartres 198 

Chastel-Rouge 

chess 129, 188 

chevalier 163 

Children of Israel 65, 77, 121, 243 

Chronicon of William of Tyre 83 

Cicero 55, 171-2 

Civetot, battle 21 October 1096 82, 
95, 108, 109, 112, 274 

Civray 23 

Clarembald of Vendeuil 
204, 211 

clientes 48-50, 63, 72, 255 

Cohn, Norman 98 


141, 192, 252 


190, 191, 


INDEX 


Cologne 66, 103, 191, 296 

Coloman I, king of Hungary 230 

coloni 105, 274 

comites 84, 225, 230 

Cono of Montaigu 175, 207, 215 

Conrad, constable of King Henry IV of 
Germany 177 

Conrad, count of Luxembourg 277 

Constantinople 18, 77, 95, 109, 110, 
122, 123, 170, 222, 243, 254, 255, 
256 

consules 55, 73, 170, 234-5, 296 

Cosmas of Prague 105 

Council of Clermont, 18-28 November 
1095 40, 42, 43, 44, 45, 58, 66, 70, 
87, 102, 104, 165, 172, 173, 188, 
216, 218, 244, 250 

Coxon 33, 160, 220, 239 

Crusade, of 1101 83, 102, 166, 173, 
215, 240, 272 

Crusade, Second (1147-8) 

Cyprus 17, 114, 215 


105, 298 


Daimbert of Pisa, Patriarch of 
Jerusalem 12, 88-9 

Dalmatia 31 

Daniel, Norman 83 

Daron 156 

Decretum of Burchard of Worms 

Decretum of Gratian 282 

Demetrius, saint 129, 169 

deteriores 58, 70, 73 

dictator 253 

ditiores 70, 73 

dwites 14, 19, 32, 44, 45, 46, 57, 61, 
69, 71, 73, 114, 119, 153, 166, 215, 
216 

Dodo of Clermont 177 

Dodo of Cons-la-Grandville 

Dol 52 

domini 8, 11, 47, 50, 57, 61, 65, 68, 69, 
73, 77, 79, 84, 105, 111, 215, 219, 
237, 253 

Dorothea, saint 284 

Dorylaeum, battle 1 July 1097 69, 71, 
162, 163, 202, 206, 212, 224, 226-7, 
249, 250, 253, 275, 295 

Drogo of Nesle 190, 191, 197, 203, 
211, 230, 266 

Dublin 6 

Duby, George 2, 7, 187, 197, 204, 
211, 280, 292-3, 298-9, 300 

Du Cange 5 

duces 57, 63, 64, 170, 225, 230, 234 


284 


277 


317 


Duncalf, Frederick 95, 100, 103 


Duquq of Damascus 35, 129, 182 
Durazzo 110 

Ebrard, priest 145 

Ecclesia Primitiva 57, 65 


Ecclesiastical History of Orderic Vitalis 
273 

Edessa 40, 41, 49, 82, 87, 88, 117, 
126, 181, 190, 204, 228, 229, 230, 
239, 264, 265, 266 

Edgington, S. B. 25, 84-5, 86 

egeni 3, 47, 61, 89, 112, 113, 149, 240 

Ekkehard, abbot of Aura 11, 101, 
104, 108, 272, 278-9 

Elvira, wife of Count Raymond of 
Toulouse 271, 276 

Emeline, wife of Fulcher 277 

Emicho, count of Flonheim 108, 191, 
215 

Emma of Hereford 277 

Emma, sister of Bohemond 262 

Engelbert, knight 177 

Engelrand of Saint-Pol 
198, 202-3, 205, 214 

Enguerrand of Coucy 204 

Epp, Verena 41, 46, 164-5 

equestres 50, 160-86, 220 

equites 44, 50, 63, 71, 82, 87, 104, 
160-86, 214, 215, 221, 232 

Erdmann, Carl 292-3 

Eugenia, saint 284 

Euphrosyne, saint 284 

Eustace II, count of Boulogne 13 

Eustace III, count of Boulogne 63, 
168, 211, 261, 264, 265 

Eustace I, Granarius 177-8 

Everard of Beteuil 137n 

Everard III, lord of Le Puiset 175, 
191, 194, 197, 198, 202-4, 207-8, 
211, 277 

Exorogrorgum (Eski-Kaled) 82 


88, 116, 175, 


familia Christi 62 

Jamiliares 25, 37, 60, 62-3, 97, 148 

famine 4, 53, 71, 90, 92, 100-3, 114, 
118, 126, 135, 194, 214, 238, 240, 
263, 279, 281, 293 

Firuz 67, 189-90, 194, 239 

Five Books of Tropologiae on Hosea, Amos 
and the Lamentations 241 

Flori, Jean 109, 126, 289, 293 

Folbert of Bouillon 176, 178, 179 

Folkmar, priest 108 


318 


‘Foraging Battle’ 31 December 1097 
30, 35, 162 

France, John 24, 27, 28, 30, 86, 98-9, 
127, 151, 185, 221, 223, 254, 259, 
288-9, 295 


Franco I of Maasmechelen 176, 202 
Frankfurt-am-Main 66 
Frederick I, duke of Swabia 246 


Frutolf, chronicler 100 

Fulcher of Chartres, chronicler 5, 9, 
28, 39-50, 55, 57, 93, 103, 110, 114, 
117, 119, 124, 126, 127, 147, 151, 
160-1, 164-7, 180, 181, 209, 216-9, 
226-8, 232, 243, 233, 248, 254, 265, 
268, 275, 279, 297 

Fulcher of Chartres, knight 
191, 194, 198, 207, 230 


169, 190, 


Gaelic bardic poetry 5 

Galilee 197 

Gaston IV, viscount of Béarn 
190, 226, 230, 267 

Geldmar Carpenel 

Genoa 151, 296-7 

gens minuta 17, 21, 25, 59, 114, 133 

gens pleba 59 

Geofirey I Jordan, count of Vendôme 
166 

Geofrey of Montscaglioso 240 

George, saint 38, 129, 145, 169, 
209-10 

Gerard of Avesnes 176, 201 

Gerard the Chamberlain 177 

Gerhoch, provost of Reichersberg 105 

Gervase of Bazoches 75, 162, 173-4, 
177 

Gesta Dei Per Francos of Guibert of 
Nogent 5, 13, 74-84, 171, 196-200, 
216, 220, 238-40 

Gesta Dei Per Francos of Jacques Bongars 
27 

Gesta Francorum 5, 9-23, 24, 25, 26, 33, 
38, 41, 49, 51, 52, 54, 57, 59, 60, 61, 
62, 64, 65, 66, 67, 70, 71, 73, 74, 77, 
84, 85, 86, 93, 109-110, 111, 112, 
113, 114, 117, 119, 120, 122, 125, 

27, 128, 129, 132, 133, 139, 

50, 155, 160, 161, 162, 163, 

167-8, 169, 170, 171, 180, 181, 184, 

190, 192, 195, 200, 206, 208-9, 210, 

213, 215, 216, 217, 220, 221, 222-5, 

229, 235, 236, 239, 240, 245, 247, 

249, 253, 255, 256, 257, 258, 261, 

267, 275, 276, 295 


151, 


176, 210, 215, 268 


INDEX 


Gesta Francorum Iherusalem Expugnantum 41 

Gesta Tancredi 124, 206 

Gibbon, Edward 2, 290 

Gilbert of Traves 215 

Gilo, cardinal-bishop of Tusculum 
117-8, 193-5, 197, 203, 205, 207, 
209 

Glossarium Mediae et Infimae Latinatis 5 

Godfrey IV, duke of Lower Lotharingia 
10, 11, 18, 20, 36, 63, 65, 72, 92-3, 
111, 116, 135-6, 148, 150, 151, 168, 
169, 175, 176, 196, 201, 205, 211, 
215, 218, 221, 222, 223, 227, 229, 
230-1, 232-3, 234, 237, 239, 241, 
244, 246, 248, 252, 256, 257, 258, 
260, 261, 263, 264, 266, 267, 268, 
277 

Godfrey of Esch 175 

Godschalk, priest 90, 108 

Godvere of Tosni 92, 276-7 

Goufhier of Lastours 169, 192 

gradus 44, 86, 87, 219 

Gratian 280 

Gregory VII, pope 20, 246, 292 

Gregorian reform 56, 57, 65, 123 

Grenoble, bishop of 296 

Guibert of Nogent 5, 6, 13, 40, 41, 
52, 55, 67, 74-84, 101, 104, 106, 
107, 108, 110, 111, 114, 115, 118, 
119, 121, 124, 131, 133, 146, 147, 
150, 153, 160-2, 171-4, 179, 181, 
183-4, 195-200, 205, 208, 213, 
216-7, 219-22, 237-41, 243, 245, 
246-7, 254, 272-3, 278, 280, 281-2, 
283, 284, 288, 295 

Guido of Biandrate 176 

Guy of Hauteville 169 

Guy of Possess 89, 112, 202-3 

Guy II, ‘the red’, count of Rochfort 
127 

Guy Trousseau of Montlhéry 119 


Hagenmeyer, Heinrich 12, 16, 23, 39, 
41, 48, 49, 165 

Haifa 202 

Hainault 201 

Hamah 263 

Hamilton, Bernard 13 

Harem 65, 257 

Harenc 263 

Hartmann, count of Dillingen and 
Kyburg 266-7 

Hebron 204 

Henry IV, king of Germany 93 


INDEX 319 
Henry of Esch 175, 178, 234, 246, inferiores 86, 87, 112 
266-7 Innocent III, pope 33 
Henry of Huntington 199 inopes 45, 70, 153 
Heraclius I of Polignac 209n ‘Tron Bridge’ 110, 203, 249 
Heribrand of Bouillon 176 Isadore of Gaye 38 


Hildegund, saint 284 

Hill, John 23, 27, 28, 96 

Hill, Laurita 23, 27, 28, 96 

Hill, Rosalind 9, 10, 12 

Hilton, Rodney 2, 300 

Historia De Hierosolymitano Itinere 
161 

Historia Francorum 5, 9, 11, 24, 27-39, 
41, 98, 209 

Historia Hierosolymitana of Baldric of Dol 
5, 52-65, 155, 216, 237 

Historia Hierosolymitana of Fulcher of 
Chartres 5, 9, 39-50, 209, 218, 227, 
228 

Historia Therosolmitana of Albert of 
Aachen 5, 84-93, 95, 127, 201, 
215, 229, 232-3 

Historia Therosolimitana of Robert the 
Monk 5, 66-74, 168, 236 

Historia Vie Mierosolimitane 193-5, 275 

Hodgson, Natasha 16 

Holy Lance 10-11, 29, 81, 96, 97, 99, 
121-5, 129, 134, 141, 144-8, 152, 
157, 243, 248, 251-2, 257, 258, 261 

Holy Land 1, 156 

Holy Sepulchre 40, 68, 92, 111 

Holy War 20, 291 

Hosn al-Akred 142 

Hugh II, count of Saint-Pol 
175, 202, 214, 268 

Hugh, knight 178 

Hugh Le Puiset 277 

Hugh of Cassel 177 

Hugh VI of Lusignan 166 

Hugh of Saint-Omer 205 

Hugh ‘the Great’, count of Vermandois 
10, 20, 78, 108, 191, 194, 195, 
203-4, 205, 206-7, 211-212, 218, 
223, 227, 238, 240 

Humberge of Le Puiset 

Hume, David 290 

humiles 69, 70 

Hussein, Saddam 294 

Huygens, R. C. 75 


14, 23-7, 


88, 116, 


197, 277-8 


Ibn al-Athir 
Iconium 180 
Ida of Bouillon 13 

ignobiles 86, 87-8, 133, 214-5 


124-5 


Isoard I, count of Die 145, 152, 259 

Isoard of Ganges 38 

iuvenes 2, 6, 7-8, 19, 33, 38, 49, 68, 
73, 84, 88, 118, 141, 187-213, 262, 
266, 289, 298 

Ivo, bishop of Chartres 198 

Ivo of Grandmesnil 119, 175, 190, 198 


142, 157 
18, 37, 150, 151, 162, 210, 221, 


Jabala 
Jafa 
268 
Janāh ad-Daulah of Homs 
Jan Brockelson 98 
Jerome, saint 282 
Jerusalem 1, 5, 7, 11, 16, 22, 28, 40, 
43, 46, 47, 51, 65, 67, 71,78, 80, 88, 
95, 97, 99, 101, 102, 105, 125, 132, 
135, 136, 138, 141, 142, 143, 144, 
147, 148, 149, 164, 166, 170, 182, 
192, 195, 207, 212, 215, 217, 218, 
223, 229, 230, 232, 233, 237, 246, 
249, 251, 259, 260, 263, 267, 269, 
273, 281, 283, 284, 296 
fall of, 15 July 1099 29, 31, 44-5, 
46, 58, 62, 69, 72, 81, 82, 91, 97, 
152-7, 198-9, 207-8, 211, 212, 
237, 244, 259, 264, 267, 276 
siege of 18, 25, 35, 36, 89, 149-52, 
162, 210, 216, 221, 226, 227, 228, 
231, 252, 268, 287 
Joppa 47, 166 
Jordan, river 251 
Joscelin of Courtenay, count of Edessa 
42, 49, 50, 166, 177, 180 
Judas Maccabeus 243, 251 


129 


Keogh Vasil 136 

Kerbogha, atabeg of Mosul 10, 18, 
20, 25, 30, 44, 80, 90, 96, 97, 108, 
118-9, 120, 122, 123, 126, 126-9, 
131, 132, 135, 162, 168, 169, 181-3, 
184, 186, 190, 191, 194, 195, 203, 
205, 207, 210, 212, 218, 223, 225, 
227, 232, 233, 235, 236, 240, 241, 
245, 247, 248, 249, 252, 255, 257, 
258, 261, 262, 267, 290 

Kerbogha’s mother 82, 127 

Kharpurt (Hisn Ziyad) 42, 50 

kingship 43 


320 


knighthood 7, 21, 159-186, 187-213 
and literacy 13-14 
and mounts 16, 33, 38, 129, 
160-86, 218, 221, 241, 256, 289 
Knoch, Peter 11, 84-5 
Krey, A. C. 51, 67 


laboratores 64, 76 

La Gran Conquista de Utramar 211 

La Hongre, dynasty 297-8 

‘Lake Battle’ 9 February 1098 32, 55, 
57, 64, 171, 223, 224 

Lambert the Poor 119 

Laon 199 

Latakia 88 148, 257, 260 

‘Law of Conquest’ 97, 118 

Leon, Abram 2, 296 

Letold of Tournai 63-4, 169 

Leyser, Karl 3, 19, 31, 113 

lignart 36, 46, 151 

Lock, Peter 288 

locupletes 45, 46, 114, 153 

London 189 

Louis VI, king of France 199 

Lucca 131 


Ma/’arra (Ma’rrat-an-Nu’man) 17, 26, 
46, 53, 54, 79, 82, 132, 138, 139, 
140-1, 157, 192, 195, 205, 212, 239, 
251, 252, 260, 267, 287 

Maconnais 7 

Magdeburg Charter 67 

magni 8, 76, 78, 83, 86, 87, 112, 142, 
214, 215, 219 

Magnificat 70 

Mainz 191 

maiores 3, 8, 17-18, 22, 46, 58, 60, 64, 
70, 81, 84, 88-9, 115, 117, 119, 125, 
128, 213, 216, 219, 224-5, 229, 235, 
237, 257, 258, 262 

maiores natu 225, 237 

Malik Ghazi 264 

Malregard, siege castle 

Mamistra 170 

Manby 49 

Marina, saint 284 

Marshall, Christopher 

Marx, Karl 300 

Matilda, countess of Tuscany 217 

Matthew, knight 77, 174, 213 

Matthew Paris 189 

Matthew, saint 36 

Mauricius, saint 169 

Mayer, H. E. 297-8 


81, 117, 257 


296-7 


INDEX 


McGinty, Martha 47 

mediocres 3, 68, 69, 75, 76, 83-4, 111, 
133, 173 

Melitene 205 

mendict 89 

Mercurius, saint 129, 169 

Meung-Sur-Loire 52 

Migne, J. P. 52, 66 

milites 2,7, 14, 16, 20, 21, 22, 23, 
33, 37-8, 44, 48, 49, 50, 57, 61, 62, 
63-4, 65, 71, 73, 74, 77, 84, 92, 117, 
140, 141, 142, 157, 159-86, 200, 
201, 203, 213, 215, 216, 218, 220, 
221, 224, 271, 287 

milites Christi 15, 16, 20-1, 38, 62, 
64-5, 73, 93, 251 

milites Dei 73 

milites peregrini 93 

Milo Louez 175 

Milo of Caremont 176 

ministeriales 92-3, 179 

minores 2, 3, 17—18, 25, 46, 47, 50, 60, 
70, 76, 81, 83, 88-9, 115, 117, 121, 
128, 133, 225, 229 

miracles 28, 32, 34-5, 96, 106-7, 108, 
129, 131, 163, 248, 250-2, 272-3, 
see also visions 

Monte Cassino Chronicle 24, 105, 274 

Monumenta Germaniae Historica 6 

Morris, Colin 10, 11, 12, 14, 16, 96, 

97, 106, 280 

Moses 56, 67, 244, 249-50, 253 

Mosul 129 

Mount Sinai 249 

Mount Zion 37, 151 

Mount Zion Church 251 

Murray, A. V. 221 


ablus 168 

ader, Marwan 106 

ativity, church of 259, 295 

icea 31, 109, 134, 174, 228, 233, 

246, 275, 288 

siege of 18, 36, 61, 70, 84, 89, 91, 
110, 112-3, 117, 161, 227, 254, 266 

Nicholson, R. L. 263 

Nicusus, Armenian prince 231 

imes 250 

ish 90, 107 

nobiles 8, 61, 57, 84, 86, 87-8, 93, 133, 

149, 150, 164, 179, 213-9 

Nogent-sous-Coucy 74 

Nir al-Daulah Belek, emir of Aleppo 

49, 166 


2AA Z 


Z Z 


INDEX 


Odo of Beaugency 194 

Oehler, Hans 15 

Oliver of castle Jussey 

Omar, lord of Azaz 

operarn 36-7, 151 

optimates 8, 58, 59, 65, 68, 73, 84, 111, 
170, 213, 218, 219, 226, 232, 234-5, 
236-7, 240-1 

opulentiores 60, 111 

Orange, bishop of 250, 296 

Orderic Vitalis 52, 54, 63, 100, 120, 
154, 199, 273 

ordines 43-4 

ordo 56, 77, 86-7, 91, 93, 112, 165-6, 
170-1, 219, 250, 257 

ordo equestris 77, 79, 171-2 

Orontes 32, 110, 114 

Otto Altaspata 177, 202 

Otto, bishop of Strasbourg 246 

Ovid 74, 278 


175, 178 
277 


Paris, Paulin 28 

parvi 78, 86, 87, 112, 142, 214, 215 

patres conscripti 54-5 

Patrologia Latina 6, 17, 39, 52, 66, 
219-20 

Patzinaks 73 

pauciores 70 

Paul, N. L. 52 

Paul, saint 20 

pauperes 2, 3, 4, 14, 15, 18, 19, 25, 26, 
30, 31-5, 42, 44, 45, 46, 47, 57, 60, 

, 70, 71, 72, 80, 81, 87, 91, 96, 97, 

, 104, 106, 110-12, 113, 114, 115, 

6, 117, 120, 121, 128, 132, 134-5, 

136, 137, 138, 139, 140, 141, 142, 

143, 144, 149, 150, 153, 154-7, 166, 

215, 218, 268, 271, 278, 287, 288, 

289, 295, 300 

Payen of Beauvais 191 

pedites 3,7, 19, 22, 37, 44, 47, 57, 60, 

61, 62, 71, 74, 82, 83, 87, 104, 111, 

113, 150, 160-86, 214, 215, 218, 241 

Pelagia, saint 284 

People’s Crusade 79, 80, 82, 89, 90, 

95-110, 126, 169, 174, 191, 205, 

215, 224, 228, 231, 233-4, 268, 289 

Peter, abbot of Maillezais 52, 53 

Peter Bartholomew 26, 27, 29, 30, 
33-5, 81, 96, 97, 99, 121-6, 129, 
130, 134-48, 152, 243, 248, 251-2, 
279-80 
trial by fire 

Peter Desiderius 


re OD 
eo 


29, 36, 97, 146-9 
145, 149, 152, 209-10 


321 


Peter of Aups 170, 257 

Peter of Blois 33 

Peter of Castillon 239 

Peter of Lombardy 176 

Peter of Narbonne, bishop of Albara 
37, 259, 269 

Peter of Roaix 239 

Peter Rainaud 226 

Peter Raymond of Hautpoul 122, 239 

Peter, saint 34, 120, 139, 143-4 

Peter, son of Gisla 175 

Peter the Hermit 77, 80, 85, 89-90, 
103, 104, 106-110, 126-8, 143, 181, 
228, 230, 268-9, 280, 281, 293 

Peter Tudebode 5, 9, 14-15, 17, 23-7, 
119, 120, 128, 139, 140, 143, 161, 
208-9, 213-4, 217 

Philip I, king of France 

Philips, Jonathan 288 

plague 4, 87, 92, 100-103, 132, 135, 
190, 212, 214, 233, 276, 293 

Plastencia 257 

plebs 3, 58, 59-60, 61, 72, 82, 91, 104, 
110, 117, 185, 215-6 

plunder, social tension over 35, 81, 84, 
97, 117-18, 131, 140, 142, 153-5 

Poissy 95 

Poitiers 23 

Pons, count of Tripoli 

Pons of Balazuk 13 

Pontius Rainaud 226 

populus 3, 16, 36, 64, 259-60 

Porges, Walter 96, 99, 287 

potentes 68, 69, 70, 73, 84, 101, 111, 
219, 232, 240 

Prawer, Joshua 155-6 

preaching, of the First Crusade 
101-3, 106 

primates 230-1, 261 

primi 232 

primores 8, 84, 88, 89, 92, 107, 149, 
219, 220, 221, 231-2, 237, 238-40, 
256 

Princes’ Crusade 95, 228, 231, 274 

principes 3, 8, 22, 30, 38, 39, 70, 73, 
75, 76, 79, 81, 82, 84, 107, 119, 131, 
141, 173, 180, 213-41, 265-6, 271 

proceres 8, 58, 60, 73, 84, 111, 112, 
119, 135, 162, 211, 213, 219, 221, 
226-7, 233, 235, 237, 239-40 

property, on the First Crusade 

2 


183, 197, 257 


166 


4, 100, 


43, 57, 


Pseudo-Isidorian Decretals 44 
pusilli 88 


322 INDEX 


Qilij Arslan, sultan of Rim 108, 224 
quintain 68, 188-9 


Rabinus Maurus, abbot of Fulda 76 

Radolphus of Fontanais 175 

Raimbold Croton 175, 198-9, 208, 212 

Rainald, a leader of the People’s 
Crusade 224 

Rainald III, count of Toul 190, 230 

Rainald of Beauvais 202-3, 211 

Rainald Porchet 213-4 

Rainer of Brus 178 

Ralph of Caen 124, 127, 154, 190, 197, 
198, 204, 206-8, 223, 244, 248, 264 

Ralph I of Gael 277 

Ralph of Montpingon 176 

Ralph of Mousson 176 

Ralph of Scegones 215 

Ramleh 50, 205, 260 
battle 6 September 1101 205, 232 
battle 17 May 1102 41, 164, 165, 218 
battle 27 August 1105 40, 41, 165 
bishop of, see Robert of Rouen 

Rauol, count of Vermandois 199 

Ravendel 136 

Raymond IV, count of Toulouse 10, 
20, 22, 27, 35, 36, 37, 39, 56, 62, 88, 
97, 99, 122, 123, 124, 134-5, 136, 
137-8, 140-9, 150, 151, 152, 162, 
172, 184, 192, 215, 216, 218, 220, 
221, 222-3, 226, 231, 233, 235, 237, 
239, 240, 241, 248, 249, 250-2, 254, 
255, 256, 257, 258, 259-60, 261, 
263, 264, 267, 268, 276 

Raymond of Aguilers 5, 9, 11, 13, 
24, 26, 27-39, 41, 54, 57, 60, 62, 70, 
87, 91, 93, 96, 97, 98, 109, 110, 113, 
114, 119, 120, 121-2, 123-4, 126, 
127, 129, 131, 133, 135, 136, 139, 
140, 142, 143, 145, 146, 148, 149, 
150-1, 154, 163, 184-5, 190, 190, 
209-11, 214, 225-6, 244, 249, 251, 
253, 259, 260, 265-6, 279 

Raymond Pilet 17, 21, 22, 38, 59, 62, 
63, 132-3, 146, 162, 168, 169, 172, 
195, 221, 239, 267-8 

Raymond, viscomes of Turenne 263 

Recueil des Historiens des Croisades 6, 23, 
27, 52, 54, 66, 75 

Régnier, Adolphe 23 

Reims 66, 199 

Reinhard of Hemmersbach 175, 178-9 

Reinhard of Verdun 177 

Reinold, knight 177 


Richard of the Principate, count of 
Salerno 111, 175, 230, 234 

Ridwan, emir of Aleppo 17, 32, 55, 
133, 223, 277 

Riley-Smith, Jonathan 3, 122, 199, 
222, 291-3 

Ritter 163 

Robert, abbot of St-Rémi 66 

Robert I, count of Flanders 257 

Robert II, count of Flanders 37, 63, 
88, 136, 138, 151, 162, 215, 217, 
218, 222, 223, 227, 231, 233, 235, 
236, 238, 241, 248, 252, 256, 257, 
258, 260, 261, 267, 268 

Robert II, duke of Normandy 12, 
36, 40, 88, 103, 110, 145, 151, 
169-70, 203, 206, 215, 217, 218, 
223, 227, 231, 233, 235, 238, 240, 
245, 248, 252, 257, 258, 261, 274, 
295 

Robert fitz-Gerard, constable to 
Bohemond 63 

Robert Guiscard, duke of Apulia and 
Calabria 183-4, 257, 263 

Robert, knight of Apulia 176 

Robert of Anzi 175 

Robert of Rouen, bishop of Ramleh 
50, 260, 268 

Robert of Vieux-Ponts 177 

Robert the Monk 5, 52, 55, 66-74, 
75, 102, 107-8, 111, 113, 115, 
119, 125, 141, 156-7, 162, 164, 
168-71, 181, 182, 188-93, 195, 
197, 203, 205, 234-6, 243, 244, 
259 

Robinson, I. S. 245 

Roger Barneville 38, 175, 194, 203, 
247, 268 

Roger I, count of Sicily 21, 77 

Roger of Rozoy 177 

Roger of Salerno 205 

Roger I, prince of Antioch 

Rogers, Randall 97-8 

Rome 93 

‘rope dancers’ 118-20, 157, 294 

Rothard, son of Godfrey 203, 205 

Rothold, knight 176 

Rubenstein, Jay 15, 24 

Rule of St Benedict 81, 115 

Runciman, Steven 29, 85, 123, 288, 
290-1 

ruricolae 104 

rustici 30, 114, 121, 156 

Ryan, E R. 47, 49 


INDEX 


Andrew’s Church, Antioch 123 

George’s Gate, Antioch 117, 193, 

197 

George’s Monastery 63 

Germer de Fly, abbey 74 

Maria in Oeren, convent 110, 246 

Mary of Le Puy, church 27 

Mary’s Church, Antioch 120 

Peter’s Church, Antioch 123, 138, 

252, 258 

St Symeon’s Port 21 

St Rémi, abbey 66 

satellites 63 

scutiferi 47, 48 

seditio 102 

seniores 16, 20, 22, 25, 62, 65, 73, 84, 
141, 213, 223-5, 235-7, 240, 257, 
258-9 

sequaces 86, 112 

servi 57, 61, 68, 69, 77, 86, 87, 105, 
112, 151, 215, 237 

serviens 49, 208-9 

servientes 19, 49 

Shaizar, emir of 142 

Sidon 149, 231 

Sigebert of Gembloux 100 

Sigemar of Maasmechelen 200 

Sigurd Magnusson, king of Norway 231 

Simms, Katherine 5 

Simon, chaplain to Count Raymond of 
Toulouse 136 

simony 42 

Skumbi (Genusus), river 110 

slavery 78-9 

Solomon’s Palace 91 

Speyer 191 

status 86, 87 

Stephen II, count of Blois 40, 41, 77, 
78, 110, 119, 161, 164, 177, 214, 
217, 223, 227, 240, 245, 253-4, 255, 
257, 258, 261, 288 

Stephen I, count of Burgundy 
166, 177, 217 

Stephen of Valence 25, 120, 125, 126, 
129, 143, 145, 148, 224-5, 237, 248, 
249 

subditi 88 

Suger, abbot of St Dennis 199 

Suqman ibn Ortuq 32, 55, 223 

Sweetenham, Carol 66, 164, 170 

Symeon, Armenian lord 170 


NN 


RANRNRNNnNM 


164, 


tafurs 54, 82-3, 115-6, 141 
King Tafur 82-3, 115-6 


323 


Tancred 20, 49, 59, 63, 91, 111, 117, 
124, 126, 127, 142, 154, 163, 168, 
175, 183, 193, 195, 196-7, 200, 202, 
204, 205, 206, 207, 208, 223, 234, 
236, 239, 247, 252, 259, 261-4, 267, 
275, 288, 295 


Tarsus 40, 41, 91, 207, 236, 239, 263, 
264 

Tatikios 118-9, 170, 254, 257, 258, 
261, 288 


Temple of Solomon 69, 154, 264, 267 

terraticum 155 

Thecla, saint 284 

Theodora 284 

Thomas de Marle 175, 178, 191, 197, 
198—200, 203-4, 207-8, 211, 212 

Thoros, ruler of Edessa 265 

‘three orders’ 19, 56, 64, 75, 87, 88, 
143, 170, 172 

Tiberias 174 

tirocinare 202 

tirocinium 202 


tirones 201-6 

Tortosa 268 

Toucy 193 

trial by combat 47, 127-8 
trial by ordeal 29, 97, 146-9 


Tripoli 31, 46, 97, 145, 148, 157, 214, 252 
trivium 53 

Troy, siege of 173 

Truce of God 42, 172, 280 

Tudebode, see Peter Tudebode 

Tughtigin, atabeg of Damascus 49 
turba 35, 108, 147 
Turbessel (Tell Bashir) 
Turcopoles 72 
Tusculum 193 

‘two swords’, doctrine of rulership 56 
Tyerman, Christopher 105 

Tyre 49, 166, 206 


136, 266 


Udelrard of Wissant 175 

Urban II, pope 42, 43, 44, 45, 58, 70, 
87, 98, 102, 125, 165, 172, 173, 219, 
244-5, 250, 254, 261, 278, 280, 283 


Valenciennes 47 

van Luyn, Pierre 163 

Via Egnatia 110 

Victory in the East 185 

Virgil 74 

visions 28, 34-5, 96, 99, 120-6, 129, 
134-5, 136-8, 139-40, 145, 148, 149, 
152, 248, 249, 279-80 


324 


Voltaire 290 

Vulgate 15, 34, 36, 76, 82, 121, 163 

vulgus 3, 30, 31, 75, 76, 79, 80, 83, 
89-91, 101, 106, 107, 108, 112, 
114-5, 118, 124, 126, 133, 135, 147, 
149, 150, 153, 172, 214, 233 


Walbricus, knight 175 

Wallon, Henri 23 

Walo II of Ghaumont-en-Vexin 
200, 202-4, 235, 277-8 

Walo of Lille 89, 112 

Walter of Tahun 176 

Walter of Verra 176, 178 

Walter Sanzavohir 95, 103, 107, 109, 
169, 174 

Warner, count of Grez 

Welf of Burgundy 175 

Wibert of Mount Laon 177 

Wicher the Swabian 176 

Wiesselburg 191 

William Carpenter 80, 126-7, 170, 295 

William IX, duke of Aquitaine 215 

William I, duke of Normandy 253, 257 


197, 


175, 178 


INDEX 


William Hugh of Monteil 148, 152, 259 

William II, king of England 295 

William Marchius 202, 205, 240 

William of Benium 194, 209 

William of Grandmesnil 119 

William VI of Montpellier 220, 239 

William of Tyre 13, 83, 84, 126, 138, 
145, 153, 154, 155, 156, 276, 279 

William of Wanges 177, 215 

William Peyre of Cunhlat 33, 121 

William Ricau 37, 151 

Winemer of Boulogne 265 

Wirich, butler to Duke Godfrey of 
Lotharingia 176 

women, on the First Crusade 1, 2, 8, 
31, 59, 64, 87, 89, 90, 96, 104, 105, 
106, 107, 108, 110, 112, 115, 118, 
139-40, 171, 197, 214, 235, 247, 
269, 271-85, 293 

Worms 191, 296 


Xerigordo 224 


Yaghi-Styan, governor of Antioch 190 


