TITLE: Crusader Syria in the Thirteenth Century: The Rothelin Continuation of the History of William of Tyre
IDENTIFIER: shirley-rothelin
URL: https://archive.org/download/shirley-rothelin/Shirley Rothelin_djvu.txt




Crusade Texts in 
Translation 


Editorial Board 


Malcolm Barber (Reading), Bernard Hamilton (Nottingham), 
Norman Housley (Leicester) and Peter Edbury (Cardiff) 


Titles in this series include: 


The Conquest of Jerusalem 
and the Third Crusade 
Sources in Translation 
Peter Edbury 


The Song of the Cathar Wars 
A History of the Albigensian Crusade 
Janet Shirley 


Chronicle of the Third Crusade 
A Translation of the /tinerarium 
Peregrinorum et Gesta Regis Ricardi 
Helen Nicholson 





Crusader Syria in the 
Thirteenth Century 


The Rothelin Continuation 
of the History of William of Tyre 
with part of the Eracles or Acre text 


translated by 
Janet Shirley 


Ashgate 


Aldershot ¢ Brookfield usa * Singapore * Sydney 

















Copyright © Janet Shirley, 1999 


All rights reserved, No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval 
system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, 
recording, or otherwise without the prior permission of the publisher. 


Published by 

Ashgate Publishing Limited Ashgate Publishing Company 
Gower House Old Post Road 

Croft Road Brookfield 

Aldershot Vermont 05036-9704 

Hants GU11 3HR USA 

England 


ISBN 1-84014-606-0 


Janet Shirley has asserted her moral right under the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 
1998 to be identified as the author of this work. 


British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data 

Shirley, Janet 

Crusader Syria inthe Thirteenth Century: the Rothelin continuation of William ofTyre. — 
(Crusade texts in Translation; 4) 

1, William, of Tyre, Historia Hierosolymitana 2, Rothelin— Translations into English 3. 
Lracles ~ Translations into English 4, Crusades — Later, 13th, 14th, and 15th centuries 5. 
Syria History ~ 750-1260 6, Syria— History -1516 

I Title 

956 ,9' 102 


Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
Crusader Syria in theThirteenth Century 

p. cm. 

1. Crusades. 2. Syria--History--750-1260. 3. Military history. 

Medieval. 

D172.C78 1999 
940. 1'8--de21 98-46703 
CIP 


Crusade Texts in Translation 5. 
Printed and bound in Great Britain by MPG Books Ltd, Bodmin, Cornwall 





Contents 












Reliability of the texts 
_ Notes on the translation 
Names of people and places 


Bibliography 


, p of the Holy Land 

t, Arabia and part of Palestine 
he Rothelin Continuation 

he Eracles or Acre Continuation 


vi 


10 
13 
121 


145 





Acknowledgements 


Thanks are due and are gladly paid to a number of helpers, especially to historians 
who have been kind enough to share their knowledge of this period with a struggling 
linguist. These benefactors include such names as Jaroslav Folda, Bemard Hamilton 
and William G. Zajac, but pre-eminent among them for his unfailing patience is Peter 
Edbury of Cardiff University. He has provided me with a wealth of research material, 
has corrected my footnotes, supplied new ones, and time and again has shed ablaze 
of light into what I thought was an impenetrable jungle. His care has saved me from 
some serious blunders. Any mistakes that remain are purely my own. 

lam also very grateful to Dick Barlow and to Clive and Trish Bumham of Cerberus 
Printing. Lastly | thank as always the Librarian and staff of the London Library, 
whose helpfulness goes far beyond that of any call of duty. 































Introduction 


« continuations of William of Tyre 


ie famous Historia Hierosolymitana of William of Tyre and its translation into 
feneh as L 'Estoire de Eracles empereur et la conqueste de la Terre d'Outremer 
ispired many later writers to continue this work and to note down events in and 
‘ting the Holy Land in their own time. William’s text described the history of the 
des and the Latin East from the time of the First Crusade (1095-99) until 
\, The large family of continuations, some written in Syria, others in France, 
ites from the thirteenth century and represents the efforts of various people to fill 
he gap between 1184 and their own day. Together these form a rich corpus of 
uve material for the later crusades to the East, including the mid-thirteenth-century 
ainpaigns of Theobald, count of Champagne and king of Navarre, and Richard, 
it! of Cornwall, in Syria and of King Louis IX of France in Egypt. 
_ The two texts offered here in translation are the Rothelin and the Eracles or 
re continuations. The first is so called from the name of the Abbé Rothelin, 
Wher of a principal manuscript in the eighteenth century. It was published in 1859 
ii the Recueil des historiens des croisades' and is acomplete work in itself, linked 
i still earlier continuation by an opening résumé of events in Jerusalem in 1229. It 
jneludes with the expulsion of Christians from that city in the year 1261. 
‘The other text, covering the same years and published in the same volume, has 
«n known as the Eracles from the general title of the French version of William’s 
otk, whose opening sentence names Heraclius, Eracles, emperor of Byzantium, 
ix» restored the True Cross to Jerusalem in 629. M.R. Morgan, however, suggests 
alling this section the Acre continuation of William of Tyre, since its earliest 
iinuscripts Were written in that city.’ It survives in various redactions and some of 
h manuscripts take the story down as far as 1248, 1264, 1275 or, in one instance, 
01277. It is clearly acompilation, with sections describing subsequent history 
jdded from time to time. The excerpt translated here covers the same time-span 
(1249-61) as the Rothelin text? 


Historiens occidentaux (abbreviated RHC Occ.), vol.2, pp. 489-639. 

M.R. Morgan, ‘The Rothelin Continuation of William of Tyre’, in Outremer, Studies 
presented to Joshua Prawer (Jerusalem, 1982), pp. 244-57. 

RHC Oce,, vol. 2, pp. 413-45. 


























2 
The manuscripts 


These have been described and classified in the Recueil and by Mas Latrie, by 
Riant in 1881 and by Jaroslav Folda in 1973,' and are fully discussed by Morgan in 
the article quoted above. 

All redactions of the Eracles or Acre continuation were composed in the East, 
and at least seven of the surviving manuscripts were copied there. 

The Rothelin continuation exists intwelve manuscripts. All twelve, says Morgan, 
were written in the Ile-de-France or northern France or Flanders, and the Rothelin 
text is “a purely European production’, probably written in or near Soissons.? The 
writer is well informed about this area — see for instance the end of chapter 75 
where he gives the name of the abbot of St Médard as well as those of the count 
and the bishop of Soissons. 

The family of manuscripts can be divided into two sub-groups of five and seven. 
An essential difference between them is that the smaller sub-family includes two 
songs of protest written by angry crusaders, and the other does not. The manuscripts 
in this small sub-group, however, do not include the long interpolation telling stories 
of Cato, Charybdis, snakes, and Alexander the Great, which is present in all seven 
manuscripts of the larger group. 


Content of the Rothelin Continuation 


This text in its fullest form offers constant surprises. Readers embark on an account 
of interaction between Christians and Saracens in the year 1229, only to be confronted 
almost at once by six chapters of solid description of the holy city of Jerusalem. 
Good Christians, says the compiler firmly, will enjoy this; others may skip. This is an 
almost exact transcription of the Old French text written in the late twelfth century, 
now known as The Condition of the City of Jerusalem. Next come several chapters 
describing pilgrimages to be made in the Holy Land. Chapters 12-14 plunge the 
reader, or the audience, into the bewildering world of prophecy, where stars and 
planets, woe and destruction, wolves and a pregnant camel combine to baffle 
interpretation. This is the Prophecy of the Son of Agap. Emerging from this, we 
have two brisk chapters on Saladin, his brother, and their many sons; then astriking 
passage on the Assassins, followed by a description of the role and duties of the 
caliph of Baghdad. Then follows a chapter bluntly entitled ‘Of the wickedness of 
Frederick, emperor of Germany’. Only in chapter 20 do we find real history again, 
when crusaders from France gather at Marseille in 1239 and sail for Acre. 

This was the crusade led by Theobald, king of Navarre and count of Champagne. 
Vivid pictures follow of men preparing for war, sharpening swords, shoeing horses, 





lL. J. Folda, ‘Manuscripts of the History of Outremer by William of Tyre: a Handlist’, 
Seriptorium, 27 (1973), pp. 90-5. 
pe Morgan, ‘Rothelin Continuation’, p. 251. 


3 

































of others out foraging and sweeping up rich plunder, oxen, buffaloes, camels, 
ds of livestock —a brief chapter on the various meanings of the name ‘Babylon’ 
11 (he count of Bar’s unforgivably foolish raid deep into enemy territory and the 
wit disaster at Gaza, Chapter 27 includes an interesting description of the 
tlan intelligence and signal system, Then comes the shocking defeat itself, 
d in chapters 30 and 31 by the text of two songs, the first written by one of 
od lords and the next by a disillusioned crusader still serving in the host. 

¢ commanders do nothing, he says, and how can poor men manage, those who 
their estates in pawn before they came away? 

jeotiations and truces follow. In 1240 (chapter 36) Richard of Cornwall arrives 


The focus now shifts - chapters 37-9 - to the emperor Frederick II and his 
with the papacy. 
hapters 40 and 41 deal with the incursions of the Khwarazmian peoples and 
sond disaster near Gaza, the battle of La Forbie of 1244. 
iene: 42 King Louis of France embarks for the East. The narrative of his 
“ hg and struggles in Egypt goes swimmingly along until, right in the middle of a 
#1 from the king’s chamberlain, John Sarrasin, describing these events (chapters 
anid 44), the compiler switches into a lengthy passage about the dangers of the 
twenty-two days we were at sea, Sarrasin has just said, and suffered great 
. Ah, says the compiler in effect, many people do not know how dangerous 
oun is, and he proceeds to tell them. Sirens, Charybdis and volcanoes fill chapter 
nd very effective they are. Next he remembers that there are dangers on land 
i d in several chapters he gives us a lively description of the torments suffered 
/ Cato and his knights on campaign in the deserts of Libya. Snakes, dragons and 
kutrices throng on every page. Next we have the problem of the source of the 
‘ile and a story about Alexander the Great. Most of this very vigorous section is 
vee Be aetely on parts of Lucan’s Pharsalia and on Nicander and more 
etal on the highly popular Ket des Romains. This is acompendium of 
history and legend thought to have been put together in the Ile-de-France 
M12 14, It is significant that one of the most important illuminated manuscripts 
th in work was copied in Acre,' 
_ At the end of chapter 58 the compiler announces that ‘we will return to our 
#vutive’ and in chapter 59 he continues what, on close inspection, turns out to be 
interrupted letter from John Sarrasin. The remaining chapters tell of the strenuous 
is of Louis and his forces in Egypt, of their appalling suffering and ultimate 
. Negotiations come next, truces sworn to and broken, fresh negotiations, 
un War between Egypt and Aleppo, the king’s eventual return to France, local 
» and warfare, Bedouin activity, Christians shamefully at war with other 
ians, Mongol victories and defeats and at last in the final chapter, 82, how 


Hrussels: Bibliothéque r "ae MS 10212; see J, Folda, Crusader Manuscript 
Mlumination at Saint-Jean d'Aere, 1275-1291 (Princeton, 1976) pp. 91-4 and plates 


























4 


Sayfal-Din Kutuz, the sultan of Egypt, was murdered by his successor, Baybars. 
The truces of a dead sultan cease to exist, and such Christians as were present in 
Jerusalem were expelled from the city. They made their painful way, suffering heavy 
losses, to the stronghold of Acre, where at this date, 1261, aremnant of Christians 
still clung to this fragment of the Latin kingdom. 

As M.R. Morgan points out in the article cited above, the Rothelin chronicle is 
a work to dip into, a collection of heroic stories, and as such it marks a chan ge in 
public taste. William of Tyre wrote to inspire men to defend the Latin kingdom and 
because he wanted posterity to know the truth; he was a historian of record, he 
cared about facts. Now in the mid-thirteenth century his continuator writes as an 
entertainer, as a provider of thrilling yarns, of history as diversion. 


Content of the Eracies or Acre Continuation 


Our extract begins in 1239 with chapter 44 of book 33: the crusade of Theobald of 
Navarre sails from Marseille. The narrative moves swiftly to the disaster at Gaza, 
after which the crusaders retreat to Acre, where they remain fora lon ig time and do 
nothing. Negotiations follow with the sultan of Hama who is at odds with Aleppo. 
Complex relationships between Egypt and Damascus are described; there is a truce 
between the Templars and Damascus, but the Hospitallers will not support it and 
make a truce of their own with Egypt. Ralph of Soissons marries Alice, queen of 
Cyprus and regent of Jerusalem, but is allowed no power and goes home to France. 

Richard of Comwall arrives, refuses to support either alliance, fortifies Ascalon, 
and goes home. ‘The Ibelins take the city of Tyre while the Filan gieri brothers, the 
emperor’s men, are away. In chapter 53 we learn of Innocent IV’s problems and 
Frederick II's deceitfulness; Innocent makes vigorous war in Germany and William, 
count of Holland, is crowned king of the Germans. The Filangieri brothers return to 
Tyre and are forced to surrender its castle. Egypt summons the Khwarazmian hordes; 
Damascus, Homs and Christians gather in alliance; the disaster of La Forbie, 1244, 
follows. In chapter 58 we are in France at Louis’ apparent deathbed, when he 
recovers and insists on taking the cross. Chapter 59 deals with the conflict between 
Damascus, Aleppo and Egypt; Egypt lays siege to the Hospitallers in Ascalon; 
storms destroy the Egyptian fleet but the castle is undermined and taken. The last 
chapter of book 33 notes that Turcomans are laying waste the country all around 
Antioch, but adds that we must now return to the whole question of affairs in Syria. 

Book 34 is frankly dull, an annal consisting of ever shorter and shorter notes, 
some of them confused, covering events from Louis [X’s arrival in Cyprus in 1248. 
There can be little doubt that there is now a new author at work and that his annals 
are closely related to those to be found in the texts known as the Annales de Terre 
Sainte.' Our extract ends with the Greeks’ recovery of Constantinople from the 
French in 1261. 





1. Edited by R. Réhricht and G. Reynaud, Archives del Orient Latin, 2 (1884), pp. 427-61. 










































ility of the texts 


ih these texts, especially the Rorhelin, full of rich detail, provide valuable 
uration and indeed vivid pictures of the crusading expeditions of the early 
eenth century. Neither, however, ‘supplies the complete picture of all the 
{intions in which the Western leaders were involved’,' and they are still less 
aliuetory for the period between Richard of Cornwall's departure in the spring of 
and the battle of La Forbie. The Eracles or Acre text offers only a highly 
wlensed account of these years, with very little on external relations. 
There are occasions when these two texts conflict. The relative dating, for instance, 
‘the negotiations with al-Muzaffar of Hama, the Gaza campaign and the death of 
wut John of Macon in 1239 is hard to establish. Jackson argues that these abortive 
Mtiations belong to the autumn of that year and has evidence for Count John’s 
ath in November.’ 
Perhaps the most valuable contribution of both these texts lies in the light they 
}on the way men and women of that time saw themselves, and how they preferred 
nee their history. The Rothelin text, for instance, although scathingly critical of 
e nobles who rode so far, unsupported, into enemy territory and then settled 
iwn fora picnic (chapter 27), still shows these men as heroes in the epic mould. 
ommanders exhort their troops before battle moult doucement, very kindly, as 
iver and Roland did. The final defeat, when the few surviving nobles refuse to flee 
id cut down the Saracens in such great swathes, moult granz essarz, that they 
and alone surrounded by the dead and none dare approach.them, could all come 
night from the Song of Roland or any other heroic tale. Never mind what happened; 
uit is how a French hero behaves in the face of disaster. 
Another assumption eloquent of the differences between one time and another is 
« unquestioned belief clear in both texts that devotion to Christ demanded the 
silling ofnon-Christians. Pity might occasionally move the writer’s heart, as in chapter 
| of the Rothelin chronicle, where the French ride in amongst Saracen tents and 
jussacre men and women, old people and children, and ‘it was sad indeed to see 
4) many dead bodies and so much blood spilt’, but then, as he reminds himself and 
iis hearers, ‘they were enemies of the Christian faith’. 


Notes on the translation 


he year given at the head of most chapters is supplied by the translator. 

The expressions ‘prime, terce, none’ and ‘vespers’ refer to very carly morning, 
{o ubout 9 a.m., midday and evening, but are approximate. They are the names of 
some of the canonical hours of prayer, which would be said according to the daylight 
available at the time of year, not according to any notion of clock time. 


P, Jackson, ‘The Crusades of 1239-41 and their Aftermath’, Bulletin of the School of 


Ortental and African Studies, 50 (1987), p. 32. 
Jackson, ‘Crusades of 1239-41’ p. 40; and see the Eracles/Aere text, chapter 46, and 


Rothelin, chapter 22. 























6 


‘Outremer’; The words ‘outre’ and ‘mer’ are joined, given an initial capital and 
used by modern writers as an equivalent for ‘Palestine’ or ‘the I loly Land’, acustom 
that was already beginning in medieval times. In fact these words simply form an 
adverbial expression meaning ‘beyond the sea’ and it is important to remember that 
the phrase was used of any journey across the Mediterranean in any direction. 

‘Griffons’ in Old French meant ‘Greeks’, or rather ‘those wretched Greeks’, 
and was applied to the inhabitants of the Byzantine empire and members of the 
Eastern Orthodox Church. The word consists of the element Grieu, ‘Greek’, with 
an augmentative ending added. 

‘Poulain’ is thought to have meant ‘colt’, or the young of any animal, and was 
used of Syrian-born Franks, settled colonials, whose ideas often differed sharply 
from those of crusaders newly arrived from the West. It does not necessarily mean 
‘half-caste’.! 


Names of people and places 


European personal names are almost all given in their English forms. Arabic names, 
except for such well known ones as ’Saladin’, follow the transliterations used in 
P.M. Holt’s Age of the Crusades (London and New York, | 986). 

‘Babylon’ almost invariably means the capital of Egypt. The city’s castle was 
known as ‘the Cairo’ from its name e/-Kahira, ‘the Victorious’, See Rothelin 
chapter 24, ‘How many Babylons there are’. 

Names and words printed in italic are as found in the text and have not been 
identified. 


Bibliography 
Editions of the texts 


Continuation de Guillaume de Tyr de 1229 4 1261, dite du manuscrit de 
Rothelin, in Recueil des historiens des croisades: Historiens occidentaux 
(abbreviated RHC Occ.), vol. 2 (Paris, 1859), pp. 489-639, 

L'Estoire de Eracles empereur et la conqueste de la terre d’Outremer in RHC 
Occ., vol. 2 (Paris, 1859), pp. 1-481. 





1, See M.R. Morgan, The Chronicle of Ernoul and the Continuations of William of Tyre 
(Oxford, 1973), appendix 2, pp. 194-5. 







































vde Terre Sainte’, ed. R. R&hricht and G, Raynaud, Archives del Orient 
2 (1884), pp. 427-61. 
d'Evnoul et de Bernard le Trésorier, ed. L.de Mas Latrie (Paris, 1871). 


dation (Aldershot, 1996). 

sles Romains, ed. L.-F. Flutre and K. Sneyders de Vogel, 2 vols (Paris and 
wen, 1938). 

it, Ayyubids, Mamlukes and Crusaders, ed. and trans. U. and M.C. 
sand J,8.C, Riley-Smith, 2 vols (Cambridge, 1971), vol. 2, pp. 25-6. 

aie of Seville, Etymologiarum, ed. W.M. Lindsay, 2 vols (Oxford, 1911), XII, 


de Joinville, Histoire de Saint Louis, ed. N.de Wailly (Paris, 1868). 

' in, Lettre a Nicolas Arrode, ed. A.Foulet (Paris, 1924). 

ii, Pharsalia, ed.and trans. H.T. Riley (London,1853). 
thew Paris, Chronicles, ed. and trans. R. Vaughan (Gloucester, 1986). 
ader, The Poems, ed. and trans. A.S.F. Gow and A.F. Scholfield (Cambridge, 


li \ wn of Tyre, A History of Deeds Done Beyond the Sea, trans. E.A. Babcock 
A.C, Krey, 2 vols (New York, 1943), vol. 2, pp. 317-18. 
inson, J., Jerusalem Pilgrimage, 1099-1185. Hakluyt Society 167 (London, 


er works 


ckingham, C.F., “The Quest for Prester John’, Bulletin of the John Rylands 
pary, 62 (1980), pp. 291-310. Reprinted in his Between Islam and 

tendom: Travellers, Facts and Legends in the Middle Ages and 

ance (London 1983), article II. 

| wken, A.-D. von den, Die ‘Nationes christianorum orientalium’ im 
ysttindnis der Lateinischen Historiographie (Cologne, 1973). 

wehthal, H., Miniature Painting in the Latin Kingdom of Jerusalem (Oxford, 


, P.W., John of Ibelin and the Kingdom of Jerusalem (Woodbridge, 
.P.W., The Kingdom of Cyprus and the Crusades, 1191-1373 (Cambridge, 
). 

.P.W., “The Lyon Eracles and the Old French Continuations of William of 


if ’ in Montjoie; Studies in Crusade History in Honour of Hans Eberhard 
Mayer, ed. B.Z. Kedar et al. (Aldershot, 1997), pp. 139-53. 

















8 


Folda, J., The Art of the Crusaders in the Holy Land, 1098-1187 (Cambridge, 
1985). 

Folda, J., ‘Manuscripts of the History of Outremer by William of Tyre: a Handlist’, 
Scriptorium, 27 (1973), 90-5, 

Hamilton, B., The Latin Church in the Crusader States: The Secular Church 
(London, 1980). 

Holt, P.M., The Age of the Crusades: The Near East ‘From the Eleventh Century 
to 1517 (London and New York, 1986), 

Humphreys, R.S., From Saladin to the Mongols: the Ayyubids of Damascus, 
1193-1260 (Albany, 1977), 

Irwin, R., The Middle East in the Middle Ages: The Early Mamluk Sultanate, 
1250-1382 (London and Sydney, 1986). 

Jackson, P., ‘The Crusades of 1239-41 and their Aftermath’, Bulletin of the School 
of Oriental and African Studies, 50 (1987), pp. 32-60, 

Kennedy, H., Crusader Castles (Cambridge, 1994), 

Marshall, C., Warfare in the Latin East, 1192-129] (Cambridge, | 992). 

Mas Latrie, L. de, ‘Essai de classification des continuateurs de I’Histoire des croisades 
de Guillaume de Tyr’, Bibliothéque de l’Ecole des Chartes , 5.1 (1860), pp. 38- 
72, 140-78. Reprinted in Chronique d'Ernoul et de Bernard le Trésorier (Paris, 
1871), pp. 473-639. 

Morgan, D., The Mongols (Oxford, 1986). 

Morgan, M.R., The Chronicle of Ernoul and the Continuations of William of 
Tyre (Oxford, 1973). 

Morgan, M.R., ‘The Rothelin Continuation of William of T yre’ in Outremer: Studies 
in the history of the Crusading Kingdom of Jerusalem (Jerusalem, 1982), pp. 
244-57. 

Pelliot, P., ‘Two passages from “La Prophétie de Hannan, fils d’Isaac”” in Prester 
John, the Mongols and the Ten Lost T; ribes, ed. C. F.Beckingham and B. Hamilton, 
(Aldershot, 1996), pp.113-37. 

Peters, F.E., Jerusalem (Princeton, 1985), 

Pringle, D., ‘King Richard I and the Walls of Ascalon’, Palestine Exploration 
Quarterly, 116 (1984), pp.133-47. 

Riant, P., ‘Inventaire sommaire des manuscrits de l’Eracles,’ Archives de | ‘Orient 
Latin, | (1881), pp. 247-52, 716-17. 

Richard, J., Saint Louis, Crusader King of France, trans. J. Birrell (Cambridge, 
1992). 

Runciman, S., 4 History of the Crusades, 3 vols (Cambridge, 1951-54). 
Thorau, P., The Lion of Egypt: Sultan Baybars I and the Near East in the 
Thirteenth Century trans. P.M.Holt (London and New York, 1992), 





400m 





Herod's pate 







St Stephen's 


o Tomb of the 
Virgin 







Beisan® 








Sebastga 
Nablus? 














o Ramla Jericho 
ie °Latun * 


JERUSALEM? 
heme 







Map of the Holy Land 
































: Faqus 
° 
Bilbeis 


Desert ARABIA 
PETRAEA 
Ail 








Egypt, Arabia and part of Palestine 
































~The Rothelin continuation 


of William of Tyre 




























































y the Saracens attacked the Christians in Jerusalem 


at was the danger in which Frederick’ left the Christians of the Holy Land in 
salem, for the city was completely open and unprotected. The Saracens had 
olished all the fortifications, except the Tower of David, while the Christians 
¢ besieging Damietta’ as we told you earlier.’ Neither the emperor Frederick 
his deputy’ did anything to repair the city’s defences. The Saracens in neighbouring 
W4 saw this clearly, and one moming crowds of villainous Saracens gathered and 
#ed Jerusalem, intending to kill the Christians.’ The Christians defended 
4s¢l ves vigorously, killing more than 500 and losing only oneman, an Englishman. 


‘ condition of the city of Jerusalem on that day 


most good Christians are glad to talk and hear about the holy city of Jerusalem 
{the holy places where Our Lord died and lived, we will tell you what it was like 
he day Saladin and the Saracens took it from the Christians.° Some will want to 
on; others can go past this place. 

Jerusalem is the most glorious and the most noble city in the world. It lies three 
4’ journey’ from Damascus and is not now situated in the same place as it was 
|Our Lord Jesus Christ was crucified. Then, but not now, it stood on Mount 
#1, The day the Saracens took it there was nothing in that place but a church and 
muastery.® It was there that the house stood where Jesus Christ had supper with 
postles and created the sacrament of the altar.’ In the same church was the 
¢ where he appeared to his apostles on Easter Day after he had been restored 
jife,'” In the same church too was the place where he showed the wounds in his 
«ls, feet and side to St Thomas on the octave of Easter.'' And it was there that he 
ed to his apostles on Ascension Day” and ate with them; then, when 


Frederick Il Hohenstaufen (1194-1250), crowned emperor in the West 1220, active in the 
Past 1228-29. 
In 1218-19 during the Fifth Crusade. 
See Eractes, RHC Oce., vol. 2, p. 339. 
~ Reynald of Haifa. 
This occurred in 1229, 
2 October 1187. 
Really about thirteen. 
Of Augustinian canons. 

14 


¢ 22:14, 
Mark 16:14; Luke 24:36; John 20:19, 
John 20:26, 
Luke 24:51; Mark 16:19; Acts 1:9, 



































14 


they had accompanied him to the Mount of Ol ives, he ascended to heaven. To this 


same place they returned and waited for the Holy Spirit, whom Our Lord himself 


had promised he would send them. Here too did Jesus Christ send them the Holy 
Spirit on the day of Pentecost.' In this same church was the place where my lady 
St Mary died, and from here they carried her to the valley of Jehosaphat for burial 
and laid her holy body in atomb. In the place where her tomb stood was the church 
known as the church of my lady St Mary of Jehosaphat, and an abbey of black 


monks.’ The church on Mount Sion was called the church of my lady St Mary of 


Mount Sion, and there was an abbey of monks there. These two abbeys stood 
outside the city walls, one on the hill and the other in the valley. Mount Sion abbey 
was to the right, southwards, and the one in the val ley of Jehosaphat lay to the east, 
between the Mount of Olives and Mount Sion. Mount Calvary and Our Lord’s 
tomb were outside the city walls when Jesus Christ was crucified; now they are 
inside them. The city lay ona slope facin ig the Mount of Olives, which rises up to the 
east over the valley of Jehosaphat. 


CHAPTER 3 
Of the same 


In the city of Jerusalem there were four main gates, each one opposite another in the 
form of a cross, with posterns in between. I will tel! you their names in order: the 
Gate of David lay westwards, directly opposite the Golden Gates which faced east 
behind the Temple Domini;; it was built against the Tower of David. You could 
stand inside this gate and turn right into a street which led past the Tower of David, 
and so out onto Mount Sion through a postern in the street on the left. Just as you 
went out of the postern, you saw the church of my lord St James of Galicia, brother 
of my lord St John the Evangelist. It was there, they said, that St James was beheaded, 
and that is why the church was built there.‘ The main street running directly from the 
Tower of David to the Golden Gates was known as David’s Street from that point 
to the Exchange. On the left of David’s Tower was a large square where corn was 
sold. A little further down David's Street, you came to a street on the left called the 
Patriarch’s Street, because the patriarch lived at the top of it. The patriarch had a 
gate giving access to the Hospital. Next there was a gate into the church of the 
Sepulchre, but this was by no means its main gate. Reaching the Exchange where 
David’s Street ended, you came to Mount Sion Street. Leaving the Exchange, you 
found a covered street, vaulted over, known as the Street of Plants, and here were 
sold all the vegetables, fruits and spices of the town. At the top of this street stood 





Acts 2. 

Benedictines. 

‘Of the Lord’; see below, chapter 6. 

The Armenian cathedral; St James the Great, son of Zebedee, ‘of Galicia’ refers to St 
James’ supposed grave in Santiago de Compostela 


FeyNe 


15 



































jurket, and behind the fish market was a very large open area where cheeses 
wold, and ducks and hens as well. To the right of this market were the stalls of 
rian goldsmiths, and here were sold the palm fronds which palmers take home 
the land beyond the sea. On the left of the market stood the booths of the 
dsmiths, Beyond them was a nunnery called St Mary the Great. Next 
was an abbey of black monks known as St Mary of the Latins, and after that, 

right, the Hospital. 


wht on from the Hospital was the main entrance into the Sepulchre. In front of 

as u fine open area paved with marble. To the left of the door into the Sepulchre 
he church of St James of the Jacobites. On the right and adjacent to the entrance 
‘aleps leading up to Mount Calvary. At the top of the Mount was a beautiful 
#1 leading into the church of the Sepulchre. Another flight of steps led down 
yside the church entrance. Below Mount Calvary lay Golgotha. On the right 
the Sepulchre’s bell-tower, and also a chapel called Holy Trinity.' This chapel 

ge and roomy, for all the brides in the city came to be married there, and it 
wld the font in which children were baptised. The chapel was directly adjacent 
pulchre and had a door leading into the church. Straight on from this door 
the Monument,’ and here the church was completely circular, and open above, 
avered, ‘The Monument itself was vaulted over, and contained the stone of the 
chive, Outside the Monument, at the apsidal end, was an altar called the Chever,' 
© mass was sung every day at dawn. A wide paved area surrounded the 
Kument, so that processions could move all round it. Next, going east, was the 
s choir where the canons sang; this was long. Between the canons’ choir 
the Monument there was an altar where the Greeks sang mass, but there was a 
lion separating the two, with a door leading from one to the other. In the centre 
i canons’ choir stood a marble lectern known as the Compass;' there they 
{ihe epistle. To the right of the high altar of the choir was Mount Calvary, so that 
" they were singing the mass of the Resurrection, the deacon singing the Gospel 
ill turn towards Calvary as he said, ‘Crucifixum’. Then he would turn 
Js the Monument, saying, ‘Surrexit, non est hic’. And he would point: 


Rights and lefis depend how the pilgrim is facing. The bell-tower and Trinity chapel 
lay west of the courtyard. 
Now referred to as the ‘aedicule’, ‘the little building’, housing what was left of the 
Rb discovered by St Helen, 
is word is left untranslated, as it means both the head end of a bed or couch and the 
idal end of a church, The author must mean the altar at the extreme west of the 
chureh, beyond the aedicule, 
Swe below, p,19, 







































































16 


‘Ecce locus ubi posuerunt eum’.' Then he would turn back and continue his Gospel. 
In the choir apse was a door by which the canons came in to their stalls on the right, 

Between this door and Mount Cal vary was a very deep cleft with stairs down 
into it, and here there was a place called St Helen. That is where St Helen found the 
cross, the nails, hammer and crown.’ Into this cleft, at the time Our Lord was 
buried, they used to throw the bodies of thieves who had been cruci fied, hanged, or 
had their feet, hands or heads cut off. All the justice that was done, was done on 
Mount Calvary. It was given the name ‘Calvary’ because executions and all the 
requirements of the law were done here, and it was there they shaved the limbs that 
criminals were condemned to lose? 

As the canons left the Sepulchre, they had their dormitory on their left and the 
refectory on their right, next to Mount Calvary. Between these two lay their cloisters 
and courtyard. In the centre of the courtyard was a large opening through which 
one could see St Helen’s chapel down underneath it, for otherwise it could not be 
seen at all. 


CuaptTer § 
Of the same 


Opposite the Exchange, joining the Street of Plants, was a street known as Mal 
Cuisinat, Ill Cooked. This was where they cooked foodstuffs which were then 
sold to pilgrims; and they also washed heads there. It was reached from Sepulchre 
Street. Just opposite II] Cooked Street was another called the Covered Street 
where cloth was sold, and this was all vaulted Over; it led to the Sepulchre. The 
street leading from the Exchange to the Golden Gates was called Temple Strect, 
and had this name because it led first to the Temple and then to the Golden Gates. 
On the left, going down this street towards the Temple, was the meat market where 
all the town’s meat was sold. On the right was another street leading to the Hospital; 
this was called Germans’ Street. On the left above the bridge was the church of m y 
lord St Giles. At the top of this street stood a pair of gates called the Precious 
Gates, so called because it was through them that Our Lord Jesus Christ entered the 





J; ‘Crucified. He is risen, he is not here. There is the place where they laid him,’ Matthew 
28:6. 

2. Helen, c. 250-330, mother of the emperor Constantine. 

3. “Shaved translates eschauvoit, which the writer derives from the Latin calvus and links 


with the word ‘Calvary’, “Calvary’ does derive from caivus. but only by way of calvaria, 
‘a skull", which is a translation of the Greek golgotha, ‘a skull’: see Matthew 27:33 
This ingenious back-formation no doubt contributed to the idea put forward by John 
of Wiirzburg, pilgrim c. 1170, who says that at the time of Christ in the Place of a Skull 
the heads of condemned criminals were Shaved and their hair cut off: J, Wilkinson, 
Jerusalem Pilgrimage, 1099-1185 (London, 1988), pp. 257-8), 


17 























lem when he went about on earth, These gates were in a wall which 
the city and the Golden Gates wall.' 


i the city wall and the Golden Gates wall stood the Temple. This was 
ed across an open space more than a bowshot in length and more than a 

WW Wide. ‘The whole area was paved, and so was known as the Pavement. 
4s you came through these gates, was the Temple of Solomon,? where 
of the Temple lived. Directly between the Precious Gates and the 


ps. Going up them, you came to another Pavement, an open area, very 
t ind paved over its whole extent with marble and entirely surrounding the 
shureh, This church was completely circular. On the left of the Temple’s 
ent stood the abbot and canons’ private quarters, and here there were 
t from the lower Pavement to this upper one and to the Temple. 
4, acljacent to the Temple church, was the chapel of the apostle, my lord St 
he Less, placed here because it was here he was martyred when the Jews 
down from the Temple.* Inside this chapel was the place where Our Lord 
livit freed the woman who was a sinner as they were leading her to execution 
sahe had been taken in adultery.° 
ie end of this Pavement, going towards sunrise, you went down more steps 
den Gates, Once down them, you were in a wide open space, approaching 
es, There stood the court which Solomon built.’ No one passed through 
Which in fact were blocked up, and they were unblocked and used only 
. A procession went through them on Palm Sunday because Our Lord 
iat Came in through them that day and was welcomed in procession;* and 
‘wh Holy Cross day in September,’ because it was through these gates that 
¥ (ross was brought back to the city of Jerusalem when the emperor Heraclius 
|i Persia and brought it back to the city through that gate, and people went 
‘Procession to meet him.'? As no one ever left the city through 


seems that the Precious Gates gave access to the Temple enclosure from the town. 
i Golden Gates were in the external wall behind the Temple, leading east. 
i als Aqua mosque. 
Temple ‘of the Lord’, the Dome of the Rock, under the Crusaders a church served 
} gustinian canons, 
An fet octagonal, 
1 ” son of Alphaeus, sentenced by the Sanhedrin to be stoned in AD 62. 


this relic was taken by Chosroes II in 614 and brought back in 629 by the Byzantine 
“emperor, Heraclius (c, 575-642). 





























18 


these gates, there was a postern further along known as the Jehosaphat Gate. People 
living in that part of the city went out by it. This postern stood on the left of the 
Golden Gates. To the south you went down from the upper Pavement to the lower 
Temple, and so to the Temple of Solomon. On the left, going down from the upper 
Pavement, was the church of the Cradle, where God, they say, was cradled in his 
childhood! 

The church of the Temple had four doors set as across. The first faced west and 
gave city-dwellers access to the Temple. By the eastern door you reached the 
chapel of St James, and then the Golden Gates. The southern door led to the 
Temple of Solomon and the northem one to the abbey. 


CHAPTER 7 


Of the same 


Now I have told you where the Temple and the Sepulchre stood, also the Hospital, 
and about the streets between the Gate of David and the Golden Gates, one runnin f 
on from the other, the one eastwards and the other to the west. Now I will tell you 
about two other gates, which stood opposite each other. 

The northern one was called St Stephen’s Gate, and through it came all the 
pilgrims and everyone who travelled to Jerusalem from Acre and from all the land 
between the river’ and Ascalon on the coast. Outside this gate, before enterin g the 
city, you had the church of my lord St Stephen on your right. It was there, they said, 
that my lord St Stephen was stoned to death.’ Opposite this church, on the left, was 
a large building called the donkey-house, where the Hospital’s donkeys and pack 
animals were kept. This church was demolished by the Christians in Jerusalem 
before they were besieged, because it stood close to the walls. The donkey-house 
was not demolished and afterwards it was, in fact, essential to visiting Christians, 
who paid to enter Jerusalem when the city was under Saracen control, because they 
would never let them reside within the city. For this reason the donkey-house was 
essential to them. On theright of St Stephen’s Gate and adjacent to the walls was 
the Jerusalem infirmary. Opposite this was a postern called the St Lazarus poster 
After the Saracens took the city from the Christians, they used this entrance to admit 
Christians privately to the Sepulchre, for they had no intention of letting Christians 
learn anything about their affairs or those of the city. For this reason they let them in 
by the Patriarch’s door in the street of the Sepulchre church, and never by the main 
entrance. But you can be sure that Christian pilgrims who wanted to go to the 
Sepulchre and the other holy places paid the Saracens very large sums of money; 
the Saracens reckoned the income at 30,000 bezants or more a year. Later, however, 





See Wilkinson, op.cit., p.43. 
Jordan, 
Acts 7:59, 


WN 


19 










































who should make such payments were excommunicated, so that this 
Phined 
win by the main St Stephen’s Gate, you found a street to the right and 
he left, leading south! to the Mount Sion Gate, and to a postern called 
sya straight on over the bridge. The street which ran to the Mount Sion 
1 St Stephen’s Street. Reaching the Syrians’ Exchange, you came 
0 Street on the right. In this was the door into the house of the Sepulchre; 
of the Sepulchre entered their houses and dwelling places. Coming 
Hnge, you found on the right a covered street, vaulted over, along which 
to the Sepulchre church. Syrians sold their fabrics in this street, and 
were made there. Fish was sold outside these Exchanges. Adjacent 
Were three streets leading to the Exchange of the Latins, One was called the 
| Street, where the Latins sold their cloth, the second was the Street of 
4d the third, Il Cooked Street. The Street of Plants led into Mount Sion 
ul out across the Street of David. Covered Street led into the Street of the 
‘This street was called the Arch of Judas Street, because it was said that 
wy i himself there? and it contained a stone arch. On the left of this street 
1h called St Martin’s and near this gate was a church of St Peter. There, 
i |, Jesus Christ put mud on the eyes of the man who had never been able to 


lle Mount Sion Gate there were three roads; that on the right led to the 
«/ church of Mount Sion; between the abbey and the city walls was a large 
anda church. Turning left and following the city walls, you came to the 
‘(jates and from there went down into the valley of Jehosaphat. This was 
‘Way to the Pool of Siloam." On the right of this gate stood the church of St 
4 Ga licantu, This contained a deep ditch where it was said St Peter hid 
n fier he denied Christ; there he heard the cock crow and there he wept.’ 
leading directly south from this gate went over Mount Sion, passing the 
slown the hill and so on to Bethlehem, 


id 


pilgrimage in the Holy Land 


d 


the hill you came to a pool in the valley called Germain’s Pool, because 
citizen of that name had it made to collect rainwater coming down from 


South’ supplied from the Chronique d'Ernoul et de Bernard le Trésorier, ed. L. de 
Maow 273. aris, 1871), p, 200, 


Mi 
Mi 
il ‘ 


Jolin 97, 
Mat 26:75; Mark 14:68; Luke 22:61; John 18:27, 


















































20 


the hills; the city’s horses were watered there.' Across the valley on the left not far 
away was a burial place known as Aceldama. Pilgrims who died in the Hospital of 
Jerusalem were laid there. The piece of land where it stood had been bought with 
the pence for which Judas sold the flesh of Jesus Christ, as the gospel bears witness.’ 
Outside the Gate of David was a pool to the west called the Patriarch’s Pool, where 
the water of that area was collected for horses to drink. Near this pool was a burial 
place called the Lion’s Graveyard. It happened once, they say, ona day long ago, 
that Christians and Saracens fought a battle between this graveyard and Jerusalem 
in which many Christians were killed, and the victorious Saracens were going to 
burn them all next day because of the stench. Buta lion came at night, so it was said, 
and put them all into this ditch, and so it is called the Lion’s Graveyard.’ Above the 
graveyard was a church where mass was sung daily. 

About a league away was a nunnery where one of the pieces of the True Cross 
is said to have been found. The nuns belonged to a country called Anegie; some 
said it was the land of Femenie.‘ 

The upright stake of the True Cross was taken from in front of the Temple. It had 
been brought from Lebanon with timber for the Temple, and left there because no 
one could find any place to use it where it was not either too long or too short. Thus 
ithappened, they said, that people going to the Temple and getting their feet muddy 
would wipe their feet on it. Then one day a queen went that way, saw it covered 
with mud, wiped it with her own clothes and adored it. Now I will tell you about this 
piece of wood, and how it came, so they say, to this land. Adam lay on his death 
bed and begged one of his sons for the love of God to bring him a twig from the tree 
whose fruit he had eaten when he sinned. It was brought, and he put it in his mouth 
Then he clenched his teeth on it, and his soul left him. After he died, no one could 
get the twig out from between his teeth, and so he was buried, they say, with the twig 
in his mouth. It took root and grew into a fine tree. Then when the F lood came, it 
uprooted the tree and carried it to the mountain of Lebanon. From there it was 
brought to Jerusalem with the other timber felled on that mountain for the building of 
the Temple. It happened, so it was said, that when Jesus Christ was hung on the 
cross, Adam’s head was enclosed in the timber, and that when Christ’s blood flowed 
from his wounds, Adam’s head came out of the cross and received the blood. In 





1. In 1186 Germain had the choked-up well near the Spring of Siloam dug out and water 
brought up by a continuous circle of wheel-mounted pots, worked by horse-power; 
see the description in The Conquest of Jerusalem and the Third Crusade, trans. & ed 
Peter W. Edbury (Aldershot, 1996), p. 16. 


2 Matthew 27:7; Acts 1:19. 

3. This tradition refers to the capture of Jerusalem in 615 by Chosroes II when 20,000 
Christians died. See Wilkinson, pp. 202, 307. 

4. Anegie represents Abasgia, i.e. western Georgia, on the Black Sea; Femenie refers to 


the land of women, the Amazon legend, In the opening lines of his Knight's Tale 
Chaucer speaks of ‘the land of Femenye, that whylom was yeleped Scithia’, 





21 




































y of this all the crucifixes made in the land of Jerusalem have a head placed at 
tof the cross.' 

Georgians who are in the abbey from which part of the Cross was taken 
trom a country called Anegine. There are a king and a queen in that land, and 
ull it the land of Femenie, because the queen rides to war and maintains an 
# Women just as the king keeps an army of men, In this country women have 
j@ breast, and I will tell you why: when a female is born and has grown a little, 
i off her right breast with a hot knife and leave her the left one to suckle her 
i, The reason they do this is so that the breast shall not get in her way when 
g in battle. 

¢e leagues west of Jerusalem there was a spring called the Fountain of 
iis,’ Emmaus castle stands beside it. They said that Our Lord was sitting by 
‘ing, With his two disciples when they recognised him in the breaking of the 

is reported in the Gospel which is read in Holy Church.’ 


wR9 
@ holy places of the Holy Land 


T return to St Stephen’s Gate and to the street on the left which led to the 
ern. A good distance along this street another called Jehosaphat Street 
+hed off to the left. As soon as you had gone a little further, you came to a 
ouds, leading on the left to the Temple; from this you went straight to the 

e. At the end of this road was a gate leading to the Temple called the Gate 
. Through this gate Our Lord Jesus Christ passed when they led him to 
to be crucified and that is why it was called the Gate of Sorrow. On the 
s crossroads was the stream to which the Gospel bears witness when it 
hat Our Lord crossed it as he was taken to be crucified.* A church of St John 
vinigelist stood here, and there was also a large dwelling house. These both 
ied to the nuns of Bethany, who lived there when Christians and Saracens 

at war.’ 

»w I shall return to Jehosaphat Street. Between this street and the city walls, 
ie left, were streets forming as it were a town. Mostof the Syrians in Jerusalem 


The blood and water flowed ... onto the head of Adam and washed away all the sins of 
the human race’, Saewulf, pilgrim c. 1102, in Wilkinson , p. 128; see also pp. 36, 102, 259 
fora dissenting view. Professor Folda writes: “Not all crucifixes made in the holy land 
have Adam’s skull at the foot of the Cross but many do, and it is a regular feature of 
middle Byzantine iconography as well. For Crusader examples, see H. Buchthal, 
Miniature Painting in the Latin Kingdom of Jerusalem (Oxford, 1957), plates 56, 57.’ 
rivate communication.) 

mmaus Fontenoid, now Abu Ghosh; see Wilkinson, pp, 71-3. for different sites 

Beeitiod sa Emmaus. 
13; 


Kedron, John 18:1, 
Bethany was in open country 2.5 kilometres east of Jerusalem . 















































N 
nm 


lived here, and these streets were called the Jewry. In this Jewry was the church of 
St Mary Magdalene; near the church was a postern, leading out not into the fields 
but along between two walls. On the right of Jehosaphat Street was the church of 
Rest; there, it was said, Our Lord Jesus Christ rested as he was being led to 
crucifixion. There too was the prison where he was held the night he was apprehended 
in Gethsemane. Just before that, in the same street, had stood the house of Pilate, 
Opposite this house on the left was a gate leading to the Temple. Close by and to 
the left of the Jehosaphat Gate, was a nunnery called St Anne’s. In front of this was 
a spring known as the fountain above the pool. This spring does not flow, but was 
underneath a church placed over it. Into this pool, in the time of Jesus Christ, angels 
used to descend and move the water, and the first sick person to reach it after it was 
moved was cured of their disease.’ Around this pool stood five porches where the 
sick used to lie, 

As you left the Gate of Jehosaphat and went down into the valley of Jehosaphat, 
there was an abbey of black monks. In this abbey was a church of my lady St 
Mary, and in the church was the tomb where she was buried. When the Saracens 
captured the city they demolished the abbey and took the stones away to reinforce 
the city, but they did not touch the church. 

Opposite this church at the foot of the Mount of Olives there was a church on a 
rock called Gethsemane. There Our Lord was arrested. About a stone’s throw 
away on the other side of the road, going towards Mount Olivet, was the church of 
the Holy Saviour. It was there Jesus Christ went to pray the night he was arrested 
and there the sweat fell from his body like drops of blood.* Hermits and solitaries 
lived in the valley of Jehosaphat, all the way along it as far as the Pool of Siloam, for 
I cannot name them all. On Mount Olivet was an abbey of white monks.’ Near it 
on the right a road led to Bethany. Ona bend of this road was a church called Holy 
Pater Noster. There it was said Our Lord composed the Pater Noster and taught it 
to the apostles. Nearby was the fig tree which God cursed as he was going into 
Jerusalem.‘ Between Pater Noster church and Bethany was a church called 
Bethphage, where Jesus Christ went on Palm Sunday; he sent two of his disciples 
into Jerusalem that day to look for a donkey and from there he rode the donkey into 
Jerusalem.’ 

Now I have told you the names of the abbeys and churches of Jerusalem outside 
the city, and of those in the streets of the Latins, but I have said nothing at all about 
the abbeys and churches of the Syrians, nor of the Greeks, Jacobites, Bedouin,’ 





The Pool of Bethesda, John 5:4. 

Matthew 26:47; Mark 14:43: Luke 22:54. 

Matthew 26:36; Mark 14:32: Luke 22:44. 

Augustinian canons. 

Matthew 6:9; Luke 11:2, 

Matthew 21:19; Mark 11:13 & 20. 

Mark 11:1-10. 

In the text: Boavinz. This must refer to a church or monastery for the use of Christian 
Arabs in Jerusalem. See Anna-Dorothee v. den Bt incken, Die ‘Nationes Christianorum 
Orientalium' im Verstiindnis der Lateinischen Historiographie (Cologne, 1973) p. 188 


PADMPwWNe 


23 























Winns, Armenians, or any of the other peoples who had churches and abbeys 
‘wily but were not of the Roman obedience, The reason I have no intention of 
J you about all these people just mentioned is that they are said never in any 
ih ve accepted obedience to Rome. 


we have told you what the holy city of Jerusalem was like on the day when 
1 unc the other Saracens took it from the Christians. Next we will tell you 
ilpriims made their pilgrimages. Those in the West, that is to say in the kingdom 
in Germany and the other lands in that part of the world, who want to go 
Holy Land, must go directly east. In those days they had to enter Jerusalem 
tephen’s Gate. (Near that gate he was stoned.)' He must go straight to the 
hiof the Sepulchre of Our Lord Jesus Christ. Atthe entrance to the Sepulchre, 
on the right, was the chapel of Mount Calvary where Our Lord was crucified. 

y in the place of Golgotha, where Our Lord’s blood flowed down the rock. 
they said, the head of Adam was found after the flood. There Abraham 
wuerifice to Our Lord.? There Our Lord said to the penitent thief who asked 
vy, ‘Amen, I tell you! Today you shall be with me in paradise." There 
#18 regained his sight through Our Lord’s blood with which he touched his 
A‘ the foot of Mount Calvary, on the right, were the place and the pillar to 
Lord was tied, bound and flogged.’ Next, eastwards, 44 steps down, 
ie place where St Helen found the True Cross.* In the choir of the church was 
pulehre of Our Lord Jesus Christ and there beside it was the Compass that 
«nil measured with his hand, in the middle of the world, as it was said.° There 
viel Cod when they took him down from the cross. There he was anointed and 
wd in the shroud. In the left part of the choir was Our Lord’s prison. Near 
ie first appeared to Mary Magdalene after the resurrection.’ On the right of 
wh altar, high up, the True Cross was adored. On Easter Eve when noon was 
nil the sun touched the arm of St Gabriel, whose picture was painted above 


If, pilgrim c. 1102 (before the crusaders extended the church), in Wilkinson, p 
104; ‘Outside the church of the Holy Sepulchre but within its surrounding walls, is ‘the 
face called Compas, where our Lord Jesus Christ with his own hand marked and 
easured the centre of the world,’ 

thew 28:9; Mark 16:9; John 20:14, 





24 


the Sepulchre, holy fire came from above and lit one of the lamps ofthe Sepulch 
On the left outside the door into the Sepulchre was the altar of St John the Bapt 
Beside the church of the Sepulchre stood the church of St Mary of the Latins; 
Mary Cleophas. There St Mary Magdalene, Mary mother of James and the ot 
women tore their hair when they saw Our Lord hanging on the cross.2 Near th 
was the Hospital of St John. Two bowshots away was the Temple of Our Lo 
with four entrances and twelve doors. There was the place of confession wh 
used to be called Sancta Sanctorum: There stood the pillar which the Saracx 
adored after capturing the city because it was said to be the altar on which h 
Abraham intended to sacrifice his son.’ In the middle of the Temple was a rock 
which were placed the Ark of the Covenant, the rod of Aaron and the five book: 
Moses.* It was on this rock that Jacob fell asleep and saw angels ascending a 
descending to heaven ona ladder.® On this rock appeared the angel holding 
sword with which he slew the people in vengeance when David numbered them.’ 
this Temple Our Lord was offered and presented by aged St Simeon.® Above t! 
rock the angel appeared to Zachariah to tell him that he would father a son.’ It 
there Our Lord forgave the sins of the woman taken in adultery and delivered | 
from the Jews.'” There Our Lord took shelter when the Jews tried to arrest him a 
the rock rose up above his head and made room for him and a star came down a 
gave him light.'' Between the Temple gates, towards the path, is the spring of whi 
they sing between Easter and Pentecost: Vidi aquam egredientem de Templc 
latere dextero, etc.'” The pinnacle of the Temple is the place where Our Lo 
allowed the devil to set him in order to test him."? From the pinnacle St James w 
flung; he was the first bishop of Jerusalem.'* On the paved area around the Tem} 
used to stand an altar where, under the old law, Jews would sacrifice doves a 
pigeons. Between this altar and the Temple the Jews killed Zachariah, son. 
Barachiah.'’ At the Beautiful Gate of the Temple lay the cripple whom St Peter a 


I, See the moving account of Daniel the Abbot, pilgrim from Russia c.1107, of the comi 
of the holy fire, Wilkinson, pp. 166-70; also the report of the pilgrim Theoderic (1 164-7) 
Wilkinson, p. 283. 

2 Matthew 27:55; Mark 15:40; Luke 23:49; John 19:25. 

3, ‘The holy of holies’, 1 Kings 6:16. Pilgrims used to go for confession to a cave belo 
the Dome of the Rock in which Jesus was said to have forgiven the woman taken it 

adultery. 

4 Genesis 22:9. Perhaps the stump of a column, resembling an altar. 

5. Numbers 17:7; Deuteronomy 31:26. 

6. Genesis 28:12. 

7. 1 Chronicles 21:15. 

8 


A Luke 2:25, 
9. Jesus’ cousin, John the Baptist, Luke 1:11, 
10. John 7:11, 
Il. Perhaps a version of the events in Luke 4:29-30, or John 8:59, 
12. “I saw water flowing from the right side of the Temple.’ Ezekiel 47:1, anthem sung at 


High Mass during Eastertide. 

13. Matthew 4:5; Luke 4:9, This ‘pinnacle’ was the surviving south-east corner of Herod 
wall around the Temple area. 

14. See above, chapter 6. 

15. The Old Testament prophet; Matthew 23:35, 


2s 











































(ought to his feet,' South of the Temple of Our Lord stood the Temple of 
} Past from here inside the angle of the Temple enclosure were the bedstead 
with of Our Lord, Our Lady's bed and St Simeon’s tomb. East of the 
) were the Golden Gates through which Our Lord rode on the donkey 
ore junday;? the three steps can still be seen in the hard rock of the stairs up to 
ile, to the northward. Outside the Temple walls was the Pool, This was a 
here an angel used to come and move the water so as to heal the first sick 
sho entered it.’ 


of) i 


the holy places of the Holy Land of Jerusalem 


© was the church of St Anne, mother of Our Lady," and in it she lies, Up 
ui there stood the church of the Magdalene. North-east from the Sepulchre 
fuuteh of St Christopher, who lay in the ground for 800 years.’ South of 
“hte stood Mount Sion. There was a fine church there in honour of Our 
1 it was in that place she passed from this world. From here the apostles 
| w body to the valley of Jehosaphat. At the upper end of the choir in this 

4 un) altar where the Holy Spirit descended upon the apostles;’ on the left 
(sane was the table at which Our Lord had supper with his apostles and 

/ Down below is a hollow which held the stone from which came the 
ord used to wash his disciples’ s feet; and that is where he stood after his 
wand said, ‘Peace be among you!”* And yet the doors were closed, 
Thomas touched Our Lord’s wounds. There on the left was the courtyard 
Stephen was buried. On the left was a chapel which had been the house 
wi, in Which Our Lord was bound, sentenced, mocked, beaten, spat on 
ned with thorns, On the right of Mount Sion, across the valley, was the 
Ay ere Our Lord appeared to St Peter and the women." Next to the 
int Sion was asmall church where once stood the Praetorium mentioned 
rel" Beyond Mount Sion stood a church in the place St Peter went to 
sied Our Lord; this was called Gallicantu.” On the southern slope of the 
PAcaldamo. This was the field of blood which was bought with the thirty 


oh 
id 
rd 
th 
le 
ul 
af 
ul 


Bl 
above, chapter 9, 
Pool of Bethesda, John 5. 
{mentioned by name in the second-century apocryphal Gospel of St James. 
ird century, martyred in Asia Minor. 


. 
ew 26:20; Mark 14:18; Luke 22:14; John 13. 
ahove, chapter 2, 
; slo hg vi Mount of Olives. 
28:9; 


wh Te sdeociont, Toh 18:28 & 33. 
iliove, chapter 7, 


u 
I 

















26 


pence for which God had been sold.' Near there was the Pool of Siloam which | 
mentioned in the Gospel;’ nearby was the tomb of the prophet Isaiah. Betwee 
Jerusalem and the Mount of Olives lay the valley of Jehosaphat, which contained th 
tomb of Our Lady; and near this ran the Brook Kedron, called Torrentem Cedron 
In this valley lay King Jehosaphat’ and his tomb, which gave the valley its name. 1 
the far side of the Brook Kedron the Jews arrested Our Lord and took him to bv 
crucified. Our Lord used to go to the garden that stood there, and that is where li 
was arrested. In it was Gethsemane, where God left his disciples when he went ti 
pray to his father and said, Pater, si fieri potest, transeat a me calix iste.’ An 
there was a church there. A short stone’s throw away was the place where |\ 
sweated and his sweat fell to the ground like drops of blood. In Gethsemane the’ 
showed a stone where the Jews bound Our Lord when they arrested him, so it | 
said. Near the valley of Jehosaphat was a church where holy Zachariah the prophe 
and aged St Simeon and St James the bishop were buried. From the summit of th 
Mount of Olives Our Lord rose to heaven. There was a fine church there, and in i 
were his footprints, made as he stood still before ascending. Nearby was a hollow 
where the body of St Pelagia the martyr lay.5 Not far away stood a chapel in the 
place where Our Lord taught the Lord’s Prayer to his disciples. 

A league from Jerusalem was Bethany, where Simon the leper® had a house and 
where Our Lord forgave Mary Magdalene her sins and brought Lazarus back (0 
life,’ Further on was the Quarantaine, where Our Lord fasted forty days and forty 
nights.’ Beyond this was the Garden of Abraham’ and near the Garden was Jericho. '' 
Two leagues from Jericho ran the River Jordan in which Our Lord was baptised 
From there it is a day’s journey to Kerak"' and then another as far as Montreal." 

The road to Bethlehem runs from the Gate of David. Half way along this road 
was a church where holy Elias lived. Among the vineyards near Bethlehem was the 
tomb of Rachel, Jacob’s wife. In Bethlehem were the church of Our Lady where 
Our Lord was born, the crib where he was laid and his hard stone pillow. In the 
cloister an arch sheltered the tomb of St Jerome and the burial place of the Innocent 
One league from Bethlehem was a church in the place where the angel announced 
the birth of Our Lord to the shepherds. It was there that Gloria in excelsis dea 


See above, chapter 8. 

See above, chapter 7. 

King of Judah in the ninth century BC. 

‘Father, if it is possible, let this cup pass from me’, Matthew 26:39. 
An actress who died a penitent in a cave on the Mount of Olives. 
Matthew 26:6. 

John 11. 

Matthew 4. ‘Quarantaine’, a forty-day period, but here applied to a place, a mountain 
and castle near Jericho. 

9. A defensible camp for pilgrims visiting the Place of Baptism. 

10. Thirty-nine kilometres north-east of Jerusalem. 

ll. South, to Kerak of Moab, a castle in the Transjordan. 

12, Shawbak, another major castle. 


PADMPwWhre 


27 









































or the first time.' A little way up the road from Bethlehem was a small 
vhere Our Lady rested after giving birth, 
hh from Bethlehem lay Hebron, where Our Lord formed Adam from the 
Hamascus. There too were buried the three patriarchs, Abraham, Isaac 
wh, with their wives, and Joseph, Adam and Eve. Near there Our Lord 
to Abraham as the Trinity, for he saw three and adored one.’ A league 
water was the place where the Holy Cross was found, and where it grew. 
ues from there was St John of the Wood, where Our Lady greeted 
ih,‘ there St John was born, son of Zachariah.’ Another league on was the 
Jimmaus, where Our Lord appeared to his disciples on Easter Day. Three 
a from Jerusalem was a chasm called the Lion’s Graveyard. A lion placed 
d martyrs in this chasm in the time of King Chosroes.’ 
ses north of Jerusalem were Nablus and the well beside which Our 
J with the Samaritan woman.’ There stood the mountain to which Abraham 
HHon Isaac in order to sacrifice him.’ Two leagues away was Sebastea 
{ John the Baptist was beheaded and the dust of his body lay there." Ten 
‘ ards stood Mount Tabor where Our Lord was transfigured.” Not far 
ye was Mount Hermon where the city of Nain stood. There, outside the 
#, Out Lord brought a child back to life." 
af this lay the Sea of Galilee, which is simply a freshwater lake formed by 
srdlan and the other streams which run into it. By the Sea of Galilee Our 
with his apostles after his resurrection." He ate the backs of fishes, leaving 
bones stripped bare, but the rest of each fish remained whole. Then he 
yi into the water and the fishes at once came to life again and swam off with 
», but all without backs except for the stripped backbones. These fish are 
| or larger than freshwater thornbacks or mullets in France. Beside this 
| place where Our Lord satisfied the hunger of five thousand men, and of 
jon and children too, with five loaves and two fishes, And the leftover 
of these five loaves and two fishes completely filled twelve baskets."’ 
Worn here lay the city of Nazareth. It was here that the holy angel Gabriel 
ad to Our Lady that the son of God would take flesh within her.'* Her home 
1), und so too was the spring from which she fetched water to give Our 


= —_— = 


a Det et ee ee 


j 

ub} to God in the highest’, Luke 2:9-14, 
joni 1H, 

yo 1157. 

above, chapter 8. 


4 22:9, 
iiiliew 14:10, A tomb and ‘ashes of St John’ were shown at Sebastea and a tradition 
wip he he had been beheaded there. 


when 
wi thd, 

+y 14:15; Mark 6:41; Luke 9:12; John 6:5. 
he bt, 

















28 


Lord. In the stream that flowed from it Our Lady used to wash the clothes s 
dressed him in. This was the spring to which Our Lady used to send Our Lo 
when he was a little older, and he was always glad to go and fetch water in jugs at 
pitchers or other containers.' This was later, after they came back from the land 
Egypt. 

Near Nazareth was a town called Cana of Galilee. In it was the place whe: 
Our Lord changed water into red wine, as it says in the Gospel.? All these pilgrimag. 
Ihave told you about are in the Holy Land of Jerusalem and the Holy Promise 
Land. 

Now I will tell you about the other more distant pilgrimages. Near the city « 
Damascus was a mountain and on this stood a church of Our Lady, St Mary of th 
Rock, so it was said. In this church were twelve nuns and eight monks. The plac 
was called Sardenay; some people referred to it as Our Lady of Sardenay.? In thi 
church was a wooden tablet measuring one ell in length and half an ell across. On i 
carved into the wood, was depicted the image of Our Lady St Mary. Oil smellin | 
sweeter than balm came from this image, and many sick people used to anoin 
themselves with it and were much helped by it. Yet however much was taken, th 
quantity of oil never grew less. All the Saracens of the nei ghbourhood used to go ti 
this church on Lady Day in mid-August and in September,‘ and there they prayed 
adored and made offering. This image was made in Constantinople; a patriarch o 
Jerusalem brought it away; an abbess asked him for it, was given it and took it to th 
place I spoke of. 

Tortosa is the place where a church was first built in honour of the Mother o 
God. Originally it was dedicated jointly to Our Lady and St Peter, the apostle. 

In Beirut there was an image of Jesus Christ made soon after he ascended int¢ 
heaven. Out of hatred to Our Lord, the Jews crucified this image. They struck it in 
the side with a lance and from this side flowed water and blood. Through this 
miracle many believed in Our Lord. This water and blood were used to anoint sick 

people and many were healed, 

In the city ofnew Babylon in Egypt and at the Cairo — Babylon was the city and 
Cairo the castle — in this Babylon there was a spring. In it Our Lady washed the 
clothes of her dear son when they fled from King Herod into Egypt. The Saracens 
felt great reverence for it and were happy to go and wash in it. This spring watered 
the trees which bore the true balm. In Cairo castle in those days there was a date 
palm bearing fruit. Our Lady St Mary one day was under this tree and wished for 
some dates, but the tree was too tall and she could not get them. The tree bowed 
itself down to her feet. The glorious lady took some fruit and then the tree rose up 
again in the sight of many Saracens and heathens who were present. Then the 
Saracens cut the tree down, but next day they found it standing straight up again, 


See the apocryphal Gospel of St Thomas. 
| 9 


iF 

2. John 2:1. 

3. An Orthodox monastery still in existence. 
4, 15 August; 8 September, 


of 


29 

























d, with no cut or axe-mark to be seen, From then on they treated the tree 


« to the prophecy of the son of Agap 


ve heard about some of the holy places and the pilgrimages in the Holy Land 
je sea at the time when Saladin, the great prince of the Muslims, conquered 
ans and took the Holy Land from them, as the people of the country show 
etibe them. But because the unbelievers possessed then, and do still possess, 
# Work composed much earlier by a Saracen Muslim, from which those who 
“ill learn much about events of Saladin’s days, and earlier - and later too, for 
vents have not yet occurred, and Saracens consider this writing prophetic 
Ahat all its contents will come true - for this reason we will repeat it for those 


il like to hear it.' 
Ta) 
wins the prophecy of the son of Agap’ 


‘What is said in the book of the son of Agap, an unbelieving follower of 
mud’s law. This son of Agap was a physician and a philosopher, and the 
hilosopher’ rings as if to say, one who sets the sciences in order. Through 
iy the son of Agap knew the courses of the stars and the planets, This is 


~ Whoever reads this work will know that I have laboured, struggled 
idl studied with all my strength to write these passages, which are of 
» knowledge, and must realise too that no philosopher can succeed 
yo is not wise, truly valiant and powerful in learning. Nor have I 
iidle this study, this work, for idiots but for kings and wise men. Listen 
Hear tell of the end of the kingdom of those who hold and follow 

¢ law of Muhammad, Lear that in the West a star will appear, its tail 
42 44 a lance and its face round like a shield. In those days the 
yom of the Saracens shall be destroyed. Then out of Arabia shall 


‘ere are several versions of this prophecy, whose author is also described as ‘Isaac, 
Hof ttannan’, Written in Arabic, probably at Damietta early in 1220 by a Nestorian 

jan, a Syrian, it was warmly welcomed by the legate Pelagius, who quickly had it 

anal J. It announces the imminent downfall of Islam and the Christian recapture of 
erimalem, See P, Pelliot, ‘Two Passages from "La Prophétie de Hannan, fils d'Isaae", in 

ty rw John, the Mongols and the Ten Lost Tribes, ed, CP. Beckingham and B, Hamilton 


Ol, 1996), pp, 113-37. 
author's own interpretation of some of the following prophecies, see below, 


30 


come a sign and after him a noble man who will rei gn over the earth and 
over the mountains and long shall he rule without battle. After him shall 
come anation who will be called Turks. Atthe beginning of their time 
a king will come whose people do not believe in God and they will 
destroy the city of Bilbeis.' Without blame, without guilt shall he lose it, 
and very cheaply shall he sell his sons, his daughters and his men; he 
shall give them away as worthless. After this man shall rule one who 
bears a yellow banner.’ His eyes are black and he will be true and 
compassionate in his words. He will conquer his enemies and take 
Damascus. In his time shall many men’s heads be cut off. A man of 
his kinship’ shall attack the city of Tripoli, and that day there will be 
much suffering among the men of that kingdom. And he will sell the 
men of the kingdom at a very low price. Woe unto you, Hattin, let me 
weep for you, for your commanders shall be led away like camels and 
your knights condemned, brave men turned coward and faint-hearted! 
Woe be to you Ascalon, to your houses, your wealth and your 
strongholds! You shall be overthrown and barely a trace of you remain. 
And he who bears the yellow banner shall take Daron, Beirut and Sidon. 
Many shall fly before him in terror in those days, many shall fall under 
his feet, no city or castle shall stand before him, none but Tyre. The city 
of Tyre, no one shall take, for God will defend it. Woe be to you, 
Arabia‘ and to the north for fear ofhim! Woe be to you, Jerusalem! 
By his skill and wisdom shall this man take you, his enemies shall lie 
under his feet and he will give them away fora trivial price.> Woe be to 
you, Acre! In you shall be great fear, great suffering and darkness. 
Terrible will be your anguish, your houses soaked in the blood of 
slaughter. Sorrow be upon you, fields of Acre! Many a stream of 
blood will flow across you, in a single day great ladies will die by 
thousands; the river will run red with your blood. Vessels will put hurriedly 
Out to sea, will be shattered and many people drowned. You will weep 
blood, my friends, not tears. After that a great king will come, will land 
in Acre and will stay there because of this, He shall be lord of counsel 
and of reason, shall be of the lineage of kings and shall bring with him a 
great host raging like fire. All shall be under his command. Another 
king will come to his help and he and his men will take Acre by force of 




















_ 


A reference to King Amaury of Jerusalem (1163-74), who sacked the Egyptian city of 
Bilbeis and massacred the inhabitants in 1168. 


z Saladin. 

3 His brother al-‘ Adil, ‘Saphadin’. 

4. This term was often used to mean all the non-Christian country east of the Jordan 
5: Jerusalem surrendered to Saladin on 2 October 1187. 














31 






































umbers.' He will kill and enslave, but never shall he be able to free 
jerusalem from the hand of him that bears the yellow banner. How 
Judly would I live long enough to be there then and give him good 
qunsel! It would be in the name of God. 


pula 
panne 


~ Tut after seven times four years and half one more, the Turks will 
ove the land captured by the lord of counsel, bearer of the yellow 
unner. And these shall be the signs: great hosts will come joyfully 
‘om beyond the sea, will gather in Egypt as those others did before, 
jindl go forward like thunder. They will have no fear of death and their 
hunners will move onward. Thin-faced and tall shall be their leader’ 
and all shall be under his command. His lordship shall be above the 
lordship of the kings and all shall be obedient to him and to his orders. 
‘his is no marvel, for all his armies will obey his commands « the 
ands of God! - and the victory shall always be his, Sorrow be 
‘Turks in the days of this lean man, for in those days they will lose 
whole lordship! This has God decided and laid down. And! 
truly, for in the month of July the Turks’ kingdom and their rule 
ahull perish. Then people will say that this man is wise. I tell no lie, for 
these unbelieving peoples will press onward one after another, eager 
sy war, Fearful and anxious, all the kings of the heathen will tremble 
hefore them. 
~ Oh Damietta,’ sorrow be upon you and all your neighbourhood in 
the time of this thin man! Where is the beauty of your courtyards, 
where are your sweet fruits? Where are your tall and noble palm trees? 
deed they shall be cut down, every one of them; it will be hard to 
believe they ever existed. Woe to the knights of the Cairo, for battle 
‘shall rage right into the camel market and into the city and shall pierce 
‘the hearts of all who see and hear it. New-born infants shall turn old 
and White-haired for anguish, the birds of the air shall gorge themselves 
on the flesh of the slain and the city of the Cairo shall perish. 


, Which had fallen to Saladin in July 1187, was besieged by forces from the Latin 
and the Third Crusade from en pee 1189 until July 1191, Philip 1 Augustus of 
“Trance, the first of the kings alluded to here, joined the siege on 20 April 1191 and 
Hichard Lof England, the second king, arrived before the beleagueted city early in 


: P »bably a reference to the papal legate, Cardinal Pelagius of Albano. 
At ell icra laid siege to Damietta in May 1218 and captured the city in early 
Jove 1219, 


32 


Woe be unto you, Egypt, for you shall be called ‘blackened’ and 
such shall be the meaning of your name, Terre Nercie, blackened 
land;' fire shall burn you because of your sins. And in the time of this 
thin man Jerusalem shall be destroyed and its walls flung down; at this 
the whole world shall weep. Great too will be the grief for the captivity 
of Egypt. Then Nix and Xuan,? two of Egypt’s noble cities, shall be 
destroyed; then in great violence and very suddenly shall Egypt perish, 
it shall fall as a flood falls, as a stream tumbles down a mountainside. 
Andaman of noble birth will come and will take Damascus and Palmyra 
which is beyond Damascus and all the surrounding country - but he will 
not keep them as long as a year and four months, 

Weep, you people of the country, weep, for you will see many men’s 
heads cut off! Much will you see then to astonish you, and much 
hardship. Wolves will gather, and you shall see to what end the land of 
Egypt willcome. Pharaoh’s kingdom will perish, both Egypt and Syria; 
in men and in riches it will decline. Nothing will be seen there but wild 
beasts in waste land. Then by God’s will Baalbek and Homs will be 
taken and devastated. Great battles will be fought between peoples 
and great numbers slain. Muhammad will be angry, grief will be bitter. 
The Arabs will be destroyed and their power will end. The armies 
which came from the west will vanish away like snow. Many men will 
be discovered living wild in waste land like animals. All will be reduced 
to utter poverty, seven days and seven nights shall they weep. 

Now a great man will come from the north, and aking of Araby will 
come and in that cruel time will destroy Mecca. The battle will draw 
near. And in the fields shall be found a she-camel heavy with young; 
she will give birth, and those who see her will say, ‘This camel belonged 
to the Turks’. And nowhere will anyone find clear water to drink. 
After this Antichrist will come, and will change the condition of many 
people from what they were before. The River Nile will hardly rise at 
all. Bad people will mix with good, just as water is mixed with wine. 
This will continue for four years and four months. In the West a star 
shall be born, and beyond this none shall speak. Then shall follow the 
day of judgement upon those who are not in the way of Our Lord Jesus 
Christ. 

Listen to me, you friend of God, hear the good things I have said! | 
have leamed them from good masters and from those who speak 
goodness. All that you have heard will happen. However much these 
things may delay, they cannot fail. 


lL. ‘Egypt’ is a Greek word, meaning not known; the native name for the country was 
Kimet, ‘black’, referring to the colour of the soil. 

2. Probably Qus, justnorth of Luxor, and Aswan, still further up the Nile, important trading 
centres, 








43 



































{a the record of the book of the son of Agap. 


who destroyed the city of Bilbeis was Amaury, king of Jerusalem, The 
‘the yellow banner was Saladin, ‘The kinsman who came to his help was 
er, Saphadin, Saladin took Damascus and attacked the city of Tripoli, He 
Tripoli, and razed the defences of the city of Ascalon and destroyed it, for 
Christians after they took the city of Acre back from him, He captured 
Beirut and Jerusalem and the whole of the Promised Land except the 
vie. The king who took Acre by force of numbers and killed its people was 
ingot France, ‘The king who helped him was King Richard of England. He 
«unable to free Jerusalem from the hand of Saladin, bearer of the yellow 
These things are found written in the preceding account. 


he necount of Saladin and of his heirs who were disinherited 


ted many people and conquered more lands than all the unbelieving 
j who ever lived before him. All his life he succeeded in everything he 
ak Init as Soon as he died his children lost nearly all of it, as the patriarch of 
] tted to the pope. The pope of Rome, Innocent III, sent to ask the 
iif Jerusalem to enquire into the usages and customs, the lands and names 
helieving princes whom the Christians were going to attack in order to 
{heir lands, ‘The patriarch enquired, and wrote back to the pope as follows.' 


ere were two great Muslim brothers. One was called Saladin and 
‘other Saphadin,? Saladin died and left fifteen sons. Saphadin had 
1) all killed but one and seized all the lands Saladin had bequeathed 
them, He let the survivor, li Coradinz,’ keep the whole land of 
Joppa, with its castles, cities, towns and all appurtenances, all to be 
slot him, Inthis way Saphadin put up with him for awhile, Saphadin 
‘ihirteen sons.’ He gave extensive lands to seven of them and rich 
to the other six. Saphadin’s eldest son was called li Quemerz 





I yf Merencourt was patriarch from 1215 to 1224; but this letter seems not to be 
Fitclains, Innocent III died in 1216, while the death of al-‘Adil, mentioned in the 
) way in 1218, But the letter is clearly not much later than 1218 and must have 
tiled in the context of the Fifth Crusade. 
Adil Sayf al-Din, died 1218, 
awhir Cihazi, died 1216, 
‘juiiiies an given here are evidently garbled, Al-‘ Adil Sayf al-Din had at least nine 
tne hiding: al-Kamil Muhammad (d. 1238), al-Mu‘azzam Isa (d. 1227), al-Ashraf 
sa tiilerin the Jazira and then Damascus, d, 1237), al-Auhad Ayyub (ruler of Diyar 
yh 1210), albMuzzaffar Ghazi (ruler in the Jazira, d. 1244), al-Fa’iz Ibrahim (d.1220), 
i Arata (ruler of Qal'at Ja’bar, d.c.1242) and al-‘Aziz Uthman (ruler of Banyas, d. 























34 


Maleatlinz;' to him he gave the whole land of Egypt — Cairo and 
Babylon, Alexandria and Damietta, and all their appurtenances. When 
Saphadin died, this man continued as lord over all his brothers. 
Saphadin’s second son was called /i Coradinz;? to him he gave 
Damascus and the holy city of Jerusalem, the whole Promised Land 
and the kingdom and all their appurtenances. To his third son, 
Meschipes, he gave the whole land known as Gimelle with all the land 
round about it and all its dependencies. To his fourth son, Mehemodom, 
he gave the entire kingdom of Asia’ and everything belonging to it. To 
his fifth son, Mehelchissemaphat, he gave the kingdom of Sarro and 
its dependencies. His sixth son, Me/chisenech, received the kingdom 
of Baudas and all its appurtenances. As for his seventh son, Salafaz, 
he decreed that each of his brothers should send him every year two 
excellent horses, saddled, and one thousand Saracen bezants. To two 
of his other sons Saphadin gave the whole income and all the offerings 
from the Temple and the Sepulchre of Our Lord. This was reckoned 
at more than 30,000 Saracen bezants a year. The tenth and eleventh 
sons received the income and all the offerings made to Muhammad and 
to the temple in the city of Mecca. This was reckoned at 30,000 
Saracen bezants or more. To the twelfth and thirteenth of his sons, 
Saphadin gave the crossings and the revenue from the River Nile, which 
spreads over and waters the lands of Egypt in the month of August. 
This was worth at least 40,000 Saracen bezants a year to them. Saladin 
had won all these sources of wealth with Saphadin’s help, and that is 
why people said it was right for Saphadin to be lord after his brother, 
rather than his nephew who had not contributed in any way. 


CHAPTER 16 


Account of Saphadin and his heirs 


Yenere 


When Saphadin went out riding, he covered his head with a length of 
scarlet samite. When he visited his sons, they would go out a long way 
to meet him, and as they drew near would throw themselves to the 
ground before his horse’s feet. Then they would get up and bow down 
very humbly and would kiss his hands and feet four times, three times 
while he was still on horseback and once after he dismounted. He did 
this once a year. When he had spent as much time as he pleased with 
them and was going away, he would give fine rich gifts to each of them, 
and over and above these he gave each one a golden ring with his 


Al-Kamil Muhammad. 
Al-Mu‘azzam Isa. 
Mesopotamia. 


45 





































eonit. Then he would kiss them one after another, take leave 
wil go, Saphadin insisted that his face should not be seen in public 
except on ten occasions in the year. When any kings or princes sent 
ivoys to him, they were received on the first day in the hall of his 
yiluce, Here there would be numerous well-armed sergeants guarding 
‘entrance, at least two hundred of them or more. In this place the 
voya were richly and generously supplied with everything they needed. 
s the second day Saphadin’s translators and interpreters asked the 
yvoys What they wanted and why they had come; then they would go 
) Saphadin and report to him. On the third day the envoys were 
{before Saphadin, for no stranger could approach or speak to 
im before the third day. Saphadin had very many wives and an even 
ter number of concubines, according to the law of Muhammad, as 
iin lorbears had had. When it pleased him, he had them brought to him 
i his palace, and he would be happy to see them, talk with them and 
«lux in their company. It sometimes happened that ifone of them had 
yore him a son, he would lie with her rather than the others. All the 
who served and protected Saphadin’s wives had been castrated. 
Jw other man dared go near there unless on his orders, or he would be 
verely punished. 
~ Saphadin and all his sons wanted to give back to the patriarch of 
valor and the Christians all the land the Christians were holding at 
iw time they lost it, and pay them a large sum each year, on the 
ilerstanding that there should be permanent peace between themselves 
wl the Christians, Such a peace, however, did not please the Christians, 
that the plan failed, for the Christians said they would never make 
-e with unbelievers, it would be against God and against reason. 


" 


tof the Assassins and their lord 


of Damascus and Antioch there was a people known as Assassins. ' 
was called the Old Man of the Mountain. These unbelieving Muslims ate 
r May with their own mothers, sisters, daughters and all the women they 
i, contrary to the laws of Muhammad. They lived in high mountains and in 
‘Jen and fortresses. The country was rich in game, which was very useful to 
Jour and far, all kinds of people went in terror of this prince, for he often 
ave people killed without right or reason. This lord possessed a fine palace, 
rich, beautiful and magnificent things, surrounded by high ramparts, 





’ " ume derives from an Arabic word meaning ‘eaters of hashish’, but this author 
ws not mention drug-induced visions of paradise, 

















36 


and extremely well defended. It had only one single entrance and no other way in 
Here in this palace he had the sons of his villeins brought up, from the moment they 
were in their cradles. From then on these children saw no one but their masters, 
who taught them various trades and various languages. They also taught them to 
fear their lord and obey his commands, and told them that in this way, and in no 
other, they would attain paradise. They never left the palace until the day their lord 
sent for them in order to have someone killed. When such a man appeared before 
him, the lord would ask whether he wanted to obey his commands and throug) 
them achieve paradise. The man would answer just as he had been taught, ‘Yes, 
lord, whatever you wish, in whatever way you command.’ Then the lord would give 
each of them a sharp and well-honed knife and send them wherever he wanted ii) 
order to do harm and kill someone. If they could then escape and return to theit 
lord, they received great honour and glory, wealth and power in that country, more 
than any others. But ifthey were taken and killed, they believed for certain that theit 
souls would stand before God in paradise. 


CHAPTER 18 


Of the caliph of Baghdad 


The unbelieving Muslims had a lord whom they all obeyed, one who held, they said, 
the place of Muhammad on this earth. They called him the caliph of Baghdad. Hw 
was feared and obeyed by all of his law in Baghdad, and could only be seen twice 
ina month. This caliph absolved, excommunicated, and granted indulgences, 
remissions and forgiveness of sins to unbelieving Muslims just as the pope of Rome 
does to Christians. At times he would grant very great pardons to any unbelievers 
who would attack Christians, absolving them of every sin they had ever committed 
and of all that they ever would commit in the rest of their lives; thus they would save 
their souls. He had this pardon preached and proclaimed throughout all the lands 
which obeyed him and their law. When this caliph rode on pilgrimage to Muhammud 
in the city of Mecca, and to the other places in that city which unbelievers conside! 
good and holy, and had prayed in the temple of Muhammad’s law, he would sacrifice 
animals, and he and his people would eat and drink plentifully before he went away 
Afterwards he would ride home in pomp and great glory, wearing his crown, with 
his people joyfully celebrating around him. Saracens honour and revere this caliph 
so profoundly that when they approach him, they go down onto the ground at his 
feet, they kneel and bow down before him almost as devoutly as ifhe were God 
The seat of the caliph and the headquarters of all Muslim unbelief are in the city of 
Baghdad, just as Rome is the seat of the pope and the head of all Christendom. 11 
the city of Mecca were the principal and most important pilgrimages of the unbelieving 
Muslims which Muhammad commanded, preached and recommended in his law 
and his commandments. Infidel Muslims believe they are released from their sins 
when they make a pilgrimage there, just as Christians are when they go to the holy 


37 









































of Jerusalem where God died and lived, Now we will stop talking of these 
sand go back to recalling events and describing them to all who want to listen, 


R19 
ne wickedness of Frederick, emperor of Germany 


we holy places of which we have told you there were, in the days when Christians 
the Holy Land, great churches, minsters, and fine rich chapels, also great abbeys 
¢lipious houses, rich and beautiful, handsomely adored and well endowed, of 
monks, of the abbey of Prémontré and the Cistercian order, the Augustinians 
other orders of recluses and hermits and others who followed the religious life. 
When the Saracens conquered the land and took it from the Christians, as we 
| you earlier, they knocked them down, demolished, overthrew and destroyed 
#1 ull, except for the church of the Sepulchre and some others. They spared 
# not out of love for Christians, but for the sake of the heavy taxes, the extensive 
jens ancl rich offerings the Christians provided when they made their pilgrimages. 
y refrained from demolishing these buildings because of the great wealth they 
fom them every day. But when the pope and the patriarch understood this, they 
wd! a general sentence of excommunication everywhere upon all men and women 
suhould give them any payment, wages, or purchase money when on pilgrimage 
ie holy places. For this reason the Saracens did not receive nearly as much 
ne as before. 
"ye Saracens had turned the holy Temple of Our Lord into one of their 
hommeries' and so it remained under the treaty Frederick made with the sultan, 
vou have already heard. Frederick did not rebuild the churches of the holy 
nor did he strengthen the holy city. Such was his fondness for the unbelievers, 
ye his intimacy and friendship with them, that he did them more honour and 
k more pleasure in their company and their affairs than in those of any other 
ile. He employed infidel Muslims as his chamberlains and confidential servants, 
i those who had been castrated to guard his women, and in many ways followed 
sen customs and manners. Whenever he received envoys from unbelievers, 
‘would greet them so kindly and with such delight that all were astonished, and 
jul give them handsome and expensive gifts. He often sent splendid and costly 
ts to the sultan, and the sultan behaved in just the same way to him and his 
voys, For this reason the pope and all Christians who knew of this were very 
wh afraid he had fallen into the unbelief of Muhammad’s law. Others, however, 
dintained that he believed none of it, and that whenever he felt like it he would say 
ivately that he had not yet decided which faith to destroy and which to keep as the 
sat He also said, they alleged, that Moses had fooled the Jews, Jesus Christ the 
stians and Muhammad the Saracens, 


‘This word is often translated ‘mosque’, but the Dome of the Rock, a holy place of Islam, 
has never been a mosque, 





























38 
CHAPTER 20 1239 
Christians take the cross in Navarre and all over France 


The pope realised that Frederick was not going to put forward any plan for freciny 
the Holy Land from unbelievers. He sent to France, England and other parts of 
Christendom, ordering the clergy to preach the cross beyond the sea, and renewing 
all the pardons, indulgences and remissions which his predecessors had granted (o 
crusaders. Then many brave men and good knights took the cross. In France these 
were: Theobald, count of: Champagne and king of Navarre;! Peter Mauclerc, count 
of Brittany;’ his brother, John, count of Macon: Amaury, count of Montfort;' the 
duke of Burgundy;' the count of Bar-le-Duc;* the count of Joi gny;’ the count of 
Grandpré;‘ the count of Sancerre;? Simon of Clermont; his brother Ralph;'' the 
lord of Bove; Ralph, brother of the count of Soissons;" Richard of Beaumont; '' 
Robert Malet;'® Matthew of Marly;'* Le Bouteillier of. Senlis;'’ Stephen of Quierem;'" 
Philip of Nanteuil;'® Guy Mauvoisin;° Girard of Aubeville and Giles of Arsies,"! 
Almost all the best knights of France took the cross with them, and so did many 
other knights and many ordinary people. In England, Richard, brother of the king of 
England and earl of Cornwall,” took the cross, as did many noblemen and very 
many of the commons of that land. 

The French leaders who had taken the cross decided to set off with the August 
passage, and ordered each man to prepare whatever armour, horses and other 





1. Born posthumously to Theobald III and Blanche of Navarre in 1201, he inherited 
Navarre in 1234; died 1253. 


2. A son of Robert, count of Dreux, he became count of Brittany by marriage; resigned 
Brittany to his son in 1237; died 1250. 

3. John of Braine. 

4. As a young man he took command of Albigensian crusade when his father Simon was 


killed in 1218, but without success; was captured at Gaza in 1239; later freed, he died of 
dysentery in Italy in 1241. 

Hugh IV, duke 1218-72. 

Henry II, count 1214-239. 

William, count 1223-55. 

Henry, count 1231-87. 

Louis, count 1218-68, 

Regent of France 1270, died 1280. 

Lord of Ailli. 

Robert. 

Married Alice, queen of Cyprus, but later returned to France. 
Captured at Gaza in 1239, 

Lord of Bernai. 

Died 1249. 

William, died on this campaign. 

Or of Charny, see below, chapter 28. 

Captured at Gaza. 

Lord of Rosny. 

Captured at Gaza. 

-Born the second son of King John in 1209, he became the brother-in-law of Frederick 
II, was elected king of the Romans in 1257, and died in 1272 


BEBSRIRAEGHA Se waa 


39 






































he would need. As the date of the crossing came nearer, but before it was 
to leave, Frederick, emperor of Germany, sent word that if they would wait 
fear he would definitely go with them and would bring all his resources to help 
win the land. When the barons heard his envoys telling them this, they were 
al, for every one of them was ready and prepared, on the point of setting off, 

¢ all the other pilgrims who were travelling from France. When they had 
audi the matter, they answered Frederick’s envoy and said that in order to 
tich support from so powerful a prince as the emperor of Rome, both by sea 
y land, they would wait one more year, but that this would do very great harm 
1» themselves and to the other crusaders. When the barons and the other 
had waited this year and the crossing of the following August was drawing, 
Viederick sent his envoys to them again and told them that he had a great deal 
sinens to attend to and was not at all ready to set off, but that ifthey would like 
{ one more year, then he would set off and would go with them without fail. 
wons talked together and they saw very clearly and said in council that the 
jor of Rome’s message was nothing but guile, trickery and deceit, sent because 
» determined that the pilgrims should not cross the sea with his support to 
war on the unbelieving Muslims who were his dear, close and intimate friends, 
told the envoys that they certainly would not wait any longer and that the 
inv had suffered great harm from having had to wait so long. The envoys 
410 their lord, having done nothing towards fulfilling their task or their reason 


# barons and pilgrims of France set off and they all assembled at Marseille for 
yiuat crossing. Some, but not many, went through Lombardy into Apulia. 
mM J, count of Champagne and king of Navarre, with almost all the other French 
jen Wwe mentioned above and all the other pilgrims who were at Marseille and 
y muke the crossing, went aboard the ships which had been prepared for 
“The sails were hoisted and as soon as they had a fair wind they set out. Many 
saple were prevented from crossing by lack of money, and others by illness 
iysieal troubles. When the fleet and the pilgrims’ ships were only two days 
Acte, so the sailors said, a great storm arose at sea and scattered them so 
ily that they gave themselves up for lost. This storm tossed the ships and 
Hyer onto various islands, onto Cyprus, Sicily, Corsica and Sardinia. By 
race, none of the vessels was lost, so far as anyone could tell. They waited 
il until the sea was calm. As soon as it grew calm, they went aboard, made 
ul with a good wind soon arrived in Acre harbour.' It was not long before all 
(js ronched port and all the travellers gathered in the city. They formed a very 
fore, Some were lodged inside the town and others outside it. Here they 
Jor atime and refreshed themselves after the great distress, the great fear and 




















40 


CHAPTER 21 1239 


How the Saracens demolished the Tower of David 


When the Saracens heard what a large number of Christians had arri ved in Aor 
they became very anxious. They gathered cavalry and footsoldiers as fast as the 
could and made straight for Jerusalem, which had no defences except the keey 
known as the Tower of David. The Christians had begun to fortify the city near th 
St Stephen Gate, using the alms they received for this purpose, and had repaired 
short stretch of the ramparts and a few turrets, but the moment the Saracens jr 
there, they demolished all this and pulled it down. They laid siege to the Tower o 
David and attacked its tiny garrison from every side. These men put up as stri nye 
defence as they could, and in fact forced the Saracens to pull back and call off thet 
attack. The emperor Frederick’s deputy! had not provided enough men, victuals 
arms, engines or any of the other equipment needed to defend acastle. The Saracetis 
realised this, and knew the tower could not hold out long, being so badly equipped 
They talked to the defenders and offered to have them taken safely to Christendon \ 
with their wives and children and all their possessions, if they would surrender (he 
castle. The defenders understood the position and knew that if the Saracens to. ik 
the tower by assault there would no quarter given, they would all be killed, not one 
would escape. They knew they had no means of. defence, nothing to drink, noth ing 
to cat, and that very soon they would be taken by storm or starved out and all put ta 
the sword. They accepted the Saracens’ offer, left the castle, threw all their poods 
out of it, and the Saracens kept their word faithfully and had them taken to safet y 
Once the Saracens got possession of the Tower of David, they immediately put theit 


David which had stood there ever since it was first built until that day, in times of 
peace and of war, of heathens and Jews, of Muslim Saracens, of Christians and all 
kinds of people? This was done in the year of the Incarnation of Our Lord 1249 
The pope of Rome at that time was Gregory IX; Frederick was emperor of Rome, 
king of Germany, of Sicily, Apulia and Calabria and of the Holy Land of Jerusalen), 
Louis IV‘ was king of France; Henry was king of England; Theobald was kin gol 
Navarre and count palatine of Brie and Champagne; Henry was archbishop of Rein,’ 


———— 


L. Riccardo Filangieri at Tyre. 

Bs ALNasir Dawud of Kerak in Moab commanded this attack, Runciman dates the surrendey 
to 7 December 1239: 4 History of the Crusades, 3 vols. (Cambridge, 1951-54) vol, 4, 
215n.2, 

The lower levels of the tower dated back to Herodian times. 

Louis IX, the fourth Capetian king of that name. 

Henry Il, 

Henry of Dreux, archbishop 1227-40, 


Dir bw 


41 


































n22 1239 
stian forces went to fortify Ascalon 


istian forces in Acre heard that the unbelievers had torn down the Tower of 
| were all very angry at the news. When they had rested briefly and 
vod from all their sufferings at sea, it was agreed at the wish ofall the leaders 
gy should appoint a day to meet in the city of Acre. Then all the noblemen 
ul taken the cross, all the prelates and all the nobles of the land of Syria would 
hile and consider how they could best help Christendom. The agreed day 
all the great men who could do so attended. These were: Theobald, king 
and count of Champagne, and all the French lords we mentioned above 
John of Braine, count of Macon, who was dead.' From the land beyond the 
ie the patriarch,’ the archbishop of Tyre’ and the bishop of Acre,’ Count 
jf Jaffa,’ the grand commander of the Temple and the grand master of the 
lof Our Lady of the Germans.’ There were many others, whose names we 


= 8 - Ss 


= > 


sy all were assembled, many words were spoken, many arguments put forward, 
jyteement was reached that day. Orders were given that all should return the 
iy day, Next day when they reassembled, they agreed, after much discussion, 
ing, that they would all go together and lay siege to the city of Damascus, 
Wis large, rich, full of people, well supplied and contained great wealth, But 
‘all they would go and make secure a castle which stood where once had 
noble city of Ascalon, before it was destroyed. When they had rebuilt this 
ilefences, they would all go together and besiege Damascus. Proclamation 
‘ that everyone must be ready on All Saints’ Day.’ Then in all the streets 
eles you would have seen men checking their armour, greasing their hauberks, 
ip helmets, sharpening swords and daggers, shoeing horses and fitting horse- 
; and covers onto their mounts. Everyone made the best preparations he 


on the day after All Saints, the feast of All Souls, the entire force set offand 
el towards Ascalon, using the coast road. Once out in the open, with the 
jen all arrayed, they formed a huge army. Some said it included at least 
its, Besides these there were so many other troops that the whole country 











ave below, p.120. 
bly Gerold; his successor Robert, bishop of Nantes, was not consecrated till 


of Sergines, 1235-44, 
h of Tournai, ¢, 1232-45, 
, eountof Brienne, 1205-c. 1247, was probably not the count of Jaffa; married to 
the sister of Henry 1, king of Cyprus, he held Jaffa on behalf of her mother, Alice 
i magne, whose dower it was; on her death Jaffa passed to her heir, Henry 1; see 
Ne ah Vdbury, John of Ibelin and the Kingdom of Jerusalem (Woodbridge, 1997), 
vapor 4, 


iad of Thuringia, grand master of the Teutonic Knights 1239-40, 


























































was covered with people and horses, with carts, men, pack animals and othe 
equipment. But there were not nearly enough horses for such a large army. Ver’ 
many valiant knights and good sergeants went on foot, and hard going they found it 
for they were not used to it, Many great lords were only too happy to find 4 
donkey to ride or to load their equipment on. All together they went to Chateau 
Pélerin. Robert Malet and other pilgrims were forced to remain there, as they were 
too ill to go any further. So they travelled on day after day to the castle of Jaftiy, 
where they stayed four days. 


CHAPTER 23 1239 
How Count Peter of Brittany went raiding 


The sultan of Damascus! knew very well what was happening, for his spies had told 
him that when the Christians had fortified Ascalon, they intended to besiege his 
noble city of Damascus. He did not fail to provide for this as well as he could, like 
aman who expected to be besieged at any moment. Food, weapons, engines, and 
everything that people under siege could need, he collected it all into his city. He 
was careful to beg the townspeople to do their utmost themselves for their own 
defence, Then you would have seen the neighbouring towns stripped bare and 
everything brought into the city - wheat, oats, peas and beans, barley, wine, oil, 
vinegar, salt meat, iron and steel, and a great deal of livestock. The town was 
wonderfully well provisioned, Many went into it from the strongholds round about 
because they feared the Christians and did not dare remain, and they took all theii 
possessions into the city. The sultan of Damascus had sent messages to all his 
friends requiring them to help him and to provision his city against the Christian army 
that was on its way. Each one did all he could to help him. Amongst the rest there 
was an important man, rich and powerful, who got together a great quantity of oxen, 
cows, ewes, sheep, camels, buffaloes and other livestock. He took armed men on 
foot and on horseback with him and went with all his plunder towards Damascus, 
staying one night in acastle. 

While the Christian forces were resting in Jaffa, Peter Mauclerc, count of Brittany, 
was informed that he could reap great profit in that place. He left the army very 
privately one evening, taking with him two hundred knights and the other armed men 
he knew he would need. They had plenty of people with them to guide them, and 
they travelled all night and in the moming reached a place through which this boot y 
would have to pass. Here he placed part of his force in ambush. Then the count 
himself and the rest of his men laid in wait at another spot where the convoy would 
pass, so that if one attack failed, the other must succeed. They made careful 
arrangements for coming to each other’s help ifnecessary. When the sun had risen, 
the Turks came out of the castle with all their booty and made straight for the place 





1 Al-Salih Isma‘il. 


43 

















































the count was waiting. As soon as Count Peter Mauclere of Brittany saw 
he ancl his men mounted quickly and rode in good array to attack the unbelievers. 
soon as the emir and the Turks who were with him escorting this booty saw 
ks of Christians, they were sure they meant to attack them and seize their 
| They discussed what they should do, Some said it would be best to 
in the convoy and move off, fast; perhaps the Christians would concentrate 
2 up the cattle and so they would avoid a conflict. Ifthe Christians did 
hey could put up a better defence if they were not encumbered with livestock. 
‘suid that they had a much stronger force than the Christians and would set a 
jot example if they abandoned their convoy without striking a blow. For this 
they recommended moving on, while continuing to protect their plunder, If 
44 on their side, they would all get safely past, in spite of the handful of 
i Ahead of them. The unbelievers could not see all their opponents and had 
ei that the count had laid an ambush. They could only see the men with the 
wid of course supposed that that was his entire force. Their lord the emir, 
Win i pod knight, valiant and courageous, upheld the second opinion, and so 
ilickly arrayed their men, putting the livestock in the centre and themselves all 
iit, They placed their archers in the front, to make the first encounter. The 
Jdvessed all his men generally, and spoke to the bravest and most daring, 
dnp Where they were in the ranked companies, and begged and exhorted them 
well and to fight hard. It was a mere nothing, he told them, forso many brave 
wi they were to kill and cut to pieces the handful of riffraff now approaching 
| As the archers drew near the Christians, they attacked at a brisk gallop, 
iz thick and fast. But the count of Brittany and our men spurred hard against 
xl forced them back onto the companies following them, penning them into a 
W place where they could not ride to and fro to shoot or fight. They had to 
i) their usual spurring technique and fight with swords and maces, which was 
ly so easy for them. But the two sides met in sharp conflict, hitting out with 
is und maces, none holding back, The unbelievers made a united attack upon 
and almost compelled them to turn and run. Now Ralph of Soissons and his 
»ved their worth: if they had not been there, the count of Brittany would have 
taken or killed. 
he men lying in ambush knew nothing about this conflict. The count saw that his 
ere suffering and the unbelievers were doing as they liked with them; then he 
whorn sounded. The men in ambush heard it and knew they were needed. 
y Mounted at once and spurred hard towards the battle, charging into the mélée 
much fury that the Turks were all astounded. Hand to hand they fought and it 
some time before anyone could tell which side would be victorious. Soon, 
er, the unbelievers were completely crushed and they turned and fled, not 
ls Damascus but to the castle where they had spent the night. ‘They never 
“thought to their plunder or their convoy. Our men pursued them and kept so 
we and so hard on their heels that a good many rode into the castle along with the 
ilives, They killed many of the men inside it, captured and bound the rest, and 
everything they could find, They rounded up the livestock, all the plunder and 









































44 


all their prisoners, and returned in perfect safety to Jaffa where the army was lyin 
Great was the delight of the rank and file when they arrived with so much livestoeh 
for there was such a scarcity of food in the army that a man could not get his fill at 
bread fortwo pence of Tours. The count gave many of his beasts to the commande 
of the host; some were very pleased and others were scornful and jealous because 
he had won so much plunder. This led them to do things that brought great shame 
and harm upon Christendom. Poor people were helped for a time, as the count sit 
his companions gave them plenty of meat, which had been in very short supply. This 
happened in the same year, the month of November, on the Friday after Martins ’ 


CHAPTER 24 
How many Babylons there are 


The mightiest and richest of all the unbelieving princes whose lands marched with 
those of the Christians in the land of Syria, was the sultan of Babylon in Egypt. Hui 
you must know that there are three Babylons. The first is in Mesopotamia; there {jy 
the field of Shinar on which the giants built a tower to reach up toheaven.’ That 
where languages werecreated. This Babylon stands on the great river, the Euphrates, 
which flows from the earthly paradise and runs through the land of Mesopotarniit 
and on another river called Chobar.’ David spoke of them in the psalms, sayin 
Super flumina Babilonis.4 Nebuchadnezzar was lord of this Babylon, as we fil 
when we read the Bible in the Book of Kings.° 

The second Babylon is in Egypt. Some say that when the children of Israe! wer 
in Egypt it was known as Memphis. These two Babylons lie destroyed and desolite. 
no man or woman lives there. In the Babylon in Mesopotamia live huge numbers if 
serpents, adders and other snakes which dwell in the ruined walls of the tower built 
by giants, more such creatures than anywhere else on earth.* 

The third Babylon is sometimes called New Babylon. This has the Cairo as (ts 
main castle and stands on the River Nile which flows from the earthly paradine 
From New Babylon to Alexandria is three days’ journey by land, six by wate) 
From this Babylon to Damietta takes four days. The sultan’ was lord of this New 
Babylon, of the whole land of Egypt, of the surrounding country and of'a large put 
of Syria. 





1. In 1239 St Martin’s day, 11 November, fell ona Friday, so that this encounter seers t 
be dated to the 18th, a week after the disaster at Gaza. But as it is known to have 
occurred before, not after, the Gaza defeat, perhaps the text should read ‘the riiiy 
before Martinmas’. 


2, The tower of Babel, Genesis 11:4. 

3. A tributary of the Euphrates, now al-Chabar. 
4. ‘By the waters of Babylon’, Psalm 137:1. 

5. 2 Kings 24, 25. 

6. Isaiah 13:21, 

te 


Al-‘Adil Abu Bakr II, 1238-40, 


45 



































wu25 1239 
he sultan sent his armies against the Christians 


he heard what a large number of Christians had landed at Acre, he sent 
{ent scouts to discover which way they meant to go. The scouts did so, and 
dd quickly to their lord and told him that the Christians were going to go and 
Awcalon, When the sultan heard that, he immediately summoned his troops ~ 
ya and mounted men, knights and crossbowmen in great numbers — and in 
wid of them he put a rich and powerful Turk, a good knight, experienced in 
was known as Rukn al-Din of the Mountain.' The sultan ordered him to 
» whole force in that direction, and to put his castles and strongholds into a 
ence. He provided him with letters commanding all to do as much for 
they would for himself, their own lord, and gave him strict orders to do all the 
he could to these Christians who were coming. Emphatically he commanded 
|. Din and all his men to take every chance they had of attacking and killing 
ill, except for the most valiant, whom he should take alive and send, bound, to 
1 and the Cairo, where he would hold them prisoner in his jail all the rest of 


4 of this happened just as he had planned. Rukn al-Din set offat the head of 
army, and he amply supplied all the sultan’s fortresses with armed men, 
{ines of iron and steel, with timber and stones, with com, flour, oil, salt meat, 
{ive and all that is needed for a castle’s defence. He gave strict orders to all 
weople, telling them they must all be ready, that the moment they heard his 
vers or saw the need, or at night should see the fires lit, they must join him at 
well mounted and as well armed as possible. Having made these arrangements, 
{his whole army to Gaza, which is not far from Ascalon. There he quartered 
en. He had efficient scouts working in the Christian army to discover their 
ad he sent to all the narrow places and difficult passes in the country so as to 
how he could best damage his opponents without unnecessary risk to his own 
begged and commanded them urgently to let him know as soon as they 


W the count of Bar and his companions went raiding 


je Saturday after Martinmas, which is in November,’ while the Christian army 
lying at Jaffa, the count of Bar and other barons, all great lords, became very 
sun and envious of the plunder the count of Brittany had won from the unbelievers. 


fukn al-Din al-Hijawi, died 1249, For details of this encounter, see Christopher Marshall, 
Warfare in the Latin East, 1192-1291 (Cambridge, 1992). For Rukn al-Din's death, see 
below, chapter 59. 

In 1239 the Saturday after Martinmas fell on 12 November, 









































46 


They talked about this together and said that they were just as powerful as the count 
of Brittany, if not more so, and that it would be a great disgrace, shame and eternal 
reproach to them if they did not go out too and win booty from the unbelievers 
They all engaged resolutely in this enterprise; we will tell you their names ina momerit 
They had the horses given a late feed of oats and then, after vespers, they called 
each other out from their places in the host and gathered, well armed and well 
mounted, outside the encampment on the side towards Ascalon. They were: the 
count of Bar; Amaury, count of Montfort; Walter, count of Jaffa; the duke of Burgundy 
and Girard of Aubeville, Robert of Bove, Stephen of Sevinghen, Philip of Nantcuil, 
Matthew of Marly, Giles of Arsies, Guy Mauvoisin, William Le Bouteillier of Senlis, 
his brother Ralph' and Richard of Beaumont. Six hundred knights at least they 
were, all well mounted and clad in iron, themselves and their horses down to the 
very hooves, as well as seventy or more knights bearing banners, and not countitijj 
the crossbowmen and sergeants, mounted and on foot, who went with them. There 
were many more too, who had heard about this expedition and joined it in the hi pe 
ofplunder. It looked to those who gathered there as if’ they must certainly accomplish 
some great thing which would be talked about for evermore. So they would have 
done, if God had not intervened because of their pride and other sins. 

The king of Navarre, the count of Brittany, the masters of the Temple,’ of St 
John’s Hospital’ and the Hospital of Our Lady of the Germans* and other important 
leaders whose names we cannot list here, learned that these men had assembled ta 
go out foraging. They knew very well that neither their intentions nor their motives 
were good, that they were inspired by envy, malice, pride and greed, and so they 
very much feared they would come to grief. They mounted quickly and rode fast (o 
the place where these men had gathered and found them there, settling their plans 
They reproached them vigorously for intending to ride to war like this, when the 
whole country was in a state of alarm, the unbelievers had their spies out in all the 
narrow ways and passes and the sultan of Babylon had called up a great host and 
sent it into this country to defend his land, and it was stationed at Gaza. But if they 
would wait till next day the whole army should break camp and they would all go 10 
Ascalon together, they would be nearer their enemies there and be better able tw 
learn their dispositions and could then make plans. They told them clearly that if 
they rode to war as they intended, they could well be disastrously ambushed by the 
unbelievers and all of them killed or taken prisoner, to the great shame and harm 0! 
Christendom. 

The foragers replied forcefully that they would do nothing of the kind, they had 
come there to fight unbelievers and did not mean to keep putting off any encounter 
They would go to Gaza and would rejoin the host next day. The leaders begped 
them all to wait, but it was useless. When the king of Navarre saw that requests had 


= a = 


Died 1250. 

Armand of Périgord. 

Either Bertrand of Comps or his successor, Peter of Vieille-Bride. 
Conrad of Thuringia. 


PYeNE 


47 






































fleet, he spoke in the name of God, ofall Christians and of himself, and reminded 
yofthe oath and fealty they had promised him when they put him in command of 
host at Acre. He forbade them to move, they must wait till next day when the 
would break camp and they would all go together. They refused to wait. ‘The 
‘of Navarre and his companions returned to the host. They discussed matters 
ther and declared that the whole force should move at daybreak and should go 

Jit to Ascalon, following these others. They had it proclaimed throughout the 
‘hat all were to move at first light. Next day, before dawn, they broke camp; 
sommanders arrayed their men and they made straight for Ascalon, some six 
yes away, They went in great haste, anxiously enquiring, listening and asking for 
word about the men who had left for Gaza the previous evening. But when they 
jyed Ascalon, and before they had all found quarters, they heard the sad and 


y the Saracens defended themselves against the Christians 


4 the count of Bar and the other lords whose names we told you earlier were 
iy lo go foraging, as we said above, they travelled together along the coast road 
4s Gaza. They passed Ascalon and reached the brook which marks the 
between the kingdom of Jerusalem and Egypt.' It was a fine night and 
_ The moon and stars shone and gave plenty of light. When they reached 
sok, Count Walter told them that as soon as they crossed it they would be 
‘near Gaza and their enemies, that they should think about what to do next, for 
wy erossed they would be in great danger, they had already travelled eight or 
lengues, their horses were very tired, and so were they all. A good many 
symended returning to Ascalon and waiting there for the main host to join them, 
y had pushed ona long way and had not found any enemies or any means of 
w them harm. Others disagreed strongly, and said they were going to cross the 
sk and go on to a wide stretch of pastureland near Gaza. They had been told 
-would find plenty of animals there, because local people had brought them in 
sar of the fighting, as it was a remote place and the beasts would be quite safe 
» They never imagined the Christians would dare to cross the brook, not unless 
Whole host came at once. 
\ the end all agreed on the worst plan and said they would cross. Count Walter 
‘his men crossed first, and, once over, deployed along the riverbank. They 
41a white pennon and raised it high so that the rest could see it from a distance 
‘make straight for them. Both horse and foot crossed quickly, and they all 
ed the far bank. Then they formed up in close array and moved on quietly. 
they saw, had already broken. On they went until they had all entered a 


This brook became part of a boundary in the treaties agreed by Theobald, count of 
Champagne, and Richard, earl of Cornwall, 









































48 


They dismounted. Rich men had cloths spread and sat down to eat, for they had 
brought plenty of bread, poultry and capons, cooked meat, cheese and fruit, as well 
as wine in casks and barrels, all loaded onto pack-beasts or in carts. Some ate, 
others slept, others saw to their horses. Such was their pride and their arrogance 
that they felt little or no concem about their enemies, into whose land they had thrust 
so far forward and who were very near them. Then they learned indeed that Our 
Lord will not be served in this way. 

Rukn al-Din, who was at Gaza, knew for certain from his scouts, almost before 
nightfall, that these men were coming to look for plunder, that they would all be 
extremely tired, both men and horses, before they got that far, and so he would be 
able to do as he liked with them. He was sure that ifhe could defeat and crush these 
men, the main Christian army would be seriously weakened. He at once had abip 
fire lit on top of the highest of the nearby hills and sent messengers to every place 
from which he knew his men could see the fire, to summon and hasten them, and to 
tell them to come, well armed, and joinhim. The unbelievers of the district, thoroughly 
familiar with this system, no sooner saw this large fire burning on the hilltop than they 
knew there was an emergency near Gaza where the fire was burning, and that it was 
lit to summon them. They ran at once to arms, passing the summons on from one to 
another, and set out immediately on foot and on horseback. As they went, they met 
the messengers, who encouraged them to hurry and exhorted them to do the work 
well. Very soon the whole district was covered with streams of men pouring in to 
join Rukn al-Din. Before the sun was up he had more men than he needed. His 
scouts came and went, keeping a constant watch on the valley our men had entered, 
as they wanted to know what state they were in, how many they were, and what 
they were doing. The unbelievers could scarcely believe the danger they had thrust 
themselves into. 

When Ruknal-Din knew exactly how matters stood and had his troops assembled, 
he quickly got them armed and arrayed. The crossbowmen, archers, javelin-men 
and slingers he ordered up onto the hillsides; they were to surround our men on all 
sides, to shoot and sling stones vi gorously so as to kill and shatter both men and 
horses. This would be easy, they said, for ours would never be able to spur against 
them up the hillsides. He ordered his cavalry to station themselves within the narrow 
pass where our men were, so that they would have no way of getting out into a 
wider space; as our men had placed themselves, they were as ifina fortress which 
could only be attacked from the front or the rear. When Rukn al-Din had issued his 
orders, each man went to his post. Then they came on ata great pace, with such 4 
noise of drums, timbrels, tabors, horns, of men shouting and horses neighing that 
nothing else could be heard. A terrifying sound that is to hear, for those who are not 
used to it. 


49 

































the count of Bar and his companions were defeated 


it Walter of Jaffa saw them first, and told the others. They ran to arms at once, 
jnted, and gathered to discuss what they should do. There was no agreement 
it them. Count Walter and the duke of Burgundy said they should retreat, 
idl lead their troops back and certainly not wait and fight, as they were in a place 
@ both men and horses would be treading up to their knees in sand; that for 
iin Of theirs there were fourteen or more attacking, for the whole country was 
ming with Turks and Saracens. They gave several other strong reasons for 
ii, back. The counts of Bar and Montfort and most of the other leaders said 
/whould fight; they would not be able to retreat even if they tried to do so, as the 
M4 Were too near. Ifby any chance those on horseback escaped, all those on 
# Would be killed or taken. Count Walter of Jaffa and the duke of Burgundy said 
had no intention of destroying themselves and their men, so they began to 
1 ind set off fast towards Ascalon. When the others saw that, they begged 
{o tell the king of Navarre and the main army to come to their help as quickly 
wy could, for they were all in danger of destruction. They replied that they 
itt be glad to do so, but that it would be better if they all went back safe and 
il together instead of courting defeat. Then the duke of Burgundy and Count 
jer of Jaffa withdrew. 
hie count of Bar, the count of Montfort and the others who remained put 
Ives into great danger. They re-ordered their troops, both horse and foot; 
ow the unbelievers on the hillsides drew near enough to shoot and fling at 
_ They hurled rocks, slung stones, shot bolts and arrows; no storm of rain, no 
ould have made the sky darker. Great was the uproar among the Christians, 
julfered many injuries and lost many horses killed. As soon as the leaders saw 
ey ordered their archers and crossbowmen to shoot, and they did so. Soon 
# that the unbelievers drew back for fear of the crossbow bolts. Many on both 
were killed in this attack. Neither Rukn al-Din and his companions in the 
ze nor those on the hillsides dared approach our men as long as their bolts 
d But most unfortunately these soon ran out, as they had not brought enough. 
ve they were all shot off, the unbelievers saw it, rushed in from all sides and 
iii 10 hurl and shoot a dense rain of missiles at our men. When the leaders saw 
sappening, they spurred their horses and all charged together against Rukn al- 
The unbelievers on foot, guarding these narrows, received them fiercely. There 
# 4 bitter and strenuous conflict. Great blows were struck with swords, 
ulawords and maces, no one spared his opponent. For sometime the unbelievers 
{ firm, as the pass was narrow and our Christians had difficulty getting at them, 
in the end they were vigorously thrust back and our Christians occupied this 
ow place by force, driving out the Saracens, who fled, angry and sorrowful. 
ours were in these narrows, the unbelievers on the hillsides could not hurt 
1 They could well have stayed there some time, if their pride and arrogance 
































50 


had not led them to charge in pursuit of the unbelievers who were pretending to rut) 
away. 

When Rukn al-Din saw our men in that strong place, he very much feared they 
would hold out there and defend it until help reached them. He summoned his met 
at once and told them to make a feint of running away, as our Christians were 40 
proud and so arrogant that when they saw them run, they would pursue them at 4 
great rate, and would leave the narrow gorge. Rukn al-Din sent orders at once {a 
his men on the hillsides, telling them that as soon as our men left that place, they 
should move in and occupy it so that ours could not get back into it. When Rukn al 
Din had given his orders, as you have heard, he and his whole company took to they 
heels and appeared to flee. When ours saw this, they thought they had won 
decisive victory and went rushing out of the gorge. This proved to bea great mistake 
As soon as the men on the hillside saw them leave the pass, they occupied it, so that 
ours could not get back in. When Rukn al-Din saw our men well out of the place 
and pursuing him, he turned his men and his whole force to meet them. And the 
other Saracens, the ones who came down from the hills, were behind them. Now 
our men were completely surrounded and as it were hemmed in by the unbelievers 
Then they first began to regret that they had been so sure of themselves, but thei 
regret came too late. Those few who could do so rallied to their own companies 
along various tracks. Tenderly, kindly, the count of Bar and the count of Montfort 
urged them to do well and to sell their lives dearly, for there was no question of 
escape. 

The battle began, arduous, fierce and bloody. Our men gave mighty blows and 
did great deeds. When the Turks, who were using Turkish bows, had shot very 
many arrows and saw that our men and their horses were injured and wounded, 
they took their maces, drew their swords and attacked on every side. They had our 
men at a great disadvantage, for ours were so few. They stood firm as long as they 
were able. In the end they could not withstand such numbers; as the enemy attacked 
down the hillsides, they ran, utterly defeated. The count of Bar, the count of Montfort, 
a few knights and other men who did not wish to flee, remained on the field, These 
did wonders, and cut great clearings among the Saracens surrounding them. No 
one dared go near them, but they shot and flung at them and hurled lances as if at 
target. At last they were exhausted and the Saracens rushed them from every side 
They were all killed or taken. 

In this battle the count of Bar was taken or killed, it is not known which: the 
count of Montfort was taken; Philip of Nanteuil and Giles of Arsies, Le Bouteillier of 
Senlis, Stephen of Charny, Peter of Valeni and many others whose names I cannot 
list were bound fast and taken captive to Egypt, to Damietta and to the Cairo and 
Babylon and to many other places in that land, Grievously were they mocked and 
jeered at in the good towns of the unbelievers which they entered. The unbelievers 
took horse-droppings and the dung of other animals and put it into censers and 
censed them. Much vile and shameful treatment they received as they went along 
the streets, All the unbelievers, great and small, went running from every side to see 
them. 


5] 












































ren 29 1239 
hey were not rescued 


cing of Navarre and the main army, stationed near Ascalon, heard that their 
vo had gone out foraging were in great need ofhelp. Allofthem ran to arms 
jounted, leaving part of their force to guard the encampment. The rest ordered 
i tanks and rode in good array towards Gaza. The commander and brothers of 
ospital of Our Lady of the Germans never waited for the rest but ran to arms, 
We, and galloped at great speed towards the conflict. But they did not arrive in 
Ours had already been defeated and were running — those that could —as fast 
waible towards the army. The German brothers were a great help to these, for 
on) ais the Saracens chasing them saw this strong force of Christians heading for 
iat full gallop, they did not dare wait but turned and fled very fast back to the 
# reat companies of Saracens, who were tying up the Christians they had 
wed in the battle. The brothers caught them up, killed and overthrew them and 
\e worst they could to them, but were quite unable to recover the prisoners. All 
y that road they saw sights which much distressed them — Christians stripped of 
armour, cut to pieces, lying naked and dead, for the Saracens had carried off 
plunder, Some they found who were not yet dead. One of these was my lord 
en de I'Ile, whom they found lying naked, stripped bare and badly wounded. 
id the others were carried back on the knights’ shields. 
When the king of Navarre and the main army with him had ridden far enough and 
i for themselves that the others were defeated, dead and taken captive, they 
jvwaed what they should do. They asked the Templars, the Hospitallers and the 
il people who were with them what they advised. They answered that the 
wens had won the battle and were holding the Christians bound and captive; 
hey were in their land, their country, near their fortresses and strongholds, 
) would make them prouder and more arrogant; that if they saw the Christian 
»proaching them, they would kill all their Christian prisoners, then they would 
(1 ait inside their fortresses. In this way all the valiant men taken in the battle, 
might be recovered if they were held prisoner, would be lost. The king of 
ive and the leaders listened to this, but proceeded to disagree with each other. 
wlutives of the captured men said it would be wrong for the host not to advance, 
june the prisoners could very well be rescued. Others strongly disagreed and 
that if the host did advance, the Saracens would kill the prisoners. After long 
wwwiion they all agreed upon withdrawal. So the whole host put itself'in motion, 
il they returned to their quarters at Ascalon. 
Civeat was the outcry, great the shouting, and men said that now the host of 
Wiwtendom was powerless, as all its good knights were killed or in prison. This 
i event occurred in the year and month we said, on the Sunday after Martinmas, 
hi is in November.' 


14 November 1239, 





52 
CHAPTER 30 1239 


Of the songs made in Babylon by Philip of Nanteuil 





Philip of Nantueil was taken captive to Babylon with the others and while there lw 
wrote several songs. One of these he sent to the Christian army, and we shall recite 
it now for those who would like to hear it:! 





Insong!’Il mourn 

to ease my grief 

for Montfort, noble count, 
who bore his fame so well. 
He came to Syria - 

sad loss to France! - 

there to make war. 

But soon his warfare ceased 
for from his first assault 

God allowed no return, 






































Ah France, admired and loved, 
now all your joy is tured 

to endless tears. 

Always in future now, 

silent, you’ll grieve. 

This was the tragedy: 

no sooner did they come 

than both your counts were lost, 


Ah count of Bar, your loss 

strikes cruelly at France. 

When Frenchmen hear the news 
how they will grieve! 

Poor France, stripped of her sons, 
such brave and valiant knights! 
Accursed the day 

that changed these noble men 

to slaves and prisoners! 





eee 


I. This literal translation represents nine- and ten-line stanzas of seven-syllable lines, 
mostly rhymed ABABCDCCDD, 
































53 












































Ifthe Hospitallers, 

‘Templars and brother knights 
hiad shown our men the way, 
had ridden as they should, 
then all our chivalry 

would not in prison lie, 

nor Saracens still live. 

Wut this they did not do. 
Cireat was the error here, 
some would say treachery. 


My song, made up of grief, 

of griefand pity mixed, 

and find Pity, beg 

God and friendship’s sake, 
she run to find the host, 

~ tell them, make sure they know, 

that they must not break faith! 

Make them put out their strength 

and get our people back, 

hy warfare or by wealth. 


M1 1239-40 


he Christian army returned directly to Acre 


iy of Navarre and the other leaders certainly did not mean to repair the 
of Ascalon at that time, nor to stay in that neighbourhood. Orders were 
ned throughout the host: all were to move next day, early. This was done, 
wning they broke camp, marshalled their forces and returned to Jaffa. From 
hey went by short stages to Acre. At every place they came to there were 
cl lurnentations because such a strong force of Christians was returning without 
achieved anything for God’s love or for Christendom against the enemies of 
i, Once back at Acre, they remained there some time. Then they all went 
{opether, travelling by way of the cities and good towns held by the Christians 

vountry, that is to say, by Tyre, Beirut, Tripoli and Tortosa and other good 
we cannot name. It was a very large force indeed, for when they were all on 
wve, they covered the whole country. Many people said they could have 
ved most of what they wanted in the land, if it had not been for the leaders’ 

jealousy and other sins. They said too that the leaders constantly received 
4 (rom the princes of the unbelievers, who gave them lavish retainers and 
ity, Preachers speaking in the host often said things which very much 
{the commanders. 



































54 


There was a Minorite in the army, Brother William,' the pope’s confessor, legate ( 
the host, who ended many of his sermons with the words: 

‘For God’s sake, good people, pray to Our Lord, beg him to give the commandery 
of this host their hearts back, for you can be sure they have lost them through thei) 
sins! Such a huge force of Christians ought to be able to attack the unbelievers if 
any place at all, if they had God on their side.’ Some of the Christians wrote several 
songs about this but we shall put just one in our book: 


There is no point, say what you will, 
in happiness or joy, 

when idle barons take their ease 

at war in Syria. 

As yet they’ ve not made one assault 
on castle, city, town; 

a foolish raid, ill-planned, that’s all, 
which killed the count of Bar. 


If they’d but show some energy, 

how quickly things would change! 

But each man’s racked with arrogance, 
and jealous of the next. 
If God does not correct this pride, 

their labours will be lost, 

all their exertions useless prove, 

the pilgrims’ journey vain. 


Shameful will be the going back, 

and Holy Church disgraced, 

for nothing so far have they done 

of glory or renown. 

No hero’s courage have they shown, 
there’s no such news as that. 

Let God correct this arrogance, 

or we are all condemned. 


How great and glorious a throng 
set off from France, the flower, 
or so it seemed, of chivalry, 

best in the world, all said, 





1. William of Cordelle, the Papal penitentiary who preached the cross in France and 
accompanied the crusade to the East, Sée C.T. Maier, Preaching the Crusades 
Mendicant Friars and the Cross in the Thirteenth Century (Cambridge, 1994), p. 34, 


55 


Young gentlemen, poor vavassors, 
not one of them’s to blame. 

This long delay is hard on men 
who’ ve left their lands in pawn. 


The great lords show no kindness, give 
no sort of help or aid 

to such when all their money’s gone. 
These don’t deserve to die! 

Ifever they come home again, 

who'll blame them? None but fools! 
Imprisoned lords, all over France 

her people pray for you! 


So eager in your arrogance 

to show offall your strength, 
pig-headed, stupid, brave, you rode 
outstripping all support. 

Now Turkish masters hold you fast 
and Mary’s son must mourn. 

Great will the grief and sorrow be 
if God loose not your bonds. 


eR 32 1240 


¢ truce between the Christians and the king of Damascus 












the king of Navarre and the host of Christendom had spent some time at 
li with the prince of Antioch,' who treated them during their stay with great 
and courtesy, they took leave of the prince and went back to Acre. From 
they went straight to the Springs of Saffuriya, where they encamped. The 
of Damascus and Kerak? very much feared that our forces intended to attack 
Each of them had his own army with him to protect his lands. These sultans 
voys to the king of Navarre and the leaders of the host to propose a truce. 
offered excellent terms and the truce was agreed by both sides. Among the 
| benefits it brought the Christians was the sultan’s restoration to them of a 
known as Beaufort; this had previously been held by the lord of Sidon.’ 
the sultan of Damascus sent his men there to hand the castle over to the lord 
, the sultan’s garrison refused to surrender it and said they were not going to 


Bohemond V. 

Al-Salih Isma‘il and al-Nasir Dawud, 

Beaufort (Qal‘at al-Shaqif) had been 4 possession of the lords of Sidon in the twelfth 
century but had been in Muslim hands sinee 1190, 








































































































56 


leave. They even said openly that if the sultan wanted to surrender such a castle t 
those pigs, dogs, Christians, unbelievers and infidels who did not believe in God, 

i ablow being struck, then he himself did not faithfully believe in Muhammad" 
law. 

The sultan was informed. He went at once with his army and laid siege to the 
castle. Neither for him nor for any messenger he sent would the men inside the 
castle surrender it, nor would they let him enter it. The sultan immediately sent for 
his siege engines from Damascus. When they arrived he promptly had them set up 
all round the castle and began an assault from every side, using the engines to hurl 
both large and small stones. Very soon the Turks inside the castle saw that they 
could not hold it long and that they could expect no help from any quarter. For these 
reasons they held a parley with the sultan and told him that they would surrender the 
castle to him if he would promise them their lives. The sultan interrupted them at 
once and said that he would certainly not make any agreement with them; either they 
would surrender the castle and themselves to his good pleasure or he would take 
them by storm, whoever might be sorry. When they heard that, they were very 
much afraid that one day soon the sultan would attack with such force as to take 
them by assault and have them all put to a painful death. Therefore they went to him 
and submitted entirely to his will. He at once put them all under arrest. Some he 
had drawn to the gibbet and hanged, others banished from his land, and from others 
he took all they possessed. And there were some whose heads he had shaved, 
except the beard, and others were half-shaved, not more. He could not have 
humiliated them more, the Saracens said, or done them worse shame. When the 
sultan had done all this, he surrendered the castle to the lord of Sidon,' who garrisoned 
and equipped it with all the weapons, victuals and other things necessary, 


CHAPTER 33 1240 


How the Christians repaired the defences of Ascalon 


When the king of Navarre and the army of Christendom had secured this truce, they 
went all together to Ascalon. Here they found ample supplies of stone and building 
material, for the noble city of Ascalon had been a very great place. They began to 
repair one of its castles and to build good towers and dig good ditches. Each 
individual was glad to help in the work, and all could see that it was well done and 
very strong. 

Then they began to talk and say that it would bea good thing ifsome plan could 
be made for setting free the Christians captured at Gaza. Envoys from the sultan of 
Damascus were then present in the army, and they told the leaders in their lord's 
name that if they would stay in the country and make war on the sultan of Babylon, 
their lord would join them and would bring his own men, weapons and victuals to 
their assistance. This was readily agreed to by the Templars, Hospitallers and all the 





E Balian I Garnier, 


oF 










































{stians of the land of Syria. They said still further that ifthe others would agree to 
d besiege some city in Egypt, whether Damietta, Babylon, the Cairo, or any 
# city that should bring profit and honour to Christendom, they would have great 
tities of food brought to the army, it should be richly and unfailingly supplied. 
sultan of Damascus promised faithfully to do all these things. The king of Navarre 
the other lords from France who were present discussed this together and 
glutely refused to agree. And while these plans were being discussed the king of 
ivarre went off with many of his people to Jerusalem, to Our Lord’s holy Sepulchre 
he other holy places there. After that they returned to the castle that was being 
jired at Ascalon. 


the truce which the king of Navarre made with the sultan of Babylon 


vas not long before the king of Navarre madeatruce with the sultan of Babylon, 

greement being that Rukn al-Din and his men would retum all the Christians he 
iJ taken at Gaza. When the men of the army heard this, they were all furiously 
wy, They said openly that no truce should be made so soon, not until the Christians 
led! and taken at Gaza had been thoroughly avenged by strong and vigorous attack. 
jen the Templars, Hospitallers and Christians of the land heard about these things, 
#y openly opposed the truce, set themselves clearly apart and said they had no 
ention of entering into a truce with the sultan of Babylon. Then throughout the 
wt there was great hostility towards the king of Navarre. He saw clearly how 
ich the men of the army disliked him, and that they did not obey his orders, as they 
dl promised to do at the beginning, when he landed in Syria. He seriously expected 
«y would shame or physically injure him, and one evening very privately when the 
ny was asleep he went aboard ship and sailed for France.! When the Christians 
had left behind learned of this, they all set off individually for home and got 
nselves back to France as best they could, each to his own district and his own 
nl, The duke of Burgundy said he would not leave until Ascalon castle had been 
ell and thoroughly repaired, well enough for Christendom to be able to hold it, and 
kept his word, staying another full year. 


y the prisoners were set free 
he sultan of Babylon kept faithfully to the agreement he had made with the king of 


‘ arre, He released all the prisoners he was holding, the count of Montfort, Philip 
anteuil and all the others, rich and poor. The sultan’s envoys accompanied the 


In September 1240, 








58 


men whom the king of Navarre sent for this purpose to all the good towns of Egypt, 
and in all these places they were set free, These men insistently asked and searched 
for the count of Bar but could never hear any news ofhim. Some people said that 
Bedouins had watched the battle and after witnessing the Christians’ defeat had 
rushed in to gather plunder, as they usually did, and that they had taken the count of 
Bar along with their other booty. Later, when they left the area and made cam p, 
they tethered him to a post, where he was overcome by a flux and diarrhoea, of 
which he died. So it was said by some, but whatever the facts were, no one ever 
knew what became of him. All the other prisoners held by the sultan were sought 
out and set free without any difficulties being made. 














CHAPTER 36 1240 








How Earl Richard went to the Holy Land 


Richard, brother of Henry, king of England, who was a great and powerful prince it) 
the realm of England, had taken the cross, and many English took it with him. When 
the French took the cross, Richard set off with all his men and travelled straight 
through France and on to Marseille. There he and all his people went aboard ships 
and vessels and put out to sea, and they landed without delay at Acre.' They 
stayed a while at Acre and then, after the others had gone, they all took the road for 
Ascalon. Very well armed, they were, and well mounted, anumerous force. Reaching 
Ascalon, they found the duke of Burgundy and many local men there; these were 
protecting the workmen so that the Saracens should not prevent the castle being 
rebuilt or demolish the new work. Richard had no intention of breaking the truce 
which the king of Navarre had made with the Saracens, but he put his men hard to 
work on repairing the castle and spent a large part of his wealth on it. He and the 
duke of Burgundy stayed there until the castle was finished, made secure, and wel! 
provided with everything needed to endure a siege — men-at-arms, engines, food 
and other things.’ A fter that they made their pilgrimage to the holy city of Jerusalem 
and to all the other holy places in the land of Outremer that they could go to. Then 
they left to go safely back to their own lands and their own countries. Thus all these 
many men did almost nothing in the Holy Land that was of any use, and yet wher 
they first set out to go there, everyone said they would bring great gain and great 
honour to God and to Christendom. These things happened 1240 years after the 
Incarnation of Our Lord, and the pope, emperor and king were those whom we 
named to you earlier. 




































































I, On 8 October 1240, leaving again 3 May 1241, 
2. On the rebuilding of Ascalon at this period, see Denys Pringle, “King Richard I and the | 
Walls of Ascalon’, Palestine Exploration Quarterly, 116 (1984), PP. 133-47 at pp. 143-6 ; 








59 








































eR37 1240-45 
w the emperor Frederick was condemned 


Je these things were happening in Syria, there was great enmity between Pope 
wry and the emperor Frederick. The pope excommunicated him and had the 
lence proclaimed throughout Christendom. F rederick harassed the pope, and 
{only him but all kinds of clergy and religious and any who supported them. In his 
clerks were beaten, imprisoned, hanged and slaughtered. One of the Minorites 
burnt there, another skinned, and a bishop was drawn to the gallows and hanged. 
hunished bishops and archbishops from his land, and clerks, abbots and religious 
| He had crosses, censers and chalices taken out of churches, as well as palls 
‘other ornaments of Holy Church and gave them to those who helped him make 
‘on Holy Church. He refused absolutely to allow the presence of any bishop, 
ibishop or other prelate anywhere in his land, unless they were his own familiar 
nds, Many were the churches in his land which stood empty, the clerks and 
iets Who ought to do God’s service all driven out. Very many churches were 
sked down and demolished. Fifty or more bishoprics had neither bishop nor 
Ibishop, so that the whole land was given into the hands of wicked men, free to 
‘k evil, for there was no one to rebuke them or preach the word of Our Lord 
us Christ. Clerks and religious were so burdened with taxes and heavy exactions 
they could scarcely get food to eat. Every month they had to pay a large sum 
viwds the building of the emperor’s castles and strongholds. Clerks were 
»elled by force to plead before the emperor’s regents, and they had to give 
s of battle and had to fight if they were appealed, or if they appealed others. 
itted Minorites in his land for some time, but then drove them all out. When 
sents took the ornaments out of some church and the clergy bought them back 
paid the ransom, then these men would come back after the items were redeemed 
J ake them again, so that they lost both their money and their ornaments. He 
uk everything he could from the Church of Rome. He refused to let anyone go to 
ame, nor could anyone return from there except by his special permission. He 
‘no faith or any oath he had made with Holy Church. He gave his daughter to 
tutzes,' the greatest of the Griffon princes, who was excommunicate, cut off from 
uly Church. He had the prettiest Christian girls taken and sent them to the sultan 
{Hubylon and to other unbelieving princes who were his friends, and they did as 
ich forhim, No agreement, no pact that he made with Holy Church did he ever 


_ The Holy Land beyond the sea belonged to his son Conrad, and Frederick had 
ven had himself crowned king there, but he put forward no plan by which it might 


An illegitimate daughter, Constance or Anna, married John Ducas Vatatzes, emperor of 
Nicaea, in 1244. 

An allusion to Frederick’s imperial crown-wearing ceremony at the Holy Sepulchre in 
1229, Frederick's son Conrad was the child of Isabella or Yolanda of Brienne, heiress 
of the kingdom of Jerusalem, who died in childbirth in 1228, 



















































































60 


be freed from the unbelievers and brought into the service of Our Lord Jesus ( ‘hrist, 
All his wars were attacks upon Holy Church. He laid siege to the cities and castley 
belonging to the pope and Holy Church, and when he was able to capture theif 
defenders, he had them drawn to execution, hanged and put to acruel death, He 
took numerous Saracens about with him, who were happy to kill Christians as viciously 
as they could. When they entered any of the good towns, they would stable their 
horses in the churches and set up brothels and bawdy-houses in them quite 
unchecked. We cannot possibly describe all the atrocities Frederick did and 
permitted, nor tell you the humiliation in which he kept Holy Church, which was «ill 
but lost and destroyed under Frederick’s rule. 

The pope decided to seek advice from the prelates of Holy Church and he 
summoned a great council to meet in Rome. The prelates who were summoned set 
off and travelled safely through the kingdom of France and through the other lands 
as far as Genoa, which is on the coast. Having reached there, they did not dare no 
any further by land for fear of F rederick, and they boarded several vessels so as (i 
go to Rome by sea. Frederick had ordered his son, the king of Sardinia,’ to prepare 
a large number of war galleys. These were to keep guard and make sure that none 
of those attending the council should escape; all must be killed or captured. The 
prelates and clergy sailed on; Frederick’s men in the galleys attacked them, killed 
some, drowned others and took others prisoner, Some escaped, for they saw the 
attack coming before the others did and fled back towards harbour, but the galleys 
sped after them. When Frederick had the prelates and clergy in front of him, as well 
as two Roman cardinals captured with the rest (legates to France and to England 
returning for the council), he subjected them to harsh and wretched imprisonment.’ 
He had them paraded from town to town, from prison to prison, put on display, 
mocked, insulted, jeered at and humiliated in various ways. Many of them died of 
hunger and thirst, of heat or cold and other forms of suffering. 

Soon after these events came the death of Pope Gregory LX, a good and energetic 
prelate.’ The Church of Rome was then without a pope for some time, after which 
the cardinals assembled and elected an old man, whom they called Celestine? When 
he became pope he renewed and confirmed all the sentences Pope Gregory had 
pronounced against the emperor Frederick. He lived for some 28 days and ther) 
died. After him the Church had no pope for along time. Then laymen who supported 
Frederick said that the clergy had been caught ina fine trap and would never have a 
pope again. Even the Jews said that the prophecy of Daniel was fulfilled, that ‘when 
the Holy of Holies comes, the unction shall fail’.> Some were prepared to wager 
large sums that Christians would never have a pope again and that now the unction 





1, A bastard son, Enzo. 

ys His prisoners included the cardinals, James of Palestrina and Otto of St Nicholas, and 
the legate, Gregory of Montelongo, captured in a naval battle, 3 May 1241, 

3, 22 August 1241. 

4. Goffredo da Castiglione, elected as Celestine IV on 25 October, died 10 November 124 | 

5. Possibly an allusion to Daniel 9:26. 


61 






































spoke of had failed, the Holy of Holies would goon come, or had already 
@ in some part of the world, Christians themselves said many offensive things 
it the clergy, and that Frederick was manipulating them in such a way that they 
id never again have a pope and would be just the same as laymen. 
Vien the Church of Rome had been without a pope fora long time, the cardinals 
ni bled and elected a valiant man whom they called Innocent IV.'! When he 
me pope he saw that it was not safe for him to stay in Rome and that Christians 
id not go to him there because Frederick had a watch kept on all land and sea 
# so that no one could pass. Innocent had a galley prepared, went aboard 
elly at night and fled to Genoa. Once there, he had no anxiety about Frederick, 
ye men of that city supported the Church and the most powerful were his kinsmen. 
cardinals and his people joined him there secretly, running many risks to do so, 
allevents they escaped them. Now the pope fell ill and lay sick and at death’s 
1 in Genoa for along time. He recovered, regained his full health and strength, 
‘went to Lyon on the Rhone, taking with him his cardinals and an excellent 
ypany, as well as a great number of other men whose attendance Frederick 
inotprevent. At Lyon the pope summoned a great council of the kings, prelates, 
les and clergy of Christendom, who were all to go to him or send duly empowered 
wurators. When they were assembled there, the pope excommunicated Frederick 
recorded in their presence all the acts of sacrilege and treachery the emperor 
‘daily committed against Holy Church and against Christendom. By common 
yd in full and solemn council Frederick was deposed from all authority as king 
femperor. In full council the pope solemnly excommunicated both Frederick 
jill in general who should offer him honour, obedience or respect as king or 
\peror. He also absolved all men and women who had sworn him faith, oath or 
ilty. He commanded the electors to elect another man. After the events I have 
worded for you, the council dispersed. 


R38 1246-47 
w the landgrave was elected and died 


ie electors met in Germany and chose a very great and powerful man, Henry of 
ymany of Thuringia.’ The people of Aix-la-Chapelle‘ refused to let him be 
ed in their town because they favoured Frederick and his son, Conrad, When 
was king-elect of Germany, Conrad attacked him in great strength. King 
opposed him with all his forces. They fought a major battle, and in the end 
id was heavily defeated, losing 700 or more knights whom King Henry and his 


Sinibaldo Fieschi of Genoa, 25 June 1243-7 December 1254. 


In July 1245, 
Henry Raspe, landgrave of Thuringia, was elected in 1246, defeated Conrad in August 


the same year, but died in 1247, 
Now Aachen in Germany, 










































































62 
troops took prisoner, as well as a large number of important men, and this seriously 


reduced Conrad’s power. Not long after this battle King Henry died without having 
been crowned. 


CHAPTER 39 1247-48 
How the count of Holland was crowned at Aix 


The electors met and chose the count of Holland! as king of Germany. The people 
of Aix-la-Chapelle would not let him be crowned there, any more than they had the 
other man. The new king of Germany informed the pope of this, and he sent 4 
cardinal called Master Pietro Capoccio’ into that country and made him legate of 
the kingdom of Germany. 

When the legate arrived there, he had the cross preached everywhere and ro 
people to fasten crosses to the front of their shoulders, Many people throughout (hie 
country took the cross, and when the new season came the new king summoned ail] 
his forces and the legate all his crusaders and they went and laid siege to Aix-lw 
Chapelle. 

They stayed there a long time. Many were killed on one side and on the other, 
Below the town the besiegers built an embankment, broad and high, to check the 
course of the river and streams. None of the rivers. could flow away but were iil] 
held back by this embankment. This mass of water swelled and became very dees, 
and then it spilled into the town and poured all along the streets and into the houses 
and cellars. This caused much damage and great alarm, for it carried up all the 
sewage from stables and private houses and elsewhere, so that whole place stank. 
The townspeople were in serious difficulties fora long time. After the siege had 
lasted half a year, the defenders realised that they were not going to get any help 
from Frederick. They went out and surrendered the town about seven days betore 
All Saints. The new king had the embankment cut and the town drained, and it was 
then well and thoroughly cleansed. He entered it and was crowned with joy, festivity 
and great solemnity on All Saints’ Day. This was done in the year of the Incarnation 
of Our Lord 1247.3 


CuaprTer 40 
Of the Tartars and the Khwarazmians 
We shall speak again now about the Holy Land beyond the sea, but shall begin a 


little further back. Before the events occurred which we have just described, it 
happened that in parts of the East various kinds of people who were later called 





L. William, count of Holland, elected 1247, died 1256. 
yA Cardinal deacon of San Giorgio in Velabro, 
3. Aix is low-lying, with hot springs; William took iton 21 October 1248. 


63 


































ry left their own lands, saying that this was at God's command.' They conquered 
he lands they came to and destroyed all sorts of peoples — heathens, Muslims, 
sand Christians — without distinction, They conquered every land they entered 
s there were so very many of them, a whole variety of kinds of people, more 
janyone could credit. They believed in nothing. In less than forty years they 
yuered all the territories between their own land and Persia, which is at least a 
months’ journey. So many people did they slaughter, heathen Muslims more 
1 others, that it was hard to believe it was happening, it all seemed a fable. 
Ongst others they destroyed the kingdom of Persia. Out of that land they drove 
i her sort of people who were called Khwarazmians? and belonged to Babylon 
‘the law of Muhammad. These could not find any nation of their own law who 
il receive them, because of their great wickedness and great cruelties, and they 
elled on till they came to the sultan of Babylon. The sultan refused to give them 
wne in his own land, but granted them the holy city of Jerusalem and the holy 
mised Land where Christians were living. He urged and ordered them to go 
¢ and promised them faithfully that ifthey did, he would support and help them 


| ‘the Christians were then heavily defeated by the Saracens 


Khwarazmians heard these things and then by agreement with the sultan they 
kk their wives and children, their armed companies and fighting equipment, and 
ered the Holy Land. Very many of them were armed, both horsemen and on 
. They burst suddenly into the Christians’ land by Safed and Tiberias, and the 
jstians had heard nothing of their coming. Then they overran and plundered the 
di. ‘They made several strong attacks on the holy city of Jerusalem, where at this 
ie the ramparts were few and lacked any crenellation. 
‘When the patriarch’ and the other good men of the land learned these facts, they 
sussed the situation and all agreed strongly that they could not fight the 
Warazmians on their own, being so few in number compared with the invaders. 
decided unanimously to send to the sultan of Damascus and the sultan of 
" 4 who were bound to the Christians by truces promising them aid and defence 
“hyristian-held lands against all kinds of people of their own law, to ask them to 
and help the Christians against the Khwarazmians who had entered their land. 
these sultans promised upon oath to come and help them. 





These were the Mongols, the followers of Chingiz Khan and of his sons and grandsons. 
‘These were a Turkic people who until 1219 had ruled a large kingdom in western Turkestan 
4tretching from the Aral Sea to eastern Persia. Their power was destroyed by the 
Mongols under Chingiz Khan, and they were forced out of their traditional pasture- 
lands. They then sought new lands or employment as mercenaries in the Islamic lands 
further west. Itwas only in the early | 2405 that they moved southwards into Palestine. 
Robert, bishop of Nantes, patriarch | 240654, 

Al|-Salih Ismail and al-Mansur Ibrahim, 




























































































64 


While the Christians and the two sultans were preparing to drive the 
Khwarazmians out of their lands, or to fight them if they dared wait to be attack, 


the Christians inJerusalem were very much afraid that the Khwarazmians, whi 


were making repeated assaults on the city, would force an entry and cut them all i 


pieces. For this reason a good six thousand or more assembled, both men anil 
women, and they left the cityand tried to make their way through the mountains (a 


Christian-held lands. They relied confidently on the truce granted to the Christians 
by the sultan of Kerak, whom they called Lenas,' and the unbelievers of the whale 
land. When the unbelievers saw them, they kept no faith, no oath, no truce they 
had made with the Christians, but gathered from all sides and attacked them. Sone 
they killed and others they took away, bound, and sold them in markets and Wii 
Some managed to get away, but they escaped one danger only to run into another, 
for the Khwarazmians encountered them on the Ramla plain where they attacked 
and massacred them. In this way all those men and women who left Jerusaleny 
were lost, forno more than 300 reached Christendom, and these were in a pitiable 
condition. 

After that the Khwarazmians entered Jerusalem, which stood quite empty. Iii 
the church of the Sepulchre they found Christians who had refused to leave witli 
the others. These they disembowelled before the Sepulchre of Our Lord, and they 
beheaded the priests who were vested and singing mass at the altars. Then they 
threw down the marble framework that enclosed the Sepulchre of Our Lord and 
took the carved columns that stood in front of it and sent them to Muhammiicl sit 
Mecca as a sign of victory. And fora disgrace and dishonour to Christians, they 
demolished the tombs of the kings and took the kings’ bones and scattered then 
about.’ In different ways they soiled and made filthy the holy places, not only in the 
church of the Sepulchre but in all the holy places of the city and in all the Holy Land 
itself, where they committed far more acts of shame, filth and destruction againal 
Jesus Christ and the holy places and Christendom than all the unbelievers who hel 
been in the land had ever done in peace or war. 

When the sultans of Damascus and of Homs arrived with all their forces, and 
the whole strength of Christendom in the land had joined them, they set off together 
in arms to do battle with the Khwarazmians, moving in ordered battalions along thi 
coast road. Learning this, the Khwarazmians retreated and established themselven 
at Gaza. The sultan of Babylon sent strong reinforcements to them there, bot) 
horse and foot, to assist them against the Christians. 

As the hosts of Christendom approached Gaza, they saw the Khwarazmians 
and the men of Babylon arrayed in their companies ready for battle. The Christians 
placed their own squadrons in such a way that the sultans of Damascus and ol 





1. Al-Nasir Dawud. 

2. They may well have opened the royal tombs, searching for treasure, but the tombs 
themselves were still being shown to visitors until the fire of 1808. For what is known 
on this: Jaroslav Folda, The Art of the Crusaders in the Holy Land, 1098-1187 
(Cambridge, 1995), see index, s.v. 'Holy Sepulchre, tombs’, 







7 








































65 


a would have to fight first. ‘The armies drew near and clashed, Saracens against 
wens, Neither side spared the other in the least, just as if they had not been 
vers of the same law. They struck many fine blows and did great deeds of 
4, both the men of Damascus and of Homs, but they lost many killed and 
‘ed, and were defeated and made prisoner. This left the Christians standing 
-on the field of battle, and they were very few compared with their enemies. 
tously the two forces attacked each other; very sharp and cruel was the 
uniter, It was hard to believe that so few could fight so well against so many 
weyers, Then the Khwarazmians and the men of Babylon made a joint attack 
Just ours could not stand against such overwhelming numbers.! 
‘this defeat the brothers of the Temple lost all but thirty-six Templars, the 
lers all but twenty-six, and the brothers of the Hospital of Our Lady of the 
ns all but three. All the others were either taken or killed, and almost all the 
Jords were captured in the battle. Nearly all the crossbowmen and footsoldiers 
The patriarch, the constable of Acre.?Philip of Montfort’ and others who 


refuge in the new castle at Ascalon returned along the coast road to Acre, 
iii, shouting and crying as they went, so that it was a grief to hear them. 
{ler this victory over the Christians the Khwarazmians, with great pride and 
©, encamped on the Acre plain, only a league away from the city, and they 
(and shared out among themselves all the land the Christians used to hold, so 
the Christians now had nothing but the castles. 
he army of the sultan of Babylon which had come to help the Khwarazmians 
ver more men than before, and they all went together and laid siege to the new 
wufAscalon. Vigorously did its guardians defend it, and long did they hold it 
at their enemies. The siege lasted nearly two years. The defenders were very 
wd of those many were wounded. They saw that they could expect no help 
the Christians of the land, who all had enough to do defending their own 
holds, When they felt sure they could not hold the castle any longer, battered 
aged in many places as it was, they put to sea at night— those that still lived, 
suny had been killed in the assaults. They escaped as best they could and made 
i way to Christian territory. And when the Saracens saw what had happened, 
entered the castle, demolished and razed it to the ground.° 


This battle took place near Gaza on 17 October 1244 and is known as the second battle 
of Gaza, the battle of La Forbie, or of Harbiya. 


John of Ibelin, lord of Arsur, died 1258. 
Philip was a half-brother of Balian, lord of Sidon, and a cousin of Amaury of Montfort 


and of Simon of Montfort, earl of Leicester (died 1265). He married the heiress of Toron 
and controlled Tyre from 1246 until his death, 

William of Chateauneuf, master 1243-58. 

This was in 1247, 


































































































66 

























Then they did all they could and sent word to the king of Cyprus and to the prit 
Antioch telling them of the defeat they and Christendom had suffered and ask 
them to send men to help defend them. They also sent the bishop of Beirut! to { 
solemn messages to the pope and to the kings of France and England and to 
other nobles and to the prelates of Holy Church to tell them these things, | 
emphasised that if swift decisions were not taken about the Holy Land, it wo 
soon be completely lost. 

In the middle of winter these good men put to sea. Christendom’s urgent} 
led them to undergo the risk of a sea voyage in winter, and great were the dan 
the distress and suffering they encountered at sea. However, they landed on 
other side and made their reports to the pope and the king of France and the ot 
to whom they were sent. Little orno help or support did they receive except { 
the king of France and Frenchmen. These gave them help in the way and on 
terms that you will hear next. Christendom suffered these terrible events in the yi 
of the Incarnation of Our Lord Jesus Christ 1244. The defeat took place in 
month of October, on the eve of the feast day of St Luke the Evangelist.’ 


CHAPTER 42 1244-48 
How King Louis, fourth of the line of Hugh Capet, went across the seu 


In the same year and at the same time and season that these terrible events 
occurring in the Holy Land beyond the sea, a serious illness struck the good 
valiant Louis, king of France, the fourth of that name of the descendants of H 
Capet. The illness caused him great distress, and it grew worse. He made hy 
confession and received communion and all the rites of Holy Church proper far 
good Christian. He made his will, put his affairs in order, and earnestly begyed lily 
brothers to take care of his wife and his children, who were very young and helpless 
When he had done all this, the illness racked him so severely that everyone though 
he had died. Then they all began cry out in bitter grief and lamentation, and not only 
those with him but all the people of Pontoise where he then was, makin g such a 
outcry that no Christian born of a woman, however hard-hearted, could have {iiiled 
to be moved by it. 

When the king had lain speechless a long time, he returned from death to life, a 
it pleased God he should do. Having returned, he told the bishop of Paris’ who wae 
present to give him the cross of the Holy Land. The bishop and others were 
astonished to hear him speak, for they were sure he had died and left this world 


1 For Bishop Galerand’s mission to the West, see Bernard Hamilton, The Latin Church “" 
the Crusader States: The Secular Church (London, 1980), p. 264. 
On 17 October. 

William of Auvergne, 1228-48. 


wN 


67 












































the bishop gave him the cross and the king took itand immediately ordered 
should be attached to his clothing, His brother, the count of Artois, and the 
veut men present took the cross at once,! 
not long before the king made a full recovery and became quite fit and 
sent to the pope of Rome to ask him to send a legate to France to preach 
dle to the French people and to advise him about his own pilgrimage. ‘Then 
sent as legate into France Master Odo of Chateauroux, who was bishop 
um and a cardinal of the Church of Rome. When he arrived and preached 
juice, and French people knew that the king had taken the cross, there was 
Jord, prelate or great man of any kind who did not take the cross, with the sole 
ion of Theobald, king of Navarre and count of Champagne. Many others in 
also took the cross. The pope and the French clergy saw that the Holy 
ond the sea was in urgent need of help and counsel and that it was right for 
to spend large sums of money for this purpose; they granted him one tenth 
je revenues of the churches in his realm for a three-year period. When the 
» of Beirut and the other Christian envoys from beyond the sea reached France, 
wyefore found, by the will of Our Lord Jesus Christ, that the king and a large 
un of the people of France had already taken the cross to go to the Holy Land. 
jen the king and the other crusaders were ready, they left home and set off to 
AL e sea, The king went by way of Lyon on the Rhéne where he met the pope 
ived his blessing. From Lyon he left for Aigues-Mortes, intending to sail 
Jere with the August crossing. His boat was ready for him there, and so were 
af most of the crusading lords and prelates. 
hey went aboard and set sail on St Augustine’s day,” heading straight for the 
dof Cyprus. On the evening of St Lambert's day’ Charles, count of Anjou and 
#1 of the king of France,‘ reached Cyprus at the port of Limassol, where he 
ils wile’ and his people went ashore. That same night the king reached harbour 
ext day he went ashore with his wife the queen’ and his forces. About terce 
sii, count of Artois and brother of the king of France, reached the same port 
too landed with all his following. Very happy were the three brothers to find 
jather safe and well. On the advice of the legate and the other good men there 
decided that they should remain on that island until the whole army arrived, 
layed there until Ascension Day.” And the crusaders assembled on this island 
4 with them to attack the enemies of the faith of Jesus Christ. This was 1248 
fier the Incarnation of Our Lord Jesus Christ, in the month of September. 





‘Tn December 1244. Robert, count of Artois, (1216-49) was the second son of Louis VIL. 
; old 


mber, 
satoe ( 1226-85) was the seventh son of Louis VIII. 
Tieatrice of Provence, 
Margaret of Provence, 
4 May 1249. 

















P == 
== ———_ == 














— 
ae 








68 
Cuapter 43 1249 
How God restored the city of Damietta to King Louis 


To Lord Nicholas Arrode,' John Sarrasin, chamberlain of the king of 
France,’ greeting and love. This is to inform you that the king and 
queen, the count of Artois, the count of Anjou and his wife and I myself 
are fit and well in the city of Damietta, which God by miracle, in his 
compassion and mercy, restored to Christendom on Sunday the fifteenth 
day of Pentecost.* 

I will tell you how it happened: the king and the army of Christendom 
took ship at Aigues-Mortes. We set sail on St Augustine’s day at the 
end of August and landed in Cyprus fifteen days before the feast of St 
Remigius, that is, on St Lambert’s day.* The count of Anjou landed in 
the city of Limassol, as did the king and we who were with him in his 
ship, the Mountjoy;* we disembarked into a town. Next day very 
early, about terce, the count of Artois also came ashore at this same 
port. We had only a small force with us in this town, and we stayed 
there to wait for the fleet which had not yet arrived. 


CHAPTER 44 1249 
Of Tartar envoys to the king of France 


The previous Christmas one of the great princes of Tartary, Eljigidei,’ a 
Christian, had sent an embassy to the king of France at Nicosia in 
Cyprus. The king sent Brother Andrew of the order of St James to 
meet these envoys.’ The envoys, who had no idea whom to expect, 
recognised him at once, as Brother Andrew did them, just as you and 
I would know each other. The king then called these envoys into his 
presence and they spoke for some time in their own language. Brother 
Andrew translated their words into French and told the king what they 


— 


died in 1252. 


Arrode, ed. A. Foulet (Paris 1924). 
6 June 1249, 
28 August; 17 September. 


Wbw 


pilgrims had their first sight of the holy city. 
The Mongol general in Iran. 


The son of Eudes Arrode of Paris (a household official of Philip Augustus), Niclwilt: 
John Sarrasin died between 1270 and 1275; this letter is published as Lettre a Nicula 


The king’s ship is named for the French warcry, ‘Montjoie’, which in its turn derive: 
from the name of the hill outside Jerusalem, Mons Gaudii, the hill of joy, from whit 





no 


They were Nestorian Christians; Andrew of Longjumeau, a Dominican, was returnliy 
from an embassy sent by the pope to the Mongols, [tis now thought that the Mongol. 
were not sincere in their offers but were trying to encourage the Christians to attack thy 
Muslims so as to make a Mongol conquest easier, See David Morgan, The Mongal: 
(Oxford, 1986) pp. 181-2. 





69 








































d: that the greatest prince of the ‘Tartars had been christened at 
‘piphany and many ‘Tartars with him, even including some of their 
‘preatest lords. They also said that Eljigidei would bring his whole Tartar 
‘my to support Christendom and the king of France against the caliph 
of Baghdad, because he wanted to avenge the terrible acts of shame 
and hatred done to Our Lord Jesus Christ by the Khwarazmians and 
er Saracens. Their lord, they said, also wanted to tell the king that 
when spring came he should enter Egypt to attack the sultan of Babylon, 

nd at exactly the same time the Tartars would invade and make war 
on the caliph of Baghdad, and so they would be able to help each 

‘The king of France proposed to send his envoys and those of Eljigidei 

Jyack to the latter’s lord together, and on to the sovereign lord of the 
“Partars, Gityiik,' to leam the truth ofall this. They said it was at least six 
ynonths’ travel to the place where Giiyiik lived, but that their lord Eljigidei 
ind the Tartar host were not far away, as he was in Persia, which he 
had destroyed and subjected to Tartar rule. They also said that the 
‘Lartars were very much at the service of the king and Christendom. 
‘Two weeks after Candlemas,’ the Tartars’ envoys and those of the 
king of France set off together. They were: Brother Andrew of the 
order of St James with one ofhis brothers, also Master John Goderiche, 

mother clerk who was from Poissy, Herbert Le Sommelier and Gilbert 
‘of Sens.’ Half-way through Lent the king heard that these envoys were 
travelling with their banners displayed through the unbelievers’ territory 
towards the master of the Tartars, and that for dread of this master’s 
‘envoys they were able to obtain everything they needed. 

After this, the king with his whole force, which he reckoned to be 
at least 2,500 knights and 5,000 crossbowmen and many more fighting 
men, both horse and foot, went aboard the ships and put out to sea 
{rom Limassol and the other Cyprus ports on Ascension Day, 13 May, 
to go to Damietta. Twenty-two days we were at sea and suffered 
many difficulties and much distress.* 


agers and storms at sea 


‘ people who live along way from the sea are surprised when they hear about 
yn and the dangers of sea travel, and about the different kinds of serpents and 


Son of the Great Khan Ogedei. 
Candlemas falls on 2 February. 
Vor this embassy see Jean Richard, Saint Louis, Crusader King of France, trans. Jean 


Wirrell (Cambridge, 1992), p. 283. 
Louis reached Damietta in Egypt on 4 June, Jobn Sarrasin’s letter resumes at chapter 59. 





















































70 


beasts and the desert monsters which enter it, and about the nature of the River Nile 
which falls into the sea by four main channels below Egypt, we shall stop telling our 
story fora while and talk about these things, just as we have found them described 
in other old books. Those who do not want to hear this can pass on from this place 
and come back to the narrative which we shall continue later. 

One of the dangers of the sea is that of sirens. These are sea-monsters, formed 
from the navel upwards like birds. Sometimes when boats go near these creatures, 
great flocks of them swoop onto the boats and grip them fast, forcing them unde 
water. Sometimes when a boat is not strong enough, they tear it to pieces, ripping 
the timbers apart, and so destroying it. At other times they sing so beautifully tht 
the sailors and all on board fall asleep, and then the sirens attack the ships, tear ther 
to pieces and drag them down under water. When any wise and thoughtful sailor 
see them, they make those aboard ship arm themselves and stop up their ears 90 
that they are quite deaf, and then they can shoot at them with handbows and 
crossbows while they are still some way off. When the sirens come nearer and take _ 
hold of the vessels, they can strike them with knives and axes, with swords anil 
other weapons. In this way they have at times killed 900, counted, ina single day 
When there are only a few of them, say two, three or four, they throw them a little 
cask or some other container which will float, and the sirens all rush to it and take il 
and are delighted; they toss and throw it to each other, and while they are playing 
with it, the sailors make all haste to get away. Many have escaped this danger by 
this means, 

Charybdis is another peril of the sea. The ancients say that this is the navel of the 
sea and it is commonly called the Gulf. That is where the earth swallows the sou 
down into the abyss. From fifteen leagues away and more all around this Gull 
everything rushes to it and is dragged down. As fast as a bolt from a crossbow all 
is drawn there, so that it is terrible to see, a great horror anda great wonder, No 
boat or any other earthly thing can go near it without being instantly pulled to it, 
swallowed up and overwhelmed, sucked down into the abyss with the waters of the 
sea. This Gulf sucks down the waters of the sea two or three times every day and 
night. And after it has swallowed them like this, itreturns them, spouts them upwards 
in a great jet so high that the sea seems to reach the clouds. That too is very 
dangerous, but less so than the other. Some say, and it can be found in writing bul 
Ido not know for certain if it is true, that the tides of the sea occur whenever the Gulf 
vomits up the sea-water two or three times a day, and whenever it swallows and 
sucks it down, the tide and the sea go back. 

There is another danger at sea, and these are the great high rocks which appear 
above the water, and in some places there are many which do not appear at all, 
When strong winds drive a ship towards them and it chances to strike on them, it is 
in great danger of being shattered and sunk. Sometimes it happens that the prow of 
the leading ship dashes against a hidden rock and the others hold back and sui! 
across the sea. That is how ships are sometimes lost. 

Some say that in the sea there are great mountains and great rocks which can be 
seen, and others lying hidden behind them, and that these rocks are made of adamant. 





7\ 




































en boats touch them, the rocks hold fast to the bolts and iron nails in the vessels, 
hut they cannot move. Ships are lost in this way. 
Another danger is that of mountains which spout and cast forth great fires and 
nes, and afterwards swallow them down again into their boiling and burning 
s and hollow places. It is found written that the reason these mountains throw 
flames like this is because of the great quantity of sulphur inside these caverns 
we fire rages and burns. Sometimes these mountains burn so fiercely and spout 
nuich fire and flame into the sea that the water itself boils, and if any boats pass 
| way the great heat of the sea-water melts the pitch and so the boats take in 
and perish. One of these mountains is called Etna. It stands in the island of 
There are many other dangers at sea, but it would take too long to describe 
m, [will tell you one more, and then we will talk of other things. Ina book called 
ssar! are found the dangers endured at sea and in the Libyan desert by Cato,’ a 
al prince of Rome, and his companions. It runs as follows: 


1» and his companions wanted to go to the kingdom of Juba, king of Libya, 
jueent to Ethiopia where the Moors live, but nature hindered their journey by 
iting, a most dangerous passage in their way. This perilous place was called Syrtes. 
was neither land nor sea, for sand and gravel were so heaped up by the winds and 
ves that many of these shoals could be seen above water. Some were covered 
/ ihe sea, some a foot or two, others six feet or twelve. Between these heaps of 
| the sea was deep enough to float a vessel, if there had been no such shoals 
, in other places it was so shallow between the sandbanks that even a small 
it could not pass. Thus, Lucan said, it is neither land nor sea, for the land is not 
y enough for horse or foot to pass, and the water is not free enough from earth for 
pat to pass through it. 
(ato was a determined man, certain that his ships would somehow pass through 
jene Syrtes and that nothing would withstand his strength. As soon as his fleet had 
il 16 Sea to ZO through the Syrtes and past these dangers, the air became cloudy, 
ack and full of rain. The wind blew so hard it prevented the ships reaching their 
ht port. It drove the waves on and away from the Syrtes and what water there 
‘wy among the sand dunes was so violently stirred up by the strength of the wind 


Book 9 of the Pharsalia of Lucan. 


Cato the Elder, 232-147 BC. 
The following chapters, omitted from several manuser’ 
Pharsalia and from the Pseudo-Callisthenes, but are inspired more closely by the 


thirteenth-century compilation known as Li Fet des Romains, ed. L.-F, Flutre and K. 
Sneyders de Vogel, 2 vols (Paris and Groningen, 1938), 


ipts, derive ultimately from Lucan’s 
































































































































72 


that it fled away and laid the shoals bare. These towered up, and the wind 
storm grew fiercer and heaped the sands of the Syrtes up into such tremende 
dunes that the waves were powerless against them. None of the ships that had { 


swept by the wind in any direction it chose. Then the wind among the Syrtes dro 
alittle, and the travellers were in great danger, for the ships drove, prow first, | 
the sand because the water was so low, and their sterns were battered by the sti 
Thus they were in danger of breaking up at the bows and of being sunk by the st 
Some of the ships escaped this danger. These, whose sails were not firm ly set 


which had gone aground on the sandbanks were wretchedly situated, for they | 
reached land, but not harbour, They could see water all around them and could i 
see the land which was holding them. However, the sailors did their best, and they 
knew the conditions in that area and managed to escape, but only after a severe 
Struggle and with great difficulty, They emptied the grounded vessels so as to wet 
away more easily. Some men escaped, others remained and were got off in simul 
barges. 


CHAPTER 47 
Of dangerous winds 


When Cato and his companions entered the desert, the wind became more y iolent 
still. Not one of those knights could stay long on his feet, for the wind picked up the 
sand all around, Ifthe ground had been firm and solid so that the wind could nel 
hold oft, it would have crashed it down all at once, but it was sandy and offered fis 
resistance. The upper sand blew away and that below remained. The wind tore the 
helmets from the knights’ heads and the shields from their necks, the lances anil 
javelins from their hands, and carried them through the air to foreign lands. Well 
might the inhabitants of other countries be astonished when these things fell am wy 
them! They thought, said Lucan, that God was making war on them, shooting at 
them from the clouds, and that these weapons were aimed at them from the heavens. 
Long ago one day in Rome Numa Pompilius was offering sacrifice, and in the 4| wht 
of all beholders a round shield dropped out of the clouds. Wise Romans and Tuscany 
said at the time that Jupiter had sent it from heaven and that Rome would be master 
of the world as long as this shield was kept safe. Numa then had twelve others 
made exactly like the first one, and they were all carried in procession, and the 
priests who carried them always leaped as they went so that the shield could not 
possibly be identified. But Lucan tells us that this shield simply fell in the way we 
have just told you. The wind may have taken it from one of Cato’s knights, carried 
it across the Libyan deserts and borne it in the air and upon clouds as far as Rome, 
Then when the cloud and wind ceased, it fell. 





73 



































young men of Rome who were with Cato suffered severely from the violence 
dnd, Each was very much afraid the wind would pick him up and carry him 
hey hugged their clothes and weapons to them, dug their fingernails into the 
ching to the ground with hands and feet, and exerted all their strength to stay 
the ground. The wind heaped sand and grit over them, and did more, for 
olished stone walls and carried dressed stones away. Ruins appeared where 
| houses had stood, stone upon stone, flung down by the wind. Tracks and 
‘were so covered with sand that no mother’s son, however wise or clever, 
{ind his way except by looking at the stars as sailors do at sea. Moreover we 
Wy stars in this country which the Libyans cannot see, and they see others that 
(of our sight, for that is how they are displayed in the firmament, according to 
juition of different countries. 

sh misery Cato’s knights dragged themselves along. They travelled all night 
om morning to midday, and the heat was very great because the wind had 
yed a little and the dust settled, so that the sun struck directly on them. Their 
yw had dried up with thirst and their lips were cracking with thirst and pain. 


{ increased tremendously, and moreover they were ina part of Libya where 
ye lives because it is so hot there, summer and winter, and they were travelling 
noon onwards. Very little water could they find until they came to a beautiful 
i, Whose waters ran fast, plentiful and clear. They could all have drunk their fill 
the surroundings of the spring had not been alive with snakes. All around it 
y piece of ground was so thick with them as to be quite invisible — big snakes 
tle ones, and even in the water itself there were many edypes,’ snakes which 
ways thirsty because their poison burs so fiercely. Others were in the water 
he sake of its coolness — asps, chelindres,’ amphybanes,* scorpions, newts 
vipers, cersydres,’ toads, lizards and other serpent-like creatures which it 
1 take too long to name. 
Liveut was the men’s distress, when they found water and did not dare drink or 
i it because of these snakes which hissed and darted their stings at them. Cato 
danger his knights were in, for they would all die of thirst if they went away 


yout drinking, and he spoke to them: 


The passages below derive from Li Fet des Romains, pp- 602-3: descriptions of some of 
the snakes are found in Lucan, also in the Theriaca of the third century B.C. poet, 
Nicander, See Nicander, The Poems, ed. and trans. A.S.F.Gow and A.F Scholfield 
Cambridge, 1953). 

1obably the same word as dipse, which occurs below in chapter 49, in the Latin dipsades, 
from the Greek word for ‘thirst’. 
Chelydrus, a water snake, Lucan IX, 1, 7-11. 
Amphisbaena jLucan LX, |. 719, 
Chersydrus; Lucan 1X, 1.711, 














































































































14 








“My lords, you’ve no need to be afraid! You can drink this water safely, 
danger comes when a snake stings a man and the poison enters his veins and 1 
with his blood, or when it bites him, for its teeth are poisonous. But there's 
poison in this water, and no danger at all. You can drink it in perfect safety, Just 
careful none of the snakes bite or sting you.’ 

Having said that, he tied his helmet to the end of his lance, dipped up some wit 
from the spring and drank before anyone else, a thing he had not done in the who 
Libyan desert. Normally he drank last, but this time he drank first so as to share | 
danger, if there was any. He drank, and felt no ill effects, as the water was 1) 
poisonous. Then the others got water as best they could without attacking the 
snakes or disturbing the water, for they did not want to poison the water, and if th 
had slashed at them in the water, venom and blood must have spurted into it, call 
man drank as much as he wanted and then they went on across ground that was all 
littered with snakes, 

(We know very well from holy Scripture that the Lord God created snakes at the 
beginning of the world, and that it is natural forall snakes to dwell for preference ii 
warm earth rather than cold, and this is why there are so many more of them \ij 
Libya than elsewhere, especially in the area near India where the heat is greater, 
That is where the great flying dragons are, ones which can easily break the back wf 
a horse or an ox or knock down an elephant with their powerful tails. A dragon 
does not kill by poison but can take an ox in its tail and crush it with such strength 
that the beast falls in two halves.) \ 

There on the ground were the snakes we told you about, and also emorroiy,! 
hasmedites? cykalex} swimming snakes, parixas,* presters,5 and many other 
kinds of snakes which cannot be accurately named. 

On amongst all these plagues went Cato and his troops, many of whom he saw 
die on those arid sands from trivial wounds inflicted by small snakes. Great was (he 
astonishment of those who were not used to seeing men die of such small injuries, 


CHAPTER 49 


Of the same® 


A young man of high birth, Aulus by name, Cato’s standard-bearer, trod on a dipye,’ 
which is a little snake. It wounded him slightly on the foot, and at first he hardly 
noticed it, as it had bitten him through his footwear, and he never made any complaint 
about it or felt anything but perfectly well. Then when he looked at it and the venorti 





Haemorrois, a blood-letting sidewinder; Lucan IX, 11.709, 806; Nicander, II. 282 ff. 
Hammodytes, a sand-coloured snake; Lucan IX, |. 716. 

Scytale, acylindrical snake, i.e. of equal diameter throughout its length; Lucan IX, |, 17 
Pareas, a reddish-brown snake sacred to Asclepius; Lucan IX, |, 721, 

Prester, a snake whose bite causes a burning thirst; Lucan EX, II, 722,791, 

See Li Fet des Romains, pp. 604-5 and Lucan IX, lI, 734-60. 

See above under edype in chapter 48. : 


NAW WN 


75 






































jo run through him, and his veins, marrow and entrails began to overheat and 
th © venom consumed the humours whose task it was to keep his body strong 
hole, It dried up his tongue and palate, no drop of liquid or sweat issued from 
{the orifices of his body, no tears from his eyes. The heat of the venom caused 
violent thirst that no one could hold him or stop him running about the country 
1 an, looking for the water he craved. Ifhe had been by the Rhine, the 
¥ the Rhone, he would have wanted to swallow the whole river. He thought 
was nothing wrong with him but thirst and did not realise the dipse had bitten 
put it is asmall snake and bites before its victim is aware. Aulus scraped at the 
ad to see ifhe could find any drop of water, then ran back to the Syrtes which 
not far away, for he kept beside the sea. He sucked up the spray from the 
but could not drink enough to quench his thirst. They drew blood from their 
als’ veins and filled his mouth with it, they even took a steel blade and opened 
veins of his legs, which were excessively swollen, and he sucked out his own 
|. Then it was not thirst but death which claimed him. 


R50 
he same! 


ost at once another sad event occurred. A small snake known asa cerf bit a 
fit, Sabelles, in the thigh. He felt its teeth in him, so took it, tossed it up above his 
nd then struck it with a dart and pinned it to the ground, just as one would spit 
yt. This is a very small snake, but its bite causes a worse injury than any other. 
vkin broke at once, his flesh cracked open to the very bone, it rotted and poured 
iy him; all the flesh dropped and fell away from his thighs, leaving his leg and 
«-hones stripped bare. Then the flesh of his buttocks split, the skin on his belly 
il i ils broke out, and the venom ran through his veins, nerves and 
its; the veins ofhis feet were empty. Nothing within the man remained hidden. 
yenom laid bare his shoulders, arms, neck and head, everything rotted offhim in 
time than it takes rain or a little snow to vanish. And that was nothing to the 
wel that happened next, for ifthe venom ate up his flesh, so too can fire, but what 
ean burn bones away? Yet not one bone of him remained. This kind of snake 
4 the mastery and the lordship among all the snakes and plagues of Libya, for the 
ers only take men’s souls, but this one takes everything. 


See Li Fetdes Romains, pp, 605-6 and Lucan EX, Il, 76-88, 
Seps; a snake whose bite causes putrefaction and/or extreme thirst, perhaps the south 


European viper; Lucan 1X, 1, 764, 







































































76 


Cuapter 51 











Of the same! 


Then there was another strange happening — a kind of snake called a pres 
suddenly struck Nafide. His face turned red as blood and swelled up so that 
eyes, nose and mouth, all human features vanished. Then the venom spread tht 


his arms, he became so huge that one could have rolled him about without injuti 
his arms. No one could tell from looking at him that he had ever been human. | 
was still swelling up when his companions fled in terror. Not one of them wo 
have touched him to give him burial, they all fled, terrified, and left him there. 


CHAPTER 52 


Of the same} 


They had not gone much further when another strange thing happened to th 
Hermoroiz,' another vicious snake, bit a young man called Tullus. He was 
distinguished young man who with his utmost strength followed Cato’s example 
work and goodness. As soon as the snake bit him, his whole trunk and limbs tur 
orange-red like saffron, there was not an orifice, ears, mouth, eyes, nose, nor 
other above or below, from which red blood did not spurt. Blood sprang oul 4 


CHAPTER 53 


Of the same° 


As they travelled on they came to an old tree-trunk which stood there without leayen 
or branches, and a snake leaped from this trunk and struck violently at a knight, 





See Li Fet des Romains, p. 606 and Lucan IX, Il. 789-804. 
See above, chapter 48. 

See Li Fet des Romains, p. 607 and Lucan IX, Il, 805-14, 
See above under emorroiz, chapter 48, 

See Li Fet des Romains, pp. 607-8 and Lucan IX, Il, 822-7, 


MSwWNE 


tt 


































" him on the temple. Its beak was hard and sharp, a bolt from a wound-up 
how could not have driven so fast through both temples as this snake did. In 
itis called jaculus because it strikes so fast, The knight’s name was Paul. He 
wot poisoned, but fell dead, killed by the wound through his temples. 


a 54 


«same! 


{Murcus, a constable, encountered a basilisk or cockatrice, as lay people call 
quiture is such that it can kill birds in the air and burn up grass in front of it with 
wath, No snake or other creature can survive this breath except for the weasel, 
{kills it when it can get at it. *King of snakes’, is what the writing calls it? It has 
Nindquarters ofa toad and the front is that ofacock, with beak and cockscomb. 
ges a man before he sees it, itkills him. Murcus did see it first and promptly 
ed it, but the astonishing thing was that the venom raced up his javelin and 
yed his body faster than an eye can blink. Murcus instantly drew his sword, cut 
own arm at the shoulder, and thus escaped. Otherwise his whole body would 
heen poisoned and destroyed. 
Jone of Cato’s men could rest night or day, for they did not trust the ground they 
own on, they had no moss or leaves under them but lay stretched out on the 
‘earth. The snakes, which are cold at night, perceived their warm breath and 
ered near them for warmth, sleeping between their arms and legs, but did not 
them, as they are less able to use their poison at night because the cold affects 


{ + travellers could keep no track of their journey except by the stars, for there 
‘jo toads or paths in the desert. 


morning Publius, Scipio’s nephew, happened to get up early to relieve himself, 
[he others were waking up, but it was notyet light enough to recognise individuals. 
blius saw a long dragon stretched out on the sand, a good fifteen feet long and 
k as a big piece of timber. He thought it was a log or a big tree lying there, and 
down on it to put on his shoes. When the dragon felt him sit down on its back, 
ytantly flexed its tail, wrapped it round him and began to drag him away. Publius 
sited out and called to his uncle. Scipio drew his sword and ran to help him, and 


did other young men. Marrus got there first, raised his sword and struck down, 





See Li Fet des Romains, p, 608 and Lucan 1X, tl, 828-47, 
luidore of Seville, Etymologlarum, ed, W.M, Lindsay, 2 vols (Oxford, 1911) XI, 6-7, 


Gee Li Fet des Romains, pp. 609° 10, 






































78 








meaning to cleave the creature’s head, but the sword sprang back as if from a #t 
anvil and the serpent seized him in its sharp pointed teeth. It sank its teeth 
hauberk was no protection — into his liver and lungs, and then dropped him at ity { 
and gaped wide again. Galien attacked it, thrusting his sword into its mouth with 
point against the palate and the pommel down by the chin. The serpent closed | 
jaws and the point drove a good twelve inches into the palate and stopped att 
hard outer hide. Now the serpent had lost the use of its teeth, and they attacked 
wherever they could and wounded it in several places. But its great strength wis | 
its tail. Publius was already quite unable to breathe, when Scipio drove his sword 
which was very sharp, into the hair on its tail, and worked it until he had cut through 
the spine and the marrow of the tail, where all its strength lay. Publius fell to the 
ground. Then they hacked at it until all their swords were foul with venom and out if 
to pieces. They took a precious stone from between its eyes. This was worth (hw 
gold of a whole city, for no one who wore it could be affected by sorcery ai 
enchantment. Scipio kept it for some time and then it was taken to Rome and found 
in the treasury of the emperor Heraclius. Severe indeed were the sufferings and 
distress of those men in the desert, and many died there either of heat or snake-bite 


CHAPTER 56 
Of the Psylles who cure sufferers from poison! 


On they went until chance brought them a little help and comfort, although it cane 
late for they had lost many men. They found a kind of people who were quite 
unafraid of snake-bites. These lived in the land of Libya and were called Psy/les 
Marmarinz. They had a spoken charm, as powerful against snakes as the mow! 
efficacious plants in the world. They were so constituted that their blood would nut 
receive venom or poison. When children were born to them, they would put a very 
uncommon snake called an asp into their cradles and make the children handle it, If 
the child was theirs, the asp did it no harm; if someone else had fathered the child, it 
was poisoned and would die. Thus they tested the truth of their wives and children, 
as an eagle does its chicks as soon as they are hatched: the chick which gazes 
straight at the rays of the sun it accepts and feeds, the chick which blinks at the light, 
it does not recognise and throws out. In the same way the Psylles count as theif 
own the child which the asp does not touch, but do not acknowledge the other, {i 
their children play with snakes as with a ball. 

These Psylles could protect strangers just as well as themselves and when guests 
came to them, would keep them quite safe from snakes. When Cato and the Romans 
found these people, they made them accompany the army, and each evening when 
they were going to make camp the Psylles would recite the charms in the place 
where the tents were to be pitched and all the snakes would flee away. They would 
also light a fire ofa kind whose smoke would drive the snakes off so that they did 


i. See Li Fet des Romains, p, 611 and Lucan IX, Il. 890-938, 






























» come near the men, Onto this fire they put wallwort, the juice of arabic 
el. tamarisk, parsnip, larch and southernwood, a plant which is good for sheep 
yhiose smoke snakes detest, and stag’s horn. They put all these things onto the 
cl 80 could sleep safely through the night.' 
{asnake poisoned any ofthe Romans during the day, it was wonderful to see 
he Psylles fought the venom: they used their saliva to moisten all around the 
nil; the saliva constricted the venom and held it in the wound so that it could not 
up ordown. Then they would recite their charms so fast that froth fell from their 
and they kept up an uninterrupted muttering, for if they paused even fora 
ake the wound swell and suppurate and would spread 
n the venom which had spread into the veins was driven 
to the wound by the strength of these words and the wound would reject it and 
san was saved. Ifthe venom was so strong it would not come out, then they 
id keep licking the limbs and draw the venom to the wound. In this way they 


| great men from death and such was the help Cato and the Romans found. 
»re this, though, very many died and were lost, and they wandered two months 


ii desert. 

Inthe deserts between Syria and Egypt where Shirkuh and his armies encountered 
great storm we spoke of earlier? there are nothing like the quantities of snakes 
snd in the deserts of Libya, although Egypt and Libya share acommon border. 


uh the veins. Sometimes 


tR 57 


the nature of the River Nile’ 


spreads across the land of Egypt and why it 


Caesar, afterwards emperor of Rome, was in 


he was in the city of Alexandria and 
ity and country. His name was 


sy have wondered why the Nile 
uls late in the year. When Julius 
yt, he stayed there some time. One day 


J; him was the bishop of the heathens’ law of that c 

sreus. He had been bor in the city of Memphis, which some say is now called 

nylon, This Acoreus, bishop of Alexandria, was seated on a faldstool; he was an 
noured by everyone for his 


man, ancient, wise and discreet in such matters, ho 


{ worth. Julius Caesar addressed him as follows: 
‘Sir,! would be very glad to understand something of the nature of the Nile, and 


ow it is that it spreads across the land of Egypt to water and irrigate it, and where 
he spring and source of it may lie. Lam well aware that Egypt is one of the best 
ds in the world for studying the nature of astronomy, because it rains so little 

», and therefore the air is cleaner and clearer than in other lands.’ Acoreus 


ered him: 


ation is mentioned by Nicander, Il. 35 ff. and in Lucan IX, 11,915 ff. 
d-storm while on campaign in | 167, see 


ladin, was lost in a san 


‘This protective fumig 
Beyond the Sea, trans. F.A. Babcock and 


Shirkuh, uncle of Sa 
William of Tyre, 4 / Jistory of Deeds Done 
A.C, Krey, 2vols (New York, 1943), vol. 2, PP: 317-18. 

See Li Fet des Romains, pp. 628 ff, and Lucan X, M1, 173-331. 






















































































80 


“Caesar, | am happy to reveal the secrets of my former masters who knew 1m 
and to speak of things hidden till now from those not fit to know them. Others 
Say it is better not to speak of hidden and miraculous things, but I say it is pood 
make clear and to teach everything that can be useful. 

As it pleased the Almighty King, the Lord God gave different powers to the 


and the moon at the beginning of the world and to the five other stars whieh 
called planets, a word that means “wanderers’, because they are never at rest, ly 





















earth its light is so strong that it quenches for us the light of the moon and stars, Wh 
shine all day long just as they do at night. The sun is hot and burning; the mooi is 
cold and humid, and the sea rises as it waxes and sinks back as it wanes. Satury) la 
cold and full of ice and snow; Mars is hot and brings hail, wind, lightning and sudden 
accidents; Jupiter makes the air soft and mild if other evil stars do not prevent ih 
Venus is both hot and cold and nourishes sown crops and good things of the earth. 
Mercury, hot and humid, causes flux and reflux of the sea and of the Nile, ( ‘wont, 
that you asked about. When Mercury leaves the sign called the Crab and enters ily 
neighbouring sign the Lion in that part of the firmament where on the left there js “ 
star rising called Hernu' or the Dog Star, because it makes it dangerous to catwh 
fish or to let blood, then the Nile leaves its bed and Spreads over the fields of Egypt 
This is because the river is their neighbour under the planet I spoke of, Mercury. 
because Mercury is then in that part of the firmament which is directly opposite the 
Nile, and the heat and humidity of the planet cause it to rise. And as one humour 
mingling in another produces heat in the second, the heat, like ahumour mixing with 
another, draws the water out of its channel towards itself; and the humidity does wit 
let it dry up as it comes because the planet, as I told you before, contains in itsell 
both heat and humidity. Mercury does the same to the sea of Ocean when it is Now 
it, for it is always in the light of the sun. 

The ancients used to say that in the mountains of Ethiopia there is much snow, 
and that when this thaws, the Nile rises, but no one can believe this, for Ethiopia is 
so hot it cannot ever have frost or snow —all the men and women of that land are 
black because of the heat. All the rivers, moreover, that rise because snow Or ice if 
melting start to do so in March when warm weather is beginning to thaw the sn WwW, 
but the Nile does not leave its bed or spread out until Hernu enters, that is to aay 
after the end of June, half’ way through July. Then it spreads, and September is more 
than half gone before it returns to its bed. Not a drop of water leaves it all winter, 
but only during the fiercest heat, to protect the fields of Egypt from extreme drought 
and to soften the earth and nourish all the seed that is cast into it at the end of 
autumn. In July it leaves its bed, when we have longed for it and called it and made 
good sacrifices for its coming. But what man exists who can give a sufficient reason’? 





1. Qui anon hernu, but Li Fet des Romains reads qui amene hernu, ‘which brings July! 
(p. 630), 


81 









































is given a reason from nature why it should rise and flood at certain times and 
1 the world has need of it. 
hers said long ago that when Zephyrus! blew for a long time it could bring its 
ind heavy clouds from the west to the other side of the rain-winds, and that 
‘clouds would fall into some part of the Nile and make the river rise; or that 
ithe wind blew hard against the course of the Nile it held back the water so that 
uild not flow and it would break out and spread across the country. Other 
Je said that different rivers joined the Nile underground and thus it overflowed. 
‘it was said that the sun and the airs drew clouds from the sea of Ocean and 
these clouds fell into the Nile at night, so that it overflowed in August. Many 
le believe some part of these different assertions. 
ly own opinion, and my belief,’ said Acoreus, ‘is this—that at the beginning of 
world the Lord God put waters into the veins of the earth, and these flow into the 
fal certain times. When they break out of these veins, then the river flows fast 
ause the water is so abundant and it is forced to leave its bed and spread over 
lelds of Egypt. 
hers who long ago wanted, as you do, to understand the nature of the Nile, 
je kings of Persia, of Egypt and of Macedonia. They were wise men in their time 
‘wanted to explain these things and left their writings on this subject for those 
4 were not yet born. But whatever anyone has said, we cannot be wholly certain. 
‘great king Alexander sent men up the Nile to the very end of Ethiopia, through 
J which seemed on fire, in order to find the head of the river, but it came to 
jing. His servants were sent back with a stone which an aged man sent to 
sander, and he told them they were seeking foolishness and should return. 
ystris,’ king of the East, went to that country and was so great a king that other 
ys carried him on their shoulders. He too wanted to know where the Nile 
winated, but he could sooner have drunk up all the water of the westem rivers 
§ne and Po than find that out, however great his power, nor could he lear where 
river is born or where it comes from. Cambyses’ too was so frantically anxious 
‘now where the Nile came from that he travelled to the end of the world and 
whed the country where no one dies. When the men and women there have lived 
Jong that they can no longer turn over for old age, they have themselves carried 
yond its boundaries and there they die. Cambyses and all his men went right 
jouph this land and travelled on till their food ran out and they could find nothing to 
{ Then out of hunger they ate their animals and their horses. Even so Cambyses 
juld not give up but went on until for lack of food he had his men killed and they 
each other, just as if they had been pigs or sheep. But none of them ever 
shed the source of the Nile. 


The west wind, 
‘Sesostris’ a name used by Herodotus and later writers, usually identified with the 


nineteenth dynasty ruler, Rameses II, 
King of Persia, 529-22 BC, 












































82 




























No song or story tells us the certain truth. No one can boast that theirs i#{ 
country where the Nile begins. All I can tell you, Caesar, is what the Creator allo 
me to know. It is certain that the River Nile rises and spreads at the hottest time 
the year, when the sun has left the Crab and is in the Lion, and this is in July, the {| 
month from March. We call it quiptile;' in your calendar you call it July, from yé 
name. The river flows from south to north; once it turns west, at other times ¢ 
Libya and Arabia are the two countries where it runs straightest without turning. 
crosses Ethiopia, not as a single stream but in the bed of the Euphrates, into whieh 
falls. Afterwards it splits into several streams which bring water to many lands, 
then they join up again and comeas one to a people called Serez,? where there 
quantities of worms which make silk. These are the people who see it first, If 
believed to run across their lands before it touches any other inhabited countries, 
appears everywhere as a great river. We may wonder where it comes from, bul | 
one can say. Meroe, the chief city of the Jews in India,’ where people are black 
pepper, is surrounded by two arms of the Nile. There are many trees there of t) 
kind which grow into ebony trees. No trees growing in that place can cast a slime 
deep enough to keep the rays of the sun from the Euphrates, which runs there tou, 
and prevent its waters becoming scalding hot. When the Nile leaves Meroe it ruts 
through the sands of Libya in that part where no one can live because of the suti'» 
heat, yet the sun never reduces its flow. Here the river is narrow and deep, in ot} 
places broad and shallow; now it splits into several streams, then again these unite 
into a single channel between Arabia and Egypt. Between the Great Sea and thie 
Red Sea it runs quietly and without sound to the place where it falls into the sea, Ii 
other places which are steeper, it runs roughly, tumbles stones and rocks before it 
and sends up clouds of spray. When it must spread across Egypt, it begins to mows 
near the city called Memphis, where its banks are low. There it first begins ti 
spread and then floods across the whole land. Mountains check it to right and lett 
so that it cannot flow into Libya or anywhere else, but it waters all the valleys, plains 
and fields of Egypt right up to the mountains.’ 


CuapTer 58 
Of the same and of the stone which was sent to Alexander* 


When Alexander the Great,* king of Macedon, who conquered so many lands, 
went eastward with his armies towards the birthplace of the sun, they all encamped 


Quintilis, fifth. 

Lucan X, |. 292; Seres, inhabitants of China. 

In Ethiopia; the terms ‘Ethiopia’ and ‘India’ were differently understood at this period) 

see C.F. Beckingham, ‘The Quest for Prester John’ (1980) pp. 291-310 in Benween Islam 

and Christendom (London, 1983 and Aldershot, 1996). 

4. This comes from Li fet des Romains, chapter IV; it was a well known story, based on 4 
Jewish original and occurs in several forms, both as Alevandri Magni iter ad Paradisum 
and in Old French versions; Li et, vol. 1, pp. 397 ff. and notes vol, 2, pp. 161-2 

3, 356-23 BC, 


wn 


83 







































le the River Nile, which St Jerome in the Bible calls Gyon.' There Alexander 
d, for he had travelled far by land and sea and was sure he had reached the 
end of the world. From then on, he was told, he would find neither men nor 
_ He hada ship loaded with everything necessary and then ordered his men 
<j, ‘The two captains of this ship were called Mirones and Aristeus. He spoke 
jen as follows: 
Gio up the River Nile until you have eaten three-quarters of your food. Use the 
on your way back, for you will come downstream faster than you go up. 
that you are able to tell me what you discover.’ They did as Alexander 
inded. They travelled up against the current until they had used up three- 
yiers of their supplies. Just as they were about to begin the return journey, 
»s saw in the distance a small handsome dwelling standing beside the river. It 
‘enclosed in a high wall and had a pleasant garden. This building stood on one 
ol the river, and on the other rose ahigh mountain whose top seemed to reach 
Jouds. At the foot of the mountain stood a very tall marble pillar with an iron 
suttached to it. The ring held a heavy chain which stretched across the river 
we the water, across the wall and so to the dwelling house. This house stood 
yeen the river and another mountain, which was just as high as the first. 
’s go on,’ said Mirones to his companion, ‘and look at this strange thing.’ 
y went on as far as the chain, but could not pass it unless it was lowered. They 
ok it, as if they were trying to find out what it was. At this noise, an old and 
jent man thrust his head and shoulders out of a window. His hair and beard were 
w, thick and white, whiter than any wool, his face red and rubicund and he wore 
iment of white samite. As soon as he put his head out of the window such a 
t odour spread from his clothing that the men in the boat thought balm or 
« had been released there. The garden, too, gave offa wonderful perfume. 


‘Girs,’ he said, ‘who are you and what are you looking for?” 
‘We are sent by King Alexander,’ they answered, ‘and we want to discover 
jit kind of people live further up this river, and report this to him, as to one who 

kn to be lord of the world. And if you will revictual this boat for us and have this 

in, raised or lowered so that we can pass, We shall go on until we have found 

TT { marvel which we can report to our lord.’ 

*You are not wise,” the old man replied, ‘to try to discover the secrets of the lord 
ye world.’ 

at,’ said Mirones, ‘is there any other lord of the world but Alexander?’ 

*¥ es, he said, ‘one other, and there is none like him. Alexander is older than 
and yet he existed before Alexander.’ He granted this place and this passage to 
io guard, for beyond it there is arich garden where he wants none to enter. In it 
jg a tree whose fruit is such that if any eat it, they cannot die. More than three 
and years have | guarded this chain; no one has ever gone past except two 


Genesis 2:13. 
Flutre and Sneyders de Vogel see here a reference to Christ. 



















































































84 


men, one before the Flood and one after. ' They live and will live long in this 














will be right for me to lower this chain, I can tell youno more. Go back to your 
for if you go on, you will certainly die. And as youare going looking for marve 
your lord’s command, you shall take him one from me; a greater I have never 
Then he took a most beautiful stone out ofa small purse. It was about the sive 
hazelnut, perfectly clear, and on one side there was a wonderful eye carved 
skilfully that you would have thought this eye saw you and watched you |uet 
clearly as the most genuine eyes in the world. He held it out to Mirones and 
‘Here, take this to your lord, and tell him that such aman sent it, for you oA 
know my name. Tell him that this stone resembles him more than anything in 
world. Let him look at the stone, he looks at himself.’ Having said this, he eli 


the wise men could explain to him. Aristotle had himself carried to the king; the k 
handed him the stone. Aristotle looked at it. Then he said, 
‘Sire, it is true that you are like the stone, and the stone is like you. Have a net 
scales brought, and plenty of your gold, and I will show you.’ The kin @ hind 
scales and the gold brought. Aristotle put the stone on one scale anda gold hal i 
on the other. The stone weighed heavier and went down. He took off the haltper 
and put a bezant there, and the stone still went down. He added a second bow 
the stone was heavier. He added a third anda fourth and so on till the scale way 
of bezants and the stone still went down. Aristotle had these scales removed 
others, the biggest he could find, brought, but they could not fill them Up, NOL W 
gold, silver, iron, lead, earth or anything else, but still it was always the stone th 
sank. Then Aristotle said, 
“There’s no need to go on. No one can put anything there that will outweiwh th 
stone.’ 


What lay on the other scale weighed more heavily, and little by little Aristotle ont 
it till there was only a halfpenny there, and this weighed more than the stone, ” 





I. Perhaps Enoch and Elijah; ‘another king’, below, perhaps the Antichrist, 


85 




































whiny was removed and Aristotle put a straw there ~ the straw was heavier. 
ader and his men were more astonished than ever. Then Aristotle said, 

su do indeed resemble this stone. As long as its eye was uncovered it weighed 
jan anything that could be set against it. When its eye was covered with dust, 
y outweighed it. You are just the same: as long as your eyes are open in this 
ile, you outweigh the whole world, whose lord men call you, but when you are 
wil your eyes are covered with alittle dust and earth, it will be very different. 
jnno one, even ifhe envied you before, who will not then be glad to exchange 
W whalfpenny or something less.’ Alexander knew very well that his teacher 
Ming him the truth. Thoughtful and sad, he took the stone and looked at it, 
ivew it into the river it had come from. The stone floated and travelled up 
jal the stream. No deer or greyhound ever ran so fast, and all knew it was 
wick to the place it came from. 

il now we will return to our narrative. ' 


yen 59 1249 


duch though by no means all of our force, and we were a good three 
‘Jengues from shore. The king ordered the fleet to anchor and summoned 
ill the leaders to join him at once. They gathered aboard the Mountjoy, 
‘the king’s ship, and agreed unanimously that they would land next day, 
curly, fighting their way ashore if their enemies dared offer resistance. 
Orders were given that all the fleet’s galleys and small boats should be 
pared, and next morning all who were fit to do so must go aboard 
them. It was made clear that all must confess themselves, make their 
‘wills and put their affairs in order for death, if Our Lord Jesus Christ so 
willed it. 

Very early next day” the king heard the service of Our Lord and 


~ uch amass as is usual at sea, and he armed himself and ordered all to 


awin and get into the small boats. The king went aboard a Normandy 
‘bog, and so did we, our companions and the legate, who held up the 
Truc Cross and instructed the armed men who were getting into the 
other small boats to go ashore. The king ordered my lord John of 
Heaumont,’ Matthew of Marly and Geoffrey of Sergines* into the 








And to the letter from John Sarrasin. 

Saturday, 5 June 1249. 

A Vicard noble and royal chamberlain, remembered as an adv 
Joinville (Histoire de Saint Louis , ed, Natalis de Wailly (Paris, 


PA night of Louis’ household, Geoffrey remained in the East in 1254 to command the 
vontingent Louis established in Acre; see below, chapter 75, He became seneschal of 
‘the kingdom of Jerusalem and from 1261-63 held the office of regent; he died in 1269, 


ersary of Jean, sire de 
1921),chapters 33, 37, 





86 


ship’s barge and entrusted to them the banner of my lord St Denis! 
The barge led the way and all the other vessels followed it and the 
banner. The cog with the king, the legate beside him holding aloft the 
True Cross, and ourselves followed on in the rear. When we were 
within crossbowshot from the shore, very many Turks, both horse ana 
foot and well armed, facing us on the shore shot Strongly at us, and we 
at them. As we came in to land at least 2000 Turkish cavalry rode inte 
the sea to encounter our men, and many on foot waded out as well 
Our men, and the knights too, saw this as they stood armed in the 
boats, and they refused to follow the banner of my lord St Denis but 
leaped fully armed into the sea, some up to their chests, some to their 
arm-pits, some deeper, some less So, according to the varying depths 
ofthe sea.’ Many of. ourmen, with strenuous exertion and in difficult y 
and danger, got their horses out of the boats. Then our crossbowmen 
renewed their efforts and shot so fast and so thick that it was a wonder 
to see. And then ours came ashore and made good their landing. 

When the Turks saw this, they gathered together, talked in thelt 
language, and then attacked our men so furiously that it seemed they 
would all be killed and cut to pieces. But ours did not shift from the 
seashore but fought back with such vi gour that they seemed to have 
suffered nothing at sea, no danger, no trouble or distress, and all was 
through the strength of Jesus Christ and the True Cross which the legate 
held high above his head against the unbelievers. When the king, saw 
the others getting out of the boats into the sea, he wanted to do the 
same and join them in the water, but they refused to let him do this 
None the less he did get out in spite of them and was up to his waist in 
the sea, and all of us with him. 

Fighting continued a long time after this. When the battle had lasted 
from moming till midday, the Turks retreated into Damietta. The king 
remained on the shore with the Christian army. Few or no Christians 
were lost in this battle but the Turks lost up to 500 killed as well ws 
many horses. Three emirs were among their dead. Rukn al-Din, who 
commanded in the battle in which the count of Montfort and the count 
of Bar were defeated and captured near Gaza, was killed in this battle, 
He was said to be the greatest lord in all Egypt after the sultan, a good 
knight, hardy, and wise in warfare. 

Next day, the Sunday after the octave of Pentecost,’ a Saracen 
went to the king in the morning and told him that all the Saracens had 




















am 


The oriflamme, banner of the kings of France, kept in the abbey of St Denis near I 
2. Joinville, Histoire, chapter 155: as his boat overtook the king's ship, he heard oly 
ordering him to follow the banner displayed on the leading vessel, mais je ne ley on 
pas, he did not trust them, but headed straight for the shore and 6000 mounted iT 





















































{t Damietta, and let him be hanged if this was not true. The king had 
jim put under guard and sent men at once to find out. Definite word 

me to the king and the army before none,' saying that many of our 
iwn people were already in Damietta and the king’s banners were 
2 from a tall tower. 


yn60 1249 
mietta’s great strength and ample supplies 


fuger thanks did our men give to Our Lord Jesus Christ when they 
heard that, praising him for the great kindness he had shown to 
Mhristendom, because the city of Damietta was so strong with its 
jamparts, ditches and many tall, strong towers, its hoardings and 
bicans, its ample supplies of engines, weapons, food and everything 
needed to defend a town, that it was hard to imagine how it could be 
ken, exceptat the cost of great labour and toil and with overwhelming 
bers. Our men found it well stocked with all necessities. In its 
prison were found fifty-three Christian slaves, who had been there, 
they said, thirty-two years. They were released and taken to the king. 
They said the Saracens had fled on the Saturday night, and that they 
ere telling each other about the Christians, saying that ‘the pigs had 
me’. 
Syrian Christians were found too, how many I do not know, who 
lived there under Saracen rule. When they saw the Christians entering 
the town, they took crosses and so were not afraid. They were allowed 
{0 keep their houses and possessions. 
After they had spoken to the king and the legate, the king and the 
wmy left the city and encamped outside it. Next day, the day after the 
feast of St Barnabas the apostle,’ the king entered Damietta at prime 
‘i great procession and with great humility. He had the town’s chief 
‘mosque, indeed all the mosques, destroyed and used to build churches 
dedicated in honour of Our Lord Jesus Christ. We felt sure we would 
‘not leave Damietta until the feast of All Saints’ because of the rise of 
‘the river of Paradise which runs there and is called the Nile. No one 
ean go to Alexandria or Babylon or to the Cairo when it has flooded 
across the land of Egypt. The floods, it was said, were not due to 


recede until then. 








the ninth hour of the day, about midday, 


12 June. 
| November. 


87 


88 


You must know that we have no information about the sultan of 
Babylon, ' but the king has been told that other sultans are making war 
on him. Know for certain that since the Lord God gave us the city, ne 
one has been seen near our army except Bedouin Saracens, who 
approach now and again within two leagues of our forces, but whet 
our crossbowmen start to shoot at them they run away. These Bedouin 
come about the army at night to steal horses, and people’s heads. The 
sultan of Babylon is said to give ten bezants for every head of a Christian 
that is brought to him, and so these Bedouin Saracens cut the heads off 
hanged men and dig up buried bodies to get their heads and take ther 
to the sultan, so it is said. One Bedouin Saracen who came every night 
was captured, and is still being held. They could do this thieving easily 
enough, for although the king has placed his wife the queen and part of 
his war equipment inside the palace and strongholds of the sultan of 
Babylon in Damietta, and the legate has the halls and strongholds of 
Rukn al-Din, who was killed in the fighting when we landed, and each 
of the barons too has chosen his own large residence in the city of 
Damietta, yet the host of Christendom, the king and the legate are 
quartered outside the town. Because of this Bedouin thieving, the 
Christians have begun to dig good ditches, deep and wide, around the 
army, but they are by no means complete yet. Thus in his mere y Our 
Lord restored the noble city and fortress of Damietta to Christendom, 
It was then 1249 years since the Incarnation, the Sunday after the octave 
of Pentecost, that is the sixth day of June, which fell on the Sunday, 





























CHAPTER 61 1249 
How many years between the two captures of Damietta 


Thirty years ago the Christians took the city from the Saracens with 
great toil and labour, and lost it again the same year when they moved 
to go and lay siege to the Cairo, and the river rose and flooded all 
around them so that they could go neither forward nor back. For this 
reason we think the army should not move until the river has dropped 
and returned to its bed. Inform all our friends of these letters. 

Written in the city of Damietta, the eve of the nativity of my lord St 
John the Baptist? in the same month. 





18 Al-Salih Ayyub, now very ill with either gangrene or more probably tuberculosis, ret 
in haste from besieging Homs; he put his elderly vizier Fakhr al-Din in command at 
army opposing the French invasion. 

2. On 23 June, 














89 


R62 1249 



































he host of Christendom was terribly defeated and Damietta restored 
idl time to the Saracens 


) Damietta had been captured in the way we told you earlier, the cardinal and 
of France had an archbishop! appointed to the town’s high church, formerly 
hief mosque, and put canons there to perform the service of Our Lord. Good 
ents did the king assign both to the archbishop and to the canons, and also to 
emplars, the Hospitallers, the brothers of Our Lady of the Germans, the 
tes, the brothers of StJ ames, of the Trinity,’ and others, so many that we 
iname them all. To the lords and princes of the Holy Land the king assigned 
nicl handsome residences within Damietta appropriate to each. He had the 
hes which had been converted from mosques, and others too, richly adored 
shulices, censers, candles and candelabras, crucifixes, chasubles, albs, stoles, 
ples, altar cloths and cloths of silk, pictures of Our Lady, choir copes, tunics, 
ilies, phylacteries of gold, silver and crystal, and everything else that was proper. 
wd king had priests, chaplains, clerks and men of Holy Church placed wherever 
s was need, and he assigned and delivered to them revenues on which they 
‘Hive with honour and decency, according to what was right for them all. Great 
nd determination, great thought and judgement did the king apply to these 
¥4 nd to others by which the service of Our Lord should be maintained in the 
of Damietta and in that land, and the Christian faith be upheld and respected. 
he fortress of Damietta itself, already very strong, he made wonderfully stronger 
whes were dug out, barbicans built where they were lacking, stockades and 
luits repaired, and much more that we cannot describe. The king spent a great 
of energy and thought on these things we have told you about, so much so that 
Mber of people in the host said it was all nonsense and folly, we could very well 
anaged with less. 
he queen, the countess of Artois,’ the countess of Poitiers> and other Christians 
ded in houses in Damietta. The king, the cardinal and the bulk of the army were 
ainped opposite the bridge to the city, on the River Nile, on the same island on 
hi they had landed. They were quartered on the river bank, and the river itself 
7 setween the army and Damietta. This is the island of Maalot, which stands 
yu the river opposite Damietta and is rich and fertile. The king and the Christians 
jv encamped there on the sands. They suffered very much from the extreme heat 
from the numerous flies and fleas, large and small, which infested the army. 
ing and Saracens went to and fro spying on the host and attacked any of ours 


Giles of Saumur, archbishop of Tyre 1253-66, died 1266. 
Probably Dominicans, called 'of St James' from the name of their house in Paris. 
A religious order formed to buy back prisoners of war. 

Matilda, daughter of Henry I, duke of Brabant, 


Jeanne of Toulouse, 


























90 


they could find at a distance from it, and we did the same to them. Sometimes 
Saracens won, more often we did. Thus Christians and Saracens were often 104 
lying dead in the fields round the army’s encampment. About half way throw 


one dare to leave the lists, and so none of our Christians ventured to move, 
The Saracens remained in their ranks for some time. However, when some 
them realised that none of the Christians were going to come out of the stock; 
they left the main body and rode close up to the stockade and the Christians | 
provocation. My lord Walter of Antréche! could not stand that: he rode out on hi 
well-armoured horse and left the enclosure, against the king’s command, but no oie 
followed him. Vigorously he attacked the Saracens who had come so near, and} 
fine battle he fought. So well and with such energy did Sir Walter bear himsel/ all 
alone there that he killed three of them and drove off the rest. They fled to their own 
companies, who were arrayed at some distance. These were watching but did jt 
move. Sir Walter struck spurs into his horse to pursue the fugitives, but the hor 
was tired and fell, with Sir Walter under him. When the fleeing Saracens saw Siy 
Walter fall, they tumed swiftly back towards him and meantto kill him. But my low! 
Imbert of Beaujeu? saw what was happening and rode out fast, and other k nights 
with him, and they spurred hard towards him. The Turks saw them, had no time ty 
kill Sir Walter, leaped onto their horses and fled back to their own ranks. Sir Wal Ww 
was carried back to the host and on the third day he died of the injury he received 
when he fell.? The Saracens returned to their own ranks when they saw that the 
Christians would not fight them. 
Later on, about the feast of St Luke the Evangelist,’ there were such great and 
Widespread storms at sea in these districts that very many vessels in harbour were iti 
danger, many of our people were drowned and supplies of food lost at sea. ‘This 
storm was felt in almost all the seaports of the Holy Land. It did not affect the port 
of Limassol in Cyprus, where the count of Poitiers’ and his whole force came 
ashore. He and his people rested there briefly and then put to sea again and all 
came safe and sound to Damietta, Very happy was the king, and so were the why le 
host, at the arrival of the count of Poitiers and his men. 
Then when the feast of St Cecilia came,° the king had his ships prepared, There 
were so many barges and galleys, so many great and small boats loaded with 




















1. Son of Guy of Nanteuil who was lord of Antréche and castellan of Bar. 

2. Lord of Montpensier and Aigueperse, Constable of France (1240-50); died in Egypt 

3: Joinville says that Walter was thrown from his horse before reaching the enemy, and the 
horse, a stallion, galloped on to join the mares on which the Turks were mounted 
Joinville and a friend went to visit the injured man, entered his tent quietly but found 
him dead. The king remarked that he would not wish to have a thousand such men, foi 
they would all disobey him. Histoire, chapter 37, 

4, October. 

5s Alphonse (1220-70), fifth son of Louis VIII, married Jeanne, heiress of Toulouse, He 


was regent of France after death of Queen Blanche. 
6. 22 November. 


9\ 









































(stuffs, with weapons, engines, armour and everything else needed in warfare, 
i) men and horses, that it was a wonder to behold, Ships and small boats, there 
1¢ so many of all sorts that they covered the whole of that part of the river. The 
ny then moved and left Maalot island and crossed to the other island on the far 
« where Damietta stands. They arrayed their companies and set offupriver, so 
{ the forces going by boat and those on land were travelling side by side. Those 
Jund had the river and the fleet on their right all the time. They all went upriver 
ether, going south, with Damietta on their right and Tanis castle on their left, 
Wing against the great body of Turks who were massed beyond the river, above 
nis water in the place called Mansourah. At that place the Tanis leaves the left 
ofthe Nile’s main channel and flows into the sea past Tanis castle. The Saracens 
ww that the king intended to besiege the noble city of Babylon and the Cairo and 
conquer the whole land of Egypt if the Lord our God would help him, and that he 
wild have to cross the River Tanis there because he had a large fleet and could not 
yandon it without heavy loss, and it was there that the rivers divided. 
ey travelled upriver slowly and by very short stages each day, because they 
4e moving into the teeth of a fierce wind, and the ships and other vessels could 
{ be brought on without immense labour, but they could not leave them. The king 
i the others on land travelled safely, but from Damietta to Mansourah, not more 
n eighteen leagues, it took them over thirty-one days. They left Damietta on 20 
syember and reached their goal on the day of St Thomas the Apostle, the fifth day 
helore Christmas." 
As they were moving on by short stages the Turks ambushed them at dawn on 
ie day after St Nicholas’ day? Six hundred of the bravest and most experienced 
lurks, the best armed and mounted of all their army, were sent at daybreak to 
jurge our vanguard. So fast and fiercely they came, it seemed they must defeat our 
yhole host. But the Templars and the others of ours in the vanguard were not in the 
wst startled or dismayed. Steadily they received them on the edges of their swords, 
erce and sharp was the conflict while it lasted. Soon it was over, the defeated 
Vurks fled back fast to their ambush and from there they fled all together to their 
host. Three hundred Turks were found killed, but only two Christians. 
After this our men suffered very little trouble until they reached the forward point 
of the island where the two rivers divide. They had the Saracen host ahead of them, 
sross the water, the Nile on the right and the Tanis on the left, so that ours could 
yeither go forward in any direction, nor could they retreat. They encamped, therefore, 
where they were, between the Tanis and the Nile. 
 Onthis same day the Saracens crossed the Tanis and attacked our infantry. But 
‘the knights and horsemen of our host saw this, raced there and attacked; the Saracens 
‘did not hold for long but were heavily defeated, losing many killed and taken. The 
“st fled away, but to a wretched end —they could not make for the Tanis but went 
‘towards the Nile, where our fleet lay at anchor. Our Christians were pursuing them, 


——_— 


21 December. 
On7 December, 


= 
































92 









slaughtering and knocking them down, and when they reached the river the Sa 
plunged in, horse and foot, to escape death, But it did them little good. Our tt 
the boats attacked as soon as they saw them; they saw Saracen horsemei 
footsoldiers drowning and they hit them with swords, axes and poles and s0 ki 
them in the water. Some of the Christians got long boathooks and fished the men 
out of the water, drew them close in and then threw them back into the river, ln 
way almost all the Saracens in this assault were lost. 

Next day the Turks attacked again with a much larger force, burning for rey 
They charged our host; our men received them without mercy on sword and | 
point. It was a fierce and bitter encounter. The Turks could not endure itt 
suffered a defeat as serious or worse than that of the day before. 


CHAPTER 63 1250 


How the king and the Christians went to Mansourah 


now confirmed: the sultan of Babylon who had been ill almost a year had ree 
died.’ He had sent reliable messengers to his son, then in the East, tellin fe hin 
come quickly to Egypt and be lord of the land and to resist the Christians who 
trying to conquer it.’ He had made all his emirs and all the important men in 
country swear on the book of Muhammad’s law which they call the al-Koran! 
take an oath of fealty and homage, promising to accept him as lord and sultan 
he arrived. He had appointed a great and rich emir, a wise and valiant kni ght 
fine warrior, as commander and protector of all his land and of the very large 
he had gathered against the Christians, until his son’s arrival. This emir’s nare 
Saphadin.* 

When the king and the host of Christendom saw that they could not crows 
river because of the Saracen army encamped on the far side, the king, on the ady 
of his lords, ordered a causeway to be built out into the River Tanis; it must 


20 January. 

Al-Salih Ayyub, see above, chapter 60. 

His son, al-Mu‘azzam Turan-Shah, was far away in the Jazira. 
The text has alechorem. 

The vizier, Fahkr al-Din, 


VFtYNr 


93 









































y. broad and high, constructed of timber and earth, This was intended to divert 
water of the Tanis into the channel of the Nile, or at least, by driving the causeway 
i into the Tanis, to narrow the stretch of water so that it could more easily be 
jyed to reach the far bank where the Saracens were stationed. 
© it was planned, but it was not at all an easy thing to do. The king had two 
ul strong cats! built and had his siege-engines, stone-throwers, mangonels, 
shets and other weapons set up to attack the Saracens who would oppose the 
ing. When all this was ready, our men had the cats brought forward to the 
ii place. Themen bringing earth and timber and the others building the causeway 
fered underneath them. Seeing this, the Saracens set up numerous siege-engines 
suite ours, to shatter the cats and the causeway. They hurled such quantities of 
t and small, that all were astonished. They threw, slung and shot crossbow 
i, they shot Turkish javelins and threw and flung Greek fire.’ In how many 
vent ways did they attack our engines and the men building the causeway! It 
{errible to see, terrible to hear. Stones, javelins, arrows, crossbow bolts and 
wk fire flew thick as rain. When the causeway had been laboriously and painfully 
i out beyond the centre of the stream, at the cost of more blows and in worse 
yer than most people could easily believe, the Saracens stepped up their attacks 
diongly, using relays of men day and night, that they seemed to be starting afresh 
over again. 

fiere were three reasons why the causeway could not be carried right across 
river; when the river was made narrow like that, the current ran so fiercely 
lh the gap that no material could be held in place, but was swept downstream. 
| was the first reason. The second was that the Saracens flung so many huge 
y stones against our engines that they shattered almost all of them. The third 
wn was that together with the great stones aimed at our two cats protecting the 
meway-builders, the Saracens shot innumerable darts, arrows and crossbow bolts 
dit and blazing with Greek fire, the stones smashed the cats and the Greek fire set 
i ulight, and so they were burned to ashes. 
While our men were struggling to build the causeway, the Saracens very suddenly 
preat strength got across the river and charged in amongst our men from 
ry vide. They attacked a section defended by the Hospitallers, and another held 
the brothers of Our Lady of the Germans. Both gave them apitiless welcome. 
hile it lasted it was a great and bitter conflict. Many heroic deeds, many fine 


ywi and feats of courage were performed on both sides. In the end the Turks’ 


ible attack was beaten off. Very many were killed. Ours pursued them to the 


4 branch of the Nile, overthrowing and cutting them down. In terror of death, 
i plunged into the water. Very many Saracens were slain and drowned that day, 

‘reat was the loss the unbelievers suffered from their deaths. Many in the host 
stendom said that if our men at the causeway had made an immediate and 


Movable protective screens, 


An inflammable mixture of naptha and other substances. 




















94 


vigorous attack on the crossing during this conflict and pursuit, they could have 
across the river in spite of the Saracens and would have captured the crossing, | 
Hospitallers lost eleven of their brothers in this battle. The brothers of Our Lady 
the Germans did not lose more than four, but were highly praised and commer) 
that day throughout the host. The battle was fought on the day of the feast of 
Sebastian the martyr, which is in January. ' 

After this came the Saturday before Candlemas? when a very strong wind bl 
from the Saracen host down the Nile towards the place where our ships lay 
anchor. They took four barges, fastened them together with iron chains, then {ilhat 
them with tow and straw, dry wood, pitch, wax and other food for flames, set (hen 
alight with Greek fire and floated them downstream to burn our ships. But awe 
sailors were quick, active and alert; they ran for staves and boat-hooks and in spite 
of the wind and the flames streaming towards them and the fire blazing up ad 
spitting in their faces, they thrust them off from our ships and no harm was done. 


Cuarter 64 1250 
How the king and the Christians crossed the River Tanis 


When the king of France and the commanders of the Christian army realised that tlie 
causeway could not be carried right across, for the reasons we told you, they 
discussed means of crossing the river and fighting the Saracens who were stationed 
on the far bank to prevent them crossing. They asked Saracen traitors, who had left 
the unbelievers’ army to join ours, whether they knew of any ford. One of thew 
men told the king that there certainly was a ford further down the Tanis; it was rathey 
deep, but he was sure the king would be able to cross there. The king and (he 
barons in council could think of no other way of getting across, and so they agreed 
to try to use the ford mentioned by the Saracen. Next day was Shrove Tuesday | 
The king, his three brothers and most of the knights and other men of our }\wot 
armed and mounted before first light and rode out from the host with their companies 
arrayed. The king left good men on guard to protect the equipment and troayiy, 
both horse and foot, who were left behind. When the king and the others, all an 
horseback so as to cross the ford, were out in the open, the king commanded all af 
them generally, great men and small, that no one should dare to break ranks; ofeh 
man must stay in his own company and the companies must keep close together and 
all move in an orderly fashion at no more than a walk, When the first contingent had 
got over the river, they must wait on the bank until the king and all the others hw! 
crossed, 

When the king had issued these orders and arrayed his companies, the Saraeet 
guided them and they went all together towards the ford which he showed thei, 





1. 20 January. 
2. Candlemas is 2 February. 
3: 8 February 1250. 





95 












































wehing it, they found it much more dangerous than they expected. The banks 
¢ very high and the ground on both sides of the river was nothing but marsh, mud 
swamp. The water was deeper and more dangerous than the Saracen had said, 
J ut one point they had to swim the horses. Once they reached the crossing place 
J the Saracen had shown them the ford, the king had him taken back to our host 
I given great wealth. The count of Artois and the others who formed the vanguard 
\inged boldly into the water and courageously got across, with great difficulty and 
serious risk to themselves and their horses. The king and all the others crossed 
er them in the same way. There was not one of them, however good his horse, 
© was not in great fear of drowning before he got across. 

Reaching the far bank, the vanguard disobeyed the king’s orders and rode fast 
tiver as far as the place where the Saracen engines were sect up opposite the 
liseway. Very early in the day and very suddenly they attacked the Saracen 
fees encamped there, who were expecting no such attack. Some were still fast 
leep, others lying in bed. The Saracens on sentry duty were defeated first and 
Most all put to the sword. Our men charged in through the Turks’ quarters, killing 
li d sparing none; men, women and children, old and young, great and small, rich 
«l poor, they slew and slashed and killed them all. Ifthey found girls or old people 
ding for fear of death, it did them no good to shriek and cry and beg for mercy, 
wy were all slaughtered. Saphadin' was killed there, commander of the Saracen 
ut, an important and powerful man, along with the others. It was sad indeed to 
« so many dead bodies and so much blood spilt, except that they were enemies of 
je Christian faith. 

When our men saw that they could do as they wished with the Saracens and that 
ey were all running away, they went foolishly rushing after them without any thought, 
yithout any consideration. Brother Giles, grand commander of the Temple, a good 
Hight, valiant, hardy, wise in war and clear-sighted in such matters, advised the 
sunt of Artois to halt and rally his men; they should all wait for the king and the 
ther companies which had not yet crossed the river. Brother Giles went on to say 
wt they had achieved one of the finest acts of courage and chivalry seen for a long 
ne in the Holy Land, and then he recommended that they should move out from 
mong the Saracens’ engines opposite the causeway, scattered and separated as 
were, the Saracens could easily rally and defeat them, as they were so few 
pared with the Saracens gathered there. A knight with the count of Artois, 
vhose name we do not know, exclaimed, 

“There now, there’s wolf’s fur in that!? If the Templars and Hospitallers and the 
nen who live here’ really wanted it, the land would have been conquered long ago. : 
thers who were there spoke to the count of Artois: 


S 





Fahkr al-Din. 
Ades i aura dou peul du leu, perhaps the phrase derives from Aesop’s fable of the wolf 
in sheep’s clothing, 


Syrian-born Franks, a8 opposed to crusaders from the West. 











96 





































“My lord, don’t you see that the Turks are beaten and running? Won't it 
wicked and cowardly if we don’t pursue our enemies?’ The count of Arty 
commanding the vanguard, readily agreed to pursue them, and told Brother (| 
that ifhe was afraid, he could stay behind. 

‘My lord,’ Brother Giles answered, ‘neither I nor my brothers are afraid. 
shall not stay behind, we shall ride with you. But let me tell you that none of 
expect to come back, neither you nor ourselves,’ While they were talking like th 
ten knights came galloping up to the count of Artois and told him in the king's nai 
not to move, he must wait until the king came up. He answered that the Saracens 
were beaten and he certainly would not wait, he was going to pursue them. 

Instantly they set off after the Saracens in among all the tents, scattering: ane 

separating as they hunted them out, keeping to no one path, until they reached « 
small town called Mansourah. One after another they charged straight in, kill ii 
everyone they could catch. The Saracens could hardly believe our men had engage 
in so stupid a pursuit, running into such danger and scattering along the streets of (his 
village. They had them at their mercy, as they clearly saw. Horns, trumpets ail 
drums were sounded, promptly they rallied, surrounded our men on every side il 
savagely they attacked, for their hearts were bitter at the slaughter of their ows 
people which they had witnessed. Ours were at a fatal disadvantage, for they were 
not together, and their horses were dropping with exhaustion, so much had they 
raced to and fro among the Turkish tents. The Saracens found them in small groups, 
easily did what they wanted, slashed and cut and took and bound them and draped 
them into captivity. Some fled towards the river to escape death, but the Saracens 
were on their heels, bringing them down with Danish axes, with maces and sworty, 
and if they reached the river, great, fast and deep, and flung themselves into it, they 
drowned. 

No one ever knew for certain who was killed, taken or drowned in this battle: 
Robert, count of Artois, brother of the king of France, perished, as did Ralph, lord 
of Coucy; Roger, lord of Rosoi in Tieresche; John, lord of Cherisy; Erard,' lord of 
Brienne in Champagne; William Longsword, carl of Salisbury? in England, and all 
the Templars who were present, so that only four or five Templars survived.’ Very 
many of our lords, knights, crossbowmen and mounted sergeants, the most valiant, 
most hardy, the best of all our host —all these were lost and nothing definite was ever 
known about them. 

When the king and the companies with him had crossed the river, they moved 
well arrayed and in good order towards the Saracens, but the Saracens, who had 
defeated our men so terribly, were riding high with pride and did not care a button 
for the king or all the rest of our army. The moment they saw the king, in great pride, 





1. A cousin of Count Walter of Brienne and through Walter connected by marriage with 
Henry I, king of Cyprus. 
ye 1226-50. 


ay Joinville, Histoire, chapter 45, records the deaths of the count of Artois, the lord of 
Coucy, and an estimated three hundred knights; the master of the Temple later told him 
that they had lost fourteen score mounted men-at-arms. 


97 





























wance and strength they rode boldly and fiercely to the attack. Seeing this, the 
w reflected that those who had led the way had certainly placed Christendom in 
at danger. He ordered all who were with him to close ranks and keep strictly 
ether. He exhorted them strongly, and told them they must not be afraid of this 
wat number of unbelievers riding towards them, for Our Lord Jesus Christ, for 
yse sake they were here, was stronger and mightier than any other. 
As soon as the Saracens drew near our people, a tremendous noise of horns, 
ss and drums broke out, men shouted, horses neighed; it was horrible to see or 
1. They completely surrounded our forces and shot dense clouds of bolts and 
ows at them; no rain or hail could have caused such darkness. Very many were 
ounded, both men and their mounts. When the Turks’ first troop had shot off all 
\eir arrows and emptied their quivers, they retired and made way for asecond 
jp, more numerous still and shooting even more densely than the others. The 
ng and our men had no crossbowmen with them, all who had crossed the river 
4th the king had been killed in the vanguard, for the Saracens killed without mercy 
yery crossbowman they took. When the king and our men saw that they and their 
wses were being destroyed, they spurred forward in one massed charge to escape 
he Turks’ arrows. With swords and broadswords they killed and brought down 
juny, but there were such multitudes of Turks that this seemed little or nothing. For 
very Turk killed, another at once appeared, fresh and vigorous. The Turks saw 
jow severely our men and horses were injured, and they quickly slung their bows 
wer their shields on their left arms, and attacked cruelly with swords and maces. It 
s amazing to hear and to see how closely they harassed our men on every side. 
Many of ours who fought in this battle said and affirmed afterwards that ifthe king 
ad not behaved with such courage and energy, they would all have been taken and 
killed. Never in this battle did the king tum his face away or try to keep himself safe 
from the Turks. He exhorted and comforted our people and gave them fresh heart; 
fiercely did they defend themselves, overwhelmed as they were and subjected to 
wave after wave of Saracen attack. The struggle continued like this until about 
hone. 

The knights and others in our quarters who could see what was happening but 
ould not help because the river was in the way, shouted, wept and yelled aloud. All 
of'them great and small, they beat their breasts, wrung their hands, tugged out their 
hair, scratched their faces and exclaimed, 

‘Alas, alas, alas! The king and his brothers and all of them are lost!’ Then 
bravely and very fast the footsoldiers and common people of the host ran to the 
timber, the engines and other pieces of equipment and began to try to construct 
some means of getting across SO that they could go and help the king. With much 
trouble and hard work they builta wooden way across the river, and it was dangerous, 
for the water was deep and ran fast underneath it, and the place itself was dangerous, 
narrowed as it was by the causeway built out there, so that no one who fell could 
with great difficulty and as quickly as they could, they crossed 


hope to survive. Soon, 
they broke off, 


over to help the king. When the Saracens saw them crossing, 
withdrew and retired to their quarters. 








98 


In this battle the Saracens lost many men wounded and injured in various ways 
Ours, having with God’s help won the field, returned to the crossing place. There 
they had their tents and pavilions pitched and they encamped near the Saracens’ 
engines, of which they found fourteen. They also found plenty of timber, tents, 
pavilions and other equipment abandoned by the Saracens when the vanguar¢| 
surprised them. The king stayed there that night with only a few men, but not before 
the bridge across the river had been properly constructed and very securely built 
with large beams and solid timber so that people could cross safely from one force 
to the other. Next day, Ash Wednesday,' the king ordered a bridge of boats to be 
made so that the river could be crossed safely, and he had some of our troops 
brought across and quartered near him on that bank. He also commanded that the 
fourteen engines they had won should be dismantled and the timber used to build 4 
strong stockade all round the host. 

On the Friday after Ash Wednesday the Saracens gathered from all sides, coming! 
in such numbers as to cover all the ground. They intended to kill, cut to pieces and 
drag into captivity all the Christians there. They completely surrounded the stockaded 
area. As they drew near they poured in, as they always did, such quantities of 
arrows, bolts, sling stones and stones that some witnesses said they had never in) 
their lives seen hail fall as heavily. In so many ways, so persistently, horribly and 
dreadfully did they attack our men inside the stockade that men of the country wh« 
were there said they had never seen such a bold and violent assault in any part of 
Outremer. Clearly they thought nothing of dying and did not fear it. As soon as ariy 
were weary, others took their place, fresh and vigorous. They hardly seemed human, 
but like wild beasts, frantic with rage. Ours stood at bay inside the stockade 
Wonderfully the king begged and exhorted them to do well. Some Christians in the 
host said that never in this battle nor in any others before or after did they sce the 
king appear unhappy or anxious or afraid; to look at him he was quite calm and 
fearless. The Turks and our men hammered at each other with maces, lances, 
swords, Danish axes, with cutlasses, clubs, daggers and other weapons as if they 
were striking on rocks, timber or other inanimate objects. When the battle had 
lasted a long time and the Saracens were exhausted and had done and lost enough, 
they drew off and retired to their quarters. The Turks lost many more killed and 
wounded in this battle than we did. After these events the Turks remained quiet for 
while, except for skirmishes here and there involving small numbers. Not long afles 
this battle the son of the late sultan, whom he had summoned from the east before he 
died, arrived with a strong force and joined the Saracen host at Mansourah.’ The 
Egyptians received him with great joy, welcoming him with timbrels, flutes, viols, 
flageolets and other instruments. They accepted him as lord and sultan as they had 
promised his father, and pledged fealty to him according to the customs of the land, 
With his arrival the strength and power of the unbelievers was greatly increased, 





l. 9 February, 

2. Turan-Shah reached Mansourah on 23 or 25 February 1250; Ibn al-Furat, Ayyubidy, 
Mamelukes and Crusaders, ed, and trans, U, and M.C, Lyons and J,S.C, Riley-Smith, 2 
vols (Cambridge, 1971), vol, 2, pp, 25-6, 


99 































Carrer 65 1250 
Sufferings of the king and the Christians at Mansourah 


All kinds of Christians must feel great pity, grief and sorrow in their hearts. What 
happened to the king and to Christendom encamped there at Mansourah, after they 
had triumphed over the Saracens and taken the river from them by force, can only 
be spoken of with groans and tears amongst those who truly love the honour and 
exaltation of the Christian faith. Almostall these things now befell them against their 
will: an awful and general mortality anda widespread pestilence that attacked humans 
and horses while they remained in that place. Hardly a day passed when twenty or 
thirty biers were not carried to the chapels and churches. Everyone expected to 
die, no one supposed he could escape. It would have been hard to find one man in 
all that great host who was not mourning a dead friend, or a single tent or shelter 
without its sick or dead. Healthy men were only too sure that next day they would 
be ill or dead. The fit were overwhelmed with the care of the sick. It was no 
(lifferent with the horses. Food supplies had run out, both for men and for horses, 
throughout the host. The famine was so severe that even healthy men were too thin 
nd weak to help themselves. They ate the flesh of dead horses, donkeys, mules 
und other army cattle when they could find them and counted it a luxury. Later, 
when they could get them, they ate much worse things. Anyone who could finda 
dog or a cat would eat it as a great delicacy. Many of the great men, driven by 
hunger, would break into a place where they knew someone was alone, eating. 
No food could come from Damietta because the new sultan had fifty galleys 
brought overland on carts and other vehicles, and he put them on the Nile, manned 
by strong, armed Turks, between our host and Damietta. These harassed our people 
and prevented any communication by river between our forces and Damietta. This 
new sultan had already stationed great bands of Turks on the roads, so that no one 
could travel between our army and Damietta without being taken or killed. The fifty 
leys on the river captured many of our vessels which were bringing victuals from 
Damicetta to the host. Besides other damage, there were two especially harmful 
episodes: our Christians twice sent from Damietta convoys of | 50 or more boats, 
well manned by seamen and armed troops, to bring bread, wine, flour, salt meat and 
“many other things, all desperately needed in the host. As they were moving upriver, 
Saracen galleys attacked and defeated them. They killed a good many men and 
took others captive, together with the boats and all their contents. They sent the 
victuals to the Saracen host, to their great advantage. They took both these convoys 
like this, one after the other, a serious loss to the Christian army and a great acquisition 
for the Saracens. 

When the king and our people saw and learned of these disasters, which grew 
worse every day, they were very much perturbed. Men said openly that all was 
lost, Even those who were fit and able were so disheartened that not one of them 
made any real attempt to aucceed, ‘They said that all the best of our host had been 
Jost with the count of Artois, that the king could not pay the hired troops what he 


— 














100 


owed them, that many Christians had deserted for lack of food and gone to join the 
Saracens, and these, they said, were doing most damage to our men. All these 
things that we have mentioned seriously reduced the strength of the army of 
Christendom. Almost every day there were skirmishes and attacks, great or small, 
upon our stockade. 

On Maundy Thursday, Good Friday, Easter Saturday and Easter Sunday! the 
Saracens mounted as massive and prolonged an attack on our stockade as the one 
we told you about on the Friday after Ash Wednesday, conducted in just the same 
way. The king was very much afraid that sooner or later the Saracens would attack 
so fiercely that they would take them all by force and put every one of them to the 
sword, Our own men who were with the king, plenty of them, said openly that they 
did not like this business at all, that they could see God did not approve of it, and i! 
only it were possible they would certainly leave, go home to their own country and 
not stay in this land any longer. 

Because of all these difficulties and the others mentioned above, the king, on his 
barons’ advice, sent envoys to the sultan to ask for a truce. The sultan and the 
Saracens who were with him made a show of being willing to discuss this, but they 
had no intention of granting any truce, as later became clear. The sultan, however, 
said he would like to take advice on this matter, and they should come back on 
particular day. Three or four times they made them go and come back again like 
this. Whenever a truce was mentioned, he would fix a day for taking advice. The 
Saracens did then leave our people in some sort of peace. When our envoys returned 
to the sultan for the last time to hear what advice he had chosen, the sultan answered 
them as follows: 

‘Let your king and all the Christians with him know for certain that I shall give 
them no truce. I know their situation better than they suppose. They are all in my 
power. I shall do exactly as I like with them, for life or for death. Go back and tell 
them to do the best they can.’ When our envoys returned and told the king and 
barons what the sultan had said, they were all appalled. They could not stay where 
they were any longer and agreed unanimously to go back to Damietta, if Our Lord 
would allow it. 


CuHaPTER 66 1250 


How the king and the Christians turned back to go to Damietta and were all 
captured on the way 


Some of the nobles went to the king and advised him privately to mount the best 
horse he could find, strike in his spurs and get away by land. Others said he ought 
to go aboard a well-armed galley and reach safety in Damietta by water, ifhe could, 
for all the rest were lost. Others advised him to take his brothers’ with him. But the 





24-27 March 1250. 
Alphonse and Charles, counts of Poitiers and Anjou. 


No 











101 


king and his brothers cut them off short and said they would certainly not do this, 
they would stay with them, whether to live or die. ‘They strongly urged the king that 
he at least should go, but he would not be persuaded. 

Once they saw that the king would not go, they began to plan how they should all 
get away. They decided to put all the sick and infirm into boats on the river, with 
gailors and armed men who would take them downriver to Damietta, if this lay in 
God’s plan. They also decided, after discussion, to leave most of their tents, pavilions 
and the stockade undisturbed, so that the Saracens should not immediately realise 
they had gone. They agreed to leave at ni ght, so as to get away and across the Tanis 
before the Saracens noticed. It was emphasised that all, on land and water, horse 
and foot, must keep well together. 

Once it was all settled, the king and our people went back across the river and 
set off for Damietta as they had agreed, like men with a task to perform, one far 
harder than they knew, in straits that can scarcely be described, in circumstances of 
overwhelming difficulty." When the Turks saw this, they very quickly crossed the 
Tanis after them. As soon as they were over the river, they drove in their spurs and 
_ rode after our people at great speed. They began to yell and shriek, to whistle and 
sound drums and timbrels, horns and trumpets; great was the hue and cry they 
raised in pursuit. They caught them up and completely surrounded them; massive 
contingents swarmed round in front to head them off. The fifty galleys on the river 
came fast and attacked those who were on the water. Our men now expected 
~ nothing but death, and took heart and courage in themselves. Their sole purpose 
was to sell their lives dearly. Every time the Turks came within reach, ours attacked 
with vigour and opened a good broad way among them and were able to pass 
through. The king had given orders that they must on no account abandon any who 
were wounded in the Turkish attacks, but must put them in the boats and other 
vehicles. Repeatedly the Turks harassed them in every way they could; our numbers 
dwindled and those of the Turks increased. Arrows rained so fast upon our men 
that their shields and targes, the riders’ saddlebows and other equipment were all 
covered with them. The suffering and distress were such as to astonish the Turks 
themselves. The king kept reassuring his men and exhorting them to do well, which 
greatly encouraged them and made them readier to defend themselves. 

Harassed like this, they kept moving on until they were within five leagues of 
Damietta. The sultan saw then that they were not far from the city and was seriously 
worried that the king and our men might escape him. He had sent word to all the 
good towns near Mansourah when our men left there, ordering all to come to him, 
mounted or on foot, so that the faithless dogs who were going away should not 
escape. His men had come in from all parts. The sultan addressed them and all the 
others in his host, speaking as follows: 

‘Itis avery great disgrace and great dishonour to such a large number of important, 
rich and powerful men, to such good and valiant knights, hardy and experienced in 


L. The retreat began on 5 April, 




















102 


all kinds of war, to such good fighting Saracens as we have in our host— for many 
claim that we have here the pick, the very flower of brave men from all the lands 
under Muhammad’s law — a dishonour, I tell you, that a handful of wretched, 
miserable Christians, hungry, sick, weak, enfeebled, ill-mounted and few in number, 
their footsoldiers completely exhausted, should hold out against us so long. | am 
sure this is due to our faults, to our sins, and that Muhammad is angry with us, 
Remember how often these men have destroyed the lands of Muhammad’s law, 
how they have killed fathers and mothers, and then the children! Remember how 
glad they would be to do the same to us, ifonly they could, like the dogs and infidels 
they are, who call Muhammad and his law worthless and speak of it only to mock, 
If they can get to Damietta, we have lost them. They hold the city, and it is full of 
their men. Much danger, much harm, will come to all of Muhammad’s law if they 
escape us now.’ All this and more he said to them in rebuke, and he rode about 
among the Saracens’ great companies and exhorted them to do well. They all 
exclaimed and cried out that what the sultan said was true. 

The sultan spoke in the same way to the men in the fifty galleys. He ordered all 
the wounded and injured men and any who could not help themselves, out of the 
galleys and their places to be taken by fresh and active men. Wherever he thought 
there were too few armed men, he stationed more, many more, for he had plenty to 
choose from. The whole country was covered with Turks and they were still pouring 
in onall sides. Men who were present and saw these things affirmed that the sultan 
had there in that host at least 300,000 armed Turks. 

Then this whole business began again. Great companies of Turks surrounded 
our men. Ours were taken at a very great disadvantage, for by now they were all 
exhausted. Many could not stand. From every quarter the Turks launched vehement 
attacks on them and many died on both sides. Ours could no longer stand up to 
these constant attacks, company after company of Turks unleashed against them 
without pause or respite. The Turks began to slaughter and cut them all down, so 
that the ground was strewn with dead men and spilt blood. The Saracens did 
whatever they liked with the Christians. Most of them they killed, others they took 
alive, bound them and dragged them away to prison. The king was taken, and his 
two brothers, the counts of Poitiers and of Anjou, also the count of Flanders,' the 
count of Brittany,’ the count of Soissons,* and many other leading men and sergeants 
whose names we cannot give. A good many Christians fled towards our boats, 
hoping to escape, but the boats had already gone. These men reached the river, 
plunged in and were all drowned. 

Our forces retuming by land were all lost as well. Some said that not one single 
man survived of all those who fought in that last land battle. Our sick and the others 
on the boats going down the Nile suffered almost as severely. The Saracens in the 
galleys attacked them, slew and drowned all they could reach and broke up and 





1. William of Dampierre, died 1251. 
2: Peter Mauclere, died 1250, 
3 John I of Nesle, 1237-70, 





103 














sank the boats. They rowed their own boats fast downriver after ours which were 
trying to escape and hurled Greek fire into them, ‘Thus they burned the boats on the 
river with all the sick and other Christians aboard. In this way all ourmen returning 
by water were lost. Some of our vessels did escape, but only very few compared 
with those which were lost. When the legate of the Church of Rome, Master Odo 
of Chateauroux, and the patriarch of Jerusalem! and the other bishops and prelates 
in the king’s host saw Christendom so confounded, the king advised them to go 
aboard the boats and they did so. The legate, the patriarch and some others escaped. 
The bishop of Langres” and many others were killed on the river. The bishop of 
Soissons’ refused to leave the king but it is still not known whether he was killed or 
captured. 

Thus by land and water and in various ways were lost all the Christians who had 
assembled there against the enemies ofour faith. And the unbelievers took their 
tents and pavilions, their horses, weapons and armour, clothes, chalices, books, 
gold and silver and all their other possessions, including even the king’s seal. The 
enemies of Christendom were richer and such of our Christians as survived much 
poorer. After Christendom suffered these unhappy events, the sultan had the king 
and all the other prisoners sent into captivity in different places, some in the Cairo, 
some in Babylon and others in the good towns of Egypt. There were so many of 
them that the country’s prisons were quite full. 


CHAPTER 67 1250 
Of the truce which the king and the sultan made together 


Soon after the king’s capture, the sultan sent men to tell him in fierce and bitter 
terms, uttering threats, that he must immediately restore Damietta to the sultan in its 
entirety, just as well provided in every way and as rich in all goods as it was the day 
the Christians entered it. The king must also repay him all the costs and expenditure 
he and his father had had to pay out for the war since the Christians landed in Egypt. 
Furthermore he demanded that the king should return to him all the Saracens held 
captive by Christians, captured recently or long ago, in the city of Damietta and in 
the kingdom of Jerusalem, and make good all the harm he and his father had suffered 
in the war the king had made upon them. 

After many words and much discussion a truce was arranged between the king 
and the sultan in the following terms: the sultan would set free all Christian captives 
who had been taken since the day the king arrived in Egypt, both in his own land and 
in the lands of those obedient to him, and all others who had been taken since the 
day the truce was made between al-Kamil, his grandfather, and Frederick, emperor 








1. Robert (1240-54), see Eracles, book 33, chapter 56. 
oy Hugh of Roche-Corbon, abbot of Cluny, elected bishop of Langres in 1244, 
oF Guy, son of Ralph, count of Chiteau-Porcien, 


























104 


ofRome,' wherever these captives might be, in whatever land they had been captured 
and whether they were rich or poor, beginning with the king, his brothers and all the 
nobles. Also under this truce the Christians would retain in peace, freely and without 
any impediment, all the lands they held in the kingdom of Jerusalem on the day thé 
king landed in Egypt, that is to say, cities and castles, towns, villages and fortresses 
with all their dependencies; also all the possessions the king and Christians then 
owned in the city of Damietta; they could take them away and do what they liked 
with them. Any possessions the Christians, both the king and others, wanted to 
leave in Damietta would be held in perfect safety under the sultan’s guard; and they 
would be able to take them away where they liked and when they liked, by land of 
by water. All Christians who remained in Damietta either because of illness, to sell 
their goods or to wait for ships, would stay safely in the city and could go away it) 
safety and take all their property with them, by land or sea. The sultan undertook ts 
provide them with safe and sure conduct to a Christian land. The sultan must ensure 
that all these conditions were fulfilled without let or hindrance and was bound to 
abide by all these undertakings. The king was bound to surrender and make over to 
the sultan the city of Damietta and eight times one hundred thousand Saracen bezants 
for his own release, for all the other conditions mentioned above and for the costs, 
expenditure and damage the sultan and his father and all the others had had in the 
war. Also the king was obliged to set free all the Saracens in captivity who had been 
taken in the kingdom of Jerusalem after the truce was made and guaranteed between 
al-Kamil, the sultan’s grandfather, and Frederick, emperor of Rome, as well as all 
those taken in Egypt from the time the king landed in the port of Damietta. This 
truce, in the form we have described to you, the sultan promised to keep, on the law 
of Muhammad according to his law and his custom. The king himself promised the 
same in the form and manner used by Christians. The king paid the sultan one hal! 
of his ransom, that is to say four times one hundred thousand bezants. 

When this truce had been confirmed by both parties the sultan at once moved 
with his whole host and brought the king, his brothers and the nobles who were with 
him straight towards Damictta, in order to fulfil all the conditions jointly agreed, But 
one day it happened that when the sultan was staying near Damietta, he rose one 
morning from table and as he did so was attacked by certain Saracen knights, with 
the consent and agreement of most of the Saracen army. We do not know for 
certain why they did this. Some say it was because of the king’s ransom, and that 
they wanted it for themselves. Treacherously attacked and wounded, the sultan ran 
out of his tent and fled. The others ran hurriedly after him and in front of almost all 
the emirs of the host and many other Saracens, they struck him with swords, wounded 
him cruelly, killed him and cut him to pieces. As soon as they had done this, very 
many Saracens entered the king’s tent, still furiously angry and frantic with rage, fully 
armed, just as if they were going to cut him and the other Christians to pieces like 
their lord. Plenty of people there were sure this would happen. But as soon as they 





L 18 February 1229, 


105 
































saw the king, they offered him no Violence at all but at once, without delay, asked 
im for the same truce and alliance he had agreed with the sultan, and that he should 
ediately give them the city of Damietta. 


‘Carter 68 1250 
How the Saracens killed the sultan and the same truce was made between 
the king and 122 emirs 


en they had said enough about this to the king, and he to them, and they had 
r in strong words and with great oaths that they 
would keep the same truce and the same agreement with the king as the sultan had 
‘made with him, the king and the Christians with him at last agreed to the following 
terms: 
Allthe emirs in the Saracen host, that is to say 122, swore on the law of Muhammad 
that they would keep steadfast faith with the king and Christendom and abide by the 
truce and all the conditions we have already described. The king and his nobles in 
their turn promised just the same to them as they had done to the sultan. Under this 
‘second truce a specific day was named for the surrender of Damietta to the emirs 
‘and for all captives on both sides to be set free. 
On the agreed day the king surrendered Damietta to the emirs.’ As soon as this 
was done, the emirs released the king from captivity, together with his two brothers, 
the counts of Poitiers and of Anjou. With them were released the count of Flanders 
and Peter Mauclere who had been count of Brittany, the count of Soissons and 
‘many other lords and knights of the kingdoms of France and of Jerusalem and ofthe 
jsland of Cyprus and other countries. 
When these things had been done and the king and all the Christians with him 
were sure the emirs would steadfastly and faithfully keep the truce and agreement 
they had sworn to the king, the king chose good and loyal men to remain with the 
‘emirs and receive the prisoners. Then the king had his wife the queen brought out of 
Pamietta, together with her sister the countess of Anjou,’ the countess of Artois,’ 
the countess of Poitiers, 4 the duke of Burgundy,* and all the other knights and men 
and women who wanted to come out, bringing all their possessions with them. But 
there were very few vessels available, so that there was then considerable delay, 
both for people and for equipment belonging to the king and the others. 

When all this was done, the king went aboard his ship, and so did all the others 
who could find a vessel. Then they left Damietta harbour, put out to sea and sailed 
straight to Acre. All in that city went to meet the king in a great procession. The 


CEE ee 


5 May 1250. 

Beatrice, countess of Provence, 
Robert’s widow, Matilda of Brabant; 
Jeanne of Toulouse, 

Hugh, see above, chapter 20, 


she later married Guy of C hatillon. 


vSen- 




















106 


clergy were solemnly vested and bore reliquaries and crosses, holy water, censers 
and other things appropriate to Holy Church. Knights, citizens, sergeants, ladies, 
girls and everyone else were all as splendidly dressed and adorned as they could 
manage. All the bells in the town were rung and had been ringing the whole day long 
from the moment they were seen coming across the sea. They went right down to 
the harbour where he came ashore in order to meet him and do him honour. Then 
straight away they led him and those with him to the high church of the city. Many 
tears were shed in compassion and for joy that the king, his brothers and companions, 
had been saved from the great blow Christendom had suffered. Then they escorted 
the king to his residence and all the great men of Acre gave him very handsome gifts, 
rich and precious. 


CHAPTER 69 1250 


How the emirs broke the truce, and how wickedly 


Once at Acre, the king sent numerous messengers and plenty of ships to fetch the 
captives and others who had stayed behind, and the sick and the military equipment 
and other things left in Damietta. When the messengers reached Damietta, the emirs 
had already gone. They followed them and went on after them to Babylon. They 
requested in the king’s name that the prisoners should be delivered to them, and also 
all the property belonging to the king and the other Christians, according to the truce 
they had swom. The emirs gave them every hope that they would do this, and made 
them stay a long time in Babylon. 

The king’s men waited and waited and every day they urgently pressed the emirs 
to hand over the prisoners and the property and keep their oath. After making them 
wait a very long time, the emirs handed over amere 400 prisoners, nothing like the 
number they held. These were people who could do nothing for themselves, old 
men, sick or mad; and many were being released for ransom. Many of the 400 
soon died. Wickedly and wretchedly these faithless emirs broke the truce they had 
sworn and guaranteed to the king and to Christendom. They gave back no more 
than 400 prisoners out of the 12,000 they held. They kept all the property belonging 
to the king and the Christians who stayed on in Damietta after the king left. They 
searched the prisons where the captives were held, took the best, strongest and 
most active young men they found, held naked swords at their throats and heads 
and compelled them by various torments and much suffering to renounce the Christian 
faith, and made them believe in the law of Muhammad. There were many who were 
strong champions of Our Lord Jesus Christ, firmly rooted in faith and belief in him, 
who refused absolutely in spite of any threats, torment or suffering to renounce the 
Christian faith and they ended their lives in this world in glorious martyrdom. Those 
who had remained in Damietta when the king sailed, unable for lack of ships to go 
with him, and others who had stayed behind on account of their military equipment 








~ 


107 


or to sell property, those too who stayed in the city because of illness, unable to 
move — all these they put to a cruel death. Some said that they took wicker 
containers, which were plentiful in the city, enclosed the Christians in them, tied them 
up tightly, set them alight and cruelly burned them. They said other things too, that 
the Saracens collected all the wicker containers they could find, dragged them and 
the bodies of the Christians they had killed and others who were still alive, to a place 
outside the town, heaped them all up together, set fire to them and burned them to 
ashes. These faithless men took the crosses and crucifixes they found in Damietta, 
tied ropes to them and then, jeering and laughing, dragged them about in scorn and 
mockery. Then they would beat them and afterwards smash them to pieces and 
villainously trample them under their feet. Many people said and maintained for 
certain that if the king and his companions had stayed only a little longer, they could 
never have escaped with life and limb but would all have been killed and cut to 
pieces. 

When the king’s messengers realised that these terrible things were happening, 
they at any rate accepted the 400 men they were offered. They spoke strongly 
about all the rest, but nothing they could say or do had any effect. When they saw 
that they could achieve no more, they went aboard ship with their captives and 
returned to the king at Acre. They reported everything to the king exactly as it had 
happened. The king and those with him were so shocked, they could find no words 
to express it. 

Atthetime his men returned from Egypt with this report, the king was having his 
fleet prepared and equipped, for he was longing to return to France with the August 
crossing, which was not far off, But when he knew that the emirs had broken the 


truce they had sworn and promised under Muhammad’s law to observe faithfully, he 


refused to leave Acre without serious discussion. He summoned all the nobles of 
France who were there to meet ona particular day, and they decided to send envoys 
to the emirs telling them to give the king his men back and to keep their swom oath. 
The emirs passed these words on to the sultan, and when the sultan heard of it he 
was very angry and swore emphatically that he would never make a truce with the 

The king asked his nobles what they advised about these events. Almost all 
agreed on one thing and replied to the king saying so: that as the emirs had broken 
the truce, his going home to France could only mean the abandonment of the land 
and the country and the Christians who lived there and were at the mercy of the 
Saracens. To the captives who still lay blinded and dying of hunger and disease in 
prison, it would mean the loss of any hope of release. The whole land, they said, 
would be utterly lost, as well as all those in prison and all the others, ifhe went away 
now. All the leading men and almost all the best men had died in the great war in 
Egypt, so that now the Christians were in such a dangerous situation, So weak, 
pitiful and unhappy, that those who were left did nothave the power to hold the land 
or defend it, but would all die or be taken captive and the land would be lost. It was 
still possible, they said, that ifthe king would stay for some time, the captives in the 
land might be set free and the cities, castles and towns be kept and the Christians 











108 


saved, and his staying would benefit Christendom in many other ways.' The others 
said — but there were only a few of them — that it would certainly not be good for the 
king to stay longer here beyond the sea, for this would put him in great danger, and 
they would not advise him to do so. 

The king fully understood that ifhe left the land beyond the sea in this situation, he 
would cause its total loss. He replied and told them that he would not leave the Holy 
Land at such a juncture but would stay, he would live or die with them. He said too 
that he would not want to live longer in this world if he were to cause the loss of the 
land. In no way in the world, he said, would he quit the Holy Land in such danger, 
Many pitied him and many tears fell when he said these things. 

The king sent his two brothers to France. By them and by the letters sealed with 
his new seal? in which all these events, good and bad, were written down, he sent 
word to all in France, great and small, rich and poor, and requested and urged them 
to help him and the Holy Land. Ardently he sought to do the will of Our Lord Jesus 
Christ, for love of whom he had taken the cross and left the land and kingdom of 
France of which he was lord and gone to foreign lands and foreign countries. Thus 
King Louis of France remained in the land beyond the sea and his brothers and the 
other nobles returned to the land of France. 

So it was that Christendom suffered this grievous blow and for the second time 
the Christians lost the noble and very strong city of Damietta. This was the year of 
the Incarnation of Our Lord Jesus Christ 1250, the month of May, Innocent I'V was 
pope of Rome; Louis, king of France; Henry, king of England; William, count of 
Holland, was king of Germany, crowned and chosen to be emperor of Rome, and 
Joel, who had long been archbishop of Tours, was archbishop of Reims.* 


CHAPTER 70 1250 


Of the troubles which befel Christendom in the same year, and of other 
events in the land beyond the sea 


While the king was staying in Acre, messengers came and informed him that Muslim 
Turkomans‘ had twice in a short period of time laid waste the land of Antioch, 
which was strongly protected by fortresses and castles. Others came back from 
Armenia and told the king that unbelieving Muslims were devastating that land and 
had already almost entirely destroyed it, and had captured and imprisoned the king 
of Armenia’s brother. Others again told him that the Christians of Tripoli had gone 
out to pillage Saracens and had been defeated with great loss, both of weapons and 


1. Joinville gives a different picture, saying that almost all the nobles wanted Louis to go 
back to France to fetch men and money. Joinville himself disagreed: attacked as a 
poulain for wanting to stay in Syria, he said he would rather be a poulain than a worn: 
out hack like themselves; Histoire, chapters 82-84, 

The royal seal was lost with everything else in the defeat; see above, chapter 66. 

Joel of Mayenne, 1244-50, 

Nomadic Turks probably displaced by the Mongol advance. 


PWN 


109 















horses. Others reported to the king that the envoys! he had sent to the Saracens and 
‘Tartars had returned, and that they had suffered imprisonment in the city of Aleppo. 
The Old Man of the Mountain, lord of the Assassins, also sent envoys to the king, 
but we do not know for certain why this was. The great prince of the Greeks, 
Vatatzes,” sent men to him as well, but we do not know why. The king sent his own 
envoys to this Vatatzes and to the Old Man of the Mountain, accompanying theirs. 

Other messengers, important men, arrived in Acre on two occasions, sent by 
Frederick, former emperor ofRome. Frederick sent them because he wanted to 
“instal his own deputies and sergeants in thecity of Acre and throughout the Christian- 
held territory of Jerusalem. 

Other envoys retumed and informed the king that the king of Cyprus had married 
the daughter of the prince of Antioch.’ The king was very pleased about this. 

_ Envoys from the Egyptian emirs came to see the king and told him as from the 

emirs that the agreed truce was being observed just as they had promised. The king 
replied that it was not, that they had broken it, as we described earlier. Words flew 
to and fro and the king sent his own men to the emirs in Egypt, but we do not yet 
know what they did. 

Others came and reported to the king that great discord and fighting had broken 
out among the Saracens. When the sultan of Aleppo* learned that the Egyptians 
had killed the sultan, their lord, he immediately summoned his armies, both horse 
and foot, and sent to all his friends for help. With this huge force he then moved and 
_ took Damascus and almost all the cities, castles and towns in the lands of Syria and 
Jerusalem which were under Egyptian lordship. The sultan of Aleppo, they said, 
was eager to take his whole strength into the land of Egypt and exact revenge for the 
death of the sultan, their lord, whom they had murdered. Nor was that all: he 
wanted to conquer the whole land of Egypt for himself and his heir. Messengers 
came constantly from all parts to the king in Acre and every day brought him fresh 
information. The king was unfailingly pleasant, cheerful and resolute. 


CHAPTER 71 1250 


How some Christian slaves were set free 


When the king’s two brothers and the other nobles had returned to France, the ruler 
of Babylon and Egypt’ and the other emirs sent back to the king in Acre some of 


————— 


1. Andrew of Longjumeau and his companions, sent to the Mongols while Louis was in 
Cyprus before the Egyptian campaign. 

John III Vatatzes, Byzantine emperor of Nicaea, 1222-54. 

Henry I of Cyprus married Plaisance, daughter of Bohemond V of Antioch, as his third 
wife in September 1250. 

Al-Nasir Yusuf, 

After Turan-Shah's murder, al-Salih Ayyub’s widow, Shajar al-Durr, was vested with 
authority, but three months later she abdicated in favour of al-Mu‘izz Aybeg. See 
Robert Irwin's clarification of Egyptian power-struggles at this time in his The Middle 
East in the Middle Ages: The Early Mamluk Sultanate, 1250-1382 (London and Sydney, 


1986), pp. 26-9. 


ve YR 














110 


the Christians they were holding captive. These were: the master of the Hospital! 
and 25 knights Hospitallers, fifteen Templar knights, ten knights of the Hospital of 
the Germans, 100 lay knights and 600 other prisoners, both men and women. Then 
the king sent envoys and rich gifts and some 300 Saracen slaves to the rulers in 
Egypt, who welcomed them with delight, and in return sent the king about four: 
score and ten enslaved Christian knights and 2200 men and women, as well as ar 
elephant, a wild ass and rich and precious gifts; but these were by no means all the 
Christian captives. The king paid out large sums of money to buy Saracen captives 
from their Christian owners in order to send them to the Egyptian rulers so that they 
should send the Christian captives back to him. He spent heavily in order to support 
knights and crossbowmen, and to send his envoys to the sultans and receive theirs, 


CHAPTER 72 1251 


How the Egyptian commanders and the men of the country defeated the 
sultan of Aleppo 


Meanwhile the sultan of Aleppo had gathered a large army and had taken the kingdoms 
of Damascus and Jerusalem from the Egyptians, except for the areas held by 
Christians. He was anxious to avenge the death of the sultan of Egypt and to conquer 
that kingdom for himself and his heir. Now he led his army across the deserts 
between Syria and Egypt until he reached the Egyptian border. Here he was cut off 
from all supplies by the Bedouins, and was in serious trouble. The Egyptian 
commander’ gathered his troops and advanced with a large army to meet the sultan 
of Aleppo and his men on the border. Very early on Candlemas moming? the two 
armies met. They fought a fierce battle in which many were killed or captured. In 
the end the Egyptians were defeated and fled. The Bedouins came running for their 
arms and armour and carried it off. Towards evening the Egyptians regrouped, 
arrayed their companies, attacked the men of Aleppo and fought them again. At 
last the invaders were overwhelmed and fled. In this battle the sultan of Aleppo lost 
nearly all his emirs and about 24,000 fighting men killed or captured. The Bedouins 
raced in and took all the Aleppan armour and gear; in this way the Bedouins gained 
the whole military equipment of two armies. 


CHAPTER 73 1251 
How the king was released from his oath to the emirs 


Seeing that the Egyptians were certainly not keeping the truce they had made with 
him and with Christendom, the king summoned the legate, the prelates, nobles and 


1. William of Chateauneuf. 

2. Aybeg, 

3. Candlemas is 2 February, but Muslim sources give the date of the battle as equivalent 
to 3 February 1251. It was fought at al-‘Abbasa in the approaches to the Delta. 


M1 





















wise men, clerk and lay, toa meeting, in his presence, He recalled the conditions of 
the truce and how they had been settled between himself and the sultan of Babylon, 
later murdered, and subsequently with the 122 Egyptian emirs, and he asked whether 
the emirs had properly observed the truce, whether he himself had broken it in any 
way, and if the emirs had done so. They discussed this among themselves and 
replied that the emirs had not kept the terms of the truce or their sworn word but 
had most grievously and treacherously broken them, never had they kept them as 
they ought but broke their oaths every day. They said they could not see any way in 
which the king had not well and faithfully kept them, as he ought to do and was still 
doing. The king requested the legate to release him from the oath he had sworn to 
the emirs. The legate asked the advice of the prelates and wise men who were 
present. They replied that as the emirs were not keeping the truce, neither ought the 
king or Christendom to do so. When the legate had received this advice and the 
matter had been thoroughly discussed by all present, he released the king from his 
oath to the emirs and declared that the king and Christendom were inno way bound 
_ to keep the truce with the Saracens, as the Saracens were not keeping it. Thus the 
king and Christendom now had no truce with any Saracens. 


CuarTer 74 1251-52 


_ Of the truce between the new sultan and the king and how all the Christian 
slaves were freed and the heads returned! 


After these events, when winter was over and March came, the king gathered his 
men and took his army to Caesarea in Palestine, which is on the sea. He lodged 
there and had the town enclosed with ramparts, ditches and sixteen towers. 

During his stay there he sent envoys to the new sultan of Babylon,’ requiring him 
to make good his and the emirs’ infringements of the truce. While the king was at 
Caesarea he received envoys from the sultan of Aleppo’ offering to make a truce 
with himself and with Christendom. But the terms he offered did not please the king 
or Christendom, and so no truce was made and the envoys went away with nothing, 
done. 

The sultan of Babylon and Egypt and the other sultans of the land were very 
anxious, fearing that Christians would send the king substantial help and would return 
to Damietta and the kingdom of Egypt, conquer them and take the land. They 
considered this, and went to Damietta, where they demolished all the ramparts, 
razing them to the ground, and, in order to prevent the Christians ever making use of 
the city, they took all the stones and carried them to the River Nile. The envoys 








I, Et les testes randues; this must refer to a clause in the final treaty between Louis and 
the rulers of Egypt by which the heads of crusaders killed at Gaza and hung on the walls 
of Cairo castle were returned for burial, See Joinville, Histoire, ¢.518. 


2. Aybeg. 
3 AL-Nasir Yusuf, 














112 


from the king to the new sultan of Egypt returned, and the new sultan sent his own 
envoys to the king. Messages went to and fro until a truce was settled between the 
king and the Christians on one side and the new sultan on the other. This latest truce 
guaranteed the release of all captive Christians in Babylon, the Cairo and all the 
strongholds under Egyptian control; and the new sultan wrote off the 4000 Saracen 
bezants of the ransom which he said the king owed him. The truce included one 
condition which was quite new in Christian or Saracen truces: all renegade Christians, 
converted willingly or by force, were given leave to go freely back to the king and to 
Christendom. This truce bound the new sultan to return the Holy Land of Jerusalem 
to the king and to Christendom, as well as the city of Bethlehem, the land of hol y 
Abraham,' the city of Nablus, all Galilee and all the land on this side of the River 
Jordan, except for some unfortified towns which the sultan kept so that he could 
travel through them on his way to the kingdom of Damascus. As soonas this was 
settled, the king and his host removed and went to Jaffa, where he had the town 
enclosed with ramparts, towers and ditches.” 


CHAPTER 75 1252-54 
How the truce was not observed and the king returned to France 


Very hopeful were the king, the legate and the Christians that the holy Promised 
Land would soon be given back to them as we have described, but the Saracens 
did nothing of the sort. The king sent numerous envoys to the sultan, and so did the 
sultan to him, but it all came to nothing. They did nothing whatever about returnin 2 
the Holy Land as they had agreed. 

The king and the Christians became very apprehensive when they realised that the 
sultan had no intention of keeping the agreement. The king had no troops with him 
whom he could have used to put things right, nor did anyone bring him news of like! y 
help or support from any quarter. He discussed matters with the prelates and other 
nobles and decided, on their unanimous advice, to appoint Sir Geoffrey of Sergines 
to stay in the Holy Land. The king would provide him with money to maintain 
knights, crossbowmen and sergeants, mounted and on foot, to defend the land against 
the Saracens. The king himself would go back to France, as he could get no 
reinforcements. 

The king did just as we have said: he had his ship prepared, took his wife the 
queen, who was pregnant, and the two children she had given birth to beyond the 
sea, one in Damietta, the other in Acre,’ returned to France and was welcomed on 
the eve of Lady Day in September with a great and solemn procession, for everyone 


1. That is, Hebron. 
2, Louis remained at Jaffa from May 1252 to June 1253. 
3. John of Damietta, count of Valois (1250-70), and Blanche, born 1252, who married 


Ferdinand, Infante of Castile, 


113 


thought they had lost him.' ‘This was the year of the Incarnation of Our Lord Jesus 
Christ 1254; Innocent IV was pope of Rome; Louis of whom we have spoken was 
king of France; William, count of Holland, king of Germany; Henry (II), king of 
England; Theobald was count of Champagne, lord of Brie and king of Navarre; 
Nevelon of Basoches was bishop of Soissons;? Jerome of Coucy, abbot of St 
Médard:? and John was count of Soissons.* 


CHAPTER 76 1255 


How the Christians made a truce with the sultan after the king left, and how 
it was broken 


Once the king had left the land beyond the sea, as we have just said, it was not long 
before the new sultan of Babylon and Egypt and the sultan of Damascus’ and the 
Saracens on the one side and the lords of the Christians’ territory with the Temple 
and the two Hospitals on the other agreed upon a truce to run for ten years, ten 
months and ten days. Jaffa castle was excluded from this truce.® 

The following Christmas my lord Geoffrey of Sergines and a great company of 
Christians met in this castle for the very reason that it was not included in the truce, 
whereas all the other Christian-held lands were, so that they could not attack the 
Saracens from any base but Jaffa. When they had all gathered, they sent scouts out 
into Saracen country to discover where they could gather the richest plunder. Then 
on the Wednesday after Christmas they armed themselves, mounted and went out 
very quietly, on horseback and on foot, and rode allnight. Reaching a point between 
Gaza and Ascalon, they saw that this was the moment to attack the Saracens. They 
swept through the villages and collected men, women and animals, large and small, 
and returned fast to Jaffa, in the best of health. They lost only one man, a Turcopole 
who was killed, and they won and shared out among themselves 400 slaves, not 
counting the ones they killed, 800 or more. They also gained 10,000 smaller beasts 
and at least 1000 head of large cattle, mostly oxen and camels. 

The Saracens instantly informed the sultan ofall the events we have just described. 
‘The sultan sent word immediately to the emir of J erusalem, telling him to summon 
the other emirs from all around there, and plenty of fighting men; let them go and lay 
siege to Jaffa and do them all the damage they could. The emir did so. He brought 


a very strong force to besiege Jaffa, and quartered his men in the place called 


za aa 


1. Louis left the East on 25 April 1254, landed in France on 7 July and made his ceremonial 
entry into Paris on 7 September. 


om 1252-62. 

3, 1253-70. 

4. John Il de Nesle, This passage, naming an abbot and the bishop and count of Soissons, 
would seem to indicate the chronicler's interest in this part of France. 

5. Al-Nasir Yusuf, 

6, The truce dates from February 1255, Geoffrey of Sergines’ raid, below, took place at 


Christmas of the same year and the battle outside Jaffa described in chapter 77 in March 
1256, 








114 


Toron des Chevaliers,' where the men inside Jaffa could see them clearly. Often 
they saw them coming right up to the city walls, but they did not dare move, as they 
were few in number, feared an ambush, and dreaded losing the castle. 

The Saracens remained there some time. Then they realised that the Christians 
were not going to come out and sent a detachment into Christian-held territory. This 
force rode out and overran the lands of Christians, who, because of the truce, were 
not expecting anything of the kind. They roamed at will across the country and all 
came back safe and sound, laden with plunder, to the Saracen army encamped 
before Jaffa. The emir of Jerusalem took all the prisoners, a good hundred of them, 
Templars, Hospitallers and sergeants. This raid won them an estimated 40,000 or 
more beasts, large and small, which they certainly did not want to send to the sultan, 
as they thought they would have to be returned, all the Christians of that area being 
included in the truce. 


CHAPTER 77 1256 


How the Christians defeated Saracens, who were not in the truce, outside 
Jaffa 


After this the Saracens kept offering provocation, often sweeping right up to the 
walls of Jaffa. The Christians inside Jaffa agreed that they were not going to put up 
with this. They posted a strong garrison to hold the castle, whatever might happen 
to the men going out to fight the Saracens, and on the Friday before mid-Lent, when 
the Saracens came skirmishing up to Jaffa, the Christians, alert and ready, had the 
gates opened and at once rode out to do battle. Fiercely they yelled and shouted, 
crying out, 

“Kill! Kill! Kall!” 

A great and wonderful conflict it was, but the Saracens lost men killed, broke 
under the attack and fled. Some said at the time that every Saracen there would 
have been killed or captured if only the count of Jaffa’ had not fallen. He would 
have been killed if the Hospitallers had not rescued him, but the Saracens captured 
his horse. 

Then my lord Geoffrey of Sergines pursued them all the way to their encampment; 
his knights clustered round him and advised him to retum for fear ofan ambush. My 
lord Geoffrey and the Christians with him then rode back to Jaffa. They counted 
2000 Saracens killed or taken in this battle, and of the Christians, twenty sergeants 
and one knight. Yet the Christians had only had 200 mounted men and about 300 
others, crossbowmen, archers and sergeants. 

Among others killed in the battle were the emirs of Jerusalem and Bethlehem, 
The Saracens reported their defeat to the sultan at Damascus and told him that the 





E At Latrun, which had once belonged to the Templars. 
2. John of Thelin. 








115 


Christians had got these two emirs’ heads, ‘The sultan sent a letter to an emir in the 
Saracen host, telling him to redeem the head of the emir of Jerusalem. The emir sent 
promptly to my lord Geoffrey of Sergines: he was to send him the head of the emir 
of Jerusalem and would receive in return the count of Jaffa’s horse and 10,000 
Saracen bezants. My lord Geoffrey sent back to say that even if he gave him a 
whole tower full of bezants and horses, he would certainly not return the head. The 
emir reported this reply to the sultan at Damascus and when the sultan heard it he 
was furiously angry and swore that he would never make truce with the Christians. 


CHAPTER 78 1256 


How the Bedouins took a good two parts of their plunder from 
the Saracens and how the truce was re-established 


The Bedouins up in the mountains heard that the Saracens had won rich plunder 
from the Christians. They said they would like a share of it, and came down from 
the hills into the Saracen host where the plunder was kept. They told the emir whom 


_ the sultan had put in command of the army that they wanted a share of their plunder. 


He said they certainly could not have any, as they had not helped to win it. The 
Bedouins attacked, fought and went off with at least two parts of the livestock, 
whoever might be sorry. Three thousand or more Bedouins and Saracens were 
killed in this conflict. 

The Christians discussed these events and sent envoys to the sultan in Damascus: 
he should make good the harm he had done the Christians and restore the truce he 
had broken; after that let the truce be reinstated as before, if that was what he 
wished; ifnot, let it be war. 

Words and messengers went from the sultan to the Christians and from the 
Christians to the sultan. In the end the sultan gave way to the Christians sufficiently 
for my lord Geoffrey of Sergines, the count of J affa, the other lords of Christian 
territories, the Temple and the two Hospitals on the one side, and the sultan of 
Babylon and Egypt and the sultan of Damascus on the other to agree to arenewal 
and confirmation of the truce on the same terms as before, to run for ten years, ten 
months and ten days. This was the year of the Incarnation of Our Lord Jesus Christ 
1256. 


CHAPTER 79 1256-58 


How the Christians fought each other 


When this truce had been renewed and confirmed and the Christians were not at 
war with the Saracens, except for Jaffa castle which was excluded from the truce, 
the Christians began to make shameful and wretched war on each other, both sides 
being equally agpressive, Discord broke out between the Venetians, the Pisans and 


116 


the Poulains' of the land on the one hand, and the Genoese, the brothers of St 
John’s Hospital who supported them, and the Spaniards on the other. This was 
over a building standing by the sea between Genoese and Venetian territory,’ and 
the fighting went on for nearly a year. They slew and slaughtered and did each other 
all the harm they could, just as they did to Saracens. 

The prince of Antioch was informed of this and went at once to Acre. He took 
with him anephew of his who ought, so the prince said, be heir, lord and king of the 
land as being descended from Count Walter of Brienne. He was not the count’ s 
own son but the son of his heirs.’ The prince brought the child’s mother, the queen 
of Cyprus, with him as well, and hoped to bring peace to the land ifhe could find any 
way to do so. Having reached Acre, the prince, in his nephew’s name, summoned 
all the knights of the country who held of the kingdom of Jerusalem and the masters 
of the religious houses to meet on a certain day in Acre. 

They attended, and in his infant nephew’s name the prince required them to do 
homage to the child as to the heir and lord of the kingdom of Jerusalem. They said 
they would consider this, and after some discussion the master of the Temple, the 
master of the Hospital of the Germans and the kni ghts of the country who held of the 
kingdom, together with the Venetian and Pisan communes, did homage to the child, 
reserving all rights. But the master of St John’s Hospital, the Genoese commune 
and the Spaniards said they certainly would not do homage, because the child was 
not heir to the land. Conrad’s son was heir, they said, because Conrad was son to 
the daughter of King John of Acre, who was the true heir of the land.4 Seeing this 
disagreement and realising that he could not put a peaceful end to this war, the 
prince decided to appoint a regent in his infant nephew’s name. He appointed the 
lord of Arsur* regent of the land and at his own expense he hired 800 French 
troops, present in the country, to support him for one year. The prince ordered him 





1. An epithet meaning ‘cub, colt, youngster’ applied, perhaps perjoratively, to Syrian. 
born Franks; see above p. 108, n. 1 for Joinville’s use of the word, and M.R. Morgan, 
The Chronicle of Ernoul and the Continuations of William of Tyre (Oxford, 1973), pp 
194-5. 


3 The war of St Sabas began in June 1256 and was fought over a building belonging to the 
Orthodox monastery of St Sabas in Judaea. It stood on the Acre waterfront, so placed 
that its possession would enable the Venetians to block Genoese access to the harbour 

3. In February 1258 Bohemond VI of Antioch (1252-75) brought his sister Plaisance (d.1261), 
widow of Henry I of Cyprus, and her young son King Hugh II of Cyprus (1253-67), to 
Acre, where Hugh was accepted as titular regent for the absentee king of Jerusalem, 
Conrad V (Conradin) of Hohenstaufen (1254-68). This enabled the authorities in Acre 
to transfer their support, without losing face, from the Genoese to the Venetians, who 
were by now gaining the upper hand. The text is not correct in claiming that Hugh I 
was descended from Walter I'V of Brienne (died c. 1247). The text may be corrupt, and 
should perhaps read: ‘the prince said that he, Hugh, ought to be heir and king and lord 
of the land in preference to the sons of Count Walter of Brienne’. Walter’s sons were in 
the same degree of relationship to the Hohenstaufen and probably of age, whereas 
Hugh, though a prince of royal blood, was a child, See Peter Edbury, The Kingdom of 
Cyprus and the Crusades 1191-1373 (Cambridge, 1991 ), p. 86, n. 53, 

+ Isabella (Yolanda) daughter of John of Brienne, born c, 1211, married Frederick I] in 1225, 
died in 1228 after giving birth to Conrad (died 1254); his son was Conradin (1254-68), 

$, John of Thelin (d,1258), cousin of John of Ibelin, count of Jaffa (d, 1266), 








117 


to harass the Hospitallers, the Genoese commune and the Spaniards to his utmost 
power, if they did not submit; and he was not to spare the prince’s funds, he should 
be well supplied. After this the prince went back to his own land, as he was unable 
to pacify these Christians, so deplorably at war with each other. 

After the prince left Acre the conflict became more bitter and more shocking still. 
Four score or more ships were bumed during the year it lasted, all of them laden 
with goods, wealth and merchandise coming into the port of Acre. And all that year 
there were at least sixty engines, every one of them throwing down onto the city of 
Acre, onto houses, towers and turrets, and they smashed and laid level with the 
ground every building they touched, for ten of these engines could deliver rocks 
weighing as muchas 1500 pounds, weight of Champagne. This meant that nearly all 
the towers and strong houses in Acre were destroyed, except for religious houses. 
twenty thousand men died in this war on one side or the other. The Genoese and the 
Spaniards, however, suffered most defeats by land and sea, and they surrendered 
all the towers they held in the city of Acre; these were torn down to the ground. 
They passed under the swords ofthe Venetians and Pisans and by the peace terms 
went away to the city of Tyre. The city of Acre was as utterly devastated by this 
war as if it had been destroyed in warfare between Christians and Saracens. This 
was the year of the Incarnation of Our Lord Jesus Christ 1258. 


Cuarter 80 1258-60 


How the Cumans defeated the Tartars, and the castles which the Christians 
garrisoned against them 


News came next to the city of Acre and its neighbourhood that the Tartars had 
divided their people into three armies and that one of these had gone to the land of 
Comenie.' As it approached its borders, the Cumans said they would play all for all 
and would fight them. The Cumans gathered, arrayed their companies and 
encountered the Tartars. A bitter and bloody battle followed, and only a few men in 
these two large armies escaped death or capture. In the end, however, the Tartars 
were defeated and they fled as fast as they could, abandoning their equipment and 
trying to hide in trees and bushes. Some got away but nearly all were killed or 
taken. 

The second army was on its way to Syria and had already conquered and subdued 
the kingdom of Persia, the noble and mighty city of Baghdad and all that territory, 
had killed the caliph,? who was called the Saracens’ pope, had conquered the land 
of the Medes, that of Assyria, of Chaldea, of Turkey, Edessa, Aleppo, Hama, Homs, 





1, The Cumans or Qipchag tribe were a Turkish people settled on the steppes north and 
north east of the Black Sea, they were subjugated by Batu Khan in 1238 and later mostly 
absorbed into the Mongol kingdom of the Golden Horde, 

2 Al-Musta' sim, 





118 


great Caesarea,' the land of the Old Man of the Mountain? and many other lands, 
provinces and kingdoms which all belong to the Saracens, and the lands of Gec rir 
and Armenia and the city of Antioch, which belong to Christians. 

There was scarcely a land in all the country, near or far, which they did not 
conquer, utterly destroy or hold in subjection through huge exactions of gold and 
silver, of men and women and many other forms of slavery, so that they would all 
have been better dead. 

Only a very few Christians now remained free of Tartar dominion in the whole 
land of Syria. These few Christians took counsel together and said that never, 
please God, would they submit to the Tartars. As they were now so close, they 
said, almost the entire land was lost except for some strong castles, and they decided 
to put the strongest of these into a state of defence. The Templars would garrison 
seven of their strongest castles, the Hospitallers two, the Hospitallers of Our | vady 
of the Germans one, and all would share in the defence of the cities of Acre and 
Tyre. They saw clearly that the whole land could never hold. These castles which 
were put into a state of defence gave them a great deal of trouble, as they could not 
find any hired troops who would garrison them unless they were paid the money 
they wanted. The soldiers said they were taking money to be killed and die, as the y 
could see no way of escaping the huge number of advancing Tartars. 


CHAPTER 81 1260 
How the Saracens heavily defeated the Tartars and how the Tartars fled 


The sultans of Babylon and Egypt and of Damascus‘ were very much alarmed, as 
were all the Saracens, when they heard this news. The sultan summoned all his 
fighting men, and committed the defence of his land to an emir he supposed to be 
loyal to him —but very disloyal he proved in the end.> The sultan and his host set of f 
crossed the deserts between Egypt and Syria and reached Damascus. Saracens 
from all around came in to join him; five sultans were present, so it was said, They 
discussed the situation, and sent word to the Christians asking them to join them in 
the fight against the Tartars. 

The Christians considered this, and most of them agreed to fi ght on the Saracens’ 
side. But the master of the Hospital of Our Lady of the Germans’ said this would 
certainly not be wise, because they had often discovered, and very recently too, that 


Now Kayseri in Turkey, 

The Assassin stronghold of Alamut in Persia was taken by the Mongols in 1256. 

The Mongols took Baghdad in 1258, Aleppo and Damascus in 1260; they did not 
occupy Antioch, but its prince had accepted Mongol overlordship since the mid-1240s, 
a status renewed in 1259. In 1260 the papal legate excommunicated Bohemond fot 
accepting Mongol dominion. 

4. Al-Muzaffar Kutuz, Mamluk sultan (1259-60), and al-Nasir Yusuf, 

5. Rukn al-Din Baybars, Mamluk sultan 1260-77. 

6. Anno of Sangerhausen, master 1257-74, 


wNe 


119 






the Saracens never kept any truce or agreement with the Christians as they should, 
but frequently broke them. If they fought alongside the Saracens against the Tartars 
“and the Tartars were defeated, any Christians who survived such a battle would be 
exhausted, as would their horses; then if this huge number of Saracens suddenly 
attacked them, all the surviving Christians would be taken or killed. In this way all 
‘the land held by Christians would be utterly lost. 

All agreed when they heard this, and they sent a reply to the sultan saying they 
would not join them in battle, but they could be quite sure that no harm would come 
to them from the Christians, who would on the contrary help and support them with 
food supplies and safe conduct, and they need not be on their guard against Christian 
attack. When the sultans heard this answer, they readily agreed to it and said that 
this was certainly no reason to postpone battle, as they had plenty ofmen. They 
arrayed their companies and made straight for the Tartars, who were said to be 
near Sidon. 

‘As the Saracens came near the Tartars and saw their moment, they arrayed their 
ranks for battle and attacked. They charged with great vehemence, and were met 
by a fierce defence. Such masses of men fought on one side and on the other, it was 
-awonder to see. Long and bloody was the battle, and many died on both sides. At 
last the Tartars were beaten and conquered.' On three separate days they fought 
like this, in three places, and all three times the Tartars were defeated. One hundred 
thousand Tartars died in these battles, so it was estimated. After this third battle the 
Tartars fled and no one ever knew what became of them. Some said they had fled 
as far as a very distant place known as Cold Waters, and that they had informed 
their lord of this great defeat and asked him to send help, as nearly all of them were 
dead. 


CHAPTER 82 1260-61 


How the Egyptians murdered their lord the sultan, and how Christians came 
back from Jerusalem in great distress 


When the land was cleared of Tartars, the Saracens went away and retumed to their 
own countries. The sultan of Babylon, through whose efforts this task had been 
accomplished, went back to Egypt” The emir’ he had left in charge of his land had 
made great plots and conspiracies against him. All was safe and at peace, so he 
thought, but very soon he was murdered and the Saracens of that country made 
another sultan. It was said that they choseas lord that same emir who had murdered 
the other sultan. The Christians were not at all pleased, as they had a truce with him. 
But when he was murdered and dead, the truce ceased and the whole land was at 
war, so that Christians who had gone on pilgrimage to Jerusalem lost many of their 


In the battle of ‘Ayn Jalut, 3 September 1260. 
Kutuz, 
Baybars, 








120 


people and much property, for when the emir in charge of the city heard of the 
sultan’s murder, he had the city gates closed and strongly guarded so that no one 
could go in or out without his permission. Christians who had entered the city on 
pilgrimage were quite unable to leave it for a long period, but were detained there, 
because they would not allow anyone to leave. 

The Christians persevered and in the end, after much suffering, were allowed to 
go. As best they could and amid great dangers they returned all together to the 
Christians’ territory by the sea. They were often attacked on the way and lost many 
of their people and possessions, and it was said for certain that all these attacks on 
them were made on the orders of the emir of Jerusalem, to whom they had paid 
considerable sums, and by whose leave and safe-conduct they had gone to the Holy 
Sepulchre. With great difficulty and much trouble they returned from there. When 
the Christians saw them, they were all delighted and full of joy, for so much had 
happened to them, and with a loud voice they gave praise and thanks to Our Lord 
Jesus Christ and to his glory. There were then 1261 years since the Incarnation o! 
Our Lord Jesus Christ. 





The Eracles or Acre continuation 


of William of Tyre 


Eracles Book 33, chapters 44-62 


Book 34, chapters 1-4 














123 


Book 33. Cuaprer44 1239 


A great crusade now left the kingdom of France to go to Syria.' Men left their own 
countries and travelled to Marseille and to Aigues-Mortes, where they went aboard 
ship and crossed to Acre. On this journey were: Theobald, king of Navarre, who 
was count of Champagne;? also Henry, count of Bar-le-Duc;’ the duke of Burgundy;* 
Peter of Dreux, count of Brittany;> the count of Forez,° who was count of Nevers in 
right of his wife; as well as Amaury, count of Montfort;’ John of Dreux, count of 
Macon;* and a number of other important men. 

When the pilgrims reached Acre they lodged both in the town and outside on the 
sands. There they discussed matters, agreed without a dissenting voice that they 
should go and fortify Ascalon, and rode to Jaffa. 

At Jaffa a scout reported to the Templars that there were 1050 Turks quartered 
at Gaza under the command of an emir known as Rukn al-Din.’ When the Christians 
heard this, they decided to send 400 knights out on this mission. These included the 
count of Bar-le-Duc, the count of Montfort, Balian of Sidon,!° Odo of Montbéliard,'' 
John of Arsur” and the Templars and Hospitallers. They left Jaffa in the early evening 
and rode until they reached Gaza next day. Then they put on their armour and rode 
in battle array towards the Turks’ encampment." 


Cuapter 45 1239 


When the Turks saw them advancing, they mounted their horses and took station on 
ahill. Rukn al-Din consulted his men, who advised him to retreat, as he had nothing 
like enough numbers to fightthem. Rukn al-Din replied that he would withdraw in 
due course, but first he would send his heavy equipment away, and would go and try 
their strength. He did as he had said, sending 200 Turks to harass them. As soon as 
these approached and began shooting, the Christians began to mil] about and jostle 
each other. Seeing this, the skirmishers attacked more fiercely and pressed their 
enemies harder. Rukn al-Din saw how disorganised the Christians were, and came 
down fast from his hillside to join the fight. Reaching it, both he and his men spurred 
to a gallop, charged into the confused crowd of Christians and did them much injury. 





In the summer of 1239. 

Theobald IV, count of Champagne (1210-53) and king of Navarre (1234-53). 
Henry IL, count of Bar-le-Duc, 12 14-739. 

Hugh IV, duke of Burgundy, 121 8-72. 

Peter of Dreux, count of Brittany by marriage 1213-37; died 1250. 

Guiges V, count of Forez (1 203-41) and of Nevers (1239-41). 

Amaury VI, count of Montfort, 1218-41. 

John of Dreux, brother of the count of Brittany, count of Macon 1234-39. 
Rukn al-Din al-Hijawi, died 1249, 

Balian, lord of Sidon, died 1240, 

Odo, constable of Jerusalem and by marriage lord of Tiberias, died 1244. 
12. — Johnof Ibelin, lord of Arsur, died 1258, 

13. This expedition took place in November 1239, 


PL a ata a a 





— 























124 


Without any attempt to re-order their ranks, they fled pell-mell, each man for himself’ 
Amaury, count of Montfort, was taken, the count of Bar-le-Duc killed,! anda great 
mass of knights were killed or captured, both laymen and religious. The foot- 
sergeants were all lost and so was most of the equipment. 

Those who escaped from the battle went to Ascalon, where they found the king 
of Navarre and the count of Brittany with the main army. As soon as they got there, 
such panic struck every heart that they all thought the Saracens were coming to 
capture every one of them. The moment it was dark, therefore, each man set off on 
his own for Jaffa, in complete disorder, not one of them waiting for another. Off the y 
went like defeated men, abandoning large quantities of food and equipment. They 
reached Jaffa, paused briefly, set off again and did not stop till they got to Acre. 


CHAPTER 46 1239 


Having reached Acre, they settled down and stayed there a long time without doing 
anything. During this period aclerk from Tripoli called William went to the host and 
told the commanders that the sultan of Hama wanted them to know that if they 
would come to his land and bring him help and support from the Christians, he 
would put his castles under their control and would become a Christian.2 He urged 
and begged them to do this and not to put any obstacle in his way. The commanders 
discussed this and agreed to co-operate. 

Then the army left Acre and rode along the coast to Tripoli. Here they stopped, 
encamped on Mount Pilgrim outside the city, and from there sent their own envoys 
with the clerk, William, to the sultan of Hama, hoping to find out ifhe intended to g0 
ahead with this plan. The sultan made a show of wanting an agreement and led them 
on with words for some time, but in the end he completely let them down, as ifhe 
had merely been playing with them. He put on this whole display because he was 
afraid of the lady of Aleppo, mother of the sultan, with whom he was at war. This 
lady was holding the lordship of Aleppo for her son, the sultan, because he was 4 
child and very young.’ At last the Christians realised that the sultan of Hama was 
lying and deceiving them, and after staying some time outside Tripoli, where Bohemond 
prince of Antioch’ treated them with great distinction, they left and returned to 
Acre, But John, count of Macon, died at Tripoli and was buried in the church of the 
Hospital of St John.* 


The exact fate of the count of Bar was never known, as the Rofhelin tells us above, 
chapter 28. 

Al-Muzaffar Mahmud of Hama may have set this rumour going in order to deceive his 
enemy, the ruler of Homs. 

Dayfa Khatun bint al-Adil, the regent of Aleppo, was the grandmother, not the mother, 
of the young heir, al-Nasir Yusuf. 

Bohemond V, 1233-52. 

He died on 3 November, according to Peter Jackson, ‘The Crusades of 1239 and their 
Aftermath’, Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African Studies, 50 (1987), . 40; 
Jackson dates the abortive negotiations with al-Muzaffar to the autumn of 1239, 


wr ww N 








125 
Cuarter 47 1240 


Once back at Acre, the army soon removed to the Cayphas palm groves in order to 
graze their horses. When the grass there was finished, they went and encamped 
near the Springs of Saffuriya.' An envoy from the sultan of Damascus went to them 
while they were there in order to discuss the truce. This sultan was al-Salih,’ son of 
al-‘ Adil Sayf al-Din,’ and he had been and still was lord of Baalbek. He became 
sultan of Damascus in this way: when al-Ashraf* died, al-Kamil’ held Damascus, as 
you heard earlier. Then after al-Kamil died the town was without a lord, as his 
eldest son was away in his own lordship in the land of the Levant. His name was al- 
Salih, like his uncle whom you have heard mentioned. Another son, al-‘ Adil,’ was 
in Egypt, of which he was lord. For these reasons a nephew of Saladin called al- 
Malik al-Jawad* came forward and went to Damascus, where he was accepted as 
lord and made sultan. He held the land for a long time, until al-Salih who was in the 
Levant moved from there with a strong army and went to Damascus. Al-J awad 
went to meet him, surrendered Damascus to him and remained with him, for he 
knew that the men of Damascus would never support him against al-Salih. 

Al-Salih prepared his army to go to Egypt and take that land from his brother. 
But he halted at Nablus, realising that he had not enough men for the task, sent some 
of his troops back to Damascus and stayed at Nablus with only avery few. The son 
of Coraidin, known as al-Nasir, was at Kerak.’ He learned that al-Salih was at 
Nablus almost alone, and so promptly left Kerak for Nablus, captured al-Salih and 
took him back to Kerak. Here he had him loaded with chains and kept a prisoner, 
Al-Salih of Baalbek heard this news, went to Damascus and was welcomed there 
and made sultan.'° 





Cayphas is now Haifa; Saffuriya is near Nazareth. 

Al-Salih Isma‘il, ruler of Damascus 1237 and 1239-45. 

Al-‘Adil (I) Sayf al-Din, brother of Saladin and sultan of Egypt; died 1218. 

‘Al-Ashraf Musa, ruler of Damascus 1229-37; died 1237. 

‘Al|-Kamil Muhammad, the brother of al-Ashraf Musa and al-Salih Isma‘il and sultan of 
Egypt (1218-38), ruled in Damascus from 1237 until his death the following year. 
Al-Salih Ayyub, in fact al-Kamil’s second son, ruler of Egypt (1240-49) and Damascus 
(1245-49). 

This was the eldest son, al-‘ Adil (II), ruler of Egypt 1238-40. 

Al-Jawad Yunus was a grandson of al-‘ Adil (I) Sayf al-Din (thus a great-nephew of 
Saladin) and the nephew of al-Kamil, al-Ashraf Musa and al-Salih Isma‘il; died in 1244, 
‘Al-Nasir Dawud, ruler of Kerak until 1249 and ruler of Damascus (1227-29), tried to use 
his power over al-Salih Ayyub to regain Damascus. He was the son of al-Mu’azzam Isa, 
known to Christian sources as Coraidin, ruler of Damascus 12 18-27, Foran account of 
the complex dynastic politics of this period, see R.S. Humphreys, Krom Saladin to the 
Mongols: the Ayyubids of Damascus, IT 93-1260 (Albany, 1977), chapter 7. 

10. Al-Salih Isma‘il of Baalbek took control of Damascus in September 1239; it was after this 
that his nephew al-Salih Ayyub allowed himself to be taken into al-Nasir Dawud’s 
custody. Al-Nasir Dawud then (lune 1240) helped al-Salih Ayyub to overthrow al-' Adil 
IL in Egypt and become sultan there, 


All 


yo wen Nf 


aul, 























126 
CHAPTER 48 1240 


The Christians were now at Saffuriya and this al-Salih of whom you have heard! 
had sent his envoy to them. Matters went ahead and a truce was made between him 
and the Christians by which he returned Beaufort castle to them and agreed to give 
them back all the land held by the Franks between the coast and the River Jordan.’ 
They promised him not to make any truce or settlement with the sultan of Babylon’ 
unless he agreed and was party to it; also to assist him against that sultan, and to go 
and encamp at Ascalon or Jaffa with their whole force so as to prevent the sultan of 
Babylon crossing the desert and entering Syrian territory; and he* was to encamp 
near them at the place where the Jaffa River* runs out. The whole of this agreement 
which you have heard was sworn to by all the commanders of the host and by the 
sultan and his emirs. He began by giving them back Beaufort and the lands of Sidon 
and Tiberias. 

This sultan of Babylon, against whom the sultan of Damascus had made agreements 
with the Christians, was the nephew of the al-Salih whom, as you heard, al-Nasir 
took and held in prison in Kerak.* He hoped that by capturing him he would get 
possession of Damascus, but when he learned that their uncle al-Salih held Damascus 
and his hope came to nothing, he had to think again. He told his cousin al-Salih, 
whom he had in prison, that ifhe would marry his sister and promise him to bring 
troops to help him get Damascus, which had belonged to his father, and when he 
had got it, would let him hold it in good peace. If, he said, he was willing to do this 
for him, he was prepared to do all he could to put his brother al-‘ Adil into his hands, 
and would make him sultan of Babylon. He already had some support for this plan 
from the emirs of Babylon, to whom he had given and promised great wealth, for his 
father had left him a richly filled treasury. 


CuapTer 49 1240 
When al-Salih had given him the guarantees he wanted, had married his sister and 


been released, al-Nasir sent privately to Babylon and made sure of the agreements 
the emirs had promised him on oath. Then he set out with his whole strength, which 


1. AlJ-Salih Isma‘il, now ruling in Damascus. 

2 Beaufort (Qal‘at al-Shaqif now in southern Lebanon) had fallen to Saladin in 1190. The 
Christians reoccupied it from 1240 to 1268. The promise to return all the land between 
the coast and the Jordan was not kept. See Jackson, 'Crusades of 1239', p. 42 for details. 

3. Al-Salih Ayyub, sultan of Egypt from June 1240. 

4. Al-Salih Isma‘il. 

5. The Nahr al-‘Auja. 

6. This does seem to be what the French text says, somewhat confused here, but it is not 


correct. Al-Salih Isma‘i] of Damascus was the uncle; his three nephews were the brothers 
al-‘Adil II, ruling in Egypt 1238-40, and al-Salih Ayyub, and their cousin al-Nasir Dawud 
of Kerak. Al-Nasir wanted Damascus, and when he heard that his uncle had gained it, 
he did a deal with his cousin: he would help al-Salih Ayyub get Egypt if the latter would 
help him get Damascus, 








127 


included 700 mounted Turks and 500 of more Turks who had rejoined al-Salih 
once they knew he was free, They crossed the desert, travelling secretly and as fast 
as they could, until they reached the Cairo, There they found that the emirs had 
taken their lord al-‘ Adil prisoner.' They handed him over to his brother al-Salih, 
who put him in prison — or into some other place. He was never seen again. Thus 
al-Salih became sultan of Egypt. This was the man whom the other al-Salih, sultan 
of Damascus, feared, so that he turned to the Christians when the truce was sworn, 
as you heard earlier. 

The Christians went to encamp at Jaffa; al-Salih of Damascus and the lord of 
Homs? settled with all their forces at the mouth of the river. 

This truce that you have heard about was sought and made at the instigation of 
the Temple but without the Hospital’s support, so that the Hospital got the sultan of 
Babylon to make a different truce with some of the Christians. This truce was 
sworn to by the king of Navarre, the count of Brittany and many other pilgrims, 
none of whom gave amoment’s thought to the promise they had made to the sultan 
ofDamascus. Once this truce was settled as you have heard, the king of Navarre, 
the count of Brittany and the other pilgrims who had sworn the Babylon truce, left 
Jaffa and went to Acre, hired ships and went home to their own countries.’ The 
master of the Hospital, Brother Peter of Vieille-Bride,* who had sworn to this truce 
but had made no promise to the sultan of Damascus, left Jaffa with his whole 
brotherhood and went to Acre, where he settled among the men of that land. The 
Templars, however, and the count of Neversand one section of the pilgrims remained 
at Jaffa, refusing either to go away or to withdraw from their agreement with the 
sultan of Damascus. Thus the Christians’ affairs were full of discord and dissension, 
as one party adhered to one truce and the others to the other. 


Cuapter 50 1240 


While the pilgrims were at Acre, Alice,* mother of the king of Cyprus,’ married one 
of the great men of France, Ralph of Soissons, brother of the count of Soissons. 
Having married her, he then came forward, supported by one party among the 
people of the country, and demanded on his wife’s behalf that she be given the 
guardianship of the kingdom of Jerusalem. He did this on the grounds that she was 
the nearest heir to be found in the country among the heirs of King Amaury her 





1. On2 June 1240. 

2. Al-Mansur Ibrahim. 

3. Theobald left the East in September 1240. Jackson (‘Crusades of 1239", pp.44-5) thinks 
the report of a truce between him and the ruler of Egypt is based on confusion with a 
later agreement, 

4. Master of the Hospitallers, 1239 or 1240-42. 

a The granddaughter of King Amaury, she married Hugh | of Cyprus, Bohemond V of 
Antioch and Ralph of Soissons; died 1246, 

6. Henry I. 





























128 


grandfather, or who had existed since the death of her niece, the empress Isabella.' 
The people of the kingdom discussed the matter and replied that Queen Isabella, 
the emperor’s wife, had had a son, who was in Apulia and was the true heir to the 
kingdom. But as he was not present, nor ever had been, they would accept her as 
lady and would grant her the kingdom in ward and would be bound to her, saving all 
the rights of King Conrad, son of the empress Isabella, her niece, and so it was 
done. 

When Ralph of Soissons had obtained the lordship in the way you have heard, 
he held it feebly enough, for those who had put him there, that is his wife’s relations, 
had more authority and power than he had, so that he seemed to be nothing but a 
shadow. Angry and disappointed, he threw it all up, left his wife and went home to 
his own country.’ 


CHAPTER 51 1240 


As the king of Navarre and the count of Brittany left for home on the voyage of the 
holy Cross, Richard, king of Comwall’ and brother of King Henry of England, 
arrived in Acre, bringing with him a fine company of knights and also great wealth." 
He stayed at the house of St John’s Hospital in Acre. When he had spent some time 
in Acre and had equipped and prepared himself and his men, he moved on to Jaffa, 
where he lodged with the other Christians there. While he was at Jaffa the Templars 
urged him to become a party to the truce and agreements made with the sultan of 
Damascus, and pressed him to swear to it. The Hospitallers sent messages to him - 
and indeed many in Acre itself spoke to him about this - begging him to adhere to 
the truce made with the sultan of Babylon. He refused to do either, but said that if 
the Christians in Jaffa would go and encamp at Ascalon, he was prepared to fortify 
the castle. The commanders of the host discussed this with the Templars and the 
German Hospitallers. They saw that his proposal did not conflict with their agreement 
with the sultan of Damascus’ and that it would benefit Christendom, and so they 
agreed to it, found labourers and everything else needed for the work, and left Jaffa 
to go to Ascalon. Having arrived there, they settled down and began their task. 
They fortified the castle in the same way that King Richard of England, uncle of this 
Earl Richard now repairing it, had done.® 





1. Isabella II , queen of Jerusalem. The daughter of Alice’s half-sister, Maria, and John of 
Brienne, she married Frederick II in 1225, bore a son, Conrad, and died in 1228, aged 16 
or 17. 

For a recent account of Ralph’s disappointment, see P.W. Edbury, JoAn of Ibelin and 
the Kingdom of Jerusalem (Woodbridge, 1997), pp. 74-5. 

Richard, earl of Cornwall, was born in 1209, the second son of King John; brother-in- 
law of Frederick II, he was elected king of the Romans in 1257; died in 1272. 

They came with the autumn sailing, arriving 8 October 1240. 

Al-Salih Isma‘il. 

In 1192; for an archaeologist’s assessment of Richard’s work at Ascalon, see D.Pringle, 
‘King Richard I and the walls of Ascalon’, Palestine Exploration Quarterly, 106 (1984), 
pp. 142-6. 


Awk Ww N 





129 


When he had fortified it, he equipped it as well as he could and then sent word to 
Jerusalem to a knight called Walter Pennenpié, who was deputy governor of the 
cityfor the emperor and held it by agreement and truce with the sultan of Babylon. 
As soon as Walter reached Ascalon, Farl Richard delivered the castle to him, to 
beheld for the emperor. That done, he returned to Acre, hired a ship and went back 
to his own country.' 

The army retumed to Jaffa. And wherever the Christian army went, the sultan o f 
Damascus and his forces always encamped close by. After staying a long time at 
Jaffa, the pilgrims who had remained behind the others wanted to go home, so they 
~ went to Acre, hired vessels, and went back to their own lands. All! the other Christians 
then returned to Acre. 


CuHarter 52 1242 


At this point Riccardo Filangieri, the emperor’s marshal, who was at Tyre, took ship 
for Apulia to go to the emperor, who had sent for him. He left his brother Lotario in 
his place and made over the city and castle of Tyre to him. 

With Riccardo gone, Balian of Tbelin, lord of Beirut, and Philip of Montfort, lord 
of Toron,? having managed to win supporters inside Tyre, left Acre at nightfall and 
rode to Tyre. As soonas they approached the walls, their supporters inside the city, 
who were all stationed in arms near the Butchery Gate, made signals to them; then 
they struck in their spurs and took to the sea, rode all round the city wall by the 
Hospital of the Germans and entered the town through the postern where their 
friends were waiting. Then they rode hard for the castle. 

Lotario Filangieri heard all this happening, armed himself, left his lodgings and 
went to the castle. All the Apulians in the town, those that could get there, entered 
the castle too. That is how the city of Tyre was taken from the emperor’s men. 


Cuarrer 53. 1240-45 


When Ralph of Soissons, who knew nothing about this venture, heard that Balian of 
Ibelin and Philip of Montfort had taken Tyre and were holding it, he and his wife 
Alice left Acre and went to Tyre. Having arrived there, Ralph demanded the city of 
Tyre for himself and his wife from Balian and Philip; they wished to hold it in the 
same way as they held everything else in the kingdom. These said they would not 





L. In May 1241, after making a truce with the sultan of Egypt; Jackson holds that this truce 
accomplished nothing more than the release of prisoners, that the sultan was yielding 
territory over which he had no power and ‘the treaty merely recognized the Franks’ rule 
over territories which they had acquired from Ayyub’s enemies’ (Jackson, ‘Crusades of 
1239’, pp. 47-8). 

2. Philip was the son of Guy of Montfort and Helvis of Ibelin, and husband of Maria, 
heiress of Toron, he and Balian, lord of Beirut (1236-47), were first cousins. The account 
given hore of the end of Hohenstaufen rule in Tyre is seriously at odds with other, more 
detailed, accounts, 


























130 


yield or deliver the city to them but would keep it until they knew who was the right 
person to receive it. This was one of the reasons why Ralph of Soissons went away, 
as you heard. 

At this time Pope Innocent IV' realised that he could not summon a council to 
Rome or to any place in that region, and so he sent word to Genoa, asking for 
galleys to be sent secretly to the mouth of the Tiber. When they arrived, he left 
Rome privately, reached the place, embarked on the galleys and went to Genoa. 
He travelled like this so that the emperor Frederick should not stop him. He stayed 
a while at Genoa, then left, crossed the mountains and went to Lyon on the Rhone. 
Here he stayed, summoned his prelates and assembled all those he could get.” Then 
he sent to the emperor, admonishing him on thirteen heads under which he was 
accused and ordering him to place himself in the mercy of the Church. He had 
previously informed him of these accusations, and as he had never come forward to 
make any answer, he, the pope, had had enquiry made and found that the allegations 
were true; Frederick was a proven and convicted offender. As such he should put 
himself in the mercy of Holy Church. 

When the emperor heard the pope’s orders, he sent envoys to Lyon. These 
were the marquis of Frohburg and Master Piero della Vigna, one of the emperor’s 
lawyers and an excellent advocate. 

These went to the pope, and, once admitted to his presence, Master Piero 
addressed him: 

“My lord, the emperor my lord commends himself to you at your feet as to his 
lord and father, and he informs you that he would have come in person to your feet 
to hear your commands and obey you in everything ifhe could, buthis body prevents 
this, as he is ill in bed and unable to move. Therefore he asks you to grant him some 
delay so that he can come and obey your commands. And if you are pleased to 
release him from your demands and will establish him and leave him in peace as a 
Catholic Christian who believes in Jesus Christ, he is prepared within one year from 
now to put Jerusalem and the whole land which used to belong to the Latins into the 
hands and control of Christians.’ 

The pope asked him if he could show any authorisation to prove that he really 
was the emperor’s envoy and that the words he had spoken came from him. He 
said yes, he could. Then he held out a letter sealed in gold and another from a 
notary public, saying that he was trustworthy and should be regarded as an envoy. 
Then the pope asked him ifhis lord the emperor had in fact the power to do all he 
claimed in Syria. The man said yes, and affirmed it strongly. Then the pope tumed 
to the prelates and cardinals and said loudly so that everyone heard him, 


— 


Sinibaldo Fieschi, 1243-54. 


2. Presumably to discussions before the First Council of Lyon, 28 June-17 July 1245, 
described in the following chapter. 
3; A leading counsellor of Frederick’s until his arrest and blinding at the emperor's orders 


in 1249, Some authorities identify Taddeo de Suessa as Frederick's representative at 
Lyon; see D. Abulafia, Frederick I; A Medieval Emperor (London, 1988), pp. 368-73, 








131 


‘My lords, now you see what sort o {Christian the emperor is! He has the power 
to take the Holy Land and the Holy Places of J erusalem and give them back to 
Christians, he can release them from the hands and the power of unbelievers, but he 
will not do it and refuses to do it, except through agreement!’ Then he told the 
emperor’s envoys that they should excuse him, what they had said was not sufficient 
and he did not accept it because they had not proved or offered to prove their 
message; he would be acting out of order, let them not approach him again. 


Cuaprer 54 1245 


Next the pope called a general council and laid this matter of the emperor before it, 
with the result that the emperor was condemned and deposed, both himself and his 
heirs.' The pope made this widely known and excommunicated all who in future 
should consider or refer to him as emperor. After that the pope sent a legate into 
Germany to preach against the emperor, so that many people tumed against him and 
supported the pope, especially all the clergy, who are very powerful in the land. 
When the pope knew that he had won most of the power in Germany over to his 
side, he sent word and succeeded in getting a king chosen there and crowned at 
Aix-la-Chapelle? The man they made king was William, count of Holland,‘ and the 
pope promised him that as soon as he was in Rome and had the freedom to do so, 
he would crown him emperor. 

Then a great and bitter war was fought between those who supported the emperor 
Frederick and those who held by William, the new king. Very hard did the pope 
work to support this warfare, sending to it all the men and money he could, and 
offering indulgences for it as great as those for the land beyond the sea. This war 
and conflict continued until the emperor’s death.* When the emperor died, the 
pope returned to Rome. The men of the kingdom sent for King Conrad,’ the 
emperor’s son, who was in Germany, of which his father had made him king, and 
they continued to fight against the Church and against King William. 


Cuaprer 55 1242 


Now we will go back to the matter of Syria. Youheard how Riccardo Filangieri, 
the emperor’s marshal, left Tyre. With him were his brother Enrico and their wives, 
as well as considerable wealth. They set off: aboard ship to go to Apulia. After nine 
days at sea, storms and ill fortune struck them and kept them long at sea and in great 
distress. At last the weather carried them towards Tripoli on the Barbary coast. 





1. On 17 July 1245, 

2. Now Aachen. 

3. Innocent’s first choice as emperor was Henry Raspe of Thuringia, 1246-47; William was 
elected on 21 October 1247; his election was confirmed at Lyon by Innocent in 1251; 
died 1256, 

4, 


1250. 
5, Conrad [TV Hohenstaufen, died 1254, 

















132 


Here they found that their boat was falling to pieces and water was coming in 
everywhere. Looking around, they saw a Saracen supply vessel making for 
Alexandria out of Tunis. They came up alongside her, went aboard with all their 
belongings and left their own ship to the Saracens. While they were heading, they 
supposed, for the island of Sicily, violent weather blew up and drove them back for 
several days, until in the end they fetched up again at Tyre, from which they had 
sailed. They entered harbour, anchored, and disembarked into what they thought 
was their own town, for they had no idea what had been happening since they left. 
The townsmen saw them coming ashore, went down to the harbour, laid hands on 
the marshal, his brother and their wives and all their possessions, and took them to 
Balian, lord of Beirut. 

Balian had them taken to the castle entrance, where he had a gallows set up and 
told Lotario to surrender the castle, and then he would release his brothers. If he 
did not surrender it, he would have them hanged before his eyes. Lotario considered, 
saw that he could not hold the castle and surrendered it to Balian, setting his brothers 
free. 


CHAPTER 56 1244 


At this time al-Salih, sultan of Babylon, sent great wealth to the eastern lands of 
which he was lord, in order to bring troops to his assistance. He also told them that 
he would give them land in Egypt if they wanted to come and live there, with the 
result that a populous nation from a city called Khwarazm — hence their name, 
Khwarazmians'— 20,000 mounted men at least, rode to join him. They did so for 
fear of the Tartars, who had entered their countries. These Khwarazmians rode on 
until they reached Gaza, where they found the army of the sultan of Egypt. On their 
way they caused terrible damage in the land of Tripoli and elsewhere. So suddenly 
did they appear at Jerusalem that very few could escape; more than 30,000 were 
killed, men, women and children, in this surprise attack, for these people took no 
prisoners, all they wanted to do was kill. 

The sultan of Damascus, Malik al-Salih, sent his host to Acre, 4000 mounted 
men commanded by the sultan of Homs. When they got there, the Christians who 
were present — the Hospitallers of St John, the Templars, the Hospitallers of the 
Germans, the lay knights of the country and the others who had gone there from 
Cyprus and Tripoli —set out from Acre together with the Turks. Robert, patriarch 
of Jerusalem, and several other prelates accompanied them, and they all rode on to 
Ascalon. Count Walter of Brienne joined them from Jaffa and so did 600 Christian 
knights, not counting other mounted men and sergeants on foot. Having reached 
Ascalon, they discussed their next move. In the course of the discussion the sultan of 
Homs said: 

‘My lords, you are dealing with a large nation of foreigners who have no base 
here. This will make them desperate, and so I strongly advise against battle. We 


1, For these people and events, see above, Rothelin, chapters 40 and 41. 





133 


should stay here, as we have plenty of food and will get more from Acre; they have 
very little food and are numerous, they cannot possibly stay long but will have to 
move on. All we need is for them to go away, and as they are foreigners without a 
base they will not be able to stand firm, they will destroy themselves and will have to 
go. Ifthey go into the land of Babylon, where I do not in the least suppose the sultan 
will admit them, we shall be rid of them for the present.’ 


CHAPTER 57 1244 


Many of the Christians agreed with the sultan but others insisted that they should go 
and attack them where they were. Through hatred and envy amongst the Christians, 
through sin and misfortune, the worse plan prevailed, and so they set out from Ascalon 
at dawn on a Tuesday morning and rode to Gaza. There they found the host of 
Babylon, who were 3000 Turks, and the 20,000 Khwarazmians. The squadrons 
encountered and a fierce conflict began. It was brief, however, as the sultan of 
Homs and his Turks soon rode off the field and fled; they lost all their equipment, 
The Christians began milling about, the squires and foot-sergeants pushed in amongst 
the ranks and the knights could not spur forward to get at the Turks. Then they 
began to quit, and one section turned the battle into arout. Envy, pride and folly 
brought the Christians to this. 

In this battle! were taken: William of Chateauneuf, master of St John’s Hospital,’ 
Armand of Périgord, master of the Temple, who died in prison;’ Walter, count of 
Brienne who also died in prison;* Thomas of Ham, constable of Tripoli; and John 
and William, sons of Bohemond, lord of Botron. Many other knights, lay and 
religious, were killed or captured, and so were countless others. Hardly a quarter 
of the whole host escaped, and the dead included Peter of Sergines, archbishop of 
Tyre, and the bishop of St George of. Ramla.’ Those who survived this defeat went 
to Ascalon but only paused there briefly before moving on to Acre. 

The Turks from Babylon rode away from Gaza with all their plunder and went 
back to their own land. They left the Khwarazmians, who hoped that the sultan 
would send for them, but he was afraid of the harm they could do him, being so 
numerous. Not wanting to bring them anywhere near him, he stationed men at 
Bilbeis to oppose them and prevent them crossing the desert.’ When the 
Khwarazmians heard this, they felt they had been thoroughly tricked and cheated. 
Then they went away across the country looking for some means of living, doing 
much damage in many places and under frequent attack from various peoples. They 





La Forbie or Harbiya, 18 October 1244. 

William was master 1242-44; released 1250. 

Armand was master of the Templars c. 1233. Captured in 1244, he died in captivity ¢. 
1246. 

Walter IV count of Brienne, lord of Jaffa and brother-in-law of King Henry I of Cyprus, 
Peter of Sergines, archbishop of Tyre 1235-44; Ralph was bishop of Lydda, near Ramla, 
1225-44, 

Bilbeis guards the approaches to Cairo, 


we Wr 


> 




















134 


kept to open country as they had no base, no city or castle. This meant that the 
people living there, who were all hostile to them, could often take them by surprise 
and reduce their numbers. Thus it went on for some three years, by which time they 
had been so harassed there was not one of them left in that country. This defeat 
took place on a Tuesday in the year of the Incarnation of Our Lord 1244 in the 
month of October, on the feast day of my lord St Luke the Evangelist.' 


CHAPTER 58 1244 


At this period Pope Innocent IV was at Lyon on the Rhone, as you heard earlier. In 
France King Louis was taken very ill, so much so that he lost all power of speech 
and was thought to have died.” His mother Queen Blanche, his wife and his brothers 
broke out into lamentations, thinking him dead, and they sent for clergy to conduct 
his funeral service. Then at that moment he breathed, opened his eyes, looked 
round him and said, 

‘Fetch the bishop of Paris.’ In joy and happiness, all their grief changed to 
delight, those who were with him sent for the bishop.’ When the king saw him, he 
said, 

‘My lord bishop, give me the cross for the Holy Land beyond the sea.” When 
the queen mother, his brothers and the queen his wife heard that, they knelt to him 
and said, 

‘My lord, in God’s mercy, wait till you are better! Then you can do what you 
like.’ This made him angry and he said, 

“You can be sure I shall neither eat nor drink until I have the cross for Outremer 
on my shoulder.’ Then he called the bishop of Paris back to him and asked him 
again for the cross. The bishop did not dare refuse, so he took a piece of silk 
ribbon, folded it into a cross, knelt down weeping in front of the king and offered it 
him. The king took it, kissed it, held it to his eyes and then had it fastened to his 
shoulder. 

“Now I am cured,” he said. You may be sure that the weeping and lamentations 
inside and outside his bedroom were as great as when they thought he was dead. 

When the king was up and better, he had letters written and sent to inform them 
in Syria that he had taken the cross; let them take comfort, defend and equip their 
cities and castles, for with God’s help he would soon be in the Holy Land. 


CHAPTER 59 1245-48 
It now happened that al-Salih, sultan of Damascus, went to Baalbek, which had 


been his oldest possession. A dispute arose between him and the sultan of Aleppo: 
this ended in a battle in which the sultan of Damascus was defeated, captured and 





1. 18 October. 
2. In December 1244. 
3 William of Auvergne, 1228-48, 





135 


imprisoned in Aleppo.' When the sultan of Babylon heard that his uncle al-Salih 
was in prison in Aleppo, he set out with his whole great host, went to Damascus, set 
siege to it and made a pretence of cutting down the gardens. The townspeople 
were afraid he would do this, and saw that they had no lord whatever to protect 
them — they are a soft race and bad people, merchants and tradesmen every one of 
them, and only a very few warriors. For this reason they welcome anyone who 
arrives with some slight strength, and so they surrendered to him. 

After taking Damascus, he went to Homs and to Baalbek and took them both. 
Then very soon he sent his forces to besiege a castle at Tiberias which Odo of 
Montbéliard had fortified. They attacked in great strength, took it by storm, killed 
or captured all inside it, then went on to besiege Ascalon.? Here they mounted a 
strong siege and attacked vigorously, using engines, mining, and direct assaults upon 
the ramparts. And in order to reduce the castle and prevent men and supplies being 
brought in by sea, the sultan sent to Alexandria and Damietta for 22 galleys, as well 
as a supply vessel carrying victuals and gear for the galleys. These kept station off 
Ascalon so that no boats could get in. 


CHAPTER 60 1246-47 


When the Hospitallers, defending Ascalon for the emperor,’ saw this, they requested 
assistance from everyone in Acre, prelates, religious, communes and others: let them 
help to provide armed vessels so as to drive the galleys off and allow supplies and 
reinforcements to come in. They sent to Cyprus for this purpose and asked King 
Henry for help. He sent eight galleys, well armed and well manned by knights and 
sergeants, under the command of Baldwin of Ibelin, seneschal of Cyprus.‘ As soon 
as they were ready they left Famagusta and made for Acre, where they joined the 
other boats being prepared. From there they moved on all together. There were 
fifteen galleys and other vessels: galliots, galleasses and ganguemeles, at least fifty 
all told. Under sail and oars they all reached Ascalon. 

When the Saracens saw them, they brought their galleys and supply ship as close 
inshore as they could, to protect them from attack. The Christians’ ships lay opposite 
them, anchored out at sea, and there they remained five days. Then one evening a 
strong wind blew from the west, putting the Christian fleet into some danger. ‘The 
vessels, however, rode safely at anchor, and the more so because they were a good 





1, The information here is badly garbled. In 1245 al-Salih Ayyub of Egypt and al-Nasir 
Yusuf of Aleppo made common cause against al-Salih Isma* il in Damascus, which they 
captured in October 1245. Al-Salih Isma‘il was allowed to keep Baalbck and some other 
properties. He later tried to make an alliance with the Khwarazmians against al-Salih 
Ayyub, but they were defeated (May 1246) and al-Salih Isma‘il took refuge in Aleppo 
where he was kept under open arrest. Al-Nasir Yusuf of Aleppo had him executed in 
1251. 

Tiberias fell in June 1247, and Ascalon in October. 

The emperor had given it to them in 1243. 

Baldwin of Ibelin, seneschal of Cyprus (before 1247 - 1267), a brother of Balian of Ibelin, 
lord of Beirut, was among the crusaders captured in Egypt after the defeat at Mansourah 
in 1250, 


wy 























136 


distance offshore. Along this coast the sea is more turbulent and dangerous inshore 
than it is further out. Thus the Turkish galleys could not weather the storm but drove 
ashore and all twenty-two galleys and the supply ship were wrecked. In the momming 
the Christians saw the Saracen vessels lying smashed along the shoreline and were 
able to bring in fresh supplies. But the wind and sea were so violent they could not 
endure it any longer, but raised anchor, loosed their sails and returned to Acre. 


CHAPTER 61 1246-47 


When the Turks saw what had happened, they attacked the castle more vigorously 
than ever, and what was expected to help the place in fact harmed it. When the 
galleys were shattered, the Saracens used the timbers and planks to make cats, 
mantles and covered ways, they converted masts into engines to fling missiles into 
the castle, and so they pressed harder and harder until the castle could hold out no 
longer. Yet its defenders fought bravely; it is a long time since anyone has heard of 
men who endured as they did or showed such courage and resolve. This did not 
help them: the castle was stormed and taken, for they were exhausted by the incessant 
assaults which gave them no respite and no chance to rest. Besides this, the Turks 
dug amine into the very hill on which the castle stood; the miners broke through right 
inside the castle and the Turks rushed in pell mell. Some saw this happening before 
the others did, ran down to the shore and aboard the boats. Most escaped in this 
way, but others who stayed behind were killed or captured. The castle was 
demolished. Thus all the castles fortified by the king of Navarre, the count of Brittany 
and Ear] Richard of Commwall were lost, all except Safed Castle, which the Templars 
had fortified.' 


CHAPTER 62 1247 


Tt happened now in Antioch that a people called Turcomans? rose in anger because 
of injuries done to them and began to make raids in the land of Antioch, sweeping 
across country, looting the villages and killing the peasants. These Turcomans are 
an undomesticated people who have no towns or castles but always live in tents 
made of felt and possess large flocks of animals, sheep and ewes, goats, and oxen 
and cows too. They live like shepherds and never raise any kind of crops. Ofall 
Saracens, none are more despised when it comes to fighting, and this is why the 
people of Antioch held them in contempt. For this reason they now simply went out 
to hunt them down without any order or plan, they thought so little of them. But the 
fleeing Turcomans looked back, saw their pursuers scattered about here and there, 





1. Safed is in eastern Galilee, north west of the Lake of Tiberias. For the rebuilding by the 
Templars, see De constructione castri Saphet, translated into English in H. Kennedy, 
Crusader Castles (Cambridge, 1994), pp. 190-8. Safed fell to the Muslims in 1266. 

2. Turkic tribesmen in Anatolia, defeated in a major battle by the Mongols in 1243, 





137 


and they rallied, turned back and attacked, They defeated their pursuers, killing 
some and capturing others. ‘This happened frequently, to the alarm of the people of 
Antioch and the joy of the ‘Turcomans. 

Now we shall stop talking about Antioch and the Turcomans because we must 
continue with the subject of this book and set out in order the events that occurred 
in the land of Syria. 


Book 34 CuHapTeR1 1248-50 


Louis, king of France, who had taken the cross as you heard earlier, made preparations 
to cross to Syria. One year before he himself left, he sent some of his people to the 
island of Cyprus. He did this so that they could collect supplies of food and other 
necessities; they brought fifty valuable horses, and were commanded by a valiant 
sergeant called Nicholas of Soisi.! The year after they reached Cyprus, the king left 
France to go to Aigues-Mortes. This was in the year of the Incarnation of Jesus 
Christ 1248; he landed in Cyprus on 28 September. In Marseille Earl Patrick died.’ 

The lord of Arsur® gave up the post of regent and John Fuinon* became regent; 
Odo of Tusculum® was legate. 

On 20 May 1249 the king left Limassol for Damietta, where he arrived on the 
fourth day of June. On the fifth day he forced a landing and on the sixth day the city 
of Damietta fell to him without a blow being struck. 

In Acre there was fighting between the Pisans and the Genoese. It lasted twenty- 
eight days; they shot at each other with twenty-two different engines, stone-throwers, 
trebuchets and mangonels. 

John Fuinon ceased to be regent and the lord of Arsur resumed that post. He 
made a three-year truce between the communes. 

After the fighting, a storm destroyed 72 vessels, large and small, in Acre harbour, 
also 32 ships in Damietta harbour, 10 other vessels and many more on the river. 

On 27 November the king and his host set out for Mansourah and reached it on 
22 December. On their way the Templars and the count of Artois,° who formed the 
vanguard, encountered Li Sac and the Saracen vanguard at Sharimshah and killed 
about 155 of them. Next day a good thousand Saracens were killed, captured or 
drowned after fording the stream on foot to harass the Christians. 

On 8 January the lord of Arsur and the kingdom’s forces went to demolish 
Bechsen’ anda Turcoman encampment, where they won 16,000 beasts, large and 
small, and captured the emir who commanded there. 





Or of Choisi, see Joinville, Histoire, chapters 75 and 126. 

Earl of Dunbar in Scotland. 

John of Ibelin (died 1258), son of John I (died 1236) and brother of Balian of Ibelin, lord 
of Beirut, 

This man is not otherwise known in the sources from the Latin East, which is strange if 
he was important enough to become regent. 

Odo of Chiteauroux, 

Robert (1216-49), second son of Louis VIL. 

Perhaps Beisan in Palestine, 


ag WI ade Sl ra 


SS 




















138 


On 8 February 1250 the king and his forces crossed the River Tanis, but many 
knights and other men were drowned. After that the king made a surprise attack on 
the Saracen camp and killed many of them. The army’s vanguard forced its way 
into Mansourah and out of greed the common troops looted the town. The Saracens 
saw this and came back. They killed the count of Artois, the earl of Salisbury,' 
Count Ralph of Coucy’ and many others. 

On 5 April the king and his host, having no food left, set off to go to Damietta and 
were all captured on the Sharimshah road. 

On 2 May the Saracens killed their sultan. Then the king and the lords swore a 
truce with the Saracen emirs and paid 100,000 marks of silver in ransom. The king, 
his brothers, the legate and the patriarch were released, and so were many nobles, 
knights, and other men. They reached Acre on 8 May. 

Next the king fortified the town of Acre and on St Laurence’s day? Count 
Alphonse of Poitiers,* Charles, count of Anjou’ and William, count of Flanders* left 
to cross the sea.’ Henry, king of Cyprus, married Plaisance, daughter of the prince 
of Antioch, ® in September and the Saracens released Brother William, master of the 
Hospital,’ 120 knights and about 800 others. 

The emperor Frederick died on St Lucy’s day." 


CHAPTER2 1250-54 


Conrad, king of Jerusalem, Frederick’s son lived two years, five months and fifteen 
days.'' He closely imitated his father’s wickedness and he despised and hated the 
female sex. Unstable, a drunkard and spendthrift, he was a ravisher and persecutor 
of the Church. He is said to have had young Henry, the king of England’s nephew, 
poisoned, and also his own nephew, Frederick, son of his brother, King Henry.!” 
He killed certain Minorites and other religious in different painful ways. He had the 
walls of Naples and of Capua demolished."* He had himself named emperor by the 
people in defiance of all right and law, and this at a time when William, count of 


William Longsword. 

Succeeded his father Enguerrand c, 1242. 

10 August. 

1220-70; the fifth son of Louis VIII, he married Jeanne, heiress of Toulouse. 

1226-85, the youngest son of Louis VIII. 

Of Dampierre; he inherited the county of Flanders from his mother Marguerite; died in 
1251. 


That is, to return to France. 

Bohemond V. 

William of Chateauneuf, taken at Gaza in 1244. 

10. 13 December 1250. 

ll. After succeeding his father; died 1254. 

12. Frederick Il married successively Constance of Aragon, Isabella of Jerusalem and 
Isabella, sister of Henry III of England. By Constance he had a son Henry (1216-42), 
king of the Romans; by Isabella of Jerusalem, he had Conrad; by Isabella of England he 
had another son also called Henry (1238-54). The accusation that Conrad had the 
younger Henry poisoned is also found in other sources. 

13. In 1253. 


Ces AVP Ww Nie 





139 


Holland, had been elected king and had the right to the empire. This Conrad was 
excommunicate by the authority of Pope Innocent IV until he died. In Egypt the 
sultan of Aleppo! and 30,000 mounted men were defeated; more than 2100 
Egyptians died in the battle.’ 

Henry, king of England, took the cross and forbade the great men of his land to 
make this journey.’ 

In 1251 the king of France fortified Caesarea; Peter Larcat* was made archbishop 
of Tyre; Bohemond died;° his son Bohemond® became prince and count after him. 

Then Alexander, son of the king of Scotland, married the king of England’s 
daughter.” In 1252 King Louis fortified Jaffa, and his mother, the lady Blanche, 
died. King Louis knighted Bohemond, prince of Antioch, at Jaffa. Julian, lord of 
Sidon, married the daughter of Hethoum, king of Armenia.’ 

In 1253 Saracens from Damascus appeared outside Acre. They destroyed Doc 
and Ricordane,’ took Sidon, killed 800 or more men and carried off 400 or more 
prisoners, masons and others. The king fortified Sidon once again. 

Henry, king of Cyprus, died, and so did Guy of Mimars, bishop of Paphos, 
Walter, bishop of Acre, and Nicholas Larcat, archbishop of Tyre. After him Giles 
from Damietta was elected as archbishop.'° Hethoum, king of Armenia, travelled 
to the Tartars. 

In 1254 the rebuilding of the walls of Sidon was completed and the king, went 
away to Acre. He knighted Balian of Ibelin," the lord’s son, who later married 
Plaisance, the queen of Cyprus.” 

After St Mark’s day"? the king set out from Acre with the queen and their people 
to goacross the sea. He left one hundred knights with my lord Geoffiey of Sergines,"" 
seneschal of the kingdom, to defend the kingdom of Syria. 

Martha," lady of Sidon, died on 5 June. Next day Peter of Beaune, marshal of 
the Hospital, died. 





Al-Nasir Yusuf. 

6 February 1251. 

Henry III; 6 March 1250. 

In fact Nicholas Larcat, archbishop of Tyre 1251-53. 

Bohemond V, prince of Antioch and count of Tripoli, died in January 1252. 
Bohemond VI, now aged fifteen, died 1274. 

Alexander ITI (reigned 1249-86), married Margaret, daughter of Henry III, on 26 December 


~e ADMVAwWNS 


1251. 

Son of Balian I; he married Euphemia (4.1309) daughter of King Hethoum I of Cilician 

Armenia (1226-69); unable to defend Sidon, Julian sold it to the Templars in 1260; died 

1275. 

9. Two neighbouring settlements south east of Acre, both with mills, Tall Da’uk belonging 
to the Templars and Khirbat Kurdana to the Hospitallers. There was a long-running 
dispute between the orders over water rights for the mills. 

10. Giles, a Breton, had been appointed bishop of Damietta while it was in Christian hands 
(1249-50) and was now without a see; archbishop of Tyre 1253-66. 

11. Balian of Ibelin (d.1277), son of John of Ibelin, lord of Arsur. 

12. Widow of Henry I and regent of Cyprus for her infant son, Hugh II. 

13. 25 April. 

14. See above Rothelin, chapter 59. 

15. In fact Margaret. 




















140 


On 21 May King Conrad died. Then on 8 June Robert, patriarch of Jerusalem, 
died. The patriarch Epice' landed in Acre; John of Ibelin, count of Jaffa, was regent 
of the kingdom.” 

The legate Odo bishop of Tusculum left Acre in mid-September to go across the 
sea. 

Then Bohemond, prince of Antioch, married Sibylla, daughter of Hethoum, king 
ofArmenia.’ 

Then in December Pope Innocent died,’ and was succeeded by Alexander.° 


CHAPTER3 1255-1261 


Alexander IV was made pope. He had been bishop of Ostia, and gave St Lazarus 
of Bethany with its dependencies to the Hospital of St John; also Mount Tabor.® 

In 1255 atruce was made with the lord of Damascus.” It covered territory from 
the Arsur river to Beirut. 

Cardinal Otho entered the kingdom of Apulia with Pope Alexander’s forces. 
Foggia surrendered to him, as did St Laurence of Siponto, Monte Sant’ Angelo and 
the whole coastline as far as Otranto. 

In 1256 John of Ibelin ceased to be regent and was succeeded by John of Ibelin, 
lord of Arsur. 

On 3 June, the eve of Pentecost, the patriarch of Jerusalem, Master James,* 
formerly bishop of Verdun, arrived in Acre. After St John’s day,’ Master Florent, 
consecrated bishop of Acre in Rome, reached Acre.'° 

Hugolino Bozacharia, consul of the Pisans at Acre, died. It was he who took 
prisoner the prelates on their way to the council in Rome." 

Fighting began between the Genoese and Venetians for possession of the house 
of St Sabas.!2 With help from the Pisans, the Genoese defeated the Venetians and 
took and ransacked their street right up to and in St Mark’s. 

Brother Reynald of Vichiers, master of the Temple, died. Brother Thomas Berard 
was made master after him. 


Opizo dei Fieschi, a Genoese, the Latin patriarch of Antioch, 1247-92. 

John of Ibelin, count of Jaffa (died 1266), regent 1254-6. 

Bohemond VI of Antioch and count of Tripoli ,1251-75; Sibylla, died 1290. 

7 December 1254. 

Rinaldo, count of Segni, elected as Alexander IV, died 1261. 

Alexander IV granted the Hospitallers the monastery of Mount Tabor in 1255 and the 
nunnery of St Lazarus of Bethany in 1256. Bethany itself had been lost to the Muslims 
in 1187, but anumber of its estates had remained in Christian control and so until 1256 
an abbess and nuns had managed to support themselves. 

7. This was now al-Nasir Yusuf, ruler of Aleppo (1236-60) and Damascus (1250-60). 
8. Jacques Pantaléon, patriarch of Jerusalem 1255-61; pope as Urban IV 1261-64. 

9, 24 June. 

10. Florence, bishop of Acre 1256-62; later archbishop of Arles. 

ll See above, Rothelin, chapter 37. 

12. In Acre; see Rothelin, chapter 79. 

13. Reynald, master 1250-56; Thomas, master 1256-73. 


AWN 





141 


In 1257 the Genoese agreed and promised on oath to guard and keep the lordship 
for themselves, as the Venetians and Pisans were reconciled with each other and 
had sworn an agreement against the Genoese. 

Next, Bohemond, prince of Antioch, arrived and brought his sister, Plaisance, 
queen of Cyprus, and his nephew Hugh, the queen’s son, and heir of the kingdom of 
Cyprus and of Jerusalem;' they came to Acre on the first day of February because 
of the enmity of the Temple and John of Ibelin, count of Jaffa. 

In 1258 peace was made between Prince Bohemond and the lord of Arsur who 
had been at odds with each other. And Balian, son of the lord of Arsur, freed 
Queen Plaisance, as she did him, of the marriage between them; and the queen, her 
son and the prince retumed to Tripoli. The regency of the kingdom of Jerusalem 
remained in the hands of John of Ibelin, lord of Arsur. 

Rosso della Turca, commander of the Genoese, arrived off Acre with 50 Genoese 
galleys and 4 ships; he was defeated by 40 Venetian galleys. 24 galleys were captured 
between Acre and Cayphas and a good 1700 men of Genoa were taken or killed in 
the conflict. Later an agreement was made whereby the Genoese would give up 
their tower and their street and go away to Tyre; they must not fly their flag from any 
boat in Acre harbour; they must have no court or rod in Acre.’ Then their tower 
and all the houses in their street were pulled down and the stones from the base of 
the tower and the columns were taken away to Venice. The Venetians and Pisans 
used the rest of the stones to fortify their streets. 

The Tartars took the land of the Assassins in Persia.’ John of Ibelin, lord of 
Arsur and regent of the kingdom of Jerusalem, died. 

King Conrad also died, having been reconciled after the death of his father 
Frederick4 He stormed and took Naples after it rebelled against him. 

In 1259 Brother Thomas’ of the Dominican order, bishop of Bethlehem, arrived 
in Acre as legate from the pope. Geoffrey of Sergines was regent of the kingdom 
and did much justice, having many thieves and murderers arrested and hanged, 

In 1260 the Tartars took by storm Aleppo and Harim, Hama, Homs and 
Damascus, entered the kingdom of Jerusalem and captured the city of Sidon, Later 
they were defeated by the sultan of Babylon on 3 September on the plain of Tiberias.° 

Then Bandocdar killed the sultan, who was on his way back to Babylon, and 





a 


Hugh Il of Cyprus (1253-67), still very young, and said to be the closest available heir of 
Conrad V, son of Conrad IV Hohenstaufen. The point about this shake-up in Acre Is 
that the new regime switched their support in the war of St Sabas from the Genoese to 
the Venetians, who were winning. See above, Rothelin, chapter 79. 


2. That is, they could have no court for their own nationals and no wand of office, no 
jurisdiction. 

3 At Alamut in Persia. 

4. Reconciled to the Church; see above, p. 136 where his death in May 1254 has already 
been mentioned. 

3: Thomas Agni or Thomas of Lentino, bishop of Bethlehem (1259-67), archbishop of 


Cosenza, Italy (1267-72), patriarch of Jerusalem (1272-77). 
6. At the battle of ‘Ayn Jalut, 











142 


was made sultan instead ofhim.' At this time Julian sold Sidon and Beaufort to the 
Temple, which later caused great hatred between the king of Armenia and the 
Temple. 

Then the Turcomans defeated John of Ibelin, lord of Beirut, John of Gibelet, 
marshal of the kingdom, and Brother Stephen of Sissey, marshal of the Temple, with 
all the brothers of the Acre house, of Chateau Pélerin, of Safed, and Beaufort. They 
took prisoner the lord of Beirut and the commander of the Temple, Brother Matthew 
Le Sauvage, John of Gibelet, Count Vidans and several other knights. Many others, 
mounted men and on foot, were killed or captured. The Templars lost all their 
military equipment. The lord of Beirut was later ransomed for 20,000 bezants. The 
commander of the Temple, the marshal of the kingdom, James Vidans and several 
others were also ransomed. 

In 1261 Pope Alexander died and was succeeded by Urban.’ 


CHAPTER4 1261 


Alexander was succeeded by Urban IV, born at Troyes in Champagne; he came of 
apoor family. He was bishop of Verdun and legate in Germany, then patriarch of 
Jerusalem. It was during his time that the great war between the men of Genoa and 
Venice took place in Acre and almost destroyed the town; he supported the Venetians. 

After this war Brother Thomas of Lentino, bishop of Bethlehem, arrived in Acre 
as legate, and so the patriarch, angry that this man who ought to be under him was 
preferred as legate above him, left Syria and went to the court of Rome. But he 
gave a different reason and told people that he was going in order to have Pope 
Alexander’s gift of St Lazarus of Bethany to St John’s Hospital cancelled. After the 
patriarch had reached the Roman court and stayed there some time, Pope Alexander 
died and this man was chosen as pope and given the name Urban. He was aman of 
intrepid courage, and created many cardinals‘ as soon as he was appointed. He 
gave the kingdom of Sicily and the land of Apulia to Charles, count of Anjou,’ made 
him a vicar of the church, granted the privileges and confirmed the whole matter. 
But he died before Charles went to that land, so that the business could not be 
completed during his lifetime. He also cancelled the gift of St Lazarus of Bethany 
which Pope Alexander had made to the Hospital of St John.° At Troyes he had the 
church of St James built, which was later burned. 

Balian of Arsur sold Arsur castle with all its appurtenances to the Hospital of St 
John. 


1. Baybars | of Egypt, who murdered Kutuz on 23 October 1260, reigned from 1260-77; a 
Cuman sold as a slave in Egypt, his additional name ‘al-Bunduqdari’ derived from that 
of his owner. 

As we saw above in chapter 2, Julian’s wife, Euphemia, was a member of the Armenian 
royal family. 

Urban IV 1261-64; born Jacques Pantaléon c. 1200 at Troyes, the son of a shoemaker. 
Fourteen, six of them Frenchmen. 

Charles, count of Anjou, brother of Louis IX, became king of Sicily in 1266; died 1285. 
Urban IV cancelled this gift in September 1261, less than a month after his election. 


AWW NHN 


143 


Plaisance, queen of Cyprus, died on 22 September, and Hugh of Lusignan was 
made regent of Cyprus. 

On 25 June the Griffons took Constantinople from the Latins. The Palacologos 
made himself emperor and had himself called Constantine.’ 





18, Hugh of Lusignan became regent for the child, King Hugh II, after the death of the 
boy’s mother, Queen Plaisance. He was King Hugh’s cousin, and on the boy's death 
aged 14 in 1267 he succeeded to the throne of Cyprus as Hugh III (1267-84). 

2. ‘Griffons’, a frequent and probably pejorative word for Greeks. In 1261 the Greeks of 
Nicaea seized Constantinople from the Latins who had held it since 1204 and the wiper 
of Nicaea, Michael (not Constantine) Palaeologos ruled as Emperor Michael VIII (1258- 
82). 














Index 


References to Christians, Jews, pilgrims, Saracens, Syrians, Turks, to the Bible, the Holy Land 
and to Jesus and Muhammad are too frequent to index. Almost all individuals are listed under 
their first names, not by surname or title. For different churches, see under the collective entry 
Churches, and so too for the various Gates and Streets in Jerusalem. 


Aaron 24 

Abasgia, Georgia 20n., 21 

abbey of Mount Olivet 22 

of Mount Sion 14, 19 

of St Denis, Paris 86n. 

of St Mary of Jehosaphat 14, 22 

of St Mary of the Latins 15 

of St Médard, Soissons 113 
Abraham 23, 24,27 

garden of 26 

land of, see Hebron 

Aceldama, burial ground 20, 25f. 

Acoreus, Egyptian priest 79 ff. 

Acre Iff., 4, 18, 30, 33, 39, 40, 41, 45f., 53, 55, 
58,65, 105f,, LO7fF., 112, 116f., 118, 123ff., 
127f¥.,132f., 135f., 137ff., 140f., 142 

bishop of, see Florent, Ralph of Tournai, 
Walter 

Adam 20, 23, 27 

adamantine rocks 70f. 

al-‘Adil Abu Bakr II, sultan of Egypt 44f., 46, 
57f., 125f., 127 

al-‘ Adil Sayf al-Din (Saphadin) 2, 30, 33, 34f., 
125 

Africa 77 and see Barbary, Tripoli 

Agap, son of, prophet 2, 29-33 

Aigues-Mortes 67f., 123, 137 

Aix-la-Chapelle 61f., 131 

Alamut, Persia 118, 141 

Aleppo 3f.,33 ,109f., 117, 124, 135, 141 

regent of, see Dayfa Khatun 
sultan of, see al-Nasir Yusuf 

Alexander IV, pope 140ff. 

Alexander, prince of Scotland 139 

Alexander the Great 2f., 81 ff. 

Alexandria 34, 44, 79, 87, 132 

Alice, queen of Cyprus 4, 38n., 127f., 129 


Alphonse, count of Poitiers 66, 90, 94f., 97, 
100f., 102, 104f., 108, 134, 138 
Amaury, count of Montfort 38, 46, 491, 52, 
57, 86, 123f. 
Amaury, king of Jerusalem 30n., 33, 127f, 
Amazon legend 21 
amphybane, snake 73 
Andrew of Longjumeau, papal envoy O8f,, 
109 
angels 22, 24, 25, 26 and see Gabriel 
Anjou, countess of, see Beatrice 
count of, see Charles 
Anno of Sangerhausen, master of the 
Teutonic Knights 1 13f,, 116, 118 
Anseau de I'Ile 51 
Antichrist 32, 84n. 
Antioch 4, 35, 108, 118, 136f. 
patriarch of, see Opizo 
prince of, see Bohemond V 
Bohemond VI 
Antréche, Walter of, see Waller 
Apulia, Italy 39,40, 128f., 131, 142 
al-Aqsa mosque, see Temple of Solomon 
Arabia, Arabs 22n., 30, 32, 82 
Aral Sea 63n. 
Aristeus, Alexander’s captain 83f. 
Aristotle 84f. 
Ark of the Covenant 24 
Armand of Périgord, master of the Temple 
46,133 
Armenia 108, 118 
king of, see Hethoum 
Armenians 23 
armour, see Weapons 
Arrode, see Nicholas 
Arsies, see Giles of 
Arsur castle 142 











146 


Arsur, lord of, see John of Ibelin 
river 140 
Artois, countess of, see Matilda 
count of, see Robert 
Ascalon 4, 18,30, 33, 41f., 45ff., 49, 51, 53, 
56f., 58, 65, 113, 123f., 126, 128f., 132f., 
135 
al-Ashraf Musa, sultan of Damascus 33n., 
125 
Asia (Mesopotamia) 34 
asps 73, 78 
Assassins 2, 35ff., 109, 118, 141 
lord of, see Old Man of the Mountain 
Assyria 117 
astronomy 29, 79f. 
Aswan 32 
Aubeville, see Girard of 
Augustinian canons 13n., 17,22, 37 
al-Auhad Ayyub 33n. 
Aulus, Cato’s companion 74f. 
‘Ayn Jalut, battle of 119, 141 
al-‘Aziz Uthman 33n. 


Baalbek 32, 125, 134f. 
Babel, tower of 44 
Babylon (in Mesopotamia) 44 
Babylon ( Memphis) 44, 79 
Babylon (now Cairo) 3, 28, 31, 34,44, 45, 50, 
§2, 57, 63,65, 87, 91f., 103, 106, 112, 126, 
133, 141 
sultan of, see Egypt 
Baghdad 36, 117 
caliph of 2, 36, 69, 117 and see al- 
Musta‘sim 
Baldwin of Ibelin, seneschal of Cyprus 135 
Balian I Garnier, lord of Sidon 55f., 123 
Balian of Ibelin, lord of Beirut 129f., 132 
Balian of Ibelin, son of John 139, 141f. 
‘Bandocdar’, see Rukn al-Din Baybars 
baptisms 15 
Barbary 131 
Bar-le-Duc, count of, see Henry 
barley 42 
basilisk 3, 77 
bath of Our Lord 25 
Baybars, sultan of Egypt, see Rukn al-Din 
Baybars 
beacon fires 45, 48 
Beatrice, countess of Anjou 67f., 105 
Beaufort castle 55, 126, 142 
Beaujeu, see Imbert of 


Beaumont, see John of 
Beaumont, viscount of, see Richard 
bed of Our Lady 25 
Bedouins 3, 22, 58, 88, 89f., 110, 115 
bedstead of Our Lord 25 
Beirut 28, 30, 33, 53, 140 
bishop of, see Galerand 
lord of, see Balian 
Beisan 137n. 
bells 106 
Benedictines 14, 37 
Berard, see Thomas 
Bertrand of Comps, master of the Hospital 
46 
Bethany 21, 22, 26, 140n. and see Convent 
Bethesda, pool of 22, 25 
Bethlehem 19, 26f., 112 
bishop of, see Thomas Agni 
emir of 114f. 
Bethphage 22 
bezants 18, 34, 84, 88, 104, 112, 115, 142 
Bilbeis 30, 33, 133 
Black Sea 117n. 
black-skinned people 80, 82 
Blanche, daughter of Louis IX 112 
Blanche, queen mother of France 134, 139 
blood-letting 80 
Bohemond of Botron 133 
Bohemond V, prince of Antioch 55, 66, 124, 
138f. 
Bohemond VI, prince of Antioch 116, 117, 
1394f. 
Le Bouteillier, see William 
Bove, lord of, see Robert 
Bozacharia, see Hugolino 
bread 27, 44, 48,99 
brides 15 
Brienne, see Isabella, John, Erard, Walter 
Brittany, count of, see Peter Mauclerc 
Brook Kedron, see Kedron 
brook on Egyptian border 47 
brothels 60 
buffaloes 3, 42 
bugles see Drums 
Burgundy, duke of, see Hugh IV 
Byzantium, see Constantinople 


Caesarea 111, 139 
the Great (Kayseri) 118 
Caiaphas, house of 25 





Cairo, the 6, 28,31, 34,44,45, 50, 57,87, 91f., 
103, 112 
Calabria, Italy 40 
Calvary, see Mount Calvary 
Cambyses 81 
camel market 31 
camels 2f., 30, 32, 42, 113 
Cana of Galilee 28 
candles 19, 89 
Capoccio see Pietro 
capons 48 
Capua 138 
Cato 2f., 71-79 
cats 99 = 
cattle, livestock 42ff., 47f., 99, L13f., 115, 136, 
137 
Cayphas (Haifa) 125, 141 
Celestine IV, pope 60 
cerf, snake 75 
cersydres, snakes 73 
Chaldea 117 
chalices, church furnishings 89, 103 
Champagne 142 
count of, see Theobald 
weight of 117 
chapels: 
of Mount Calvary 23 
of Our Lady’s Rest 27 
of St Helen 16 
of St James the Less 17f. 
of the Pater Noster 26 
of the Trinity 15 
Charles, count of Anjou 66ff., 94f.,97, 100f., 
102, 104f., 108, 134, 138, 142 
Charny (Quierem) see Stephen of 
Charybdis 2f., 70 
Chateau Pélerin 42, 142 
cheese 48 
cheese market 15 
chelindre, snake 73 
Cherisy, see John lord of 
Chinese, see Serez 
Chingiz Khan 62n,,. 63n. 
Chobar, river 44 
Chosroes IL, king of Persia 20n., 27 
churches: 
at Bethphage 22 
of Gethsemane 22, 26 
of Gloria in excelsis 26 
of Mount Sion 19, 25 
of Our Lady and St Peter 28 


147 


of Rest 22 
of St Anne 25 
of St Christopher 25 
of StGiles 16 
of St James in Troyes 142 
of St James of Galicia 14 
of St James of the Jacobites 15 
of St John the Evangelist 21 
of St Martin 19 
of St Mary in Bethlehem 26 
of St Mary Magdalene 22, 25 
of StMary of Jehosophat 14, 22 
of St Mary of Mount Sion 14, 25 
of St Mary of the Latins 24 
of St Mary of the Rock 28 
of St Peter 19 
of StPeter in Gallicantu 19, 25 
of St Stephen 18 
of the Ascension 26 
of the Cradle 18 
of the Holy Saviour 22 
of the Holy Sepulchre 14f,, 18f, 231,47, 
59n., 64 
of the Hospital of St John, Tripoli 124 
of the Last Supper 13f. 
of the Pater Noster 22 
of the Praetorium 25 
of the Temple of the Lord 17f, 
of Zachariah’s burial 26 
Cistercians 37 
cloth, clothing 34, 83, 89, 103 and see Silk 
cloth markets 16, 19 
cockatrice see Basilisk 
Comenie, north of Black Sea 117 
Compass 15, 23 
Conrad (Conradin), son of Conrad 116 
Conrad of Thuringia, grand master of the 
Teutonic Knights 41,46 
Conrad, son of Frederick I 61f., 116, 128, 
131, 138f.,, 140f. 
Constance, daughter of Frederick II 59 
Constance of Aragon, wife of Frederick II 
138n. 
Constantinople (Byzantium) 1,4 ,28, 143 
convent of Georgian women 20 
of St Anne 22 
of St Lazarus, Bethany 21, 140, 142 
of St Mary the Great 15 
converts to Islam 106, 112 
corn 45 
corn market 14 











148 


Cornwall, see Richard, earl of 
Corsica 39 
Coucy, see Ralph, lord of 
cows 42, 136 
Crab, sign in zodiac 80, 82 
crib and pillow of Jesus 26 
crossbowmen killed 97 
crosses, references include 87, 107, 134 
Cross, relic 1, 16, 17, 20f., 23,27, 85f. 
crucifixes 21,89, 107 
crystal 89 
Cumans 117, 142n. 
currency, see Bezants and Pence 
cykalex, snakes 74 
Cyprus 4, 39, 67f., 69, 90, 105, 132, 135, 137, 
141, 143 
king of, see Henry I, Hugh I 
queen of, see Alice, Plaisance 
seneschal of, see Baldwin 


Damascus 4, 13,27, 28, 30, 32,33, 34, 35,41, 
42f., 56, LOOF., 112, 114, 118, 125f., 135, 
139, 141 

sultan of, see al-Ashraf Musa, al-Nasir 
Yusuf, al-Salih Isma‘il 

Damietta 13, 29n., 31,34, 44, 50, 57, 68f., 85- 
92,99-108, 111, 112, 137, 139 

Daniel, abbot 24n. 

Daniel, prophet 60f. 

Daron 30, 33 

date-palm 28 

David, king of Israel 24, 44 

David, tower of 13f., 40f. 

Dayfa Khatun bint al-Adil, regent of Aleppo 
124 

deer 85 

deserts 3, 72-79, 110, 118, 126f., 133 

dipse, snake 73n., 75 

dogs 85,99, 10If. 

Dog Star 80 

Dome of the Rock, see Temple 

Dominican order 68, 89, 141 

donkey-house 18 

donkeys 18, 22,25, 42,99 

doves, pigeons 24 

dragons 3, 74, 77f. 

Dreux, see Henry, John, Peter Mauclere of 

drums, horns, tabors etc. 48, 96,97, 101 

ducks 15 


eagles 78 


ebony trees 82 

Edessa 117 

edype see dipse 

Egypt, refs. include: \ff., 4, 28, 32, 34, 44, 47- 
50, 57f., 65, 69, 70, 79ff., 82, 85-112, 118, 
125, 132f., 139 

sultan of 44 and see al-‘ Adil Abu Bakr II, 

al-Kamil Muhammad, al-Mu‘azzam Turan- 
Shah, al-Mu‘izz Aybeg, Rukn al-Din 
Baybars, al-Salih Ayyub, Sayf al-Din 
Kutuz al-Muzaffar 

elephants 74, 110 

Elias 26 

Elijah 83n. 

Elizabeth, mother of John the Baptist 27 

Eljigidei, Mongol general 68f. 

Emmaus 21,27 

emorroiz, snakes 74, 76 

England, English 13, 38, 40, 58 

Enoch 83n. 

Enrico, see Filangieri 

Enzo, son of Frederick II 60 

Erard, lord of Brienne 96 

Ethiopia 71, 80, 81, 82 

eunuchs 35, 37 

Euphemia of Armenia 139, 142n. 

Euphrates, river 44, 82 

Eve 27 

ewes 42, 136 

Exchange in Jerusalem 14, 16 

Exchanges of the Latins, of the Syrians 19 

execution of criminals 16 


Fahkr al-Din, vizier 88n., 92, 95 
al-Fa’iz Ibrahim, son of Saphadin 33n. 
Famagusta, Cyprus 135 
famine, hunger 99f., 107 
fennel 79 
fig tree 22 
Filangieri, 

Enrico 4, 131f. 

Lotario 4, 129, 132 

Riccardo 4, 40, 129, 131f. 

wives of Enrico and Riccardo 131f. 
fire 78f., 107 

holy 24 

and see Beacon fires, Greek fire 
fireships 94 
firmament 80 
fish 27, 80 
fish market 15, 19 





Flanders 2 
count of, see William of Dampierre 
flies, fleas 89 
Flood, biblical 20, 23, 84 
floods 62, 87, 88 
Florent, bishop of Acre 140 
flour 45,99 
Foggia, Apulia 140 
food supplies 40, 42, 44, 48, 57, 58, 59, 81,87, 
90, 99f.. 119, 133, 135, 137f., andsee 
Barley, bread, capons, cats, cheese, 
corn, dogs, ducks, fish, flour, fruit, hens, 
meat, oats, oil, peas and beans. pepper, 
pork, poultry, vinegar, wheat, wine 
La Forbie, battles of 3ff., 64f., 133f. 
Forez, count of, see Guiges 
France Iff., 4, 23, 27, 38, 40, 52, 55,57, 58, 60, 
66, 67, 105, 107f., 112, 123, 134, 137 
king of, see Louis, Philip Augustus 
queen mother of, see Blanche 
queen of, see Margaret 
Franciscans, see Minorites 
Frederick II Hohenstaufen 2f., 4, 13, 37ff., 39, 
40, 59ff., 62, 103f., 109, 129ff., 135, 138, 
141 
Frederick, son of Henry Hohenstaufen 138 
frogs 75 
Frohburg, marquis of 130f. 
fruit 14,28,48 


Gabriel, archangel 23f., 27 
Galerand, bishop of Beirut 66f. 
Galien, companion of Cato 78 
Galilee 112 
on Mount of Olives 25 
Sea of 27 
galleasses 135 
galleys, see Ships 
Gallicantu 19,25 
galliots 135 
ganguemeles, vessels 135 
gardens 83f., 135 and see Abraham, 
Gethsemane 
Gates in Jerusalem: 
Beautiful 24 
Golden 14, 16f., 18, 19,25 
of David 14, 18, 20, 26 
of Jehosaphat 18, 22 
of Mount Sion 19 
of St Stephen I8f,, 21, 23, 40 
of Sorrow 21 


149 


Precious L6f, 

St Lazarus postern 18 

St Mary Magalene postern 22 
Tannery postern 19,21 

Gaza 3ff.,45ff., 51, 56f., 64,86, 113, 123f, 

132f. 

Genoa, Italy 60, 61, 130, 142 

Genoese 1 16f., 137, 140f. 

Geoffrey of Sergines 85, 112, 113ff,, 139, 141 

Georgia 20f., 118 

Germain’s Pool 19f. 

Germany 4, 23, 40,61, 108, 131, 142 and see 
Conrad, Frederick II, Henry Raspe, William, 
count of Holland 

Gerold, patriarch of Jerusalem 41, 

Gethsemane, garden of 22, 26 

giants 44 

Gilbert of Sens 69 

Giles, grand commander of the Temple 951, 

Giles of Arsies 38, 46, 50 

Giles of Saumur, archbishop of Tyre 89, 149 

Girard of Aubeville 38, 46 

goats 136 

Goderiche, John 69 

gold 84, 89, 103, 118, 130 

goldsmiths, Latin, Syrian 15 

Golgotha 15,23 

Grandpré, count of, see Henry 

grazing 47f., 125 

Great Sea (Mediterranean) 82 

Greek fire 45, 93f., 103 

Greeks 4, 15, 22 and see Griffons 

Gregory of Montelongo, papal legate 60n,, 

61 

Gregory IX, pope 38, 40, 59, 60 

greyhound 85 

‘Griffons’, Greeks 6, 59, 143 

Guiges, count of Forez and Nevers 123, 127 

Guy Mauvoisin 38, 46 

Guy of Chateau-Porcien, bishop of Soissons 

103 

Guy of Mimars, bishop of Paphos 139 

Giyiik, Tartar ruler 69 

Gyon, river 83 


al-Hafiz Arslan, son of Saphadin 33n, 
Haifa, see Cayphas 
Hama 117,124, 141 

sultan of 4 and see al-Muzaffar Mahmud 
Harim 141 
hasmedites, snakes 74 











150 


Hattin 30 
heads as trophies 88, 111, 115 
Hebron (land of Abraham) 27, 112 
Henry, count of Bar-le-Duc 3, 38, 45-50, 52, 
54, 58, 86, 123f. 
Henry. count of Grandpré 38 
Henry I, king of Cyprus 66, 109, 127, 135, 
138, 139 
Henry ITI, king of England 40, 58, 66, 108, 
113, 128, 139 
Henry of Dreux, archbishop of Reims 40 
Henry Raspe of Thuringia 61f. 
Henry, son of Frederick IT and Constance 
138 
Henry, son of Frederick II and Isabella of 
England 138 
hens 15 and see Poultry 
Heraclius, Byzantine emperor 1, 17,78 
Herbert Le Sommelier 69 
hermits 22, 37 
hermoroiz see Emorroiz 
Herod, king of Israel 28 
Hethoum, king of Armenia 108, 139, 142 
hired troops 99f., 112, 116, 118, 132 
Holland, count of, see William 
Homs 4, 32, 88n., 117, 124n., 135, 141 
sultan of, see al-Mansur Ibrahim 
horns, see Drums 
horses, refs. include 2, 20,34, 41f., 46f., 60, 
74, 86, 88, 89, 91, 94F., 96, 97,99, 100, 103, 
114f., 119, 125, 137 
Hospital of Our Lady of the Germans, see 
Teutonic Knights 
Hospital of St John, Hospitallers 4, 14f., 18, 
20, 24, 51,53, 56f., 65, 89, 93f,, 95, 110, 
113f,, 115ff, 118, 123, 127f., 132f., 135, 
140, 142 
house in Acre 128 
marshal of, see Peter of Beaune 
master of 116 and see Bertrand of Comps, 
Peter of Vieille-Bride, William of 
Chateauneuf 
Hugh IV, duke of Burgundy 38, 45, 49, 57, 58, 
105, 123 
Hugh II, king of Cyprus 116, 141 
Hugh of Lusignan 143 
Hugh of Roche-Corbon, bishop of Langres 
103 
Hugolino Bozacharia 140 
humours 75, 80 


Ibelin family 4 and see Baldwin, Balian, John 

illness, disease 22, 24, 28, 39,42, 58, 61, 66, 
99, LOLE, 104, 106, 107, 130, 134 

Imbert of Beaujeu, Constable of France 90 

India 74, 82 

infirmary in Jerusalem 18 

Innocent III, pope 33 

Innocent LV, pope 4, 61f., 66f., 108, 113, 130f., 
134, 139f. 

Innocents, Holy 26 

intelligence 3, 45, 46, 48, 94, 113, 123 

interpreters 35, 68 

iron and steel 42, 45, 46, 84 

Isaac 24, 27 

Isabella of Brienne 59n., 116, 128, 138n. 

Isabella of England 138n. 

Isaiah, prophet 26 

Isidore of Seville 77 


Jacob 24,27 
Jacobites 15,22 
Jacques Pantaléon, see Urban IV 
Jaculus, snake 77 
Jaffa 42, 44,45, 53, 112, 113f., 115, 123f, 
126f., 128f., 132, 139 
count of, see John of Ibelin, Walter of 
Brienne 
James, count of Vidans 142 
James of Palestrina, cardinal 60f. 
al-Jawad Yunus 125 
Jazira 33n.,92n. 
Jeanne of Toulouse, countess of Poitiers 89, 
105 
Jehosaphat, king of Judah, tomb of 26 
and see Gate, Street, and Valley 
Jericho 26 
Jerome of Coucy, abbot of St Médard 2, 113 
Jerusalem, city and kingdom, refs. include: 
Iff., 4, 13-26, 30-34, 36, 40, 57, 58, 63f., 
103f., 105,110, 112, 116, 119f., 129, 130f., 
132, 141f 
emir of 1 13ff., 120, 127f. 
patriarch of 33, 35 and see Gerold, 
Jacques Pantaléon, Ralph of 
Merencourt, Robert, bishop of Nantes 
Jewry in Jerusalem 21f. 
Joel of Mayenne, archbishop of Reims 108 
John Ducas Vatatzes, emperor of Nicaea 59, 
109 
John Fuinon, regent 137 
John Goderiche 69 





John lord of Cherisy 96 

John of Beaumont 85 

John of Brienne 116 

John of Damietta, son of Louis IX 112 

John of Dreux, count of Macon 5, 38,41, 
123, 124 

John of Gibelet 142 

John of Ibelin, count of Jaffa 114f., 140f., 142 

John of Ibelin, lord of Arsur 65, 116, 123, 
137, 140ff. 

John of Nesle, count of Soissons 2, 102, 105, 
113,127 

John of Wirzburg, pilgrim L6n. 

John Sarrasin 3, 68f., 85-88 

John, son of Bohemond of Botron 133 

John the Baptist 24 

Joigny, count of, see William 

Joinville’s Histoire 90n., 96n., LO8n. 

Jordan, river 18, 26, 27, 112, 126 

Joseph 27 

Juba, king of Libya 71 

Judas Iscariot 19f. 

Julian, lord of Sidon 139, 142 

Julius Caesar 79-82 

Jupiter, deity 72 

Jupiter, planet 80 


al-Kamil Muhammad, sultan of Egypt33n., 
34, LO3F., 98f., 121, 125 
Kedron, brook 21, 26 
Kerak of Moab 26, 125f. 
sultan of, see al-Nasir Dawud 
Khirbat Kurdana (Ricordane) 139 
Khwarazmians 4, 62-65, 69, 132ff. 
al-Koran 92 
Kutuz, see Sayf al-Din Kutuz al-Muzaffar 


Langres, bishop of, see Hugh of Roche- 
Corbon 

Larcat, see Nicholas 

larchwood 79 

Latrun 114 

lead 84 

Lebanon 20 

Libya 3, 71, 73f., 75, 78,79, 82 

Limassol, Cyprus 67f., 69, 90, 137 

Lion’s Graveyard 20, 27 

Lion, sign in zodiac 80, 82 

lizards 73 

Lombardy, Italy 39 

Longinus 23 


ISI 


Lotario, see Filangieri 

Louis, count of Sancerre 38 

Louis LX king of France 1, 3f.,40, 66-69, 85- 
113, 134, 137ff. 

Lucan 3, 71f. 

Lyon, France 61,67, 130, 134 


Maalot, island 89, 91 

Macedon 8 1 ff. 

Macon, count of, see John 

magic, marvels 78, 79, 84f. 

Malet, see Robert 

Mansourah 91,96, 98f., 101, 1378. 

al-Mansur Ibrahim, sultan of Homs 63ff., 
127, 132f. 

Margaret of England 139 

Margaret of Sidon 139 

Margaret, queen of France 66ff,, 88, 89, 105, 
112, 134, 139 

Marly, see Matthew of 

Marrus, companion of Cato 77 

Marseille, France 2,4, 39, 58, 123, 137 

Mars, planet 80 

martyrs LO6f. 

Mary Cleophas 24 

Mary, mother of James 24 

Mary, mother of Jesus, see St Mary 

Matilda of Brabant, countess of Artois 89, 
105 

Matthew Le Sauvage 142 

Matthew of Marly 38,46, 85 

Mauclerc, see Peter 

Mauvoisin, see Guy 

meat 42, 44, 45, 48, 99, and see Food 
supplies 

meat market 16 

Mecca 32, 34, 36, 64 

Medes 117 

Mediterranean (‘Great Sea’) 78 

Memphis 44, 79, 82 

Mercury, planet 80 

Meroe, Ethiopia 82 

Mesopotamia 34, 44 

Michael Palaeologos, Byzantine emperor 
143 

miners, mining 40, 135f. 

Minorites, Franciscans 54, 89, 138 

Mirones, Alexander’s captain 83f. 

monastery of Mount Tabor 140 

monastery of Sardenay 28 

Mongols 3 and see Tartars 

















152 


Monte Sant’ Angelo, Apulia 140 

Montfort, see Amaury, Philip, Simon 

Montreal (Shawbak) 26 

Monument, aedicule 15 

moon 47, 80 

Moses 24, 37 

mosques 37n., 87, 89, and see Temple of 
Solomon (al-Aqsa mosque) 

Mountain, see Old Man of 

Mount Calvary 14f., 21,23 

Mount Etna 71 

Mount Hermon 27 

Mountjoy, Louis’ ship 68, 85 

Mount of Olives 14, 22, 26 

Mount Pilgrim 124 

Mount Sion 13f., 25 

Mount Tabor 27 and see Monastery 

al-Mu‘azzam Isa, son of Saphadin 33n. 

al-Mu‘azzam Turan-Shah, sultan of Egypt 
92, 98, 99, 100ff., 103fF., 109fFf., 138 

al-Mu‘izz Aybeg, sultan of Egypt 109n., 110, 
111f.,113,115 

mules 99 

Murcus, companion of Cato 77 

musical instruments 98 and see Drums 

al-Musta‘sim, caliph of Baghdad 117 

al-Muzzafar Ghazi, son of Saphadin 33n. 

al-Muzaffar Mahmud, sultan of Hama 5, 124 


Nablus 27, 112, 125 

Nafide, companion of Cato 76 

Nahr al-‘Auja, Jaffa river 126f. 

Nain 27 

Nanteuil, see Philip of 

Naples, Italy 138, 141 

al-Nasir Dawud of Kerak 40n., 55, 64, 125f. 

al-Nasir Yusuf, sultan of Aleppo and 
Damascus 1009ff., 113ff., L18f., 124, 134f., 
139, 140 

Navarre 38 

king of, see Theobald 

Nazareth 27 

Nebuchadnezzar 44 

Nestorian Christians 23, 29n., 69n. 

Nevelon of Basoches, bishop of Soissons 2, 
113 

Nevers, count of, see Guiges 

newts 73 

Nicholas Arrode 68 

Nicholas Larcat, archbishop of Tyre 139 

Nicholas of Soisi 137 


Nicosia, Cyprus 68 

Nile, river 3, 32, 34, 44, 70, 75, 79-85, 88, 89, 
102f., 111, 137 and see Tanis 

Nix see Qus 

Numa Pompilius, king of Rome 72 


oats 42,46 

Ocean 80f. 

Odo of Chateauroux, cardinal legate 67, 85ff. 
88f. , 103, L1OFF., 137f, 140 

Odo of Montbéliard 123, 135 

oil 28,42,45 

Old Man of the Mountain, lord of the 
Assassins 35f., 109, 118 

onager, wild ass 110 

Opizo dei Fieschi, patriarch of Antioch 140 

oriflamme, royal banner 86 

Ostia, Italy 140 

Otho, cardinal legate 140 

Otranto, Apulia 140 

Otto of St Nicholas, cardinal 60f. 

oxen 3, 42, 74, 113, 136 


pack-animals 18, 42, 48 and see Donkeys, 
Mules 

palmers 15 

palm fronds 15 

palm trees 28f., 31, 125 

Palmyra 32 

Paphos, bishop of, see Guy of Mimars 

paradise 23, 36, 44 

Paris, bishop of, see William of Auvergne 

parixas, snakes 74 

parsnip 79 

patriarch of Jerusalem 14, 18, 33,35, 37,41 

and see Gerold, Ralph, Robert 

Patriarch’s Pool 20 

Patrick, earl of Dunbar 137 

Paul, companion of Cato 77 

Pavements, upper and lower 17f., 24 

payments, ransoms, revenue, taxes 18f., 34, 
37, 59, 67,88, 89, 103, 104, 106, 110, 112, 
115, 118, 120, 126, 138, 142 

peas and beans 42 

pence 26, of Tours 44 

Pennenpié see Walter 

Pelagius, legate 29n., 31f. 

pepper 82 

Persia 17, 63,69, 81, 117, 141 

Peter Mauclerc, count of Brittany 38, 42f., 
45f., 102, 105, 123f., 127f., 136 





Peter of Beaune, marshal of the Hospital 139 

Peter of Sergines, archbishop of Tyre 41n., 
133 

Peter of Valeni 50 

Peter of Vieille-Bride, master of St John’s 
Hospital 46n., 127 

Philip II Augustus, king of France 30f., 33 

Philip of Montfort 65, 129f. 

Philip of Nanteuil 38, 46, 50, 52, 57 

pictures, images 23f., 28, 35, 89 

Piero della Vigna 130f. 

Pietro Capoccio, cardinal 62 

pigeons 24 

pigs 81, 87 

Pisa, Pisans 1 1 5ff., 137, 140f. 

Plaisance of Antioch, queen of Cyprus 109, 
116, 138f., 141, 143 

planets 29, 80 and see Jupiter, Mars, 
Mercury, Saturn, Venus 

Poissy, France 69 

Poitiers, countess of, see Jeanne 

count of, see Alphonse 

Pontius Pilate, house of 22 

Pontoise, France 66 

pope of Rome 36, 37 and see Alexander IV, 
Celestine [V, Gregory LX, Innocent III, 
Innocent IV 

Po, river 81 

pork 35 

posterns, see Gates 

‘Poulains’ 6, 108n., 116 

poultry 15, 48 

poultry market 15 

Praetorium 25 

Premonstratensians 37 

prester, snake 74, 76 

prisoners 44,45, 51ff., 56, 57f., 60, 65, LO2ff., 
LOSfF., 110, 112, 114, 135, 138f., 140 

prison in Jerusalem 22 

psalms 44 

Psylles Marmarinz, Libyans 78f. 

Publius, companion of Cato 77f. 


Qipchaq, see Cumans 
Quarantaine near Jericho 26 
Quierem see Stephen of 
Qus, Egypt 32n. 


Rachel, tomb of 26 
Ralph, bishop of Lydda 133 
Ralph, brother of William Le Bouteillier 46 


Ralph, lord of Ailli 38 

Ralph, lord of Coucy 96, 138 

Ralph of Merencourt, patriarch of Jerusalem 
33n. 

Ralph of Soissons 4, 38, 43, 127f., 129f. 

Ralph of Tournai, bishop of Acre 41n, 

Rameses II, see Sesostris 

Ramla 64 

ransoms, see Payments 

Raspe, see Henry Raspe 

Red Sea 82 

Reims, France 40 

archbishop of, see Henry of Dreux, Joel of 

Mayenne 

Reynald of Haifa 13 

Reynald of Vichiers, master of the Temple 
140 

Rhine, river 75 

Rhone, river 75, 81 

Riccardo, see Filangieri 

Richard, earl of Cornwall Iff., 4f,, 38,471, 58, 
128f., 136 

Richard I, king of England 30f,, 33, 128 

Richard, viscount of Beaumont 38, 46 

Robert, count of Artois 66ff., 9417, 97, 99, 
134, 137f. 

Robert, lord of Bove 38, 46 

Robert Malet 38, 42 

Robert, patriarch of Jerusalem 63, 65, 66, 103, 
132, 138, 140 

Roger, lord of Rosoi 96 

Rome 23, 36,40, 59, 60, 72, 78, L30f., 140, 142, 
and see Pope of 

Rosso della Turca 141 

Rukn al-Din Baybars, sultan of Egypt 4, 
118f., 141f. 

Ruknal-Din Hijawi 44, 48ff., 57, 86, 88, 123 


Sabelles, companion of Cato 75 
Saewulf, pilgrim 23n. 

Safed 63, 136, 142, 

Saffuriya, Springs of 55, 125f. 
St Anne, mother of Mary 25 
St Christopher 25 

St Denis 86 

St Helen, empress 16, 23 

St James the Great 14 
StJames the Less 17, 24, 26 
St Jerome 26, 83 

St John the Baptist 24, 27 

St John the Evangelist 14, 25 








154 


St Lazarus 26 

St Mary Magdalene 23, 24, 26 

St Mary, mother of Jesus 14, 25, 27f. 

tomb of 14, 22, 25, 26 

St Pelagia 26 

St Peter 19, 24f. 

St Sabas, house and war of 116f., 140 

St Simeon 24, 25, 26 

St Stephen 18, 23, 25 and see Church, Gate 
and Street 

St Thomas 13, 25 

Salah al-Din ibn Ayyub, Saladin 2, 13,23, 
294f., 33, 125 

al-Salih Ayyub, sultan of Egypt 63f., 65, 
60f.. 69, 88,92, 103f., 125fF., 128f, 132f., 
135 

al-Salih Isma‘il, sultan of Damascus 42, 55f., 
57, 63ff., 125fF., 128f., 132, 134f. 

Salisbury, earl of, see William 

Salutation of Mary and Elizabeth 27 

Samaritan woman 27 

Sancerre, count of, see Louis 

Sancta Sanctorum 24 

Santiago de Compostela 14n. 

Saphadin, see al-‘ Adil Sayfal-Din, 
Fahkr al-Din 

Sardenay, monastery of 28 

Sardinia 39 

king of, see Enzo 

Sarrasin, see John 

Saturn, planet 80 

Sayf al-Din Kutuz al-Muzaffar, sultan of 
Egypt 4, 118, 119f., 141. 

Scipio, companion of Cato 77f. 

scorpions 73 

scouts, see Intelligence 

seal, royal 103, 108 

Sebastea 27 

Senlis, see William Le Bouteillier of 

Sepulchre, Holy, 14, 18, 21, 23f., 34,57, 59n., 
64, 120 and see Church of 

Serez, Chinese (?) 82 

Sergines, see Geoffrey of, Peter of 

Sesostris (Rameses II) 81 

Shajar al-Durr, widow of al-Salih Ayyub 
109n. 

Sharimshah 137f. 

Shawbak, see Montreal 

sheep 42, 79,81, 136 

shepherds 26, 136 

Shinar, field of 44 


ships, shipping 30, 39, 57, 58, 60, 61, 66, 67, 
68f., 7OMF., 83, 85f., 9OFF., 94, 98F., LOOFE., 
103f., LOSf., 107, 112, 117, 123, 127, 129F., 
131f., 135f., 137, 141 

Shirkuh, Saladin’s uncle 79 

Sibylla of Armenia 140 

Sicily 39, 40, 71, 132, 142 

sick and infirm 96ff., 101 and see Illness 

Sidon 30, 33, 119, 126, 139n.,, 141f. 

lord of, see Balian, Julian 

siege engines 42, 45, 56, 58, 87,91, 93,95, 
97f., 117, 135f., 137 

silk 34, 82, 83, 89, 134 

silkworms 82 

Siloam, pool of 19, 22, 26 

silver 84, 89, 103, 118, 138 

Simon of Clermont 38 

Simon the leper 26 

Siponto, Apulia 140 

sirens 3, 70 

slaves 52,87, LO9f., 111, 113, 118 

snakes 2f.,44, 69, 73-79 

snake-venom 73-79 

snow 32, 80 

Soissons 2, 113n. 

bishop of, see Guy of Chateau-Porcien, 
Nevelon of Basoches 

count of, see John of Nesle 

John’s brother, see Ralph of 

Solomon, king of Israel 17 

Sommelier, Le, see Herbert 

songs 2f., 52f., 54f., 82 

Sonnac, see William 

southernwood 79 

Spaniards | 16f. 

spice market 14 

spies see Intelligence 

stars 2,24, 29, 32, 47,73, 84 

Stephen of Quierem or Charny 38, 50 

Stephen of Sevinghen 46 

Stephen of Sissey, marshal of the Temple 
142 

stonemasons 139 

storms see Weather 

Streets in Jerusalem: 

Covered Street 16, 19 
Ill Cooked Street 16, 19 
of David 14, 18, 19 

of Jehosaphat 21 f. 

of Mount Sion 14, 19 
of Plants 14, 16, 19 





of St Stephen 19 

of the Germans 16 

of the Latins, Arch of Judas Street 19 

of the Patriarch 14 

of the Sepulchre 16, 18f. 

Temple Street 16,21 
sun 78, 80ff. 
Syria, refs. include: 1, 4,32, 44, 52,54, 57,79, 

109f., 117, 118, 123, 130, 131, 134, 137, 139 

Syrtes, shoals 71f., 75 


tabors, see Drums 
Taddeo de Suessa 130n. 
Tall Da’uk (Doc) 139 
tamarisk 79 
Tanis castle 91 
river 91ff., 94fF., 96,99, 101, 138 
Tartars (Mongols) 62f., 69, 109, 117ff., 132, 
139, 141 
Tartary 68 
taxation, see Payments 
Templars 4, 17,51, 53, S6f., 65,89, 91, 95f., 
110, 113, 114n., 115, 118, 123f., 127f., 
132f., 136, 137, 141, 142 
grand commander of 41 and see Giles 
marshal of, see Stephen of Sissey 
master of 116 and see Armand, Reynald of 
Vichiers, Thomas Berard, William Sonnac 
Temple of Solomon (al-Aqsa mosque) I7f., 
25 
Temple of the Lord, Templum domini (Dome 
of the Rock) 14, 17f., 20, 21f., 24f., 34, 37 
Teutonic Knights 41, 51, 65, 89, 93f., 110, 
113, 115,118, 128, 132 
Grand master of, see Anno of 
Sangerhausen, Conrad of Thuringia 
Hospital in Tyre 129 
Theobald, count of Champagne and king of 
Navarre I ff., 4, 38ff., 41, 46f.,49, 51,53, 
S5ff., 67, 113, 123f., 127f., 136 
Thomas Agni or of Lentino, bishop of 
Bethlehem 141f. 
Thomas Berard, master of the Temple 140 
Thomas of Ham, constable of Tripoli 133 
Thuringia 57 and see Conrad of, Henry 
Raspe of 
Tiberias 63, 126, 135, 141 
Tiber, river 130 
tides of the sea 70, 80 
timber 20, 23, 45, 93,97, 98, 136 
timbrels, see Drums 


155 


toads 73 
tombs of patriarchs, prophet and saints 26 
tombs of the kings of Jerusalem 64 
Toron 129 
Toron des Chevaliers, Latrun 114 
Tortosa 28, 53 
Tours, archbishop of, see Joel 
pence of 44 
tree of life 83 
trees, see Date, Ebony, Fig, Palm, Timber 
Trinity, Holy 27 
Trinity, religious order 89 
Tripoli 30, 33, 53, 108, 124, 132, 141 
Tripoli, north Africa 131 
Troyes, France 142 
Tullus, companion of Cato 76 
Tunis 132 
Turan-Shah, see al-Mu‘azzam Turan-Shah 
Turcomans 4, 108, 136f., 142 
Turcopole 113 
Turkey 117 
Tuscans 72 
Tyre 4, 30,33, 41,53, 117,118, 1290, 1418, 
141 
Tyre, archbishop of, see Giles of Saumur, 
Nicholas Larcat, Peter of Sergines, William 


Urban IV, pope, Jacques Pantaléon 140, 142 


Valley of Jehosaphat 14, 19, 22, 25, 26 
Vatatzes, see John Ducas 
vegetable market 14 

Venice, Venetians 11 5ff., 140ff. 
Venus, planet 80 

Verdun 142 

Vidans, see James 

Vigna, Piero della, see Piero 
vinegar 42 

vineyards 26 

vipers 73 

volcanoes 3, 71 


wallwort 79 

Walter, bishop of Acre 139 

Walter of Antréche 90 

Walter of Brienne, ‘count of Jaffa’ 41, 46f,, 
49, 65,116, 132f. 

Walter Pennenpié, deputy governor of 
Jerusalem 129 

water supplies 19, 27f., 32,34, 62, 73f,, 791, 
82 





156 


weapons and armour, refs. include 41,42,43, — William of Cordelle 54 
46, 48£., 72, 77, 87,91, 93, 96,97, 98, 103, William of Dampierre, count of Flanders 102, 


110 105, 138 

weasel 77 William of Tyre 1,4 

weather conditions 4, 39, 66, 69ff., 71ff., 79, William, son of Bohemond of Botron 133 
80, 81,89, 90,91, 94, 131f, 135f. will, testament 66 

weddings 15 —™ wine 28, 32, 42,48, 99 

wheat 42 ‘wolf's fur’ 95 

William, aclerk 124 wolves 2, 32 

William, count of Holland 4, 62, 108, 113, 
131, 138f. 

William, count of Joigny 38 Xuan, see Aswan 


William Le Bouteillier of Senlis 38,46, 50 
William Longsword, earl of Salisbury 96, 138 
William of Auvergne, bishop of Paris 66f., 
134 Zachariah, father of John the Baptist 24, 27 
William of Chateauneuf, master of the Zachariah, prophet 24, 26 
Hospital 65, 110, 133, 138 al-Zahir Ghazi, son of Saladin 33 





