TITLE: The History Of The World, In Five Books 1736 Sir Walter Raleigh
IDENTIFIER: TheHistoryOfTheWorldInFiveBooks1736
URL: https://archive.org/download/TheHistoryOfTheWorldInFiveBooks1736/The History of the World, In Five Books 1736 Volume 1_djvu.txt


Digitized by 


Googl 


e s' 


I 










THE 



IN FIVE BOOKS. 


By Sir WALTER RALEGH, Kt. 


The Eleventh Edition, printed from a Copy revis'd by Himself. 


To which is Prefix’d, 

The LIFE of the AUTHOR, 

NEWLY COMPIL’D, 

From Materials more ample and authentick than have yet been publifh’dj 

By Mr. O L D T S. 

Alfb his TRIAL, with fome Additions: 

TOGETHER WITH 

A new and more copious Index to the whole W ork. 

In Two Volumes. 


Volume I. 


L O N D 0 N; 

Printed for G. Conyers, J. J. and P. Rnapton, D. Midwinter, A. Bettesworth 
- and C. Hitch, B. Sprint, R. Robinson, B. Motte, J. Walthoe, A. Ward 
J. Clarke, S. Birt, T. Wotton, T. Longman, H. Whitridge, H. Lintot* 
and J. and R. Tonson. . 


M D C C XXXVI. 


Digitized by LiOOQLC 

























Digitized by 




To the READER. 


T HE ufe of chronological tables is needful to all hijlories, that reach to 
any length of time ; and mojl of all, to thofe that are mojl general: f ace 
they cannot, like annals, yearly Jet down all occurrences not coherent. This 
here followings may ferve as an index to the prefent fart of this work ; pointing un¬ 
to the feveral matters, that having fallen out at one time, are far disjoined in the rela¬ 
tion. Certainly it is not per jell: neither do I think, that any can be. For howjbever the 
years of the firjl patriarchs may feem to have been well-near comjpleat \ yet m the 
reigns of the kings of Juda and Ifrael, we find many fractions, and the l aft year, or 
years, of one king reckoned aljo as the foremojl of another. The Jamc is mojl likely to 
have fallen out in many other j though not fo precifcly recorded. Hereto may be added 
the divcife and imperjecl forms of the year, which were in ufe amongfundry nations: 
catlfing a the fummer months, in proccfs of fome ages, to fall into the winter ; and fo 
breeding ext ream confufion in the reckoning of their times. Neither is it a fmall fart of 
trouble, to chufe out of Jo many, and fo utterly difagreeing computat ions, as have al¬ 
ready gotten authority, what may probably be held for truth. All this, and a great 
deal more, is to be allcdged, in excufe of fuch error as a more attentive and perfeSb 
calculator Jhall happen to find herein. It may ferve to free the book, and likewifc the 
reader (ij but oj mean judgment) from any notorious Anachronifm ; which ought to 
fuffice. The book indeed will need it, even in that regard ‘ not only for Jome errors 
oj theprefs, in the numbring of years, but for fome hafly mij-reckonings oj mine own ; 
which I dejire to have hereby reformed, in hope that the printing oj this table Jhall 
not want careful diligence. The reader, if he be not of ended with the rcjl, Jhall 
find reafon to be plcajed with this, as tending wholly to his own cafe. 

The titles over the columns, have reference to that which follows under them ; as 
will readily be conceived. Where two titles, or more, arc over the head, as ( 

there do the numbers underneath anfwer profortionably, the higher to the higher, the 
lower to the lower. For example : the walls of Jerufalem were finijlidin the 5 1 9 year 
from the building of Rome, and in the 514 from NabonalTar. In like manner it is 
to be under ft ood, That Jehofaphat began his reign in the 3774. of the Julian /Era, 
in the 30 92 of the world, and in the 99 year oj the temple. This needs not more 
illujlralion; nor indeed Jo much, to thofe that are acquainted with works of this kind. 
To avoid prolixity, I have forborn to infert thofe years, which I find notfgncd with 
fome regardable accident: as with the birth or death of Jome patriarch • the begin- 
ning of jome kings reign * fome change of government', Jome battelj ought • or the like. 
So, of the 15 years wherein t Sy lvius Capetus reigned over the Latins, I note only 
the firjl ; that is, omitting all between the 4. of Jehofaphat, wherein Capetus began, 
unto the \ 7, wherein Sylvius Aventinus fuccccded, and wherein Jehoram firjl reign¬ 
ed with Jehofaphat his father. For I thought it vain to have filled up a page with 
12 lines of idle cyphers \ numbring forth 2,5,4, 5, and Jo fill onwards, till I had 
come to the firjl of Aventinus, and 1 7 of Jehofaphat. In felting down the king), 
there is noted over the head of every one, what place he held in order of fucccffiori ‘ 
as whether he were the firjl, fecond, fifth, feventb, or fo forth, in rank, of thofe that 
reigned in his country, without notable intermption : Before the name is theJirJl year 
oj his reign ’ at the end, or foot of the name (as the jpace gtves leave) is the whole 
number oj years in which he reigned; in the fpaces f ollowing underneath arc thofe 
years of his, which were concurrent with the beginning of Jome other king , or with 
the year of any remarkable accident. IF here two numbers, or more, are found be¬ 
fore one kings name, there it is to be under flood, that the fame year belonged, not 


Digitized by 


Google oM 


a See Lib. 2% Ct \«/*. 5. §. 













To the R E A D E R. 


only to the king then beginnings but unto fome one or more of his fore-goers ; as the 
firjl year of Jehoram, king of Ifrael ‘was the fame with the Jecornl of bis brother 
Ahazia, and the twcnty-Jccond of his father Ahab. So, 'where two or three names 
are found in one fpace \ as in the 3077 year of the 'world , Zimri, Tibni, and 
Omri, it is meant , that every one of them reigned in fome part of the fame year ‘ 
which is reckoned the fecond of Ela, and the firfl of Omri. Particularly, under 
the years of the Egyptian kings, are Jet down the years of thofe Dynafties, which 
it was thought meet to infer t • as like wife, otherwhilcs, the day oj the month up¬ 
on which NabonafTar’j year began ; which , how it varied in other years , may be 
found in the place lafl above-cited. 

Concerning the /Era, or account of years , from Iphitus, who began the Olym¬ 
piads, from Rome built, from Nabonaflar, and the like, as much as was thought 
convenient hath been Juid, where due place was in the book it fclf ’ fo as it re- 
maincth only to note, that under the title of Olympiads is fet downjirfl the num¬ 
ber of the Olympiad, and beneath it the year of that Olympiad ; as that Cyrus 
began his reign in Perfia, in the fifty-fifth Olympiad, and the firfi year thereof 

Now , for that the years of the world, of the Olympiads, of Rome, of Na- 
bonalfar, and other, had not beginning in one month , but Jomc oj them in March, 
fome in !k nril, fome about Midfummer, and fome at other times ; the better to cx- 
prefs their f eu d beginnings, jome painful chronologcrs have divided them propor¬ 
tionally in their Jeveral columns \; oypofing part oj the one year to part of the other : 
not (as l have here done) cutting all over thwart with one fir ait line, as if all had 
hgun and ended at one time. But this labour have I fpared , as more troublcfome 
than lifeful; face the more part would not have apprehended the meaning, andfince 
the learned might well be without it. It will only be needful to obferve, that how- 
foever the ./Era of the Olympiads be 24. years older than that of Rome, and 
0 . 9 than that of Nabonaflar \ yet the reign oj fome king may have begun at fitch a 
time of the year, as did not Juit with this difference. But hereof I take little re¬ 
gard. The more curious will cafily find my meaning\ the vulgar will not find the 
difficulty. One familiar example may explain all. Sbfficen Elizabeth began her 
reign the 17 th of November, in the year of our lord 1 5 5 S : Jhc was crowned * 
held a parliament ; brake it up \ threw down images , and reformed many things in 
religion; all in her firfi year: yet not all in that year 1558, but the greater part 
in the year following ; whether wc begin with the firjl 6 f January, or with the i^th 
of March. The like may be otherwhilcs found in this table \ but fo, as the diff e¬ 


rence is never of a whole year. 

The Julian period, which I have placed , as the greater number, over the years of 
the world, was devifed by that honourable and excellently learned Jofeph Scaliger ; 
being accommodated to the Julian years, now in ufe among us. It confifleth of 7980 
years ; which rcfult from the multiplication of 19, a8, and 15 ; that is, of the 
cycle of the moon, the cycle of the fun, and the years of an indithon. Being di¬ 
vided by any of thefe , it leaves the number of the prefent year \ or, if no fraction 
remain, it jbews the lafl year of that cycle to be current. For example, in the 
4.4.9 S/b of this period, when was fought the great battel of Cannse, the prime, 
or golden number was 14, the cycle oj tbe fun 1 8, and confequently the domini¬ 
cal letter F, as may be found by dividing the fame number of the Julian pe¬ 
riod 44.98 , by 19, for the prime, by 28, for the cycle of the fun. This Julian 
period , after the prefent account, always exceeds the years of tbe world by 68 a. 
Be files the former ufes, and other thence redounding, it is a better char all cr of a 
year, than any other /Era (at From the beginning of the world, from the flood, 
IVom Troy taken, or the like) winch arc oj more uncertain pojhion. 

IvJrx'c I/ball not need to write, as touching the ufe or explication of tlcjc tables . 
Neither was thus much rcquijhc to fitch as are convcrfant in works oj this kind ; it 
f'■ fleet b, if hereby all le made plain enough to the vulgar. 

A 


Digitized by 


Google 








• . .! 

t ri e 


P RE FACE. 


t 

I 


I 

1 


O W unfit, artel how unworthy a choice I have made of my felf, 
to undertake a work of this mixture; mine own reafon, though 
exceeding weak,; hath ffifficiently refolved me. For had it been 
begotten then with my firft dawn of day, when the light of com¬ 
mon knowledge began to open it felf to my younger years; and 
before any wound received, either from fortune or time: I might) yet well 
have doubted, that the darknefs of age and death would have covered over 
both it and me, long before the performance. For, beginning with the crea¬ 
tion, I have proceeded with the Hiftory of .the World ; and laftly purpofed 
(fome few Tallies excepted) to confine myi dlfeonrfe, within this our renowned 
ifland of Great Britain. I confefsthat it had better forted with my difability, 
the better part of whofe times are run out iri other travels; to have fet toge¬ 
ther (as I could) the unjointed arid fcattered frame of our Englijh affairs, than 
of the univerfal: m whom had there been no other clefecl (who am all defe&) 
than the time of the day, it were, enough; the day of a tempelluous life, 
drawn on to the. very evening ere , I began. But thofe inmoll, and foul-pier¬ 
cing wounds, which are evei* aking while uncured: with the defire to fatis- 
fy thofri friends, which; I have tried by the fire of adverfity ; the former en¬ 
forcing, the latter perfwading ; have caiifed me to make my thoughts legi¬ 
ble,-and my felf the fubjeclof. every opinion^ wife or weak. 

To the world I prefent them, to which: I--am nothing indebted: neither 
have others that were (fortune changing) fped.much better in any age. For, 
profperity and adverfity have evermore tied and untied vulgar affeflions. And 
as we fee it in experience, That dogs do always bark at! thofe they know not; 
and that it is in their nature to accompany one another-in thofe clamours: fo 
is it with the inconfiderate multitude. Who,-wanting that virtue which we 
call honefiy in all men, and that efpecial gift of. God which we call charity in 
chriftian men ; condemn, without hearing ; and wound, without offence 
given; led thereunto by uncertain report only ; a which his majefly truly ac- 
knowledgeth for the author of all lyes. b Blame no man (faith Siracidesj be¬ 
fore thou have inquired the matter: underfond fir ft, and then reform right eoujly. 
Rumor , res fine lefie , fine judice , maligna , fallax ; nemour is •without •witnefs , with¬ 
out judge, malicious and decetvable. This vanity;of vulgar opinion it was, that 
gave S. jlugufiine argument to affirm, That he feared the praife of good men, 
and detelled that of the evil. . c And herein no man hath given a better rule, 
than this of Seneca ; Confcicntiec futisfacimus : nihil in famam laboremus ; fcquatur 



• Damionolog. 1 . 3. c. 1. . b Ecd. c. u. v. 7. ' Laudari a bonis timeo, & amari a malis 

deteftor. Sen. dc ira. 1.9‘. c. 22 . " . . • 

- . «■ a •• . - pel 

Digitized by Google 











» • 


* 


11 


The PREFACE. 


vel Mala , dttm bene mcrearis. Let us fatisfy our own conferences, and not trouble 
our [elves with fame : be it never fo ill, it is to be defpifed Jo we deferve well. 

For my felf, if I have in any thing ferved my country, and prifed it before 
my private : the general acceptation can yield me no other profit at this time, 
than doth a fair fun-fhine day to a fea-man after fhipwreck ; and the contra¬ 
ry, no other harm than an outragious temped after the port attained. I know 
that I loft the love of many, for my fidelity towards her, whom I mud ft ill 
honour in the duft ; though further than the defence of her excellent perfon 
I never perfecuted any man. Of thofe that did it, and by what device they 
did it: he that is the fupreme judge of all the world, hath taken the account; 
fo as for this kind of fuffering, I mud fay with Seneca, Mala opinio, bene parta , 
dcledat. 

As for other men ; if there be any that have made themfelves fathers of 
that fame, which hath been begotten for them: I can neither envy at fuch 
their purchafed glory, nor much lament mine own mifhap in that kind ; but 
content my felf to fay with Virgil , Sic vos non veins, in many particulars. 

To labour other fatisfa&ion, were an effeft of phrenzy, not of hope : fee¬ 
ing it is not truth, but opinion, that can travel the world without a pafs-port. 
For were it otherwife ; and were there not as many internal forms of the 
mind, as there are external figures of men ; there were then fome pofiibility, 
to perfwade by the mouth of one advocate, even equity alone. 

But fuch is the multiplying and extenfive virtue of dead earth, and of that 
breath-giving life which God hath caft upon flime and duft: as that among 
thofe that were, of whom we read and hear, and among thofe that are, whom 
we fee and converfe with; every one hath received a feveral picture of face, and 
every one a diverfe pi£hire of mind : every one a form apart, every one a fan¬ 
cy and cogitation differing : there being nothing wherein nature fo much tri- 
umpheth, as in diffimilitude. From whence it cometh, that there is found fo 
great diverfity of opinions; fo ftrong a contrariety of inclinations ; fo many 
natural and unnatural; wife, foolifh; manly, and cbildifh affe&ions and pafi* 
fions in mortal men. For it is not the vifible fafhion and fhape of plants, 
and of reafonable creatures, that makes the difference, of working in the one, 
and of condition in the other ; but the formal and internal. 

And though it hath pleafed God, to referve the art of reading men’s 
thoughts to himfelf : yet, as the‘fruit tells the name of the tree ; fo do the 
outward works of men (To far as their cogitations are a£led) give us whereof 
to guefs at the reft. Nay, it were not hard to exprefs the one by the other, 
very near the life \ did not craft in many, fear in the moft, and the world’s 
love in all, teach every capacity, according to the compafs it hath, to qua¬ 
lify and mask over their inward deformities for a time. Though it be alfo 
true, Nemo poteji diu perjonam flrre fittam: cito in naiurom fuam refidunt, quilus 
veritas non fubejl. No Man can long continue masked in a counterfeit behaviour : the 
things that are forced for pretences, having no ground of truth * cannot long dijfemblc 
their ovjn natures. Neither can any man (faith Plutarch ) fo change himfelf, 
but that his heart may be fometimes feen at his tongue’s end. 

In this great difeord and difl&militude of reafonable creatures, if we di¬ 
rect our felves to the multitude ; Omnis benefice rci malus judex ejl vulgus, The 
common people are evil judges of honejl things, and whofe wifdom (faith EcclcfiaJ- 
te r) is to be defpifed ; if to the better fort ; every underftanding hath a pecu~ 
liar judgment, by which it both cenfureth other men, and vaiueth it felf. 
And therefore unto* me it will not feem ftrange, though I find thefe my 
worthlefs papers torn with rats’: feeing the flothful cenfurers of all ages, 
have not fpared to tax the reverend fathers of the church, with ambition; the 

. Tevcreft 

Digitized by UU^lt 





The PREFA C E. 


fevered men to themfelves, with hypocrify; the greated lovers of juft ice, with 
popularity; and thofe of the trued valour and fortitude, with vain-glory. 
a But of thefe natures, which lie in wait to find fault, and to turn good into 
evil, feejng Solomon complained long fince : and that the very age of the 
world renders it every day after other more malicious; I mud leave the pro-' 
feflors to their eafy ways of reprehenfion, than which there is hothifig of 
more facility. 

To me it belongs in the fird part of this preface, following the common 
and approved cudom of thofe who have left the memories of time pad to 
after-ages; to give, as near as I can, the fame right to hidory which they 
have done. Yet feeing therein I (hould but borrow other men’s words; I 
will not trouble the reader with the repetition. True it is, that among ma¬ 
ny other benefits, for which it hath Seen honoured ; in this one it trumi- 
pheth over all human knowledge, that it hath given us life in our under- 
ltanding, fince the world it felf had life and beginning, even to this day: 
yea it hath triumphed over time, which, befides it, nothing but eternity 
hath triumphed over: for it hath carried our knowledge over the vad and 
devouring fpace of fo many tboufands of years, and given fo fair and pier¬ 
cing eyes to our mind; that we plainly behold living now, as if we had li¬ 
ved then, that great world, Magnt Dei J'apiens opus, the 'wife 'work ("faith 
Hermes) of a great God , as it was then, when but new to it felf. By it I fay 
it is, that we live in the very time when it was created': we behold how it 
was governed : how it was covered with Waters, and again re-peopled : how 
kings and kingdoms have flourifhed and fallen ; and for what virtue and piety 
God made profperous; and for what vice and deformity he made wretched, 
both the one and the other. And it is not the lead debt which we owe unto 
hidory, that it hath made us acquaihted with our dead ancedors ; and, out of 
the depth and darknefs of the earth, delivered us their memory and fame. 
In a word, we may gather out of hidory a policy no .lefs wife than eternal; 
by the comparifon and application of other men’s fore-paded miferies, with 
our own like errors and ill defervings. 

But it is neither of examples the mod lively inftru&ioh, nor the words of 
the wifed men, nor the terror of future torments, that haith yet fo wrought 
in our blind and dupified minds ; as to 1 make us remember, that the infi¬ 
nite eye and wifdom of God doth pierce through all our pretences; as to 
make us remember, That the judice of God doth require none other ac- 
cufer, than our own confciences: which neither the falfe beauty of our appa¬ 
rent a&ions, nor all the formality, which (to : pacify the opinions of men) 
we put on; can in any, or the lead kind, cover from his knowledge. And 
fo much did that heathen wifdom confefs, nO Way as yet qualified by the 
knowledge of a true God. If any (faith Euripides) having in his life com¬ 
mitted wickednefs, think he can hide it from the everlading gods, he thinks 
not well. 

To repeat God’s judgments in particular, upon thofe of all degrees, 
which have played with his mercies; would require a volume apart ; for 
the fea of examples hath no bottom. The marks, fet on private men, are 
with their bodies cad into the earth ; and their fortunes, written only in the 
memories of thofe that lived with them : fo as they who fucceed, and have 
not feen the fall of others, do not fear their' own faults. God’s judgments 
upon the greater and greated, have been left to poderity; fird, by thofe 
happy hands which the Holy Ghod hath guided ; and fecondly, by their 

» F.ccl. cap. ii. k Nihil faciliusi, quam reprebendere alium 

„ Digitized by VjOOQ 1C 

virtue, 








IV 


The: P R;E FiA. C E.r 


virtue, who have gathered the acts and ends of men, mighty and remarka¬ 
ble in the world. Now to point far off, and to fpeak of the converfion of 
angels into, devils for ambition : or of the greated and molt glorious: kings, 
who have gnawn the grafs of the earth with beads,- for pride and ingrati¬ 
tude towards God : or of that wife working of Pharaoh, when he flew the 
infants of /fuel, ere they had recovered their cradles: or of the policy of 
jfezebel , in covering the murder of Naboth by a trial of the Elders, ac¬ 
cording to the law ; with many thoufands of the like : what were it other, 
than to make an hopelefs proof, that far-off examples would not be left to 
the fame far-off refpe£ta, as heretofore ? For who hath not obferved, what 
labour, pra&ice, peril, bloodlhed, and cruelty, the kings and princes of the 
world have undergone, exercifed, taken on them, and committed ; to make 
themfelves and their iffues maders of the world ? And yet hath Babylon^ 
Pcrfta, Egypt, Syria, Macedon, Carthage, Rome , and the red, no fruit, flower, 
grafs, nor leaf, fpringing upon the face of the earth, of thofe feeds : No ; 
their very roots and ruins do hardly remain. Omnia quce mam hominum facia 
font, vel manu hominum evertuntur, vel Jlando & durando deficiunt ; All that the. 
hand of man can make, is either overturn d by the hand of man, ,or at length 
by /landing and continuing confumcd.' .The reafons of thofe ruins, are diverfly 
given by thofe that ground their opinions on fecond caufes. • All king¬ 
doms and dates have fallen (fay the politicians) by outward and foreign 
force, or by inward - negligence and diflenfion, or by a third caufe arifing 
from both. Others obferve. That the greated have funk down under their 
own weight; of which JL ivy hath a touch : Eo crcvit, ut magmtudino laborct 
fua: Others, That the divine providence (which Cratippus objected to 
Pornpey ) hath fet down the date and period of every edate, before; their 
fird foundation and ereftion. But hereof I will give my felf a day over 
to refolve. 

For feeing the fird, books of the following dory, have undertaken the 
difeourfe of the fird kings and kingdoms : and that, it : is impoflible for 
the fhort life of a preface, to travel after and overtake , far-off antiquity, 
and to judge of it; I will, for the prefent, examine what profit hath been 
gathered by our/ own, kings, and - their neighbour princes : who having 
beheld, both in divine and human f letters, the fuccefs of infidelity, in- 
jndice, and cruelty;, ; have (notwithdanding) planted after the fame pat¬ 
tern. ' '•/•:. ! "• ‘ , • . 

True it is, that the judgments of all men are not agreeable ; nor ('which 
is more drange) ( the affe£lion of any one .man dirred up alike with ex¬ 
amples of like nature : But every one is touched mod, with that which 
mod nearly feemeth to touch his own private; or otherwife bed futeth 
with his apprehenfion. / but the judgments of .God are for ever unchangea¬ 
ble; neither is he wearied by the Jong procefs of time, and won to give 
his blelfing in one age, to that which he hath curfed in another. Where¬ 
fore thofe that are wife, or whofe wifdom, if it be not great, yet is true 
and well grounded ; will be able to difeern the bitter fruits of irreligious 
policy, as well among thofe examples that are found in ages removed far 
from the prefent,' as in,thofe of latter times. And that it may no lefs ap¬ 
pear by evident proof, than by alfeveration,. That ill doing hath always 
been attended - with ill fuccefs ; I will here, by way of preface, run over 
fome examples, which the work enfuing hath not reached. 

Among our kings of the Norman race, we have no fooner pafled over 
the violence of the Norman conqued, than we encounter with a Angular 
and mod remarkable example of God’s judice, upon the children of Henry 

Digitized by Google* 





V 


The PREFACE; 

the firft. For that king, When both by force, craft, aiid cruelty, he had 
difpoffefs’d, over-reach’d, and laftly made blind and deftroyed his elder bro¬ 
ther Robert duke of Normandy , to make his own fdns lords of this land r 
God call them all, male and female, nephews and nieces (Aloud excepted ) 
into the bottom of the fea, with above a hundred and fifty others that at¬ 
tended them; whereof a great many were noble, and of the king dearly be¬ 
loved. 

To pafs Over the reft, till we come to Edward the fecond; it is certain, 
that after the murder of that king, the iffue of blood then made, though it 
had fome times of ftay and flopping, did again break out; and that fo of¬ 
ten, and in fuch abundance, as all our princes of the Mafctiline race ( very 
few excepted) died of the fame difeafe. And although the young years 
of Edward the third, made his knowledge of that horrible fa£t no more than 
fufpicious: yet in that he afterwards caufed his own uncle the earl of Kent 
to die, for no other offence than the defire of his brother’s redemption, whom 
the earl as then fuppofed to be living (the king making that to be trea- 
fon in his Uncle, which was indeed treafon in himfelf, had his uncle’s in¬ 
telligence been true;) this, I fay, made it manifeft, that he was not ignorant 
of what had paft, nor greatly defirous to have it otherwife; though he caufed 
Mortimer to die for the fame. 

The cruelty, the fecret and unfearchable judgmeat of God revenged, on 
the grand-child of Edward the third: and fo it fell out, even to the laft 
of that line, that in the fecond or third defcent they were all buried under 
the ruins of thofe buildings, of which the mortar had been tempered with 
innocent blood. For Richard the fecond, who faw, both his Treafurers, 
his Chancellory and his Steward , with divers others of his counsellors, fome 
of them flaughtered by the people, others in his abfence executed by his 
enemies; yet he always took himfelf for over-wife to be taught by exam¬ 
ples. The earls of Huntington and Kent, Alontague and Spencer, who thought 
thcmfelves as great politicians in thofe days, as others have done in thefe : 
hoping to pleafe the king, and to fecure themfelves, by the murder of Glo - 
cejler ; died foon after, with many other their adherents, by the like vio¬ 
lent hands; and far more fhamefully than did that duke. And as for the 
king himfelf (who in regard of many deeds, unworthy of his greatnefs, 
cannot be excufed, as the difavowing himfelf by breach of faith, charters, 
pardons, and patents) he was in the prime of his youth depofed, and mur¬ 
dered by his coufin-german and vaffal, Henry of Lane after, afterwards Henry 
the fourth. 

This king, whofe title was weak, and his obtaining the crown traiterous: 
who brake faith with the lords at his landing, protefting to intend only the 
recovery of his proper inheritance ; brake faith with Richard himfelf ; and 
brake faith with all the kingdom in parliament, to whom he fwore that the 
depofed king fhould live. After that he had enjoyed this realm fome few 
years, and in that time had been fet upon on all fides by his fubjecls, and 
never free from confpiracies and rebellions: he faw (if fouls immortal fee 
and difcern any things after the bodies death) his grand-child Henry the fixth, 
and his fon the prince, fuddenly, and without mercy, murdered ; the poffef- 
fion of the crown (for which he had caufed fo much blood to be poured 
out) transferred from his race ; and by the iffues of his enemies worn and 
enjoyed : enemies, whom by his own pra&ice he fuppofed that he had left 
no lefs powerlefs, than the fucceffion of the kingdom queftionlefs ; by en¬ 
tailing the fame upon his own iffues by parliament. And out of doubt, hu- 

b man 


Digitized by 


Google 



VI 


The PREFACE. 


man reafon coulcl have judged no otherwise, but that thefe cautious provifi- 
ons of the father, feconded by the valour and fignal victories of his fon Henry 
the fifth, had buried the hopes of every competitor, under the defpair of 
all reconqueft and recovery. I fay, that human reafon might fo have judged: 
were not this paffage of Cafaubon alfo true; Dies, hora, momentum , cvertendis 
dominatiombus fuffcit, qua: adamantinis credcbantur radicibus cjfc jimdat^e * a day , 
an hour, a moment, is enough to overturn the things , that Jcemed to have been, 
founded and rooted in adamant. 

Now for Henry the fixth, upon whom the great fiorm of his grand¬ 
father’s grievous faults fell, as it formerly had done upon Richard the grand¬ 
child of Edward: although he was generally efieemed for a gentle and inno¬ 
cent prince; yet as he refufed the daughter of Armaignac , of the houfe of 
Navarre , the greateft of the princes of France , to whom he was affianced 
( by which match he might have defended his inheritance in France ) and' 
married the daughter of Anjou ( by which he loft all that he had in France ) 
fo in condefcending to the unworthy death of his uncle of Gloccjler , the 
main and ftrong pillar of the houfe of Lancafler ; he drew on himfelf and 
this kingdom the greateft joint-lofs and dishonour, that ever it fuftained 
fince the Norman conqueft. Of whom it may truly be faid, which a coun- 
fellor of his own fpake of Henry the third of France , £>u/l cfloit un fort gentil 
p'incc ; mats fon reigne ejl advenu en une fort mauvais temps : That he vitas a very 
gentle prince ; but his reign happened in a very unfortunate Jcafon. 

It is true, that Buckingham and Suffolk were the practifers and contrivers 
of the duke’s death : Buckingham and Suffolk, becaufe the duke gave inftruc- 
tions to their authority, which otherwife under the queen bad been abfolute ; 
the queen, in refpect of her perfoiial wound, fpretaeque injuria fornne , becaufe 
Gloceflcr dilTwaded her marriage. But the fruit was anfwerable to tire 
feed ; the fuccefs to the counfel. For after the cutting down of Glouceficr, 
York grew up fo faft, as he dared to difpute his right, both by arguments 
and arms \ in which quarrel, Suffolk and Buckingham, with the greateft num¬ 
ber of their adherents, were diffolved. And although for his breach of 
oath by facrament, ifrpleafed God to ftrike down York: yet his fon the earl 
of March , following the plain path which his father had trodden out, de- 
fpoiled Henry the father, and Edward the fon, both of their lives and king¬ 
doms. And what was the end now of that politick lady the queen, other 
than this, That {he lived to behold the wretched ends of all her partakers : 
That (lie lived to look on, while her husband the king, and her only fon the 
prince, were hewen in funder; while the crown was fet on his head that 
did it. She lived to fee her felf defpoiled of her eftate, and of her move¬ 
ables : and laftly, her father, by rendring lip to the crown of France , the 
earldom of Provence and other places, for the payment of fifty thoufand 
crowns for her ranfom, to become a ftavk beggar. And this was the end of 
that fubtilty, which a Siracidcs calleth fine , but unrighteous: for other fruit 
hath it never yielded fince the world was. 

And now came it to Edward the fourth’s turn (though after many diffi¬ 
culties ) to triumph. For all the plants of Lancafter were rooted up ; one 
only earl of Richmond excepted : whom alfo he had once bought of the 
duke of Britain, but could not hold him. And yet was not this of Ed¬ 
ward fuch a plantation, as could any way promife it felf liability. For this 
Edward the king (to omit more than many of his other cruelties) beheld 
and allowed the {laughter, which Gloccjler, Dorfct, Haflmgi, and others. 


made 


Digitized by 


Googl 


e 


* Sirac. c. 19. 






The P R E F A C lL. 



made of Edward, the prince in his own prefence : of which tragical aClors, 
there was not one that efcaped the judgment of God in the fame kind. 
And he, which (befides the execution of his brother of Clarence, for none 
other offence than he himfelf had formed in {us own imagination) in- 
ftructed Glocejlcr to kill Henry the fixth, his predeceffor ; taught him alfo by 
the fame art to kill his own foils and fuccellbrs Edward and Richard. For 
thofe king r, which have fold the blood of others at a low rate ; have but made the 
market for their own enemies, to buy of theirs at the Jame p ice. 

To Edward the fourth fucceeded Richard the third, the greateft mailer in 
mifehief of all that fore-went him : who although, for the neceffity of his tra¬ 
gedy, he had more parts to play, and more to perform in his own per- 
fon, than all the reft ; yet he fo well fitted every affe&ion that play’d with 
him, as if each of them had but acted his own intereft. For he wrought 
fo cunningly upon the affections of Haflings and Buckingham , enemies to 
the queen and to all her kindred ; as he eafily allured them to condefcend, 
that Rivers and Grey, the king’s maternal uncle and half-brother, fhould 
(for the firft) be fevered from him : fecondiy, he wrought their confent 
to have them imprifoned : and laftly ( for the avoiding of future inconve¬ 
nience ) to have their heads fevered from, their bodies. And having now 
brought thofe his chief inftruments to exercife that common precept, which 
the devil hath written on every poft; namely, a To deprefs thofe whom 
they had grieved, and to deftroy thofe whom they had deprefs’d ; he urged 
that argument fo far and fo forcibly, as nothing but the death of the 
young king himfelf, and of his brother, could fafhion the conclufion. For 
he caufed it to be hammered into Buckingham's head, That whensoever the 
king, or his brother, fhould have able years to exercife their power; they 
would take a moft fevere revenge of that curelefs wrong, offered to their 
uncle and brother, Rivers and Grey . 

But this was not his manner of reafoning with Haflings, whofe fidelity to 
his mafter’s fons was without fufpeCl : and yet the devil, who never dif- 
fwades by impoffibility, taught him to try him. And fo he did. But 
when he found by Catcsby, who founded him, that he was not fordable ; 
he firft refolved to kill him fitting in council : wherein having failed with 
his fword; he fet the hangman upon him, with a weapon of more weight. 
And becanfe nothing elfe could move his appetite, he caufed his head to be 
ftricken off, before he eat his dinner. A greater judgment of God, than 
this upon Haflings, I have never obfervecl in any ftory. For the felf-fame 
day that the earl Rivers, Grey, and others, were ( without trial of law, or 
offence given ) by Haflings* s advice executed at Pomfrct: I fay, Haflings him¬ 
felf in the fame day, and (as I take it) in the fame hour, in the fame 
lawlefs manner had his head ftricken off in the Tower of London. But 
Buckingham lived a while longer ; and with an eloquent oration perfwaded 
the Londoners to elect Richard for their king. And having received the 
earldom of Hereford for reward, befides the high hope of marrying his 
daughter to the king’s only foil; after many grievous vexations of mind, 
and unfortunate attempts, being in the end betrayed and delivered up by 
bis truftieft fervant; he had his head fevered from his body at Salisbury, with¬ 
out the trouble of any of his peers. And what fuccefs bad Richard himfelf 
after all thefe mifehiefs and murders, policies and counterpolicies to chriftian 
Religion : and after fucli time, as with a moft mercilefs hand he hadpreffed 


1 Scdcra fcohribus memla. Sen. de Gem. 


out 


Digitized by LiOOQle 


viii The PREFACE. 

out the breath of his nephews and natural lords; other than the profperity 
of fo ftiort a life, as it took end, ere himfelf could well look over and difcern 
it ? The great outcry of innocent blood, obtaining at God’s hands the effu- 
flon of his; who became a fpe&acle of fhame and difhonour, both to his 
friends and enemies. 

This cruel king, Henry the feventh cut off; and was therein ( no doubt ) 
the immediate inftrument of God’s juftice. A politick prince he was, if 
ever there were any ; and who by the engine of his wifdom, beat down and 
overturned as many ftrong oppofitions, both before and after he wore the 
crown, as ever king of England did : I fay by his wifdom, becaufe as he 
ever left the reins of his affe&ions in the hands of his profit, fo he always 
weighed his undertakings by his abilities, leaving nothing more to hazard 
than fo much as cannot be denied it in all human aflions. He had well 
obferved the proceedings of Loys the eleventh, whom he followed in all 
that was royal or royaMike, but he was far more juft, and begun* not their 
proceffes, whom he hated or feared by the execution, as Loys did. 

He could never endure any mediation in rewarding his fervants, and 
therein exceeding wife; for whatfoever himfelf gave, he himfelf received 
back the thanks and the love, knowing it well that the affections of men 
(purchafed by nothing fo readily as by benefits ) were trains that better be¬ 
came great kings, than great fubje&s. On the contrary, in whatfoever he 
grieved his fubje&s, he wifely put it off on thofe, that he found fit mini- 
fters for fuch actions. Howfoever, the taking off of Stanleys head, who fet 
the crown on his, and the death of the young earl of Warwick, fon to 
George duke of Clarence , fhews, as the fuccefs alfo did, that he held fomewhat 
of the errors of his anceftors, for his poffefllon in the firft line ended in 
his grand-children, as that of Edward the third and Henry the fourth had 
done. 

Now for king Henry the eighth : if all the pi&ures and patterns of a 
mercilefs prince were loft in the world, they might all again be painted to 
the life, out of the ftory of this king. For how many fervants did he ad¬ 
vance in hafte ( but for what virtue no man could fufpefl) and with the 
change of his fancy ruined again ; no man knowing for what offence ? To 
how many others of more defert gave he abundant flowers, from whence 
to gather honey, and in the end of harveft burnt them in the hive ? How 
many wives did he cut off, and caft off, as his fancy and affe£tion changed ? 
How many princes of the blood ( whereof fome of them for age could hard¬ 
ly crawl towards the block ) with a world of others of all degrees ( of 
whom our common chronicles have kept the account ) did he execute ? Yea, 
in his very death-bed, and when he was at the point to have given his ac¬ 
count to God for the abundance of blood already fpilt : he imprifoned the 
duke of Norfolk the father, and executed the earl of Surrey the fon ; the 
one, whofe defervings he knew not how to value, having never omitted any 
thing that concerned his own honour, and the king’s fervice; the other, ne¬ 
ver having committed any thing worthy of his leaft difpleafure : the one ex¬ 
ceeding valiant and advifed; the other, no lefs valiant than learned, and of 
excellent hope. But befides the forrows which he heaped upon the father- 
lefs, and widows at home; and befides the vain enterprifes abroad, where¬ 
in it is thought that he confumed more treafure, than all our victorious kings 
did in their feveral conquefts: what caufelefs and cruel wars did he make 
upon his own nephew king yames the fifth ? What laws and wills did he 
devife, to eftablifh this kingdom in his own iffues ? Ufing his fharpeft wea¬ 
pons 


Digitized by 


Google 








i 

/ 

The PREFACE. ix 

pons to cut off, and cut down thofe branches, which fprdng from the fame 
root that himfelf did. And in the end (notwith flan ding thefe his fo many 
irreligious provifions) it pleafed God to take away all his own, without in- 
creafe; though, for themfelves in their feveral kinds, all princes of emi¬ 
nent virtue. For thefe words of Samuel to Agag, king of the Amalekttcs, 
have been verified upon many others: As thy J'word hath made other 'women 
ehildlejs: fo Jhall thy mother be cbildlefs among other •women. And that blood 
which the fame king Henry affirmed, that the cold air of Scotland had frozen 
up in the north, God hath diffufed by the fun-fhine of his grace: from 
whence his majefly now living, and long to live, is defeended. Of whom 
1 may fay it truly, that if all the malice of the world were infufed into one 
eye: yet could it not difeern in his life, even to this day, any one of thofe 
foul fpots, by which the confciences of all the fore-namea princes (in effe&) 
have been defiled; nor any drop of that innocent blood on the fword of his 
juflice, with which the mofl that forewent him, have flained both their 
hands and fame. And for this crown of England ; it may truly be avowed, 
that he hath received it even from the hand of God, and hath flayed the 
time of putting it on, howfoever he were provoked to haflen it: that he 
never took revenge of any man that fought to put him befide it: that he 
refufed the afliflance of her enemies, that wore it long, with as great glory 
as ever princefs did: that his majefly entered not by a breach, nor by blood ; 
but by the ordinary gate, which his own right fet open; and into which, by 
a general love and obedience, he was received. And howfoever his majefly’s 
preceding title to this kingdom, was preferred by many princes (witnefs the 
treaty at Cambray in the year 1559;) yet he never pleafed to difpute it, du¬ 
ring the life of that renowned lady, his predeceffor; no, notwithfland- 
ing the injury of not being declared heir, in all the time of her long 
Teign. 

Neither ought we to forget, or neglecl our thankfulnefs to God for the 
uniting of the northern parts of Britany to the fouth; to wit, of Scotland to 
England; which, though they were fevered but by fmall brooks and banks, 
yet by reafon of the long continued war, and the cruelties exercifed upon 
each other, in the affection of the nations, they were infinitely fevered. 
This, I fay, is not the leafl of God’s bleffmgs which his majefly hath 
brought with him unto this land: No, put all our petty grievances toge¬ 
ther, and heap them up to their height, they will appear but as a mole¬ 
hill, compared with the mountain of this concord. And if all the hiflo- 
rians fince then, have acknowledged the uniting of the red rofe and the 
white, for the greatefl happinefs (Chriflian religion excepted) that ever this 
kingdom received from God, certainly the peace between the two lions of 
gold and gules, and the making them one, doth by many degrees exceed 
the former; for by it, befides the fparing of our BritiJIj blood, heretofore 
and during the difference fo often and abundantly fhed, the flate of Eng¬ 
land is more affured, the kingdom more enabled to recover her ancient honour 
and rights, and by it made more invincible, than by all our former alliances, 
practices, polices and conquefls. It is true that hereof we do not yet find the 
effect. But had the duke of Parma , in the year 1 5S8, joined the army which 
he commanded, with that of Spain , and landed it on the fouth-coafl; and had 
his majefly at the fame time declared himfelf againft us in the north: it is ea- 
fy to divine what had become of the liberty of England • certainly we would 
then without murmur have bought this union at a far greater price than it 
hath fince coft us. 

Ic 


X 


The PREFACE. 

It is true, that there was never any commonweal or kingdom in the world, 
wherein no man had caufe to lament. Kings live in the world, and not 
above it. They are not infinite to examine every man’s caufe, or to relieve 
every man’s wants. And yet, in the latter (though to his own prejudice) his 
majefty hath had more companion of other men’s necellities, than of his 
own coffers. Of whom it may be faid, as of * Salomon , Dcdit Dcus Salomoni 
latitudinem Cordis: which if other men do not underhand with Pineda to be 
meant by liberality , but by latitude of knowledge ; yet may it be better fpoken 
of his majefty, than of any king that ewer England had; who, as well in di¬ 
vine as human underftanditig, hath exceeded all that forewent him, by ma¬ 
ny degrees. 

I could fay much more of the king’s majefty, without flattery, did I not 
fear the imputation of prefumption, and withal fufpect, that it might befal 
thefe papers of mine (though the lofs were little) as it did the piflures of 
queen Elizabeth , made by unskilful and common painters; which, by her own 
commandment, were knock’d in pieces and caft into the fire. For ill artifts, 
in fetting out the beauty of the external; and weak writers, in deferibing the 
virtues of the internal, do often leave to pofterity, of well-formed faces a de¬ 
formed memory ; and of the moft perfect and princely minds, a moft defective 
reprefentation. It may fuffice, and there needs no other difeourfe, if the ho- 
neft reader but compare the cruel and turbulent paflages of our former kings, 
and of other their neighbour princes (of whom for that purpofe I have in- 
ferted this brief difeourfe) with his majefty’s temperate, revengelefs, and libe¬ 
ral difpofition: I fay, that if the honeft reader weigh them juftly, and with an 
even hand; and withal, but bellow every deformed child on his true parent, 
he fhall find, that there is no man which hath fo juft caufe to complain, as the 
kinghimfelf hath. 

Now as we have told the fuccefs of the trumperies and cruelties of our own 
kings, and other great perfonages; fo we find, that God is every-where the 
fame God. And as it pleafed him to punifh the ufurpation, and unnatural 
cruelty of Henry I, and of our Edward III, in their children for many genera¬ 
tions ; fo dealt he with the fons of Loys Debonaire , the fon of Charles the great, 
or Charlemagne. For after fuch time as Debonaire of France had tom out the eyes of 
Bernard his nephew, the fon of Pcgin , the eldeft fon of Charlemagne , and heir 
of the empire, and then caufed him to die in prifon, as did our Henry to Robert 
his elder brother; there followed nothing but murders upon murders, poifon- 
ings, imprifonments, and civil war, till the whole race of that famous emperor 
was extinguifhed. 

And though Debonaire , after he had rid himfelf of his nephew by a violent 
death; and of his baftard brothers by a civil death (having inclofed them 
with fure guard, all the days of their lives, within a monaftery) held himfelf 
fecure from all oppofition : yet God raifed up againft him (which he fufpefled 
not) his own fons, to vex him, to invade him, to take him prifoner, and to 
depofe him ; his own fons, with whom (to fatisfy their ambition ) he had 
fhared his eftate, and given them crowns to wear, kingdoms to govern, 
during his own life. Yea, his eldeft fon Lothaire (for he had four, three 
by his firft wife, and one by his fecond ; to wit, Lothaire , Pcgin , Loys , and 
Charles ) made it the caufe of his depofition, that he had ufed violence to¬ 
wards his brothers and kinfmen ; and that he had fuffer’d his nephew (whom 
he might have deliver’d^ to be (lain, b eo quod, faith the text, fratribus 

* l’in. Comment, in Sal. i K. 4. * Step. Pafquicre Rechcr. 1. 5. c 1. 

♦ 

r groginqv.is I 

Digitized by vjiDOyIc / 











the PREFACE. ■ *i 


propinquis violent iam intulcrit , nepotcm fuunL, qucm ipfe hlcrarc potcraX, interfici 
pcrmijcrit: becaufe he ufed violence to his brothers arid kinfmen, and fuf- 
fered his nephew to be {lain whom he might have delivered. 

Yet did he that which few kings do; namely, repent him of his cruelty. 
For among many other things, which he performed in the general aftem- 
bly of the Hates, it follows, a Pofl bcec caitcrn palam Je errajje confeffus ; & imi - 
talus imperatoris ftheodofii exemplum, pcenilcntiam J'pontaneam fufeepit , tarn de bis, 
attain qua? in Bernarditm propiium nepotem geferat. After this he did openly con- 
fefs himfelf to have erred; and following the example of the emperor Tbco- 
dofhts, he underwent voluntary penance as well for his other offences, as for that 
which he had done againft Bernard , his own nephew. 

This he did, and it was praife-worthy. But the blood that is unjuftly fpilt> is 
not again gathered up from the ground by repentance. ■ Tbefe medicines , miniflrcdto the 
dead, have but dead rewards , ■ 

This king, as I have faid, had four fons. To Lolbaire his eldeft he gave 
the kingdom of Italy ; as Charlemagne , his father, had done to Pepin the father 
of Bernard , who was to fucceed him in the empire. To Pepin the fecond fon 
he gave the kingdom of Aquitaine : to Loys, the kingdom of Bavicr ; and to 
Charles, whom he had by a fecond wife, called yudith , the remainder of the 
kingdom of France. But this fecond wife, being a mother-in-law to the reft, 
perfwaded Debonaire to caft his fon Pepin out of Aquitaine ; thereby to greaten 
Charles : which, after the death of his fon Pepin, he profecuted to effefl, again ft 
his grand-child bearing the fame name. In the mean while, being invaded by 
his fon Leys of Bavier, he dies for grief. 

Debomire dead: Loys of Bavier, and Clmrlcs, afterwards call’d the Bald, 
and their nephew Pepin of Aquitaine, join in league againfl the emperor Lo- 
thaire, their eJdeft brother. They fight near to Auxerre the moft bloody bat¬ 
tel that ever was (truck en in France; in which, the marvellous lofs of nobility, 
and men of war, gave courage to the Saracens to invade Italy ; to the Humes, 
to fall upon Almaine ; and the Danes , to enter upon Normandy. Charles the 
Bald by treafon feizeth upon his nephew Pepin ; kills him in a cloyfter; Carlo- 
man rebels againfl his father Charles the Bald ; the father burns out the eyes 
of his fon Carloman ; Bavicr invades the emperor JLotbaire, his brother ; Lo¬ 
th care quits the empire; he is aflailed and wounded to the heart by his own 
confidence, for his rebellion againft his father and for his other cruelties, and 
dies in a monaftery. Charles the Bald, the uncle, opprefleth his nephews, the 
fons of Lotbaire, he ufurpeth the empire, to the prejudice of Lioys of Bavier, his 
elder brother; Bavicr *s armies and his fonCarloman are beaten; he dies of grief; 
and the ufurper Charles is poifoned by Zedckias a y^w, his phyfician; his fon 
Loys le Beque dies of the fame drink. Bcquc had Charles the Simple, and two 
baftards, Loys and Carloman ; they rebel againft their brother, hut the elded 
breaks his neck, the younger is (lain by a wild boar; the fon of Bavier had the 
fame ill deftiny, and brake his neck by a fill out of a window in {porting with 
his companions. Charles the Grofs becomes lord of all that the fons of Dcbo - 
nairc held in Germany, wherewith not contented, he invades Charles the Simple ; 
but being forfaken of his nobility, of his wife, and of his underllancling, he dies 
a diftra&ed beggar. Charles the Simple is held in wardfhip by Eudcs, major of 
the palace; then by Robert, the brother of Eudcs ; and, laftly, being taken by 
the earl of Vermandois, he is forced to die in the prifon of Pcron: Loys , the foil 
of Charles the Simple, breaks his neck in chafing a wolf; and of the two foils 


■ Pafq. ibidem. 


Digitized by 


Googl 


e 


of 


xU The PREFACE. 

of this Doys 9 the one dies of poifon, the other in the prifon of Orleans ; af¬ 
ter whom Hugh Capet, of another race, and a ftranger to the French , makes 
himfelf king. 

Thefe miferable ends had the iffues of Debonaire , who, after he had once 
apparelled injuftice with authority, his fons and fucceffors took up the fafhion; 
and wore that garment fo long without other provifions, as when the fame 
was torn from their fhoulders, every man defpifed them as miferable and naked 
beggars. The wretched fuccefs they had (faith a learned French-man ) (hews, 
que en cejle mort il y avoit plus du fait des hommes que de Dieu ou de la 
jujlice: That in the death of that prince, to wit, of Bernard , the fon of 
Pepin, the true heir of Charlemagne , men had more medling than either God 
or juftice had. 

But to come nearer home; it is certain that Francis I, one of the wor- 
thieft kings (except for that fa&) that ever the French-men had, did never 
enjoy himfelf, after he had commended the deftru£tion of the proteftants of 
Mirandol and Cabrieres , to the parliament of Provence ; which poor people 
were thereupon burnt, and murdered ; men, women, and children. It is true, 
that the faid king Francis repented himfelf of the fa&, and gave charge to 
Henry , his fon, to do juftice upon the murderers; threatning his fon with 
God’s judgments, if he neglected it. But this unfeafonable care of his, God 
was not pTeafed to accept for payment. For, after Henry himfelf was flain 
in fport by Montgomery , we all may remember what became of his four fons, 
Francis , Charles , Henry , and Hercules. Of which, although three of them 
became kings, and were married to beautiful and virtuous ladies; yet were 
they, one after another, caft out of the world, without flock or feed. And 
notwithftanding their fubtilty and breach of faith, with all their maffacres 
upon thofe of the religion, and great effufion of blood, the crown was fet 
upon his head, whom they all laboured to dilfolve; the proteftants remain 
more in number than ever they were, and hold to this day more ftrong cities 
than ever they had. 

Let us now fee, if God be not the fame God in Spain , as in England and 
France. Towards whom we will look no farther back than to Den Pedro 
of Caft tie : in refpe& of which prince, all the tyrants of Sicily , our Richard III, 
and the great Evan Vafdovuick of Mufcovy , were but petty ones : this Caftilian , 
of all chriftian and heathen kings, having been the moil mercilefs. For be- 
fides thofe of his own blood and nobility, which he caufed to be flain in his 
own court and chamber ; as Sancho Ruts , the great mafter of Calatrava , Ruts 
Gonfales , Alphonfo Tello , and Don John of An agon , whom he cut in pieces, and caft 
into the ftreets, denying him Chriftian burial: I fay, befides thefe, and the flaugh- 
ter of Gomes Manriques , Diego Peres , Alphonfo Gomes , and the great com¬ 
mander of Cajlile ; he made away the two infants of Arragon , his coufin-ger- 
mans, his brother Don Frederick, Don ftfohn de la Ccrdc , Albuquerque. r, Nugnes de 
Guzman , Cornel , Cabrera , Tcnono, Mendes de Toledo^ Gutticre his great treafurer, 
and all his kindred; and a world of others. Neither did he fpare his twoyoungeft 
brothers, innocent princes : whom, after he had kept in clofe prifon from their 
cradles, till one of them had lived fixteen years, and the other fourteen, he 
murdered them there. Nay, he fpared not his mother, nor his wife, the lady 
Blanch of Bourbon. Laftly, as he caufed the archbifhop of Toledo , and the 
dean, to be killed, of purpofe to enjoy their treafures; fo did he put to death 
a Mahomet Aben Alhamar, king of Barbary , with thirty-feven of his nobility, 
that came unto him for fuccour, with a great fum of money, to levy (by his 

• ITift. of Spain. 


Digitized by favour) 













The PREFACE. 

favour) fome companies of foldiers to return withal. Yea, he would needs 
aflift the hangman with his own hand, in the execution of the old king; 
infomuch as pope Urban declared him an enemy both to God and man. But 
what was his end? Having been formerly beaten out of his kingdom, and re- 
eftablifhed by the valour of the Englifh nation, led by the famous duke of 
Lancajler: he was dabbed to death by his younger brother the earl of AJlra- 
mara , who difpofleffed all his children of their inheritance ; which, but 
for the father’s injuflice and cruelty, had never been in danger of any fuch 
thing. , 

If we can parallel any man with this king, it muft be duke John of Bur- 
goignc; who, after his traiterous murder of the duke of Orleans , caufed the 
conftable of Armagnac, the chancellor of France , the bifhops of Con/lancc , 
Bayeux , Eurcux , Senlis, Saintes , and other religious and reverend church-men, 
the earl of gran Pre , Hector of Chartres , and (in effect) all the officers of 
juft ice, of the chamber of accompis, treafury and requeft (with fixteen hun¬ 
dred others to accompany, them) to be fuddenly and violently {lain. Hereby, 
while he hoped to govern, and to have mattered France: he was foon after 
ftrucken with an axe in the face, in the prefence of the a Dauphin ; and, with¬ 
out any leifure to repent his mifdeeds, prefently flain. Thefe were the lovers 
of other men’s miferies, and mifery found them out. 

Now for the kings of Spain, which lived both with Henry VII, Henry VIII, 
queen Mary, and queen Elizabeth ; Ferdinand of Arragon was the firft; and the 
firft that laid the foundation of the pre Cent Auflrian greatnefs. For this king did 
not content himfelf to hold Arragon by the ufurpation of his anceftor, and to 
fallen thereunto the kingdom of Cajhle and Leon , which IJabcl his wife held 
by ftrong hand, and his afliftance, from her own niece, the daughter of the 
laft Henry ; but molt cruelly and craftily, without all colour or pretence of 
right: he alfo call his own niece out of the kingdom of Navarre ; and, con¬ 
trary to faith, and the promife that he made to reftore it, fortified the beft 
places, and fo wafted the reft, as there was no means left for any army to in¬ 
vade it. This king, I fay, that betrayed alfo Ferdinand a nd Frederick, kings of 
Naples , princes of his own blood, and by double alliance tied unto him, fold 
them unto the French ; and with the fame army, fent for their fuccour under 
Gonfalvo , call them out; and (hared their kingdom with the French , whom 
afterwards he moft fhamefully betrayed. 

This wife and politick king, who fold heaven and his own honour, to make 
hisfon, the prince of Spain , the greateft monarch of the world, faw him die 
in the flower of his years; and his wife, great with child with her untimely 
birth, at once and together buried. His eldeft daughter, married unto Don 
Alphonfoj prince of Portugal , beheld her firft husband break his neck in her 
prefence ; and, being with child by her fecond, died with it. A juft judgment 
of God upon the race of 'John , father to Alphonjo , now wholly extinguifhed, 
who had not only left many difconfolate mothers in Portugal , by the (laughter 
of their children; but had formerly flain, with his own hand, the fon and 
only comfort of his aunt, the lady Beatrix , dutchefs of Vifeo. The fecond 
daughter of Ferdinand , married, to the archduke Pbtlip , turned fool, and 
died mad and deprived. His third daughter, bellowed on king Henry VIII, 
he faw caft off by the king, the mother of many troubles in England ; and the 
mother of a daughter, that, in her unhappy zeal, fhed a world of innocent 
blood; loft Calais to the French ; and died heart-broken without increafe. 


3 French Invent, in Anno 14 tS. 

d 


•Digitized by 


Googl 


To 


e 


xiv The P R E F A C E. 

To conclude, all thofe kingdoms of Ferdinand, have mailers of a new name * 

and, by a ftrange family, are governed and poffefs’d.. 

Charles V, fon to the archduke Philip in whole vain enterprises upon the 
French , upon the Almatnes , and other princes and Hates, fo many multitudes 
of Chriftian foldiers, and renowned captains, were confumed, who gave the 
while a moft perilous entrance to the Turks , and Suffered Rhodes , the key of 
chriflendom, to be taken, was, in conclufion, chafed out of France; and, in 
a Sort, out of Germany ; and left to the French , Metz , 7 W, and Verdun , places 
belonging to the empire ; Hole away from Infpruck , and fealed the Alps by 
torch-light, purfued by duke Maurice ; having hoped to fwallow up all thofe 
dominions, wherein he concocted nothing Save his own difgraces. And 
having, after the daughter of fo many millions of men, no one foot of ground 
in either, a he crept into a cloyfter, and made himfelf a penfioner of an hun¬ 
dred thoufand duckets by the year to his fon Philip , from whom he very {low¬ 
ly received his mean and ordinary maintenance. 

His fon again, king Philip II, not fatisfied to hold Holland and Zealand 
(wrefted by his anceftors from jayuclinc , their lawful princefs) and to poflefc 
in peace many other provinces of the Netherlands , perfwaded by that mifehie- 
vous cardinal of Granvil , and other Romijh tyrants; not only forgot the moft 
remarkable Services done to his father the emperor, by the nobility of thofe 
countries; not only forgot the prefent made him upon his entry of forty 
millions of florins, called the b Noval aid ; nor only forgot that he had twice 
moft folemnly Sworn to the general llates, to maintain and preferve their an¬ 
cient rights, privileges, and cuftoms, which they had enjoyed under their 
thirty-five earls before him, conditional princes of thofe provinces; but be¬ 
ginning firft to conftrain them, and enthral them by the Spanijl) inquifttion, 
and then to impoverifh them by many new devifed and intolerable imposi¬ 
tions : he, laftly, by ftrong hand and main force, attempted to make him¬ 
felf not only an abfolute monarch over them, like unto the kings and fove- 
raigns of England and France ; but, TWMike, to tread under his feet all their 
national and fundamental laws, privileges, and ancient rights. To effect 
which, after he had eafily obtained from the pope a difpenfation of his for¬ 
mer oaths ('which difpenfation was the true caufe of the war and blood fhed 
fince then;) and, after he had tried what he could perform, by dividing of 
their own nobility under the government of his bafe After Margaret of Aujlria ., • 
and the cardinal Granvil , he employed that moft mercilefs Spaniard Don Fer¬ 
dinand Alvarez of Toledo , duke of Alva , followed with a powerful army of 
ftrange nations, by whom he firft flaughter’d that renowned captain the earl 
of Egmont , prince of Gavare ; and Philip Montmorency , earl of Horn , made 
away Montague , and the marquis of Bergues ; and cut off in thofe fix years 
(that Alva governed) of gentlemen and others, eighteen thoufand and fix 
hundred, by the hands of the hangman, befides all his other barbarous 
murders and maffacres. By whofe miniftry, when he could not yet bring his 
affairs to their wifhed ends, having it in his hope to work that by fubtilty, 
which he had failed to perform by force: he fent for governor his baftard 
brother Don yohn of Aujlria , a prince of great hope, and very gracious to 
thofe people. But he, ufing the fame papal advantage that his predeceffors 
had done, made no fcruple to take oath upon the Holy Evangelifts, to obferve 
the treaty made with the general Hates; and to difeharge the Lo-vu Countries 
of all Spaniards , and other ftrangers, therein garrifoned. Towards whofe pay 

* Nether. Hift. 1 . 7. p. 313. * Hiftory of the Netherlands. 

and 


Digitized by kjOOQle 







The PREFACE. 


XV 


and pafsport, the Netherlands drained themfelves to make payment of fix' 
hundred thoufand pounds. Which monies received, he fuddenly furprifed 
the citadels of Antwerp and Namure , not doubting (being unfufpecled by 
the hates) to have pofleffed himfelf of all the mattering places of thofe pro¬ 
vinces : for whatfoever he overtly pretended, he held in fecret a contrary 
council with the fecretary EJcovedo , Rhodus , Barlcmont , and others, minifters 
of the Spani/h tyranny, formerly praclifed, and now again intended. But let 
us now fee the effe£t and end of this perjury, and of all other the duke’s 
cruelties. Firfl for himfelf, after he had murdered fo many of the nobility, 
executed (as aforefaid) eighteen thoufand fix hundred in fix years ; and moll 
cruelly flain man, woman and child, in Mccklin , Zutphcn, Nacrdcn , and other 
places; and after he had confumed thirty-fix millions of treafure in fix years, 
notwithflanding his Spanijh vaunt, that he would fuffocate the Hollanders in 
their own butter-barrels and milk-tubs, he departed the country no otherwife 
accompanied, than with the curfe and deteflation of the whole nation, leaving 
his mailer’s affairs in a ten-fold worfe ellate, than he found them at his firfl 
arrival. For Don John , whofe haughty conceit of himfelf, overcame the 
greateft difficulties; though his judgment were over-weak to manage the lealt; 
what wonders did his fearful breach of faith bring forth, other than the king 
his brother’s jealoufy and dillruft, together with the untimely death that 
feized him, even in the flower of his youth. And for EJcovedo' s fharp-witted 
fecretary, who, in his own imagination, had conquered for his mailer both 
England and the Netherlands ; being fent into Spain upon fome new project, 
he was at the firll arrival, and before any accefs to the king, by certain ruffians, 
appointed by Anthony Peres , (though by better warrant than his) rudely mur¬ 
dered in his own lodging. Laltly, if we conlider the king of Spains car- 
riagey-his-cpuncil, and fuccefs in this bulinefs; there is nothing left to the me¬ 
mory of man more remarkable. For he hath paid above an hundred millions, 
and the lives of above four hundred thoufand Chrillians, for the Jofs of all thofe 
coantries; which, for beauty, gave place to none; and, for revenue, did equal 
his IVefl * Indies \ for the lofs of a nation, which moll willingly obeyed him; 
and who at this day, after forty years wars, are, in defpite of all his forces, 
become a free ellate, and far more rich and powerful than they were, when he 
firll began to impoverifh and opprefs them. 

Oh, by what plots, by what forfwearings, betrayings, oppreffions, imprri 
fonments, tortures, poifonings, and under what reafons of (late and politic 
fubtilty, have thefe fore-named kings, both ftrangers, and of our own nation, 
pulled the vengeance of God upon themfelves, upon theirs, and upon their 
prudent minilters! and in the end have brought thofe things to pifs for their 
enemies, and feen an effe£l fo direflly contrary to all their own counfels 
and cruelties; as the one could never have hoped for themfelves; and the 
other never have fucceeded, if no fuch oppofition had ever been made. God 
hath faid it and performed it ever : Perdam Japientiam fapientum , I will dcflroy 
the wifdom of the u r ife. 

But what of all this? And to what end do we lay before the eyes of the 
living, the fall and fortunes of the dead: feeing the world is the fame that it 
hath been ; and the children of the prefent time will Hill obey their parents ? 
It is in the prefent time, that all the wits of the world are exercifed. To 
hold the times we have, we hold all things lawful; and either we hope to hold 
them for ever, or at leafl we hope, there is nothing after them to be hoped 
for. For, as we are content to forget our own experience, and to counterfeit 
the ignorance of our own knowledge, in all things that concern our felves; 

or 


Digitized by 


Goog[< 



XVI 


The PREFACE. 


or perfwade our felves, that God hath given us letters patent, to purfue all our 
irreligious affe&ions with a non objlante : fo we neither look behind us what 
hath been, nor before us what (hall be. It is true, that the quantity which we 
have, is of the body: we are by it joined to the earth; we are compounded 
of earth; and we inhabit it. The heavens are high, far off, and unfearchable; 
we have fenfe and feeling of corporal things, and of eternal grace, but by re¬ 
velation. No marvel then that our thoughts are alfo earthly : and it is lefs to 
be wondered at, that the words of worthlefs men cannot cleanfe them; feeing 
their do£trine and inftru&ion, whofe underflanding the Holy Ghoft vouch- 
fafed to inhabit, have not performed it. For as the prophet Ifatah cried out 
long agone, Lord , who hath believed our reports ? And out of doubt, as Ifaiah 
complained then for himfelf and others; fo are they lefs believed every day af¬ 
ter other. For although religion, and the truth thereof, be in every man’s 
mouth, yea, in the difeourfe of every woman, who, for the greatefl number, 
are but a Idols of vanity, what is it other than an univerfal diflimulation ? We 
profefs that we know God, but by works we deny him. For beatitude doth 
not ccmftft in the knowledge of divine things, but in a divine life; for the 
devils know them better than men. Bcatitudo non efl divinorum eognitio , fed vita 
divina. And certainly there is nothing more to be admired, and more to be 
lamented, than the private contention, the paflionate difpute, the perfonal ha¬ 
tred, and the perpetual war, maflacres, and murders, for religion among Chri- 
Jlians ; the difeourfe whereof hath fo occupied the world, as it hath well-near 
driven the praffice thereof out of the world. Who would not foon refolve, that 
took knowledge but of the religious difputations among men, and not of their 
lives which difpute, that there were no other thing in their deftres r than the 
purchafe of heaven; and that the world it felf were but ufed as it ought, and 
as an inn or place, wherein to repofe our felves in palling on towards our ce- 
leftial habitation ? When, on the contrary, befides the difeourfe and outward 
profeflion, the foul hath nothing but hypocrify. We are all (in effect) become 
comedians in religion; and while we a£t in gefture and voice, divine virtues, 
in all the courfe of our lives we renounce our perfons, and the parts we play. 
For charity, juft ice, and truth, have but their being in terms , like thephilofo- 
phers Materia prima. 

Neither is it that wifdom, which Salomon defineth to be the SchooLmiJlrcfs of 
the knowledge of God , that hath valuation in the world : it is enough that we 
give it our good word ; but the fame which is altogether exercifed in the fer- 
vice of the world, as the gathering of riches chiefly, by which we purchafe and 
obtain honour, with the many refpe&s which attend it. 

Thefe indeed be the marks, which (when we have bent our confciences to 
the higheft) we all (hoot at. For the obtaining whereof it is true, that the 
care is our own ; the care our own in this life, the peril our own in the future: 
and yet when we have gathered the greatefl abundance, we our felves enjoy 
no more thereof, than fo much as belongs to one man. For the red ; He that 
had the greatefl wifdom, and the greatefl ability that ever man had, hath told 
us that this is the ufe: b fVhen goods increafe (Jaith Salomon) they alfo increafe 
that cat them ; and what good cometb to the owners , but the beholding thereof with 
their eyes? As for thofe that devour the reft, and follow us in fair weather; 
they again forfake us in the firft temped of misfortune, and fleer away before 
the fea and wind; leaving us to the malice of our deftinies. Of thefe, among 
a thoufand examples, I will take but one out of mafter Dannct , and ufe bis 


* Paul to Titus, (b. i. ver. io. b Ecclcf. v. to. 


own 




Digitized by 


Googl 


c 










The PREFACE. xvii 

own words: fPbtlft the emperor Charles the fifth, after the rejlgnation of his eftates, 
fayed at Vlufhing for windy to carry him bis laft journey into Spain ; he conferred 
on a time with Seldius, bis brother Ferdinand r ambafjadour, till the deep of the 
night. And when Seldius Jhould departy the emperor calling for Jome of bis fer- 
vantSy and no body anfwering him (for thofe that attended upon him, were J'ome 
gone to their lodgings, and all the reft afleep) the emperor took up the candle himfclf, 
and went before Seldius to light him down the ft airs ; and fo did, notwithftanding 
all the refiftance that Seldius could make. And when he was come to the flairs 
foot, hefeud thus unto him : Seldius, remember this of Charles the emperor , when 
he jhall be dead and gone, That him, whom thou haft known in thy time invironed 
with fo many mighty armies, and guards of foldiers , thou haft alfo Jeen alone, aban¬ 
doned, and forfaken, yea even of his own domeftick fervants, Sac. 1 acknowledge this 
change of jortune to proceed from the mighty hand of God ; which I will by no means 
go about to withjland. 

But you will fay that there are fome things elfe, and of greater regard 
than the former. The firft, is the reverend refpeft that is held of great 
men, and the honour done unto them by all forts of people. And it is true 
indeed: provided, that an inward love for their juftice and piety* accom¬ 
pany the outward worftiip given to their places and power ; without which 
what is the applaufe of the multitude, but as the outcry of an herd of ani¬ 
mals , who, without the knowledge of any true caufe, pleafe themfelves with 
the noife they make ? For feeing it is a thing exceeding rare, to diftinguifh 
virtue and fortune : the moft impious (if profperousj have ever been applau¬ 
ded; the moil virtuous (if unprofperous) have ever been defpifed. For as 
fortune’s man rides the horfe, fo fortune her felf rides the man. Who, 
when he is defeended and on foot: the man taken from his beaft, and for¬ 
tune from the man; a bafe groom beats the one, and a bitter contempt fpurns 
at the other, with equal liberty. 

The fecond, is the greatning of our pofterity, and the contemplation of 
their glory whom we leave behind us. Certainly, of thofe which conceive 
that their fouls departed take any comfort therein, it may truly be faid of 
them, which Laftantius fpake of certain heathen philofophers, a quod fapientes 
funt in re flulta. For when our fpirits immortal fhall be once feparate from 
our mortal bodies, and difpofed by God : there remaineth ill them no other 
joy of their pofterity which fucceed, than there doth of pride in that {tone, 
which fleepeth in the wall of a king’s palace ; nor any other forrow for 
their poverty, than there doth of (hame in that, which beareth up a beg¬ 
gar’s cottage. b Nefciunt mortui , etiam fanfii, quid agunt vivi, etiam eorum filu ; 
quia aninue mortuorum rebus viventium non interfunt. The dead, though holy, know 
nothing of the living, no, not of their own children ; for the fouls of thofe departed, 
are not converfant with their affairs that remain. And if we doubt of Saint Au- 
guflinc, we cannot of Job ; who tells us, c That we knew not if our fons JJ:aU be 
honourable: neither jhall we tender ft and conceiving them , whether they Jhall be of low 
degree. Which Ecclefiaftes alfo confirmeth : d Man walketh in a Jl:adow, and dif- 
quieteth himfelf in vain : he heapetb up riches , and cannot tell who Jhall gather them. 
The living ( faith he ) know that they jhall die , but the dead know nothing at all. 
For who can jhew unto man , what jhall be after him under the fun ? He therefore 
accounteth it among the reft of worldly vanities, to labour and travel in the 
yrorld, not knowing after death, whether a fool or a wife man fhould en¬ 
joy the fruits thereof: which made me (faith he) endeavour even to abhor mine 

• Latt. de falfa fap. 3. c. 29. * S. Aug. de cura pro mort. 

9 - S' 1 . 2. t 


* Job 1. 14, 11. 


a Ecclcf. 


Digitized by 


Goog[( 


evun 


e 


xviii The PREFACE. 


own labour. And what can other men hope, whofe bleffed or forrowful 
eflates after death God hath referved ? man’s knowledge lying but in his 
hope ; feeing the prophet Efay confeffeth of the elect, a That Abraham is 
ignorant of us, and IJrael knows us not. But hereof we are allured, that the 
long and dark night of death : of whofe following day we fhall never be¬ 
hold the dawn (till his return that hath triumphed over it) fhall cover us 
over, till the world be no more. After which, and when we fhall again re¬ 
ceive organs glorified and incorruptible, the feats of angelical affections : in 
fo great admiration fhall the fouls of the bleffed be exercifed, as they can¬ 
not admit the mixture of any fecond or lefs joy ; nor any return of forgone 
and mortal affe£tion, towards friends, kindred or children. Of whom whe¬ 
ther we fhall retain any particular knowledge, or in any fort diflinguifh them: 
no man can affure us; and the wifeft men doubt. But on the contrary ; if a 
divine life retain any of thofe faculties, which the foul exercifed in a mor¬ 
tal body ; we fhall not at that time fo divide the joys of heaven, as to cart 
any part thereof on the memory of their felicities which remain in the 
world. No ; be their eflates greater than ever the world gave, we fhall ( by 
the difference known unto us) even detefl their confideration. And what- 
foever comfort fhall remain of all forepart, the fame will confift in the cha¬ 
rity, which we exercifed living : and in that piety, juflice, and firm faith, 
for which it pleafed the infinite mercy of God to accept of us, and receive 
us. Shall we therefore value honour and riches at nothing, and neglecl 
them, as unnecelfary and vain ? Certainly no. For that infinite wifdom of 
God, which hath diftinguifhed his angels by degrees : which hath given 
greater and lefs light and beauty to heavenly bodies: which hath made dif¬ 
ferences between beads and birds : created the eagle and the fly, the cedar 
and the fhrub : and among ftones, given the faired tincture to the ruby, 
and the quickeft light to the diamond ; hath alfo ordained kings, dukes or 
leaders of the people, magirtrates, judges, and other degrees among men. 
And as honour is left to poflerity, for a mark and enfign of the virtue and 
underrtandi.ig of their ancertors: fo, feeing b Siracidcs preferreth death before 
beggary : and that titles, without proportionable eflates, fall under the mi- 
ferable fuccour of other men’s pity; I account it foolifhnefs to condemn fuch 
a care : provided, that worldly goods be well gotten, and that we raife not 
our own buildings out of other men’s ruins. For as c Plato doth firft prefer the 
perfection of bodily health; fecondly, the form and beauty ; and thirdly, DP 
vilias nulla jraudc qudcfitas : fo Jeremy cries, d fVoeunto them that ere<% their houfes 
by unrightcoujncfs , and their chambers without equity ; and Efay the fame, e /Vce to 
thojc that I foil, ami were not [polled. And it was out of the true wifdom of 
Solomon , that he commandeth us, f not to drink the wine oj violence ; not to lie 
in wait for blood ; and not to Jwallow them up alive , whofe riches we covet: for fuch 
arc the ways (faith he ) of every one that is greedy of gain. 

And if we could afford our felves but fo much leifure as to confider ; 
That he, which hath mod in the world, hath, in refpeCl of the world, no¬ 
thing in it: and that he, which hath the longert time lent him to live in it, 
hath yet no proportion at all therein, fetting it either by that which is part 
when we were not, or by that time which is to come in which we fhall a- 
bidc for ever: I fay, if both, to wit our proportion in the world, and our 
time in the world, differ not much from that which is nothing; it is not out 
of any excellency of underrtanding, that wefo much prife the one, which hath 

* l(ai. 63, 16. b Sirac. c. 40. v. 28. c Plat, de leg. 1, 2, 6. & in Gorgca. d Jer. 22. 13. 
f lfai. 3?. ' Prov. x. 18, 12. Prov, 23. 1. 3. 8. 9. 25. 9. 8. 

(in 


Digitized by 


Google 









The PREFACE. xix 

(in effeft) no being: and fo much negleft the other, v/hich hath no ending 1 
coveting thofe mortal things of the world, as if our fouls were therein im¬ 
mortal, and neglefting thofe things which are immortal, as if our felves af¬ 
ter the world were but mortal. 

But let every man value his own wifdom, as he pleafeth. Let the rich 
man think all fools, that cannot equal his abundance ; the revenger cfteem 
all negligent, that have not trodden down their oppofites; the politician, all 
grofs, that cannot merchandize their faith: yet when we once come in fight 
of the port of death, to which all winds drive us; and when by letting fall 
that fatal anchor, which can never be weighed again, the navigation of this 
life-takes end: Then it is, I fay, that our own cogitations (thofe fad and 
fevere cogitations, formerly beaten from us by our health and felicity) re¬ 
turn again, and pay us to the uttermoft for all the pleafing paflages of our 
lives pall. It is then that we cry out to Gocl for mercy ; then, when our 
felves can no longer exercife cruelty towards others : and it is only then, that 
we are Bracken through the foul with this terrible fentence, a "that God will 
not be mock'd. For if, according to St. Peter , *The righteous fcarcely be faved : 
and that God [pared not his angels: where {hall thofe appear, who, having 
ferved their appetites all their lives, prefume to think, that the fevere 
commandments of the All-powerful God were given but in fport; and that 
the (hort breath, which we draw when death preffeth us, if we can but 
faftiion it to the found of Mercy (without any kind of fatisfaftion or a- 
m ends) is fufficient ? O quam multi , faith a reverend father, cum hueJ'pe ad 
atemos labores & bella dejeendunt: I confefs that it is a great comfort to our 
friends, to have it faid, that we ended well : for we all defire (as Balacm 
did) to die the death of the righteous. But what fhall we call a difefleeming, 
an oppofing, or (indeed) a mocking of God ; if thofe men do not op- 
pofe him, difefteem him, and mock him, t hat think it enough for God, to 
ask him forgivenefs at leifure, with the remainder and laft drawing of a ma¬ 
licious breath ? For what do they otherwife, that die this kind of well-dying, 
but fay unto God as followeth ? We befeech thee, O God, that all the falfe- 
hoods, forfwearings, and treacheries of our lives part, may be pleafing unto 
thee ; that thou wilt for our fakes (that had no leifure to do any thing for 
thine) change thy nature (though impoftible) and forget to be a juft God; 
that thou wilt love injuries and oppreffions, call ambition wifdom, and cha¬ 
rity foolifhnefs. For I fhall prejudice my fon' (which I am refolved not to 
do) if I make reftitution; and confefs my felf to have been unjuft (which 
I am too proud to do ) if I deliver the oppreffed. Certainly, thefe wife 
worldlings have either found out a new God; or have made one : and 
in all likelihood fuch a leaden one, as Lewis the eleventh wore in his cap ; 
which, when he had caufed any that he feared, or hated, to be killed, he 
would take it from his head and kifs it : befeeching it to pardon him this 
one evil aft more, and it fhould be the laft ; which (as at other times ) he did, 
when by the praftice of a Cardinal and a falfified facrament, he caufed the earl 
of Armagnac to be {tabbed to death ; mockeries indeed fit to be ufed towards 
a leaden, but not towards the ever-living God. But of this compofition are 
all the devout lovers of the world, that they fear all that is durelefs and ridi¬ 
culous: they fear the plots and praftices of their oppofites, and their very 
whifperings : they fear the opinions of men which beat but upon fhadows : they 
flatter and forfake the profperous and unprofperous, be they friends or kings: 
jea they dive under water, like ducks, at every pebble-ftone, that’s but thrown 


« Gal. 6 . 7. I Pet. 4. 


towards 


Digitized by 


Googl< 



XX 


The PREFACE. 


towards them by a powerful hand: and on the contrary, they (hew an obfti- 
nate and giant-like valour, againft the terrible judgments of the All-powerful 
God : yea, they (hew themfelves gods againft God, and flaves towards men ; 
towards men whofe bodies and confciences are alike rotten. 

Now for the reft : If we truly examine the difference of both conditions; 
to wit of the rich and mighty, whom we call fortunate ; and of the poor 
and oppreffed, whom we account wretched : we fhall find the happinefs 
of the one, and the miferable eftate of the other, fo tied by God to the 
very inftant, and both fo fubjefr to interchange (witnefs the fudden down¬ 
fall of the greateft princes, and the fpeedy uprifing of the meaneft perfons) 
as the one hath nothing fo certain, whereof to boaft; nor the other fo un¬ 
certain, whereof to bewail it felf. For there is no man fo affured of his 
honour, of his riches, health or life ; but that he may be deprived of either 
or all, the very next hour or day to come. £htid vefpcr vehat, inccrtum eft ; 
What the evening will bring with it, it uncertain. And yet ye cannot tell ( faith 
Saint yantes ) what Jhall be to morrow, a To day he is Jet up, and to morrow he 
fhall not be found ? for be is turned into duft, and his purpofe perifheth. And al¬ 
though the air which compafleth adverfity, be very obfeure : yet therein we 
better difeern God, than in that fhining light which environeth worldly 
glory; through which, for the clearnefs thereof, there is no vanity which 
efcapeth our fight. And let adverfity feem what it will ; to happy men, 
ridiculous, who make themfelves merry at other men’s misfortunes ; and to 
thofe under the croft , grievous : yet this is true. That for all that is paft, 
to the very inftant, the portions remaining are equal to either. For be 
it that we have lived many years, and ( according to Solomon ) in them all 
we have rejoyccd ; or be it that we have meafured the fame length of days, 
and therein have evermore forrowed : yet looking back from our prefent 
being, we find both the one and the other, to wit, the joy and the woe, 
failed out of fight; and death, which doth purfue us and hold us in chace, 
from our infancy, hath gathered it. Sfhticquid ataiis retro eft, mors tenet : 
IVhatfocvcr of our age is paft, death holds it. So as whofoevet he be, to 
whom fortune hath been a fervant, and the time a friend : let him but 
take the account of his memory (for we have no other keeper of our plea- 
fures paft ) and truly examine what it hath referved, either of beauty and 
youth, or foregone delights; what it hath faved, that it might laft, of 
his deareft affe&ions, or of whatever elfe the amorous fpring-time gave his 
thoughts of contentment, then unvaluable; and he fhall find, that all the 
art which his elder years have, can draw no other vapour out of thefe dif- 
folutions, than heavy, fecret, and fad fighs. He fhall find nothing remain¬ 
ing, but thofe forrows, which grow up after pur faft-fpringing youth; 
overtake it, when it is at a ftand; and over-top it utterly, when it begins 
to wither : in fo much as looking back from the very inftant time, and 
from our now being; the poor, difeafed, and captive creature, hath as lit¬ 
tle fenfe of all his former miferies and pains; as he, that is moft blefs’d in 
common opinion, hath of his fore-paft pleafures and delights. For whatfo- 
ever is caft behind us, is juft nothing : and what is to come, deceitful hope 
hath it. Omnia qiue ventura funt, in incerto jacent. Only thofe few black 
fwans I muft except, who having had the grace to value worldly vanities at 
no more than their own price ; do, by retaining the comfortable memory of 
a well-a£ted life, behold death without dread, and the grave without fear ; 
and embrace both, as neceffary guides to endlefs glory. 


• Jam. 4. 14. 


For 


Digitized by 


Google 










The PREFACE. xxi 

For my felf, this is my confolation, and all that I Can offer to bihers, that 
the forrows of this life, are but of two forts : whereof the one hatli refpcct 
to God ; the other, to the world. In the firJffc, we complain to God againfl 
our felves, for our offences againfl him; and confefs, Et tu juftus cs in omni¬ 
bus qvue venerunt fitter nos j And. thou , O Lord , art juft in all that halh bejalien 
us. In the fecond, we complain to our felves againfl God, as if he had 
done us wrong, either in not giving us worldly goods and honours, an- 
fwering our appetites; or for taking them again from ns, having had them : 
forgetting that humble and jufl acknowledgment of jfob, The Lord hath 
given , and the Lord bath taken. To the firfl of which St. Faul hath promifed 
blelfednefs; to the fecond, death. And out of doubt he is either a fool or 
ungrateful to God, or both, that doth not acknowledge, how mean foever 
his eflate be, that the fame is yet far greater, than that which God oweth 
him: or doth not acknowledge, how fharp foever his affli£lions be, that the 
fame are yet far lefs, than thofe which are due tinto him. And if an hea¬ 
then wife man call the adverfities of the world, but triluta vroendi y the tri¬ 
butes of living ; a wife Chriflian man ought to know them, and bear them, 
but as the tributes of offending. He ought to bear them manlike, and re- 
folvedly ; and not as thofe whining foldiers do, qui gemtnles Jtquuntur Imye- 
feratorem. 

For feeing God, who is the author of all our tragedies, hath written out 
for us, and appointed us all the parts we are to play : and hath not, in 
their diflribution, been partial to the mofl mighty princes of the world ; 
That gave unto Darius the part of the greatefl emperor, and the part of the 
moll miferable beggar, a beggar begging water of an enemy, to quench 
the great drought of death \ That appointed Bajazet to play the Grand 
Signior of the Turks in the morning, and in the fame day the foutftool of 
Tamerlane ('both which parts Valerian had alfo played, being taken by Sa-> 
fores) that made Bellifarius play the mofl victorious captain, and lallly the 
part of a blind beggar ; of which examples many thoufands may be pro¬ 
duced ; why fhould other men, who are but as the leafl worms, complain of 
wrongs ? Certainly there is no other account to be made of this ridiculous 
world, than to refolve, That the change of fortune on the great Theatre , 
is but as the change of garments on the lefs. For when on the one and the 
other, every man wears but his own skin ; the players are all alike. Now 
if any man, out of weaknefs, prize the paffages of this world otherwife (for 
faith Petrarch , Ma°ni ingenii eft revocare mentem a Jen ft bus ) it is by reafon of 
that unhappy fantafy of ours, which forgeth in the brains of man all the 
miferies (the corporal excepted ) whereunto he is fubjefl : therein it is, that 
misfortune and adverfity work all that they work. For feeing death, in the 
end of the play, takes from all, whatfoever fortune or force takes from any 
one : it were a foolifh madnefs in the fhipwreck of worldly things, where 
all finks but the forrow, to fave it. That were, as Seneca faith, Por tunas 
ji(ccumlerc y quod tnftius eft omni fato • To fall under fortune , of all other the moft 
mijcrable dcfhny. 

•But it is now time to found a retreat ; and to defire to be excufed of this 
longpurfuit: and withal, that the good intent, which hath moved me to 
draw the picture of time pafl (which we call lliftory) in fo large a table, may 
alfo be accepted in place of a better reafon. 

The examples of divine providence, every-where found (the firft divine 
hiftories being nothing elfe but a continuation of fuch examples) have per- 
fwaded me to fetch my beginning fromthe # beginning of all things , to wit, 

f creation. 


Digitized by 


Google 



xxii The PREFACE. 


creation. For though thefe two glorious actions of the Almighty be fo near, 
and (as it were ) linked together, that the one neceflarily implieth the other: 
creation, inferring providence (for what father forfaketh the child that he 
hath begotten ? and providence prefuppofing creation ) yet many of thofe 
that have feemed to excel in worldly wifdom, have gone about to disjoin 
this coherence; the Epicure denying both creation and providence, but gran- 
ing that the world had a beginning ; the Arifotelian granting providence, 
but denying both the creation and the beginning. 

Now although this do&rine of faith, touching the creation in time (for 
by faith we underJ]and., that the world was made by the word of God ) be too 
weighty a work for Ariflotle s rotten ground to bear up, upon which he hath 
( notwithstanding) founded the defences and fortrefTes of all his verbal doc¬ 
trine : yet that the neceflity of infinite power, and the world’s beginning, 
and the impofiibility of the contrary, even in the judgment of natural rea- 
fon, wherein he believed, had not better informed him; it is greatly to be 
marvelled at. And it is no lefs flrange, that thofe men, which are defirous of 
knowledge ( feeing Aidftotle hath failed in this main point; and taught little 
other than terms in the reft ) have fo retrench’d their minds from the follow¬ 
ing and overtaking of truth, and fo abfolutely fubje&ed themfelves to the law 
of thofe philofophical principles ; as all contrary kind of teaching, in the 
fearch of caufes, they have condemned either for phantaftical, or curious. 
But doth it follow, that the pofitions of heathen philofophers, are undoubted 
grounds and principles indeed, becaufe fo called ? Or that ipf diserunt , doth 
make them to be fuch ? Certainly no. But this is true, That where natu¬ 
ral reafon hath built any thing fo ftrong againft it felf, as the fame reafon 
can hardly affail it, much lefs batter it down : the fame in every queftion of 
nature, and finite power, may be approved for a fundamental law of human 
knowledge. For faith a Charron, in his book of wifdom, Tout proportion hu- 
maine a autant d? author it e que V autre, ft la raifon non fait la difference ; Every 
human proportion hath equal authority, if reafon make not the difference, the reft: 
being but the fables of principles. But hereof how (hall the upright and im¬ 
partial judgment of man give a fentence, where oppofition and examina¬ 
tion are not admitted to give in evidence? And to this purpofe it was well 
faid of b Laflantius, Sapicntiam fbi adimunt, qui ullo judicio inventa majorum 
prolant , ab aliis pccudum more ducuntur : They neglect their own wifdom, who 
without any judgment approve the invention of tbofc that forewent them ; and 
fujfcr themfelves, after the manner of bcafs, to be led by them. By the advantage 
of which {loth and dulnefs, ignorance is now become fo powerful a tyrant: 
as it hath fet true philofophy, phyfick, and divinity, in a pillory ; and writ¬ 
ten over the firft, Contra negantem principia ; over the fecond, Virtus Jpccifca ; 
and over the third, Ecclcfa Romana. 

But for my felf, I (hall never be perfwaded, that God hath fhut up all 
light of learning within the lantern of Arifotle\ brains : or that it was 
ever faid unto him, as unto Efdras, Acccndam in corde tuo lucernam intcllettus : 
that God hath given invention but to the heathen ; and that they only 
have invaded nature, and found the ftrength and bottom thereof; the fame 
nature having confirmed all her ftore, and left nothing of price to after-ages. 
That thefe, and thefe be the caufes of thefe and thefe effe&s, time hath taught 
us; and not reafon : and fo hath experience, without art. The cheefe-wife 
knowetb it as well as the philofopher, that four runnet doth coagulate her 
milk into a curd. But if we ask a reafon of this caufe, why the fournefs 

» Clurron de SagcfTe. *La£t. de Orig, Erroris. 1. 2 . c, 8 , 

doth 


Digitized by 


Google 







The PREFACE. xxiii 

doth it ? whereby it doth it ? and the manner how ? I think that there is 
nothing to be found in vulgar philofophy, to fatisfy this and many other like 
vulgar queftions. But man, to cover his ignorance in the leaft things, who 
cannot give a true reafon for the grafs under his feet, why it fhould be green 
rather than red, or of any other colour ; that could never yet difcover the way 
and reafon of nature’s working, in thofe which are far lefs noble creatures than 
himfelf; who is far more noble than the heavens themfelves : Man ( faith 
A Salomon ) that can hardly difcern the things that are upon the earth , and •withgreat 
labour find out the things that are before us ; that hath fo fhort a time in the 
world, as he no fooner begins to learn, than to die ; that hath in his me¬ 
mory but borrowed knowledge ; in his underfhnding, nothing truly; that 
is ignorant of the effence of his own foul, and which the wifeft: of the na- 
turalifts (if Arifiotle be he) could never fo much as define, but by the 
aclion and efle&, telling us what it works (which all men know as well as 
he) but not what it is, which neither he, nor any elfe, doth know, but Cod 
that created it (for though I were perfeft, yet I know not my foul , faith jfob .) 
Man, I fay, that is but an idiot in the next caufe of his own life, and in the 
caufe of all the aflions of his life, will ( notwithftanding ) examine the art of 
God in creating the world ; of God, who (faith b yob ) is Jo excellent as wc 
know him not ; and examine the beginning of the work, which had end be¬ 
fore mankind had a beginning of being. He will difable God’s power to 
make a world, without matter to make it of. He will rather give the moths 
of the air for a caufe ; call the work on necelTity or chance ; bellow the ho¬ 
nour thereof on nature; make two powers, the one to be the author of the 
matter , the other of the form; and laflly, for want of a workman, have it 
eternal: which latter opinion Arifiotle , to make himfelf the author of a new 
do&rine, brought into the world: and his fe&ators have maintained it; 
parati ac conjurati, quos fequunlur , Philofophorum animis inviflis opinioncs tucri. 
For Hermes , who lived at once with, or foon after, Mofcs , Zoroajler , Mufic- 
us f Orpheus , Linus , Animenes, Anaxagoras , Empedocles , Mcliffus, Pherecydes , 
‘Thales , Clcanthes , Pythagoras , Plato , and many others (whofe opinions are 
exquifitely gathered by Stcuchius Eugubinus ) found in the necelTity of invinci¬ 
ble reafon, one eternal and infinite Being , to be the parent of the univerfal. 
Horum omnium fententia quamvis fit incerta , codcm tamcn fpeflat, ut Providentiam 
unam cfic confentiant: five enitn Natura, } five JEther , five Ratio, five mens , five fata- 
lis nccejjitas , five divina Lex ; idem effe quod a nobis dicitur Deus. All thej'e mens 
opinions (faith c Laflantius ) though uncertain , come to this , That they agree upon 
one Providence ; whether the fame be Nature , or Light , or Reajon , or underfunding, 
or defliny , or divine Ordinance • that it is the fame which we call God. Certain¬ 
ly, as all the rivers in the world, though they have divers rifings, and di¬ 
vers runnings; though they fometimes hide themfelves for a while under 
ground, and feem to be loft in fea-like lakes ; do at laft find, and fall into 
the great ocean : fo after all the fearches that human capacity hath ; and af¬ 
ter all philofophical contemplation and curiofity; in the necelTity of this infi¬ 
nite power, all the reafon of man ends and diffolves it felf. 

As for others , and firft: touching thofe, which conceive the matter of the 
world to have been eternal , and that God did not create the world ex nihi- 
lo, but ex materia praexifiente : the fuppofition is fo weak, as is hardly worth 
the anfwering. For ( faith ^ Eufebias ) Mihi videntur qut hoc dicunt , jortunam 
quoque Deo anncficre. They Jecm unto me , which affirm this , to give part of the 
work to God , and part to fortune. Infomuch as if God had not lound this 

’Salomon, i. 9. k Job 26. * Laft. 5. ? Eufcb. de Prjcp. Evang. I. 7. c. S. 

firfl 

Digitized by Google 



XXIV 


The PREFACE. 


firfl matter by chance, he had neither been Author, nor Father, nor Creator, 
nor Lord of the univerfal. For were the matter or chaos , eternal : it then 
follows, That either this fuppofed matter did fit it felf to God ; or God, 
accommodate himfelf to the matter. For the firfl ; it is impofiible, that 
things without fenfe could proportion themfelves to the workman’s will. 
For the fecond ; it were horrible to conceive of God, That as an articifi- 
cer he Applied himfelf, according to the proportion of matter which he 
lighted upon. 

But let it be fuppofed, That this matter had been made by any power, 
not omnipotent and infinitely wife : I would gladly learn how it came to 
pafs, that the fame was proportionable to his intention, that was omnipo¬ 
tent and infinitely wife; and no more, nor no lefs, than ferved to receive 
the form of the univerfal. For, had it wanted any thing of what was fuffi- 
cient; then mufi; it be granted, That God created out of nothing fo much of 
new matter , as ferved to finifh the work of the world : or had there been 
more of this matter , than fufficed; then did God diffolve and annihilate what- 
foever remained and was fuperfluous. And thus mufi; every reafonablc 
foul confefs, That it is the fame work of God alone, to create any thing 
out of nothing • and by the fame art and power, and by none other, can 
thofe things, or any part of that eternal matter , be again changed into no¬ 
thing ; by which thofe things, that once were nothing, ohtained a begin¬ 
ning of being. 

Again, to fay that this matter was the caufe of it felf; this, of all other, 
were the greatefl idiotifm. For, if it were the caufe of it felf at any time; 
then there was alfo a time when it felf was not: at which time of not 
being, it is eafy enough to conceive, that it would neither produce it felf, 
nor any thing elfe. For to be, and not to be, at once, is impofiible, Nihil 
autem Jeipfum prrecedit, neque feipfum componit corpu r ; There is nothing that doth 
precede it felf neither do bodies compound themjelves. 

For the refl; Thofe that feign this matter to be eternal, mufi of necefiity 
confefs, that infinite cannot be feparate from eternity. And then had inp - 
nite matter left no place for infinite form, but that the firfl matter war finite , 
the form which it received proves it. For conclufion of this part; whofoever 
will make choice, rather to believe in eternal deformity, or in eternal dead 
matter, than in eternal light and eternal life : let eternal death be his re¬ 
ward. For it is a madnefs of that kind, as wanteth terms to exprels it. 
For what reafon of man (whom the curfe of prefumption hath not flupi- 
fied ) hath doubted. That infinite power ( of which we can comprehend but 
a kind of fhadow, quia comprehcnfio eft intra terrninos, qui infinito repugnant ) 
hath any thing wanting in it felf, either for matter or form ; yea for as many 
worlds (if fuch had been God’s will) as the fea hath funds ? For where 
the power is without limitation, the work hath no other limitation, than 
the workman’s will. Yea reafon it felf finds it more eafy for infinite pow¬ 
er, to deliver from it felf a finite world, without the help of matter pre¬ 
pared ; than for a finite man, a fool and dull, to change the form of mat¬ 
ter made to his hands. They are Dionypus’s words, Deus tn una esiftentm omnia 
pnchalct : and again, EJJc omnium efl ipja divmitas , omne quod vidcs, & quod 
non vides ; to wit, caufalitcr, or in better terms, non tanquam forma , Jed tan - 
quarn caufa univcrfalis. Neither hath the world univerfal clofed up all of 
God: For the mofl parts of his works (faith a Siracides ) are hid. Neither can 
the depth of his wifdom be opened, by the glorious work of the world : 


a Cap. 16. v. 21. 


which 


Digitized by 


Google 










XXV 


the preface. 

which never brought to knowledge all it can; for then were liis infinite 
power bounded, and made finite. And hereof it comes, that we feldom 
entitle God, the all'/hewing, or the all-willing , but the all-mighty ; that is, in¬ 
finitely able. 

But now for thofe, who from that ground, 'that out of nothing, nothing is 
made , infer the world’s eternity ; and yet not fo falvage therein, as thofe 
are, which give an eternal being to dead matter: it is true, if the word 
[nothing] be taken in the affirmative; and the making , impofed upon natu¬ 
ral agents and finite power; that out of nothing, nothing is made. But 
'feeing their great Do&or Arif otic himfelf confefieth, Quod omnes anttqui de- 
creverunt quafi quoddam rerum grincigium, igfumque infinitum ; that all the an¬ 
cient decree a kind of beginning, and the fame to be infinite: and a little after, 
more largely and plainly, a Prindpium cjus efl nullum, Jed ipjum omnium ccr- 
nitur ejje grincigium, ac omnia cornglc&i ac regcre. It is ft range that this phi- 
lofopher, with his followers, fhould rather make choice out of falfhood, to 
conclude falfty ; than out of truth, to refolve truly. For if wc compare) 
the world*univerfal, and all the unmeafurable orbs of heaven, and thofe 
marvellous bodies of the fun, moon, and ftars, with iffum infinitum : it may 
truly be faid of them all, which himfelf affirmeth of his imaginary Materia 
grima , That they are neither quid, quale , nor quantum ; and therefore to bring, 
finite (which hath no proportion with infinite) out of infinite (qui defruit 
omnem grogortionem) is no wonder in God’s power. And therefore Anaximan- 
der, Melijfus, and Empedocles, call the world univerfal; but parttculam univerfi- 
tatis & infmtaJtis ; A parcel of that which is the univerfality and the infinity it 
felf ; and Plato, but a Jhadow of God. But the other, to grove the world’s eter¬ 
nity, urgeth this maxim; That, A fujficicnt and effectual cauj'e being granted, an an- 
fwerable effed thereof is alfo granted: inferring, that God being for ever a fuffi- 
cient and effectual caufe of the world, the effect of the caufe fhould alfo have 
been for ever; to wit, the world univerfal. But what a ft range mockery is this 
in fo great a mafter, to confefs a fufficient and effe&ual caufe of the world (to 
wit, an almighty God) in his antecedent: and the fame God to be a God 
reftrained in his conclufion ; to make God free in power, and bourid in 
will; able to effect, unable to determine; able to make all things, and yet 
unable to make choice of the time when ; For this were impioufly to re¬ 
folve of God, as of natural neceflity; which hath neither choice, nor will, 
nor underftanding ; which cannot but work matter being prefent; as fire, to 
burn things combuftible. 

Again, he thus difputeth, That every agent which can work, and doth 
not work ; if it afterward work, it is either thereto moved by it felf, or 
by fomewhat elfe ; and fo it pafleth from power to act. But God (faith 
he) is immoveable, and is neither moved by himfelf, nor by any other ; 
but being always the fame, doth always work : whence he concludeth, if 
the world were caufed by God, that he was for ever the caufe thereof, and 
therefore eternal. The anfwer to this is very eafy; for that God’s per¬ 
forming in due time that, which he ever determined at length to perform, 
doth not argue any alteration or change, but rather conftancy in him. For 
the fame a&ion of his will, which made the world for ever, did alfo with¬ 
hold the effe& to the time ordained. To this anfwer, in it felf fufficient, 
others add further, that the pattern or image of the world may be faid to 
be eternal; which the Platonicks call, fgirilualem mundum ; and do in this fort 

* Steuc. Eug. 1 . 3 . c. 9. ex Arid. Phyf. 3, 20; 

g diftinguifh 


Digitized by LhOoqlc 



XXVI 


The PREFACE. 

diftinguifh the idea, and creation in time. a Spiritualis illc nutndus, mundi ha- 
jus exemplar, primumque Dei opus, vita cequali ejl architcclo ; fuit femper cum illo, 
eritque Jemper. Mundus autem corporalis, quod fecundum opus ejl Dei, decedit jam ab 
opipec ex parte una, quia non fuit Jemper ; netinct alteram, quia fit femper fut urns. Thai 
reprefentative, or the intentional world (fay they) the Jamplar of this vifiblc world, 
the ftrfl work of God, was equally ancient with the architect ; for it was for ever 
with him, and ever JhaU le. This material world, the fecond work or creature of 
God, doth differ from the worker in this, That it was not f rom everlajling ; and in 
this it doth agree, that it JhaU be for ever to come. The firft point, That it was 
not for ever, all Chriftians confefs: the other they underftand no otherwife,* 
than that after the confummation of this world, there (hall be a new heaven 
and a new earth, without any new creation of matter. But of thefe things we 
need not here (land to argue; though fuch opinions be not unworthy the 
propounding; in this confideration, of an eternal and unchangeable caufe, 
producing a changeable and temporal efTe£t. Touching which point Pro- 
clus the Platonifl difputeth, That the compounded eflence of the world (and 
becaufe compounded, therefore diflipable) is continued, and knit’to the di¬ 
vine Being, by an individual and infeparable power, flowing from divine 
unity ; and that the world’s natural appetite of God fheweth, that the fame 
proeeedeth from a goodnefs and underftanding divine ; and that this vir¬ 
tue, by which the world is continued and knit together, mud be infinite, 
that it may infinitely and everlaflingly continue and preferve the fame. Which 
infinite virtue, the finite world (faith he) is not capable of, but receiveth it 
from the divine infinite, according to the temporal nature it hath, fuccef- 
fively every moment by little and little; even as the whole material world 
is not altogether : but the aboli(hed parts are departed by fmall degrees, 
and the parts yet to come, do by the fame fmall degrees fucceed; as the 
(hadow of a tree in a river, feemeth to have continued the fame a long time 
in the water, but it is perpetually renewed, in the continual ebbing and flow¬ 
ing thereof. 

But to return to them, which denying that ever the world had any be¬ 
ginning, withal deny that ever it fhall have any end ; and to this purpofe 
affirm, that it was never heard, never read, never feen, no, not by any rea- 
fon perceived, that the heavens have ever fuflered corruption ; or that they 
appear any way the elder by continuance; or in any fort otherwife than they 
were ; which, had they been fubje£l to final corruption, fome change would 
have been decerned in fo long a time : to this it is anfwered, that the little 
change as yet perceived, doth rather prove their newnefs, and that they have 
not continued fo long; than that they would continue for ever as they are. 
And if conje&ural arguments may receive anfwer by conje£tures, it then feem¬ 
eth, that fome alteration may be found. For either b Arijlotle, Pliny, Strabo, 
Bcda, Aquinas, and others, were grofly miftaken ; or elfe thofe parts of the 
world lying within the burnt Zone, were not in elder times habitable, by reafon 
of the fun’s heat; neither were the feas under the equinoflial, navigable. But 
we know by experience, that thofe regions, fo fituate, are filled with people, 
and exceeding temperate; and the fea, over which we navigate, pafla- 
ble enough. We read alfo many hiftories of deluges, and how that in the 
time of Phaeton, divers places in the world were burnt up by the fun’s vio¬ 
lent heat. 

a Mar. Ficin. de immort. animae. I. 18. c. i. b Arift. Met. 2. Plin. 1 . 2. c. 8. Saab. 1 . 3. Bedade 
ratione t$m. 11. c. 32. Thom. 1. p. q. 102. art. 2. 

Bat 


Digitized by 


; y Googl( 











The PREFACE. xxvii 

But in a word, this obfervation is exceeding feeble. For we know' it for 
certain, that (lone walls, of matter mouldering and friable, have Hood two or 
three thoufand years; and that many things have been digged up out of the 
earth, of that depth, as fuppofed to have been buried by the general flood, 
without any alteration of fubftance or figure ; yea, it is believed, and it is very 
probable, that the gold which is daily found in mines and rocks, under-ground, 
was created together with the earth. 

. And if bodies elementary, and compounded, the eldeft times have not in¬ 
vaded and corrupted; what great alteration fhould we look for in celeftial and 
quinteflential bodies ? And yet we have reafon to think, that the fun, by 
whole help all creatures are generate, doth not in thefe latter ages aflift na¬ 
ture, as heretofore. We have neither giants, fuch as the eldeft world had; nor 
mighty men, fuch as the elder world had; but all things in general are re¬ 
puted of lefs virtue, which from the heavens receive virtue. Whence, if the 
nature of a Preface would permit a larger difcourfe, we might eafily fetch ftore 
of proof; as that this world fhall at length have end, as that once it had 
beginning. 

And I fee no good anfwer that can be made to this objection : if the world 
were eternal, why not all things in the world eternal ? If there were no firfl, 
no Caufe, no Father , no Creator , no incomgrehenfible fVifdom , but that every 
nature had been alike eternal; and man more rational than every other na¬ 
ture: why had not the eternal reafon of man, provided for his eternal be¬ 
ing in the world? For if all were equal ; why not equal conditions to 
all ? why fhould heavenly bodies live for ever, and the bodies of men rot 
and die. 

Again, who was it that appointed the earth to keep the center, and 
gave order that it fhould hang in the air; that the fun fhould travel be¬ 
tween the tropicks, and never exceed thofe bounds, nor fail to perform 
that progrefs once in every year ; the moon to live by borrowed light ; 
the fix’d ftars (according to common opinion) to be faftened like nails in 
a cart-wheel, and the planets to wander at their pleafure ? Or, if none of 
thefe had power over other; was it out of charity and love, that the fun, 
by his perpetual travel within thofe two circles, hath vifited, given light 
unto, and relieved all parts of the earth, and the creatures therein, by 
turns and times ? Out of doubt, if the fun have of his own accord kept 
this courfe in all eternity, he may juftly be called eternal charity, and ever- 
lafting love. The fame may be faid of all the ftars, who, being all of 
them moft large and clear fountains of virtue and operation, may alfo be 
called eternal virtues; the earth may be called eternal patience ; the moon 
an eternal borrower and beggar; and man, of all other, the moft mifera- 
ble, eternally mortal. And what were this, but to believe again in the old 
play of the gods? Yea, in more gods by millions, than ever Hcfiodus dream’d 
of. But, inftead of this mad folly, we fee it well enough with our feeble 
and mortal eyes: and the eyes of our reafon difeern it better; that the fun, 
moon, ftars, and the earth, are limited, bounded, and conftrained : themfelves 
they have not conftrained, nor could. Ornne determinatum caufam habet aliquam 
efficientem , qua illud detcrminavcnt; Every thing bounded hath J'omc efficient caufe , 
by which it is bounded . 

Now for nature ; As by the ambiguity of this name, the fchool of 
Ariflotle hath both commended many errors unto us, and fought alfo 
thereby to obfeure the glory of the hi^h Moderator of all things, fhining 
in the creation, and in the governing of the world: fo if the beft defini¬ 
tion 


Digitized by 


Google 


xxviii The PREFACE. 

tion be taken out of the fecond of Ariftotlcs phyfcks, or primo de Cu'lo, 
or out of the fifth of his mctaphyfcks ; I fay, that the beft is but nominal, 
and ferving only to difference the beginning of natural motion from ar¬ 
tificial : which yet the academics open better, when they call it A J'emi- 
naty flrength, infufed into matter by tbc foul of the world, who give the firft 
place to Providence , the fecond to fate , and but the third to nature. Pro- 
videntia (by which they underftand God) dux & caput; fatum, medium ex 
Providentia prodiens ; natura poflremum. But be it what he will, or be it any 
of thefe (God excepted) or participating of all : yet that* it hath choice 
or underflanding ( both which are neceffarily in the caufe of all things ) 
no man hath avowed. For this is unanfwerable of a LaSlantius ; Is autem facit 
aliquid, qui aut volant at cm facicndi habet, out Jcicntiam ; He only can be fiid to he 
the doer of a thing, that hath either will or knowledge in the doing it. 

But the will and fcience of nature, are in thefe words truly expreffed by 

Fictnus: Potefl ubique natura, vel per diverfa media , vcl ex diverfis mater its, 
diverfa facere : fublata vero mediorurn matenarumque diverftate , vel tmieion vcl 
fmtllimum operator, neque potefl quando adejl materia non operari; It is the power 
of nature by diver fity of means, or out of diverfty of matter, to produce divers 
things: but taking away the divcrfty of means, and the diver fty of matter, it 
then works hut one or the like work ; neither can it but work, matter being pre- 
Jent. Now if nature made choice of diverfity of matter, to work all thefe 
variable works of heaven and earth, it had then both underflanding and 
will ; it had counfel to begin; reafon to difpofe; virtue and knowledge to 
fiiiifh; and power to govern; without which, all things had been but one 
and the fame ; all of the matter of heaven; or all of the matter of earth. 
And if we grant nature this will, and this underflanding, this counfel, rea¬ 
fon, and power: c Cur natura potius, quam Deus nominetur ? IVhy fhould we 
then call fuch a caufe rather nature, than God ? God, of whom all men 
have notion, and give the firfl and highefl place to divine power : d Omnes 
homines rationem deorum habent, omncfquc fummum locum divino cuidam numini 
ajfgnant. And this I fay in fhort, that it is a true effect of true reafon in 
man (were there no authority more binding than reafon) to acknowledge and 
adore the firfl and mofl fublime power. Vera philofophia, eft afeenfus ab his 
quae fuunt, oriunlur, & occidunt, ad ca quae vera funt, & Jemper eadem : True 
pbilofopby, is an afeending from the things which fiow, and rije , and fall , to the 
things that are for ever the fame. 

For the reft; I do alfo account it not the meaneft, but an impiety monftrous, 
to confound God and nature : be it but in terms. For it is God, that only 
difpofeth of all things according to his own will; and maketh of one earth, 
vcjjcls of honour and dijhonour. It is nature that can difpofe of nothing, but 
•according to the will of the matter wherein it worketh. It is God, that 
commandeth all ; it is nature that is obedient to all; it is God that doth good 
unto all, knowing andioving the good he doth; it is nature, that feconda- 
rily doth alfo good, but it neither knoweth nor loveth the good it doth. It 
is God, that hath all things in himfelf; nature, nothing in it felf. It is God, 
which is the Father, and hath begotten all things; it is nature, which is be¬ 
gotten by all things; in which it livethand laboureth; for by it felf it exifteth 
not. For fhall we fay, that it is out of affection to the earth, that heavy 
things fall towards it ? Shall we call it reafon, which doth conduct every 

1 de ira Dei, 1 . j, c. 10. b Ficin. in Plat. * Latt. dc ira Dei, 1 . i. c. io. 5 Arift, 1.1, 
de ccelo, c. T. 22. 

river 


Digitized by LiOOQlC 








the PREFACE. xxix 


fiver iiitd tile fait fea ? Shall we term it knowledge in fire, that makes it to 
confume cOmbuftible matter ? If it be affection, reafon, and knowledge in 
thefe; by the fame affeftion, reafon, and knowledge it is, that nature work¬ 
eth. And therefore feeing all things work as they do (call it by form, by na¬ 
ture, dr by what you pleafe:) yet becaufe they work by an impulfion, which 
they cannot refill; or by a faculty, infufed by the fupremefl power, we are 
neither to wonder at, nor to worfhip, the faculty that worketh, nor the crea¬ 
ture wherein it worketh. But herein lies the wonder, and to him is the wor¬ 
fhip due, who hath created fuch a nature in things, and fuch a faculty, as, nei¬ 
ther knowing it felf, the matter wherein it worketh, nor the virtue and power 
which it hath, doth yet work all things to their lafl and uttermofl perfection. 
And therefore every reafonable man, taking to himfelf for a ground that which 
is granted by all antiquity, and by all men truly learned that ever the world 
had ; to wit, that there is a power infinite and eternal (which alfo neeeflity 
doth prove unto us, without the help of faith ; and reafon, without the force 
of authority;) all things do as eafily follow which have been delivered by divine 
letters, as the waters of a running river do fucceilively purfue each other from 
the firfl fountains. 

This much I fay it is, that reafon it felf hath taught us ; and this is the be¬ 
ginning of knowledge. a Sapientia pr<ecedit, rcligto fequitur ; quia pnus cji Dcum 
fcire , confequens colere: Sapience goes before, religion follows; becaole it is 
firft to know God, and then to worfhip him. This fapience l J lato calleth, 
abfolutt ioni fcientiam' y The fcience of the abfolute good : and another, Scan - 
tiam rerum prtmarum , fempiterndrum , perpctuarum. For faith (faith b lfidorc) 
is not extorted by violence; but by reafon and examples perfwaded ; fides ne- 
quaquam vi extorquetur ; fed raXione & exemplis fuadetur. I confefs it, that to 
enquire further, as of the eflence of God, of his power, of his art, and by 
what mean he created the world; or of his fecret judgment, and the caufes; is 
not an effe£t of reafon: Sed cum ratione infaniunt ; but they grow mad with rea¬ 
fon, that enquire after it. For as it is no fhame nor difhonour (faith a French 
authorj de faire aneft au but qu<on nafeeu furpaffer ; For a man to reft himfelf 
there, where he finds it impofllble to pafs on further: fo whatfoover is be¬ 
yond, and out of the reach of true reafon, it acknowledged it to be fo ; as 
c underftanding it felf not to be infinite, but according to the name and na¬ 
ture it hath, to be a teacher, that belt knows the end of his own art. For 
feeing both reafon and neeeflity teach us (reafon, which is pars divini fpiritus 
in corpus humanum merft) that the world was made by a power infinite ; and 
yet how it was made, it cannot teach us; and feeing the fame reafon and ne- 
ceflity make us know that the fame infinite power is every-where in the world ; 
and yet how every-where, it cannot inform us, our belief hereof is riot we’ak- 
ned, but greatly firengthned by oar ignorance ; becaufe it is the fame reafon 
that tells us, that fuch a nature cannot be faid to be God, that Can be in all 
conceived by man. 

I have been already over-long, to make any farge difeourfe either of the 
parts of the following ftory, or in mine own excufe; efpecially in the excufe 
of this or that paflage, feeing the whole is exceeding weak and defe£tive. 
Among the grofleft, the unfuitable divifion of the books, I could not knoxv 
how to excufe, had I not been directed to enlarge the building after the foun¬ 
dation was laid, and the firft part finilhed. All men know that there is no 

* Laft. 1 . 4. c. 4. de veri Sapiencia. b Ifaac de deftn. * Quod eft infinitum, & non fccundum na- 
turam terminatum, non concinctur a lcientia. Arift. Poftcr. 


h 


great 


Digitized by 


Googl 


c 


XXX 


The Preface. 


great art in the dividing evenly of thofe things, which are fubje£t to number 
and meafure. For the reft, it fuits well enough with a great many books of 
this age, which, fpeak too much, and yet fay little ; Ij>Jt nobis furto fubducimur. 
We are ftolen away from our felves, fetting a high price on all that is our own. 
But hereof, though a late good writer make complaint, yet (hall it not lay hold 
on me, becaufe I believe as he doth; that who fo thinks himfelf the wifeft man, 
is but a poor and miferable ignorant. Thofe that are the beft men of war 
againft all the vanities and fooleries of the world, do always keep the ftrongeft 
guards againft themfelves, to defend themfelves from themfelves, from felf- 
love, felf-eftimation, and felf-opinion. 

Generally concerning the order of the work, I have only taken counfel from 
the argument. For of the AJfyrians , which, after the downfal of Babel , take 
up the firft part, and were the firft great kings of the world, there came little 
to the view of pofterity: fome few enterprifes, greater in fame than faith, of 
Nvnus and Semiramis excepted. 

It was the ftory of the Hebrews , of all before the Olympiads, that overcame 
the confuming difeafe of time ; and preferved it felf, from the very cradle and 
beginning to this day: and yet not fo entire, but that the large difcourfes 
thereof (to which in many fcriptures we are referred) are no-where found. 
The fragments of other ftories, with the actions of thofe kings and princes 
which fhot up here and there in the fame time, I am driven to relate by way 
of digreftion : of which we may fay with Virgil , 


Apparent rari nantes in gurgite vaflo. 

\They appear here and there floating in the great gulf of time . 


To the fame firft ages do belong the report of many inventions therein 
found, and from them derived to us; though moft of the authors names have 
perifhed in fo long a navigation. For thofe ages had their laws; they had 
diverfity of government; they had kingly rule ; nobility, policy in war ; na¬ 
vigation ; and all, or the moft of needful trades. To fpeak therefore of thefe 
(feeing in a general hiftory we ihould have left a great deal of nakednels by 
their omiftion) it cannot properly be called a digreftion. True it is, that I 
have alfo made many others ; which, if they fhall be laid to my charge, I 
muft caft the fault into the great heap of human error. For, feeing we di- 
grefs in all the ways of our lives, yea, feeing the life of man is nothing elfe but 
digreftion; I may the better be excufed, in writing their lives and a&ions.. 
I am not altogether ignorant in the laws of hiftory, and of the kinds. 

The fame hath been taught by many ; but by no man better, and with 
greater brevity, than by that excellent learned gentleman Sir Francis Bacon. 
Chriftian laws are alfo taught us by the prophets and apoftles, and every day 
preach’d unto us. But we ftill make large digreflions; yea, the teachers them¬ 
felves do not ('in all) keep the path which they point out to others. 

For the reft ; after fuch time as the Perjums had wrefted the empire from 
the Chaldeans , and had raifed a great monarchy, producing a£lions of more 
importance than were elfewhere to be found, it was agreeable to the order of 
ftory to attend this empire; whilft it fo flourifhed, that the affairs of the 
nations adjoining had reference thereunto. The like obfervance was to be ufed 
towards the fortunes of Greece , when they again began to get ground upon 
the Perfians y as alfo towards the affairs of Rome , when the Romans grew more 
mighty than the Greeks . : : 

As 


Digitized by 


Google 










XXXI 


The PREFACE. 


As for the Medes , the Macedonians , the Sicilians , the Carthaginians , and other 
nations, who refilled the beginnings of the former empires, and afterwards 
became but parts of their compofition and enlargement: it feemed bell to 
remember what was known of them from their feveral beginnings, in fuch 
times and places, as they in their flourifhing eftates oppofed thofe monar¬ 
chies ; which, in the end, fwallowed them up. And herein I have follower! 
the befl geographers, who feldom give names to thofe fmall bro6ks, where¬ 
of many, joined together, make great rivers * till fuch time as they become 
united, and run in a main dream to the ocean fea. If the phrafe be weak, 
and the flile not every way like it felf; the firft {hews their legitimation 
and true parent; the fecond will excufe it felf upon the variety of mat¬ 
ter. For Virgil } who wrote his Eclogues , gracili avena , ufed fllonger pipes 
when he founded the wars pf JEneas. It may alfo be laid to my charge, 
that I ufe divers Hebrew words in my firft book, and effewhere ; in which 
language others may think, and I my felf acknowledge it, that I an} altoge¬ 
ther ignorant; but it is true, that fome of them I find in Montams ; others 
in Latm c.hara&er in S. Senenjis , and of the reft I have borrowed the inter¬ 
pretation of fome of my learned friends. But fay I had been beholden to 
neither, yet were it not to be wonder’d at, having had eleven years leifure 
to attain the knowledge of that, or of any other tongue : howfoever, I 
know that it will be faid by many, that I might have been more pleafing 
to the reader, if I had written the ftory of mine own times; having been 
permitted to draw water as near the well-head as another. To this I an- 
fwer, that whofoever, in writing a modern hiftory, fhall follow truth too 
near the heels, it may happily ftrike out his teeth. There is no miftrefs or 
guide, that hath led her followers and fervants into greater miferies. He that 
goes after her too far off, lofeth her fight, and lofeth himfelf; and he that 
walks after her at a middle diftance, I know not whether I fhould call that 
kind of courfe temper or bafenefs. It is true, that I never travelled after 
mens opinions, when I might have made the beft ufe of them; and I have 
now too few days remaining, to imitate thofe, that, either out of extreme am¬ 
bition, or extreme cowardice, or both, do yet (when death hath them on 
his fhoulders) flatter the world, between the bed and the grave. It is 
enough for me (being in that ftate I am) to write of the eldeft times; where¬ 
in alfo, why may it not be faid, that, in fpeaking of the pafs’d, I point at the 
prefent, and tax the vices of thofe that are yet living, in their perfons that 
are long fince dead; and have it laid to my charge. But this I cannot help, 
though innocent. And certainly if there be any, that, finding themfelves 
fpotted like the tigers of old time, fhall find fault with me for painting them 
over a-new, they fhall therein accufe themfelves juftly, and me falfly. 

For I proteft before the majefty of God, that I malice no man under 
the fun. Impoffible I know it is to pleafe all, feeing few or none are 
fo pleafed with themfelves, or fo affined of themfelves, by reafon of their 
fubjeftion to their private pafllons; but that they feem divers perfons in one 
and the fame day. Seneca hath faid it, and fo do I: -Unus mihi -pro populo erat: 
and to the fame eflefl Epicurus , Hoc ego non multis , fed tibi ; or (as it hath fince 
lamentably fallen out) I may borrow the refolution of an ancient philofo- 
•pher, Satis eft urns , fatis eft nullus. For it was for the fervice of that in- 
eflimable prince Henry , the fucceffive hope, and one of the greateft of the 
chriftian world, that I undertook this work. It pleafed him to perufe fome 
part thereof, and to pardon what was amifs. It is now left to the world 
without a mafter ; from which all that is prefented, hath received both blows 

and 


Digitized by 


Google 


xxxn 


The PREFACE. 

and thanks. Eadeni probamus, eadcm reprchcndtmus: bic c situs eft minis judicii, 
in quo Its fecundum pluses datur. But thefe difcourfes are idle. I know that as 
the charitable will judge charitably, fo againft thofe, qui gloriantur in malitia ? 
my prefent adverfity hath difarmed me. I am on the ground already ; and 
therefore have not far to fall; and for rifing again, as in the natural priva¬ 
tion, there is no receflion to habit; fo it is feldom feen in the privation po¬ 
litic. I do therefore forbear to {tile my readers gentle , courteous , and friendly , 
thereby to beg their good opinions, or to promife a fecond and third volume 
(which I alfo intend) if the firft receive grace and good acceptance. For 
that which is already done, may be thought enough, and too much, and it is 
certain, let us claw the reader with never fo many courteous phrafes, yet (hall 
we evermore be thought fools, that write foolifhly. For conclufion; all the 
hope I have lies in this, that I have already found more ungentle and uncourte- 
ous readers of my love towards them, and well-deferving of them, than ever 
I (hall do again. For had it been otherwife, I (hould hardly have had this 
leifure to have made my felf a fool in print. 



THE 


Digitized by 


Google 








THE 


CO NTE N T S 

OF THE 

» 

Chapters y Paragraphs , and Sections y of the First Book of the 
First Part of the History of the World. 


CHAP. I. 

Of the Creation , and Prefcrvation of the World. 


Se& I. 

T HAI"the invifiblc God is feen in bis crea¬ 
tures. Page 3 

Sed. II. 

That the w'tfefl of the heathen, whofe 
authority is not to be defpiftd, have acknowledged 
the world to have been created by God. 4 

Sea. III. 

Of the meaning of In principio, Gen. i. i. ib^ 

Sea. IV. 

Of the meaning of the words {heaven and earth ] 
Gen. i. i. 5 

Sea. V. 

That the fubftance of the waters , as mint in the 
body of the earthy is by Mofes underfood in the word 
\eartb~\ and that the earthy by the attributes of un¬ 
formed and void, is defcribed as the chaos of the 
ancient heathen. ib. 

Sea. VI. 

How it is to be underflood, that the fpirit of God 
moved upon the waters: and that this is not to be 
fearcbei curioujly. & 

Sea. VII. 

Of the light created, as the material fubjlance of 
the Jim: and of the nature of it , and difficulty of know¬ 
ledge of it: and of the excellency and ufe of it: and 
of motion , and heat annexed unto it. 7 


Sea. VIII. 

Of the firmament, and of the waters above the fir¬ 
mament : and whether there be any cryjlalline heaven, 
or any Primuin Mobile. Pag e 9 

Sea. IX. 

A conclufion, repeating the fum of the works in the 
creation, which are reduced to three heads: the crea¬ 
tion of matter i the forming of it j the finifiring of 
it. ib. 

Sea. X. 

That nature is no Principium per fe } nor form , 
the giver of being: and of our ignorance how fecond 
c aufes Jhould have any proportion with their effetls. 10 

Sea. xi. 


Of fate i and that the Jlars have great influence : 
and that their operations may divcrjly be prevented 
or furthered. ib. 

Sea. XII. 

Of prefcience. 

Sea. XIII. 

12 

Of providence. 

Sea. XIV. 

1 3 

Of predefiination. 

Sea. XV. 

ib. 


Of fortune and of the reafon of fome things that 
feem to be by fortune, and againfi reafon and provi¬ 
dence. ib ‘ 


CHAP. 


Digitized by LhOoqlc 






The CONTENTS. 


CHAP. II. 

Of man's ejlate in bis fir ft creation: and of God's reft. 


Sea. i. 

O F the image of God, according to which man was 
fir ft created. ij 

Sea. II. 

Of the intelleElual mind of man, in which there is 
much of the image of God: and that this Image is 
much deformed by fin. 17 

Sea. in. 

Of our bafe and frail bodies : and that the care 
thereof fbottld yield to the immortal foul. 18 


Sea. IV. 

Of the fpirit of life, which God breathed into man 
in bis creation. ^ 

Sea. v. 

'That man is (as it were') a little world: with a 
digreffion touching our mortality. ib. 

Sea. VI. 

Of the free power, which man had in his fir ft cre¬ 
ation to difpofe of bimfelf. 10 

Sea. VII. 

Of GocTs ceafing to create any more : and of the 
caufe thereof, becaufe the univerfal created was exceed¬ 
ing good. 21 


C H A 
Of the place 

Sea. I. 

HAT the feat of Paradife is greatly miftaken: 
and that it is no marvel that men fhould err. ji 
Sea. II. 

A recital of ftrangc opinions touching Paradile. 22 

Sea. III. 

That there was a true local Paradife, eafiward, 
in the country of Eden. ib. 

Sea. IV. 

Why it ftjould be needful to intreat diligently of the 
place of Paradife. 24 

Sea. V. 

That the flood hath not utterly defaced the marks 
of Paradife, nor caufed hills in the earth. 25 

Sea. VI. 

That Paradife was not the whole earth, as fome 
have thought , making the ocean to be the fountain of 
tbofe four rivers. 2 6 

Sea. VII. 

Of their opinion which make Paradife as high as 
the moon : and of others which make it higher than 
the middle region of the air. 27 

Sea. VIII. 

Of their opinion that feat Paradife under the Equi- 
noaial: and of the pleafant habitation under thofe 
climates. 2 8 


P. III. 

of Paradife. 

Sea. IX. 

Of the change of the names of places : and that be- 
fides that Eden in Ccelefyria, there is a country in 
Babylon, once of this name, as is proved out of Ifeiah 
57. and Ezek. 27. 28 

Sea. X. 

Of divers other teftimonies of the land of Eden : 
and that this is the Eden of Paradife. 31 

Sea. XI. 

Of the difficulty in the text , which feemetb to make 
the four rivers to rife from one fir earn. 33 

Sea. XII. 

Of the ftrange fertility and bappinefs of the Baby¬ 
lonian foil , as it is certain that Eden was fueb. 34 

sea. xiii. 

Of the river Pifon, and the land of Havi- 
lah. 35 

Sea. XIV. 

Of the river Gehon, and the land of Cufli: amt 
of the ill tranflating of ./Ethiopia for Culh, 2 Chron. 
xxi. 16. 36 

Sea. XV. 

A conclufion , by way of repetition of fome things 
fpoken of before. 39 



CHAP. IV. 

Of the two chief trees in the garden of Paradife. 


Sea. I. 

T HAT the tree of life was a material tree : 

and in wbat fenfe it is to be taken, that man, 
by his eating the forbidden fruity is made fubjeft to 
death. 40 

Sea. II. 

Of Becanus’r opinion, that the tret of knowledge 
was Ficus Indica. ib. 


Sea. III. 

Of Becanus’/ not unwittily allegorizing of the fiory 
of bis Ficus Indica. 41 

Sea. IV. 

Of the name of the tree of knowledge of good and 
evil: with fome other notes touching the fiory of 
Adam’r fin. 4* 


CHAP. 


C 


Digitized by boogie 



















of the FIRST :BOOK 


CHAP. V. 

Of divers memorable things between the fall of Adam, and the flood of Noah. 

Se£t. I. Sea. V. 

O F the caufe, and the revenge of CainV fin \ Of the long lives of the Patriarchs : and of fome 
and of bis goitte out from God. 42 of late memory. 45 

' 4 Sed. II. Sea. VI. 

Of Cain’; dwelling in the land of Nod: and of bis Of the Patriarchs delivering their knowledge by 

eitt Enoch 43 tradition: and that Enoch writ before the flood 46 

y Sea. III. Sea. VII. 

Of Mofes’i omitting fundry things concerning Cam’/ Of the men of renown before the flood. 4 7 

generation. 44 Sea. VIII. 

Sea. IV. That the giants, by Mofes fo called , were in- 

Of the diverflties in the ages of the Patriarchs, deed men of huge bodies : as alfo divers in latter 
when they begat their children. 45 times. 4 3 


CHAP. VI. 


Of idolatrous corruptions, quickly rifingy and hardly at length vanijhing in the world: and 
of the relicks of truth touching thefe ancient tirnety obfcurely appearing in fables and old legends. 


Sea. I. 

T HAT in old corruptions we may find fome flgns 
of more ancient truth. 49 

Sea. II. 

That the corruptions tbemfelves were very ancient: 
as the family of Noah, and in the old Egyptians. 50 
Sea. III. 

That in procefs of time thefe leffer errors drew on 

f r eater, as appearetb in the grtfs fuperflitions of the 
Egyptians. ib. 

Sea IV. 

That from the relicks of ancient records among the 
Egyptians and others, the firfl idols and fables were 
invented: and that the firfl Jupiter was Cain i Vul¬ 
can, Tubalcain, (flc. ib. 


Sea. V. 

Of the three chiefefl Jupiters •, and the flrange 
Jlory of the third. 51 

Sea. VI. 

Of Cham, and other wicked ones , whereof fome 
gat, fome affected the name of Gods. 54 

Sea. VII. 

That the wifer of the ancient heathen had far bet¬ 
ter opinions of God. ib. 

Sea. VIII. 

That Heathenifm and Judaiftt, after many wounds , 
were at length about the fame time under Julian mi- 
raculoufly confounded. 56 

Sea. IX. 

Of the faff refuges of the devil to maintain bis 

kingdom. 57 


CHAP, m 

Of Noah’* flood. 


Sea. I. 

O F God’s forewarning : andfome human teflimo- 
nies: and fome doubting touching the truth of 
Noah'/ flood. 57 

Sea. II. 

Of the flood in the time of Ogyges : and that this 
was not Noah*! flood. 58 

Sea. III. 

Of Deucalion’; flood: and that this was not Noah*! 
flood: nor the Umbri in Italy a remnant of any uni- 
verfal flood. 59 

Sea. IV. 

Of fome other records teflifying the univerfal flood: 
and of two ancient deluges in Egypt: and of fome 
olfewhert. 60 

Sea. V. 

That the flood of Noah was fupernatural, tho' fome 
f*J it might have been fore-feen by the ftars. 61 

Sea. VI. 

That there was no need of any new creation of mat¬ 
ter to make the univerfal flood: and what are Cata- 
raaas Coeli, Gen. vii. 11. 6z 


Sea. VII. 

Of fome remainder of the memory of Noah among 
the heathen. 62 

Sea. VIII. 

Of fundry particulars touching the Ark : as the place 
where it was made ; the matter > faflnon •, and name. 6 2 
Sea. IX. 

That the Ark was offufllcicnt capacity. 64 

Sea. X. 

That the Ark refled upon part of the hill Tau¬ 
rus ( or Caucafus) between the Eaft-Indies and Scy¬ 
thia. 66 

i. I. 

A Pretention of fome queflions lefs material: with 
a note of the ufe of this queflion, to find out the 
metropolis of nations. ib. 

-I-. II. 

Apropofal of the common opinion , that the Ark 
refled upon fome of the hills of Armenia. ib 

+. III. 

The firfl argument againfl the common opinion. They 
that came to build Babel, would have come fooncr, had 
they come from fo near a place as Armenia. 67 

[. IV. 


Digitized by 


Google 





The C 


O N T E N T S 


+. IV. 

The fecond argument -‘that the eafiern people were 
more ancient in populofity, and in all human glory. 7 

v. 

The third argument ; from the wonderful ref fiance 
which Semiramis found in the^ Eafl: Indies. i . 

The fourth argument i from divers conf derations 

in the perfon of Noah. 

j. VII. 

Of the fenfefs opinion of Annius thecommentator 
upon Berofus that the ark rcfled upon Montes Caf- 
pii in Armenia v and yet upon Gordari, which are 
300 miles diflant alfo in Armenia, and yet tn bey- 

thia. ^ 

+. VIII. 

The fifth argument ; the vine mufl grow naturally 

near the place where the ark refted. 7 ° 

+. IX. 

Anfwer to an objection out of the words of the text. 
The Lord fcactercd them from thence upon the face 
of the whole earth. 7 1 


+• X. 

An anfwer to an objection from the name of Ararat 
taken for Armenia: and the height of the bills there. 71 

f. XI. 

Of Caucafus, and divers far higher hills than the 
Armenian. 7 2 

"f. XII* 

Of divers incongruities , if in this Jlory we fhould 
take Ararat for Armenia. lb - 

f. XIII. 

Of the contrary fituation of Armenia to the place 
noted in the text : and that it was no marvel, that the 
fame ledge of hills running from Armenia to India, 
Jbould keep the fame name all along, and even in India 

be called Ararat. lb * 

+. XIV. 

Of the befl vine naturally growing on the fouth-fide 
of the mountains Caucafi, and towards the Eaft-In- 
dies: and of other excellencies of the foil. 73 

+. XV. 

The conclufion, with a brief repeating of divers 
chiefpoints. 


CHAP. VIII. 

Of the firflplanting of nations after the flood: and of the fons of Noah * Shcm, Ham, and Japhet, by 
J whom the earth was npcopled. 


W 1 


Scbt. I. 

r Hetber Shem and Ham were elder than Ja¬ 
phet. 74 

Scft. II. 

Of divers things that in all rcafon are to be pre¬ 
sumed, touching the firfl planting of the world •, as that 
all biflorics mufl yield to Moles : that the world was 
not planted all at once , nor without great direction * 


+. I- 


Q F Jofephus’/ tale of an Ethiopcfs_ wife to 


Mofes, grounded on the miflaking of the feat 
of Chulh. 85 

J f. II. 

A difpute avainjl the tale of Jofephus. 86 

' +• IIL 

Chufli ill expounded for Ethiopia, Ezekiel xxix. 

Tint .... — ■— - o jq, . 87 

and that the known great lords of the firfl ages, were * .j-. iy. 

of the iffut of Ham. 75 Another place of Ezekiel xxx. 9. in the likemau- 

Sea. III. ner miftaken. tb. 

Of the ifles of the Gentiles in Japhet’/ portion : of ... +\ V * ., 

Berofus’/ too fpeedy feating Gomer the fon of Ja- A place, Ifaiahxvm. \.tn like manner corrupted by 

phet in Italy •, and another of Japhet’/ fons Tubal taking Chufli for Ethiopia. ib. 

in Spain: and of the antiquity of longinque navtga- f. VI. 

Tljat upon the like miflaking, both Terhaka tn the 
Sc-a IV fl° r y °f Sennacherib, and Zera in the jlory of Afa, 

Of Gog and Magog" * Tubal and Mefech, feated *re unadvifed/y made Ethiopians. 88 

r-vK about Afia/ie lets,out o/Exekiel xxxvm. 39. 78 . T- V11 - ... ., 

fi'fl aooui xxi • j , j A farther expofit ton of the place , Ifaiah xvm. 1. ib* 

Sea. V. sea. IX. 

Again (l the fabulous Berofus’/ fin ion, that the 0 / the plantation and antiquities of Egypt. 89 
Italian Janus was Noah. 80 

Sea VI ___ +. I. 

That Gomer alfo andhis fon Togorma, of the po- 'T**? Mizraim the chief planter of Egypt, and 
, were firfl feated about Afia the lefs: A the refi of the fons of Ham, were feated in or- 


Jlerity of Japhet, 
and that from thence they fpread weflward into Eu- 
rope j and northward into Sarmatia. 81 

Sea. VII. 


der, one by another. ‘b. 

f. II. 

Of the time , about which the name of Egypt be- 
00.1. » *»• nan to be known: and of the Egyptians lunary years. 

Of Javan the fourth fon of Japhet ^ and of Meich, which made their antiquities feem the more fabulous, ib, 
of Aram, and Mefech of Japhet. 82 j-. HI. 

Sea. VIII. Of certain vain affertions of the antiquit:es of the 

Of Afcanez and Riphath, the two elder fons of Egyptians. ^ 

*"* 0inC <>.q. ^ Againfl Percrius-, that it is not unlikely, but that 

*****/*. 

fi cat ton of 1 harlis, either for a proper name y or for . J , , , r it nn j OQ 

*//- fat 84 thc ™ orlcl > were P eo P led be f ore tbe A 00 *' 90 

Seft. X. Of fome other reafons agatnfl the opinion of Perc- 

‘TLit the feat of Chufh, the eldefl % fcn of Ham, rius. 9 l 

was in Arabia, not in Ethiopia: and of flrangc fa- J'. V r I. 

bles 9 and ill tranflxtions of Jcripture, grounded upon Of the words of Mofes, Gen. x. ult. whereupon 
the miflaking of this point . 85 Pererius grounded his opinion . Vr 

t. ^ “* 


Digitized by 


Google 











of the FIRST BOOK 

f. VII. ^ 

Pta> 

OnU tlm . /M/m , f Canaan, , fc/wrt/ 0/(fo ^ **Xl<r. ^ 

f. I. Jeremy, cap. 9. v. 7. 1 ^ ^ /Aw <>/■ 

^ F /& of tbt 1**1 of Canaan; nr ,, . _ , Setf. X V. ib - 

names of bis eleven fons . •. w tffue of Sem. 

■L ” 10, 95 


*/ 


o 


nr , . +* «• 

°J tbe portions of Zidon and Heth 

—.. , f. III. 

Of tbe Jcbufitcs, <»«</ Amorites 
f. IV. 

0 //& Gergefites, Hivites, and Hzrkites. 

Of Sini 4/7*/ Arvadi. 

0/ Zcmari. + ‘ VL 

Of Hamathi. VIt 
Scft. XIII. 


ib - Qf Him. Aflor ArpLd. w w 
93 0 / Aram, and bis fons. 

*f* • iv. 


ib. 

97 


ib. °f tbe fons of Jodlan, tbe other fin of Hcbcr. 99 
r \^Hat the mofl of tbe Ton's of Cl,, n, Into lbe Eaft ^Indlt*/^* °^j J?^ an > t»bo alfo faffed 

fcsaiSsSSii^l 


C H A P.ix. 

Of a. ague W ,„ MMg e/ {tww 

AJf( , Sea. I. 

v 3 ^ ff m * be fi r Jlgovernment un- Of th j Scft ‘ ***• 

f ^ of ,b, firft kinis . 

Scft, IJ 101 T 

**■* ™fZr!:r:z i/J*** «*** «* 

ib. 


chap. x. 

Of Nimrod, Betas, «*f Ninus • ./ 

’ ^ m '*orable things about thofe times. 

Tfj al , T . Sea. I. 

re &td like f 0 t“!J„ e f r f *f ter tbe flood that n't, Sea. V. 

*£“• -■ v “i; 

77,., v . Sea. Ill I0 ^ °/ tbe name of Bclus 

//,/, . mr0d > W/ A/TIip *i ■; xr. ***•*. 7 » 0// ^ WWW 

o„, ro -va ^ 

Of tbe An &< ^. VI. I0 7 in Babel. & t f wages, begun from Beluc 

^ ^;cv/ N,mrod ^Bclus, « /jr 4J 0/ . Sea. VIII. Jb ' 

io 9 Zoroafter.^ N,nUS 1 ^ •/ «*r 


11. 


Is 


chap. 


Digitized by LiOOQlC 






The CON T ENTS 


CHAP. Xl. 

O/Zoroaftcr, fuppofed to have been the chief author of Magic arts: and of divers kinds of Magic. 

Se £^ i demning of the magicians, doth not jufiify all their 

T HAT Zoro&tr was not Cham, nor the firfi in- practices. „ 117 

vent or of aftrology, or of magic: and that . „ 

there were divers great magicians of this name. 113 The abufe of things , which may e found in nil 

& g e( c^ u # kinds-, is not to condemn the right ufe of them. 1 j S 

OF the name of Magia : and that it was anciently Seft. VI. 

fardiverfe from conjSirg and witchcraft. 114 Of the divers ™S 1C * lb - 

That the good knowledge in 'the ancient magic is Of divers ways by which the devilfeemeth to work 

not to be condemned thd the devil here , as in other bis wonders. vTTI 1 ' ^ 

kinds,hath fought to obtrude evil things under the name 5 e«. vni. 

and colour of good things. ” 6 rhat none was everraifedfrom thedead by the 

Sett. IV. power of the devil: and that it was not the true Sa- 

That Daniel’* mijltking Nabuchodonofor’r con- muel which appeared to Saul. 120 


CHAP. XII. 

Of the memorable buildings of Ninus: and of his wife Scmiramis: and of other her alls. 

Sc< 5 t. I. Se< 5 t. IV. 

O f the magnificent building of Nineveh by Ninus: Of her expedition into India, and death after 

and of Babylon by Scmiramis. 121 difeomfitnre : with a note of the improbability of her 


Sett. II. , vices. 122 

Of the end of Ninus: and beginning of Semiramis’x 

ib # ocdti V. 

re, & ,u jjj of the temple of Bclus, built by Semiramis: and 

Of Semiramis ’s parentage , and education: and me- of the pyramids of Egypt. ib. 

tamorphofis of her mother. ib. 


The Contents of the Chapters, Paragraphs, and Sections, in the Second 
Book of the Firft Part of the History of the World. 

C H A P. I. 

Of the time of the birth of Abraham: aed of the ufe of this qnejlion, for the ordering of 

the (lory of the Aflyrian empire. 


Scd. I. 

F fomc of the fucceJJ'ors of Scmiramis: with 
a brief tranjlation to the quefiion , about the 
time of the birth of Abraham. 123 

Sea. 11. 

A propofal of reafons or arguments , that are brought 
to prove Abraham war born in the year 292 after the 
flood , and not in the year 352.. 124 

Sea. III. 

The anfwer to one of the objections propofed , (hewing 
that Abraham made but one journey out of Mefopota- 
mia into Canaan j and it , after his father's death, ib. 

Sea. iv. _ 

The anfwer to another of the objections propofed , 
fhewing that it was not unlikely, that T erah Jboidd be¬ 
get Abraham in his hundred and thirtieth year. 126 

Sea. V. 

The anfwer to t wo more of the objections , fhewing 
that we may have certainty of Abraham’j age from 
the fcriplurcy though we make not Abraham the 
eldefi fen : and that there was great caufc , why in 
the flory of Abraham his two brothers JJjould be re- 
fpcllcd. ib. 


Sea. VI. 

That the naming of Abraham firjl of the three 
brethren , Gen. xi. 26. doth not prove that be was 
the eldefi : together with divers reafons , proving that 
Abraham was not the eldefi fon 0/Terah. 127 
Sea. VII. 

A conclufion of this difpute , noting the authors on both 
fides : with an admonition , that they which fborten the 
times, make all ancient ftories the more improbable. 12S 

Sea. VIII. 

. A computation of the times of the AfTyrians and 
others-, grounded upon the times noted in the fioryof 
Abraham." 129 

Sea. XI. 

That Amraphel, one of the four kings whom Abra¬ 
ham overthrew , Gen. xiv. may probably be thought 
to have been Ninias the fon of Ninus. 1 30 

Sea. X. 

Of Arioch, another of the four Kings: and that 
Ellas, whereof he is (aid to have been king, ties be¬ 
tween Coelefyria, and Arabia Pctrara. ib. 

Sea. XI. 

Of Tidal, another of the four kings. 131 

Sta. xif. 



Digitized by LiOOQie 













of the FIRST BOOK, 

Sc< 5 t. XII. , . . 

That Chedorlaomer, ibt thitf of tbe four kings, tIfiS're°vUb ''tbuTllZ'- f ,,j a! 'try bad 

■MS not of Aflyria, bus o/Perfia: and that she Ally- fo retained the names J"/*""'* 'bemfclvci, and 
rim mplreaubu time math impaired. At {am, ZbiebifTh, r. f “*’"*'***** tbey 

Sta. xih. i npw *»■ 

That it was not improbable, that the four kings bad other difficulties * °* }0 “ Oie 6ur J clv!s with many 

J 3 ’ 


CHAP. ir. 

Of tb, kings of Egypt from tbefrfi pe-pling „ ,be time of, be delivery of tb, Ifrariacs 

Sc( 5 t I 

A Brief of the names and times of the firfl kings of of Ofiris. ^ * nto P c ** the time o/Orus, the fon 
IX Egypt: with a note of the canfes of difficulty ’ * 3 6 

inrefolving of the truth in thefe points. i54. r\c u TT W .* ’ 

Sect IL 34 °f T yP, h ° n > Hercules, Egypcius, Orus, and 

That by the account of the Egyptian Dynafties . ra \ n f , ° . %° j 5 S ’ J ucce J]tvtly reigning after M\z- 
and otberwife , it appears that Clnm’j reign in Egypt ^ r j. * an> °' dtvcri err °rs about the former Sefo- 
began in the year after the food 191. ib. ' 1 3 7 

Sett. III. Sett. VII. 

That thefe Dynafties were not divers families of °f Bufiris, the firjl op/r/eftor of the IlVaelitcs: and 
kings , but rather fucccfjions of regents •, oft-times ma- °fbis fucceffor queen Tlicnnutis, that took up Mofcs 
ny under one king. out of the water. • ^ 

q p a ivr * 3 ® 

O/Cham, and bisfmWlsmm, or Ofiri, ib. Of.be ,m. brosbnaof fan Thcrmuti a: and 

Of Ibt time when Ofiris’j reign „M: and sha, Zboi, 7 a's‘fmlfiAt'",URd/if"'' 


CHAP. III. 


Of the delivery of Ifracl out of Egypt. 


O Sett. I. 

F the time of Mofes’i birth ; and how long the 
Ifraehtes were oppreffed in Egypt. j^q 

Sett. II. 

,h?JAT “'ir" ?’ m E SW'. ’uuuiomd in 
this ft or y, or elfewbcre tnthe feripture. 140 

Sett. Ill 


Sett. V. 

OfPhirzoh’spur/utt of the Ifraelites: and of their 
paffage towards the Red fea, fo far as Succoth. 14 ? 

Sect. VI. 

Of the folary and lunary years: and how they are 
reconciled: with the form of the Hebrew year' and 
oecc. in. - their manner of intercalation. . 

Of the cruelty againft the Ifraelites young children nr , r Scrt ‘ V11 * 

•n Egypt: and of Mofes’i prefervation and educa- » °f \ hc pa ^ a ft e ofllraclfrom Succoth towards the 
tm - ‘ • -■-£*“ / M; and °t the divers ways leading out of 

Sett. VIII. * 

Of their paffage over the Red fea : and of the Red 
feet it feIf. , J ib 

Sett. IX. 

That tin paffage through the Red/™ was miracu- 

iOUS t Clnd not At n. Inntt shL r> 


I4i 


nr** r Sett. IV * 

of fi yin& . ° Ut °f E gyP c * a » d the opinions 

nil- a 'a a r C ! ent hiftorians of his war in Ethio- 
ll ’ ‘T ° f n b “ mrri W there : Philo’, judgment of 

oAl, ft fob ^ “/ Pererius '/ * took, »/ 

142 



of.b, ofIh! I(m]iKsfnm tbe plact ^ tbi im 

j dijeourfe of laws. - * 

ftty Zdib & / r °\°V* y * : 'of”be ° f th<! definition °f laws > * nd the la ™ eternal - 

} until the Amalekues met with tbe Ifradkes.140 Sett. VI. 

qc . Sett. II. Of tbe law of Nature. 

on o{caZ» X T\i 6 T' , Midianitcs ’ and Kenites, up- Sett. VII. 

Jethroh ,„J S b . at tie with tbe Anialekites, and °f the written law of Cod. 

Vidian, W 0 etn & a was prieft of Sett. VIII. 

r\ Sett III , 1 5 ° Of the unwritten law of God, given to the patriarchs 

the time 1 • ^ ^^udition. 

£07H ^endaticm nf tl ^ ***• was & iven : divers Scft. IX 

ns of tbe invention of laws rr T nr ti i * • / » . . , 

Seel IV J l $ l morale judicial, and ceremonial law: with 

p . 0 / tbe name and meaning nf /A* rv ,t ‘ , * note prefixed, bow the feripture fpcaketb not al - 

Z f he uioids , Law, and ways in one J'enfe , when it nameth the law of Mo 
ib. fes. 157 


152 

154 
1 r ,G 


Digitized by 


Go 


i57 
Sett. X. 









The CONTENTS 

Se£t X that the difficulty is not in tcfpeEl of the cow* 

A propofol of nine other points to be conftdered , mandments, but by ,6 ° 

d /oafA 0/ / 6 e ^ ///fore wore not any religion , »cr judgment tocome. 

Of the fixth point , /# '«*, V the difference and yettbeDcc a \ogu C wer^oftn^arytobeobferv'd.x6z 
agreement of the old and^new^teftament. 159 ^ human law, written and unwritten. 1 63 

Of the reft of That only the prince is exempt from human laws* 

Of the federal commandments of the Decalogue: and in what fort. 1 65 


CHAP. V. 


The flory of the Ifraelites, from the receiving of the law to the death of Mofes. 


Sea. I; 

O r the numbering and difpofing of the hoft of 
Ifrael, for their marches through the wtldernefs ; 
with a note of the reverence given to the worfhip of 
God, in this ordering of their troops. 166 

Seft. II. 

The offerings of the twelve princes : the paffover 
of the Second year : the departing of Jethro. 168 

J Sea. III. 

The voyage from Horeb to Kades: the mutinies 
by the way : and the caufe of thtir turning back to 

'*' Rcd/M - sea. IV. 

Of their unwillingnefs to return: with the punifh- 
ment thereof: and of divers accidents in the return. 169 

Sea. v. 

Of Mofes’r arrival at Zin-Kades, and the acci¬ 
dents while they abode there. * 7 ° 


Sea. VI. 

Of their comparing Idumea, and travelling to 
Arnon, the border of Moab. 17* 

Sea. VII. 

Of the book of the battels of the Lord , mentioned 
in this flory ; and of other books mentioned in ferip- 
ttire, which are loft. 1 7 z 

Sea. VIII. 

Of MofesV /paring the iffue of Lot, and of the 
giants in thofe parts > and of Sehon and Og. 173 

Sea. IX. 

Of the troubles about the Midianites, and of 
MofesV death. *74 

Sc-a. X. 

Obfervations out of the flory of Mofes > how 
God difpofeth both the fmallefl occafions, and the 
great eft reft fiances, to the cffeHtvg of his purpofe. ib. 


CHAP. VI. 


- th whm the Ifraelites had dealing after their coming out of Egypt; and of the me* 
the Urn, of Utb mi Jolhua , «M <*./«. of *. Jjfe, 

of Jolhua. 


Sea. I. 

H o IV the nations, with whom the Ifraelites were 
to have war , were divers ways (as it were) 
prepared to be their enemies. >75 

oCCt. U • 

Of the kints of the Canaanites and Midianites, 
mentioned in he ancient wars of the Ifraelites 176 

Sea. III. 

Of the Amalekites and Ifmaelites. 177 

Sea IV. 

Of the inftauration of civility in Europe about 
thc/e times j and of Prometheus and Atlas. 178 


Sea. V. 

Of Deucalion and Phaeton. 179 

Sea. VI. 

Of Hermes Trifmegiftus. ib. 

Sea. VII. 

Of Jannes and Jambres, and fome other that 
lived about tbofe times. 181 

Sea. VIII. 

A brief of the hiftory of Jolhua, and of the fpace 
between him and Othoniel; and of the remainders 
of the Canaanites: with a note of fome contempora¬ 
ries to Jolhua ; and of the breach of faith 1S3 


CHAP. VII. 


Of the tribes of Ifrael that were planted in the borders of Phenicia > with fundry ft or its depending 

upon thofe places. 


sc a. I. +. 1. 

1 pm Proem to the defeription of the whole bounds of the tribe of Alhcr. 

t II. 


189 

ib. 


land of Canaan •, with an expofition of the 1 
name of Syria. >86 Of Zidon. 

1 Sea II. +• III. 

. Of the bounds of the land of Canaan j and of the Of Sarepta, with a brief hiftory of Tyre in tht 
promifes touching this land. 187 fame coaft . 

Sea. III. +• IV. 

The tribe of After. 189 Of Ptolemais, or Aeon. 


Digitized by 


Googl< 


192 

t. V. 












of the S E C O N D BOOK, 


+. v. 

Of tbe caflle of S. George. ,p 2 

+. VI. 

Of Acziba, Sandalium, and others. ib 

+. VII. 

Of Thoron, Gifcala, andfome others. iq? 
+. VIII. 

Of the rivers and mountains of After. ib. 

Sed. IV. 

‘the tribe of Nephtalim. 

+. I. 

O F the bounds of Nephtalim; and of Heliopo¬ 
lis, and Abila. ib 

+. II. 

Of Hazor. 

t- III. 

Of Cefarea Philippi. 


Of Capernaum, ,f De capofc l$6 

Of Hamath. 

f, yj, l 97 

Of Reblatha, and Rama, and divm other tnm. 

„ ■ Seft. V. 198 

The tribe of Zabulon. 

Sed. VI. 199 

TI)e tribe of Ifachar. 

, Sed. VII. 200 

The half of the tribe of ManalTe. 2 oi 



j °f tbe kingdom of Phenicia. 

f I 'HE bounds and chief cities, and founders and nr n • » Sed. III. 

ofl ,r m r° f i ki L gdom » and °f the invention tingalonT'tbe ReTr *** '^, Idumeans > *”habi- 
of letters afenbed to them. , t/m.™ j , f ea * were tbe progenitors of the 

u , Scdl - 11 - l y dZjh? d ; b il tb . e Jy^ from them r/cehei 

Of the kings of Tyre. 205 brought into Phemcu the knowledge of the true 

---_- 206 


CHAP. IX. 

Of tbe tribe of Ephraim, and of the kino< n f ,1 

if e ten tribes , whofc bead was Ephraim. 
Sed. J. r 

Sed. III. 


Q F the memorable places^in the tribe of Ephraim, 

A 0/rt, e/ „; hSt frm Jenlx Jo> ^ Of' Achab and hi, f„ cc , ffm , „„ 

210 


211 


* ‘—t r ■* «..../ m_. 


'Sb , 0 ’" 1 ’* " ” 

219 


The tribe of Simeon H ‘ 

Tbe tribe of Judah.^^' ^ 

The tribe of Reubc^'J^, borders% 


21 4 Of the Dead fea. 


+. IV. 
+. V. 


220 

2,5 

217 nr r Sed. V - 

— M-. - GadiKS> 

Schon, ^ 0 / Ammonites, £# * 

Of ,, t. II. lb ' Gd vrn frm Og, , trt i^ ,f Bala/ Vu 


ib. 


CHAP. XI. 

y f the Syrians, the chief borderers of the Ifraelites, that dwelt on the eajl of Jordan 

0 ' « - * *” ft ~ , 

Scdl r S ft IV 

^ •/ Damaicas, and of the ero-w iS^u otber le ^ er kingdoms of the Syrians, which be - 

WV their power. 7 ^ ***»• rtr AlTyrians, 

228 tbemjelves again. j. 

H A P*> 


Digitized by 


GR 









The 


CONTENTS 


Sett. I. 

O F divers memorable places in the tribe ''./’Ben¬ 
jamin, whereof Hicricho, Gilgal, Mitfpa, 
Bethel, Rama, Gobah, and Gibha. 231 

Sett. II. 

Of divers memorable things concerning Jerufalem 


CHAP. XII. 

Of the tribe of Benjamin, and of Jerufalem. 

A tt. III. 

Of the : .. of J:ruf.ilcm by the Romans. 

234 


Sea. IV. 

Of she vain ami malicious reports cf heathen wti- 

2 35 


233 ters, touching she ancient Jews. 


CHAP. XIII. 

Of the memorable things that happened in the world , from the death of Jofnua to the war of Troy 
J which was about the time of Jephtna. 


243 


Sett. I. Sett. 

O F the Intcr-regnum after JoIhuaV death i and Of the expedition of the Argonauts. 

of Othoniel. 2 35 Sett. VII. 

Sett. II. 0/ Abimelech, Tholah, and Jair ^ and of the 

Of the memorable things of this age tn other na- La tha , and 0 f ThcP.us, Hippolytus; (ffic. and 
tions i and of the difficulty in the computation of times . , of xhebcs ws this age. 24 3 

27.0 J J 

Sett. III. Sett. ^ 

Of Ehud’t time ; and of Proferpina Orithya, Of the war of 1 hebes which was in this ag\ 

Tereus, Tantalus, Tityus, Admetus, and others that IX 47 

li.ed about theft times^ ^ jy. 37 j eplitlta, and how the three hundred years 

Of Debora, and her contemporaries. 240 which be fpeaketh of Judg. x . 28. arc to be recon- 

J Sett. V. died with the places y Att. Xiii. 20. 1 Aqj. vi. j. 

Of Gideon, and of Dx-dalus, Sphinx, Minos, together with feme other things touching Chronology 

and others that lived in this age. *4' about thefe times. 24c, 


CHAP. XIV. 


Of the war of Troy. 


Sett. I. 

F the genealogy of the kings of Troy \ with 
a note , touching the ancient poets, how they 
have obferved bijiorical truth. 253 

Sett. II. 

Of the rape of Helen, and of the Jlrength of both 
fides for the war. 256 

Sett. III. 

Of the Grecians journey and embaffy to Troy •, 
and of Helena’; being detained m Egypt} and of the 
facrificing of Iphigenia. 257 


Sett. IV. 

. Of the alls of the Grecians at the fege. 23S 
Sett. V. 

Of the taking of Troy •, the wooden horfe \ the 
books of Dares and Dittys j the colonies of the re¬ 
liefs of Troy. ' 239 

Sett. VI. 

Of the diflreffes and difperfons cf the Greeks, 
returning from Troy. 260 



CHAP. XV. • 

Of Sampfon, Eli, and Samuel. 

Sett. I. fall j and the fending back of the ark. 

O F Sampfon. 260 

Sett. II. Sett. III. 

Of Eli i and of the ark taken ; and of Dagon’x Of Samuel \ and of his government. 


261 


CHAP. XVI. 
Of S A U L. 


Sett. I. 


Sett. IV. 


O F the deliberation to change the government in- Of Saul’* difobcdicnce in his proceedings in tie 
to a kingdom. 263 wars with the Philiftincs and Amalikitcs, which 

Sett. II. caufed bis final rcyeflion. 266 

Of the election of Saul. 264 Sett. V. 

Sett. III. Of the occurrents between the rejection of Saul, 

Of the ejlablijhing of Saul by his firjl viflories. 265 and his death. 267 

Sett. VI. 


Digitized by 


Google 
















of the SECOND BOOK 


sea. VII. 


Sea. VI. 

Of fuel as lived •with Samuel and Saul ; of Hel- 
lcn and Hercules, and of their iffues , upon occafon Of Homer and j 

of the Dores, with the Heracildae, entering Pelo- world that happened about ’thfaZ^ CUngti ‘ a the 
ponnelus about this time. 269 ju age. 270 


CHAP. XVII. 
Of David. 


Sea. I. 

F David*/ efate in the time of Saul. 271 
Sea. II. 

Of the beginning of David’/ reign i and the war 
made by Abner for Ilhbolheth. 272 

Sea. HI. 

Of the death of Abner, flain by Joab; and of 
Ifhbofheth, by Rechab and Baanah 272 '~' J *" t “V* acf * °f i-»aviu. / 

jy tbe revenge upon Joab and Shimei. 

Of the flourifhing time of David’/ kingdom ; the 
taking of JeHifalem } with two overthrows given to 
the Philiftines j and the conduction of the ark to the 


Sea. V. 

‘The overthrow of the Philiftincs and Moabites, 2 -1 
Sea. VI. / + 

The war which David made upon the Syrians. ib 
Sea. VII. 

Of David’/ troubles in his reign, and of his forces. 

Sea. viii. 275 

Adoni J ah ’' faction ; 

27S 


city of David. 


Sea. IX. 

Of the treafures of David and Solomon. 2 So 

Sea. X. 

Qf tb j Philiftines, whom David abfvlutcly r?ialter'd ; 

281 


ih J cr J , ’ ""'"" ± ' avi ' J <*vjoittreiyma; 

id. and offundry other contemporaries with David. 


chap. XVIII. 
Of Solomon. 


Sea. I. 


O F the eflablifhing of Solomon ; of Birthright • A*tr?r ^ * (oncett c f tv:o A a ”g e Plages about 

>7 ani , °f th ' cau J' e of Adonijah’/ death; and of ~ Tv 28 5 

Solomon’/ wifdom. “ J Sect. IV. 

Sea. II. 23 Of the fall of Solomon } and how Lug be lived. 2 S 6 

Of Solomon’/ buildings and glory. 2 g, Seed:. V. 

nr ci » /• , SeC *‘ °f Solomon’/ writings. -a- 

. Of Solomons fending to Ophir ; and of feme fee m- cJvr 7 

mg contradictions about Solomon’/ riches • Ld nf nr ,1 

3 an a of Of the contemporaries of Soloinon. 2S8 


t rl A r. 


AI Aa 


Of Solomon 'sfucceffors until the end of Jehofliaph.it. 


b p in P h Z r -> tbe defection of the 
bcs * °f Jeroboam’/ idolatry. 288 

V r\r T> 1 1 Sect. II. 

ed byTr im *f' ty ' f° r M he Punifh- 
y MaC ’ °f bts ond and contemporaries. 290 

Sect. III. 

witha coSf b T! bctWeen J er °boam and Abia: 

y °f tkc samples of God's judgments. 

ib. 


291 


Sect. IV. 

Of Afa, and his contemporaries. 

Sea. V. 

Of the great alteration falling out in thc ten tribes 
during the reign of Ah. 2q , 

Sect. VI. y ~ 

/ conjecture of the caufes hindering the re- union 
oj Urael with Judah, which might have been effect¬ 
ed by theft troubles. 2 q 

Sect. VII. 

Of Jehofhaphat and his contemporaries. 294 


C H A P. XX. 


Of Jehoram, the fon of Jehofhaphat} W Ahazia. 

^ * m ™ a ^”*detmgfundry times. 296 Of the miferies falling upon Jehoram ; and of his 

°Y tbe motiv " induci "i ‘be sea. v. 298 

making b, s f on fhonm king ^ *** '* °f. tbe f'W °f Ahaziah, and his bufinefs with 

— 2 97 the king of Ijracl. n QO 


^ings of TehnVam**"/ . , Sea. VI. 

“ nd th c rebellion of Edom Zi Lib™ Y°f V Ahaib P cri f bcd ™‘ tb the boufe of Ahab ; 

• 29S an.> bon* th.it faintly w. 7 .s defrayed by Jehu. ih. 

Digitized by GdbVItt 


Sea. III. 












The 


CONTENTS 

CHAP. XXI. 

Of Athalia, and whofe fon be was that fucceeded unto her. 


3°4 


I i"* 

O F Athalia’; ufurping the kingdom, , and what That Joas did not defend from Nathan. 

pretences fie might Jorge. 3 That Joas may probably be thought to ha ve been 

, r , . i ,j the [on of Jchoram. ib. 

i Ifrael, fo that he could J J IV. 

302 Upon what reafons Athalia might feek to defiroy 
Toas, if he were her own grand-child. 305 

3°3 Scd. VI. 


pretences fie might Jorge. 

Sed. II. 

How Jehu f pent bis time in 
not moled Athalia. 

Sea. III. 

Of Athalia’; government. 


Sea. IV. 

Of the prefervation of Joas. 

Sea. V. 

Jfhofe Con Joas was 

+. I- 


A digreffion , wherein is maintain'd the liberty of 
ib. ufing conjecture in biflories. 306 

Sea. VII. 

!The confpiracy again/l Athalia. 

Sea. VIII. 


304 
teen 

ib. and Jezebel 


WjHether Joas may bethought likely to have been The death of Athalia } with a compart fon of her 
VV the fon of Ahazia. ’ ¥ 


307 

' her 

308 


CHAP. XXII. 

Of Joas and Amazia, with their contemporaries > where fomewbat of the building of Carthage. 

Sea. I. Sea. VIII. 

O F Joas’; doings wbilft Jehoiada the prieft lived. Of Amaziah’; war againft Edom \ his apoftacy ; 

309 and overthrow by Joas. 313 

Sea. II. _ p n TY 

The death of Jehoiada, andapofacy of Joas. ib. . r . / , . , f 

J J g e( fj. hi J A difeourfe of the reafons hindering Joas from uni- 

Tbe caufes and time of ‘the Syrians invading Judah J“ d * h i0 * he , cr ™? 6 f ? fracl >‘* hen h ‘ bad 
in the dan of Toas ib. Jcrulalem, and held Amazia pr if oner. The end of 

J Sea. IV. Joas’; reign. 315 

IIow Zachariah was murdered by Joas. 310 Sea. X. 

Sea. V. The end of Amaziah’; reign and life. 317 

How Joas was fhamcfully beaten by the Aramites ; 
of bis death. 3 »* . Sea. XI. 

Sea. VI. Of the inter-regnum, or vacancy , that was in the 

Of the princes living in the time of Joas*, of the kingdom of Judah after the death of Amaziah. 318 
time when Carthage was built ; and of Pido. 312 

sea vii. Sc-a. xiii. 

The beginning of Amazia’; reign. Of Joas, king Of princes contemporary with Amaziah ; and 
of Ifrael, and Elifia the prophet. ib. more particularly of Sardanapalus. ib. 


C PI A P. XXIII. 

Of Uzziah. 

Sea. I. Sea IV. 


T HE profperity of Uzziah, and of Jeroboam 
the fecond , who reigned with him in Ifrael of 
the anarchy that was in the ten tribes after the death 
of Jeroboam, Zachariah, Sallum, Manheim, and 

Pekahia. 319 

Sea II. 

The end of Uzziah’; reign and life. 321 

Sea. III. 

Of the prophets which lived in the time of Uz¬ 
ziah i and of princes then ruling in Egypt j and in 
fome other countries. 322 


Of the Aflyrian kings defeending from Phul; and 
whether Phul and Belofus were one perfon , or heads 
of fundry families , that reigned apart in Nineveh 
and Babylon 322 

Sea. V. 

Of the Olympiads, and the time when they began. 

328 

Sea. VI. 

Of Jodiam, and his contemporaries. 329 

Sea. VII. 

Of Acbaz, and his contemporaries. 330 


CHAP. XXIV. 


Of the antiquities of Italy } and foundation of Rome in the time of Ahas. 

Sea. I. Sea. III. 

Q F the old inhabitants j and of the name of Of the ancient kings of the Latins until TEneas’; 
Ital y- 331 coming. 025 

Sea. IV. 

Sea. II. Of TEncas *, and of the kings and governors of 


Alba. 


334 


Of the Aborigines, and other inhabitants of La- Sea. V. 

tium •, and of the reafon of the names of Latini and Of the beginning of Rome ; and of Romulus’; 
Latium. 332 birth and death. 33.3 

C H A P. 


Digitized by 


Google 










of the S E C O N D BOOK. 


CHAP. XXV. 

Of Ezekiah, and bis contemporaries. 


Sed. I. 

O F the beginning of Ezekias, and of the agree¬ 
ing of Ptolemy’/ Nabonafiar, Nabopolaflcr, 
and Mardocempadus, with the biftory of the bible. 

33 $ 

Sea. II. 

Of the danger and deliverance of Judea from Sen* 
nacherib. 338 


Sea. hi. 

Of Ezekias’/ ficknefs and recovery } and of the 
Babylonian king that congratulated him. 77a 

Sea. IV. 

The kings that were in Media during the reign of 
Ezekiah j of the difference found between fundry au¬ 
thors in rehcarftng the Median kingsother contem¬ 
poraries of Ezekiah; of Candaulcs, Gyges, and the 
kings defended from Hercules. , 40 


CHAP. XXVI. 

Of the kings that reigned in Egypt, between the deliverance of Ifrael from thence , and the reign of Eze- 
kia in Juda, when Egypt and Juda made a league againjl the Aflyrians. 

Sea. I. 

T HAT many names of the Egyptian kings, found 
in biftory, are like to have belonged only to vice¬ 
roys: an example proving this , out of William of 
Tyre’/ biftory of the holy war. o 4I 

Sea. II. 

Of Acherres; whether he were Uchoreus: that 
was the eighth from Ofymandyas: O/Ofymandyas, 

and his tomb. ~ 

Sea. III. w 

Of Cherres, Armeus, Ramefles, WAmenophis- 
O/Myris, and the lake that bears his name. ib 
Sea. IV. 


Of the kings that reigned in the Dynatty 0 f the 

Lanh “- 344 


Sea. V. 

Of Egyptian kings, wbofe names are found fat¬ 
ter ing in fundry authors, their times being not re¬ 
corded: 7 be kings of Egypt, according to Cedrenus: 
Of Vaphers and Sefac. 345 

Sea. VI. 

Of Chcmmis, Cheops, Ccphrenes, and other 
kings recited by Herodotus and Diodorus Siculus, 
which reigned between the times of Rehoboam and 
Ezekia. 346 

Sea. VII. 

Of Sethon, who reigned with Ezekia, and fided 
with him againjl Sennacherib. 348 


CHAP, 
Of ManalTes, and 

f Mamfe: His mprifimunt, 
repentance, and death. * 

349 

.. Sea. II. 

the death of Sc thon: 
the reign of Pfammiticus. ib. 

„„ . Sea. III. 

to Th,* r fif encetbt f e Egyptian matters might have 
what tm P Tl ff? ment ani enlargement of ManalTes: in 
bat part of bis reign Mana&s was taken prifner.35 » 


XXVII. 

bis contemporaries. 

Sea. IV. . 

Of the fir ft and fecond Meflenian wars which were 
in the reigns of Ezekia and Manafles, kings of 
Judah. * 1 

Sea. V. 

Of the kings that were in Lydia and Media: whe- 

Ii , I V J0CCS , w f re , *!* at ktn l Arphaxad mentioned in 

the biftory of Judith. 0Cc 

Sea. VI. 355 

Of other princes and actions that were in thofe 

t>mes. 35 ' 6 


QE Ammon and Jd£ ** 


CHAP. XXVIII. 

Of the times from the death of Manafles to the deftruflion of Jerufalem. 

f. I. 

358 'J'' HE time of this expedition. 362 

Of Ph l xj Sea* II. * jj 

J eh oahaz Tand Jehokkim '’’ ° f A th * ™ rt tbat br »ke into Afia* with 

j kings 0/Juda. 359 the caufe of their journey. ib. 

Sea ITT ”f" • HI* 

Of the kinrsof R-,hui ni l J x/r .• , °f the Cimmerians war in Lydia. 561 

*° P*fs thattl y ru u d Medu: bow if f. IV. S 

dance on their bufatefs in Syria ***? 1 °* W ? teH ~ war °f ihe Scythians in the higher Afia. 364 

l °f' 'bat province ' Fi ™bich caufcd them to Sea. V. * i + 

yj ' Sea IV 360 Of princes livingin divers countries in thefe ages, ghh 

Afia ^andtwlmvijlr\ Scydlians » nbo ruled in The oppofition of J udea, Vnd deftruflion of Jerufa- 
wwj years. 362 lem by the Chaldeans. 3 6 7 

m The 

Digitized by Google 










The.CONTENTS 


The Contents of the Chapters, Paragraphs, and Sedlons, in the Third 
Book of the First Part of the Historv of the World. 

CHAP. I. 

Of the time faffing between tbe deflrutlion of Jerufalcm, and the Aflyrian empire. 

j between the dejlrutlion of Jerulalem and cor.qitefl of 

O F the connexion of facred and profane hi- Egypt. vm 37 8 

fi 0 ^' g^^ |j ^ That Egypt was conquered, and the king, therein 

A brief ttbetrfal of tm cfimnt. touching reigning.Jom by Nabuchodonofor, contrary 10 tbe 
tbe beginning of the coplmty: with an unfetter to nimonof mfluutbort: wbofollowing Herodotus am 
the cJttilc of Porphyry, inveighing ago,aft St. Mat- Diodorus, ,elate it otbermfi. 37 ') 

thew and Daniel, upon whom the latter of thefe opini- Seft. IX. 

How Egypt was fubdued and held by Nebuchad- 

3 So 


ons is founded. 37 2 

Setf. III. 

That the 70 years of captivity are to be numbred 
from the detlruflion of Jerufalcm ; not from the mi¬ 
gration of Jechonia. 

Sed. IV. 

Sundry opinions of the kings which reigned in Ba¬ 
bylon during the 70 years. ib* 

Scdtt V• 

A more particular examination of one opinion touch¬ 
ing the number, perfons , and reigns of the Babylonian 
kings. 375 

Sea. VI. 

JVhat may be held as probable of the perfons and 
times of Nabuchodonofor’* fuccejfors. 

Sea. VII. 


nezzar. 

Sea. X. 

Of the fundry accounts drawn from fundry acls of 
373 Nebuchadnezzar: and of tbe definition of Nineveh 
by him j the time of which at ion is uncertain. 381 

Sea. XI. 

Of the latter time of Nebuchadnezzar; bis build¬ 
ings, madnefs , and death. 382 

Sea. XII. 

Of Evilmerodach. 383 

Sea. XIII. 

_ A private conjeture of the author ; ferving to make 

377 good thofe things which are cited out of Berofus, con¬ 
cerning the fuccejfors of Evilmerodach, without wrong 


f A JL • w w 9 WWW*w iw mw j w I# J # 

Of tbe vitories which Nabuchodonofor obtained, to the truth > tbe quality , and death of Balthafar. 384 


CHAP. II. 

Of the original and firfl greatnefs of the Perfians. 

Sea. I. Sea. III. 

T HAT the Medes were chief attars intbe fubver- Xenophon’* relation of the war, which the Medes 
fion of the Babylonian empire. 3 85 and Perfians made with joint forces upon tbe Afly nans 

and others. 386 

Sea. II. Sea. iv. 

By what means the empire was tranflated from the The eflate of the Medes and Perfians in times fore- 
Medes to the Perfians. ib. going this great war. ib. 


3S9 

392 


CHAP. III. 

Of Cyrus. 

Sea. I. Sea. V. 

O F Cyrus’* name and firfl aElions. 3 88 H 0VJ Cyrus won Babylon. 

Sett VI. 

Sea. II. The end of Cyrus. 

Of Crocfus the king of Lydia, who made war up- Sea. VII. 

on Cyrus. ib. Of Cyrus’* decree for building the temple of 

Sea. III. ^d in Jerufalem. ib. 

Crocfus’* expedition againjl Cyrus. ib. Sea. VIII. 

Of Cyrus’* iffue: and whether Atofia was bis 
_ _ T ; IV* daughter , or (as fome think) were the fame with 

The conqucjl of Lydia by Cyrus. 389 queen Either. 393 

CHAP. IV. 

The eflate of things from tbe death of Cyrus to the reign of Darius. 

Sea. I. Sea. III. 

C\Fthe number and names of tbe Perfian kings. Tbe reft of Cambyfes’* ails. 395 

„ 394 

Sea II. Sea. IV. 

Of Cambyfes} and the conquering of Egypt by Of the intcr-regnum between Cambyfes and Da 


him. 


395 nus. 


306 

C H A P. 


Digitized by 


Googl< 


















of the T H I R D BOOK. 


CHAP. V. 

Of Darius the fon of Hyftafpes. 


Sea. i. 


f\F Darius’/ lineage. 

\J Sea. II. 

397 

Of Darius’/ government \ and fupprefling the re- 

hellion of Babylon. 

ib. 

Sea. III. 


Of Darius’/ favour to the Jews in 

building the 

temple. 

ib. 

Sea. IV. 


Of Darius’/ Scythian war. 

ib. 

Sea. V. 



Some actions of the Perfians in Europe, after the 
Scythian war. 298 


Sect. VI. 

The fir ft occafion of the war which Darius wade 
upon Greece ; with a rehearfal of the government m 
Athens, whence the quarrel grew. 398 

Sea. VII. 

Of the Ionian rebellion , which was the princi¬ 
pal caufe of the wars enfuing between Greece and 
Perfu. 400 

Sea. VIII. 

!The war which Darius made upon Greece; with 
the battel of Marathon •, and Darius / death. 402 


CHAP. VI. 
Of Xerxes. 


Sea. I. 

H E preparation of Xerxes againft Greece. 403 
Sect. II. 

Xerxes’/ army entertained by Pythius: his cutting 
of mount Athos from the continent: bis bridge of 
boats over the Helelpont: and the difeourfe between 
him and Artabanus upon the view of his army. 404 

Sea. III. 

Of the fight at Thermopyla; and Artemifium. 405 

Sett IV. 

The attempt of Xerxes upon Apollo’/ temple: and 
bis taking of Athens. 406 

Sea. V. 

How Themiftocles the Athenian drew the Greeks 
to fight at Salamis. 407 

Sea. VI. 

How ^/ Perfians confuted about giving battel: and 
bow Themiliocles by policy held the Greeks to their 


refolution ; with the viilory at Salamis thereupon cn- 
fuing. 4°S 

Sea. VII. 

Of things following after the battel of Salamis : 
and of the flight of Xerxes. ib. 

Sea. VIII. 

The negotiations between Mardonius and the Athe¬ 
nians i as alfb between the Athenians and Lacedemo¬ 
nians j after the flight of Xerxes. 409 

' Sea. IX. 

The great battel of Plataete. 410 

Sea. X. 

The battle of Mycale: with a ftrange accident that 
fell out in the beginning of it: and examples of the like. 

411 

Sea. XI. 

Of the barbarous quality of Xerxes: with a tranfi- 
tion from the Perfian affairs to matters of Greece, 
which from this time grew more worthy of regard. 412 



CHAP. VII. 

Of things that pajfcd in Greece from the end of the Perfian war , to the beginning of the Peloponncfun. 


Sea I. 

0 W Athens was rebuilt and fortified. 413 

Sea. II. 

The beginning of the Athenian greatnefs, and profpe- 
tous wars made by that ft ate upon the Perfian. 414 
Sect. III. 

» death of Xerxes by the treafion of Artabanus. 

„ 41 5 

Sea. IV. 

The banijhment of Themiftocles: hit flight to Ar- 
taxerxes newly reigning in Perfia •, and his death, ib. 
Sea. V. 

How the Athenians, breaking the peace "which to their 


great honour they had made with the Ptrfian, were 
ftjamefully beaten in Egypt. 416 

Sea. VI. 

Of other wars made by the Athenians (for the mo ft 
part) with good fucctfs , about the fame time. 417 

Sea. VII. 

Of Artaxerxes Longimanus, that he was Alu- 
Ihucrolh, the husband of queen Either. ib. 

Sea. VIII. 

Of the troubles in Greece, foregoing the Pelo- 
ponnefian war. 4 j 3 



CHAP. VIII. 


Sea. I. 

Pon what terms the two principal cities of 
Greece, Athens and Sparta, flood at the be¬ 
ginning of the Pcloponnefian war. 418 

Sea. II. 

How Sparta and Athens entered into war. 419 

Sea. III. 

The beginning of the Pcloponnefian war. ib. 


_ Sect. IV. 

Of the great lofs which the Spartans received at 
Pylus. 420 

Sea. V. 

I low the Lacedemonians hardly , and to their 
great difadvantagr, obtained a pe ter, that was not 
well kept. 4:1 

S^t. VI. 


Of the Pcloponnefian war. 



Digitized by 


Google 










The CONTENTS 


Sett. VI. 

Of tbe negotiations and practices held between many 
ftttIs of Greece, by occafion of the peace that w* 
conceded. sc£t VI , 

How the peace between Athens and Sparta was til 
kept , though not openly broken. 4 4 

The Athenians fending two fleets to flack Syracu e, 
are put to flight and utterly difcomftted. 4 2 5 

Of the troubles whereinto the flate of Athens fell. 


after the great lofls of the fleet and army in Sicilia. 426 
J Sett. X. 

How Alcibiades won many important victories for 
the Athenians * was recalled from exile ; made their 

general and again depofled. 42 ? 

Seft. XI. 

The battel at Arginufx i and condemnation of the 
victorious Athenian captains by the people. ib. 

Sett. XII. 

The battel at AZgos-Potamos, wherein the whole 
flate of Athens was ruined , with the end of the Pe- 
loponnefian war. ib* 


CHAP. IX. 

Of matters concurring with the Peloponnefian war , or Jbortly following it. 

~ t Scft. Ill* 

H o***^/-^*~ 4., j.gg* * <>■«>’ ~ 

How the 30 tyrants got their dominion in Athens, ib. 


CHAP. X. 


Of the expedition of Cyrus the younger. 


Sett. I. 

T HE grounds of Cyrus’; attempt againfl his bro¬ 
ther. 431 

Sett. II. 

The preparation of Cyrus*, and his fir ft entry into 

the war. lb ' 

Sett. III. 

How Cyrus took bis journey into the higher Afia, 
and came up clofle to his brother. 43 2 

Sett. IV. 

The battle between Cyrus and Artaxerxes. ib. 

Sett. V. 

The hard eftate of the Greeks after the fight i and 
how Artaxerxes in vain fought to have made them 

yield unto him. 433 

Sett. VI. 

How the Greeks began to return homewards. 434 
Sett. VII. 

How Tiflaphemes, under colour of peace, betrayed 
all the captains of the Greeks lb. 

Sett. VIII. 

How Xenophon heartened the Greeks, and in de- 
flpight of Tiffaphernes went off fafely. 43 6 

Sect. IX. 

The difficulties which the Greek army found in puf¬ 
fing through the land of the Carduchi. ib. 


Sett. X. 

How Teribazus governor of Armenia, flecking to 
entrap the Greeks with terms of feigned peace, was 
difappointedy and Jhamefully beaten. 437 

Sett. XI. 

The paffage of the army to Trabizonde through the 
countries bordering upon the river of Phafis, and other 
obfleure nations. ib. 

Sett. XII. 

How the army began at Trabizonde to provide a 
fleet , wherewith to return home by flea. How it came 
into the territory of Sinope, and there proflecuted the 
fame purpofe to effeCI. 438 

Sett. XIII. 

Of diffenflon which arofle in the army *, and bow 
it was embarked. ib. 

Sett. XIV. 

Mother great diffenfion, anddiflraClion in the army. 
How the mutineers were beaten by the Barbarians, 

andrefeued by Xenophon. 439 

Sett. XV. 

Of divers pieces of fervice done by Xenophon ; and 
how the army returned into Greece. The occaflons of 
the war between the Lacedemonians and the Per¬ 
fian. 44° * 


C H A 

Of the affairs of Greece, whilft they 
Sett. I. 

H OIV the Lacedemonians took courage by exam¬ 
ple of Xenophon’; army, to make war upon Ar¬ 
taxerxes. 441 

Sett. II. 

The profperous beginnings of the war in Afia. ib. 
Sett. III. 

How the Lacedemonians took revenge upon the 
Eleans for old dtfpleafure. The difeontents of the 
Corinthians and Thebans, conceived againfl the flate 
of Sparta. 443 

Sett IV. 

The paffage of Agefilaus into Afia. His war 
with Tiflaphemes. How Tiflaphemes was put to 


P. XI. 

were managed by the Lacedemonians. 

death ; and the war diverted into another province, 
through perfuaflon and gifts of Tithrauftes his fuc- 
ceffor. How carelefs the Perfian lieutenants were of 
the king's good. 443 

Sett. V. 

The war , and treaty , between Agefilaus and Plur- 
nabazus. 444 

Sett. VI. 

The great commotions raifled in Greece, by the 
Thebans and others, that were hired with gold from 
the Perfian. 445 

Sett. VII. 

How Agefilaus was called out of Afia, to help bis 
country. A victory of the Spartans, Conon the 

Athenian, 


Digitized by 


Google 











of the F O U R 

Athenian, ajfifted by Pharnabazus, overcomes the 
Lacedemonian fleet *, recovers the maflery of tbe 
feat: and rebuilds tbe walls of Athens. 445 

Sed. VIII. 

Of fundry [mail vidorics , gotten on each part. 
The Lacedemonians lofe all in Afia. Tbe Atheni¬ 
ans recover fome part of their old dominion. 446 
Sed. IX. 

Tbe bafe conditions offered unto tbe Perfian by tbe 


T H BOOK. 

Lacedemonians. Of fundry figbts % and other P a f' 
fages in tbe war. The peace of Antalcidas. 44 
Sea. X. 

Tbe war which the Lacedemonians made upon 
Olynthus. They take Thebes by treajon , and Olyn- 
thus by famine. 447 

Sea. XI. 

How the Thebans recovered their liberty , driving 
out tbe Lacedemonian garrifon. 44 ® 


CHAP. XII. 

Of tbe flourijbing eflate of Thebes, from tbe battel of Leudra, to tbe battel of Mantinaea. 

Sea. I. in the Perfian empire. Tbe fruitlefs iffue of the 

H O IV Thebes and Athens joined together againfl embaffages. 45 ° 

Sparta. How tbe Athenians made peace for Sea. V. , . 

tbemfelves , and others > out of which the Thebans How all Greece was divided between tbe Atnem- 
J 1 ' • Tbe battel of Leuara, and begin- ans and Lacedemonians on the one fide , and 1 ne- 

.1 - . ..r. 449 bans on tbe other. Of tbe great tumults fifing in 

Arcadia. 45 1 

Sea. VI. 

J terrible invafion of Peloponnefus, by Epami- 
nondas. 45 2 

Sed. VII. 

The great battel of Mantinaea. Tbe honourable 
death of Epaminondas with his commendation. 453 

Sea. VIII. 

Of tbe peace concluded in Greece after the battel 
* * * ' Sea. IV. of Mantinaea. The voyage of Agefilaus into Egypt. 

The great growth of tbe Theban eflate. Embaf- His death and qualies ; with an examination of the 

r a . es 0 f tb e Greeks to the Perfian } with the rea- comparifon made between him and Pompey tbe 

font why be mofl favoured the Thebans. Troubles Roman. 454 


-* 

were excluded . — - 

nine of tbe Theban greatnefs. 

* Sea. II. 

How tbe Athenians took upon them to maintain 
tbe peace of Greece. New troubles hence arifing. 
Epaminondas invadeth and wafletb tbe territory 
of Lacedcmon. 

Sea. III. 

The compofition between Athens and Sparta, for 
command in war againfl tbe Thebans •, who again 
invade and Jpoil Peloponnefus. Tbe unfortunate 
prefumption of tbe Arcadians. 45 ° 

* Sea. IV. 


The Contents of the Chapters, Paragraphs, and Se£lions, in the Fourth 
Book of the First Part of the History of the World. 

CHAP. 1. 


460 

ib. 


Of Philip, tbe father of Alexander the great , king of Macedon. 

Sea. I. of Philip. 

TI 7 H AT king: reigned in Macedon before Phi- Sea. VI. 

yy lip. 45 6 Ilow Philip ended the Phocian war. 

Sea. II. Sea. VII. 

The beginning of Philip’s reign ; and bow be de- How Philip with ill fuccefs attempted upon Perin- 
livered Macedon from tbe troubles, wherein he found t j, us> Byzantium, and the Sc ythians. 461 

it entangled. 45 » Se a. VIII. 

J*f‘* ... „ How Philip, overthrowing tbe Greeks in tbe bat- 

Tbt good fuccefs which Philip bad in many ^ Q c Cheromea, was chofen captain-general of 

Seft ly 459 Greece. The death of Philip. ib. 

Of tbe Phocian war •, which firfi drew Philip Sea. IX. 

into Greece. ib. fVbat good foundations of Alexander s greatnefs 

Sea. V. were laid by Philip. Of bis laudable qualities , and 

Of tbe Olynthian war. Tbe ambitious practices iffue. 462 


CHAP. II. 

Of Alexander the great. 


Sect. I. 

A Brief rehearfal of Alexander’s doings , before he 
invaded Afia. 463 

Sea. II. 

How Alexander, puffing into Afia, fought with 
the Perlians upon tbe river of Granicus. 464 

Sea. III. 

A digrejfion concerning the defence of bard puffa- 
ges. Of thing; following the battel of Granic. 465 


Sea. IV. 

Of the unwarlike army levied by Darius againfl 
Alexander. The unadvtfed courfes which Darius 
took in this expedition. He is vanquifloed at Ifliis; 
where his mother , wife., and children , are made pri 
foners. Of fome things following the battel of IlTus. 467 
Sea. V. 

How Alexander befieged and won tbe city of Tyre. 

Sea. IV. 470 

How Darius offered conditions of peace to Alexander, 
n Alexan- . 


Digitized by boogie 









The CONTENTS 


Alexander wins Gaza, and deals gracioufly with the 
Jews. 470 

Sea. VII. 

Alexander wins Egypt: and makes a journey to 

the temple of Hammon. 471 

Sea. VIII. 

How Alexander marching againjl Darius, was op- 
pofed very unskilfully by the enemy. 472 

Sea. IX. 

The new proviflons of Darius. Accidents foregoing 
the battel of Arbcla. ib. 

Sea. X. 

The battel of Arbcla: and that it could not be fo 
ftronglyfought, as report hath made it. 473 

Sea. XI. 

Of things following the battle of Arbela. The yield- 
ing of Babylon and Sufa. 474 

Sea. XII. 

How Alexander came to Perfepolis, and burnt it. 

475 

Sea. XIII. 

The treafon of Befliis againjl Darius. Darius’; 

death. 476 

Sea. XIV. 

How Alexander purfies Befliis, and took into his 
grace Darius’; captains. 477 


Sea. XV. 

Of Thaleftris queen of the Amazons ; where, by 
Way of digrejfion, it is J,hewed , that fuch Amazons 
have been, and are. 4 ->jj 

Sea. XVI. 

How Alexander fell into the Perfians luxury : and 
bow he further purfued Befliis. 47 q 

Sea. XVII. 

A confpiracy againjl Alexander. The death of 
Philotas and Parmenio. . 

Sea. XVIII. 

How Alexander fubdued the Budrians, Sogdians, 
and other people. How Befliis was delivered into his 
hands. How he fought with the Scythians. 4 ai 

Sea. XIX. 

IIow Alexander flew his own friends. 4 S3 

Sea. XX. 

Of Alexander*; journey into India. The battel be¬ 
tween him and Porus. 4 g < 

• Sea. XXI. 

How Alexander finifhed his expedition , and return¬ 
ed out of India. ib. 

Sea. XXII. 

Of Alexander*; riot, cruelty , and death. 486 
Sea. XXIII. 

Of Alexander*; perfon and qualities. 4S7 


CHAP. III. 
The reign of Aridaeus. 


Sea. I. 

O F the quejlion about fuccefjion to Alexander. 487 
Sea. II. 

The election of Aridaeus ; with the troubles there¬ 
about ariflng : the firfl divifton of the empire. 488 
Sea. III. 

The beginning of the Lamian war. 490 

Sea. IV. 

How Perdiccas employ'd his army. ib. 

Sea. v. 

The procefs of the Lamian war. 491 

Sed. VI. 

Of the peace granted to Athens by Antipater. Of 
Demofthenes’; death. 4.02 

Sed. VII. 

How Craterus and Antipater were drawn from 
their Etolian wars into Afla. The grounds of the firfl 
civil war between the Macedonian lords. 402 

Sea. VIII. 

Perdiccas*; voyage into Egypt; and his death. 494 
Sed. IX. 

ViUories of Eumenes in the lower Alia. 495 
Sed. X. 

Quarrels between Eurydice the queen , and Python 
the protector. Python refgns his office j into which 
Antipater is cbofen. 496 

Sed. XI. 

Antigonus, lieutenant of Afia, wins a battel of 
Eumenes, and befegetb him in Nora. He vanquifloetb 
other followers of Perdiccas. 497 

Sed. XII. 

Ptolemy wins Syria and Phoenicia. TJoe death of 
Antipater. 498 

Sed. XIII. 

Of Polyfpcrchon, who fucceeded unto Antipatcr 
in the protetlorfhip. The injunction of Caflander a- 
gainjl him. ib. 

Sed. XIV. 

The unworthy courfes , held by Polyfpcrchon, for 
the keeping down of Caflander. 499 


Sed. XV. 

Of the great commotions raifed in Athens Poly- 
fperchon’; decree. The death of Phocion. 499 

Sed. XVI. 

Of Polyfperchion’; vain expedition againjl Caf- 
fander. r 0l 

Sed. XVII. 

Antigonus feeks to make himfelf an abfolute lord : 
and thereupon treats with Eumenes, who difappoint- 
tth him. Phrygia and Lydia won by Antigonus. ib. 

Sed. XVIII. 

Antigonus purfues Eumenes. Eumenes having 

authority from the court, raifeth great war againjl 
Antigonus in defence of the royal boufe. 502 

Sed. XIX. 

How the princes of Macedon flood affiefled mutu¬ 
ally. Olympias takes Aridaeus and Eurydice, whom 
floe cruelly puts to death. 503 

Sed. XX. 

How Caflander was revenged upon Olympias, ib. 

T +. I- 

HE great expedition of Caflander. Olympias 
flouts herfelf into Pydna, where Caflander be- 
fiegeth her. Eacides, king of Epirus, coming to fuc- 
cour Olympias, is forfaken, and banifloed by his own 
fubjetls. ib. 

+. II. 

A continuation of Olympias’; flory. Polyfper- 
chon defeated. Extrcam famine in Pydna. Olym¬ 
pias yields to Caflander. 504 

+. III. 

The death of Olympias: and her condition. ib. 
+. IV. 

Caflander celebrates the funeral of Aridaeus and 
Eurydice •, and fecks to make himfelf king of Mace¬ 
don. 5°5 


CHAP. 


Digitized by 


Googl 


e 







of the F O U R T H BOOK. 


CHAP. IV. 

Of the great Itrdjbip which Antigonus got in Alia. 

Sfeft. I. Sett. VI. 


T HE journey of Eumenes into Perfia. Hit wife 
dealing with thofe that joined with him. 505 
Sett. IL 

How Antigonus, coming to fet upon Eumenes, 
was driven off with lofs. ib. 

Sett. III. 

Of Eumenes’; cunning. A battel between him 
and Antigonus. 506 

Sett. IV. 

Of divers flratagems praftifed by, Antigonus and 
Eumenes one againjl the other. ib. 

Sett. V. 

The conspiracy of Peuceftes and others , againjl 
Eumenes’; life. 507 


The lajl battel between Antigonus and Eumenes. 

5 ° l 

Sett. VII. 

How Eumenes was betrayed to Antigonus, and 
Jlain . 5°® 

Sett. VIII. 

Hew Antigonus flew Python, and occupied Media. 
How be removed governors of provinces, and made 
himfelf lord of Perfia > carrying away Peuceftes. 509 

Sett. IX. 

How Seleucus was chafed out of Babylon by An¬ 
tigonus. The great riches of Antigonus. ib. 


C H A 

Of the great civil war between Alexander’; captains. 
Sett. I. 

T HE combination of Ptolemy, Caflander, and 
others, againjl Antigonus. Their demands, and 
his anfwer. 510 

Sett. II. 

The preparations and beginnings of the wars. 511 
Sett. III. 

How each part fought to win the affijlance of 
Greece. Antigonus’/ declaration againjl Caflander. 
Alexander, the fon of Poly/pcrclion, revoltetb from 
Antigonus, who bad fet him up. ib. 

Sett. IV. 

The Etolians rife againjl Caflander, in favour of 
Antigonus, and are beaten. A fleet and land-army 
of Andgonus, utterly defeated by Ptolemy’s lieute¬ 
nant. In what terms the war flood at this time. 
Andgonus draws nearer to Greece. 512 

Sett. V. 

How Lyfimachus and Caflander vanquijhed fome 
enemies , ra ffed againjl them by Antigonus. The good 
fuccefs of Antigonus in Afia and Greece: with the 
rebellion of many cities againjl Caflander. 513 
Sett. VI. 

ViRories of Ptolemy by fea. A great battel at 
Gaza, which Ptolemy and Seleucus won, againjl 
Demetrius the fon of Antigonus. ib. 


P. V. 

• and bow they affumed the name and flute of kings % 
Sett. VII. 

How Seleucus recovered Babylon, and made him¬ 
felf lord of many countries in the higher Afia. The 
jEra of the kingdom of the Greeks ; which began 
with this dominion of Seleucus. 514 

Sett. VIII. 

How Ptolemy lofl all that he had won in Syria. 
JVbat the caufes were of the quiet obedience , perfor¬ 
med unto the Macedanians, by thofe that had been 
fubjeit unto the Perfian empire. Of divers petty tn- 
terprffes, taken in hand by Antigonus and Demetri¬ 
us, with ill fuccefs. 515 

Sett. IX. 

A general peace made and broken. How all the 
houfe of Alexander was deftroyed. 518 

Sett. X. 

How Demetrius, the fon of Antigonus, gave li¬ 
berty to Athens j expelling the garrffons of Caflander 
out of thofe parts. The immoderate honours decreed 
by the Athenians to Antigonus and Demetrius. 520 
Sett. XI. 

Tlse great victory of Demetrius againfl Ptolemy 
in Cyprus. How Antigonus and Demetrius took 
upon them theflyle of kings •, wherein others followed 
their example. 521 


CHAP. VI. 

Of the wars between the kings of Egypt, Afia, Macedon, Thrace, and others : until all Alexander’; 

prmccs were confumed. 

Sett. I. vailed in Greece, but loft in Afia. Of troubles in 

T HE expedition of Antigonus againfl Egypt, Macedon, following the death of Caflander. 527 
with ill fuccefs. 523 Sett. VII. 


Of Pyrhus, and his doings in Macedon. The 
death of Caflander’/ children. Demetrius gets the 
kingdom of Macedon : prevails in war againfl the 
Greeks j lofleth reputation in his war againfl Pyrrhus, 
and in his civil government *, and prepares to win 
Afia. How all confpire againfl Demetrius. Pyrrhus 
and Lyfimachus invade him: bis army yields to 
Pyrrhus ; who Jhares the kingdom of Macedon with 

528 

Sett. VIII. 


Sett. II. 

How the city of Rhodes was befltged by Deme¬ 
trius. ' ib. 

Sett. III. 

How Demetrius prevailed in Greece. Caflander 
deferes peace of Antigonus, ancl cannot obtain it. 

Great preparations of war againfl Antigonus. 524 
Sett. IV. 

How Antigonus was flatn,in a great battel at Ip- Lyfimachus. 
fas, near unto Kphelus; wherein bis whole efate was 

hft* 525 How Demetrius gathering forces, enterprifed many 

Sett. V. things with ill Juccefs , in Greece and Afia. How he 

flhciu Demetrius, forfaken by the Athenians after was driven upon Seleucus, and compelled to yield him- 
bis overthiow, was reconciled to Seleucus and Ptole- felf. His imprifonment and death. /too 

Sett. IX. 

The death of Ptolemy, of Lyfimachus, and of 
Seleucus, that was the lift of Alexander’/ captains'; 
with other occurrences. ' «r 

C H A P. 

Digitized by Google 


m y: beginning a new fortune, and Jhortly entering 
tnto new quarrels. 520 

Sett. VI. 

How Demetrius won the city of Athens i andpre- 




The CONTENTS 


CHAP. VII. 

The growth of Rome: and fetling of the eaflern kingdoms. 


Seft. I. 

H OW the Romans enlarged their dominion in 
Italy, from the death of Tullus Hoftilius, un¬ 
to fucb time as they were availed by Pyrrhus. 531 
Sea. II. 

How Pyrrhus warred upon the Romans, and van- 
quifhed them in two battels. 535 

Sea. III. 

The great troubles in Macedon and Sicily. How 
Pyrrhus, being invited into Sicil, forfook Italy •, won 


moft of the ifle ; and lojl it in Jbort /pace. Pyrrhus 
returns into Italy *, where he is beaten by the Ro¬ 
mans, and fo goes back to his own kingdom. 536 
Sea. IV. 

How Antigonus, the [on of Demetrius delivered 
Macedon from the Gauls. How Pyrrhus won the 
kingdom of Macedon from Antigonus. 5-58 

Sea. V. 

How Pyrrhus ajfailed Sparta without fuccefs. His 
enterprife upon Argos > and bis death. 539 


The Contents of the Chapters, Paragraphs, and Se&ions, in the Fifth 
Book of the First Part of the History- of the World. 

CHAP. I. 

Of the firfl Punic war. 


Sea. I. 

,4 Di/cuff on of that problem of Livy : Whe- 
/J ther the Romans could have relifted the 
V 1 great Alexander. That neither the Mace' 
donian, nor the Roman foldier, was of 
equal valour to the Englilh. 541 

Sea. II. 

Tloe efiate of Carthage, before it entered into war 
with Rome. C44 

Sea. III. 

The beginning of the firfl Punic war. That it was 
unjuftly undertaken by the Romans. 547 

Sea. IV. 

Of the ifland of Sicily. 548 

T t; I- 

HE quality of the ifland } and the firfl inhabi¬ 
tants thereof. ib. 

+. II. 

The plantation of the Greeks in Sicily. 550 

t. III. 

Of the government and affairs of Sicily, before Di- 
onyfius’j tyranny. crj 

+• IV. 

Of Dionyhus the tyrant, and others following him 
in Syracufe. cc6 

Sea. V. 

A re continuation of the Roman war in Sicily. 
How Hieron, king of Syracufe, forfook the Cartha¬ 
ginians j and made his peace with Rome. 563 

Sea. VI. 

How the Romans befiege, and win Agrigentum. 
Their beginning to maintain a fleet. Thetr firfl lof» t 
and firfl viftory by fea. Offea-fight in general. 564 


Sea. VII. 

Divers enter feats of war, between the Romans 
and Carthaginians, with variable fuccefs. The Ro¬ 
mans prepare to invade Afric: and obtain a great 
viElory at fea. c66 

Sea. VIII. 

The Romans prevail in Afric. Atilius the con- 
ful propoundetb intolerable conditions of peace to the 
Carthaginians. He is utterly beaten , and made pri- 

foner. 567 

Sea. IX. 

How the affairs of Carthage profpered after the 
viSlory againfl Atilius. How the Romans, having 
loft their fleet by iempefl, refolve to ferfake the feas . 
The great advantages of a good fleet in war , between 
nations divided by the fea. 569 

Sea. X. 

How the Romans attempt again to get the maftery of 
the feas. The victory of Caecilius the Roman conful at 
Panormus. The fiege of Lilybseum. How a Rho¬ 
dian galley entered Lilybaeum atpleafure, in defpight 
of the Roman fleet. That it is a matter of great dif- 
f cully, to flop the paffage of good [hips. The Romans, 
by reafon of grievous Ioffes received under Claudius 
and Junius their confuls, abandon the feas again. 573 
Sea. XI. 

The city of Eryx is furprifed by the Romans, and- 
recovered by Amilcar •, who ftoutly holds war with 
them five years. The Romans having emptied their 
common treafury, build a new fleet, at the charges of 
private men. The great victory at fea, of Luaatius 
the conful ; whereby the Carthaginians are forced to 
crave peace. The conditions of the peace between 
Rome and Carthage. gje 


CHAP. II. 


Of divers aHions puffing between 

Sea. I. 

O F the ctuel war, begun between the Carthagi¬ 
nians, and their own mercenaries. 577 

Sea. II. 

Divers obfervations upon this war with the mer¬ 
cenaries. 5 8o 

+• I. 

O F tyranny : and how tyrants are driven to ufe 
help of mercenaries. ib. 


the firfl and fecond Punic wars. 

f. II. 

That the tyranny of a city over her fitbjehls, is 
worfe than the tyranny of one man : and that a tyran¬ 
nical city muft likewife ufe mercenary f oldiers. 5S1 
+. III. 

The dangers, growing from the ufe of mercenary 
foldiers, and foreign auxiliaries. 582 

+. IV. 

That the moderate government of the Romans, gave 

them 


Digitized by 


Google 












of the F I F ' 

them affuranct to ufe the fervice of tbeir own fub- 
jeCls in the wars. That in marts nature there is an 
affeClion breeding tyranny, which bindretb the ufe and 
benefit of the like moderation. cS 2 

Seft. III. 

How the war againfi the mercenaries was divcrfy 
managed by Hanno and Amilcar, with variable 
fuccefs. The bloody counfels of the mercenaries ; and 
their final defiruClion. 58 6 

Sea. IV. 

How the mercenaries of the Carthaginians, that 
were in Sardinia, rebelled: and were afterwards 
drive* out by the ijlanders. The fait hiefs dealing of the 
Romans with the Carthaginians, in taking from 
them Sardinia, contrary to the peace. 590 


PH BOOK. 

Seft. V. 

How the affairs of Cartilage went, between tie 
African rebellion and the fecond Funic war. 591 
Sea. VI. 

The ejlate of Greece from the death of Pyrrlius, 
te the reign of Philip the Jon of Demetrius m Ma- 
cedon. 592 

Sea. VII. 

How the Illyrians infeflcd the eoa/l of Greece; 
and how they were fubdued by the Romans. 600 
Sea. VIII. 

Of the war between the Romans and Gauls, 
fomewhat before the coming of Hannibal into Jt ily. 

Co 2 


CHAP. III. 


Of the fecond Punic war. 

Se£t I. Se< 51 . XI. 

HE wars of Hannibal in Spain. Quarrels Strange reports of the Roman viflories in Spain, 
between the Romans and Carthaginians. Han- before Afdrubal the fun of Amilcar followed thence 


nibal befiegetb and taketb Saguntum } wbilfi the Ro 
mans are bufted with the Illyrians. ff r ar proclaimed 
between Rome and Carthage. 606 

Seft.II. 

Hannibal takes order for the defence of Spain and 
Afric. His journey into Italy. 609 

Seft. III. 


63$ 


his brother Hannibal into Italy. 

Seft. XII. 

The great troubles that Hannibal raifed in all 
quarter r, to the city of Rome. Pofthumius the Ro¬ 
man general, with his whole army, is Jlain by the 
Gauls. Philip king of Macedon enters into a league 
with Hannibal, againfi the Romans. The Romans, 
How the Romans in vain follicited the Spaniards joyning with the Etolians, make war upon Philip in 
and Gauls to take tbeir part. The rebellion of the Greece: and afterwards conclude a peace with him j 
Cifalpine Gauls againfi the Romans. 610 the better to intend their bufinefs againfi the Cartha¬ 
ginians. 642 

Seft. XIII. 

How the Romans began to recover tbeir flrengtb 
by degrees. The noble affeClion of the Romans, in re¬ 
lieving the publick neceffities of tbeir common-weal. 

647 

Seft. XIV. 

The Romans win fame towns back from Hannibal. 
Hannibal wins Tarentum. The fiege of Capua. 
Two vi ft ones of Hannibal. The journty of Hannibal 
to the gates of Rome. Capua taken by the Romans. 

650 

Seft. XV. 

How the Carthaginians, making a party in Sar- 
ced by the people, for bold and fuccefsful attempting, dinia and Sicily, held war againfi the Romans in 
adventures rajhly upon Hannibal: and is like to perifi) ' thofe ifiands \ and. were overcome. 657 

with bis army, but refeued by Fabius. 6x6 Seft. XVI. 

Seft. VII. war paffed between the Romans and 

Hannibal in Italy, from the taking of Capua to the 
great victory at Metaurus. 666 

Seft. XVII. 

How P. Cornelius Scipio the Roman, made en¬ 
tire conquefi of Spain. f- - 

+; I- 

H OIVthe Carthaginians were driven by Scipio, 
from the continent into the ijlc of Gades. ib. 

II. 


• Seft. IV. 

• Scipio the Roman eonful overcome by Hannibal, 
at Ticinum. Both of the Roman confuls beaten by 
Hannibal, in a great battel at Trebia. 611 

Seft. V. 

. The departure of Hannibal from the Cifalpine 
Gauls into Hetruria. Flaminius the Roman eonful 
fain ; and his army deftroyed by the Carthaginians, 
at the lake of Thralymene. 614 

Seft. VI. 

How Fabius, the Roman dictator, fought to 
confume the force of Hannibal by lingring war. Mi- 
nutius, the mafitr of the horfe, honoured and advan- 


• The Roman people , defirous to finijh the war 
quickly, cbooft a rajb and unworthy eonful. Great 
forces levied againfi Hannibal. Hannibal taketh 
the Romans provifions in the caftle of Cannae. The 
new confuls fet forth againfi Hannibal. 619 

Seft. VIII. 

Diffenfion between the two Roman confuls. IVhe- 
ther it be likely that Hannibal was upon point of fly¬ 
ing out of Italy, when the Romans preffed him to 
fight. The great battel at Cannae. 621 

Seft. IX. 

Of things following the battel at Cannae. 626 
Seft. X. 

Of the great fupply that was decreed at Carthage, 
to befent to Hannibal in Italy. How by the malice 
of Hanno, and Jloth or parfimony of the Carthagi¬ 
nians, the fupply was too long deferred. That the 
riches of the Carthaginians grew fafler, than of Ike 
Romans. Of Fabius and other old Roman hifiori- 
<W, bow partial they were in their writings. 632 


Funeral games held by Scipio. A duel between 
two Spanifh princes. A digrefiion concerning ducis. 

67S 

+; III. 

The laft aCls of Scipio in Spain. His return to 
Rome: where he is ebofen eonful. 6S2 

Seft. XVIII. 

Scipio obtains leave to make war in Afric. His 
preparations. Of MafanifTa, who joyned with Scipio. 
The victories againfi Afdrubal and Syplux. 6S ; 
Seft. XIX. 

The Carthaginians defirc truce and break it. 692 
o p Seft. XX. 

Digitized by VjiOOQlC 



The CON 

Sea. XX. 

In what fort Hannibal fpent the tim after the 
battel of Metaunis. The Joints of Mago in Ita¬ 
ly. Hannibal and Mago called out of Italy. How 
the Romans were diverjly affetted by Hannibal’* de¬ 
parture. 694 


TENTS 

Sea. XXI. 

Hannibal in Afric prepares to fight with Scipio ; 
treats with bint about peace in vain \ lofetb a battel 
at Nadagara j and perfwades the Carthaginians to 
fue for peace . Of the peace granted from Rome to 
Caitliage. 695 


CHAP. IV. 

Of Philip the father of Perfeus, king of Macedon j his firfi ails and war with the Romans, by whom 

be was fubdued. 


Sea. L 

H O W the Roman* grew acquainted in tbe eafi 
countries, and defirous of war there. The be¬ 
ginning of many princes , with great wars , at one 
time, The Etolians over-run Peloponnefus. Philip 
and bis affociates make war againjl the Etolians. 
Alteration of the ftate in Sparta. The Etolians in¬ 
vade Greece and Macedon i and are invaded at 
borne by Philip. 702 

Sea. II. 

How Philip was mifadvifed by ill counfellors , who 
afterwards wrought treafon againfi him ; and were 
juftly punijbed. He invadeth tbe Etolians a fecond 
time, and forcetb them to fue for peace , which is 
granted unto them. 706 

Sed. III. 

Philip, at the perfwafion of Demetrius Pharius, 
enters into league with Hannibal againfi tbe Romans. 
Tbe tenor of tbe league between Hannibal and Phi¬ 
lip. 7*5 

Seft. IV. 

How Philip yielded to bis natural vices , being there¬ 
in foothed by Demetrius Pharius. His defire to ty¬ 
rannize upon the free fiates bis affociates , with the 
troubles into which he thereby fell, whilfi he bore a 
part in tbe fecond Punic war. He poifoneth Ara- 
tus, and grows hateful to tbe Acheans. 716 

Of Phitopcemen, general of the Acheans, and 
Machanidas tyrant of Lacedemon. A battel be¬ 
tween them , wherein Machanidas is fiain 718 

Sea. VI. 

Philip having peace with Rome, and with all 
Greece, prepares againfi Alia. Of tbe kings o f Per- 
gamus, Cappadocia, Pontus, Paphlagonia, Bithy- 
nia*, and their lineages. Of the Galatians. 719 

Sea. VII. 

The town of Cios taken by Philip, at the infiance 
of Prufias, king of Bithynia, and cruelly defiroyed. 
By this and like atlions, Philip grows hateful to 
many of the Greeks, and is warred upon by Attalus, 
king of Pergamus, and by the Rhodians. 720 

Sea. VIII. 

Tbe Romans, after their Carthaginian war , feek 
matter of quarrel againfi Philip. The Athenians, 
upon flight caufe , proclaim war againfi Philip j moved 
thereto by Attalus, whom they flatter. Philip wins 
divers towns , and makes peremptory anfwer to tbe 
Roman ambaffador. The furious refolution of the 
Abydeni. 721 


Sea. IX. 

The Romans decree war againfi Philip, and fend 
one of their confuls into Greece, as it were in de¬ 
fence of the Athenians their confederates. How 
poor tbe Athenians were at this time, both in quality 
and efiate 723 

Sea. X. 

The town of Chalcis in Euboea, taken and [ach'd 
by the Romans and their affociates , that lay in garri- 
fon at Athens. Philip attemptetb to take Athens by 
furprife v wafietb tbe country about , and makes a jour¬ 
ney into Peloponnefus. Of Nabis, the tyrant of La¬ 
cedemon, and his wife. Philip offers to make war 
againfi Nabis for tbe Acheans. He returnetb home 
through Attica, which he fpoiletb again ; and provides 
againfi bis enemies. Some exploits of tbe Romans. 
Divers princes join with them. Great labouring to 
draw tbe Etolians into tbe war. ib. 

Sea. XI. 

The meeting of Philip with the Romans, and skir- 
mijhing with them on his borders. Tbe Etolians in¬ 
vade bis dominions , and are beaten home. Some 
doings of Attalus and tbe Roman fleet. ji6 

Sea. XII. 

Villius, the Roman conful , waftes a year to no effetl. 
IVar of the Gauls in Italy. An tmbaffy of the Ro¬ 
mans to Carthage, MafanilTa and Vermina. The 
Macedonian prepares for defence of his kingdom , and 
T. Quindus Flaminius is font againfi him. 727 

Sea. XIII. 

The Romans begin to make war by negotiation. 
T. Quindus wins apaffage againfi Philip. Thcflaly 
wafted by Philip, the Romans and Etolians. The 
Acheans, forfakmg the Macedonian, take part with 
tbe Romans. A treaty of peace that was vain. 
Philip delivers Argos to Nabis the tyrant , who pre- 
fently enters into league with tbe Romans. 728 

Sea. XIV. 

The battel at Cynofcephalae, wherein Philip was 
vanquifhed by T. Quindus. . 733 

Sea. XV. 

T. Quindus falls out with the Etolians, and grants 
truce unto Philip, with conditions , upon which the 
peace is ratified. Liberty proclaimed unto tbe Greeks. 
Tbe Romans quarrel with Antiochus. 734 


CHAP. 


Digitized by 


Google 












w 


of the F I F T H BOOK. 


CHAP. V. 


The wars of tbe Romans with Antiochus the great, and bis adherents. 


Scft. t. 

HAT kings , of the races of Seleucus and . Pto¬ 
lemy, reigned in Afia and Egypt before 
Antiochus the great, 737 

Soft II. 

Tbe beginning of tbe great Antiochus** reign. 
0 /Ptolemy Euergetes and PhiJopator, kings of E- 
gypt. fVar between Antiochus and PhiJopator. 
Tbe rebellion of Molo ; and expedition of Antiochus 
agatnft bins. Tbe re-continuance of Antiochus’* E- 
gyptian war: with tbe pajfages between tbe two kings : 
the victory of Ptolemy $ and peace concluded. Of 
Achaeus and his rebellion ; bis greatnefs, and bis fall. 
Antiochus’* expedition againfl tbe Pauthians, Ba&ri- 
/ ans, and Indiins. Somewhat of tbe king's reigning 
/ in India, after the death of tbe great Alexander. 739 

Seft. III. 

• Tbe lewd reign of Ptolemy Philopator in Egypt: 
with tbe tragical end of bis favourites, when be was 
dead. Antiochus prepares to war on tbe young child 
Ptolemy Epiphanes, the fon of Philopator. His irre- 
folution , in preparing for divers wars at once. His 
voyage towards tbe Hcllcfpont. He feeks to bold 
amity with tbe Romans, who make friendly Jbew to 
binr, intending nevertbelefs to have war with him. 
His doings about tbe Hellefpont j which tbe Romans 
made tbe firjl ground of their quarrel to him. 745 

Sea IV. 

Tbe Romans hold friendly conefpondence with An¬ 
tiochus, during their war with Philip: after which 
they quarrel with him. The doings of Hannibal at 
Carthage: whence he is cbaced by bis enemies, and 
by tbe Romans. His flight unto tbe king Antiochus. 
The EtoJians murmur againft tbe Romans in Greece. 
Tbe war of the Romans and Acheans, with Nabis 
the tyrant of Lacedenlon. The departure of the Ro¬ 
mans out of Greece. T. Quintius’* triumph. Peace 
denied to Antiochus by the Romans. 748 

Sea 

Of tbe long wars which tbe Romans had with tbe 
Gauls, Ligurians, and Spaniards. Of M. Porcius 
Cato. Injuries done by Mafanifla to the Carthagini¬ 
ans j they fue to tbe Romans for juflice in vain. 755 

Sea VI. 

Tbe Etolians labour to provoke Antiochus, Philip, 
and Nabis, to war upon tbe Romans; by whom they 
bold tbemfelves wronged and difgraced. Nabis be- 
fiegeth Gyttheum, and wafletb fome part of Achaea. 
The ex ail skill o/Philopoemen in advantage of ground: 
whereby be utterly vanquifhetb Nabis. Antiochus be¬ 
ing denied peace by tbe Romans, joins with tbe Eto¬ 


lians. The Etolians furprift Demetrius \ and, by 
killing Nabis their confederate , feize upon Sparta* 
But they are driven out by tbe citizens > who at Phi- 
JopoemenV perfuafions annex tbemfelves to tbe Ache¬ 
ans. 757 

Sea VII. 

Antiochus, per funded by Thoas tbe Etolian, comes 
over into Greece, ill attended. Sundry pajfages be¬ 
tween him , tbe Etolians, Chalcidians, and others. 
He wins Chalcis, and thereby tbe whole ifle of Euboea. 
Tbe vanity of tbe kings ambaffadors , and tbe Etoli¬ 
ans: with tbe civil anfwer of Titus to their ftfcour ft, 
before tbe Acheans. That it concerned tbe Greeks to 
have dtftred peace, between tbe Romans and Antio¬ 
chus } as tbe beft affurance of their own liberty. Of 
many petty eflates that fell to tbe king. Of Ami- 
nander: and an idle vanity, by which king Philip 
was lofl. Hannibal gives good counfelin vain. Some 
towns won in Theflaly. The king retires to Chalcis: 
where be marrietb a young wife, and revels away tbe 
reft of tbe winter. Upon tbe coming of the Roman 
conful, all forfake Antiochus. He with two tboufani 
Etolians keeps the freights of Thermopylae. He 
is beaten , and flies into Alia: leaving alt in Greece 
unto tbe victors. 761 

Sea VIII. 

Lucius Scipio, having with him Publius the Afri¬ 
can’* elder brother , for bis lieutenant , is fent into 
Greece. He grants long truce to the Etolians, that 
fo be might at leifure pafs into Alia. Much trouble- 
fome bufinefs by fea : and divers fights. An invafion 
upon Eumenes’j kingdom : with tbe fiege of Perga- 
mus raifed by an handful of tbe Acheans. L. Sci¬ 
pio tbe conful comes into Afia: where Antiochus 
mofl cameftly defreth peace , and is denied it. Tbe 
battel of Magnefia: wherein Antiochus, being van- 
quifhed, yieldeth to the Romans good pleafure. The 
conditions of tbe peace. In wbat fort the Romans 
ufed their victory. L. Cornelius Scipio, after a mofl 
fumptuous triumph over Antiochus, is furnamed , 
The Afiatic, as bis brother was ftyled tbe The Afri¬ 
can. 768 

Seft. IX. 

The Etolians, and tbe Gallo-greeks, vanquijhed 
by tbe Roman confuls Fulvius and Manlius. Man¬ 
lius hardly obtains a triumph : being charged (among 
other objections) with attempting to have pafj'ed the 
bounds appointed as fatal to the Romans by Sibyl. 
Of Sibyl'* prophecies : tbe books of Hermes: and 
that infeription Simoni Deo San cto. Tbe ingra¬ 
titude of Rome to the two Scipio’* and that begin¬ 
ning of faction among tbe Roman nobility. 773 



CHAP. 


Digitized by ioOOQ le 


The C O N T E N T S 


CHAP. VI. 


The fecond Macedonian war. 


Scft. I. 

T HE condition wherein tbofe princes and eflates 
remained , which were affociates of the Romans, 
when the war with Antiochus was finijbed. ‘The Ro¬ 
mans quarrel with Philip. They deal infolently with 
the Acheans. The Macedonian, being unready for 
war , obtains peace at Rome by bis fon Demetrius ; 
of whom thenceforth hc K becomes jealous. 778 

Se£t. II. 

The death of Philopcemen, Hannibal, <j»</Scipio. 
That the military profeJJion is of all other the mofi un¬ 
happy : notwit hflanding fome examples , which may 
feemto prove the contrary. 780 

Seft. III. 

Philip making provifion for war againjl the Ro¬ 
mans, deals hardly with many of bis own fubjefts. 
His negotiation with the Baftamas. His cruelty. He 
fufpettetb bis fon Demetrius. Demetrius accufed by 
his brother Perfeus; and fhortly after flain , by his 
father’s appointment. Philip repentetb him of hisfon’s 
death , whom be findeth to have been innocent : and 
intending to revenge it on Perfeus, he dieth. 783 
Sea. IV. 

How the Baflarnae fell upon Dardania. The beha¬ 
viour of Perfeus in the beginning of his reign. Some 
wars of the Romans: and bow they fuffered Mala- 
hifla, cruelly to opprefs the Carthaginians. They 
quarrel with Perfeus. They allow not their confede¬ 
rates to make war without their leave obtained. The 
treafon of Callicrates > whereby all Greece became 
more obnoxious to Rome, than in former times. Fur¬ 
ther quarrels to Perfeus. He feeks friendjhip of the 
Acheans, and is witbflood by Callicrates. The Ro¬ 
mans difcover their intent of warring upon him. 786 

Sea. V. 

How Eumenes king of Pergamus was bufled , with 
Pharnaces, the Rhodians and others. His hatred to 
the Macedonian: whom be accufeth to the Roman 
fenate. The fenate honours him greatly , and contemns 
his enemies the Rhodians; with the caufes thereof. 
The untifualfloutnefs of the Macedonian embaffadors. 
Perfeus** attempt upon Eumenes. The brotherly love 
between Eumenes and Attalus. Perfeus’* device to 
poifon fome of the Roman fenators : whereupon they 
decree war againjl him, and fend him defiance. Other 
things concerning thejuftice of this war. 791 

Sect. VI. 

The Romans folicit the Greeks to join with them 
in the war againjl Perfeus. How the Greeks flood af- 
fctlcd in that war. The timoroufnefs of Perfeus. Mar- 
cius a Roman ambajfador deludes him with hopes of 
peace. His forces. He takes the field and wins part 
of Thefialy. The forces of Licinius the Roman con- 
ful: and what afftflants the Romans bad in this war. 


Of Tempe in Theflaly; and what advantages the 
Macedonian had or might have had, but lofl by bis 
fear. Perfeus braves the Romans, fights with them , 
knows not bow to ufe bis vittory , fues for peace , and 
is denied it by the vanquijhed. Perfeus, having the 
worfe in a skirmijh , for fakes all the country lying with¬ 
out Tempe. The Boeotians rebel againjl the Romans, 
and are rigoroufly punijhed. The Roman commanders 
unfortunate in the war againjl Perfeus. They vex the 
Greeks their friends *, for whofe eafe the fenate makes 
provifionhaving beard their complaints. The flatter¬ 
ing Alabanders. 794 

Sea. VII. 

Martius the Roman con ful, with extream dif¬ 
ficulty and danger, enters into Tempe. The cowardife 
of Perfeus in abandoning Tempe. The town of Dium 
quitted by Martius, repaired and fortified by the king. 
The Romans attempt many places , with ill fuccefs. 
Their affairs in hard eftate. Martius a cunning and 
a bad man. Polybius fent ambajfador to Martius 
from the Acheans. Polybius’* honeft wifdom bene¬ 
ficial to the Acheans. King Eumenes grows avtrfe 
from the Romans. Perfeus negotiates with Antio¬ 
chus and Eumenes. His falfe dealing with Gentius 
king of Illyria, whom he draws into the Roman 
war. He fends ambaffadors to the Rhodians, who 
vainly take upon them to be arbitrators between him 
and the Romans. Perfeus lofeth a mighty fuccour of 
the Baftarnae, by his wretched parfimony. 799 

Sea. VIII. 

Of L. Aimylius Paulus, the conful. His journey. 
He for ceth Perfeus to dif camp. He will not hazard 
battel with any difadvantage. Of an eclipfe of the 
moon. Asmylius’* fuperflition. The ba(tcl of Pydna. 
Perfeus’* flight. He forfakes his kingdom : which 
baflily yield: to ALmylius. Perfeus at Samothrace. 
He yields himfelf to the Roman admiral •, and is 
fentprifoner to Emylius. 803 

Sea. IX. 

Gentius king of the Illyrians, taken by the Romans. 

S08 

Sea. X. 

How the Romans behaved themfclves in Greece 
and Maccdon, after their viflory over Perfeus. ib. 
Sea. XI. 

The war of Antiochus upon Egypt brought to end 
by the Roman embaffadors. 810. 

Sea. XII. 

How the Romans were dreadful to all kings. Their 
demeanour towards Eumenes, Prufias, Mafanifla, 
and Cotys. The end of Perfeus and his children. The 
inftability of kingly eflates. The triumphs of Paulus, 
Anicius, and OCtavius. With the conclufion of the 
work. 814 


THE 


Digitized by 


Google 







I 


I 


I 

THE 

LIFE 


O F 

l 

Sir WALTER RALEGH. 


By WILLIAM OLDYS, Gear. 


Digitized by 


Googl< 











I 


< 

I 

I 

t 

I 


r 



1 


F 

if 

sr« 


i 


u* , 







(Iff- 

T: 


H fc ; 

C r 


cor,: 
«».«c. 




r* 

Si 


Digitized by 


Goog[( 











THE 



O F 

Sir WALTER 


RALEGH. 


XPERIENCE, and her records, Hiftory, have fometimes advertifed us 
in a mod confpicuous manner j That as men, renowned for glorious exploits, 
abound more in fome ages than others, according to the genius of the times, or 
general tafte and purfuit of their leading contemporaries ; fo if a fpirit, impreg¬ 
nate with the feeds of martial perfection, fprings up in the reign of an active 
and adventurous fovereign i that he ihall rife into high repute, be much honoured and emula¬ 
ted : As, on the one fide, if he has the misfortune to furvive under a prince of a contrary 
character, that his unfalhionable virtue, unlefs it be of a fupple nature, and can mould or fhrink 
itfelf to the prevailing degeneracy, will become criminal j and his courage, of lefs fecurity than 
cowardife. 

The famous Worthy, of whole life and fortunes I have been perfuaded to attempt a 
rehearfal, will appear, in the fequel of this narrative, a fingular and convincing evidence ot that 
political obfervation. And what renders Iris ftory more obfervable is, that though h’e gave fuch 
repeated proofs of a dexterous conduct, in fo many important vicifiitudes of life ; though he 
was not only mafter of all ^he accomplifhments requifite to defend a ftate in war, but to 
adorn it in peace; and did render himfelf illuftrious, as well by letters in the latter, as he had 
done by arms, in the former condition j yet that a warlike reign was of greater fifety to him, 
and a peaceful one prov’d his dejlruttion. I Ihall not anticipate the caufes, but only premife 
thus much; That whoever, invited by no common a nimbly of authorities, can be attentive to 
the reprefentation of a brave man wreftling with adverfities, and bounding higher in the notice 
and admiration of the world, the more violently he was thrown down j whoever is any way 
concerned to know the effedt of thofe prepofieflions which may be foftered in the minds of dif¬ 
fident princes, and the proftitutions to which their fordid inftruments may be won j or would 
be informed, what a pernicious foe in his country an infmuating foreigner may be to thofe 
natives who are its real friends j I may recommend him here, and venture to promife a pro- 
fpeft inftruttive, entertaining, and full of variety. 

For though abundance of folid particulars are naturally funk in the rapid current of time, 
while many lefs fubftantial are floating upon the furface, to the hand of every ordinary me- 
morialift; And though fome fhining circumftances, in the profperous part of Sir IValter 
Rakgb’i life, have been darken’d through envy; as others, in the unfortunate part, through 
'ntereft, by the age in which he lived ; neverthelefs, his Angle life may perhaps be found more 
fruitful of memorable incidents, than the combined narratives of many perfons in lome whole 
hiftories: Infomuch, that I may be apprehenfive, with a late colle&or of his memoirs, 
the deferibing a perfon of fo diffufive a praife, fo equally great in fo many different parts 
of life, will be like attempting a landskip from a high hill, where the multiplicity and ex¬ 
tent 



Digitized by 


Google 











The L I F E of 

tent of the profpe&s may rather diftrad the mind, than dircft the eye ; and call for judgment 
to correft the fancy, which is apt to run riot, when employ’d upon too many objeds: But 
though many guides may alfo appear to lead us through the wildernefs of them \ though, like 
his abilides and adventures, numerous are the authors who mention him ; yet feeing they con¬ 
tain but fragments ot his ftory, and that thofe, hitherto widely difpers’d, have efcap’d not 
only the general hiftorians, but even the many particular compilers of one diftind monument 
to his memory * fo that thefe, in our times, who have paid him fome relped in point of 
integrity, have yet in point of induftry been fo deficient, as to prove no lefs prejudicial to his 
merits, than thofe who in his own did wilfully confpire their oblivion: Seeing, I fay, that 
moft of them have been too fuperficial or undigefted; have neither regarded continuity of mat¬ 
ter, proportion in the parts, or connexion of the whole j nor yet difeharged themfelves by 
fuch references to proper vouchers, as have fausfied thofe readers it is my ambition to pleafei 
I have efteemed the number of fuch writers, no difeouragement to the revival of his ftory. 

And firft for the name of Ralegh, otherwife written Rale and Ralega , in fome old deeds 
I have formerly feen * j it is certainly of great antiquity in this kingdom ; fince there are fome 
villages and parifhes in the weft, as well as other parts, if not towns, fo called b , which might 
at firft receive their denomination from fome, as well as afterwards give it to others, who 
were natives or pofieflors thereof: And fince we are credibly informed, that not only one of 
thofe diftridts belonged anciendy to noble lords of the fame name c , but alfo that more than 
one of them were fo called from the very family we are to fpeak of d . And as the Ralegbs of 
Devon/hire will appear to have flourifiied there before the conqueft, they might be the pro. 
genirors of thofe in other counties ; as it is exprefly intimated out of the records they were 
of thofe in fVarwickJhire'. But as we are alfo told of no lefs than five knights of this name, 
at one time differently fituated in that weftern county before-mentioned ‘ j and that there 
were three great families fo named alfo there, contemporary with Sir IValter Ralegh's , who 
bore arms different from thofe of his paternal coat 8 ; we may conclude, they were not all of 
one lineage •, and at the fame time, it is owing to the eminency of this great man, that a dif- 
tinftion of the feveral houfes, and his in particular, when all but his were in a manner ex- 
tindt, has been fo elaborately endeavoured by the antiquaries and genealogifts of his own 
time. 

As to the family of Sir Walter Ralegh therefore in particular, it is agreed on by all who 
have skilfully treated of it, that Smalridge in the parifh of Axminjler, in the laid county of 
Devon , was one of their moft ancient feats; and yet Sir William Pole , who is fa id to have 
been one of the greateft fearchers into the antiquities of that county, has been Angularly fhort 
in the time of their firft fetding there. However, if we fhould agree with him upon that per- 
fon for Sir Walter Ralegh' sdiredf anceftor, who firft removed thither, out of Nettle comb-Ralegh 
in Somerfetjbire , in the reign of king Henry III, from whom there is a fucceflivc defeent of 
thofe fix knights. Sir Wimond h . Sir Hugh, Sir John, Sir Peter, and two Sir Johns more ; 
whence defeended Walter , who married into the family of the Coplejlons -, and thence John, 
who married into the family of the Haches \ which produced Walter , who married into the 
knighdy family of the Edgcombs \ whence arofe Wimond, who marrying Jane, daughter of 
Sir Thomas Grenvil, was the grandfather of Sir Walter Ralegh *; I know not but it may be 
all® allowed, that the honours of this pedigree were fufficient to be boafted of by fome of his 
traducers. For though, in the eye of heraldry, many tides are accounted more noble than knight¬ 
hood ’, though native and patrimonial dignities, or fuch as defeend neceflarily from father to 
fon, may in the eye of the common lineal claimant appear moft legitimate > and fuch as are 
venal, be efteemed in that of the wealthy, moft valuable ; yet thofe which are perfonal, the 
individual acquifition, or recompence of every man’s proper and unalienable merit, will, in the 
eye of reafon, at leaft as it influenced the glorious times we are entering upon, furely be held 
moft honourable. 

» Among the numerous col left ions of Richard Gafcoigne, 

Efq; a skilful and famous antiquary in the middle of the 
Jail century. 

b Ralegb in the parifh of Pi/ton, near BarnftapU; Street• 

Ralegh, in the parifh of Ailejbeer, eight miles eaft of Exe¬ 
ter-, Comb- Ralegh near Honiton ; aim Widdycomb-Ralegh, 
and Coliton-Ralegb, all in Devonjbirt: Befidei Nettle- 
comb- Ralegh in Sonur/etjhir* s Ralegh in Effex, a market- 
town, thought to be the fame called Raganeia in 
3D0om*:Da?«boofe, &<■ 

e Cambden s Britannia in Devon. 

< John Prince's worthies of Devon, fbl. 1701. p. 531. 

e Dugdale '%anuquiues of IVarwictybirt, fbl. 1656. p.412. 


f Prime's worthies, fbl. 517. * Ibid. fbl. 516- 

h In a vifitation-book, made anno 1623, of the counties 
of Wilts, Dorfet and Somerfet, among the MS. collections 
of Brvwn Willis, Efq; of Wbaddon-Hall in Buds, there is 
a pedigree of Sir Walter Ralegh's family from the reign of 
king John ; with a copy whereof that worthy antiquary 
having obliged me, I find this Wymond, in the the time of 
king Henry III, is therein called lord of Coliton and Nettle- 
comb : So it may feem, the eftate in Somtrfetjbire was of 
later acceffion to the family, and that in Dowm/hirt the 
more ancient feat ; or that the removal was made rather 
to the former, than the latter country 
* Prince, fol. 530. 

But 


Digitized by boogie 







Sir WALTER RALEGH. 

But however grateful it may feem in that author, who has characteris'd the aforefaid Sir TVd- 
liam Pole, as the firft and belt antiquary of his county ; • though none of his works were ever ■ 
printed, or perhaps now remain fufficient to prove him fo to the public ; b yet we arc at li¬ 
berty to obferve, that John Hooker , another famous antiquary and hiftorian of the fame county, 
appears to have been his fenior \ c whofe actual publications, feveral years before Sir Wiliam 
Pole is faid to have privately apply*d himfelf to thefe ftudies, had eftablilh’d his character, 
through the applaufes of the beft judges in his own time j d and who, with refpett to Sir Wal¬ 
ter Ralegh in particular, being related to, and acquainted with him, had not only the greateft 
opportunities to be expert in his genealogy, but withal publicly addrefling an account thereof 
to Sir Walter himfelf, when this knight was in the very meridian of envy and detraction, had 
the greateft obligations upon him to be ftrictly accurate in difplaying it. Now this author, in 
one of his performances, gives us to underftand ; that Smalridge was in the pofleflion of the 
Raleghs before the Norman conquefl *, and that one of the family, being taken prifbner by the 
Gauls, did, for his deliverance upon St. Leonard’s day, build, at his return home, a chapel 
there, confecrated to that faint i and therein, as a grateful monument, hung up his target : e 
the records of which foundation are faid to have been given by a prieft of Axminjler to Sir Wal¬ 
ter Ralegh, ( as their moft rightful owner. So much for die antiquity of the family in Devon- 
Jhire: and as for its derivation, the laid Hooker, even in a printed dedication to Sir Wal¬ 
ter Ralegh, as I hinted (which he repeatedly confirms in the aforefaid performance) not 
only avouches his alliance to the Courtenays , earls of Devon , and other illuflrious houfes •, but 
traces the ftream of conianguinity up to the kings of England : where he fays, “ That one of 
“ his anceftors in the dirt&eft line. Sir John de Ralegh of Fardel (another feat of their ancient 
“ inheritance in the parilh of Cornwood, eight miles eaft of Plymouth) efpoufed the daughter 
“ of Sir Roger D'Amerex, who married Elizabeth daughter of Gilbert earl of Gloucejler , by 
«* Joan D'Acres, daughter of king Edward I. which Gilbert was defeended of Robert earl of 
« Gloucejler , fon of king Henry L” So goes up to the conqueror: and farther adds, “ That 
«* in like manner he may be derived by his mother alfo out of the fame houfe.”e But fince 
thefe two authors, the likelieft we have in print to have confirm’d us in the truth of this mat¬ 
ter, vary thus from each other fince Sir William Pole thought it rather another family of the 
Raleghs, which was thus royally defeended fince alfo five or fix ancient pedigrees of this family, 
which I have feen in manufeript, by the heraldica] vifitors, and antiquaries of thofe weftern 
parts, alfo differ, not only from Hooker , but in feveral points both from Sir William Pole, 
and from one another; and laftly, fince it will be confider’d, that I have not undertaken to ac¬ 
count for the whole race of the Raleghs , but only one feledl perfon of the name, here let the 
truth, as to thefe remote anceftors or alliances, hover for me: for I am not moved, on the 
wings of conjecture, to make my felf a party with any of thofe antiquaries, nor lhall endea¬ 
vour to compremife the difference between them, unlefs fuch prevailing authorities had occurr’d, 
as would enable me to do it with certainty. Befides, as thofe whole virtues have adorned them 
with a fufficiency of perfonal honours, arc ever leaft anxious about fuch as are relative ; fo it 
might well argue but little weight in the judgment of a hiftorian, to Ihew himfelf contentious 


• The fame John Prince , fol. 506, who was honour’d 
by the defendants of Sir W. Pole with the perufal of what 
remain’d in his time of that knight’s collections; as his 
anceftor had been by Sir William himfelf, with an office 
which he held under him. lb. fol. 505. 

& Many of Sir William's MSS miicarried in the civil 
wars fo effc&ually, that the very titles and arguments of 
them are likewife perifhed, as Prince tells us in the fame 
page; and thofe four or five volumes this author appears 
to have had fome view of, having been fince lent about, 
are thought, and have been reported by fome of the family, 
to be now alfo irretrievably loll. See the Engli/h baronets , 
12EQO. 1728. vol. 1. p. 323. Yet I have been told by 
a perfon of great honour and knowledge in curiofities of 
this kind, that he had heard one volume of thofe collec¬ 
tions, if not more, is fomewhere in being. 

* Sir William Pole, who was high (heriffi of De*vonJbire, 
and honour’d by king James with knighthood in 1606, 
when Ralegh was in diferedit with him, forms to have been 
a writer chiefly in his reign ; for though he might apply 
himfelf twenty years to thefe ftudies, according to Prince, 
fol. 506. we yet find one of his largeft volumes written 
Am. 1616, in the fame page. But Mr. Hooker , who was 
the firft chamberlain of Exeter about 1554* and twice 
member of parliament for that city, as we hnd in the No- 
titia Parliamentarian by Brortxn Willis Efq; vol. 2. 1716. 
P 272 j as alfo for Athenry in Ireland about 1570, as I 


find by his own words; did actually fet forth in print his 
trails about the government of Extur, and bifhops of 
that fee ; befides his augmentations of the Englijb and 
lrijh chronicles, with other pieces, before, or by the year 
1587; and, having lived to near eighty yean, died in 
1601, according to Anthony Wood, and my faid author 
Prince, in his life i though the former of them quotes 
from Hooker's own words, that he was living in 1605 (if 
*tis not a miftake of the prek) and the latter has made no 
boggle at the blunder. 

* As bifhop Godwin, Richard Carcuu Efq; the Cornijh 
antiquary, and Mr. Camden , whofe words in one place 
arc, Vir eruditus, iff de antiquitatis fiudio optime merit us 
D. Joannes liookerus. Britan. Svo. Franc . 1616. p. 138. 

« Hooker's Synrpfu Chronograph teal ; or hiftorical record 
of DerjonJbire, a MS, as quoted by Prince, fol. 530. A 
copy whereof, in this author’s time, was in the cuftody of 
Mr. John Eaftchurch of Wood in that county ; Hill extant, 
as I have heard in thofe parts; and pity it is, that it has 
not yet feen the publick light; fince above a hundred years 
ago, it was revis’d by fo able a judge of its worth as 
Sir John Dodderidge, and had his recommendation to the 
prefs. 

f Tr if tram Rif don S defeription of Drvon, in Ax m infer. 

i Hooker's epiftle dedicatory to Sir Walter Ralegh, be¬ 
fore his tranflation and continuation of the chronicles of 
Ireland, printed in Hollinjbed, vol. 2. 1587. 

q abott 


Digitized by kjOOQle 


v i 'j the Life of 

about thefe feathers for hii worthy j efpccially foch a one, as fliall be found to have tlvought to 
juftly light of them himfclf. 

Howeve ft, as all accounts allow him a very honourable extraft i let us prefer which we plcale, 
the freedom fome great courtiers took in calling him Jack and Upftart , upon his advancement 
to queen Elizabeth's favour, is thought to have fomewhat reflected rather on themfelves ; 
in fuffering their fprightly parts to take fuch advantage of their noble principles. One of thefe 
farcafms I find recorded by lord Bacon, in his little book of Apophthegms^ where he fays, 
“ That when queen Elizabeth had advanced Ralegh , fhe was one day playing on the virginals, 
“ and my lord of Oxford with another nobleman flood by ; when it happen’d that the ledge 
4 ‘ before the jacks was taken away, fo that they were feen •, whereupon that lord and the other 
“ nobleman fmil’d and whifper’d a little: the queen mark’d it, and would needs know, what 
“ was the matter ? His lordlhip anfwer’d. They laugh'd to fee , that when jacks went up, heads 
“ went down." Though the application of this reflexion particularly to Ralegh , if fuch was 
made, is difputable, notwithflanding lord Bacon's allufion, yet it i6 plain, that Sir Robert 
Naunton, who was fecretary of ftate at the time of Ralegh's death, and whofe obfervations on 
that queen’s favourites were written, though not printed, before thofe Apophthegm s, thought al- 
fo, that it was made upon Ralegh: for he has faid, with relation to this jeft by that witty earl, 
“ We all know it favours more of emulation and his humour, than of truth * it being a certain 
“ note of the times, that the queen, in her choice, never took into her favour a mere new man, 
“ or a mechanick.” b But it is believ’d, Sir Walter Ralegh himfelf was afterwards pretty even 
with his quality-critics", where he fo fblidly expofes the emptinefs of merit, nay, the real de¬ 
triment to it, in poflerity’s being entitled to the rewards of their anceftor’s virtues, by heredi¬ 
tary honours •, fucceffion of blood ; and nobility in parchment ; thofe only being truly noble, who 
by worthy a FIs have render'd themfelves mojl notable. * 

All therefore that needs be added on this head, as a matter more immediately requifitc, and 
Hh paren- indeed Efficient for my prefent purpofe, is. That Sir lFalter Ralegh was the fon of Walter 
Ralegh Efqj of Fardel aforefaid •» who being thrice married, had by his firfl wife Joan, 
daughter of John Drake of Exmoutb in Devon Efq> two fons, one named George , and the 
other John *, which laft married Anne the daughter of Sir Bartholomew Forlefcue of Fitley in 
Devon , and relift of —•- Gaicrick of Ford ; and they had iflue. His fecond wife was daughter cf 
one Darell of London } by whom he had a daughter named Alary, d who was married to 
Hugh Snedale of Hilling in Cornwall Efq; and had iflue:* his third wife was Catherine daughter 
of Sir Philip Cham per non of Modbury, and relift of Otloo Gilbert of Compton in Devon Efqj lie 
had by this laft Venter , his third fon, Carew, afterwards knighted, and of Wiltjlnre , who mar¬ 
ried Dorothy daughter of Sir William Wrought on, and relift of Sir John Thynn •, by whom he 
had iflue ; and laftly, his fourth fon, named Walter , the fubjeft of our enfuing difeourfe who 
was thereby the uterine brother of thofe three eminent knights. Sir John , Sir Humphrey , 
and Sir Adrian Gilbert. By this laft wife, Mr. Ralegh had alfo one daughter, named Marga¬ 
ret ; who was married firft to — Radford of Mount Radford in Drvon, clerk of die peace ■, and 
afterwards to — Hull of Larkebere Efq* in St. Leonards pari/h, Exeter. f 

The Emily was indeed at this time much declin’d from its former fplcndor of Erne and af¬ 
fluence of fortune: for the cflate of Smalridge, which remain’d in the name of Ralegh to the 
time of king Henry VIII, was then fold, by Sir Walter's grandfather Wimornl, to John the fa¬ 
ther of Sir John Gilbert of Compton ; but I cannot find it reduc’d to that low ebb, in the lat¬ 
ter refpeft, which fome have intimated: for Fardel remain’d flill in their pofleflion j which, 
after the death of Sir Walter's father, fell to the eldeft fon George •, and there were befides. 


« I mean the only genuine and uncorrupted edition of 
them, pub'iihed by the author himfelf, in fmall 8vo, 
1625. Tis the fir It Apophthegm in the book. 

fc Sir Robert Naunton's Fragmenta Regalia , 4to. 1642, 
in his charader of Sir IV. Ralegh , p. 28. 

« llitre diSui nobilis , quafi •virtute pr<1 aliis notabilis. 
See Sir ti r . Raltgh's hiltory of the world, lib. 1. c. 9. fed. 4. 

4 The vifitation of Drvonjhire , Ann. 1 564, by William 
H'rvy Efq; Clare ncieux , a MS. in the heralds-office. 

« Among the errors of the clerk* or transcriber of this 
•vifitation, in the paragraph concerning Sir Walter Ralegh's 
father (too obvious and minute to be here taken notice of) 
that aflertion of this daughter’s having no iflue fhould not 
be deem’d one; that book being written probably before fhe 
married. 

f Though Sir JV. Pole , in Prince's Worthies , fol. 530, 
mentions Sir W. Ralegh's father to have been but twice 
married, omitting his fecond wife, and alfo his daughters 
by her, and his third ; yet as one or both of thofe daugh- 
will hereafter occur, proving him manifeilly dc- 


fedive in that omifTion, I have thought it molt reafonaWe 
to follow fome other antiquaries of thofe parts and times, 
who concur in his marriages and iflue as they are here dif- 
play’d. And for this intelligence, the pubiick is princi¬ 
pally obliged to the incomparable HarLyan library ; its no¬ 
ble owner having honour’d me with the permifliun of ccl- 
Ieding it from the pedigrees of the Devonjhirc gentry, an 
original MS. by *Ih 9 . Weftcot y recorder of 7 uine/} f fol. 
fign. 99, C. 16. pag. 59 ; and of collating it with Richard 
Mundays MS. coll, of pedigrees, fol. fign. 90. A. to. 
png. 53; and with the vifitauon of Deior/hirc t by Has. 
St. George Efq; Richmond- herald, and Samphn Lenna*d y blue- 
mantle, deputies for W. CamcLn Efq; Clarencitux , Ann. 
1620, fol. Jig. 64. B. 1 4-p**g- 366. But feme of th -pedigrees 
in thefe books, and others I have feen of Sir Walter Ra¬ 
legh's family, might perhaps be improved, at leafl with rela¬ 
tion to die more ancient branches; that is to fay, from king 
Henry II. down to king Henry Vill’a reign, out of the valua¬ 
ble old deeds and evidences which icmain in the cuftody 
of Sir John Trevelyan of A 'ettltcoml in Somerfetjhire , Bart. 


Widdycomb- 


Digitized by 


Google 







Sir VF A L TER R A L E G M vii 


Wtddycomb-Rahgb, and Coliton-Raltgb in their pofleflion ; die former of wludi was fold, by 
Sir Walter's elder brother Sir Qarrw Ralegh, to George the natural Ion of George afordiud ; 
mid die latter was fold, by Sir Walter himfelf, t o Richard Marlin t or his father, of Exeter , * 

But neither of thefe places claim the honour of his birth. 

For liis father having the remainder of a fourfcorc-years leufe, in a pleafant farm call’d Hayes , Bitth-pl.*'* 
lituate in the parifh of BudUy , in that part of Devon/hire bordering eaftward upon the fea, near 
where die Ottery, or river of Otters, difeharges it felt into the Britijb channel ; and refiding 
upon the faid farm during the time of his Jaft marriage : this was the birth-place of Sir Walter 
Ralegh ; and it is accordingly diftinguifh’J, as for nothing more remarkable, by topographi¬ 
cal writers to this day. After the expiration of that leafe, Ralegh apply’d, but unfuccefsfully, 
to Mr. Duke of Olterton,, to whom the eftate devolv’d, to fell it him s as appears by Ralegh's 
letter to him, wherein he fays, “ That for the natural difpofition he had to the place, being 
“ born in diat houfe, he had rather feat himfelf dicre, than any-where elfe.” b From whence, 
it Jeeps, that what, fome are, by another Devonian antiquary, faid to have reported, and himfelf 
appears only to have recorded ; as if “ Sir Walter Ralegh was born in the city of Exeter , and 
“ in the houfe adjoining to the palace-gate,” c has no authority, and perhaps, had not lo much 
as rumour to countenance it. 

As to the time of his birth •, I find the computation has been made from Camden's account Born 
of his age at his death, that he was born in the year 1552. And herewith corrcfponds an ob~ 
fervation I have found in an aftrological author, who, fixing his birth in the fixth year of king 
Edward VI, which anfwers to the year of our Lord aforelaid, calls it “ A year remarkable 
“ in our chronicles •, firft, for that ftrange Ihole of the largeft fea-fiflies, which, quitting their 
“ native waters for frelh and untafted ftreams, wandered up the Thames fo high, till the river 
“ no longer retained any brackifhnefs-, and fecondly, for that it is thought to have been fbme- 
“ what ftain’d in our annals with the blood of the noble Seymer , duke of Somerfet: events 
«* (ftys he) furprifingly analogous both to the life of this adventurous voyager. Sir Walter 
«* Ralegh , whole* delight was in the hazardous difeovery of unfrequented coafts ; and alio to 
** his unfortunate death.” d 

That his younger years were feafon’d at the univerfity of Oxford , we may gather from Fj ucate( j al 
good authorities; as Hooker aforefiiid, lord Bacon, and Anthony Wood ; which lafl fiays, “ He Oxford 
** became commoner of Oriel College , in or about the year 1568 , when his kinfman C. Cham- 
** fernon ftudied there ; and that his natural parts being ftrangely advanced by academical 
“ learning, under the care of an excellent tutor, he became the ornament of the juniors-, and was 
“ worthily efteem’d a proficient in oratory and philofophy” c . But in that he came fo late thi¬ 
ther as this author mentions, and flayed fb long there as three years, which he afterwards men¬ 
tions ; and, as the biographical fry who follow have nibbled out of him, they are all miflaken: 
tor he will prefcntly appear two years before that time amounts to, in the wars abroad. What 
time then can we fpare for his refidence at Chrift-Church College alfo, in that univerfity j whereof 
J>. Fuller would needs have him a member, cither before or after he was of Oriel } ‘ unlefs we 
could find, as I fear we fhall not, that he return’d from the fchool of Mars , to that of the 
Mufes? Little more can we expeft to have been obferved of this more remote part of his life-, 
and yet fomething more in it has been preferved by lord Bacon aforefaid, who had the judg¬ 
ment to forefee, that every little circumftance would be acceptable of a man, whofe fortunes and 
misfortunes had render’d him fo memorable. And indeed it has been reprefented to me as a 
matter of no fmall honour to Sir Walter Ralegh , that a cafual expreflion of his, in his imma¬ 
ture and greened years, ftiould prefer it felf to the commemoration of that great philofopher, 
in his fageft and moft advanc’d age. But as he had obferv’d, on the nature of things ; That 
great objects may be difcern’d through a little crevice; fo he knew, with rcfpedV to the nature 
of men, that a great difeovery of genius may. be made through a fmall and fudden repartee: 
and hence might he be moved to remember ; “ That while Ralegh was a fcholar at Oxford , 

“ there was a cowardly fellow, who happen’d to be a very good archer -, but having been grofly 
“ abufed by another, he bemoaned himfelf to Ralegh, and afk’d his advice •, What he fhould do 
“ to repair the wrong that had been offer'd him ? Ralegh anfwer'd, JVhy, challenge him—at a 
“ match of fhooting.” 8 


* Prince *5 Worthies, fol. 531. 

* Dated from the court 26 Juh 1 584, and quoted by 
dntkiv'i Hoed in Athcn. Oxon. vof. I. col. 435. 

* The antiquities of Exeter, by Richard Izacke, chain- 
btttan of that city, 8vo. 1681, p. 147. 

« Supplement to G. Le Neve's collcttion cf nativities 
MS. fenes me , fol. 9. 


• Anthony Wood* s Athcn. Oxon. as before in Sir U'at 
ter Ra/cgh's life. 

f Sec Dr. Tbo. Fullers church-hi(lory, fol. 1656, in 
his tabic of the learned writers of One! College, lib. 4. 
fol. 104; and alio that of Cbrijl-Chunk, lib. 5. fed. 32. 

* Lord Skew's Apophthegms new and old, gvo. 1625. 
P *9*- 

Hove 


Digitized by boogie 


Vlll 


Goes to the 
wars in 
France . 


T*he L I F E of 

Hot? long he continued at the univerfity, is at laft rightly concluded by Anthony Wood to be 
uncertain •, but as fure as he thinks himfelf right in fettling him a ftudent of the municipal laws 
in the Middle 'temple , upon feeing a copy of verfes he might write in that inn of court; I take 
this aflmion to be a greater uncertainty than the other. For though Sir Robert Naunt on, and 
poflibly from him mod other writers of Ralegh'% life, have alfo confign’d him to the ftudy of 
the law, on his leaving Oxford ; there is a late author who believes it a miftake fo obvious j 
that no merit can reafonably be aflum’d from correcting it: * for Sir Wliter , at his arraign¬ 
ment, in a reply to the attorney-general, lays a heavy imprecation upon himfelf. If ever he 
read a word of law or Jlatutes, before be was a prifoncr in the Tower. b So that if this Ralegh 
was the author of that poem before-mention’d, and of the Middle-Temple in that year it was 
written, which we fhall prefently arrive at, we mull yet take care to keep the lawyer clear 
from the templar. 

For we are exprefly told by Hooker , “ That, after Ralegh had laid a good ground to 
** build his actions on at the univerfity, he traveled into France *,” c and this is confirm’d by 
Camden, according to whofe account of the time, Ralegh could not be, at his departure, 
above feventeen years of age ; and by the occafion of his firft going over, it will appear that 
a military courfe of life firft fledg’d his fame. For as it has been rightly obferv’d, Ralegh 
had the advantage of a ftirring age to encourage and exercife his aClive genius, throughout the 
whole feries of his firft engagements. France was now embroil'd in civil wars •, England 
foon after, to divert a menaced danger from the encroaching power of Spain , lent alliftance to 
the then diftrefs’d and humble States of Holland Spain , by a political reprifal, railed ftubborn 
infurre&ions in Ireland ; and the Pope, to make the rebellion more permanent, and more plau- 
fcble, religioufly pretended that kingdom was a perquifite of St. Peter. d 

But firft of France : and here we need not recur to the original of thofe commotions there 5 
need not trace the Hugonots to their fountain-head } e apologife for their oppofitions againft the 
Guifards i * labour to reconcile queen Elizabeth's defence of another prince’s opprefled fubjeCls, 
to the laws of nations, when imminent danger, by fuch oppreflions, threatned her own 8 nor, 
laftly, aggravate her motives againft France in particular, from their late violation of cove¬ 
nants, relating to the rendition of Calais : h thefe topics being to be fought where they have 
already been, and it is more proper they Ihould be dircftly difeufied. Sufficient therefore it 
will be, to obferve in this place, out of Camden's annals, that though the queen had her hands 
full of diforders at home, yet Ihe was not wanting either in commiferation or relief to the per¬ 
fected proteftants of France •, and not only exhorted other princes of the fame perfuafion to 
lend their hands to the common caufe, but fupply’d the queen of Navarre with money and 
men to fupport it; permitting Henry Champernon , a relation by marriage of the earl of Mont¬ 
gomery^ to march with a felcdt troop of a hundred gentlemen voluntiers, well mounted and 
accoutred, into France who bore in their ftandard this motto: Finem det mihi Vir- 
tus: Let valour decide the caufe. In the lift of thefe voluntiers, was Philip Butjhed, with 
Francis Barcley, men afterwards of note in their time i and this Walter Ralegh , the mod noted 
of all, then a very young man, and firft beginning to pulh his fortune in the world} admodum 
adolefcens, jam primum fatis monjlratus, fays our above-cited annalifl. ‘ 

The greateft hiftorian in France of thofe times, tells us, this feled troop of horfe arrived in 
the French camp, on the 5th of Oftober 1569, and that they were very honourably receiv’d by 
the queen of Navarre and the princes. k But what ferviccs diftin&ly they perform’d in France , 
or how long they continued there, neither the writers of that country, nor of our own, have, I 
think, given full fatisfa&ion. This confequence we draw from fome circumftances in the lat¬ 
ter part of Ralegh's life, that he eftablilhed himfelf a confiderable reputation while he was in 
that kingdom •, and from our author Hooker aforefaid, “ That he fpent good part of his youth 
“ in wars and martial fcrvices there 1 agreeable to which, is that paflage in another author, 
who alfo feems to have known him ; where, fpeaking of his education, he adds j “ It was not 


1 Mr. Lewis Theobald's memoirs of Sir W. Ralegh , 8vo. 
* 7 r 9 P- S-. 

*> I he trial of Sir Walter Ralegh , 8vo. 1719. p. 25 ; 
and in the State Trials, vol. 1. fol. 180. 
c Hooker's epilt. dcdic. 

d Theobald* s memoirs of Sir W. Ralegh , p. 5. 
t The original or derivation of the Hugonots is diffe¬ 
rently given by French authors. See the Sieur Caflelnau' s 
memoirs of Francis II. and Charles IX. of France . lib. 2. 
cap. 7. And in Eftienne Pafquiers Recherches de la 
France, among his works. Amfterd . 1723. tom. I. fol. 858, 
a whole chapter on the word Huguenot. 


f See Sir Jerom Bowes' s tranflat. of an apol. for the 
Chrillians in France of the evangelical or reform’d reli¬ 
gion, 8vo. bond. 1579 

t Hereof, befides Albericus Gentilis * De Jure Belli \ 
Grotius , and Puffendorf. See the bifhop of St. Afaph s 
difeourfe of God’* dilpofing of kingdoms, 4to. 1691- 
h Of thefe coveoants, ice at large in Spted* s enron. 
2d edit. fol. 1163. 

» Annal. Reg. Elix. Ann- 1569. 

k Joe. A/tg . Thuani kijioriat um fui temper is. tom. 2. 
fol. 1626. lib. 46. p 601. 

* Hooker t epiit. dedic. &c. 

part 


Digitized by 


Google 











IX 


Sir WALTER RALEGH. 


u part, but wholly gentleman, wholly foldler.” 1 And hence may we not only account for the 
greateft ebafm in all the memoirs which have hitherto appear’d of Sir IValter Ralegh’s life \ 
but alfo prefume, that he was here initiated in thole accomplilhments both civil and military, 
through the language and politenefs of the people, as well as their warlike and minifterial af¬ 
fairs, whereof he afterwards gave fuch manifold proofs *, and of which, in a period clutter’d with 
fuch extraordinary events, he mutt have here had fuch an extenfiveand inttru&ive prolpett. 

Some French hiftorians tell us, that what with the fupplics of queen Elizabeth , who fent the 
French proteftants a hundred thoufand angels, befides fome pieces of cannon and ammunition; 
and what with the aids of their other allies, the proteftant army, which took the field under 
admiral Coligny and the prince of Conde, and encamp’d about Limofin, this year of Ralegh’s 
going over, being in the beginning of their third civil war, amounted to no lefs than twenty- 
five thoufand fighting men ; when the king’s army under his brother the duke of Jnjou, be¬ 
ing encamp’d at Rochlabeille, amounted to above thirty thoufand. b But others reckon the pro¬ 
teftant army of equal number •, and obferve, tho* their men and horfe died at Limofin in great 
numbers for want of food and forage ; and tho’ a great reward was offer’d for the admiral, dead 
or alive, that it only added fuel to the fire: for what terror could itftrike, lays my author, into 
perfons, who headed an army of thirty thoufand men, and ventur’d their lives with the utmoft 
bravery on all occafions ? c As for the infincere league or union of France and England , by the 
pretended marriage, which appears to have been negotiated two years after between the two 
crowns ; d it feems not to have withdrawn thefe Englijh auxiliaries, at leaft not him along with 
them; becaufe Ralegh’s continuance in France would then fall Ihort of Hooker's implication 
aforefaid. But as we lhall difeover him to have been in that kingdom beyond the death of 
king Charles IX, which from Ralegh? s entrance thither is about five years; and that in this 
compafs of time near thirty battles, fieges, overthrows, treaties, and capitulations on one fide 
or other may be enumerated; it is manifeft that our young volunteer was hazardoufiy h« chiraflcr 
engaged in fome, if not feveral of them. He had afterwards occafion to mention, upon °' ‘ he . frMft 
his obferving here, the ill confequence of having commanders in equal power, whom 
it is almoft impoflible to chufe of equal courage and diferetion, “ How well he re- 
*« member’d, that when the prince of Conde was flain after the battel of Jarnac , the proteftants 
** did greatly bewail his lofs, in refpett to his religion, perfon, and birth : yet that comforting 
4 ‘ themfelves, they thought it rather an advancement, than hinderance to their affairs j for (as 
“ he judicioufiy proceeds to diftinguilh between the military virtues of this prince, and the ad- 
“ miral aforefaid) fo much did the valour of the one out-reach the advifednefs of the other ; 

“ that whatfoever the admiral intended to win, by waiting the advantage j the prince adven- 
** tur’d to lofe, by being over-confident in his own courage."* In another place Ralegh fpeaks 
of a ftratagem which he and his company ufed with fuccefs at Languedoc, where the enemy had Stratagem at 
fortify’d themfelves in certain caves which had but one narrow entrance cut in the mid-way of hanguedcc. 
the high rocks, and “ which (lays he) we knew not how to enter by any ladder or engine •, till 
« at laft, by certain bundles of lighted ftraw let down by an iron chain with a weighty ftone in the 
“ midft, thofc that defended it were fo fmother'd, that they furrender’d themfelves, with their 
** plate, money, and other goods, therein hidden; or they muft have died like bees that are 
“ fmoak’d out of their hives.”' And in another place he gratefully takes notice of a delive¬ 
rance he had in thefe wars. ’Tis where, reafoning upon the manner and opportunities of re¬ 
treats in battle (with that fagacity and experience which are no ftrangers in his writings) he 
firft gives an example of its being lefs dilhonour to retire in the dark, than to be ruin’d in th c 
light, in the fentiment of M. de la Noue, upon the retreat made juft before the battle of Moncoun- 
tour. « For (fays that Frenchman ) ftaying upon our reputation in Jbew, not to diflodge by 
■“ night; we loft our reputation indeed, in difiodging by day ; whereby we were forced to fight 
** upon our difadvantage, and to our ruin: yet (fays Ralegh) did that worthy gentleman DeI|vmnce 
“ count Lodowick of Najftau, brother to the late famous prince of Orange , make the retreat at at the battie 
“ Moncountour with fo great refolution, as he faved one half of the proteftant army, then ° f 
“ broken and dilbanded, of which my felf was an eye-witnefs, and was one of them who had 
“ caufc to thank him for it.” 8 But by what means Ralegh efcaped that comprehenfive de- 


tour. 


• See Sir Walter Ralegb'% ghoft ; or England*% fore- 
v ^ lrnfr i &c. Utrecht , printed by John Schellem, 410. 

*6*6. p. ir. 

k 7 deSerrts, Anno 1569. 

* Mich, de Coftelnau's memoir?, lib. 7. cap . 7, 8. 

Certain articles, confederations, demands, and anfewers, 

about the league between us and France, under the year 
, 57 , t are refer’d to in Sir Francis Walfinghams table-book, 
ot repertory of all his ftate*papen, a MS in my pofleffion. 


written in 8vo. about the year 1588. p 147. And thefe 
articles, tec. are mention’d there to be enter'd in his diurium 
of foreign matters, lib. A. pag. 25. As for the letters of 
the Englijh ambafladors upon this occafion, they were col¬ 
lected by Sir Dudley Dipges, and primed under the title of 
the compleat ambajfadcr , fol. i6c$. 

* See Sir Walter Ralegh's hijtory of the nxorld, lib j. 
cap. 2. feCt 3. 

f lb. lib. 4. cap. 2. fetf. 16. * lb. lib. 5. cap. 2. frCt 8. 

r •• ftru<ftion. 


Digitized by 


X 


The LIFE of 

ftru<ftion which broke out in the third year of this turbulent period, ualcfs with young Sid,icy 
(afterwards a knight of great renown for his own accomplifhments, and the patronage of other 
men’s, then upon his travels in France) he took fanftuary in the ambafliidor Walfingham's houfe, * 
we defpair at this diftance of learning : for then the cruel and infidious young king aforefaid, 
inflam’d by the queen mother , and her firebrands of religion, perpetrated that horrible majjnere 
of all the protejlanis in the capital city, and other parts of his realm j the invitation to which 
was the nuptials of his filler •, the fignal to which was the bell they rung to their pious mattins ; 
and in the execution whereof, among many thoufands, fell the great admiral aforefaid, by the 
procurement of his implacable enemy the duke of Guife. k And though the comet, which foon 
after glar’d out of the face of heaven upon thefe bloody a< 5 lors for many months together, e 
feems to have wrought little remorfe or contrition in them during life ; yet is their untimely and 
violent end, with the extirpation of the very line of Valois , fomewhat remarkable •, efpccially 
that of this king himfelf, whofe early delight in hunting of wild beafls, thus improved to the 
(laughter of his fellow-creatures ; till in lefs than two years after that inhuman maflacre, his in- 
fatiable thirll of his people’s blood, was quenched by an irrefiftible extravafation of his own. d 

Now that Ralegh was, till the death of that king, and even donger, in France , we may be 
fully convinc’d, from the further light I have fortunately met with, in an eminent authorof 
his own time. For Mr. Richard Hakluyt , in his moll excellent collcWion of voyages , dedicating 
his tranflation of a French adventure therein to Sir Walter Ralegh, tells him, That “ calling 
“ to mind you had fpent more years in France than I, and underftand the French better than 
“ my felf; I perceiv’d you approve my endeavour, not for any private eafe, but for the fpecial care 
“ you had of thofe to be employ’d in your own-like enterprife.” e And how long Hakluyt had 
been in France, appears in his dedication to Sir Francis Walfingham of his firft edition of 
thofe voyages ; f where he takes the occafion to tell his patron, that himfelf had been five years 
in that kingdom: fo that Ralegh mull have been at leaft fix years there. 

And this will lead us near the time we are to look for him in London , if we take for our 
guide in the chronology of Ralegh’s life, that copy of verfes before-mentioned which Anthony 
Wood took for his, in relation to Ralegh’s profeflion. Thefe verfes I have found to be a com¬ 
mendatory poem of three ftanza’s, by Walter Rawely of the Middle Temple , as he is there 
written; and printed among others, before a fatire call’d the fieele glafs, publifhed in 1576, 
by a learned and ingenious poet of repute in thofe days, named George Gafcoigne Efq; 8 an 
EJfexian born, and therefore nearly related, as I take it, to that excellent genealogical antiquary 
of the fame furname, who afterwards lived, and died I think, in Yorkfhirc-, and of whom I 


* See Digges'* compleat ainbaflador, fol. 250. 

Themailacreof Paris was begun on St. Bartholomew'* 
day 1572. And if between M 5 elli mate of the numbers 

that were butcher'd over France, which is one of the leail; 
and Perefixis, which is one of the largeft, we incline to 
the medium ; w r e (hall prefer the computation of Natalis 
Comes, who wrote earlier, and about the very time. He 
reckons them at three/core thoufand. And fo infatiable was 
the fury of thefe parricides, that they fpared neither age, 
fex, nor quality ; vel fuberes, vel impuberes , fays he, tru- 
eidati Junt ; ncque ulhui /exits, a el atatis, vel dignitatis , 
habita eft ratio, vid. Hilt. Nat. Com. lib. 23. p. 508. 
But yet Sir W. Ralegh , in one of his MS difiour/es on the 
marriage between England and Savoy, hereafter more par¬ 
ticularly fpoken of, numbers them (not yet fo high as 
fome of their own hiftoriam) at no lefs than a hundred 
thoufand. And Margaret , queen of Navarre, confeftes in 
her memoirs, liv. 1. That (everal of her brother s friends 
fell as at ell as his enemies, in the blind rage of this diffu- 
iive and undiitinguilhing dtfolation. Inlomuch that in 
contempt of all princely promiics and proteftations of 
amity, their hiltorians were fuffer’d to boalt, More hereticks 
had been deftroy'd in that one day, than in all the twelve 
years of the mar. Well therefore did that deputy of the 
reformed religion, in his treaty for a peace with the king 
and queen mother , which they agreed to, infill upon fecu- 
nty for the prefervation of it: and when the queen mother 
laid, Why, is not the word of a king fujflcient fecurity ? W ell 
did he anfwer; No, by St. Bartholomew, Madam. How 
much this flagrant exploit was gloried in over France and 
Rome, their proce/fions, thankfgivings, medals, and jubilee, 
will fufticiently declare. 

c This blazing liar, on which 30 different books were 
written, which had been read by Tycho Brahe, the noble 
Dane, before lie compos’d his larger work thereon, firft ap¬ 
pear’d on the 9th of November 15 7 2, in the form of a lozenge 
of four points, and*:ontinued immoveable nine month*, fays 
De Serres. Sir Thomas Smith, in a letter dated December 11 . 
that year to SirF. Walfingham, deferibes it a fair comet with¬ 


out beard or tail, on the back-fide of Ca/fiofeia s chair, 
and on the edge of Latlea via ; that it was between the 
fize of Jupiter and Venus, and had then appeal’d three 
weeks in England. In another letter to Walfingham, he 
notes how much the French and Englijb aflronomers varied 
as to the placing this liar in the figns of the Zodiac. See 
Sir Dudley Digges' s compleat ambaftador, fol. 299, and 316. 
But Camden, in his annals of queen Elizabeth, more par¬ 
ticularly oblcrves it to have (hone brighter than the planet 
of Jupiter in the perigee of his eccentric and epicycle » 
that it continued in the fame place lull (ixteen mouths ; 
though alter eight months it vifibly diminiftied. Mr. Tho¬ 
mas Digges and Dr. John Dee, two famou> mathematicians 
of thole times, have learnedly proved by the do&rine of 
Parallaxes, that it was fixed in the celeftial, not the 
elementary region ; and that it difappeared by aftenfion. 
Theodore Beza very ingenioufty apply’d it to the liar w hich 
appear’d at the (laughter of the Innocents under Hired. 
And queen Elizabeth ’s gallant comportment at the fight of 
it, from her window at Richmond, which ought not to have 
efcaped her anna lift aforefaid, is prelerved by the earl of 
Northampton , in his learned Dcfenfative againft the pci/in 
of fuffo/cdprophecies. 2d edit. fol. 1620. p. 77. 

That extraordinary eruption of blood carried off king 
Charles IX, on the 30th of May 1574, in the 24th year 
of his age. His fucccffor, Henry IIJ, wasftabb’d to death 
by a Jacobin frier, named James Clement, Anno 1589, in 
that very chamber w here the council had been held for the 
fatal Bartholomew's day ; fo made way for the houfe of 
‘ Bourbon : and the duke of Guife was murder’d in the faid 
king’s cabinet at Blois, about a year befoie. Sec the 
hiftorians of France . 

* Hakluyt's voyages, Isle, fecond edit, tom 2. fo). 301. 

f Printed in one vol. fol. 1589. 

* This (atire is primed in cne of the faid Gafcoigne's col¬ 
lections of poems, called a Hundredftveral flowers bound 
up in one fmall poefy, 4to. without date; but ftt forth, I 
take it, the fame year with that fatyr. 


have 

\ 


Digitized by kjOOQie 








XI 


Sir WALTER RALEGH. 

have elfewhere more particularly fpoken. Now though I have had the opportunity of feeing 
fome original manufcripts of Sir Walter Ralegh's writing, and his name written feveral times 
by his own hand, I lhall not cavil at the pfeudograpby thereof before the faid printed copy of 
verfes; becaufe I could inftance greater errors of the like nature, which yet have not excluded 
authors from thtf reputation of their compofitions ; but more elpecially, becaule there are 
fome glimmering circumftances which render the writing of that piece by this our author pro¬ 
bable to me: as namely, a kind of familiar dependency which that Gafcoigne had upon the lord 
Gray of Wilton j as in the dedication of this, and fome other of his works, is evident •, under 
which nobleman Ralegh will foon after appear to have ferved in the wars of Ireland. Again,. 

Gafcoigne had led a life fomewhat like Ralegh in foreign travel and military fervices: then "tis to 
be noted Gafcoigne ufed the very motto, under his pidture prefix’d to that fatyr before-mention’d ; 
which, after his death, is fo well known to have been aflumed by, or appropriated to, Ralegh 
himfelf; Tam Marti , quam Mercurio. All which feem to lhadow out the links, if not the 
perfeft chain, of fome acquaintance between them. But the poem it felf, to me, difeovers, in 
the very firft line of it, a great air of that folid axiomatical vein, which is obfervable in other 
produftions of Ralegh's mufc: 

Sweet were the fauce would pleafe each kind of tajle. 

And die whole middle Hex a flic, is fuch an indication of his own fortune or fate } fuch a 
caution againft that envy of fuperior merit which he himfelf ever ftruggled with j that it could 
proceed from no hand more properly than his own. 

Though fundry minds in fttndry fort do deem ; 

Yet worthiefl wights yield praife to every pain : 

But envious brains do nought, or light efleetn. 

Such Jlately fteps as they cannot attain : 

For whofo reaps renown above the reft, 

With heaps of hate Jhall furely be opprefs'd. 

Laflly, As to the particular of his being at this time of the Middle Temple , all we can In what fenfe 
conclude of it is, fincc he has fo publickly and folemnly protefted he never ftudied the law ^ the 
there ; that it might be as cuftomary in the inns of court then, as it is now, for a young gen- ‘Temple. 
tleman to be with a friend, or have the yfe of his chambers while he is out of town, or even 
have chambers of his own, rather than be confin’d to the Angularities of a family in lodgings, 
and never read a word of the law; much Ids have any purpofe to pratftife it. And this is 
ftrengthned by what I have met with both in fome old writings, and fome hiftorians of thofe 
times, which obferve, that the inmates not only in private houfes, but thofe who dwelt among 
the lawyers, and did not follow their profeflion, grew fo numerous and inconvenient, that there 
was an order or proclamation for their removal out of the inns of court about the latter end of 
queen Elizabeth's , or the beginning of her fucceffor’s reign.* 

His next ftage of attion was in the Netherlands , according to one of the writers of his life ; Goes to the 
who tells us he ferved under the prince of Orange, as a volunteer againft the Spaniards j ma- betberlandi. 
king himfelfj in the low-countries , mafter of the art military } and confirming, through the 
fuccefs of his firft campaigns, his refolution to advance himfelf by arms, as the nobler and rea¬ 
dier way to glory. b Sir Robert Naunton alfo intimates, that before he was in Ireland under the 
lord Grey , he was engaged in the Low-countries, and alfo in a voyage at fea. c Another 
author likewife agrees in this Low-countries fervice, and voyage at fea, before Ralegh was known 
at tourt. d But whereas the firft of thefe two writers mentions an earlier expedition of Ralegh's 
in Ireland, before this of the Low-countries, as his firft expofure to a military life, being igno¬ 
rant of all the time he pafs’d in the French wars ; and whereas the laft fixes him in that firft 
Irijh expedition, under general Norris ; I apprehend them to be herein both miftaken •, the for¬ 
mer, in that Ralegh appears not to have been twice againft the rebels in Ireland, nor once 
as his firft engagement in war ; and the latter, in that this Norris appears not to be in Ireland, 
when the courfe of Ralegh's employments will allow him to have been in that kingdom: 

• Further; to confirm this conjecture of Raley’s be- wrote the abovefaid poem from thence, or any other year 
ing only an inmate there, I have been led to enquire before, up to the beginning of queen Elizabeth's reign : 
after the rtgifttn of the Middle Temple, which are Hill though fome of his countrymen, and I think relation}, 
extant, of thofe times; and upon a diligent fearch, have occur there in that fpace of time. 

fatisfy’d my felf that there was no tuch perlon enter'd l> In lives Englijh and foreign, 8vo. 1704. vol. 1 p 76. 

a ‘ a /indent of the lain in that inn, by the name of Walter « Fragment a Regalia, p. 28. 

Ralegh, or any name like it, either in this year that he * Aulitut Cejuinarta, 8vo. 1650. p. 74. 

But 


Digitized by boogie 




XU 


'the LIFE/ 

but now that there is room for Ralegh's being in the Netherlands we find general Norris to be 
there. 

For the emperor Charles's natural fon Don John of Aufiria, a brisk, forward young man, 
fluff'd with the late victorious battle of Lepanto againft the turks, and high in the Pope’s 
favour i being fent by his brother the king of Spain in the year 1577 governourof the Low- 
countries, to divert his mind from higher reaches at home j and having incurr*d the general 
odium ot the ftates for his tyranny over them, no lefs than the jealoufy of the Engli/fj , for 
his treachery to this nation ; queen Elizabeth thought the Dutch now more immediately need¬ 
ful of her notice and more particularly from a difeovery that had been made to her, fome 
fay, by the prince of Orange., of a vain project the faid Don John had form’d of refeuing the 
queen of Scots out of prifon *, and by marriage with her, or the force of arms, to dethrone the 
queen of England , and make himfelf matter of her crown: for Don John's haughty conceit of 
himjelf, fays Ralegh, overcame the greatejl difficulties, tbo ’ his judgment was over-weak to manage 
the leaf. * Wherefore the queen not only receded from that peace with the Spaniards, and 
neutrality then in agitation j but fent the States both men and money, as they had requefted, 
to carry on the war more powerfully againft them. Among the forces, both Englijb and Scotch, 
which now poured over, under Sir John Norris, Sir Robert Stewart, colonel John North , Henry 
Cavendijh ,znd others, not to forget colonel Thomas Morgan •, whofe veteran troops were the firft 
perfect harquebufiers of our nation, and the firft who taught us to like the musket b there is 
here, and here only, I think, a vacancy in the ftory of Ralegh , that will admit of him under the 
firft of thofe commanders: fo might he probably fharein the danger and honour of that memo* 
rable Lammas day, Anno 1578, which buried the reputation of Don John \ which this govemour 
did not two months furvive ; and which has raifed the emulation of pencils, as well as pens, to 
commemorate. For the ftates having thus gather’d a powerful army, and planted themfelves 
near the village of Rimenant , about a league from Mechlin j Don John, at the head of, fome 
fay thirty thoufand men •, 1 being aflifted by the prince of Parma, Mondragon, and other the 
belt commanders of Spain, now refolved to give them battle. He made a furious onfet; but 
Th battle tf in the end, by a notable ftratagem, was deluded to a great overthrow. d For perceiving, as 

Rimenant. bought, the whole confederate army encamped before the faid village, in an open and in¬ 
viting plain *, Don John, too rafh to take advice, and too raw to prevail without it, precipi- 

toufly detach’d a ftrongcr force to encounter them j which fo fucceeded on both fides, that the 

ftates army, after a convenient refiftance, feigning a flight, quitted this their counterfeit camp ; 
the Spaniards eagerly purfuing, in a fcattered and diforderly manner, to compleat their fuppofcd 
victory ; till, amaz’d, they found themfelves in the midft of the fugitives true camp, envi¬ 
ron’d with nineteen thoufand horfe and foot a number confidently greater than the aflailants. 
To extricate themfelves was impoflible•, there was a river on one fide; when they attempted 
the thicket on the other, it was lined with an armed ambufeade of Englijh and Scots ; and 
when they affaultcd the trenches, they could not fuftain the fury of the artillery. Yet was the 
battle vigoroufly maintained from morning till night; tho’ the Englijh and Scots, harrals’d by 
a long and wearifom march, came but a day, fome fay but an hour, to the field, before the en¬ 
counter began: and yet partly thro’ bravery, partly thro’ the fultry warmth of the weather j or, as 
one author has it, more fenfibleof a little heat of the fun, than any cold fears of death," they 
made themfelves further remarkable, by ftripping off armour and cloaths, and fighting in 
their Ihirtsj till at laft, thofe who had purfued the ftates army in a pretended flight, were 
themfelves driven, with great {laughter, to a real one. And had count Boffiu, La Noue, with 
the reft of the ftates commanders, been but vigorous in charging the Spaniards upon this re- 
treat, it would have proved an abfolute difeomfiture, and might have put an end to all fuc* 
ceeding oppreffions. But it was fufficient to chaftife Don John for the faithlefs treaties of peace 
wherewith he had abufed the ftates, upon his entrance into that government. “ The fortune 
“ of the day (fays my laft author) may be better aferibed to the fervice of the Englijh and 
« Scots, by comparing this charge near Rimenant, where the Englijh and Scots were in great 
“ numbers, with the like charge given by Don John, half a year before at Gemblours , where 
“ the fuccefs was contrary j there being at that time but a handful of Englijh and Scots, and 
“ they put into confufion by their own horfes. ” f 

Soon after, a profpeCt prefented it felf for Ralegh to try his fortune in another clement; for 
his brother Sir Humphrey Gilbert, having now newly obtain’d a patent of the queen to plant 

* Sir Walter Ralegh's Hiftory of the World in Pref. « Critnftone's general Hlftory of the Netherlands, Fol. 

k See Sir Roger Williamts brief Difcourfe of the Spa- 1609, p. 662. 
r.tjh dilcipline in war, 4to. 1590. Alfo his Athens of a Fam. Strada dt Bel. Belg Anno 1578. 
the Ltrw-countries, 4to. 1618, p. 126. _ « Lord Bacon's Difcourfe of war. 1 Ibid. 

and 



e 


D g lizoo 







Sir WA LT E R RALEGH. xiii 


and inhabit fomc northern parts of America f unpoflfefs’d by any prince with whom (he was in 
alliance, foon engaged Ralegh , upon his return into England , who was always ready to grafp 
at every occafion, that might reputably advance his fortune or his knowledge, to embark in 
this adventure. For tho’ the coafts from the cape of Honda northwards to the ifles now cal¬ 
led the Newfoundlands , had been before difeovered by John Cabot the father, with Sebaflian - 
and Sancius his tons, * both Englifhmen born, through the authority and expence of king Henry 
the feventh j yet there wanted not only more inland researches and the eftablifhnient of Chri' 
ftianity, but the very trade and commerce with Newfoundland was very flothfully ncglefted* 
even fince the reign of king Edward VI ; b for our merchants and adventurers in his time enrich'd 
this nation confiderably from their fifhery in thofe parts, as appears by that aft, c wherein care 
is taken to prevent the exaftion of any doles or taxes from them by the officers of the admi¬ 
ralty, that they might not be difeourag'd from the merchandife of fifh, but tranfj>ort it more 
plentifully into the realm, and at more reafonable rales. Now Gilbert having, as I faid, pro¬ 
cured an ample commiffion to repofleft thefe advantages with improvement, by piercing more 
effectually into the bowels of thofe trafts which extend immenfeJy into the north from thirty, 
or rather twenty-five degrees of feptentrional latitude, many gentlemen of good account re¬ 
torted to him,, among whom we fhall find his brother Ralegh to be one ; fo that from thefe pre¬ 
parations was expefted a potent fleet. Nevcrtheleft, among fuch variety of volunteers, difpo- 
fitions were various; which in the end bred divifion, and even confufion of the attempt: for, 
after the fhipping was by degrees prepared, and die men «ready to go aboard 3 fomc dife- 
greeing in opinion, tome fhrinking at obedience, and others failing of their promifes and 
engagements ; the greater number were difperfed, leaving the general, with a few only 
of his affured friends. <4 However, with thele he ventur'd to fca ; where, having tafted 
44 of no lefs misfortune, he was fhortly after driven to retire home with the lofs of a tall fhip; 

44 and more to his grief, of a valiant gentleman named Miles Morgan”* Now this mif- 
fortune at fea, and lofs of a fhip with that valiant gentleman, I have not only reafon to believe 
was by afharp encounter they had with the Spaniards , however tenderly touch'd at that time, per¬ 
haps to avoid their triumph, by my author before referred to ; but that Ralegh was in this very 
engagement, and his life in great danger thereby. For there is another author, who, in his cd- 
drefs to him before-mention'd, tells him, that after his return from his Iand-fcrvices, having 
gained fufficient knowledge and experience therein, u To the end that you might lie every way 
44 able to ferve your prince and commonwealth (fays he) you were defirous to be acquainted 
44 with marittmal affairs: then you, together with your brother Sir Humphrey Gilbert , travel- 
44 led the feas for the fearch of fuch countries as, if they had then been dilcovcr'd, infinite com- 
44 modities in fundry refpefts would have enfued ; and whereof there was no doubt, if the fleet 
44 then accompanying you had, according to appointment followed you; or your felf had 
44 efcaped the dangerous fea-fight , when many of your company was (lain, and your fhips \ n a 
44 therewith alfo fore batter'd and diiabled." c This unfortunate adventure cannot, I think, be ,ou >h*u light, 
confounded with that fecond attempt upon Newfoundland , made afterwards by thefe two bro¬ 
thers, becaufe from this. Sir Humphrey Gilbert never return'd, ns we fhall hear; befidcs, the 
courfe of this voyage is fo particularly recorded, that we may affirm no fea-fight, or any fuch 
defertion of adventurers happen'd therein 3 and as we know how to account for a good part of 
Ralegh's time, till that fecond attempt was more notorioufiy made > fo we may from thence 
and the delays aforefaid, be able to compute that this firft, happen'd in 1579 ; for I have at lafl 
found the fleet was preparing, but not fet out, in the latter end of the foregoing fummer. ‘ 


• And perhaps before them, by A fa doc ap Outn Guyneth 9 
1 Brit ip prince, who is faid in the U\ljh chronicles to 
have tranfported himfelf and fomc colonies to thefe parts 
about the year 11-0, where he named feveral of the 
places and produ&ions after the language of his own 
country, which remain to this day ; as the fruit called 
Guyreth 9 from his own name ; and the bird call’d Pertgwin 9 
which is Wdjh tor white-head, whereof, from the abun¬ 
dance cf the birds fo marked, there is an illand Hill fo 
cak'd: rnd many other Wcljb words they have in ufc. 
See Sir George Pec thorn's report of the difeovery and pof- 
kllion of A**u.found/and in Hakluyt , vol. 3 p. 173. And 
Utwel's letters, vol. 2. 34. 

b And yet within four years before Sir Humphrey Gilbert 
obtain’d his parent, there reforted to the coalls of Mtu- 
foundiand for fifli about fifty fail, of Englifh, above a hun- 
drid fail of Span tar As for cod, and thirty more from Bi/cay 
for whale to make train-oil ; about fifty fail of Portugurfe ; 
and about an hundred and fifty fail of the French and 
JJrftaiyn, My author obferves, that the trade our nation 


had then to Iceland, wis the renfon the Englijb were not 
there in fuch numbers as other nations, bee Arj . Park - 
hurft's letter i n Hakluyt, vol. 3. p. 132. 

c Jnn % 2. Edvard* fexti. 

d Captain Edward Halers report of Sir Humphrey Gil¬ 
bert's voyage to Newfoundland, iSc. in Richard Hakluyt's 
collection of voyages, CrV. of the Englijh nation, tom. 3. 
printed Bond. i6co. p. 164. 

« Hooker's epillle dedicator)' to Sir Walter Ralegh before 
his tranflation, and continuation of the chronicles of Ire- 
land 9 cited. 

f There is an old dramatic performance (lately im¬ 
parted to me by Mr. Theobald) entitled. The bijlory of 
Promos and CaiTandra, written by George Whet]toncs 9 Gent, 
who, in his dedication thereof to \l\ Flcete*i\cod Elq; 
recorder of Lovdcn 9 cxprefics himfelf, “ Kefolvcd to ac- 
** company that excellent captain Sir Hunplncy Gilbert 9 
“ in this honourable voyage : and concludes with his 
“ prayers that God would preferve him in it, 20 July 

“ 157s.” 


c 


This 


Digitized by CiOOQie 


xtv 


The LIFE of 

Tnrs ill fuccefs kept not thefe adventurers long abroad ; and now new difturbances broke 
out which call’d for men of experience in war at home. For the firft dart of any confequehcc 
which was thrown from Spam or Rome upon Ireland , being in 1580, we lhall then find Ra- 
legh among that body of his countrymen which effe&ually broke its force, and lliielded of}' the 
mifchief wherewith it would other wife harve gall’d that kingdom. For as to the invafion ot 
Thomas Stucley , two years before, it blew over into Africa ; where that meteor of oftentation, 
and tool of ambitious princes, fell in the plains of Alcazar , and with royal company expir’d. 

But now that James Fitz-Morris of the Geraldine family was come over,* and not long after 
San Jofepho, under the pope’s banner, with Spanijh and Italian forces, to afiifl the Defmonds in 
the Munfter rebellion, and had landed in three fhips at Smerwick in Kerry •, where having built 
a fort which they call’d Fort del Ore , and re-forrify’d it with the benedictions of Allen an Irifh, 
and Sanders an Englijh jefuit ; the Irifh rebels under Sir James and Sir John , brothers to the 
earl of Defmond , foon reforted thither to .join, as the Englijh farces alfo did to difperfe them. 

Their fhips were foon taken by Thomas Courtenay , a Devonjhirt gentleman ; and Fitz-Morris 
himfelf, for a prey he had made of fome garons and other cattle, was by Sir William Burk 
and his fons foon (lain, and his quarters expos’d at Kilmallock. The next, whofe fate drew on, 
was Sir James Defmond ; who, on the fourth of Augujl in the above-mention’d year, having 
made an inroad upon Mujkerry , and,taken a great booty from Sir Cormac Mac Teige , fheriff of 
Cork the faid fheriff making head againft him, recover’d the booty, wounded Sir James , 

mortally, and took him prifoner. In that condition he was kept, till by letters from the lord £ 

juftice named Sir William Pelham, and the council, he was deliver’d to Sir Warham Sentleger f 
A captain in then provoft- marfhal of Munjler , and to captain Ralegh \ and according to the coinmiflion - 

)uuT ° f directed to them, he was examin’d, indifted, arraign’d ; and then, upon judgment, drawn, - 

hang’d, and quarter’dand his head and limbs impal’d upon the city gates of Cork , for a 
terror to his affociates, and a prey for the fowls of the air. Thus the peftilent Hydra of this a 

rebellion loft another of his heads: b and this is the firft appearance we meet with of Ralegh ^ 

in Ireland •, c enough to fhake the report of thofe who fay he was a militia there, d and had his 
firft commiflion from Arthur lord Grey , baron of Wilton ; tho’ indeed under him we lhall find 
the greateft part of Ralegh's ferviccs in this kingdom perform’d : for that lord came over de¬ 
puty of Ireland on the twelfth of Augujl aforefaid \ but the fword was not refign’d to him by 
the lord juftice Pelham till a month after, f 

This lord Grey was reputed a warm and fanguine man, fomewhat wanting among the Irifh, 
perhaps in Julius Agricola's qualification, who knew how to temper what was necejfary in his 
government of the Britons with what was agreeable : for the Englijh governor is thought to have 
been fo zealous of a healthy conftitution, as fcarcely to refrain from fcarifying the parts which } 

were found, that he might be lure of clearing away thofe which were infedled j and gave fome : 

proofs he agreed in the fentiment of a fucceeding deputy, That the Irifh were like nettles, ftire 
to make tljofe fmart who gently handled than j but mujl be crufhed to prevent flinging. His ? 

firft expedition againft the Obrines, whom he is thought to have attack’d rafhly to his difad- - 

vantage in their woods and faftneffes before he was fworn, loft him fome credit, and feveral - 

brave EngliJlj officers. But the chief commander in thefe parts at this time was the earl of 1 


Ormond^ loon after governor of Munjler, a man of fuch loyalty, as to have reduc’d his rebel- t 

lious brothers to allegiance j and of fuch courage, as conftantly partaking in every danger with t 

his own foldicrs, made hitn much beloved by all his adherents ; while his apparent contempt n 

thereby of that danger, gain’d him no lefs fear from all his adverfaries. He, on the other fide, > 

bending his courfe againft the foreign enemy, encamped his army at Tralegb, within ken of the 
Spanijh tort aforefaid: hereupon many of thofe invaders diflodged, whom the earl valiantly en- a 

gag’d, flaying fome, and taking others prifoners ; the reft flew to the coverts of Glaningell. 

The prifoners he took, confefs’d their force was not above feven hundred ftrong \ but that they t; 

had brought arms and ammunition for five thoufand natives, befidcs a mafs of money for the 6 

Defmonds and Dr. Sanders } and daily expected farther fupplies from Rome * for it was abfolutely pr;i 


determin’d by the pope and king Philip to make a compleat conqueft of Ireland , and England 
befides •, nay, fo confident they fcem’d of fuccefs, if we can credit the aflertion of an author 
who was this year in Spain, that his holinefs had provided a chalice to drink the queen of Eng- 

tion of this fervice, dated 12 Auguft 15 So. 

C Hookers fupply of the Injh chronicles, in the 2d vol 
of Hollinjhtd) rof. 168. 
d Fragment a Regal/a 

e HiAory of Ireland, by Richard Cox 1689. fbl. 
366, fcfr. 


land's 


a About the beginning of July 1 579, fays Hooker , in 
his fupply of the Irijh chron. fol. 15^. And bifhop Carle- 
ton , in his thankful remembrance of God’s mercy : being 
an hillorical collection of the deliverances in church and 
ihte, from the beginning of queen Elizabeth , 4m. 1624. 
P 38- 

* The lord juflice’s letter to the queen, in commenda- 


Digitized by 



/r 








XV 


Sir WALTER RALEGH. 

land's precious blood, * fays he, as foon as Hie fliould be made a facrifice. Now after the 
aforefaid defeat, about three hundred of the enemy having made their way back to the 
fort, the earl followed them dole, and encamped at Dingle : but wanting ammunition for 
a battery, was forced to retire. And, finding himfelf of unequal force to withftand another fill- 
ley the Spaniards made, return’d to join the deputy at Rakele j who having now about eight 
hundred horfe and foot with him, under the conduct of captain Ralegh, Zottch, Denny, Alack- 
worth, and others, decamped and marched up towards the fort. But Ralegh , who had ob- 
ferv’d it to be the cuftom of the Irijh Kerns^ upon any diflodgment of the Englifh camp, 
to flock in parties thither, and glean away whatever they faw left behind ; linger’d, and lay in 
ambufh to receive them. They came accordingly with their wonted conftancy and greedinds; Surprifes the 
but in the midft of their proling, Ralegh fell upon them fo advantageoufly, that he enclos’d them at 

all with his men, and took every rebel upon the fpot, who was not (lain in refiftance. Among 
them there was one laden with withies, who being demanded, What he intended to have done with 
them ? Boldly anfwer’d, To have hung up the Englifh churls. Well, faid Ralegh ; but they 
jhall now ferve for an Irifh kern: fo commanded him to be immediately tuck’d up in one of 
his own neckbands and dealt with the reft of thefe robbers and murderers according to their del 
fats. b We read of another Irijh rebel, but of greater rank, named Brian O Rourk ; who be. 
ing afterwards to fufler at the gallows, fhew'd great concern that it was to be by the common 
halter ; and earncfUy petition’d, not for pardon or prefervation of his life, but that they would 
change the inftrument of his death \ and inftead of a rope, to let him take his fwing in a withy : 
but being ask’d, Why be inf fed upon fucb an infgnifcant difinHion ? he anfwer’d, 'Twas a dif- 
tinftion had been paid to his countrymen before him. I remember lord Bacon ingcnioufly applies 
this example to illuftrate the force or tyranny of cuftom,* 

While the lord deputy lay before the fort, there arriv’d in the bay of Smerwick , vice- 
admiral Bingham, and foon after Sir William Winter , admiral of the fleet, with frefh fupplies: 
hereupon the lord deputy refolved to befiegc the fort by land, while the admiral Ihould batter 
it by lea. But firft the Spaniards were fummon’d to furrender at difcretion: they anfwer’d, 

“ They were font, fome, from the holy father, who had given that realm to king Philip j and 
“ fome from that king, who was to recover this land to the church of Rome, which by her 
“ majefty’s means was become fchifmatical and excommunicate •, therefore, in fhort, were 
obliged to retain what they had, and recover what they could.” d Nor did they omit 
the advantage they thought this parley would produce of finding the Englifls unguarded, to 
make a fally upon them ; but they were fo difappointed, through the vigilance and valour of 
Ralegh's company, and that of captain Penny ^ that fuch as were not left dead behind, were 
forced to retreat with more hafte than good fpeed. The culverins and other pieces of ordnance 
being now landed, and a large mountainous bank laborioufly cut through, for the carriages to 
pafs to the place convenient for planting them •, the deputy is faid, by my author Hooker, to 
have given the enemy another fummons by cannon-fliot to furrender, and receive mercy. e But 
they anfwer’d as before : thereupon the artillery was order’d to attack the fort both by land and Uefieges fort 
water. Ralegh, as the fame hiftorian records, commanded the firft three days after the opening of 
the trenches; and alfaulted the fort fo roughly from his battery, that he forced die Spaniards to 
feveral excurfions; but they fkirmifh’d fo warily, and hived again fo nimbly, that there was 
no clofing with them effectually. The fourth day was commanded by Zouch , under whom 
a tall proper gentleman, named John Cheke, the fan of a knight well known among the 
learned for his writings, venturing fo near the fort as to look over the parapet, paid his life 
for his curiofity •, being obferved by a Spaniard , who levell’d his piece, and brought him to 
the ground. But now the trenches for the full battery were drawn fo near the Spaniards , and 
the Englifh play’d their cannon fo furioufly and incdfantly qpon them from every fulc, that 
the enemy began to fear, fomewhat prophetically, \yhat they had built for a garrifon would 
prove their monument, and they fhould be buried alive in the ruins of it. . Therefore, finding 
no fuccours arrive, they beat a parley, and hung out the \vhite flag, crying out Mifruordia, 

Mfericordia •, but the lord deputy would not liften to any treaty wjth the confederates of trai¬ 
tors and rebels ■, no, not fo much as to their departure with bag and baggage, or free paflage 
to any one particular perfon ■, nothing but an abfofofo furrender. And as for mercy, which 
Hooker before intimates to have been offer’d on provifo of their timely fubmiflion, we find by 

1 C«. Whet ft cm's Ettglijb Myrror, & c. dedicated to c Lord B aeon's e flays. 
qee?n ElizaLtth. 410. 1586. p. 154. d Hooker 1 fupply, lol. 171. c Idem, Ibid 

k tinker'* fupp!y, ijc. fol. 107, &C. C \ox\ hillory oi* 

fol. 376. 

Edmund 


Digitized by boogie 



XVI 


The LIFE of 

Edmund Spenfer, who was then fecretary to the lord deputy, and upon the very fpot, that his 
lordlhip never gave the Spaniards any hopes of it. For as this author writes, “ When firft 
“ their fecretary Seignor Jeffrey , an Italian , was fent to treat with the lord deputy for grace, 
«* he was flatly refufed it; and afterwards, when their colonel, named Don Sebajlian , came forth 
“ to entreat that they might part with their arms like foldiers, and at lead be fpared their lives, 
according to the cujlom of war and law of nations j it was ftrongly deny’d him, and told 
*« him by the lord deputy himfelf, that they could not juftly plead either cujlom of war or law 
“ of nations ; for that they were not any lawful enemies •, and if they were, he infilled upon 
“ their fhewing by what commiflion they came thither, into another prince's dominions, to war ? 
i‘ And when they faid they had none to produce ; but were only adventurers, that came to 
“ feek fortune abroad, and to ferve in wars among die lriffj, who defired to entertain them, 
“ it was then anfwer’d, that the Irifb themfelves, as the carl and John of Dcfmond, with the reft, 
“ were no lawful enemies, but rebels and traitors j and therefore they, who came to fuccour 
“ them, no better than rogues and runnagades •, efpecially coming with no licence or commil - 
“ fion from their own king: wherefore it would be diflionourable for him, in the name of his 
“ queen, to condition, or make any terms with fuch rafeals. So left to their choice, whether 
“ they would yield themfelves, or not.” 1 Then the faid colonel did abfolutely yield him¬ 
felf, the fort, with all therein ; and craved only mercy , which it was not thought good (lays my 
faid author) to fhew them. 

For after the lord deputy had by captain Jaques Wingfield, mafter of the ordnance, difeo- 
ver’d they were in carneft ■, that they had yielded, and fur render’d the fort, on the ninth of 
l uteis the November , b Ralegh and Mackworth , who had the ward of that day, firft enter’d the caftle, 

and, with their companies, made a great Daughter ; fo that except one Irijh nobleman, who 
was repriev’d •, another I riff man, and an Engliffman , who were fent to publick execution ; 
except alfo San Jofepbo the Spauiffj commander, and his camp-mafter* with a few Spanijb 
officers, who were fent prifoners into England , and referv’d for ranfom ; all the invaders, be¬ 
tween four and five hundred, were, according to the deputy’s pofitive command, put to the 
Puts the spa- l'word j and the country was thus weeded of thefe noxious foreigners. As for Ralegh , he never 
”{\vofd t0 tl e was taxe ^> I can learn, with any cruelty upon this account, more than Mackworth , or the 
reft of the officers: but notwithftanding it was afterwards alledg'd, that the Engliff army there 
was not enough to keep the enemy all prifoners, and ready to mutiny for want of their provi- 
fions out of the forty or that the Englff expelled hourly a faults from the Iriff rebels, more, 
than fifteen hundred at hand ; c or frefh oppofition from Spain , three thou find carbines being 
in rcadinefs to come over ; d or that they had not barks enough to tranfport their prifoners into 
England •, or that an article in the deputy’s inftniltions themfelves, was to fforten the war by ef¬ 
fectual profecutions ; c queen Elizabeth did afterwards exprefs much diftatisfaltion at this decifive 
conduit in the laid lord deputy. 

Ralegh, as 1 looker goes on, was quarter’d this winter at Cork■, where he obferv’d the fe- 
ditious practices of David lord Barry, Patrick Condon, and other ringleaders of the rebellion 
in thofe parts, to diftrefs fo intolerably thofe fubjelts who were peacefully inclin’d, and fo¬ 
ment the difafteltcd to an infurreltion ; that he was forced to take a journey in perfon to the lord 
deputy at Dublin •, f where he remonftrated the dangerous confequences he forefaw, fo urgently, 
that, the cafe being taken into confuleration by his lordlhip and the council, they return’d 
His commif- * lun with a full commiflion to enter upon the caftle called Barry-Court , with all other hinds of 
lion to Fi/e the faid Barry -, and to reduce him to peace and fubjeltion, by fuch means as he judg’d mod 
feafible •, appointing him for his farther enablement a party of horfe. In the interim, fuch mea- 
J'ureswere ufedwith thofe in authority at Cork, that the commiflion proved of little efTelf ; but 
though the faid eftatc of Barry-More , was made over to the mother of David Barry, and only 
rented to the fon } and though it was his principal feat •, yet partly in fear of that commiflion, 
partly through fpite and indignation, he burnt the caftle himfelf to the ground, and wafted the 
country about it with greater outrage and deftrultion, than his enemies, had they taken it, 
would have done. Moreover, as Ralegh was on his journey back to his quarters, an old rebel 
ol Barry's fallion, named I-itz-Edmonds, who was fenefchal of Imokelly, lay in wait to fet upon 
and lei/.c him, with a party of horfe and fome Kerns , at a ford through which he was to pafs 
between lot (gall and Cork: fome hiftorians call the place Corabby. 8 Ralegh was much inferior 


* fy'w/.V, view of the Hate of Irtland i in the latl edi¬ 
tion ut hi, works, vol. 6. unio. p. 1611. 
h Sh- c'a chronicle in that year. 

c ijilhop Carltton'i hiltorical collection of deliverances, 
p. 4'!. And lord Bacon's difeouric of war, 

41 Gevrgt lyiittjhnt's Enflijb Mirror, p. 157. 
c Co.r’i hiitory of hi/rniJ, fol. 366. 


t Sptnfcr, in his view of Inland, , gives fome politic;! 
reafons why the lord deputy’s lcat ot rdidence had betur 
be more in the middle of the kingdom, than at Dublin : 
agreeable to the ancient observation on the hide ol leather ; 
which, being prels’d or trod upon only on one liite. the dis¬ 
tant parts will rile, bur in the centre, k~- ps all parts down. 
t Cox'i hillory of Inland, p. 3 f, “- 


in 


Digitized by boogie 











XVII 


ShIFALT’ER RALEGH. 


in number, being, at his fetting out, accompanied but with fix men, and they fcatter’d behind 
when he approach’d the ford. Here Fitz-Edmonds and his crew (allied from their ambufeade, • 
and crofs’d him, to oppofe his paflage, whom Ralegh manfully encounter’d and defeated, or Defeat* Fit~■ 
at leaft broke through them, fo that he got clear over the river :* but one of his company, £an ^’ ! ‘-” 

Mr. Henry Moyle, following, cither took a part too deep and unfordable, or plung’d into a 
quick-fpring * or his horfe, otherwife foundering, threw him down in the middle of it; 
where, between fear of drowning and being taken by the enemies, he called out to Ralegh 
for help who, tho’ he had cfcap’d both dangers, yet incurred them again to fave his compa¬ 
nion’s life: but Moyle, in hafte and confufion remounting, over-leap’d his horfe, and fell down 
on the other fide into a deep mire, where he might have been (tided, had not Ralegh recover’d Saves his 
him a fecond time, and brought him (life to land j but his horfe run over to the rebels. b Ra- frlfnd * **»• 
legb waited on the oppofite bank, with his ftaff c in one hand, and a piftol in the other, for the 
reft of his company who were yet to crofs the river j among whom was his fervant Jenkin , 
who had two hundred pounds of his money in charge \ a (urn in thofe days enough to make 
a foldier of fortune in thel'e circumftances look about him , efpecially now the fenefchal had 
got a recruit of twelve men, and was in all above twenty ftrong againft him. Yet this hero, 
as his party called him, when he beheld Ralegh ftand his ground, and the reft ot his company 
advance, whom he poftibly thought might be of greater number than they were, only exchanged 
a few rough words with him, and thought it beft to offer no further moleftation. Not long 
after, there being a parley between the earl of Ormond and the rebels, where the fenefchal be¬ 
ginning to vaunt of his own exploits, Ralegh , who was prefent, charg’d him openly with fiat 
cowardife, as having lately twenty to one on his fide, and durft not encounter him alone. 

One of the rebels own comrades pretended an unwonted diffidence in their champion upon 
that rencounter *, but gave confident afiurances he would never be fo remifs again upon any like 
occafion. This fo chaff’d die earl of Ormond , that he challeng’d the fenefchal , with Sir John In a chal- 


Defmond , and any four they would nominate, to meet himfelf, captain Ralegh, and four lc "£ e - 


more whom they would bring, at the place aforefaid ; where they would pafs the great river 
to them, and there, two to two, four to four,, or fix to fix, fight and determine the point in 
debate between them; but no anfwer was then return’d: wherefore the white knight , named 
Fitz-Gibbon , was afterwards fent to him with a repetition of the challenge ; but the rebels then 
abfolutely refufed it. Soon after the earl of Ormond departed from his long and wcarifome 


fervices here to England, about the fpring of the year 1581. His government of Munjler commiffioner 


was given to captain Ralegh , in commiftion with Sir IVilliam Morgan and captain Piers. Ra- f° r thc K°- 
legh lay for the moft parr at Lifmore *, and, in the country and woods thereabouts, fpent all \fajjfrr* ° 
this fummer in continual adtion againft the rebels. c 


vernmtm of 


Then Ralegh remov’d with his little band of fourfeore foot and eight horfe, to his old 


quarters at Cork j but receiving intelligence by the way, that the arch-traitor Barry was at Clove, 
with feveral hundred men, he refolved to pafs through that town, and offer him the combat. 

Accordingly at the town’s end he met Barry and his forces, whom Ralegh charged with great p uts ]f>rd 

bravery, and put him to flight. As he purfued his journey, he overtook another company of Sar, y t0 

the enemy in a plain, by a wood-fide ; upon whom, having only fix horfe-men with him, ex- 

pefling probably his company would foon join him, he gave the onfet j but the rebels, who 

were in much greater number, being cut off from the wood, and having no other relief, faced 

about, and fought very defperately, killing five of the horfes belonging to Ralegh's company, 

whereof his own was one, and he himfelf very near being over-borne by the numbers upon 

him, had not his trufty fervant Nicholas Wright, a Yorkfhire man, interpos’d j who perceiving 

his mafter’s horfe fo mortally wounded with darts, and plunging pad all recovery, encounter’d 

fix of the enemy at once, and killed one of them \ while another of his fellow-fervants, named 

Patrick Fagnw, refeued Ralegh • which had been fo unfuccefsfully attempted by James Fitz- Refeued in a 

Richard and his kern, both of Ralegh's company, that the man was (lain, and the mafter very diri 2 crousca 

near the fame fate; whereupon Ralegh would not fuffer IFright to fight by him any longer, ^ 0 

but order’d him to charge above-hand , and fave the gentleman : at which command he rufh’d 

into the throng of the enemy, difpatch’d the antagonift who prefs’d forcfl upon Mr. Fitz- 

Richard , and refeued him. In this (harp fkirmifh, there were many of the rebels (lain, and two 

taken prifoners, whom Ralegh carried with him to Cork •, and while he lay here, he performed 

feveral other notable fervices, which deferve (fays my author Hooker j to be for ever regifter’d. d 

* Cox’s hiiiory of Inland, fol. 367. long or clumfily made ; for being headed at one end 

* //win’s fupply, fol. 173. with a (harp point or pile of iron, they might be uled 

* Thcfc ftavci were not ihort like truncheons, but ra- for defence, or offence, cither as quar:er-ihve$, or 

tier like J.0IC7, or watermen’s (Iretchcrs, though not fo fpears. d HooArr* fupply, iol. 173. « id. 174. 


r 


Among 




XV111 


Seizes lord 
>Rocb in his 
own callle. 


governor of 
Cork. 


The LIFE of 

AmoVc* the reft, his excellent conduCt in the feizure of the lord Roch is more particularly 
remember’d and applauded'. This nobleman, being much fufpeCtcd to hold confederacy 
with fome of the chief rebels, Ralegh undertook to bring, with his family, before the earl of 
Ormond at Cork. But the defign of this hazardous furprile took air among the enemy, and a. 
party of eight hundred men, under Fitz-Edmonds and Barry, were gather’d to way-lay the 
Englijh either going ©r coming. However Ralegh , knowing the lord Roch to be a powerful and 
popular man among the Irijh, fo fuddenly commanded oil his company to be in readinefs by 
eleven a-clock that night, and they were fo punctual to the hour, that he directly marched 
away to Bally in Harfh, which was Roch s feat, about twenty miles from Cork, and efcaped 
the ambufeade. He arrived there by break of day j but the townfmen were fo alarmed, that 
they foon gather’d five hundred ftrong. Ralegh drew up, and in fuch manner beftowed his 
men in the town it felf, that he foon quell’d and reftrain’d the people there •, then felccting 
half a dozen out of his company, among whom were Arthur Barlow , hereafter to be fpoken 
of, with Nicholas Wright before-mention’d j and having appointed another little party to follow 
him, he marched up »to the caftle. He was met by three or four of Rocb's gentlemen, of 
whom he defir’d to fpeak with their lord j which was agreed to, on condition he would difmifs 
three or four of his own attendants •, to which, with apparent readinefs, he comply’d; but fo 
contriv’d, that none of them were lock’d out. Then he gave them directions which way the 
reft alfo, without the gates, might be admitted, whilft he fhould hold the lord Roch in dif- 
courfe j which fucceeded fo happily, that by degrees his whole complement were got within 
the court-yard -, fome guarding the gates, others watching in the hall, each having his piece 
loadenwith a brace cf balls. The lord Roch was amaz’d and terrify’d at fo filent and infenfible 
a feizure j but, diffembling his uneafinefs, he would needs have Ralegh , and the gentlemen with 
him, participate of his plentiful table: yet the policy of his hofpitality did not defeat that ot 
their enterprifc; for, as foon as the dinner was over, Ralegh ingenuoufly laid open the occafion 
of his vifit. Lord Roch made many excufes, and in the end abfolutely refuled to go along 
with him. But when the commifiion was produced, and he found Ralegh inflexible, he chofe 
to do that by confent, which he found he muft do by compulfion. Then Ralegh urged him 
to oblige his townfmen likewife, who had fo faithfully rifen for his defence in his neighbourhood, 
to efcort and defend him in his journey ; to which lord Roch alfo confented, profefling he 
doubted not but to clear himfelf of whatever allegations fhould be laid to his charge. When 
his lord/liip, with his lady and attendance, had made themfelves ready, Ralegh was for another 
noCturnal progrefs •» but though die night fell out fo very dark and tempeftuous, and the ways 
were fo full of hills and dales, rocks and precipices, that many of his foldiers were much 
bruifed by falls, and one of them fo mortify’d, that he loft his life in the march *, yet the veil 
wherewith the reft were flicker’d, by that obfeurity, from the more dangerous ambufeades of their 
enemy, who had every-where beftrew’d the paflages to intercept them, made fuch fufficient com- 
penfation for thofc difafters, that by the next morning early he fafely prefented his prifoners to 
the general ; not widiout raifing an univerfal aftonifhment at his dexterous evafion of fo many 
perils. But the lord Roch , upon examination, did make his words good ; for being honoura¬ 
bly acquitted, he approved himfelf a faithful fubjeCt ever after, and three of his fons laid down 
their lives in her majefty’s fervice. 1 

In the month of Augujl , the fame year, the lord deputy made the aforefaid captain John 
Zouch governor of Munfler, with whom Ralegh and Dowdal made feveral journeys to fettle 
and cotnpofe the country •, but the certain place of their refidence was at Cork. And when 
Zouch , with Dowdal, made that fecret expedition, in which he lopp’d off the third branch of 
this venomous hydra, Sir John Defmond j whofe body was hung by the heels on a gibbet, then 
fix’d on the gates of that city, and his head fent to London : he left the government of Cork to 
Ralegh. b I have obferv’d this fervice againft that Sir John Defmond to have been commemo¬ 
rated by Ralegh himfelf in honour of Zouch, though in a difeourfe on a different fubjeCt, and 
fome years after his death ; c for foon after his return with the lord deputy into England , he 
was kill’d in a duel by one of his intimate friends: and this I remark here, as fomewhat 
difproving the infinuation that Zoucb’s fuperior preferment fhould have nourifhed any fuch dif- 
contcnt in Ralegh , d as might occafion that difpute we fhali hear of between him and the lord 
deputy afterwards in England. Nor can I impute it to the difbanding his company, which 
might happen about this time j it feeming reafonable, upon the filencc of the earl of Defmond, 


* Hooka's fupply, p. 174. near the Azores, Isle. m Hakluyt's voyages, vol. 2. part 2. 

l> Cox's hillory of Ireland, p.367. p. 173. d Live* Engljb and foreign, more particularly 

c Sir Walter Ralph's true report of the defperate fight cited in a fucceeding note. 


Digitized by 


Google 


the 



XIX 


Sir WALTER RALEGH. 

/ 

the (laughter of his brothers, and the. (hbraiffion Barry had newly made, that the deputy, 
thinking Munjler. was now growing quie^ fhould not only leffcn the queen’s expences there, 
by calhiering feveral companies* and difeharging many garrifons, which he did, fo as to have 
for the whple fcrvice of that province, only four hundred foot and fifty horfe ; but that in the 
command of thde, the {odor officers lliould be continued. However it was, Ralegh appears 
no longer, after this reduction, in the wars of Ireland: but how well his ferviccs were received 
by the queen, and how nobly (he rewarded him for them after the earl of Defmond himfelf was 
flain, we (hall hear when we arrive at the time that his large pofleflions came to be divided 
among thofe who had aflifted in quenching the flames of his rebellion. 

Raleoh was not long in England , before his relation in fome degree to the court began to His introduc- 
appear. Tradition has induftrioufly aferib’d his firft introduction thither to a piece of gallantry^ t ' on at court 
wherewith he furpris’d the queen accidentally in one of her walks. “ Her majefty meet- 
*« ing ((ays tpy author) with a plalhy place, made fome fcruple to go on ; when Ralegh 
“ (drefs’d in the gay and genteel habit of thole times) prcfently caft off and fpread his new 
“ plulfc cloak on the ground, whereon the queen trod gently over, rewarding him afterwards 
v with many fuits for his fo free and feafonable tender of fo fair a foot-clolb : thus an advan. 

« tageons qdmiffon (fays he) into the notice of a prince , is more than half a degree to prefer- 
« nent ."» After this, as the fame author tells us, Ralegh coming to court, and finding fome 
hope? of the queen’s favour rcflc&ing upon him, lie wrote in a glufs window, obvious to 
her eye. 

Fain would I climb. yet fear I to fall 
Under which her majefty foon after wrote. 

If thy heart fail tbee , climb not at all. 


No romantic air, that may appear in thefe paflages, has been able to deny them a recital by 
feveral ferious authors : and indeed readers of experience, knowing how often an unufual com¬ 
pliment, or artificial bait for favour, catches it, before the mod fubftantial fervices, will not 
only be apt to doubt whether fuch incidents are to be call’d accefTories, fo much as principals 
in worldly promotion j but efteem thofe as the mod inftru&ive circumftances in the lives ot 
great men, which difplay the foot-fteps of their advancement; and how they firft tell into die 
track of diftindion: for the acquifition of glory is like that of riches •, the profound myftery 
lies ip coining at the prime (lock ; an ordinary prudence will increafe it. 

But though he always made a very elegant appearance, as well in the fplendor of attire, 
as the politenels of addrefs ; “ having a good prefence, in a lundfoir.e and well compacted per- 
“ fon ; a ftrong natural wit, and a better judgment; with a bold and plauflble tongue, where- 
“ by he could fet out his parts to the beft advantage f b all very engaging advocates for royal 
favour, efpecially in a female loveraign: yet, obferving Ralegh had, at this time, render’d him¬ 
felf confiderablc enough by his ad ions ; and that the queen was not wanting in due notice to¬ 
wards fuch as were of a publick nature ; I fhould think thefe, of a more private and particular 
nature, might be accounted only as concurrent caufes of his favourable reception at court and 
efpecially feeing others, about the lame time offering, fuffkient of themfelvcs toeftablifti him there: 
but be that as it may, we find him, upon his return into England , employ’d in an expedition or 
two, by authority belike from the court j they being upon occalions of date. And though it 
imports not much whether it was now, or before he was in Ireland , that he accompanied the 
French ambaflador, Monfieur Simier , among thofe gentlemen who were appointed for his fafe 
convoy to France: yet if that ambaflador return’d home, when his maftcr the duke of An¬ 
jou came laft over in November , the year before-named, this is the place for it to be mention’d 
in. That Simier was, it feems, a proper advocate for the caufe he came to plead i (kill’d in 
all the infinuating arts and devices of amorous addrefs, and thereby perhaps won more of the 
queen’s attention to his mailer’s fuit, than fat eafy upon the earl of Leicejler's mind : for though 
this earl was now privately married to the late earl of Effcx 's widow, yet his prejudice might 
at this time be renewed againft the ambaflador, for procuring him the queen’s difpleafure, by 
difeovering that marriage •, as it was at firft created, by fupplanting him in his higher hopes. 
Indeed, the earl’s animofity is faid to have extended to the hiring of bravo's to aflaflinate the 
ambaflador •, and Camden , who relates thus much, allures us the queen publidl’d (about two years 
before this time) a proclamation, commanding that no man fhould offer any affront to Simier , or 
an y of his attendants: c nay, if we will believe a certain colleflion of mod; flagrant accufations 
againft that earl, to which Camden, who feldom fpares him, has paid much credit; the land it felf 


Pcfcriptinn 
of hL pci Ion. 


Accon'iprnirs 
Monfieur A/- 
fftier to Ft 


• Fuller'i worthies o (EnAand. fol. 1662. in Devon. 
29. 


C CdTrJ. A Aral. R g. Eliz. Arno 1$?) 


was 


Digitized by 


Google 


XX 


The LIFE of 


was no boundary to the earl’s revenge: for when other attempts fail’d, he is laid, among thole 
accufations, to have “ dealt with certain Flujhingers, and other pirates, to fink the amballador 
“ at fea, with the Englijh gentlemen, his favourers, who accompanied him at his return into 
“ France j and though they miffed of this practice alfo (as not daring to fet upon him lor 
“ fear of her majefty’s fhips •, which, to break this defign, attended by lpecial command, to 
“ waft him over in fafety •,) yet the forefaid Englifj gentlemen were holden four hours in chafe 
“ at their coming back, as Mailer Ralegh well knoweth (fays my author) being then pre- 
“ fent *, and two of the chafers, named Clark and Harris , confcffed afterwards the whole de- 
“ fignment. • 

But after the duke of Anjou himfelf had been three months in England , he alio departed 
to take upon him the government of the Netherlands. This departure was in February follow¬ 
ing ; and though the queen feems to have declin’d the marriage with him, principally becaufc 
flie found her miniltry fo averfe to it; yet there was an author, and his printer, who, for ha¬ 
ving publilhed a little treatife againft it about two years before, b had their hands cut off but a 
few days after the duke came to London. c And fhe fhew’d him many other marks of favour 
and diftindtion; particularly, when he left the kingdom, fhe bore him company in perlon to 
Dover , and having appointed a moll fplendid retinue of nobles and gentlemen to wait upon 
And the duke him to his new government; I find that Ralegh was alfo among this grand afiembly. They 
Antwrp. attended the duke to Antwerp, where, making a moll magnificent proccffion, he was created 
duke of Brabant, &<.. and inverted with his charge. Ralegh feems not only to have rtaid 
there fome time after the lord admiral Howard, Leicejier, young Sidney , and the reft were re¬ 
turn’d j but, through the opportunity of being perfonally known to the prince of Orange, ho¬ 
nour’d with fome fpecial acknowledgments from him to the queen of England. And Ralegh 
mentions thus much himfelf, in a difeourfe he wrote many years afterwards ; wherein, fpeaking 
of the Hollanders flourilhing Hate, he lays down, as the firft caufe thereof, the favour and af- 
fiftance granted them by this crown ; “ which, fays he, the late worthy and famous prince of 
“ Orange did always acknowledge : and in the year 1582, when I took my leave of him at 
oL!(Aac°. f “ Antwerp, after the return of the earl of Leicejler into England , and Monfieur's arrival there ; 
knowiedg- “ when he delivered me his letters to her majefty, he pray’d me to fay to the queen, from 
M him. Sub umbra alarum tuarum protegimur : for certainly (fays he) they had wither’d in 
“ the bud, and funk in the beginning of their navigation, had not her majefty affifted them. d 
Tow a R ds the end of Augufl, this laft mention’d year, the lord Grey refign’d the fword of Ire¬ 
land, after he had been two years deputy in that kingdom : * and this mull be the time, that dilpute 
between him and Ralegh was brought to a hearing, of which authors have fo blindly written. 
Sir Robert Naunton “ is confident, that among the fecond caufes of Ralegh's growth (not de- 
“ nying, or rather acquielcing in his actions and accomplilhments to have been the firft) 
“ that variance between him and the lord Grey, in his defeent into Ireland, was a principal; 
Grey, reckon’d “ for it drew them both over (fays he) to the council-table, there to plead their caule ; where 
cau^ot^his ** ( w ^ at ^vantage he had in the caufe, my faid author knew not, but fays) he had much the 
prejlament. “ better in telling of his tale ; and fo much, that the queen and the lords took no flight mark 
“ of the man and' his parts; for from thence he came to be known, and to have accefs to 
“ the queen and the lords.” i Now if this author is fo defective, as not to have known the 
caufe or fubjeft of their quarrel; or, that Ralegh, leaving Ireland long before the lord Grey , 
was not likely to be drawn over together with him to the council-table ; how much more mull 
thofe writers following him be fo, who have confus’d this matter with feveral other particulars ; 
though they leem to have had no other authority ? One of them fays, Ralegh had in deed, but 
not in truth, the better by the tongue; 8 and infinuates (with great caution and delicacy he 
thought, no doubt) that the queen had been told fomething fo engaging of Ralegh , befides 
his advantage in pleading, that it was not to be mention'd ; h as if any of her courtiers dared 


Brings over 


queen. 


His difpute 
with the lord 


» Lcicefier'% commonwealth, 8vo. 1641. p. 37. 

1 his treadle is entitled, V* Difovery of a gaping 
gulph, wherein England is likely t0 be Jwallowed by another 
t rench marriage , isle. Printed with a imall letter, in a 
thin Oftavo. 1579. 

« The namesol this author, and his printer or publifher, 
wer cjobn Stubbs and William Page ; and that (entence 
was executed on them at Weft minfler November 3. 1581, 
•vide Stmd s chronicles and Camden's annals in thofe years. 

Sir Walter Ralegh's invention of /hipping, in his feleft 
effays, 8vo. 1650. p. 36. 

c The fentiments of Sir Walter Ralegh, upon the (hort 
term even of three years (in thofe unfettled times) to which 
the deputies of Ireland have been commonly circumfcrib’d, 
may be read in his hijJoty of the world, lib. c. cap. 3. 

fcft. y 

f Fragment a Regalia , p. 29. t An lie. Coq. p. 90. 


* The fame author of Aulic. Coquin, fays a little before, 
“ that Ralegh fotook them (meaning the lords) by his pleac- 
ing, efpecially the earl of Leicejter , that the queen was 
€i told the talc , and fomething tro 'e cf him ; and no fooncr 
€€ he came to be knvzvn to her , but ihe took him tograce." Id. 
p. 75. I cannot be fure this is thellyle of a reverend father 
in God, tho* Mr. Tindal , in his notes upon Rafin , would in¬ 
duce us to think fo, in calling the author of this Au - 
liens Coquinari/e, by the name of Goodman, who was 
bi/hop of Gloucefler , and did indeed write a review 
of Sir Anthony Weldons court and character of king 
James \ which review is faid by Anthony Wood to be in¬ 
volv’d in this Aul/cus Coquinariet : but the review it lelf> 
written in a thin Folio, and fometimes quoted by H. Fculis , 
in his Romijl? treafons , remains hill in MS. in the Bodleian 
library, and begins differently from this printed arfwcr to 
that court and ebarafter . 

to 


Digitized by 


Google 







XXI 


Sir WALTER RALEGH. 

to fay any thing to the queen’s face, which this anonymous writer, near fifty years after her 
death, would be either afham’d or afraid to repeat. A later writer makes fuch diminutions of 
Raleghs extraordinary behaviour in this difpute, as if he had been at the council-table, and 
feen as well as heard him. * And another, after them all, has found out the caufe of this dif¬ 
ference between them to be captain Zouch's preferment; b of which we have before fpoken, as 
improbable. But palling thefc over, our author Naunton goes on; and tho* he does not deter- 
•« mine, whether the lord Leicefter had then caft in a good word for Ralegh to the queen; yet fays 
*« it is true, that he had gotten the queen’s ear at a trice, and (he began to be taken with his 
“ elocution, and loved to hear his reafons to her demands: and the truth is, fhc took him 
« for a kind of oracle, which nettled them all •, yea, thofe he relied on, began to take this his 
«« fudden favour for an alarm j to be fenfible of their own fupplantation, and to projedt his > 

« which made him fhortly after fing, Fortune my foe , lie." 

It is hinted to us fomewhat more exprefly, by another court-writer of thofe times, and chat’s 
a rarity, fuch being commonly too polite or political to be very obliging in hiftorical panicu- As alfo the^ 
lan that the earl of Leicefter befriended Ralegh (perhaps through his friend Ihip with young ^^^0° 
Sidney , that carl’s worthily beloved nephew) in his firft advancements at court ; and that being Leicefter. 
willing, for his own cafe, to beftow handfomly upon another fome part of the pains, and 
perhaps of the envy, to which a long indulgent fortune is obnoxious, either brought, or let 
him into that promiftng fphere of preferment $ where the earl foon found him fuch an ap¬ 
prentice, as knew well enough how to fet up for himfelf, fays my faid author. e So that if the And earl of 
earl of Sujfet r, who was Leicefter* s antagonift, had any hand in Ralegh's rife, as fome (later wri- s “f‘ x - 
ters of lefs authority have fuggefted, d it feems to have been afterwards, when Ralegh’s courtly 
fplendor was, by occafion, fomewhat obftru&ed •, and Leicefter meant to allay it, by interpo- 
fing the young earl of Effex: for Ralegh continued, during that ftorm, in fome luftre of a 
favour'd man, like billows which fink but by degrees, even when the wind is down that firft 
flirt'd them. But this we fhall obferve as we go on, that in all the different afpedts or con- 
jundlions of intereft, through the accefs or change of new favourites in this long reign, none 
were Ids emerg’d by the fmiles of the court, in the luxuries and vanities of it, nor more ani. 
mated by its frowns to the enterprifing of publick and fuperior difficulties for the honour and 
aggrandifement of his country. Not that he fet out to fea, but when he had defpaired of 
raifing himfelf on fhore: for thefe publick enterprifes were rooted fo early in Ralegh’% 
afpiring mind, that we perceive, even now, before factions at court could drive him from the 
land, or preferments and grants from the crown enable him for the fea > that he had built at his Bart Raled. 
own expence, to profecute them, a ftrong handfom fhip, which was named Bark Ralegh , of 
two hundred ton burden. 

And now that tho fix years period of Sir Humphrey Gilbert's patent grew fhort, four of 
them being elaps’d, he thought it high time to make a new attempt in perfon (fince his afiignments 
had proved of little confequence) at thofe difeoveries he had before fail’d in, that he might con¬ 
firm by experience what he had fo excellently advanced in theory. Accordingly, having fitted 
out a fleet of four Ihips, Ralegh alfo vidluall’d, and mann’d out his before-mention’d, which 
was the largeft among them ; and, in the quality of vice-admiral, fet out to bear his brother ^ 

Gilbert company, in this his laft expedition to Newfoundland. The fleet departed from Ply. sir h. Gilbert 
mouth on the nth of June 1583. My author, who was in this voyage, tells us, no coft was Mwfcmid- 

fpared by Ralegh in provifions and neceflaries for the happy accomplifhment of it; yet that 
in two or three days following he return’d greatly diftrefs’d to Plymouth , by reafon his whole 
fhip's company was infe&ed with a contagious ficknefs. e But lucky to him, perhaps, was this 
vifitation ; fince the voyage proved fo fatal to thofe who went through it, particularly Sir Hum¬ 
phrey himfelf; who, tho’ he arrived in Newfoundland in the beginning of Auguft follow¬ 
ing ; took poffefiion of the country in right of the crown of England , by digging up a turf. 


_ * David Lloyd fay?, Ralegh, upon this occafion, dated 
his cafe with (hat charnels; urg’d his arguments with 
that evidence and reafon; offer’d his apologies with thole 
pertinent ard taking allegations, and his replies with that 
fmaiticfs; exptelsa himlclf with that fluency and elo¬ 
quence, and manag'd his carriage and countenance with 
that difaetion, that he was, £rff, the ltatelman’s obferva- 
rion ; next, her majrfly’s lavouritc • and at lafl, her ora¬ 
cle. See this authors Obfervatims on the Jlatcfmen and fa- 
meurites of England fince the Reformation, Oclob. i 60 j. 
P- 4*7- 

k The author of Sir H'alter Ralegh's life, in Lives Eng- 
I’A and foreign, 17C4. vol. I. p. 86, fays, that Ralegh's 
difgull at the deputy’s piefcrring Zouch, grew to a diffe¬ 
rence between him and the faid lord Grey, which was re¬ 
far’d by the council of war in Ireland to that in England '; 


and there decided in Ralegh's favour: the folliciting of 
which bufmefs was the true caufe of his leaving Ireland. 
But he quotes no authority ; and 1 think by what is be¬ 
fore faid of the matter, this true caufe will appear a ground- 
lefs conjecture ; at lealt lefs probable, than what might 
perhaps be drawn from Sptnftr's View of Ireland, vol. 6. 
p. 1609. 

« Sir Henry H'otton's parallel of Robert Deveieux earl 
of Effex, and George Vtlliers duke of Buckingham. 

** Shir lefs life ot Sir Walter Ralegh. 8vo. >677, p. 19. 
and the fame in tol- p. 3. 

« Captain Edward Hayes's report of Sir H. Gilbert's 
voyage to Newfoundland, vo Hakluyt, vol. 3. p. 149. See 
alfo Sir George Pecibam's report of the dilcovery and pof- 
feffion of Hewfoundland, by that valiant and worthy gen¬ 
tleman Sir H. Gilbert, in the fame volume, p. t6j. 


and 


Digitized by 


Google 


u 


xxii The L I F E of 

and receiving it with a hafel wand* deliver’d to him according to our law and cuftom ; alio had 
affign’d lands to every man in his company, and was got three hundred leagues in his way 
home again, with full hopes of the queen’s aftiftance to fit out a fleet not only for the north» 
but one alfo for the fouth next year ; yet over-hardily venturing in a little frigat of but ten ton 
burden, called the Squirrel *, he was on the ninth of September following at midnight, in a 
high fca, fwallowcd up.* Another of the veflels, called the Delight , but tew days bdore alio 
fuffer’d the tame fate; and even the reft return’d not without great hazard, hardthip, and lofs: 
teaching (fays Camden') that it is a more difficult matter to carry over colonies to remote coun¬ 
tries upon private men’s purfes, than he and others had perfuaded thcmfelves, to their own lots 
and detriment: b but neither thefe unfortunate attempts by fea hitherto, nor the ruin ot' 
Sir Humphrey Gilbert's efface, nor the lofs of hi6 life, nor the hardfhijis of all his company be. 
Tides, could teach Ralegh that leffon : thefe examples and this experience were fo far from 
lariating, that they did but tharpen his appetite to fiich honourable dangers. 

And as we are allur’d from family tradition, by a late author of his own name and lineage, 
that the difeoveries of the great Columbus , the oonquefts of l'crnando Cortez , the famous 
Francis Pizarro , and other leaders of the Spaniards , who under die emperor Charles and his 
fon Philip II, had made the greateft and molt furprifing additions to their empire that ever 
prince received, or fubjefts wrought, were the favourite hiftories that took up Ralegh's early 
reading and convention while he was but a young man ^ e we may prefume they fo poflefs’d 
his noble genius (with perhaps alfo fome late domeftic and living examples) that no little per- 
fbnal oppofirions at home, or particular mifadventures abroad, could ever difcourage him horn 
the purfuit of thefe grand and national undertakings. But when, by his own obfervation, he 
found the Spaniards had only fettled upon the middle and fouthem parts of America, and that 
thefe were certain vaft territories yet unknown to the north of thofe lands, which the Spaniards 
already enjoy’d, as fit perhaps for fetdement, and as ealy to conquer, as any they did enjoy: and 
When, by his enquiries, among the moft obfervant pilots and mariners who had failed m the Spa- 
nijh Drips to the gulph of Mexico , many of Whom he had opportunity to meet and difeourfe 
with in Holland and Flanders , he had leafnt that the Spaniards always went into the gulph of 
'Mexico by St. Domingo and the ifland of Hifpaniola , Where die currents with the trade-winds al¬ 
ways ran together, and fet into the bay; that they always di/embogu'd, as they call’d it, or 
came out by the Havana and the channels of Bahama , which they now call the gulph of Florida ; 
and that, as they return’d by this gulph, they found a continued coaft on die weft-fide trending 
away north, which they generally loft fight of by Handing away to the eaft, to make for the 
coaft of Spain i Ralegh fully determin’d that there was a waft extern of land north Of that 
gulph, or weft from the coaft of Spain. which might be well worth difeovering •, and, after ma¬ 
ture deliberation, folly relolv’d upon the drfeovery. As foon as heliad digefted his propofal, 
and difplay’d the manner of ‘profecuting 'it In proper fchemes, he laid them before the queen 
and council, 'to whom it appearing a rational, practical, and generous undertaking, her majefty 


* As authors have been very defc&ive and erroneous in 
their accounts of this brave and publick-fpirited, but un¬ 
fortunate knight, Sir Humphrey Gilbert of Compton ; I (hall 
-here obferve that John Hooker , who knew b?m, -fays he 
was bred at Oxford. See his Supply of tie Irifli ebroni- 
dtiy p. 132 5 tho’ A . \Vood is filent of any fuch Oxo¬ 
nian. Hooker takes notice of his extraordinary Cervices in 
Ireland , for which he was made colonel of Munfttr ; and 
“Sir Roger Williams , m his Actions of the Low-countries, 

; tells us he was the firft RngHjb commander who ted’a re¬ 
giment thither to ferve the prince of Orange againft the 
Spaniards. -But John Pnnct, who pretends to give us his 
lffe among his worthies of Denson, mentions nothing of 
his land-fervices. The faid J. Prince quotes Sir W. Pole ’s 
MSS. to vouch this Gilbert's being knighted by the queen 
at Greenwich I 577. But Hooker aforefaid (hews him to 
have been knighted in the church at Drogheda, by Sir Hen. 
Sidney , deputy of Ireland, feven years fooner at lead; 
and agreeable thereto, we find him call'd Sir Humphrey 
Gilbert in a Jetter of Sir ‘Thomas Smith's, dated 1572, 
among SirD. Digger's collc&ion before-fnemfon’d, p. 299. 
Lartly, another writer of his life, in Leetin, places his kit 
expedition to Newfoundland twenty years foonerfchanhe 
undertook it, if it is not the fault rather of the printer 
than the author, vid. Hollands Hercoologia Anglka. fol. 
Arnheim 1620, p. 65. As for Sir Humphrey's -writings, 
we have extant in Hakluyt, vol. 3. p. 11. Difeourfe<0 

prove a paflage by the norths weft to GmrbayiTsd the Eaft - 
W/r/, in ten chapters; firft publish'd in 4*0. 1576. at the 
end of Which he mentions another difcourfe, now toft I fear; 
wherein he amended the ufuaJ otrors of fea-vards, whith 


make the degrees oflongitifdc In every latitude of equal big- 
nefs; ’and invented a fpberical ivflvument, with a eompafs of 
q variation , for the perfect knowledge of the longitude ; and 
'laid down a precrie order to prick the fea-cards, with certain 
rules for the (hortrtmgany difeovery, a*d knowing at the 
firft entrance of any fret, whether it lies open to the ocean 
-more ways than one, and how for the fea ltretches itfelf in- 
the* 4 W. As forche picture at Compton, laid 6y Pnnct to 
be drawn for Sir H. Gilbert ; if his author. Sir W. Pole , -is 
°no truer *hi 'his affection of the gueen’s having given 
Sir Humphrey ' the gold chain reprefonted about the neck 
thereof, than he was in her having knighted him, and 
• there are >wo other hgnatmrs befidcs chat chain, and the 
inscription of Virginia on the globe, with the verfes. under 
it relating thereto ; I fee not but the picture is to be doubt¬ 
ed, as rather meant for his brother Ralegh, who was ho- 
moured with a golden chain by the queen, and whofe title 
to that mfeription on the globe was beyond any man’s in 
the world. Bat the (lately poem in Latin Hexameters, 
upon his laft expedition, by Stephans Parmenius Budcius . 
a learned Hungarian, who was drown’d with him, was 
undoubtedly, among other EngHJh adventurers therein 
nam’d, chiefly intended (or his honour. See it in Hakluyt , 
vol. 3. p. 138. 

Ceemd. Annal. Eliz. Peg. Anno 1583 
« See an hillorical account of the voyages and adven¬ 
tures of Sir Walter Ralegh, with the difeoveries and con- 
quefts he made for the crown of England, &V. humbly 
propos’d to the Snuth-Sea company, 8vo. ! 7 , 9 *.’P* 
Though no author’s name is prefix’d to it, 1 take it 10 be 
Written by captain Philip Ralegh hercaJter mention’d. 


was 


Digitized by 


Google 




Sir IF ALTER RALEGH. 

was pleafed in the beginning of the year 1584. to grant him full power to enjoy fuch countries 
as he propoled to difeover, by her letters parents v which in epitomy, or diverted of the tau¬ 
tologies ufual, if not necertary, in inftrumeats of fuch Kind, are as follows. 

M ELIZABETH , To all people greeting. Know ye that out of our fpecial grace, 

“ we grant to our trufty and well-beloved fervant IValter Ralegb Efqj his heirs and afligns, 
“ free liberty to difeover fuch remote heathen and barharous lands not a&ually poflefled by 
“ any Chrirtian prince, nor inhabited by Chriftian people, as to him or them fhall fcem good, 
w to hold the fame with all prerogatives, commodities, jurisdictions, royalties, and privilege?, 
“ by fca and land, as we by letters patents may grant, or any of our progenitors have granted i 
“ with licenfe to inhabit or remain, build and fortify, at the diferetion of the faid IV. Ralegb , 
“ his heirs, (dc. the ftacutes or aCts againft fugitives, or fuch as depart this realm unprivileg’d 
“ notwithftanding. 

“We likewife grant him or them full power to take or lead fuch of our fubjefts, as fhall 
** willingly accompany him or them v alfo to employ and ufc fufficient (hipping and furni- 
« ture for tranfportations and navigations in that behalf: fo that none of thofe perfons be fuch 
“ as are reftrain’d by us, our heirs or fucceflprs. Farther, that the faid IV. Ralegb x and his heirs, 
fhall enjoy for ever all the foil of fuch lands fo to be difcover’d, and of all fuch cities, caftles, 
“ or towns in the fame, with the right, and royalties, as well marine as other, within the (aid 
“ lands or feas adjoining, with full power to difpofe thereof in fee fimple, or ocherwifc, ?g- 
“ cording to the laws of England , at his and their will, to any perfon within the allegiance 
“ of us or our heirs, referving always to us, for all Cervices, duties and demands, the 
“ fifth part of all the oar of gold and filver there obtain’d after fuch difeovery. All which 
“ lands, and countries, fhall be for ever hpldep by the faid W. Ralegb, his heirs, (dc. by 
« homage, the faid payment referv’d only for all ferviceg. \Ve Jikpwife granf to the fiiid 
“ Ralegh and liis heirs licenfe for their defence, to repell by land or fea all perfons that fhall witft- 
“ out his or their liking attempt to inhabit the faid countries, or within two hundred leagues 
« of the places in them where he or they within fix years to come fhall make their dwellings, if 
«* not before inhabited by the fubje&s of any Chriftian prince ip amity with us. (jiving alfo 
«* power to him or them to take thofe perfons, with their (hips and goods, and keep them 4s 
“ lawful prize, who without his or their licenfe fhall be found trafficking within the ljmjfs 
«« aforefaid (our fubje&s and others in amity with us only excepted.) And as welj fqr uniting 
«* in more perfeft league fuch countries with °ur realm? of England and Ireland , as for the 
**■ encouragement of men to diefe enterprifes, we declare that all fuch countries fo pofTeffed 
fhall be of our allegiance. And we grant to the faid IV. Ralegb, his heirs, and to all be- 
** ing of our allegiance, whole names fhall be enter’d in fome court of record withjn our 
“ realm of England, and to their heirs, who with the aftent of the faid IV. Ralegb , his heir?, (sic. 
“ fhall in his journeys for difeovery or conqueft hereafter travel to fuch lands, that they 
u and every of them, being either born within our faid Realms of England or Ireland, or 
•* any other place within our allegiance, and who fhall hereafter be inhabitants of any of the 
lands aforefaid v /ball have all the privilege of free denizens and perfons native of .England, 
'* in fuch ample manner as if they were born and pprfonally.reftdeQt fo Qur faid reajm of Eng- 
“ land , any law, (sic. notwithftanding. And further, tor tfre ftfety of all that fhall adven- 
ture themfelves, we grant the faid IV. Ralegh , and his heirs, foil power and authority wfth- 
“ in the faid lands, in the way thither, and from thence, to correct, punifh, pardon, govern 
“ by their good diferetions and policies, as well in caufcs capital or criminal, as civil, both 
“ marine and other, all our fubje&s who fo adventure themfelyes, and fhall fohabk the territo- 
“ ries aforefaid, or fhall abide within two hundred leagues pf any fuch p/aces yvbere be or 
“ they fhall inhabit within fix years next enfoing, according to.foch rtaqutes as fhall be by him 
“ or them eftablifh’d ; fo that the faid .ft?turps <?r jaws conform as near as conveniently may he 
“ with thofe of England , and do not oppugn the Chriftian faith, or any ,way withdraw .rise 
“ people of thofe lands from our allegiance. We ^lfo grant full power to our trufty and 
“ well-beloved counfellor Sir IV. Cedlc, lord BurgbUy, oyr high-trpafurer of England, and 
“ to the lord-treafurer for us and our heirs,, .and to : the privy-council of us and our heirs, or any 
“ four or more of them, that he or they, undpr their hands or foals, authorife the faid Sir IVal- 
“ ter Ralegh or his heirs, by themfelves or officers, to tranfport out of England and Ireland 
■“ any of their goods, with other commodities, as to the faid lord-treafurer or the faid privy- 
“ council fhall be thought convenient, for the better relief and fupport of the faid IValter Ra - 
“ legb or his heirs, any a<ft notwithftanding. Provided always, that if the faid IValter Ra- 
his heirs, or any other, by his or their licence, (ball rob or fpoil by fca or land, or do 
“ any unlawful hoftility to any of our fubjefls, -or thofe of kings or dates in perfect league 

“ and 


xxiii 


The queenV 
letters patent* 
to him for 
discovering of 
unknown 
countries. 


Digitized by kjOOQie 



XXIV 


"The LIFE of 

«« and unity with us, we fhall, upon juft complaint, make proclamation that die faid W. Ra- 
«* legh or his heirs fhall, within the terms to be limited, make full fatisfatflion •, fo that we 
V and thofe who complain may be fully contented} and that if he or they make not fuch fa- 
“ tisfa&ion within fuch time, it fhall be lawful for us to put him or them out of our alle- 
“ giance, and from that time for all princes or others to purfuc with hoftility, as not to be 
“ avouch’d or defended by us: though any mention of the yearly value of the premifles, or any 
4 ‘ part thereof, or of any other grant by us or our predeceffors to the faid Walter Ralegh be- 
“ fore this time made, be not exprefs’d; or any other provifion or reftraint to the contrary 
“ notwithftanding. In witnefs whereof we have caufed thefe our letters to be made patents, 
“ at Wejlminjter the 25th of March , in the 26th year of our reign. * 

Immediately upon the grant of this patent, Ralegh gave his inftru&ions for an Ameri¬ 
can voyage b to captain Philip Amadas and captain Arthur Barlow t two experienced com¬ 
manders, and had got a couple of barks well furnifh’d with men and provifions at his own ex¬ 
pence, in fuch readinefs, that on the twenty-feventh day of April following they departed from 
the weft of England. The tenth of May they arrived at the Canaries y and a month after fell 
upon the ifles of the Wejl-Judies “ which, with the reft adjoining (fays my author, one of thofe 
“ captains) are fo well known to your felf (directing the account of this voyage to his pro- 
“ prietor) and to many others, that I will not trouble you with the remembrance of them.” 
In the beginning of July they were faluted with a mod fragant gale from the land they were 
feeking, and foon after arrived upon the coaft; but fail’d along fome'fix-fcore miles before 
they could find an entrance by any river iffuing into the fea. At laft, difeovering one, they 
mann’d out their boats to view the land adjoining, where they faw vines laden with grapes in 
vaft abundance, climbing up the tall cedars, and fpreading fo luxuriantly along the fundy fhore, 
that the fea often over-flowed them. On the thirteenth of July they took pofleflion in right of 
the queen, and afterwards deliver’d the country over to Ralegh's ule. They thought this land 
had at firft been the continent, but found it afterwards only an ifland twenty miles long, called 
Wocoken plentifully flock’d with animals, groves of fweet-fmclling trees, pulfe, grain, and 
efculent roots. They obferv*d along the coaft, a traft of iflands two or three hundred miles 
long’, and pafling between them, faw another great fea, twenty, forty, and in fome places fifty 
miles over, before they could reach ,the continent; and in this inclofed fea above a hundred 
iflands of various fize, whereof one is fixteen miles long, called Roanoak t and about feven 
leagues diftant, up the river Occam , from the harbour they firft enter’d •, at which they chiefly 
fettled while they flay’d, finding it fo pleafant and fruitful as to yield three harvefts in five 
months. But they remain’d upon the borders of Wocoken two days before they beheld a human 
creature j on the third, they faw a boat rowing towards them with three of the natives ; one of 
them landed, and walk’d up the fhore near their fhip, for they were then on board j then the 
two captains, with fome others, took their boat and row’d to land, and by their courteous car¬ 
riage, foon prevail’d on the native to return with them on board, where they eloathed him, 
and gave him vitfluals, wine, and feveral little toys or utenfils, which won the Ample creature’s 
heart. Soon after his departure, he return’d again with a boat full of fifh, to be divided be- 
Thc firft voy- tween the fhip and the pinnace, and then he left them. The next day came the king’s brother 
*£c for the Granganimeo , with a great many attendants; for the king himfelf, who was named Wingina t 
Wncamfocoa. an d his large territories Wingandacoa , lay ill of the wounds he had lately receiv’d in war. His 
brother was highly pleas’d with his entertainment, and having received feveral prelents, foon af¬ 
ter fent the favages to traffkk with the Englijh - t alfo came again himfelf, and exchang’d twenty 
fkins, worth as many nobles, for a tin difh, which he hung as a gorget about his neck, to defend 
him from the arrows of his enemies: then alfo he brought his wife and children, widi her at¬ 
tendants, forty or fifty in number. She was well-favour’d, but bafhful, clad in a mantle of deer- 
fkin, lin’d with fur, and a kind of apron of the fame, her hair hung down long on each fide, with 
a band of white coral about her forehead, and long bracelets of pearl down to her middle, as 
big as peafe in her ears, a bracelet whereof , we deliver’d to your wor/hip , fays my author to Ra¬ 
legh. Her hufband’s apparel was much like hers, only about his head he wore a broad plate 
of gold or copper, and his hair was long but on one fide. After this interview, familiar com¬ 
merce pafs’d between the natives and the Englijh t who, when they went to Roanoak , were much 
carefs’d and treated by the lady aforefaid. And when fhe could not prevail with them to flay, 


•» See thefe letters patents at large ( penn’d with the fame 
limitations that Sir Humphrey Gilbert'* had been) in Hat- 
Juyt'i voyages, vol. 3. fol. 243. 

fc But that he now fail’d thither himfelf, or then made 
the diicovery, whatever he might do before, oJ the coun¬ 


try hereafter mentiou'J, in perfon, and return’d in the be¬ 
ginning of 1583, as tne au:hor of his liie, in Level Eng- 
tip> and foreign, telis us, vol. i. p. 90, is all Uncy and 
fiction. 


being 


Digitized by LiOOQie 



XXV 


Sir WALTER RALEGH. 

being but few in company, tho* the natives had no edge-tools of iron orfted, and had prof¬ 
fer’d a great box of pearl for fome armour and a fword, fhe fent her women to watch them al) 
night in their Ihips on the bank-fidc. And indeed all the people, who faw them, admir’d much 
at their Ihips, their fire-arms, their cloaths, and above all, their complexions; for, except a 
veflel which was call away with fome chriftian adventurers about twenty-fix years before near 
Secotan, the fouthermoft town in Wingandacoa, never any people in apparel, or of fair colour 
were lien or heard of among them ; which made them wonder fo much at the whirenefs of their 
/kins, and fo fond of feeing and touching them. Under thefe favourable recommendations, 
and die diftrefs which the natives were in for fome powerful friends to defend them from the inva- 
fions of dieir neighbours, the promifes of vifiting them again, wherewith the Englijh left them, 
after having learnt as much of the fituation, Hate, and produ< 5 t of the country, as was at this 
time convenient, were very acceptable. So bringing over a couple of the Indians with them, 
named Manteo and Wanchefie, to fhew them our fine country, they arriv’d fifely in the weft of 
England about the middle of September following. Then captain Barlow addrefs d the relation 
of this firft voyage, and his fuccels in it, to his proprietor, whereof I have thus given an 
abftradt. * 

When Ralegh had laid before her majefty thefe and all other reports moft worthy of notice, 
which were brought him of this rich, beautiful, and virgin country *, and had acknowledg’d 
how much this hopeful progrefs towards the poflcfllon of it was owing to the aufpices of a 
virgin queen *, fhe was fo well pleas’d with the honour and advantage it promis’d, and gave 
him fuch encouragement to compleat the difeovery, which he forthwith prepar’d to do by ano¬ 
ther expedition, that fhe call’d it her felf by the name of Virginia. 1 * What enemies this Nam.-d ri>- 
publick patronage might raife him at court, we hear not -, but find he had fuch friends in 
the country, that upon the approaching feffions of parliament, about two months after, he was 
elected a knight of the fliire for the county of Devon, Sir Pulliam Courtenay being the other He is ch</cn 
reprefentative. c There was then a clerk of the parliament fo very indolent, or otherwife indil- 
pos’d, that the tranfuflions of the houfe of commons at this time were very impel f.< 5 tly recorded. 0 
Yet we find Ralegh mention’d to have been chofen of the committees upon fome bills that 
were then read. On the fourteenth of December following, the bill, in confirmation of his pa¬ 
tent aforefaid for the dilcovery of foreign countries, was read the firft time. In the afternoon it 
wa» read the fecond time, and committed to the vice-chamberlain Hatton, fecretary IValfingham , 

Sir Philip Sidney , Sir Francis Drake , Sir Richard Greenfield (or Grenvill ) Sir William Courtenay , 

Sir Wdliam Mohun , and others. Three days after the faid bill was, without any alteration, or¬ 
der’d to be engrofs’d. The next day it was read the third time, when, after many arguments 
and a provifo added, it pafs’d the houfe upon the queftion. * Between this time in December 
and the twenty-fourth of February following he receiv'd the honour of knighthood ; for being Knlgi ::d- 
then in a committee for confidering after what manner and meafure they fliould fupply her ma¬ 
jefty by fubfidy: this is the earlieft time I meet with of his being ftyl’d Sir Walter Ralegh ; 1 a 
title which her majefty beftow’d, as all others of honour, with frugality and choice. There¬ 
fore was it a more certain cognizance of virtue or valour, than titles of more pompous denomi¬ 
nation in the reign of her fucceflor, who fuffer’d lucre to corrupt the noble fountain, to turn 
it into vulgar channels, and drain it even to the dregs > fi fo that the dignities which flowed or 
overflowed from it, proved diftinclions oftener of their pride, riches, or proftitutions, on whom 
they were conferr’d, than of any abilities or performances for the publick good that might de- 
ferve them. Nay, that this honour was intended by rhat queen as the moft fignificant tt-ftimony 
of perfonal defert, may be inftanced, according to an ingenious obferver of her reign, “ in 
“ Sir Francis Fere, a man nobly defeended *, and Sir Walter Ralegh, exactly qualify’d, fays he. 


* See the firft voyage to the coaft? of America with two 
berks, by the captains Amadas and Barlo*iu, at the charge 
of Sir Waiter Ralegh, in Hakluyt, Vol. 3 fo). 246. 

^ Moft authors tay, Ralegh firft call’d it Virginia in 
compliment to the queen; but fhe nam’d it fo her lelf, as 
further will appear. 

c fSolitia Rut hamentaria, by Brtrwn Willis Efq, 8vo. 
vol. 2. 1716. p. 254. 

d His name was Fulk OrJJtrw. See Sir Simon D'E^xes's 
journal of both houles in queen Elizabeth's reign, fol. 
1708, p. 356 ; and other parts of this ieflion. 

e lb. fol. 341. f ]b. fol. 336. 

* Sir Edrxard Walker, garter, and fecretary of war to king 
Charles I. obferves, 1 hat in all queen Elizabeth's forty- 
41 four years reign fhe created but fix earls, and eight or 
44 nine barons. So that when fhe died, the nobility con- 
44 filled but of one marquis, nineteen earls, two vifeounts, 
44 and about thirty barons: but doubts whether in the 


44 reign of king James, the difpenfing of honours fo li- 
44 berally was not one of the beginnings of general dif- 
44 contents, cfpcciallv among penons of great ex trad ion. 
44 So that when this king died, having reign’d but twenty- 
44 two years, he left the nobility in his three kingdoms 
44 above double the number to what he found them, tho* 
44 his reign was peaceable, and not full of adion, which 
44 renders men in capacity highly to merit from their 
44 prince ; and fo, without envy, receive advancement.” 
And a little further, 44 When alliance to a favourite ; 
44 riches, though gotten in a (hop; perfons of private 
44 eftates, and ot families, that many of them, and their 
44 fathers, wouM have thought themielve - highly honour’d 
44 to have been but knights in queen Elizabeth's time, were 
44 advanc’d; then the fruits thereof began to appear, tsc” 
His obfoacations on the iuconvenicncics ot frequent promo¬ 
tions to titles of honour ; in his h if. on cal difourjes, fol. 
l 7 °S» P 300and 302, fAc. 


with 


Digitized by 


Google 


X 


XXVI 


His patent 
for wine-li- 
ccnces. 


His contro- 
verfy w th 
the univerfit 
of Catnbridv 


The LIFE of 

M with riiany others, fet apart in her judgment for military fervices ; whole titles fhe never 
<« rais’d above knighthood: faying, when importun’d to make Vere a baron That in his proper 
“ fpbere, and her ejtimation, he was above it already.” 1 

About the time that her majefly granted Ralegh the patent above-cited for the difeovery of 
remote countries, Ihe feems alfo to have given him another to licenfe the vending of wines 
throughout the kingdom, that by the advantages of this, he might be better able to fuftain the 
great charges which the other brought upon him. There were no reftri&ions belike in this pa¬ 
tent from increafing the number of vintners in any part of the realm. And hence arofe his 
controverfy at this time with one of the univerfities. For Ralegh having by virtue of that ge¬ 
neral patent given licence to one John Keytner to fell wine in Cambridge , fome of the hotter 
heads, efpecially the other vintners there, among whom was one Baxter , a ’fquire beadle, li- 
cenfed to fell wine by that univerfity, oppofed this Keytner and his wife with fuch violence, 
that fhe was likely to have died. Complaint being made to Ralegh , he wrote a letter to The 
f vsorfuipful Dr. Howland, vice-chancellor, and the rcfl of the maflers, to tell them how much 
. he took this riotous demeanor as a contempt of the queen’s grant to him ; prefuming, if he 
had given any unlawful privilege, the conference he had offer’d, by his deputies, for a quiet 
decifion of the matter by learned council between them, would have been accepted. Further 
telling them, that if the abufe was not regulated, and the fa id Keytner permitted to enjoy the 
liberty granted him, he would take fome other courfe for reformation therein ; but refting af- 
fured they would ufe fuch means as might occafion no further trouble, he not defiring to exe¬ 
cute his grant to its extent among their vintners, who were the only diflurbers herein, re/]>e<ft- 
ing more their own gain than quiet government ; he only craves their anfwer, and that the 
riotous perfons might not reft unpunifhed: fo bids them heartily farewel j from his lodgings at 
the court the 9th of July 1584 j and fubferibes hi ink If Tour very affettionate loving friend. 
Th is producing no anfwer in levcn months, and Ralegh having heard they continued to op- 
prefs Keytner j he wrote, by him, again > To his loving friend the vice-chancellor, ts?c. telling 
him, that being by information perfwaded, himfelf, with the grave and well-difpoled of the 
univerfity, were fo grieved with the unfeeinly outrages lately committed by the young and un¬ 
bridled heads thereof, to the contempt of the queen’s prerogative and his diferedit, as fufficient 
order had been taken for die bearer’s quiet which caufed him to reft from requiring reforma¬ 
tion therein at his good lord-treafurer’s hands j who as yet underftood nothing from him of 
thefe riots, through the good-will he bore to their univerfity : and that he meant fo to deal with 
them for the other four taverns, as fhould fufficicntly have contented them. But his too fa¬ 
vourable dealing with them had given fuch encouragement, as, this day, he is inform’d, that, 
intending further to difturb the bearer, they had warned him to appear before them ; with 
which he had perfuaded him to comply ; for tho’ he knew them not, their place fhould tell 
him, their proceedings would be juft and lawful ; which only he defined, and wherein they 
would pleafure themfielves, and continue his readinefs to ferve them. Thus hoping to find by 
their anfwer, thefe informations fprung rather from jealoufy than juft occafion, he leaves them 
to God from the court at Somerjet-Iloufe the 10th of February in the year aforefaid, and lub- 
feribes himfelf Tour very willing friend. Upon their fending no anfwer to this, and Ralegh 
hearing they had fuddenly clapp’d up the man in prifon, he fent ten days after the laft, his 
third letter from the court, directed To the vice-chancellor, and the rejl of the majlers, &c. 
And herein tells them, he cannot a little marvel at their peremptory and proud manner of 
dealing. That he was content to ufe all manner of courtefy towards them in refpedt of his 
honourable good lord the lord-treafurer; but perceived his reafonable, or rather too fubmifs 
dealing, had bred in them a proceeding unfuflerable j having committed a poor man to prifon, 
for doing nothing but what was warranted by the great feal of England-, which, fuppofing 
they had a charter, he knew not that any man or fociety would fb much take upon them to 
do, before a trial. As 1 riverence the place , fays he, of which you are the governors, fo 1 will 
not 'willingly take any wrong or difgrace from you. But as he was allur’d the lord-treafurer would 
be indifferent in the cafe, and as the matter fo much concern’d the validity of his patent elfe- 
where, as well as in their univerfity, he would try the utmoft of his right as well for this one, 
wherewith he was content to have been fatisfy’d, as for all the other four. So having thought 
they would have vouchfafcd him an anfwer to his laft letters, he ends, fubficribing himfelf Tour 
friend , as you fhall give caufe. This rous’d them to fome confederation, and loon after, a 


• The mifrelfancous works of Francis Ojborne Efq; 
in Trndition.il Memoir on the reign of queen Elizabeth, 
vol. 2. p 43. 

k The three letters, whereof I have here given the fub- 
(hmee in Raltglf > own words, were communicated to me 


by the right honourable the earl of Oxford , from the 
collections of the reverend and learned Mr. Baker of 
St. John's College, Cambridge, who Copied them out of 
the originals. 


handfome 


Digitized by boogie 








Sir WALTER RALEGH. xxvii 

lundfome apologetical letter was lent from the vice-chancellor to Sir W. Ralegh, fetting forth,- 
that the hard opinion he had conceived of them for this matter, made them doubt what manner of 
anfwer they might addrefsto him without offence ; and that their filence was l'o ill taken, they 
knew not how their endeavours to excufe it might give him latisfadlion. That they had not neg¬ 
lected any reafonablc means to procure his favour for the quiet enjoyment of that whereof they 
had the fruition for above two hundred years ; nor omitted to become petitioners to him in a 
very humble manner. That his counfel had not made any juft exception aguinft their charters i 
and thofc who had the hearing of the cafe, thought them to have the better warrant. Yet that 
he ufed fuch hard terms, as they little look’d for at his hands j “ being by birdi a gentleman ; 

“ by education train’d up to the knowledge of good letters ; inftrufled with the liberal difpofi- 
“ tion of a univerfity, the fountain and nurfery of all humanity : and further, by God’s good 
bleffing, advanc’d in court, from whence the very name of courtefy is drawn.” That the 
prejudice he apprehended from their example againft his patent, was unlikely to fall out; fince 
other places were not privileg’d as the univerfities were. That her majefty’s grant, by her pre¬ 
rogative, gave him his title ; and the like prerogative was the ground of their charters. And 
as he would think it hard to have his patent impeach’d by an after-grant, they hoped he would 
with like equity meafure them, who were warranted to have the foie dealing with all vintners 
in Cambridge town, and the preempts thereof. Touching the imprifonment of the party, whom 
he charged them with proceeding againft before trial; and who, according to Mr. Brown's 
promife to the lord-treafurer, was to have given over at Michaelmas laft \ however the courfe 
thereof had been otherwife reported to him, it was only at this time to correct his contempt in 
not appearing, being lawfully warned, and refufing to anfwer before the ordinary judge, or enter 
bond for appearance when caufe fhould require. That for their own part, it would be no difad- 
vantage whether he or other, one or many, were vintners there •, but in regard of the youth 
committed to their charge, duty bound them to confider who they admitted to keep taverns, the 
number whereof al/o was limited ; which, if tliey exceeded, would endanger their privileges ; 
for the prefervation whereof as they had all taken a fpecial oath, fo they right humbly eflfoons' 
befeech’d him to have regard of them for their duties therein. Concluding thus •, “ What- 
ever kindnefs you fhall any ways Ihew to the univerfity As the body thereof doth fill 
“ continue , fo the memory thereof cannot decay. There is not one of us, but you may readily 
“ command wherein it may pleafe you to employ us; only we pray you, and that in the heartieft 
“ manner, to vouchfafe us your favour in matter of our privileges} That we may leave than in 
“ no worfe efate to our poferity , than we did receive them of our prcdeceffors. Thus defiring 
“ God fo to direct you with his blefied fpirit, as may be moll to his glory, and your greateft 
4 ‘ comfort, we take our leave} from Cambridge .” 1 This might probably pacify Ralegh at pre- 
fent, both for their negleft in not anfwering his letters, and their torwardnefs in impriloning the 
man} till the difference was a few months afterwards accommodated by the lord-treufurcr, who 
was chancellor of that univerfity. b 

And indeed at this juncture Ralegh feems to have had little leifure for further debates of this 
kind: for the parliament being foon after, on the 29th of March 1 585, prorogued, Ralegh 
appears feveral ways engag’d in the laudable improvements of navigation. For his brother 
Adrian Gilbert of Sandridge , afterwards knighted, in purfuance of the arguments laid down by 
his brother Sir Humphrey , having been at great charges in finding out the northern paffage to 
China and the Moluccas } and in confideration thereof been granted a patent by the queen two 
years before this time, to purfue the difeovery by partners, under the title of The colleagues of 
the fellowjhip for the difeovery of the nortb-wef paffage \ Ralegh was now one of the afibciates Comibote* 
in this enter prize} and after having duly confultcd about the likelieft means to fuccefs, and Jibe- to the amo¬ 
rally contributed towards the expence, tliey chofe captain John Davis , an experienc’d naviga- fff j ,ic 
tor, to be undertaker of the exploit. He fet firft out upon it this fummer from Falmouth in paffage/ 
two barks. When he came to land in fixty-fix degrees forty minutes latitude, he anchor’d in a 


a The old copy of this letter, whence I have given the 
extract above, is in the pofleflion of Hugh Howard Eiq; 

* For the faiJ lord treafurcr Burgblcy lent, in a letter to 
Dr. Norgate , his vice-chancellor, on the 26th of July 
is$5 # the opinion of the two chief juilices, Sir Cbrijlopber 
Wrujc and Sir Edmond Anderfon % upon this controverly be¬ 
tween that univerfity and Mr Ranvlie, as he is the.ein 
call'd, for the nomination of vintners, and fetting the 
price of wine there; which opinion is as follows— 
Hrd, touching the nomination of vintners there, we 
“ think it appertained to the univerfity, by uiagc and 
tl charters Irora her raajdly, confirmed by parliament: 


u and that Mr. Ra*wlic can nominate none there For 
“ the pi ice ; it feemeth they may let prices, lo as it be 
** according to the llutute, and nor otherwife. And if 
“ the vintners fer at higher prices, they arc to be punilhed 
“ by law. Which penalty Mr. Ravclie may di.penic 
“ withal; and yet cannot 1'uc for the penalty by his pa- 
“ tent againft the llatute laws : for therein all liberties 
“ to the univerfity is excepted.” After thi>, \vc hear no 
more of the difpute. See the faid lord BurghU\\ letter, 
and opinion of the judges, in Mr. John Strife's annals of 
the church, tom. 3. 1728. ful. 3^3. 


very 


Digitized by knOOQie 



/ 


xxviii The LIFE of 

very fair road, under a brave mountain ; which, for the fplendid appearance it made, the cliff* 
Mount Rat, t,b. thereof being as orient as gold, they named Mount Ralegh, 1 in honour of their proprietor j 
and foon after fell into the very paffage they fought, fince, well known by the name of Davis's 
Streigbts. The farther fearch whereof, through the fame patronage and liipport, captain Da¬ 
vis made in two voyages more, the two following years, and in a manner compleated the faid 
difcovery. b 

But about two months before Davis begun his faid firfl: voyage for this difcovery, Ralegh 
The lecond f ent out his own fleet for Virginia, which confifted of feven fail, whereof fome were his own 
Virgin. Ihips, and they departed from Plymouth on the 9th ok Aprils the year above fpecified. He de¬ 
puted his gallant relation Sir Richard Grenville general of the expedition, and Mr. Ralph Lane • 
who was afterwards knighted, to be governor of t!ve colony, which they now tranfported. 
There went befides, Mr. Thomas Candijh, John Arundel, Raymond, Stucley, Bremige, Vincent , 
Mr. John Clark, and fcveral others, whereof fome were captains, and others afliftants for 
council and dire&ion in the voyage. So they fliaped their courfe to the Canary iflands, from 
thence to Dominica, and to the ifland of St. John de Puerto Rico, where they were fadly flung 
with the Mujkeloes, and near which they took two Spanijh frigats •, one whereof was freighted 
with a rich cargo, and divers Spaniards of diftindtion, who afterwards were ranfom’d for 
good round fums of money. Then they made away to Ilifpaniola , foon after which the gene¬ 
ral, and fome of his company, were near being caft away in catching of Seals. From thence 
they fail’d to Florida, c and on the 26th of June anchor’d at Wocoken, whence they fent word 
of their arrival to king tVingina at Roanoak. They carried the Indians with them from Eng¬ 
land ; and Mantco , on the 6th of July, led Mr. Arundel to the main continent, where they found 
fome of their men, who had been conduced thither twenty days before, by captain Raymond. 
On the eleventh following, the genera), accompanied by Arundel, Stuclcy, Lane, Candijh, 
Harlot , Amadas, Clark, and others, palled over the water to the main land, and victual Pd 
their fliips; in which voyage they firfl difeover’d die towns of Pomeicc , Aquafgococ, and Se¬ 
ed an ; alfo the great lake Paquipe, and many other places *, then return d to their licet. They 
afterwards re-vifited thofe parts, and were kindly entertained by the favages. Coming at laft 
to anchor at Hatorajk •, prince Grangino, or Granganmco , before mention’d, came attended by 
Manteo to vifit them on board the admiral, which was named the Tyger. The particulars 
which palled between them about the fettlement are not mention’d in the fhort journal of this 
voyage; but we may conclude it was agreed on to their mutual fatisfa&ion} fince one hundred 
anti feven men, whofe names are printed at the end of the faid journal, under the govern¬ 
ment of Mr. Lane, were left lor a year in the country, without difturbance, to begin the plan¬ 
tation. On the 25th o i' Artgujl the general weighed anchor, and fet fail for England: about 
A rich prize, fix days alter he took a SpaniJJj fliip of three hundred ton, richly laden j and on the 18th 
of Olloher arrived with the prize at Plymouth , where he was courteoufly receiv’d by his wor- 
fliipful friend. d 

Of this prize, wc have fome further account, if it is to be credited; for it comes from a 
man, who, in the latter end of Sir Walter Ralegh's life, met with countenance to prove his 
greateft enemy •, but after his death, found himfelf neceflitated to publifh all the arguments he 
could devife, to juftify his perfidy towards him, and afiwage the reproach of mankind. This 
author, one of king James' s knights, was the fon, it feems, of that Stucley e mention’d in the 
foregoing voyage •, who is no where call’d a captain, nor feems to have had command in any 
of the fhips * but to have been a private gentleman, who went over as an afliftant for council. 


a Job* Jam's account of captain Davis's firfl voyage 
in June 1 58 c, for the difcovery of the north <wcjl paffage, 
in Hakluyt, vul. 3. fol. toL. 

b Theic two voyages follow the full in the fame volume. 
Joannes Baptijla Ramufxm , in the preface to his third 
volume of Navigations, writes with refped to this difeo- 
very of the north-vsefl paffage to the Eafi-Indies, and the 
attempt firlt made by $ shaft tan Cabot a, pilot-major of 
England, as follows: “ It feems, that God does lbll re- 
44 "ierve this great enterprize, tor fome great prince, to 
44 diicover this voyage to Cathay by this way ; which, 
44 tor the bringing of the fpiccries from India into Europe , 
“ were the moil eafy and Ihortdl of all others; to make 
44 his name grear, and fame immortal to all ages to 
44 come; far more than Can be done by any of all thofe 
“ great troubles and wars which daily are ufed in Europe 
“ among the miferable Chriflian people.'* 

< One argument ufed by a late author to prove this was 
the hrlt attempt made for the difcovery of theic parts of 
America^ is, that tliefe navigators “ knew no other way 


u to fail from England to the coafl of Virginia, than to 
“ go fi/il to the Canaries , from thence to Hi/paniola, and 
€t into the Gulph of Mexico ; then out by Cuba and the 
€€ Gulph of Bahama\ and io coal! along the lliore from 
“ Florida to Virginia, from the latitude of 30 minutes to 

4 2; which is in lhort (fays hej like going from Lon - 
•* don by Portfmouth , and from thence to Exeter , away 
u to Brifiol, and fo up by the banks of the Severn to 
“ come at Wift-Chejier." Captain Philip Ralegh's hillorical 
account of the voyages and adventures 0/ Sir Walter 
Ralegh, 8vo. p. 19. 

d See the voyage made by Sir Richard Gren-vi/l for 
Sir Halter Ralegh to Virginia\ Anno I 585, in Hakluyt, 
vol. 3. fol. 2^1 ; and the abridgment of it in the Latin 
life of Sir Richard Grcnvill, by H. Holland. Hcrustlog. 
Angl. fol. 1620. p 85. 

* A late author, in his life of Sir Walter Ralegh , calls 
him John Stucley, from what authority I know not. 
Lives Englijb and Foreign, vol. I. p. 9!. 


or 


c 


r 


£ 


ir 







Digitized by kjOOQie 










XXIX 


Sir WALTER RALEGH. 

or iome directions relating to the plantation. But his faid fon, after Ralegh's death, hence takes 
occafion to tell us, that one day himfelf upbraiding Ralegh with the injury hej had done his 
father, in deceiving him of a great adventure, “ which my faid father (fays, he) had in the Tyger, 

“ when he went to the Wefi-Indies with my uncle Sir Richard Grenvill \ which was, by his 
“ (RalegWs) own confefiion, worth fifty thoufand pounds, and came all to his hands, my father’s 
“ porrion being at leaft ten thoufand pounds, which he might lawfully claim : he anfwer’d ; 

“ that the queen, however (he fecm’d a great and good miftrefs to him in the eyes of the 
“ world, yet was fo unjuft and tyrannous to him, that (he laid the envy as well of this, as of 
“ many other her oppreflions, upon him: and that (he took all the pearl in a cabinet unto 
“ her (elf, without fo much as ever giving him one pearl.”* This is publi(h’d vifibly to re¬ 
flect injuftice upon Ralegh towards that author’s father, and ingratitude towards the queen'. 
but how probable it will feem (had it proceeded even from an indifferent hand) that fo great 
a (hare in this prize fhould be due to his father, and no diflatisfa&ion appear in his uncle; 
he who got it all, to be allowed alfo no lhare; or that his father (hould never claim fo great 
a fum by law, which, as the fon fays, he might lawfully claim ; and laftly, how fo great a 
profit to Ralegb will correfpond with (ome fublequent obfervations on the royal afiiftance he 
foon needed, through the (lender returns thefe Virginian voyages made for all the charge and 
care he bellow’d upon them, mull be fubmitted to the reader’s judgment, when he (hall arrive 
at thofe paflages and morp efpecially at the tragical cataftrophe of the whole (lory. 

If fo much good fortune did now befall Ralegh, a pretty enlargement was foon after made 
to it by the queen her fclf j fomewhat unufual with the leifurely courfe of her bounty : but 
that it was a favour in conjunction, or of a comprehenfive nature; from a principal (hare 
whereof, he, neither for his former eminent fervices, could be juftly excluded ; nor for the 
fupport of that chargeable difeovery, by which he had fo newly deferved. For an end ha¬ 
ving been put to the Munjler rebellion by force of arms, and the country further laid defolate 
by a raging famine, which devour’d what the fword had left, except a few who remain’d in 
cities, fled to England , or could feed upon weeds and carrion, fo as even to rob the graves 
and the gibbets of their dead, to keep the dying alive \ b the queen foon became defirous of 
repeopling the country, and to have ways confider’d on, how the late earl of Defmond' s large 
territories in Ireland might be difpos’d of to die advantage of her and her fubjefts. After 
commiflioners were fent over for this purpofe, and proper methods taken to prevent fraudulent 
conveyances by the rebels, there was now at lad a fcheme refolv’d on for the plantation of 
Munjler } and fecretary Fenton carried over the inftruClions towards the latter end of this year. c 
The whole forfeiture was above five hundred feventy-four thoufand acres of land ; d and after 
feme reftitutions had been made, the remainder was divided into Seigniories among certain 
gentlemen-undertakers , as they were call’d j® but chiefly fuch as had been inftrumental in appea¬ 
ring the Irijh rebellion. One of the largeft divifions, which was twelve thoufand acres, fituate 
in the counties of Cork and Waterford, was given by her majefty to Sir Walter Ralegh and His Seigniory 
his heirs, with certain privileges and immunities, upon thofe conditions of planting and im- in Inland. 
proving the fame, to which the reft were alfo oblig’d . 1 And tho’ many of the undertakers 
did not people their Seigniories with well-affefled Englijh , but fold them to Englijb papifts, or 
otherwife to their profit; nor fortified according to their covenants •, nor forbore encroaching 
upon the lands of the loyal and protected Irijh (as the crown on the other fide fail’d of main¬ 
taining certain forces promis’d for their fecurity from frelh invafions •,) yet I meet with none of 
thofe irregularities objedled to Ralegh: on the contrary, that he peopled his plantation unex- 
ceptionably •, that he kept the faid eftate to the latter end of the queen’s reign, and then fold 
it to Richard Boyle, afterwards the famous earl of Cork , as, in a memorial of his own life, the faid 


* Sir Leviii Stuclefs petition and information to king 
Jamei, He. ^to. p. 8. a pamphlet hereafter more par¬ 
ticularly mention’d. 

1 Hooker s Supply to the chronicles of Ireland, ad Jin. 
and SfntjWl Vienxof Ireland. 

c Cox's hiftoty of Ireland, fo!. 3 Sq— 351. See alfo 
Hvtvet abridgment of Stonu'% chronicles, Anno 1585, 
P- 353 - 

d fynet Moryfon in his Itinerary, fol. 1617. part 2. 
a P- 1 P*g- 4. agrees with Cox, fol. 392,- that the num¬ 
ber of acres Englijb meafure, forfeited by the earl of 
Dtfnond and his confederates, were 574628. But Cox 
makes three variations from Moryfon in the divifion of that 
land, with refpeft to Sir (Valter Ralegh's (hare. For 
Mtryfon makes Ralegh's dividend to lie in Waterford and 
7 ipperary ; Cox, in Cork and Waterford ; Moryfon, parcel¬ 
ling four (hares together, allots by patent to the earl of 


Ormond, Sir Chrijopher Hatton, Sir Edouard Fitton , and 
Sir Walter Ralegh, 22910 acres. But their four (hares 
joined, out of Cox, amount to 37425 acres. Vet in Cox 
thisgreater tra£t yields but 242/. 131. yd yearly rents; and 
that fmaller tradt in Moryfon, 303 /. 3 d. So that Moryfon s 
account fells (hort of the other in 14515 acres of land ; 
And Cox's account fells (hort of his in 60 /. 6. s. 8 d. 
ytarly rent. But as no other author I have met with ex¬ 
prefly diflinguifhes Sir Walter Ralegh's (hare to have been 
12000 acres, with rents 66/. 13/. 41/. befides Cox; and 
he feems to have had good authority for that diilindion ; 
1 find my felf obliged, not only by neceflity, but reafon, 
to accept of his account. See MS. collection in Lamb. libr. 
mark’d M. fol. 166. 

e Sir Francit Walfngham's table-book, MS. 8vo. 
p. 131. 

( Cox, fol. 391. Sc MS. in Bib/. Lambeth, lib. C. 


y 


oarl 


Digitized by boogie 


XXX 


The third 
voyage to 
Virginia* 


the LIFE of 

earl has related. • Bat as capacious as this benefit fecmed, it was rather expenfive perhaps at 
firft, than profitable to him. 

For Sir Richard Qrenvill, who, at his departure from Virginia, had promis’d the colony he 
left behind to return punctually with fupplies by the following Eajler at furtheft, was not al¬ 
together fo expeditious [as they expected v probably through fome difficulties attending the 
charge thereof, which Ralegh's new undertaking of planting alfo that Seigniory might proba¬ 
bly render more burdenfom. Grenvill brought over letters from governor Lane to a very wor¬ 
thy encourager of all naval adventures •, k deferibing the commodities and fertility of the coun¬ 
try they were about to cultivate and civilize: the faid governor alfo drew up notes while he 
was there, which he afterwards methodiz’d into a Difcourfe of two parts, difplaying the particu¬ 
larities of the country of Virginia, and the reafons which moved their departure from thence into 
England. c In this difcourfe we learn, that their difeovery for Sir Walter Ralegh had ex¬ 
tended from Roanoak fouthward, as far as Secotan , about eighty miles •, northward as far as the 
Cbefepians, being a hundred and thirty miles more •, and to the north-weft, as far as Chawa- 
tiook , a hundred and thirty miles: and further mentions many towns about the water-fule, 
difeovered by the way. It alfo informs us of his enquiries after a filhery and traffick for pearl 
in thofe parts j befides a mine of ftrange metal like copper, but paler and fofter: moreover, 
of the taking prince Skyco prifoner •, and after the death of Granganimeo afore/aid, how his 
brother king Wingina changed his name, and plotted an infurreCtion againft the Englifh ; for 
which he loft his life: while another king called Okifco, fent to pay homage and acknowledge 
fubjcction to the grand Weroanza , or queen of England •, and after her, to Sir Walter Ralegh. 
Laftly, the arrival of Sir Francis Drake about the 10th of June 1586 •, who, returning from 
his prolperous conqueft of St. Domingo , Cartagena , and St. Augufline , determin’d, in his way 
homeward, to vifit his friend’s colony in Virginia. They had defpaired of Sir Richard Gren¬ 
ville promile ; and the rather, becaufe of the preparations then making for Flanders , and other 
parts of America. Their corn was indeed within a fortnight of inviting the fickle; but they 
were in need of many other provifions. Hereupon Drake readily proifer’d them all manner 
of fupplies, by victuals, men, ammunition, and Ihips, to carry on and compleat their worthy 
undertaking. The governor defir’d only a fhip, and fo much provifion as about Augufl would 
carry him and his company to England, which Drake granted in full fufficiency ; befides pin¬ 
naces, boats, and two experienc’d mailers or pilots, to abide with them, and apply themfclves 
earneftly in the aCtion. All this was perform’d in two days. On the next day, while fome 
were writing letters into England , and others relating their adventures to each other, fome at 
- fea, fome on fhore, there arofe a moft violent tempeft, which Iafted three days $ drove moft 
of the fleet from their anchors away to fea, and in them the provifions and mafters aforefaid, 
with the chief of the Englifj colony; whom they faw no more till they met in England. Then 
Drake proffer’d them another fhip; but the reft of the colony, who were left behind, all begg’d 
to go for England ; to which Drake confenting, took them aboard on the 19th of June, and 
fet fail. d Sir Walter Ralegh had in the mean time provided a fhip of a hundred ton, freight¬ 
ed with all kind of provifions in a moft plentiful manner, for the relief of this colony -, but 
not failing till after Eajler , the faid colony was newly departed before this frefh fupply arriv’d 
at Virginia. After fome time fpent up the country, in feeking the colony and not finding 
it, they return’d with all the provifion aforefaid into England. * About a fortnight after. 
Sir Richard Grenvill arrived at Virginia with three fhips more, well ftored for the fame com¬ 
pany of planters; but he, after much fearch, miffing alfo of them and of the aforefaid fhip, 
left fifteen men at Roanoak with plenty of fupplies, and made for England •, not without fome 
conquefts over the Spaniards at die Azores in his return. f And indeed Ralegh was alfo about 
this very time victorious at the fame place : for, when he fent the aforefaid lhip to relieve his 
colony, or foon after, he difpatched two more, named the Serpent and Mary-Spark , both of 
them his own, to the Azores againft the Spaniards , under the conduCl of captain Jacob IVhid- 
don , John Eve foam, and others. They departed from Plymouth on the 10th of June afore- 


a *Tis a manufeript, entitled, True Remembrances, for the 
benefit and information of bis pofierity, written Anno 1632, 
remaining in the family of his noble defendants. See 
the life of the late earl of Orrery , by Eufiace Budgell Efq* 
Svo. 1732* p 3* and 18. Mr. Tbortjby alfo mentions 
this MS. in his account of the family of the Boyles , to¬ 
wards the end of his Ttpograpfyy of Leeds , printed in fol. 

1715. 

b Richard Hakluyt of the Middle Temple Efq; kinfman to 
the induftrious Richard Hakluyt , preacher of Cbriji-Churcb 
Oxford , who publifhed the voyages, as may be dirt in- 
gui/h’d in the preface to his firlt edition of them, as well 
as in other places, and not the fame perfon w ith the faid 
Oxonian, as Antl/ony Wood has confounded them. The 


governor's letter to the faid templar, is in his kinfman’s 
third volume, fol. 254. 

* This dilcourfe of Mr. Lane's immediately follows, 
in the fame volume, fol. 2 

* See Lane's faid account of the particularities of the em¬ 
ployment of the Euglijhmen left in Virginia by Sir Richard 
Grenvill, ts?e. diretted to Sir Walter Ralegh ; in Hakluyt 
aforefaid. fol. 264. Alfo Tbo. Cates's fummary and true 
difcourfe of Sir Francis Drnkds Weft- Indian voyage, began 
1585, in the fame volume, fol. 547. 

* Account of the z/wv/voyage for the relief of the colony 
in Virginia , at the foie charges of Sir Halter Ralegh, the 
fame volume, fol. z6j. t lb. 

faid 


Digitized by 


Goog[< 






XXXI 


Sir tV ALTER RALEGH. 

faid, and took more Spanijb prizes than they could bring home. In one of them was the Hisfuceefiat 

governor of St. Michaels ifland \ in another, which they took near die ifle of Gracioja , was tla 

the famous Pedro de Sermiento , governor of the ftreights of Magellan \ who was the furcheft 

and moft experienced navigator in all Spain. * They took alfo three other veflels, but turned 

two adrift, after having taken out of them what they wanted, becaufe they could not fpare 

hands to man them ; and after a fight for thirty-two hours with two great carracks, and the 

other guard-fhips of twenty fail more, richly laden, they gave over for want of powder, and 

returned fafe to Plymouth , where they were received with triumphant joy j then proceeding 

to Southampton , they were met by their owner Sir Walter Ralegh •, rewarded them with 

their (hares, out of the merchandize, and other commodities of value, which in thofe three 

prizes were thus taken from the enemy. b Not long after this, there was another voyage fee 

out, tire fame year, by the earl of Cumberland to the South-Sea , but performed no further than 

the latitude of forty-four degrees to the fouth of the equinoffial, in which as Sir Waller Ralegh s.-. th s™. 

was alfb an adventurer, his fine pinnace, named Dorothy , being engaged therein, and fome fmall 

prizes alfo being taken, he had, no doubt, his proportion in the profits that afofe from them. c 

But to return to the Virginian colony : it arrived at Plymouth on the 27th of July follow ¬ 
ing. Camden has remember’d, that by this colony of Ralegh's, and in thofe Ihips of Drake's 1 
the famous American plant called Tobacco was firft brought into England , by or under go¬ 
vernor Lane , d doubtlefs according to the inftm&ions they had received of their proprietor ; 
for the introdo&ion among us of that commodity, is generally aferib’d to Ralegh himfdf- 
There are fome pleafant (lories of this plant, wkh relation to him, which have been as carefully 
preferved as the box he kept it in. * But the tradition of “ Ralegh's fmoking tobacco at firll 
** privately in his ftudy, and of the fervant, who ufed to wait on him there, furprifing him 
“ one time with his tankard of ale and nutmeg as he was intent upon his book, before he had 
“ done his pipe *, and feeing the fmoke reeking out of his mouth, threw all the ale in his face, 
then tunning down Hairs alarm’d the family with repeated exclamations, that his mafier 
“ was on fire, and before they could get up would be burnt to ajhes * This I fay, if true, 
has nothing in it of more furprifing or unparallel’d fimplicity, than there was in that poor Nor¬ 
wegian, who upon the firft fight of Rofes could not be induced to touch , tho’ he faw them 
grow, being fo amazed to behold trees budding with fire: t» or, to come clofer by way of 
retaliation, than there was in thofe Virginians themfelves, who, the firft time they feized upon a 
quantity of Gun-powder which belong’d to the Englifh colony, fow'd it for gra in, or the feed 
of fome ftrange vegetable in the earth, with full expectation of reaping a plentiful crop of 
combuftion by the next harveft to fcatter their enemies. b But paffing over thefe tales \ as 
Ralegbvns the firft, who brought this herb in requefl: among us, and laid the foundation lor Introduces the 
that great traffick dierewith, which has been of fuch confiderable benefit to his country ■, there 
is no lefs honour due to him than has been conferr’d on that ambaflador, who had before 
brought it out of Portugal into France ; where, in mentioning the herb, they pay grateful ac¬ 
knowledgments to the importer, by calling it Nicotiana after his own name : nay, his poli¬ 
tick foveraign Catherine de Medicis, did fo zealoufiy encourage the ufe of it, that it v/as alfo 
afterwards in honour of her called the Queen's Herb. ‘ Nor was the queen of England back- 


0 While this Sarmiento was Ralegh' s prifoner in Eng¬ 
land, they were one day furveying a map together, con¬ 
cerning which, Sarmiento told him a plealant ltory of the 
Painter's Wives Ifland; which Ralegh, afterwards, inge¬ 
niously apply’d ; where he compares the liberties of local 
and bi/iorical fiftion, or fuch as geographers make, in til¬ 
ling up the blank fpaces of their maps with lands of pig- 
meys, and rocks of load (lone; to thofe of hiftorians , in 
repairing the broken accounts of paji ages: yet concludes, 
with an encouraging difference, againft the ignorant de- 
feribers of remote places, in favour of liberal conjecture, 
to enlighten the obfcuritics of antient times. See the bif- 
*ory of the Wwld, lib. i. cap. 23. fee. 4. 

b See John Evejhams account of the voyage to the 
Azores with two pinnaces belonging to Sir Waiter Ralegh , 
Vc. in 1586. in Hakluyt , vol. 2. part 2. fol. 120. 

c Relation of the earl of Cumberland's voyage to the 
South-Sea, by Mr. John Sarracoll in Hakluyt , vol. 3* fol* 
760. 

® Annal. Reg. Eliz. Amo 1585. 

* Being at Leeds in Torkjhire , foon after Mr. Ralph 
Vhortjby the antiquary died, Anno 171 faw his Mu- 
fnttm; and in it, among his other rarities, what himfelf 
has publickly calHd (in the catalogue thereof, annex’d to 
his antiquities of that town ) Sir Walter Ralegh's tobacco 
box. From the heft of ttiy memory, I can rcfemble its 


outward appearsncc to nothing more nearly than one of 
our modern Mnff-caf s ; about the lame height and 
width, cover'd vvuJi red leather, and open’d at top ( but 
with a hinge, I think ) like one of thofe. In the infide, 
there was a cavity for a receiver of glafs or metal, uhicn 
might hold half a pound or a pound of tobacco ; and 
from the edge of the receiver at top, to the edge of the 
box, a circular ilay or collar, with holes in it, to plant 
the tobacco about, with fix or eight pipes to Imoke it in. 
This travelling box, with the MSS. Medals and other 
rarities in its company, defeending to a young clergyman, 
the fon of tlie deccaled, was foon alter reported to have 
been tranllated to London. 

* The Briti/h Apollo , 3d edition, 1726. vol. 2. p 
376. 

K Tho. Forde's Feneftra in PetUri : a cohesion of fami¬ 
liar letters, Svo. 1660. p. 81. 

h Winftanley's hiftorical rarities. 8vo. 1668. 

■ Jean Nicot Maitre des Requites , ambafjadeur de France 
en Portugal; d'oii il apporta le premier a la reive Catharine 
de Medicis, la fameufe plante de Tadac ; laquelle fut 
nommee eT abord Nicotiane, de fon notn ; enfuite , Herbe 
a la Reine, a caufe que Catherine de Medicis la mit en 
riputafion dans le royaume, Sec. II eft more vers Canrte 
1559. Dcfcrip. de la villc de Paris, par Germain Bnce. 
Sept Edit. Amlh 1718. Tom. 2. p. 120. 


ward 


Digitized by CnOOQie 


xxxn 


The LIFE of 

ward in liftening to, and promoting the advantages it was promis’d to produce. We may gather 
from fome authors, that Ihe was very curious to know its virtues and properties; and that once 
converfing with Ralegh upon this fubjetft, “ he aflured her majefty he had fo well experienced the 
** nature of it, that he could tell her of what weight even the fmoke would be in any quanti- 
“ ty propos’d to be confum’d. Her majefty fixing her thoughts upon the moft impracticable part 
“ of the experiment, that of bounding the fmoke in a ballance , fufpeCted that he put the traveller 
** upon her, and would needs lay him a wager he could not folve the doubt: fo he procured a 
“ quantity agreed upon to be thoroughly fmok’d j then went to weighing ; but it was of the 
Ct afhes ; and in the conclufion, what was wanting in the prime weight of the tobacco, 
** her majefty did not deny to have been evaporated in fmoke ; and further faid, that many 
labourers in the fire fhe had beard of who turned their gold into fmoke , but Ralegh was the 
“ firfi who had turned fmoke into gold . ” * Whether thofc two queens did ever recommend 
the ufe of this herb by their own example, we are not certain; but it is evident, it foon be¬ 
came of fuch vogue in queen Elizabeth's court, that fome of the great ladies, as well as noble¬ 
men therein, would not fcruple to take a pipe fometimes very fociably j however, it was fuch 
an abomination to the refined palate of her Scotch fucceftor, that he not only refufed the ufe 
of it himfelf, but endeavoured to rob his crown of what has fince proved one of its greateft 
revenues, b by reftraining his fubjefls alfo from it. Indeed it is not to be wonder’d that fuch a 
philofopher , as could magnify the power of witches, after the manner he has done in one of 
his learned pamphlets, c fhould be fuch a politician as to difeourage the taking of tobac¬ 
co in another. d But thofe who have not admir’d at his prejudice in this attempt to dif- 
pel the fumes of that herb with greater of his own, if I may allude to the witty title of his 
performance without imputation of irreverence to his memory, may yet applaud his policy, 
in fo far conducing to its fuppreflion, as to exclude it from the body of his works, when this 
Royal Pamphleteer refolved to become an author in folio. As for the ufes and virtues of this 
plant i fince fo many learned writers have given us whole books upon them, I (hall only 


a Apophthegms of the Englijh nation MS. quarto, in¬ 
ter Codec . Rodnei Fane Armig . and James Hvu: el in his 
epillles, vol. 3. has a whole litter upon tobacco, where 
he mentions alfo in efftd this llory of Sir Halter Ra¬ 
legh' s wager with the queen. 

*> An author of experience has lately informed us; 
44 That the benefit of this vegetable to Great Britain is 
** prodigious, if we confider the fhort time fince it was 
44 hrll introduced into England by Sir Walter Ralegh. 'Tis 
44 now become, fays he, the ilaple of two of his majef- 
44 ty's colonies, inhabited by half a million of people ; 
44 many of whom could hardly fupport themfelves at 
“ home ; yet there they live in great fplendor and eafe ; 
44 having fumptuous buildings, rich equipages, Haves and 
44 other attendance. According to the exadelt compu- 
44 tation that has been made on this branch of our trade, 
44 about 430 fail of (hips, with above 5000 fcamen, have 
44 been employ'd in one year to bring over about 75,000 
44 hogfheads of tobacco from Virginia and Maryland ; 
44 the freight of which, at 8 /. per ton (a medium in 
44 times of peace) amounts to 1 50,000 /. llerling ; moll 
44 of which fum center* among our felves, in the pay- 
44 ment of Tailors and tradefmen, who live by ihipping ; 
44 befides about 15 1. per hogfhead cullom houle fees, 
44 cooperage, lighterage, wharfage, porterage, cartage, 
44 warc-houfe rent, brokerage, and other incident charges. 
44 T'is further calculated, that out of the faid 75,000 
44 hogfheads imported, there are exported 46,000 hogs- 
44 head', containing 720 lb per hogfhead, at four pence 
44 per pound on board ; which amounts to 552,000/. 
44 towards fupporting the ballance of trade with foreign 
44 nations. 1 ’ The Tame author a little further obferves, 
44 as another great benefit arifing from this vegetable, 
44 that the produce is laid out in our Britijh manufadures, 
,4 and exported to the Britijh colonies ; which in one 
44 year has amounted to 500,000/. (and would be much 
44 moie, if proper encouragement were given to manu- 
44 fadure it before exportation) therefore it may be jullly 
44 faid, that tobacco is become in few years one of the 
44 the moll valuable branches of trade belonging to Great 
44 Britain." Thus hr Mr. John Lacy> tobacco merchant, 
in his obfenvations on the nature , ufe and trade of tobacco. 
Folio, one flieet, printed Mar. 1. 1733. Befides the ad¬ 
vantage this vegetable is of to trade , a large revenue arifes 

to the crown by cufom-duties on tobacco-I have feen 

feveral accounts of its grofs and net produce, and alfo fe- 
vcral ellimates of what it might further produce, if put 
under a new regulation; but there being fo much differ¬ 
ence in the feveral calculations, that no certain judgment 
can, without much ferutiny and dillindion, be formed 
from them; it may be thought fufficicnt here to ob- 


ferve, that I have feen an account, upon the veracity 
whereof I can depend, by which it appears, the money 
paid on this article of tobacco into his majelty’s exche¬ 
quer in the year 1731, was 175,277/. 8/. 10 d. and 
that a medium for levcn yean palt to that time was 
169,079 /. os. 10 d. 

c D<rmonologie: a difeourfe in three books, Edlnb. cum 
privil. Reg. 4U). 1597. In the preface whereof, king 
James protcfls he aid not publifh this pamphlet for a 
44 fhew of his learning and ingine, but to prealle thereby, 
44 as far as he can, to refolve the doubting harts of ma- 
“ ny, both that fuch aflaults of Sathan are mod certain- 
44 ly pradis’d, and that the inflrumentes thereof merits 
44 molt levercly to be pumfhed; againll the damnable 
44 opinions of two principally in our age ; whereof the 
44 one, called Scot an Englijh man % is not aihamed in pub- 
44 lick print to deny, that there can be fuch a thing as 
44 witchcraft ; fo maimemes the old error of the SaJdu - 
44 ces , in denying of fpirits : the other call'd Wients 2 
44 German phyfician, lets out a publick apology for all 
44 thefe Craf tes folkes; whereby procuring for their im- 
44 punity, he plainly bewrayes himlelf to have been one 
44 of that profeflion. ” Then his majelty lays down the 
method he intends to follow, in fpeaking full, of magic 
and negromancy ; fecondly, of lorcery and witchcraft ; 
lallly, of all kinds of Ipirits and ipedres, that ap¬ 
pears and troubles perfons. His further affirmation of 
magicians raifing fuddenly all dainty diHies ; bringing 
wine out of a wall ; and making men unable for wo¬ 
men ; contains not yet the moll remarkable paflages in 
this crowned author ; for if you would have a mafler- 
picce of his royal fcholarlhip in the myftcries of nature, 
turn to his chapter of the lncubi and Succubi ; there you 
have Rex Platoniau in perfedion. But as many old wo¬ 
mens notions as there are in this trad, Sir Walter Ralegh w’as 
at the pains of finding fomething he could approve in it, 
and generoufly honours its author before all others for the 
fame, as may be feen by the very fiifl quotation he 
makes, in the introdudion to his Hi/iory of the World. 

* Entitled the Counter-blaft to Tobacco , 4to. without 
date. There is alfo extant K. James\ warrant to the lord- 
treafurer Dor Jet , Anno 1604, for laying a good heavy im- 
pofition upon tobacco, that lefs quantity may be brought 
into the realm, and only fufficient for the better fort, 
who will ufe it with moderation for their health: where¬ 
fore he authorifes the faid treafurer to order, that from the 
26th of Oflob. enfuing, the proper officers fhould take, 
of all who import tobacco, the linn of fix (hillings and 
eight Dence upon every pound weight, over and above 
the cultom of two pence per pound, ufually paid hereto- 
fore. Rymer's Fcrdera, Tom. XVI. fol.6ot. 

here 


Digitized by boogie 







Sir WALTER RALEGH. 

here obferve from the firft author among us, who wrote thereof out of his own experience, 
immediately upon his return with the colony aforefaid from Virginia, where he had been em¬ 
ploy’d by Ralegh to furvey the country and deferibe its products; that the favages diftinguifhed 
it by lowing it apart from all other vegetables, and held it of higheft eftimation in all their 
facrifices by fire, water and air, either for thanklgiving to, or pacification of their gods. And as 
by fucking it through pipes of clay, they purged all grofs humours from the head and fto- 
mach, opened all the pores and pafiages of the body, preferving it from obftruCtions, or break ¬ 
ing diem, whereby they notably preferved health and knew not many grievous dilcafes where¬ 
with we in England are often afflicted : So “ we ourfelves, fays he, during the rime we were 
“ there, ufed to fuck it after their manner, as alfo fince our return, and have found many 
« rare and wonderful experiments of its virtues, whereof the relation would require a volume 
“ by it felf, the ufe of which by fo many men and women of great calling, as well as others, 
“ and fome learned phyficians alfo, is fufficient witnefs. ” * 

The learned author of this account, Mr. Thomas llariot , a famous mathematician, of 
whom fomething more will be fpoken hereafter, having further in the faid difeourfe confuted 
the calumnies, which had been raifed of this new difeover’d country, by the idle, ignorant 
and avaritious part of the colony lately returned from it, and given a faithful relation of the 
merchantable commodities, with thofe fit for food or building, and an account of the natures 
of the people, in three parts, exprefies himfelf towards the conclufion of the whole in thi s 
manner. “ Seeing the air there is fo temperate and wholfome \ the foil fo fertile, and yielding 
“ fuch commodities, as I have before-mentioned ; the voyage alfo to and fro fufficiently ex- 
“ perienccd to be performed twice a year with eafe, and at any feafbn and the dealings of' 
“ Sir Waller Ralegh fo liberal in large giving and granting lands there, as is already known, 
“ with many helps and furtherances elfe -, the lead that he hath granted, having been five hun- 
“ dred acres to a man only for the adventure of his perfon : I hope there remains no catife 
** whereby the action /houJd be mifiikcd. ” b 

There are many other publick teftimonies in recommendation of this enterprife, efpecially 
of Ralegh's difereet orders or inftruCtions to thefe firft undertakers, as well as fome complaints 
that his faid directions were not always punctually followed ; and I remember to have met 
with a fcarcc old traCt in the Lambeth library, written by a learned and ingenious author of 
thofe times, wherein, according to his brief and volatile way, skimming over the characters 
of many eminent contemporaries, he mentions Sir Waller Ralegh's political government of Vir¬ 
ginia. c But where to come at thofe particular Jaws or inftruCtions now, I know not, tho’ 
they feem to have been in the poffeflion of Sir Francis Walfingbam (a great encourager of thefe 
plantations.) For 1 find a bundle entitled, matters relating to Sir / Valter Ralegh's voyages, 
mentioned in the inventory of that fecretary’s Ji at e-papers relating to the navy, about this time. J 
But the author, who this year dedicates his Jrijh hiftory to Ralegh , has in general terms, both 
largely commended his proceedings in that dilcovery, and inform’d us of others, who have 
done the like. For having mentioned the ill fuccefs wherewith his firft maiitime adventures 
were attended, as a matter fufficient to have difmay’d a man of common refolution from the 
like attempts for the future j he adds : “ Yet you, more rcfpcCting the good ends whereunto 
“ you levelled your line for the good of your country, did not give over till you had re- 
“ covered a land, tnd had made a plantation of the people cf your own Englifh nation in 
“ Virginia , the firft Englijh colony that was ever planted there ; not a little to the deroga- 
“ tion of the Spaniards glory and impeachment to their vaunts, who, bccaufe, with all cruel 
“ immanity, they fubdued a naked and yielding people, whom they fought for gain, and not 
“ for religion or the plantation of a common-wealth, over whom, to fatisfy their inJatiable 
“ covetoufnefs, they did molt cruelly tyrannize, and dgainft the courfeof all human nature fcorch 
“ and roaft them to death, as by their own hiftories doth appear. Thefe, I fay, do brag and 
“ vaunt, that they only have drawn ftrange nations and unknown people to the obedience of 
“ their kings, to the knowledge of Chriftianity, and to the inriching of their country; and 
“ thereby claim the honour to themfelves alone. But if thefe your actions were well looked 
“ into and with due confideration, it ffiall be found much more honourable in fundry refpcCts 
“ for the advancement of the name of God, the honour of the prince, and the benefit of the 
“ common-wealth. For what can be more plcafant to God, than to gain and reduce, in all 
“ chriftian-like manner, a loft people to the knowledge of the gofpel and a true chriftian 


2 A brief and true report of the new-found land of Vir• 
gtnia,& ( . written by 'Thomas Hariot (erv ant to Sir Walter 
Ralegh, a member of the colony, and there employ’d in 
dilcovering a full twelve-month. Hakluyt, \ ol. 3 . fol 271. 
k Mr. Hariot's report of the new-found land in Virgi¬ 


nia, as before, p. 280. 

c Dr. Gabriel Harveys Pierce'* Supererogation, fcfV. 
4to. 1593. 

d Sir Francis Waljingham % Table-book, MS. 8vo. p. 

44* 

religion, 



xxxiii 


I its cncr,n- 
r.igtnuTtt to 
pLr.rers. 


Digitized by LiOOQie 


XXXIV 


rhe L I F E of 


** religion, tlian which cannot be a more pleafant and fweet lacrifice, and a more acceptable fer- 
“ vice before God ? And what can be more honourable to princes, than to enlarge the bounds 
“ of their kingdoms, without injury, wrong and bloodfhcd, and to frame them from a fa- 
vage life to a civil government, neither of which the Spaniards in their conquefts haveper- 
formed ? And what can be more beneficial to a common-wealth, than to have a nation 
“ and a kingdom to transfer unto, the fuperfluous multitude of fruitlefs and idle people ( here, 
** at home, daily increasing) to travel, conquer, and manure another land, which, by the 
“ due intercourfes to be devifed, may and will yield infinite commodities? And how well 
“ you do deferve every way, in following fo honourable a courfe, not we our felves only can 
** witnefs, but ftrange nations alfo do honour you for the fame ; as doth appear by the epiftlc 
“ of Baffimerus of France to the hiftory of Florida, and by Julius Ccefar a citizen of Rome , 
4 ‘ in his cpillle to his book, intitlcd Columbeados . ” 1 To this we may here add the tefti- 
mony of Camden •, who, fpcaking of this undertaking of Virginia, at the return of the laft 
colony fent thither by Sir IV. Ralegh , fays. He was a man never to be fujfciently commended 
for the great fains he took in difcovering remote countries, and advancing the glory of the Englilh 
navigation. b 

That Bajfmerus, as Hooker calls him, was the learned Marline Baffaniere of Paris, as I 
find elfewherc, with whom Richard Hakluyt , the worthy collcdlor of our naval adventures, be¬ 
ing acquainted, and having procured a very valuable hiftory in manufcript of die firft difcovery 
ol Florida about twenty years before diis time, by Rene Laudonniere and three other French cap¬ 
tains, he fent it over to diat Monfieur Baffamere, who publilhed it from the faid French copy, 
this year c at Paris, and dedicated it as aforclaid to Sir Walter Ralegh, who, as appears above > 
is therein celebrated, for I have not yet feen, tho’ I have been promifed, that original French 
edition. But it was tranflated into Englijh the year following by Richard Hakluyt himfelf, 
A pntion of who alfo dedicates it anew to the fame patron : and indeed we find Ralegh from this time a ve- 
j'ligenTow 3 ™ 1 r y conlidcrable patron of learned and ingenious authors, not only in hiftory and geography, 
men. but antiquities, cbymiftry, poetry, and other polite branches of art and fcience •, fome further in- 

ftances whereof will occafionally arife as we proceed. And even here we may mention fome- 
diing oi his encouragement in painting ; for admiral Coligny having fent over with the afore- 
faid difeoverers of Florida, a very skilful artift from France, to take draughts of whatever he 
found oblervable and worthy of reprefentation in the laid country j which he did, not only 
among the animal and vegetable rarities thereof, but alfo, it feems, from the cuftoms of the 
natives and hiftorical events among the difeoverers themfelves : this painter living afterwards 
in London , at, or before the publication of thofe dicoveries ; was fupported by Ralegh in die 
great expence of publifhing alio his draughts and deferiptions. For Hakluyt , among odier 
reafons for not particularizing the commodities of thofe parts •, the accidents of the Frenchmen ’$ 
government therein ; the caufes of their good and bad fuccefs; with the furprilcs made by 
their enemies, tells Ralegh he does not reckon them up again j “ the rather, becaufe the fame, 
“ with divers other things of chiefeft importance, are lively drawn in colours at your no finall 
“ charges, by the skilful painter James Morgues fometime living in Black-Fryars , Loudon t 
“ whom Monfieur Chaflillion, dien admiral of France, fent thither (to Florida) with Laudo- 
“ mere for that purpofe, which ( painter) was an eye-witnefs of the goodnefs and fertility of 
“ thofe regions, and hath put down in writing many Angularities, which arc not mentioned in 
“ this treatife •, and which he hath fince publilhed together with the portraitures. ” d Hereunto 
we may further add, that there was about this time alfo another book dedicated to Ralegh , in 
praife of mufick, wherein, befides the antiquity and dignity thereof, is declared the fober and 
lawful ufe of the fame in the congregation and church of God. * It was written by an Oxo¬ 
nian dien lately deceafed, who is not named, and publilhed by the univerfity printer, who 
lubfcribing his own name Jofeph Barnes to the faid dedication, has made it pals among our 
auctioneers, and other fuperficial infpectors, for a treatife of the laid printer’s writing. 1 appre¬ 
hend, there was a greater propriety in the publilhcr’s choice of this patron to tliat work, dian 
is now commonly known for 1 have fomewhere met with hints, that Sir Walter Ralegh 
was a great proficient in mufick, either vocal, inftrumenta), or both ; whence we might tc 


a Hooker Epift. dedic. to Sir IV. Ralegh. 
b Hunquam fut ’n laudato Jludio remotas region* detegendi , 
& nanjaUm Angliagloriam trojwrvtndi. Ann. Rep. Eliz 
Anno 1585. 

• So Hakluyt himfelf in the firft edition of his voyages, 
1589. fol. 543. Vet in the preface to his fecond volume 
printed fol. 1599, he lays ’twas in the year 1587, that 
nc caufcd that hitory gf Florida to be publilhed in Franu % 


which muft be a miftake, becaufe Hooker mentions its be¬ 
ing publilhed in his dedication dated the year before. 

d Hakluyt'% dedication to Sir Walter Ralegh of the faid 
hiftory of Florida , by him tranllated and inlertcd among 
his collection of voyages, vol. 3. fol. 301. 

• The praife of mufick, &c. printed in the old Rrglijb 
character, $vo, 1586. 

fomewhat 


Digitized by kjOOQle 






Sir TFAL TE R RALEGH. xxxv 


fomewh.lt induced to conllrue fome lines of Spen fir’s concerning him, hereafter quoted, in the 
literal feme. 

Nor among learned and ingenious men only was Ralegb now in great efteem \ but he 
fiourilhed at this time alfo highly in the queen’s favour, as Camden, where he fpeaks of the 
foregoing colony, has informed us. And about this time it was, her majefty conferred upon 
him lome preferments; but of honour more than profit perhaps to him : for Hooker in the de¬ 
dication aforefaid of his Irijh hiftory, dated the 12th of Ottober this year, fuperferibes It to 
the right worthy and honourable gentleman. Sir IValter Ralegh, Km. Senefibal* of the dutchies Made SentJ- 
of Cornwall and Exeter , and lord-warden of the Jlannaries b in Devon and Cornwall. To thefe ^wifMdE*- 
dignities I prefumc he was then but newly advanced, becaufe the faid hiftorian in the body of **», and 
the dedication begs leave to remember 44 how it hath pleafed God to bring you, fays he, into 0 f 'th<•/««- 
4< the favour of your prince and foveraign ; who, befides her great favour towards you many 
“ ways, hath alfo laid upon you the charge of a government in your own country ; where 
“ you are to command many people by your honourable office of the ftannary, and where 
“ you are both a judge and a chancellor to rule in jullice and to judge in equity. — Be 
** therefore careful to be reported well of for your upright dealings both herein and in all your 
“ other aftions. Be a patron of virtue and an example of true nobility, which hath her 

foundation upon virtue ; for, as the poet faith, Ex virtule ndilitas nafiitur , non ex nobilitate 
44 virtu s : virtus fola mbilitat t non caro nec fanguis. — Your anceftors were men of great no- 
44 bility; beneficial to their princes and country many ways: and, as in nature you are def- 
“ cended from them } fo it hath pleafed God to blefs you with knowledge in learning, with 
*« Jkill of warlike firvice , and experience in maritimal caufis ; and befides hath placed you 
*« among the nobles, and in die good grace and favour of your prince. ” 

How Ralegh ufed this favour, and what ufage it alfo procured him, the fame dedication 
does fomewhat further reveal in thefe words. “ It is well known, that it had been no lefs 
44 eafy for you, than for fuch as have been advanced by kings, to have builded great houfes, 

44 purchafed large circuits, and to have ufed the fruits of princes favours, as moft men in all 
44 former and prefent ages have done ; had you not preferred the general honour and com- 
44 modity of your prince and country before all that is private : whereby you have been rather 
44 a fervant than a commander to your own fortune. And no doubt, the caufe being fo good, 

44 and the attempt fo honourable, but that God will increafe your talent and blefs your do- 
44 ings, and every good man will commend and further the fame. And albeit die more no- 
44 ble enterprifes a man lhall take in hand, the more adverfaries he fhall have to deprave and 
44 hinder the fame; yeti am perfuaded, as no good man fhall have juft caufe, fo there is none 
44 lb much carried with a corrupt mind, nor fo envious of his country’s honour, nor io bent 
44 againft you, that he will derogate the praife and honour due to fo worthy an enterprife. 

44 And that fb much the looner, becaufe you have endured fo many crofles, and have, through 
44 fo many envying} and misfortunes, perfevered in your attempts ; which no doubt fhall, at Envy’d 
44 laft, by you be performed, when it fhall pleafe him, who hath made you an inftrument of 
44 fo worthy a work. ” c 

Thus Hooker hints at the caufe of thefe envyings; but from whom they fhould proceed it 
does not manifeftly appear. The earl of EJfix had now been near a twelve-month abroad, 
under his father-in-law, Leicejler , governor of the Netherlands ; was but nineteen years of 
age when he went over, being his firft engagement in any publick adlion, yet no lefs than a 
general of the horfe; and before that, as himfelf fays, 4 ‘ he had fmall grace, and few friends 
“ at court. ” d So that it muft be now after their return, * that Leicejler fet him up a com- 

f petitor 


* Of the artient office of Senefchal, fee h grand ecu ft u- 
mtr du fay 1 A dm be de Normandie, Jot l' at it 1523* 

an extract thereof concerning this office in a fcarce trail 
reviv’d in Mr. Morgan's P bet nix Britanuicus, vol. I. 4K). 
*73*- 408. . 

k Of the inftitution of the Lord-warden, and his jurif- 
difbon, fee Camdtn and Carew in their accounts of Corn¬ 
wall; alfo Plow den's commentaries, fol. 327. And 
Plant's laws and cuftoms of the ftannaries, folio 17Z5. 
There is in being an old manuscript lift of the officers in 
queen Elizabeth's time and their feet ; in which I find 
that, as officer of thecoynageof tin, and fteward of the 
Januaries in the dutchy of Cornwall, Sir Walter Ralegh's 
ft* was 53 /. 6 /. id. Cotton. Libr. Titus B. III. 

* Hooker's dedication to Sir Walter Ralegh aforefaid. 

. See an Afoloeie of the earle of EJftx againft thofe, 
which fitlfelie and malieiouflic take him to be the only 


hindrance of the peace and quiet of his countric : penn'd 
by himfelf. Anno 159®* To Mr. Anthony Bacon. And 
printed in 4M, >603.. Alfo (from the original MS. 
as pretended ) by the title of the earl of EJfex's vindicati¬ 
on of the war with Spain, isle. in 8vo. 1729. p. 6. 

« On the 8th of December 1385, the earl of Leicejler 
and his train, with an army of about 5000 men, fet out 
from Harwich in 5® fail of ihips to his government of 
the Netherlands, and it was committed as abfolutely to 
him, as it had been to the emperor Charles V. But at 
laft the Hollanders growing jealous of his authority, and 
complaining of certain innovations, factions and treacher¬ 
ous commanders under him, he was recalled, and returned 
to London the 23d of November this following year (foon 
after the corpfe of his much lamented nephew Sir Philip 
Sidney) not without leaving behind a printed vindication 
el himfelf in Dutch, now l'carcc to be found; and link¬ 
ing 


Digitized by 


Goog[< 


XXXVI 


Slander’d. 


In parlia¬ 
ment. 


In a commit- 
tee for the re 
gulation of 
the clergy. 


The fourth 
voyage to 
/ irginia. 


The LIFE of 

petkor againft Ralegh, as we are before informed out of Sir Henry Wotlon. But Leicejlcr , as 
great as his power was, could no more bridle the licentious reflexions of the populace than 
Ralegh ; an inftance whereof we have from fome antient authority it feems, tho’ in a modem 
author, who fpeaking of ** Tarleton , the beft comedian of thefe times in England , tells us, 
“ that when a pleafant play he had made was aXing before her majcfly, he pointed at Sir 
“ Walter Ralegh , and faid. See the knave commands the queen ; for which flie correXed him 
<c with a frown: yet he had the confidence to add, that he was of too much and too intolerable 
“ a power •, and going on with the fame liberty, he refleXed on the over-great power and 
*« riches of the earl of Leicefler ; which was fo univerfally applauded by all who were pre- 
“ fent, that (he thought fit at that time to bear thefe reflcXions with a feeming unconcerneJ- 
“ nefs i but yet was fo offended, that Ihe forbad ‘Tarlcton and all her jefters from coming 
“ near her table, being inwardly difpleafed with this impudent and unreafonable liberty. *' * 
Ralegh feems to have little regarded thefe afperfions, but conftantly attended his publick charge 
and employments, whether in town or country as occafion called him. Accordingly we find 
him the latter end of this year in parliament, where, among other weighty concerns, die 
fate of Mary queen of Scots was determined. There is nothing particular upon record in the 
journals of the houfe of commons of Ralegh's opinion in this matter, nor indeed any de¬ 
bates upon the fentence that had been pronounced againft that queen. For on the 12th of 
November , a petition agreed upon in both houfes was prefented to queen Elizabeth , by the 
fpeaker Puckering, the privy-council, and a body of the commons, joyned with the lord- 
cluncellor Bromley and twenty other temporal lords, for the fpcedy execution of the faid queen 
of Scots , in confideration of the treafonable and rebellious praXices wherewith fhe had been 
proved to endanger this realm and its ruler. The faid petition was immediately printed, b and 
that queen in lefs than three months after executed. * The clerk of the parliament’s place be¬ 
ing fupplied at this time by a kinfman, inexpert in the rules and methods of the houfe *, we 
find nothing more recorded of Ralegh this feflions, which was diffolved on the 23d of 
March , than that he was appointed one of the committee to confer upon the amendment of 
fome things, whercunto the clergy were required to be fworn, and that fome good cour/c 
might be taken to have a learned miniftry *, for the queen had in her fpeech at the clofe 
of the lafl feflions told the bifhopsof fome faults and negligences, “which if you, my lords of 
the clergy, faid fhe, do not amend, I mean to depofe you. ” d 

Now Ralegh , refolving to perfevere in planting his country of Virginia , prepared a new co¬ 
lony of one hundred and fifty men to be fent thither, under the charge of Mr. John White, 
whom he appointed governor, and with him twelve afliftants, to whom he gave a charter, and 
incorporated them by the name of the governor and afliftants of the city of Ralegh in Virginia. 
Their fleet, confifling of three fail, departed from Portfmouth on the 26th of April , 1587, 
and in lefs than three months following arrived fafe at Hatorask, from whence they went to 
the ifle of Roanoak to look for the fifteen men left there by Sir Richard Grenvill the year be¬ 
fore, meaning from thence to pafs to the bay of Cbcfepiock , where they intended to make 
their feat and fort, according to the charge given them, among other direXions, under the 
hand of Sir Walter Ralegh. But they fought their companions in vain, and when they came 
to the north-part of the ifland where governor Lane had built his fort, they found it razed, 
and the ground-rooms of the dwelling-houfcs, which had been alfo ereXed about it, inhabi¬ 
ted by deer, and over-grown with melons, or fuch like fort of fruit, which thofe animals 
brooz’d upon. At Croatoan they were very well received and entertained by the natives, thro* 
the means of Mantco their country-man. Of thefe they learnt, that the Engliffjmen they 
were feeking, had been trcacheroufly fet upon by a party of the favages, who wounded fome of 


ing a modal, reprefenting his own head on one fide, and 
feven unguarded draggling Iheep on the other. The au- 
thor of a brief difeourie of Dr. Ailing feditious drifts, &c. 
410 15 83 . p. 46. endeavours to clear the earl’s condud 
in that government againft the faid dodor ; as E. Cliffe , 
in his bieviate of Holland's deliverance and ingratitude to 
to the crown of England and the houfe of Haffau, 4to. 
1665. p. 55- doe> againft Vunder Sande and Hugo Gro - 
tins i Specially the latter, who infinuates, as if the earl, 
who died within two years following, was poifoned by 
his wife, becauie (he foon after married again. I have 
read, this earl’s efFcds were then feized upon by the crown 
for debt, and heard that an inventory of them is in the 
pofteftion of Sir John Evelyn, Bart. 

-» The chnrader of queen Elizabetbby EdmundBobun, 
Ffq; OH. 1693. p. 353. 

* See the copy of a letter to the earl of Lticcfltr , and 


the parliament’s petitions to queen Elizabeth to put Mary 
queen of Scots to death. London, imprinted by Chrifio- 
fber Barker, the queen’s printer, 4x0. 1 586. 

c The imperfedions wherewith Camden was obliged in 
king James's reign to publifh that part of queen Eliza¬ 
beth's annals, relating to the queen of Scots, have occasio¬ 
ned fome voluminous publications of the memorials to be 
found on both Tides of her charadcr ; on one fide, about 
fixteen trads in Latin , French, &c. chiefly by Roman 
catholicks, were colleded by a late bookiellcr, and pub- 
lifhed by Dr . Samuel Jebb, 2 vols. folio, 1723. And 
on the other, a colledion of original papers and fcarce 
printed pieces ; by James Afiderjon, Lfq; in 4 vols. 410. 

1 7 28 *. 

* Sit Simon D'Eix ts's Journal of parliament', fol. 1 708. 
p. 413 and 328. 


them. 


Digitized by 


Google 






XXXVlt 


Sir WALTER RALEGH. 


them, and drove the reft to fome remote and oblcure parts of the country. On the 
thirteenth of Augujl, their friend Munleo was, according to the commands they had recei¬ 
ved of Sir Walter Ralegh , chriftned in Roanoak , and called lord thereof, and of Dafamongue- 
jeuk, in reward of his faithful fervices. Three days after, the governor’s daughter Elea¬ 
nor, wife of Ananias Dare , one of the aftiftants, was delivered of a daughter in Roanoak , 
and the infant was chriftned there the Sunday following, who, becaufe fhe was the firft Cuo- 
lian or Chriftian born in that country, was baptized by the name, of Virginia. Now hav¬ 
ing re-eftablifhed their intereft and alliance with the natives, as fir as this ftiort interview 
would permit, and delivered their fhips of the provifions for the colony, the planters began 
to confider, they fhould be in want of frefh fupplies \ therefore upon l’ome difference about 
choofing a fador to return for that purpofe into England , they unanimouffy petitioned the 
governor to return himfelf, to which he at laft confcnted, and the fhips with fome few of 
the company arrived in England , not without ftorms, ficknefs, and the death of fcveral of 
them by other like cafualtics, about the latter end of the fame year. 4 
It was but five days after the going forth of this fecond colony, that Mr. Richard Hak¬ 
luyt dedicated his tranflation of the voyages to Florida , before-mentioned, to the right ho¬ 
nourable Sir JValter Ralegh , as he ftiles him, captain of her majefty’s guard, lord-warden of 
the ftannaries, and her highnefs’s lieutenant-general of the county of Cornwall. In this dedi¬ 
cation it will fomewhat appear, that neither the returns, which might have been made by any 
merchantable produdS in Virginia , nor the profits arifing to him from any SpaniJJj prizes, 
which had been taken at fca, were equivalent to the great expcnces he had been at, in fettling 
this plantation; and further, diat he had received no particular or private affiftance in this 
enterprife from the queen, becaufe his hopes therein, and her majefty’s regard thereof, are fo 
handfomely excited by the faid author: but take his own words. “ Thefc four voyages 
u (fays he) I knew not to whom I might better offer than to your felf, for divers juft conft- 
“ derations: firft, for that they were dedicated to you in French : fecondly, becaufe now 
«* four times alfo you have attempted the like upon the felf-fame coaft near adjoining ; 
** thirdly, in that you have pierced as far up into the main, and difeovered no Ids fecrets 
44 in the parts of your abode, than the French did in the places of their inhabiting : laftly, 
“ confidering you are now alfo ready (upon the late return of captain Stafford , and good 
44 news which he brought you of the ihfe arrival of your laft colony in their wiihed haven) 
44 to profecute this action more throughly than ever. And here to fpeak fomewhat of this 
** your enterprise, I affirm, that if the fame may fpeedily and effectually be purfued, it will 
4< prove far more beneficial in divers refjiedh to this our realm, than die world, yea many 
44 of the wifer fort have, hitherto imagined. The particular commodities thereof are well 
4< known to your felf and fome few others, and are faithfully and with great judgment com. 
u mitted to writing, as you are not ignorant, by one of your followers, who remained there 
44 about a fwelve-month with your worfhipful lieutenant Mr. Ralph Lane , in the diligent 
4t fearch of the fecrets of thofe countries. Touching the fpeedy and effectual purfuing oi 
44 your addon, tho’ I wote well it would demand a prince’s purfe to have it diroughly fol- 
44 lowed without lingering: yet I am of opinion, that you fliall draw the fame, before it be 
“ long, to be profitable and gainful, as well to thofe of our nation there remaining, as to the 
44 merchants of England , that fhall trade hereafter thither ; partly by certain fecret commodi- 
44 ties already difeovered by your fervants, and partly by breeding of divers forts of bcafts in 
u thofe large and ample regions, and planting fuch things in that warm climate as will be ft 
* 4 prolper there,, and our realm ftandeth moft in need of: and this I find to have been the 
44 courfe which both the Spaniards and Portugals took, in the beginnings of their dilcovcries 
44 and conquefts. b And, if our men will follow their fteps by your wife directions, I doubt 
44 not, but in due time they fhall reap no lefs benefit. Moreover, there is no other likeli- 


* Seethe fourth voyage to Virginia in 1587. which, 
tranfporttd the fecond colony ; in Hakluyt , vol. 3. fol. 
208, and, at the end of the faid voyage, fol. 287, a lid 
of the men, women and children in the faid colony, 
who remain'd in Virginia this year. Among whom go¬ 
vernor Whitt, and t he pilot Simon Ferdinando are menti¬ 
oned, but erronioufly ; for it appears in the narrative of 
that voyage,’ they both returned. 

* Here this author illuftratcs his addrefs by thefe ex¬ 
amples ; 44 The Spaniards at their firft entrance ( fays he) 
44 into Hifpaniolu , found neither fugar-canes nor ginger 
“ growing there, nor any kind of our cattle ; but hnding 

the place fit for pafture, they fent kine and bulls, and 
“ fundry other profitable beads thither, and tranfported 


4 the plants of fugir-canes, and fet the roots of ginger s 
4 the hides of winch oxen, with the fi;gar and ginger, 
«• are now the chief merchandize of tnat ifland. The 
4 Portugals alfo at thcii firft footing in Madera, as John 

* Barras writes in his firtt Decade, found nothing there 

* but mighty' woods for timber, whereupon they called 
4 the illuiid by that name : howbeir, the dime Leing fa- 
4 vourablc, they inckhed it by their own indullry, with 

* the bed wines and fugars in the world. The like 
4 manner of proceeding they uled in the ides of the 
4 Escorts, by lowing therein great quantiry of vvoad. 
4 So they dealt in St. Plumas under the EquittcSlial , and, 
4 in Brajile , and in fundry’ ocher places. 

a a « hood. 


Giptain of 
the queen's 
guard and 
lieutenant- 
general ot 
ConrixalL 


Digitized by boogie 



• • • 


XXXV111 


The LIFE of 


“ hood, but that her majefly, who hath chriftned and given the name to your Virginia , if 
“ need require, will deal after the manner of honourable god-mothers, which feeing their 
“ goflips not fully able to bring up their children themfelves, are wont to contribute to their 
“ honed education, the rather if they find any towardlinefs or reafonable hopes of goodnefs in 
** them. 

tC And if Elizabeth , queen of Cajlile and Aragon, after her husband Fcrdinando and 
“ fhe had emptied their coffers in fubduing the kingdom of Granada , was neverthelefs fo 
,c zealous of God’s honour, that fhe laid part of her own jewels, which fhe had in great ac- 
“ count, to gage, to furnidi Columbus forth upon his fird voyage, before a foot of land in all 
u the IVeJi-Indies was difeovered ; what may we expeeft of our mod magnificent and gra- 
“ cious prince Elizabeth of England , into whofe lap the Lord has fo plentifully thrown his 
“ treafures? What may we, I fay, hope of her forwardnefs and bounty, in advancing this 
“ your mod honourable enterprife, being far more certain than that of Columbus , at tint time 
“ efpecially, and tending no lefs to the glory of God than that of the Spaniards ? ” 
Then a little further: “ Sundry men entering into thefe difeoveries, propofe unto themfelves 

feveral ends j fome feck authority and places of command j others experience by feeing of 
“ the world ; the mod parr, worldly and tranfitory gain, ar.d that oftentimes by diffior.ed 
“ and unlawful means ; the fewed number, the glory of God, and the faving of the fouls of 
“ the poor and blinded infidels: yet becaufe divers honed and well-difpofed perfons are cn- 
“ tered already into this your bufinefs, and that I know you mean heroaftcr to fend fome 
“ fuch good church-men thither, as may truly fay, with the apodle, to the favages, t cc feck 
‘ c not yours , but you , I conceive great comfort of the fuccefs of this your atftion j hoping, 
** that the Lord, whofe power is wont to be perfected in weaknefs, will bids the feeble foun- 
“ dations of your building: only be you of a valiant courage, and faint not, as the Lord 
“ faid to JoJJjtia , exhorting him to proceed in the conqued of the land of promifc \ «nd re- 
*‘ member, that private men have happily wcilded and waded through as great enterprifes as 
f ‘ this, with leffer means than thofe, which God in his mercy hath bountifully billowed up— 
“ on you, to the fingular good, as I allure my felf, of this our common-wealth, wherein 

“ you live : hereof thue are examples domedical and foreign. 3 -But if the greatnefs of 

“ the main of Virginia , efpecially to the wed, d.ould make you think the fubduing of it a 
“ matter of more difficulty than the conqucd of Ireland (by Strongbcw ;) fird, I anfwer, tine 
lt as the late experience of that skilful pilot, captain John Davis , to the north-wed, towards 
“ which his dilcovcry your felf has thrice contributed with the forwarded, hath /hewed a 
«* great part to be main-fen, where before it was thought main-land. So for my parr, I am 
“ fully perfuaded by Ortelius his late reformation of Calvacan and the gulph of California , 
“ that the land on the back-part of Virginia , extends nothing fo far wed-ward as is put down 
in the maps of thofe parts. Moreover, it is not to be deny’d, that one hundred men will 
<c do more now among the naked and unarmed people in Virginia than one thoufand were 
« able then to do in Ireland , againd that armed and warlike nation in thofe days. I fry fur- 
“ ther, that thefe two lad years experience hath plainly fhewed, that we may fpare ten thou- 

“ fand able men, without any mils..-Seeing therefore we are fo far from want of people, 

“ that retiring daily home out of the Love-countries, they go idle up and down in fwarms 
“ for lack of honed entertainments •, I fee no fitter place to employ Ionic part of the better 
“ fort, than in the inward parts of Virginia , againd fuch dubborn favages as lhall re- 
“ fufe obedience to her majefty. And doubtlefs many of our men will be glad and fain to 
4< accept this condition, when by reading this prefent treadle, they dull underdand the fertili- 
« ty and riches of the regions confining fo near upon yours, the great commodities and 
“ goodnefs whereof you have been contented to fufier to come to light. In the mean feafon, 
“ I humbly commend my felf and diis my trandation to you •, and your felf, with all thofe 
** who have undertaken this enterprife in hand, to the grace and good blcding of the Al- 
“ mighty v which is able to build further, and finilh the good work, which in thefe our days 
“ he hath begun by your mod chridian and charitable endeavour. ” Such were the praifes of 
this difeovery, and exhortations to proceed in it, that were publickly paid to Sir JValter Ralegh 


a As the fame author had before incited queer! Eliza- 
bith , to iitpport this chargeable enterprife, by example ; 
io here he encourages Sir H alter Ralegh to proceed in it 
by the like means, in thefe words, 44 Remember, i pray 
“ you, what you iind in the beginning of the chronicle 
44 of Ireland, newly dedicated unto your felf. Read 
44 you not, that Richard Strongboiv, the decayed earl of 
44 Chtpjioiv, palled over thither in the year 1171; and, 
44 accompanied only with certain private friends, had in 
44 lhort ipace fuch prosperous fuccels, that he opened the 
44 way for king Hetty ll. to the fpeedy Jubje&ioo of all 


41 that warlike ration to this crown of England? Tie 
44 like conqucil of Brafilia, and the annexing thereof to 
44 the kingdom of Portugal , was tirll begun by mean 
44 and private men ; as Don Antonio dr CnJhHio, ambullh- 
44 dor here lor that realm, and by office, keeper of all 
44 the records and monuments of their difeoveries, af- 
44 fured me in this city, Anno 1581. ” TJielc examples, 
as not directly necefiary to the hillory of my fubje^t, 
are thus (ubjoin’d, becaufe they illulliate the arguments 
of my author. 


Digitized by L.00Q le 





XXXIX 


Sir W A LTE R RALEGH. 

at this his felting out the fourth voyage to Virginia, by thofe who wiQi’d it might contribute no 
Ids to the improvement of his fortune, than it did to the advancement of Ids glory. 

But the (hips, in which this fccond colony was tranfported, had not been many days re¬ 
turned into England*, before we find Ralegh's thoughts diverted, fora while, from planting in 
a foreign country, and engaged upon fchemes of difplanting rather thofe powerful enemies 
who were preparing to root themlelves in his own. For the rumour grew It longer every day 
of fuch a mighty fleet threatning us, as if all Spain and Rome were to land upon our little 
illand, and over-run the whole kingdom. The queen and her privy-council therefore no 
longer delay’d all proper means for the defence of the realm \ but out of all her commanders 
by land and fea appointed thofe of moft approved abilities in naval and military affairs, as well 
as of the greateft authority in their refpedtive counties, to hold confultations for the fccurity of 
her perfon, her people, and their poflcflions. And as there were fuch confultations diftiruftly 
held by the moft ancient and experienc’d commanders at fea ; fo we find by the like appoint¬ 
ment a council of war alfo held on the 27th of November this year by others of highcfl re¬ 
pute for their knowledge how to put the forces of the realm in the belt order, to withftand 
any invafion by land. For this purpoie were cholen the lord Grey 1 , Sir Francis Knolles^, nnt ^ cv j- 
Sir Thomas Leighton 0 , Sir Waller Ralegh, d for I recite, as I find them written, Sir John Nor - %var "*' u 
nV, Sir Richard Grcnvill r . Sir Richard Bingham 1 , Sir Roger Williams\ and Ralph Lane E% ; * 

Of their determinations in this important council I (hall here prefent an abftract, from a ina- 
nufeript drawn up perhaps by Sir Walter Ralegh himfclf} the faid draught being annex’d to 
another manufeript now before me, which was apparently of his compofing. k 

They firft number’d up the places moft fufpcflled for the army from Spain, and alfo thofe moft 
convenient for that in Flanders, to land at: then concluded how many of thofe places were to be 
putin defence to binder their landing. And firft they took notice of Milford * which tho* they 
did not l’ufpeft would be preferr’d for the barrennefs of the country, yet in regard to the good- 
nefs of th zhaven, they thought it convenient there fliould be a trained number of two thoufand 
foot and five hundred horfe in readinefs \ and that in want of horfe-mcn, the gentlemen and 
their fervants were to fupply die deficiency. But Plymouth they thought the moft likely place j 
becaufe it was improbable the king of Spain would venture his fleet too far within the fleeve, 
before hehadmafter’d fome good harbour $ of which Plymouth is neareft to Spain , fooneft for¬ 
tified, and moft convenient to be fuccour’d either from Spain or France. Portland they alfo 
thought a tempdng place, having a large harbour and good landing. The Jfle of Wight 
they confiderM as a ftrong retreat, if won, and the country adjoining champion ; where the 
enemy might march his whole army. And why they thought the Downs, Margate , and the 
Thames , fit landing-places, was in regard to the eafinefs of landing - y and being neareft the 
prince of Parma , in whofe forces the king of Spain repofed fpecial cruft. .Then they con- 
fultcd whether tbefc places were to beftrengthned by fortification, or aftembly of the people, or 
loth ; and concluded, that for Plymouth , there fliould be both *, and that the five thoufand 
trained men in Devon and Cornwal, befides the Stannaries, were to be aflembled for Plymouth , 

(landing equal to both counties: of this number, inftcad of mufter-days, chargeable and of little 
efied, two thoufand fliould be aflembled in Plymouth , under the general to be appointed over 
the weflern army, that they might know their leaders, be acquainted with watch and ward, 
and fo inftruded, that on a fudden there might be no confufion *, and this to be half at the 
charge of her majefty, and half on the country, if the country charge furmounted not the 
ordinary trainings. Portland alfo was to be arm’d both by fortification and aflembly ; for the 


• Late deputy of Inland, and now lord-lieutenant of 
the county ot Bucks , knight of the garter, and an excel¬ 
lent foldier, fays Camdi n; at lcail cool in council, tho* 
hot in action. 

b Knight of the garter, treafurcr of the queen’s houfe- 
hold, and privy-councilor, a prudent and learned man, 
trained in military affairs; and perhapj now governor of 
the Jfic of Wight, whereof he writ a Central Survey, tho’ 
it was never printed. 

e Governor of the ljle of Guemfy, well vers’d in mat¬ 
ters of (late, as well as the army ; lent into France after¬ 
wards in 1591, of ipeciai trull, to advife the earl of Ffftx 
in liis a&ions there; and author of Les Loix , ccuflimcs, & 
nfagts de T lfie de Gucrnfc ;, diff erentcs du couflunticr d: Nor¬ 
mandie , d'antiennete cbfervccs tn la dice ljle. A fair written 
copy whereof, in eight fhcets Folio, is in the Hart cyan li¬ 
brary. 

d Lieutenant-general of Cormral, isle, as before. 

* Train'd in the wars of France , general in Frif.and, 
and the tvw countries, now prefidert of Alunfter in be- 
land, and the year following lord-mar dial ol the held in 
England. 


f Vice admiral, I think, in the well, b forc-incnticn’J ; 
and ot uho c valour we lli.iU hear more hereafter. 

£ A Dorfetjhire man, famous in the wars of France, Scot¬ 
land, and the Jfle of Candie ; late prefident of Cznnaug!\ 
and a brave commander in the wars of Intend, where 
he afterwards died governor of Lcinfer. 

h A valiant and experienc’d commander in the French 
and BiNck war-, of whom further mention will be made 
in the courfc of thi> hillory. 

) Late governor of Virginia, ns before observ'd; af- 
terwardi kn.ghtcd, anJ preten d to fume ccniidcrablc poll 
in the navy or the treafurv; a maa able either to give 
count'd in warlike atYairs, or put it in execution; was au¬ 
thor, betides his d:lcouries on Firfmict, of feveral mili¬ 
tary memorials in letters to the lord-treafurer and others; 
particularly ore. on the ufc to be made of Don Antonio 
again!! Sfnin \ another, about encamping of toldiers, and 
inconvenience of quartering them in towns, &e. 

k lint it led, A Difcourie on the prefent Confutation, 
touching the pear: with Spain, and retaining of the Nether¬ 
lands in fccscty and protection. \\ hich manufeript will be 
further fpoken of in 2 more convenient part of this 
>vcrk. 


two 


Digitized by 


Google 


xl 


The LIFE of 

ttoo thoufand fcven hundred trained men in DorfetffArc and IVill/bire were to be aflembled for that 
place *, and two thoufand of them to be exercifed as before, in fome part of WiltffAre , appointed 
lor the IJle of IVigbt, to take Somerfetffjire in, which are two thoufand foot. At Sandwich and 
the Downs by affembly. In Kent and Suffix, the four thoufand five hundred trained men to be af- 
fembled for defence there • and two thoufand of them to be exercifed at Sandwich, as before. 

' The like order to be taken for Norfolk and Suffolk. Their further meaning was, that thefe gar- 
rifons (hould remain but for twenty days, to be throughly train’d, and acquainted with encamp¬ 
ing. Then every fuch two thoufand men in garrifon thus difciplinM, fhould give example to a 
great army of raw men, lo prevent confufion on a fudden. Further, that twenty captains 
fhould be appointed to every fuch two thoufand men j which captains having each of them 
a hundred trained men, fhould receive under them when die army aflembled a hundred more; 
fo a & in effed there would be four thoufand men in order, and under martial difeipline. HalF 
thefe captains were to be chofen by the general of the army, the reft to be from the principal 
gentry of the country •, under whom were foldicrs to be appointed for their lieutenants. And 
the fame order to be obferv’d in all other places of garrifon. Then they confider’d on the 
courffe to betaken for fighting the enemy, if by force he fhould land j and this they agreed mull be 
left to the diferetion ot the general •, only advifed, if they could not prevent his landing and 
marching forward, that the country be driven, fo as no viduals remain to the invaders, and 
that they be kept waking with perpetual alarms ■, but in no wife to venture battle, till divers 
lieutenants were aflembled to make a flrong army, as before fpccified j except upon fpeci.il ad¬ 
vantages. Further, that in thofe provinces where there are many lieutenants, fome one to be 
appointed chief leader, that there be no ftraining of courtefy among one another, and giving 
thereby advantage to the enemy i but that every lieutenant’s authority flial! only extend to the 
command of his own company, as colonel of that reg.mcnt, and be commanded by the lieute- 
nants-gcneral: as in Drjon and Cornwal , there being ten lieutenants •» whereby it flail be 
known who Hull command in either, as need fhall require. Next they confider’d what propor¬ 
tion of men mufl be prepared for this end. Here fuppofing the enemy landed at Plymouth , they 
computed that the fix thoufand armed and furnifhed in Devon and Cornwal , with the afliftar.ee 
of tl.ofe in WiltffAre , Dorfet and Somerfetffjire , would make a fufficicnt army, ftrengthened with, 
the gentlemen, their retinue, and others of the neighbouring counties, to be incorporated, 
tho* not fo cornpkatly armed: and if by refinance, or contrary weather, the enemy pafs over 
Plymouth, and land at Portland ; then the army of the weft fhall repair to them. If the inva- 
fion happen upon Kent, or other part to the weft of the Thames , then the midland-fhircs di¬ 
rected to aflift the weft, may turn to the caft along the coaft. If the army in Flanders land to 
the caft of the Thames , the fame order to be taken with Suffolk, Norfolk , Suffix, and the city 
of London. And becaufe fpecial regard was to be had to her majefty’s perfon, an army fhould 
be provided, and commanded under counties referved for that end, to join the forces of Lon — 
don and others, to be armed out of her majefty’s ftorcs. Further, for the increafe of footmen 
wanting armour, among one fourth of the able unarmed men, eighty fhould be pikes, and 
twenty bill-men, and thofe weapons fpcedily to be provided, they being furnifhed by the realm. 
And for the increafe of pike-men in this fcarcity of armour, that the bill-men be converted in¬ 
to pike men, and that able bill-men unarm’d fhould be levied in their places j becaufe the 
ranks of bill-men in order to battle are always environ’d with pike-men for the bill-men 
ferve fpecially for execution, if the enemy be overthrown : only a few armed bill-men or hal- , 
berdiers referved to guard the ranks wherein the enfigns, drums, (3c. are plac’d. And be¬ 
caufe, on a fudden invafion, ’twill be too late to provide neceflaries j ftore of ordinance, muni¬ 
tion, and all other furniture, to be forthwith provided and fent to the forefaid garrifons. Alfo 
that horfe as well as foot be exercifed in thofe general aflemblies , and that at Plymouth , 

P or if mouth. Sandwich, or other places thought fit to have the like training, the horfe-men of 
the next counties be alio brought together; as at Plymouth , thofe of Devon, Cornwal , and 
Somerfetffjire 5 at Portland, thofe of Dorfet , Wilts, Hampfhire , and Berk fare ; and at Sand¬ 
wich, thofe of Kent , Suffix , and Surrey. And becaufe in diele places for training the infan¬ 
try', there may want forage and conveniences for horfe-men, the lieutenants may chufe the fitteft 
for the cavalry as near the foot as they can. But as they cannot refift the landing in Scotland 
they propos’d fix thoufand foot and two thoufand horfe, whereof one thoufand to be lances, for 
that fide. And if thefe fhall be thought too weak for the army in Flanders when it lands 
there, a good part of the army appointed to guard her majefty may be detach’d to join the 
army in the north, and the army of the weft march up to fupply their charge. They alfo 
confidcr’d the king of Spain's hopes in die papifts and malecontents •, and diat if thofe finall 
regiments were not in readinefs, ’twould be too late to afTemble, both for refilling a foreign 
enemy and withftanding diefc at home in one day * for every man would reft in ;ear of having 

bis 




Digitized by 


Googl 


e 








Sit WALTER RALEGH. xU 

his own houfe fir’d, and his family deftroy’d ; therefore, if they made any ftir, fevere execution 
upon fuch offenders fhould be ufed by martial law. Further, that it fhould be bruited in 
Spain, a vaft army of double or treble the number was ready in the weft, and other coafts of 
England, to embark for Portugal or the Indies ■, the fame opinion being fortify’d by the pre¬ 
paration of fo many fhips making ready in thofe parts by Sir Francis Drake. They alio 
thought, that throughout all the counties of England the proportion among the armed and 
mined as well as unarmed pikes and bills, Ihould be eighty pikes and twenty bills in every 
hundred. And laftly, caution’d the lords of the council to be wary of her majefty’s fhips lying 
at Rocbejlcr. • ' ' . 

Besides this grand fcheme for the fafeguard of the kingdom in general, Ralegh feems t6 
have had fome fpecial regard to feveral particular places. For there has been found among 
the lord Burghlefs papers, a remembrance for the lord-treafurer , touching the requejl of 
Sir IV. R. dated it feems this year: which makes requeft for five pieces of brafs cannon lying 
at Woolwich-, alfo for letters to the marquis • of Whuhejler, lieutenant of Dorfetfhtre, for a. 
hundred men and arms to defend the caftle and ifland of Portland, with a fupply of powder, 
there being but one laft. Further, for removal of the unferviceablc ordnance there to London j 
and that the lord marquis would give order for his faid hundred men, by his commifiion di¬ 
rected to the lieutenant of Portland ^ and he will undertake to col left men of fufficiency, not 
of the trained number. Laftly, for his lordfhip’s good remembrance for the towns of JVey- 
moutb and Melcomb-Regis. From whence my author is not only inclin’d to believe this paper 
was font by Sir IValter Ralegh, but that he was now governor of Portland caftle, and had 
thofe towns under his care. * We may indeed hence believe this paper was written by him and 
that he not only took thofe places, but feveral others, under his confideration, that they might be 
put in the beft ftate of defence : but that he was now governor of Portland caftle, or limited 
to the defence of that place at the time of the invafion, as might be imply’d from my author, 
feems not very confident with his lieutenancy in the weft. 

Bur as much engaged as Ralegh feems at this time to have been for the fafety of the king¬ 
dom, he found forne interval to confidcr alfo upon means for the relief of his colony: for after 
governor White return’d, and had deliver’d him his letters, with other advercifements concerning 
his late voyage, and the ftate of the planters in Virginia , Ralegh immediately appointed a pinnace 
to be lent thither, with all fuch provifions as he apprehended they might want j and alfo wrote 
letters to them, promifing that he would prepare a'good fupply of fhipping and men, with all 
other neceflaries, to be with them the fummer following. This pinnace and fleet he accord¬ 
ingly prepared at Biddeford In-the weft of England, under the command of Sir Richard Gren~ ^f a ^_ 
vill-, and all things -being now ready, they waked only for- a fair wind. In the mean time, Virginia. 
the alarm fo increas’d throughout all England , of that vaft and formidable armament made by 
dre king of Spam, under the fanftion of the pope’s Crufado , for the invafion and conqueft of 
the whole ifland ; that moft of the fhips of war then in any readinefs, receiv’d orders from the 
ftate to attend in their harbours for the defence of their own country: and Sir Richard Grenvill 
was perfonally commanded not to depart out of Cornwal. Governor White nevcrthelefs labour’d 
fo cameftly for the relief of the colony, that he obtain’d two fmall pinnaces, call’d the Brave 
and the Roe, wherein fifteen planters, and all convenient provifions for thofe who winter’d in 
the country, were tranfported} but the names of the captains who commanded thofe veflels are 
not remember’d. On the nd of April 1588, they put over the bar at Biddeford , and the fame 
night came to anchor at the ifte of Lundy > but die company, minding more to make a gainful 
voyage than a fafe one, run in chafe of prizes ; till at laft one of them was met with by a couple 
6f ftrong men of war of Rochelle , about fifty leagues to the north-eaft of Madera ; where, after 
a bloody fight, the Evglijh were beaten, boarded and rifled. But it is obfervable, the French 
men were fo immoderate in poffdfing themfelves of their fpoil, that, by over-loading the boats 
wkh the freight of the Englifh fhips, they funk what they were too eager to fhare ; fo the 
Vice, which led them to conqueft, being it felf unconquer’d, they loft by their greedinefs what 
they had won by their ftrength. In this maimed, ranfack’d and ragged condition, the faid 
Ihip return’d to England in a month’s timej find about three weeks after returned the other, 
having perhaps tafted of the fame fare ; at leaft without performing die intended voyage j. to 
the diftrefs of the planters abroad, and difpleafure of their patron at home. b 

In the mean time the king of France fent queen Elizabeth a mefiage, alluring her, that 
the tempeft, which had been gathering in Spain for three years, would certainly break very 
fpeedily upon her kingdom j therefore advifed her to make the beft preparation flie could for 

* See Stijpt'i sfoi»ls of the church, tool. 3. fol. 45a. - h Hakluyt'* voyages, ift edit. fol. 1589. p. 7713 

b b Ift 


1 


Digitized by LiOOQ le 



The LIFE of 

its defence. Nor did the king of Spain keep it now any longer a fecrct, having about tfye 
fame time, that ‘is, in the month of May this year, publifh’d at Lisbon an ample and oftenta- 
tious account 1 of this Invincible Armada, as the Spaniards themfelves had call’d it-, wherein 
the fquadrons are diftinguifh’d according to the feveral provinces •, the names of the fhips, 
their burden, and their commanders ; with the number of their foldiers, mariners, and other afio- 
ciates and adventurers ; their (lores, and all other neceflaries, likewife fpecified : whence it ap¬ 
pears the whole fleet confided of a hundred and thirty, or, according to Sir Waller Ralegh *> 
and Hugo Grotius, c a hundred and forty fail ; fome few tendqs, or others, joining them by 
the way, not being perhaps in the Spanijh lift reckon’d: carrying, by the generality of ac¬ 
counts, above twenty-fix hundred pieces of brafs and iron ordnance ; d near nineteen thoufand 
foldiers; between eight and nine thoufand lailors i bcfidcs officers, priefts, galley-flaves, fer- 
vants, and other attendants } amounting in all to about thirty thoufand perfons ; or, accord, 
ing to the confeffion of Don Diego Piementelli i one of their own commanders, who was dri¬ 
ven into Zealand , the whole fleet, army, i£c. were no lefs than thirty-two thoufand men; 
and coft the king of Spain 30000 ducats every day. e The general of this mighty navy was the 
duke of Medina Sidonia, knight of the golden fleece j and John Marlines de Ricalde was chief 
admiral. In Flanders the prince of Parma was alfo making great preparations to join this 
Armada j had gather’d up an army confiding of. more than a hundred, fome fay two hun¬ 
dred companies of foot, and four thoufand horfe j and was very bu fy in making rafts, ferry¬ 
boats, floating bridges, portcullices, gabions, and what not ? Nor were they idle in England 
for how well the directions of the council of war aforefaid were put in execution, and how far 
Ralegh may be prefum’d to have been engag’d among the moft indefatigable in this fervice, is 
to be infer’d from the words of that author, who fays, “ In a very fhort time the whole king- 
** dom and every corner were fpeedily furnifh’d with armed people on horftback and on foot j 
4t and thofc continually trained, exercifed, and put into bands in fuch warlike manner, as in 
“ no age ever was before in this realm.” And a little furdicr, “ Tliat all concur’d in one 
“ mind, to be in readinefs to ferve for the realm and fome one country was able to make 
“ a fufficient army of twenty thoufand men fit to fight, and fifteen thoufand of them well 
“ arm’d and wcapon’d : and in fome countries the number of forty thoufand able men: tliat 
“ the maritime countries from Cor nival all along fouthward to Kent, and from dience call ward 
“ to Lincolnjhire , were fo furnilh’d with foldiers, both of themfelves, and with refort from 
“ their next (hires, as there was no place to be doubted for landing of any foreign forces, but 
* * there were within forty-eight hours to come to the place above twenty thoufand fighting men 
“ on horfeback and on foot, with all manner of ammunition, provifion, and carriages, un- 
“ der die principal nobles of the countries, and captains of die greateft knowledge.” f We 
further learn from the fame author and others, that befides thefe armies for the maritime coun¬ 
tries, the city of London exercifed before the queen ten thoufand men, and had feveral thoufiinda 
more in readinefs •, that there were alfo two great armies raifed, whereof one was encamp’d at 
Tilbury in EJfex , between the city and the mouth of the Thames , confiding of twenty-two 
thoufand foot and a thoufand horfe, under the command of the earl of Leicejler. The queen 
review’d this camp feveral times, din’d, made orations in it, and lodged in the borders 
of it. 6 The other army, confiding of thirty-four thoufand foot and two thoufand horfe. 


* It i* entitled. La FcliciJJima Armada que el Rey Felipe 
nttrjiro Jen 1 or mar.dojuntar en el Puerto de la ctudad de LiJboa 
in el Reyno de Portugal 5 en el Anno de Mil e quinientos y oebenta 
y echo. Hecha far Pedro de Pos Salas. It was tranflated 
into Englijb the lame year by Daniel Archdeacon, under 
Che title of A Dijcourfe of that Armada which the king of 
Spain cexufcd to he ajjcmhled in the haven of Lifbon in the 
kingdom y~PortUgai, in the year 88, againfl England ; the 
which began to go out of the haven the 2()th and 30 th of 
May. Sec an abftract of this pamphlet in Hakluyt (out of 
Van Me ter an) vol. ». fol. 592. Alfo in the Triumphs of 
Najfau, tranflated fiom a ranch book hereafter mention’d, 
fol. 1613, from page 50 to 63. Alfo in Speed 1 % Chronicles, 
fol. 1198. And Mr . Strype\ Annals of the ebuseb. tom. 3. 
fol. 1728. Appen. n«. 51, l$c. 

h In his brief account of the Spanijh invaflon hereafter 
following. 

« Annul li f Hijl.de Rebus Belgicis. Amft. I2mo. 1648. 
p.171. But one of Mr. Lediard's lilts in his Naval Expe¬ 
ditions, now publilhing, folio 2c 2. raifes them to 145. 
the author of a letter lent out of England to Don Bernar¬ 
ds Mendoza, ambaflador in France for the king of Spain, 
4to. 1580, lays, p. 17, their number was 150. Alfo 
Van Meter an, the Dutch hiflorian’s relation of this ihvafion, 
in Hakluyt, vol. I. fol. 593, agrees in that number; but 
a little further reckons them at 134. And Stow or Howe's 
Abridgment him. advances the Spanijh fleet to 15 8 Clips. 


But the accounts above, efpecially of the Spaniards them- 
ielves at the very time, leem molt credible; for in the 
examination of one of the Spanijh prifoners, named 
EmanuelFremofa, on the 1 2th of September this year, I lind 
he confcfs’d, that they were, at their coming" forth from 
Spain , 135 fail. Thus in a fcarce trad, entitled. Certain, 
Advertijements out of Ireland, concerning the lofles and 
diftrefl’es happen’d to the Spanijh navy, 4to. 1588, in the 
Harleyan library, B. H. 

* Sir Walter Ralegh has made fome good obfervations 
upon this plenty of Spanijh guns, which there will be oc- 
cafion hereafter more particularly to recite. 

* So Emanuel Van Meter an , in Haklw.t , as before, pro¬ 
bably out of the depofltion of Don Diego Piementelh, be lore 
the chief lords of the counfaile of the Haghe in Holland * 
printed in Eng/i/h at London, 4to. 1588. 

f The copy of a letter font out of England to Don Berr 
tsar din Mendoza, tffc. 4to. 1588. p. 6. 

* The moll particular defci lption perhaps of thefe prepa T 
rations ag linft the Spanijh invalion, especially of the queer/* 
entertainment at the royal camp of Tilbury , is to be found 
in a poem of blank verte, entitled, Elizahctha Triumphant: 
containing the damned practices which the devililh popes 
of Rome have ufed ever fince her firft coming to the crown. 
Dedicated CO Dr. Julius Cerfar, tfc, by James AJkt, 4:0. 
15^8. 

commanded 


Digitized by kiOOQle 








Sir WAL TER RALEGH. xliii 

Commanded by the lord Hunfion, was planted about the queen's own perfon. 1 And it in¬ 
creas’d daily by the feveral bands and troops, which were led from the inland countries by fuch 
noblemen, knights, and gentlemen, as had no lpecial charge or government in their refpedtive 
counties •» while the young earl of Effex, and others among them, entertain'd her majefty 
with tiltings and tourneys, barriers, mock-fights, and fuch-like arts, as in publick are wont 
to render men popular. b But the lieutenants of the maritime counties were otherwife employ'd. 

And as the earl of Pembroke had been afliduous in levying the forces of Wilts and Somerfe/Jhire , 

and the earl of Both thole of Droonjhire ; lo Ralegh leems to have been no lefs forward and in- AfWoIes 

duftrious in raifiog and reducing thofe of Cornwal to the bell order and difeipline for the fer : f 0 r C «^agamft 

vice of his country, againfl the common enemy notwithftunding what lie might have done, the spawjb 

as has been laid before, at Portland: and, like the reft of the lords-lieutenant, to have ienc 

up conftantly his certificates to the queen of the numbers that were afiemblcd ; the pollure they 

were in ; the provifions they were fupply’d with *, or thofe whereof they flood in need. 

.But notwithftanding all thofe land-preparations, which moved forne fpeculative warriors at 
court to think a f«a-force unneceflary, as if the Englifh Were fiifficient to cut the Spaniards to 
pieces in landing, or when they were afiiore, and run away with their fliips at the fame time 7 
Sir Walter Ralegh knew better what another kingdom might do, even againft England , by the .» 
advantage of a fleet, if we have none r no man having To folidly refolv’d as himfclf that 
Weighty queftion, whether England , without the help of a fleet , is able to debar an enemy from 
landing ? He knew that Ihips, without putting themfelves out of breath, will eafily out-run 
the foldicrs that coalt them: he knew that a fleet after fun-fet may be fecn at the Lizardi 
and by the next morning at Portland , which an army Ihould be fix days in marching •, and 
confecjuently, that the failor may chufe his landing-place, where there are no foldicrs that can 
oppofe him; and even fuppofing an invader fhould offer to land near where our greateft army 
was ready to receive him, Ralegb doubted, when the choice of all our train’d-bands and of 
officers were drawn together, as at Tilbury , to attend the perfon of the queen, and to defend 
the city of London , whether thofe that Ihould remain to guard the coafl could be of any fuch 
force as to encounter an army like that which the prince of Parma Ihould have landed in 
England . e . ...... 

By fea therefore all poffible defence was likewife made, and the chief command was very 
properly confer’d on the lord-admiral Howard , who, hearing the Invincible Armada was upon 
the point of hoifling fail, lent Sir Francis Drake, who was conftituted his vice-admiral, with 
fifty-fix Ihips ivell appointed, to the weftem parts, and liimfelf arrived there on the 23d of May 
with others, which made up the fleet about a hundred fail; while the lord Henry Seymer was 
lent to lie with forty Englifh and Dutch fliips (according to Camden) between Dover and Calais 
to intercept the prince of Parma. 4 The Invincible Armada loofed anchor from Lijlon four 
days before j but met with fuch ftorms, ficknels, and other difafters, that the lord-admiral put 
forth towards Spain, in hopes of furprifing them in their diflrefs ■, till more maturely confider- 
ing they might pafs by undifeover’d, he return’d to Plymouth, and fuller'd his men to relieve 


■ But fix years before this occafion of raifing the military 
Brength of England , according to Sir Walter Ralegh, there 
were, upon a general view and muiler, found jn the king, 
dom, of all men fit to bear arms, eleven hundred and feventy- 
two thou land. See his Sc led fjfays and observations 8vo. 
1650, in bis difeourfe of the invention of (hipping, p. 27. 

* The earl of Ejfex was now matter of the queen’s 
horfe. See the letter to Mendoza aforefaid, p. 25. In 
which Sir Henry Wotton agrees, who makes this further 
observation: 44 This fervicc at Tilbury camp was, in my 
“ judgment (fays he) the very' poilonof all tluit followed 5 
u for there, while the queen ilood in fome doubt of the 
" §Pam/b invafion, fhe made him in field, commander of 
11 % cavalry, as be was before in court, and much graced 
“ him openly in view of the fiddlers and people, even 
u above my lord of Leicefter: the truth is, from thence- 
“ forth be fed too fnft." Parallel between Robert Deve- 
r fux earl of Ejfex, and Ccorge Viliiers duke of Buck¬ 
ingham. 

• Vid. Hiftory of the World , lib. 5. cap. I. feft. 9. 

„ * As for Ihe naval force in thefe times, William Harrifon, 
11 his Wftoricaldtfeription of England (with whom Sir Wal¬ 
ter Ralegb in his EJfays aforefaid agrees) tells us, the 
queen had then in the 24th year of her reign (fix years 
before this invafion) already built and fkrnifhed four or 
five and twenty great (hips (whofe names they both recite) 
and three notable gallies; with the fight whereof, and the 
jeft °f the navy royal, fays Harrifon , it is incredible to 
foe how greatly her grace ii delighted. They further fay. 


there were then 135 (hips more, whofe burden exceeded 
500 ton ; befides-many more of letter burden, hoys, life. 
Harrifon alfo obferves, her grace doth yearly build one 
(hip or other to the better defence of her homier* from 
the enemy. See him in the 2d vol. of Holingfhed, fol. 201. 

Michael Cajhlnau , who was ambaffinior here many' 
years in thofe times, and who has given the moil noble 
and ingenuous charader of the faid queen, in his memoirs, 
of any foreigner I have met with that knew her, comes 
fo near that author, where he obferves fhe built a noble 
fleet, the bulwark of her kingdom, as to affirm, fhe 
launches a large man of war every fecond year. But by 
that long lip of the Englift? navy (which this year oppofed 
the Spanijo Armada) among the MSS. in the Ro^al li¬ 
brary 14. B. XILI. lately printed by Mr. Lediard % in 
his Naval Expeditions , fol. 238. it appears there were 
very few (hips of that burden before-mention’d among 
them. For tho’ that lift railcs their number beyond aS 
other accounts, to 107 fail (manifeflly omitting feme 
which were there, ana probably admitting feveral which 
were not;) yet there are not above fix fhips among them 
mention’d to be of 500 ton, and not above feven of 
greater burden. Therefore, as Mr Lediard well obferves, 
tho’ our feveral fquadrons might exceed thofe of the Spa¬ 
niard* in number of (hipsyet by comparing the tonnage 
of the feveral fliips in both fleets, and the number of men 
employ’d in them, the fuperiority of the enemy’s fleet will 
appear very' confiderable ; more than double in men, and. 
very near double in burden. 


them. 


Digitized by LjOOQIC 





xiiv ?he Life of 

themfclves 6n IhOfe. The queen had received flich affurance they were fo difabled from coming 
this year by that ftorm, that (he made fccretary Walfingham fend for four of her firft-rate fhips 
to be brought home to Chatham. But their return was prevented by the intelligence which 
captain Thomas Fleming brought into the harbour on the 19th of July, that he had difcovcr’d 
the enemy approaching from the Lizard-Point in Cornwal. The captains and commanders were 
then it feems at bowls upon the Hoe at Plymouth j * and the tradition goes, dut Drake would 
heeds fee the game up ; but was foon prevail’d on to go and play out the rubbers with the Spa¬ 
niards. All hands were now at work to warp out the (hips, which, with the admirable in- 
duftry of the feamen, was very fpeedily, for the difficulty thereof, perform’d, the wind blow¬ 
ing ftiffly into the haven from the fouth-weft. The lord-admiral, with the few he could then 
■get ready, lay all night in the road. Next day about fifty or thrcefcore more join’d him, and 
at noon they ken’d the Spanijh fleet; fome with lofty turrets and decks rear’d one above ano¬ 
ther ; and others rowed along with two or three hundred oars apiece j all advancing with their 
Spanijh gravity, the wind being abated, in a femicircular order; and extended, as Camden ob- 
ferves, feven miles from end to end. The Englijh fuffered them all to pafs by, fo got the ad¬ 
vantage of the wind, when they began to chafe them in the rear : nor did the Spaniards offer 
to land at Plymouth, their commiflion being to join the prince of Parma, and fail dirc&ly to 
London. The next day, which was the 21ft of July , the lord-admiral lent out a pinnace call’d 
the Defiance, and begun the fight. This, I take it, was near the Eddijlcne j for there we have 
account of the firft conflict, and of the firft Spanijh fhip that was taken or funk. b Then die 
lord-admiral in the Ark-Royal, Drake in the Revenge , with Hankins, Frobijher, and others, 
having thunder'd thick upon the enemy for two hours together, withdrew, forty of their fhips 
not being (fays Camden ) yet come up. In this engagement the Spaniards, by endeavouring to 
circle in and fhelter one of their difabled galleons, fhc had her foremaft broken, and was 
left behind, which Drake took the next day, with Don Pedro de Valdez and other nobles in 
her, befides fifty-five thoufand ducats, which were {har’d among his failors. Immediately af¬ 
ter, another of their greateft fhips was fet on fire, with all the people in her, and yet the powder 
efcaped. But how the lord-admiral, all the firft night, follow’d the Spanijh lantern, inftead 
of Drakds , into their fleet, while Drake at the fame time was making another miftaken pur- 
fuit; and how the Ark Royal followed the Spanijh fleet alfo the lecond night, fo far, almoft 
alone, that it was the afternoon following before the Englijh fleet overtook her, with other 
particulars •, I leave to the more ample accounts of this engagement, that I may attend the 
motions of Sir Walter Ralegh j who, from being at firft the neareft, now growing impatient at 
being the moft remote from the enemy, appears to have committed his charge by land to pro¬ 
per officers, or detach’d part thereof to inarch up nearer the Spaniards , and with a gallant 
joins the company of nobles and gentlemen, in fevcral fhips, to have join’d the Englijh fleet ; that is to 

wnhsf fu* on c ^ e 2 3d of July, when the Spanijh fleet was advanced over-againft Portland ; where, 

<iron of vo- this whole day being one continued engagement from morning till night, it proved the moft ge- 

lumeers. neral and bloody fight of any between them in the Britijh channel: and here, after the taking of 

a great Venetian fhip, and others of Jeffer bulk, the Spaniards were driven from all intention of 
aflaulting the Englijh , till they had join’d the prince of Parma 5 for during this fight, or, “ in 
«* the mean while” (according to the words of my author, from Van Meter an, one of the earlieft, 
moft copious and accurate journalifts of this expedition) *• the Englijh navy increas’d ; where- 
unto, out of all havens of the realm, reforted fhips and men *, for they all with one accord 
came flocking thither (to Portland) as unto a fet field where immortal fame and glory was 
•« to be attain’d, and faithful fervicc to be perform’d unto their prince and country.” 6 In 
which number having mention’d the earls of Oxford, Northumberland, and Cumberland, he alfo 
names Sir Walter Ralegh among the foremoft of near twenty other knights and gentlemen, 
whereby the Englijh fhips were augmented to a hundred fail; and doubtlefs by fome of thofe 
Camden mention’d to have been left behind in Plymouth-Sound, with which Ralegh very probably 
advanced. d Thefe, ever afundcr, and always in motion, were on every fide ufeful to annoy the 
enemy j now prefcnting a broad-fide, and fheering off •, then tacking about and difeharging the 
other i in fuch fort, that Sir Henry Wotten call’d it a Morrice-dance upon the waters, • while 


a Pbatmx Britannicus, 4tO. 1731. p. 346. 

See the lift of the Spanijh ihips loll in the Narrow 
Seas in July and Auguft 1588, at the end of Certain Ad- 
wertifinunts out of Inland , concerning the Ioffes and di- 
ftjefs of c Spanijh navy, 4to. 1588. before-mention’d. 

• See the miraculous viftory of the Englijh fleet over 
the Spanijh Armada ; in Hakluyt, vol. 1. fol. 1599# 
p. 599, from the ifth book of Emanuel Van Miteradl 
huloiy of the Lrw-ceuutrit/, 


d What further perfuades me to believe Ralegh enter’d 
the fleet at this place and time is, my having met with a 
certain foreign hiilory, hereafter mention’cl, which had 
been his own beok, and wherein he has with his own 
hand corrected other paffages relating to himfelf; but has 
let this of his joining the fleet, as above, pafs uncon- 
tradifted. 

• His parallel between Robert earl of EJJex and Ceorgt 
dttke of Buckingham, be fore-mention'd. 


the 


Digitized by 


Google 












xlv 


Sir WALTER RALEGH. 


the flugg'ifli and unweildy caftles of the enemy clufter’d and hamper’d together, could only offer 
offence from one difabled fide; and that, when they had done, flew over the Englijh mens 
heads. Camden tells us, that in this day’s engagement, the lord-admiral was advifed by fome 
•of his officers, with more heat than diferetion, to grapple with and board the enemy. Now 
Ralegh , having made fome excellent animadverfions upon this very circumftance, goes nigh to 
prove out of his own words, that he was not only in this day’s engagement; but that the coun- 
fel he might thence appear to have given, did greatly contibute to the fuccefs of it. He has 
(hewn how well he knew, that in fuch cafe the advantage of weapons would be likelieft to 
carry it, whereof the enemy was provided with far the greateft number •, alfo, that in fuch 
clofe fight, how liable the lefler fhips were to be crufh’d by the greater; that thefe by their 
very height muft have further advantage over thofe that endeavour’d to board them from be¬ 
low •, and laftly, in thefe of more bulk and breadth being alfo more firm and more fteady, thofe 
who could beft keep their feet would probably be beft able to ufe their hands. But that I may 
not impede too much the courfe of a&ion, his further arguments upon this head are fubjoyn’d 
more clofcly in his own words. » Next day the Spaniards were glad to lie by, and the Eng. 
lijh no lefs pleafed with the ceflation, that they might take the opportunity of fending to fhore 
for a recruit of ammunidon ; and this, being a circumftance taken notice of alfo by Ralegh 
himfelf, further confirms his having been now among them. b The 25th of July , the Englijh 
had another lharp battel with the Spanijh admiral, and three great galleafles at die ifle of Wight, 
in which Camden mentions the taking of a Portuguefe galleon, and that from this time the galleaf- 
fes durft not venture upon any new engagement, but clofing themfelves up again in a rundel as 
they call’d it, made the beft of their way to tell the prince of Parma how they had been ferved. 
The Englijh fleet followed and kept playing upon their rear all the next day, having determined 
to forbear any dofer engagement till they came to the Britijb Frith , or {freights of Calais , 
where the lord Seymer expeded their arrival. “ But fo far was this Invincible Armada from 
«* •• alarming the fea-coafts, fays Camden, that the Englijh gentry of the younger fort enter’d 
« themfelves volunteers, and, leaving their friends and families, did with incredible cheerfulnefs 
«* hire fhips at their own charge, and in pure love to their country joyn’d the grand fleet in vaft 
u numbers. ” And here Camden names thofe nobles and fome of thofe gentlemen, with Ralegh 
among them, which compofed the fquadron before-mentioned, as if it enter’d but now from 
Dover, or fome of thofe ports j not that he confines their entrance to this day, otherwife than 
naming them under it, or any other way fuggefts, they did not joyn the grand fleet three days 
before •, but feems, by remembering them in this place, to have believed, they were mod con- 
fpicuous or in greateft number at this time, unlefs he poftpon’d the mention of them to a day, 
that was leaft throng’d with circumftances of a&ion. Indeed, that this noble fquadron of vo- 


* 44 Certainly he, that will happily perform a fight at 
fea, mull be skilful in making choice of veflels to 
“ fight in: he muft believe, that there is more belonging 
“ to a good man of war upon the waters than great da- 
“ ring; and mull know, that there is a great deal of 
44 diftertnce between fighting loofe or at large, and grap- 
44 piing. The guns of a flow (hip pierce as well, and 
44 make as great holes, as thofe in a fwirt. To clap 
“ ihips together without confideration, belongs rather to 
14 a mad-man than to a man of war; for by fuch igno- 
44 rant bravery was Peter Strojfie loll at the Azores , w hen 
44 he fought againfl the marquis of Sanfia Cruz, In 
44 like fort had the lord Chat Us Howard , admiral of 
“ England, been loft in 1588, if he had not been better 
44 advifed, than a great many malignant fools were, 
44 that round fault with his demeanour. The Spaniards 
44 had an army aboard them, and he had none ; they 

•• had more (hips than he had, and of higher building and 
44 charging; fo that, had he entangled himfelf with thofe 
44 great and powerful veflels, he had greatly endangered 
44 this kingdom of England. For twenty men upon the 
44 defence are equal to a hundred that board and enter ; 
44 whereas then, contrariwife, the Spaniards had a hun- 
44 died for twenty of ours to defend themfelves withal. 
“ But our admiral knew his advantage, and held it; 
44 which had he not done, he had not been worthy to have 
M held his head. Here to fpcak in general of fea-fights 
(contiuues he, tho’ I think his obfervation may have re- 
fpe& to fome further events in this particular fight, where¬ 
fore’tis here alfo added) 44 I fay, that a fleet of twenty 
44 fhips, all good failots and good fhips, have the ad- 
44 vantage on the open fea of a hundred as good (hips, 
44 but cf flower failing. For if the fleet of a hundred 
44 fail keep themfelves together in a grofs fquadron, the 
44 twenty fhips upon any angle (hall force them to 
• 4 give ground and to fall back upon their own next 
44 fellows; of which fo many as entangle arc made 


44 unferviceable or loft. Force them they may eafny ; 
44 becaufe twenty (hips, which give themfelves foupe, 
44 after they have given one broad-iide of artillery by 
44 clapping into the wind and flaying, may gi\e 
44 them the other, and fo the twenty fhips batter 
44 them in pieces with a perpetual volley, whereas thofe 
« 4 that fight in a troop have no room to turn, and can 
44 always ufe but one and the fame beaten fide. If the 
<4 fleet of a hundred fail give themfelves any diflance, 
44 then fhall the lefler fleet prevail, either againfl thole 
44 that are arrear and hindermoft, or againfl thofe that, 
44 by advantage of over-failing their fellows, keep the 
“ wind : and, if upon a lee fhore, the fhips next the 
“ wind will be conftrained to fall back inrot heir own fqua- 
«• dron j then it is all to nothing, that the whole fleet 
44 mull luffer (hip-wreck, or render it ft:If. That fuch 
“ advantage may be taken upon a fleet of unequal fpeed, 
11 it hath been well enough conceived in old time, as by 
44 that oration of Herrnoerates in Thucydid.s , which he 
44 made to the Syramfans when the Athenians invaded 
44 them, it may be eaiily obfei ved. Hijlcry 0/the World, 
Book 5. chap. 1. fetf. 6. 

k Speaking of the fuperfluity of great ordnance in the 
royal navy ; lie obferves, that 44 many times there is no 
44 proportion of (hot and powder allowed, rateably to that 
44 quantity of great ordnance, ai was ieen in the fea bat- 
44 tel, fays he, with the Spaniards in the year 1588, when 
44 it fo nearly concerned the defence and prefervation of 
44 the kingdom. So as then many of thofe great guns, 
44 wanting powder and (hot, flood but as cyphers and 
44 fcare-crovvs, not unlike to the Eajierling hulks who 
44 were wont to plant great red port-holes in their broad- 
44 Tides where they carried r.o ordnance at all. M See 
Sir Walter Ralegh's obfenvations on the royal naiy and 
fea-fermite, inferibed to Henry, prince of Wales, 8vo. 
1650. p. 26. 

c c Junteers 


Digitized by knOOQle 






xlvi 


The LIFE , of 


luntecrs was united to the queen’s navy, when fuch valiant fervices were perform’d ngair.ft the 
Spaniards in the great fight before Calais , another writer alfo, greatly to their commendition, 
agrees ; but neither is he fo expreflive as to fatisfy us it was the firft appearance they made* 
and that they were not before at Portland. For, having mentioned the earls of Cn inlet land, 
Northumberland , and other gentlemen of diftin&ion, who without any charge or know lege of 
the queen, joyn’d the fleet before Calais, and ventur’d their lives in the faid engagement -, he goes 
on to obferve, how earneft all ranks and degrees were •, by infiancingalfo, “ that the carl of 
44 Oxford, one Of the moll ancient nobles in this land, went to fea and lerved the queen among 
thr^een’s ° f ** them* as did Robert Cecil , lord Dudley and Sir JValter Ralegh , a gentleman of the queen’s 
rrtvy U cham- “ privy-chamber, fays he, and in his company a great number of young gentlemen, among 
“ er - 44 whom were IVilliam Cecil, Edward Darcie, and Arthur Gorge, ” 1 the fame perfons men¬ 

tioned with others by Camden, and alfo in larger number by the Dutch hillorian above quoted, 
three days before. 44 With the recital of whom, I only Ihew you (continues my lull author, 
44 the letter-writer) how far we have been deceived to think, that we fliould have had a party 
“ here for us, when, as you behold, both by land and fea, all forts of men were fo ready, at their 
44 own charges, without either commandment or entertainment, to adventure alfo their lives in de- 
44 fence of the queen and the realm.” b From hence it appears, this fquadron mud have alfo been 
at the final overthrow of the Spanijh Armada , which on the 27th of July in the evening anchor’d 
before Calais , intending to hold on for Dunkirk , in expectation of the prince of Parma, who 
was always preparing but never ready, and, the Englijh following, anchor’d alfo within cover¬ 
ing fhot of them. Here the lord Seymer joyn’d the Englijh-, and then the lord-admiral's fleet 
was increafed to a hundred and forty fail, fays Camden j wherein he both exaflly agrees with the 
augmentation thereof at Portland by thefe volunteers, as we have it from the Dutch hillorian there 
quoted ; and alfo excludes all intermediate addition, of Ihips at leall, by the number himfelf has 
before given us of the lord Seymer *s fquadron. Next day the Englijh refolv’d, according to 
the queen’s directions, upon the llratagem of the fire-lhips to burn or difperfe the SpaniJIj navy ; 
and the fame was put in practice at or foon after midnight, fo lucctfsfully, that the enemy, 
cutting their cables with the utmoll horror and precipitancy, were, fome fcatter’dby die wind, 
fome fell foul of each other, and others Itruck upon the fands ; the Englijh chafing and thun¬ 
dering upon them Irom all quarters: then was a great galleafs taken by captain PrcJlon, its 
commander Moncada flain, and a booty of near as much gold fell to the conquerors as was 
taken in another before-mentioned. c On the 29th of July the Spaniards ranged themfelves into 
At the final the bell order they could within fight of Graveling j, hither the Englijh fleet alio purfued them, 
th e'/triZit/e ar| d here the Spaniards received their Jail fatal adieu, by inceflant and numberlels damages 
Armada. from the Englijh cannon the greatell part of the day, till their Galleons, GalleaJJcs, Gallies, 
Ureas and Zabras were fo miferably flutter'd, having their hulls pierced through and through, 
their oars and rudders cut away, their tackling all rent, and their malls broken, that fome 
were deferted as unferviceable, fome funk with the crew that was in them, and others retir¬ 
ing upon the neighbouring coalls were feized and plundered by the inhabitants: while thofe, 
that had the ability left them, moll prudently employ’d it in running away. The Englijh Hill 
followed them into die northern feas, even beyond the latitude of fifty-feven degrees, and, 
leaving them pall all thoughts of the prince of Parma, return’d on the 4th of Attgujl | 
when the violent llorms that arofe refumed their caufe, and compleated their victory: for, 
by the tempells, Ihipwrecks, ficknefs and famine in their dangerous paflage homewards, they 
fultuined greater lofles than even all they had met with throughout the narrow feas. For the 
particulars of thofe lofles we lhall refer to the diftinCl and more copious narratives of diis inva- 
fion, d and clofe this account with the fummary thereof, which was foon after published to the 

world 


a Copy of a letter fent out of England to Don Bern, 
hhndoza, p. 28. 

k Ibidem. 

c 44 It was affirmed by men of great judgment in Ca - 
44 lan, that never was feen by any man living fuch a 
44 battery ; fo great for number, fo furious, and of fo long 
14 continuance, as the Englijh made againil the Spanijh ; 
44 Calais law the Spanijh navy firft driven from their an- 
44 chors with fire ; they faw the greatefb galleafs of the Spa- 
<* mjh , whereof was commander that worthy nobleman 
44 Moncada, fpoil’d, and himfelf flain in it by the Englijh : 
44 Calais faw the next day, that the Englijh fought and 
44 beat the Armada from eight a dock in the morning 
44 till lour in the afternoon without ceaflng : Calais faw 
44 the Spanijh hoift up all their fails and fly as fait as the 
44 wind could drive, and the Englrjh ptirfuc them : Yet 
44 Calais faw a fufficient navy of England left before 
44 Dunkirk, able to mafter all the (hipping that the duke 


44 of Parma had provided. " Thus in a fenree old traft 
in the Harley an library, B H. called, A Pack cfSpanifi.' lyes, 
firft printed in Spain , tranflated, and now ripped up, 
unfolded and condemn’d, 4to. i;88. p. 6. 

<1 At the end of an old pamphet before quoted, called. 
Certain Advert ifemtnts out of Inland , concerning tlie lofles 
and diftrefles of the Spanijh navy, there h one list of f.freen 
Sfanijh (hips, which pcriflied, or were taken by the Eng¬ 
lijh in July and, Augujl in the narrow leas; and a net fur 
lift of feventeen more, funk, burnt and taken on the 
coafts of Ireland in September ; fo tint both !olP.*s weir 
thirty-two fhips, in which were alfo deftroy’d and taken 
10185 men, whereof one thoufand were detain’d priso¬ 
ners in England and Zealand ; further adding, there were 
multitudes befides flain, funk, or ftarved, who were not 
accounted for. lnfomuch, as Van Meteran in Hakluyt 
more diftinttly computes, with whom, 1 obferve, moll of 
our hiftorians agree, there returned not home thovc fifty- 

three 


Digitized by 


Google_ 




xlvii 


Sir W A L TER RALEGH. 

world by Sir Walter Ralegh himfelf, * where giving the honour of the victory to the courage 
and conduit of the lord-admiral Howard , he fays, that ‘ c notwithftanding the victories they 
“ pretended to have obtained, it was foon manifefted to .all nations, how the navy, which 
“ they had termed invincible , confiding of a hundred and forty fail, was by thirty of the 
“ queen’s fhips of war, and a few merchant men, beaten and fhuffled together, even from the 
“ Lizard point in Cornwall to Portland , where they flume fully left Don Pedro de Valdez 
“ with his mighty fhip •, from Portland to Calais , where they loft Hugo de Moncada , 

4t with the gallies of which he was captain •, and from Calais , <driven with fquibs from their 
i‘ anchors, were chafed out of the fight of England round about Scotland and Ireland •, where, 
for the fympathy of their barbarous religion, hoping to find fmcour and aflifhnce, a great 
“ part of them were crufh’d againft the rocks j and thofe other who landed ( being very 
“ many in number) were notwithfhnding broken, (lain, and take n •, and fo fent from vil- 
“ lage to village, coupled in halters, to be fhipped into England > where her majefty, of her 
,** princely and invincible dilpofition, difdaining to put them to death, and fcorning either to 
“ retain or entertain them, they were all fent back again to their own country, to witnefs 
“ and recount the worthy atchievements of their invincible nvey. ” 

The fervices of Sir Walter Ralegh againft-this invafion, his diligence in regulating the forces 
of the land, and his intereft in ftrengthning thofe of the fea j the charges he was at, and the 
dangers he voluntarily incurr’d, however undiftinguifh’d more than is above exprefs’d by our 
common hiftorians, and thofe few inaccurate accounts thereof, which are defeended to us •, 

•were yet received with fuch approbation by the queen, that flie feems, as fome rccompence for 
them, to have this year made a confiderable augmentation to his patent of wines; as if he had, Aucmrma.i- 
befides the grant before-mentioned, another now alfo beftowed upon him for tonnage and poun- 
dageupon thofe liquors, b except it is the fame patent with the former, only renewed this year, or 
wrong dated in the author who mentions it. Be it as itlhould, this patent feems to have been one 
jof the mod beneficial favours which Ralegh ever received of the queen, anil might perhaps ex¬ 
ceed in profit the penfion which fhe fettled on the lord-admiral himfelf for his condud and 
courage in the laid overthrow. This benefit Ralegh enjoy’d as long as fhe liv’d; tho’, to¬ 
wards the clofe of her reign, the number of fuch-Iike grants to others being very much in- 
creafed, they were inveighed againft in parliament as grievous and burdenfomc monopolies, by 
thofe efpeciaJly, who had not the merit or intereft to procure any for themfelves. Sir Robert 
Naunton tells us,.in his conclufion of Ralegh’s character, with relation to the grants he thus 
obtain’d ", “ That tho* he gained much at the court, yet he took it not out of the exche- 
quer, or merely out of the queen’s purfe, but by his wit, and the help of the prerogative: 

11 for the queen was never profufe in delivering out her treafures •, but paid many, and molt 
“ of her fervants, partin money and the reft with grace. ” c We meet with another office, 
which Ralegh himfelf erected, no lefs praife-worthy than this was profitable to him. For 
one writer, in the fhort account he gives of him, having fpoken of the divifion he made of his 
time, in allowing five hours to fieep, four to reading, two for difcourle, and the reft to bufi- 
nels and other neceflaries, and having hinted at the diverfity of his corrcfpondencies, intelli¬ 
gence and the like, fays, that “ in the capacity of .an agency for all forts of perfons, he fet up 
“ a kind of office of addrefs. ” And further, “ that confidering the difpatch of fuch variety of Hfc of 
‘‘ engagements in the former part of his life, one muft be much to feek how a man of fo ' 

three fail, leaving alfo behind the greater and better part 
of their men ; and, as they all conclude, There nvas not 
a famous cr worthy family in nil Spain , nvhich in this ex¬ 
pedition lofl not a (on, a brother, or a kinfman. 

Among the Engljh , there were not in the whole 
eight or nine days engagement above one hundred loft, 
and among them only one captain, named Cock by Cam¬ 
den i Fuller , in his worthies of Devon, laments mightily, 
that he cannot recover his chriftian name; but perhaps 
Hakluyt, vol. 3. fol. 771, might have helped him "to it » 
however, the Cottonian MS. quoted by Mr. Lediard, 

,/oI. 256. puts the matter further in doubt, by calling 
4 ^ dltam Cope, and his pinnace the Delight ; which 

William Cope is more likely to be William Cox, who aid 
command fuch a veflel of fifty tun, called the Delight, 
in the faid fleet, according to the lilt, which this inge¬ 
nious gentleman himlelf has exhibited ; unlefs Camden's 
C«k is thv> Cox , and fo his name may be William ; tho’ 
it will then differ from the perfon offer’d out of Hakluyt, 
who is named ADaham. But, as the perfon of this 
chhfcian name is there only mentioned in a former expe¬ 
dition, tho* his firname agrees bell with the perfon who 
w** loft in this, it is kit to the reader’s judgment, whe¬ 


ther he will prefer this Abraham Cock , or that William 
Cox, to the honourable memory that captain Cock in 
CamJtn deferves for dying in defence of his country. 

* In his Report of the truth ot the fight about the iflcs 
of the Azures, &c. hereafter more particularly mention¬ 
ed, reprinted in Hakluyt , Tom. 2. fol. 169. Here I 
cannot but wonder, how the induflrious Mr. 67 npe was 
led to fay in his Annals , vol. 3. fol. 530. that tins brief 
relation above^quoted of the Sf atrjh invafion was penn’d 
by Sir Francis Drake, of whole writing I never law any 
thing in print or MS. but fome letters ; tho’ he quotes 
even the very page in Hakluyt, whence he takes it, as i 
do ; and where the faid Report, in which that relation is 
included, is exprefly faid to be penn’d by the honourable 
Sir Walter Ralegh. 

b In Sir Robt) t Cecir s lill of the patentees and their 
patents, which he produced in the houle of commons, 
Anno 1601, Sir Walter Ralegh's for the ronnage and 
poundage of wines is mentioned to bear date, 3C °‘» Re- 
ginev. Sec Heyavood Townjhenef ii hlflotical collections of 
the four lad parliaments of queen Elnuibsth, fol. ibtfo. 
p, 244. 

c Fragrnenta Regalia, p. 29. 


c ‘ many 


Digitized by boogie 






The LIFE of 

“ many a&ions fhould write any thing, and one of fo many writings fhould do any thing. ” » By 
another little hint, that has been elfewhere preferved, we may conceive this office did chiefly refpect 
a more liberal intercourfe, a nobler mutuality of advertifement, than would perhaps admit of all 
forts of perfons \ and fuch as advanced rather to the improvement of men themfclves, than their 
means. But this fuggeftion is drawn only from comparing it with the general tendency of thole 
other fchemes, among which I once faw it mentioned, in a letter written by an ingenious perlbn 
of great note for his writings to a nobleman, who had the greateft correfpondence with fuch 
perfons of any in his time \ recommending “ that long dried fountain of communication, 
“ which Montaigne firft propos’d, Sir Walter Ralegh put in practice, and Mr. Hart lib endea- 
** voured to revive. ” k This is all that occurs to me of this office of addrefs : but whatever 
ufeful means of this nature, for advancing the knowledge or intereft of mankind, was inflituted 
by Ralegh , ’twas probably in fome lefs adtive part of his life, than at this prefent junfture. 

For Don Antonio , king of Portugal , who had been expell’d from his dominions by king 
Philip , and was now in London , foon after the fignal overthrow of the Armada aforefaid, 
took this opportunity to renew his motion to quten^lizabeth for her affiftance towards his rc- 
ftoration, which he propounded to the lord-treafurer in a letter full of liberal offers, written in 
the Portuguefe language, all with his own hand. £ The queen not only confented to the en- 
terprife, as thinking it more convenient to return the late vifit of the Spaniards in their own 
country, than fuffer them to repeat it here, but lent fix of her men of war, and disburfed three- 
fcore thoufand pounds towards defraying the charges thereof. This encouragement, and the 
late provocation, fo fpirited up the warlike men of the kingdom, and Ralegh among the reft to 
become volunteers therein, that they augmented the number of the laid Ihips with a hundred 
and twenty fail more, and mann’d them with fourteen or fifteen thoufand foldiers and failors 
at their own further expence, committing the charge by fea to Sir Francis Drake, and that by 
land to Sir John Norris , who were probably the molt confiderable contributors thereto. 

But firft Ralegh took care for the relief of his plantation in Virginia , which that he might 
more effedtually fecure than could be expected from his own fingle affiftance, efpecially after the 
many heavy disburfments he had made, and the great difappointment the colony mult doubtlefc 
have received by miffing of the laft fupplies he fent them, through the Ioffes, which his agents 
too ralhly brought thereon *, he made an affignment to divers gentlemen and merchants of 
London , for continuing the plantation of this new difcover*d country with Englijh men. And 
this was now no lefs advifedly done with regard to himfelf, than affectionately with refpeCt to 
die people employ’d therein: whom, tho’ he generoufly aflifted with his advice and intereft 


* See Obfervations on the featefmen and favourites of 
England fence the reformation . By David Lloyd, M. A. 
October 1665. p. 489. 

k This letter, written by John Evelyn, Efq; about forty 
years pail, in a little black hand as I remember, to Henry 
earl of Clarendon, I faw among the remains of that earl’s 
moil numerous and expenfive collections, about eleven 
years fince, at which time i made the extract above out of 
it. And, as 1 have met with the fsoje&s of thofe other 
perfons mentioned in that letter with Sir Walter Ralegh, 
for this commodious interchange and accomplifhment of human 
refearches ; the recital of theirs may probably refleCt a 
further light into the nature of his; and poflibly quicken 
the publick fpiiit of fome times or other for bringing to 
perfection the important and extenfive benefits, which are 
fo many ways to be apprehended from fuch a commodious 
and delirablc intercourfe. Montaigne's project (or his fa¬ 
ther’s) was for having an office of enquiry in feveral towns, 
for every body to regrfler what they were in fearch or 
want of, with their terms, ’tis fuppos’d, for obtaining it. 
11 Car a tous coups , fays he, il y a des conditions qui s'en - 
“ trecherchent ; tsf pour ne s'entr entendre, leuffent Its hom- 
“ met en extreme neceffite." There are, fays he, ever- 
“ more conditions, which are hunting after one another; 
“ and for want of hearing one another’s occafions, leave 
“ men in very great neceflity. ” Then giving an in- 
ftance of “ thofe two excellent fcholars, Lilius Giraldus in 
44 Italy, and Sebafeian Cajlalio in Germany, who died fo 
44 poor they had fcarce bread to cat, he believes thou- 
44 fands would have retained or relieved them, had they 
“ known their wants. For the world is not fo general- 
44 ly corrupted, but that I knew a man (continues he) 
who would heartily wi(h the eilate his anceflors had 
44 left him, might be employ'd in fecuring rare and rc- 
44 markable perfons of any kind, from thofe misfbr- 
41 tunes, w hich fometimes perfecutc them to the laft ex- 
44 tremity. ” See his Effays, lib. 1. cap. 34. The 
other notice of this molt ufeful feheme ( fince I have not 
at prefent Mr. Hartlib's own account) I (hall here offer 
in Sir William Petty's ingenious reprefentation of it, direct¬ 


ed many years fince to the faid laft projector himfelf. 
« 4 We muft recommend, fays he, an offee of addrefs, 
44 according to the projection of Mr. Harthb , that pain- 
44 ful and great inltrument of this defign; whereby the 
“ wants and defires of all may be made known to all. 

44 Where men may know what is already done , in the 

44 bufinefs of learning ; what is at prefent in doing, and 

44 what is intended to be done ; to the end, that by fuch a 

44 general communication of defigns and mutual affulance 
44 the wits and endeavours of the world may no longer 
44 be as fo many fcattered coals, which, for want of union, 
“ are foon quenched ; whereas being bur laid together , 
44 they would have yielded a comfortable light and heat. 
44 For, methinks, the prefent condition of men is like a 
44 field, where, a battel having been lately fought, we fee 
44 many legs, arms and organs of ienfe, lying here and 
44 there, which, for want of conjunction, and a foul to quic- 
44 ken and enliven them, are fit for nothing but to feed 
44 the ravens and infeCl the air: fo we lee many wits 
44 and ingenuities difperfed up and down the world, where- 
44 of fome are now labouring to do what is already done ; 
44 and puzzling themfelves to re iwi'ent what is already 
44 invented: others we fee quite Buck fall in difficulties 
44 for want of a few directions, which lome other man, 
44 might he be met withal, both could and would mod 
44 eafily give him. Again, one man wants a fmall fum 
44 of money to carry on fome defign that requires it; and 
44 there is perhaps another, who has twice as much ready 
44 to bellow upon the fame defign; but thefe two, having 
44 no means ever to hear the one of the other, the good 
44 work, intended and defired by both parties does ut- 
44 terly perifh and come to nothing. But this we pafs 
44 over /lightly, tho’ very fundamental to our bufinefs; 
44 becaufe the mafter builder thereof himfelf has done it 
44 fo folidly . ** This in a Pamphlet, entitled, The advice 
of W. P. to Mr. Hartlib, for the advancement of fome par¬ 
ticular farts of learning , 4to. 1648. p. I, 2. 

« See a tranfiation of Don Antonio's letter to the lord- 
treafurer, dated Oflober 23. 1588. in Sfnpe's Annals, 
Tom. 3. fol. 536. 


in 


Digitized by LiOOQlC 








xlix 


Sir WALTER RALEGH. 

in fome future profecutions of this undertaking ; yet thefe proving improfperous, through the 
oblique courfes they took at firft fetting out upon this new foundation, like that in which they 
lately fail’d, it was twenty years from this time a , before even a whole company could make a 
more fuccefsful and advanced progrefs in this fettlcment, than Sir Walter Ralegh of himfelf 
alone had done i it having coft him, as we are aflur’d by one who Ihould beft know, no left 
than 40000/. b The particulars of that aflignment we may gather from an “ indenture !I!s 
“ made the 7th of March , 31 Eliz. between Sir Walter Ralegh of' Colitcn in Devonshire , as he ™ 

“ is therein diftinguifhed, chief governor of Virginia , and 'Thomas Smith with other merchants P. !snruion 
“ of London, and adventurers to Virginia, and John While and other gentlemen i reciting, 

“ that Sir Waller Ralegh ( by her majefty’s letters patents before-mentioned) had granted* on 
“ the feventh of January 1587, to John While and the reft, free liberty to carry into Virgi- 
»* nia, and inhabit there, fuch of her majefty’s fubjedts as ftiould willingly accompany them. 

« And that the faid Thomas Smith and others the faid adventurers, purpofing to be made 
“ free of the corporation and company, late conftituted by Sir Walter in the city of Ralegh , intend- city of Rolt^b 
“ edto be built in Virginia , had adventured divers fums of money, merchandizes, /hipping, 

«« victual, and other commodities, to Virginia : wherefore Sir Walter Ralegh, by this indenture, 

“ grants to the faid Thomas Smith and others, and to the faid John White and the reft, their 
“ feveral heirs and afligns, free trade and traflick for all manner of merchandize to and 
t‘ from Virginia, or any other part of America, where the faid Sir Walter, his heirs or af- 
“ figns, did, or might claim any intereft, title or privilege ; free from all rents, cuftoms 
** and other charges, except the fifth part of the oare of gold and filver, which he referves to 
“ himfelf and his heirs. And farther, the faid Sir Walter Ralegh, as well for and in cfpe- 
«« cial regard and zeal of planting the chriftian religion, in and among the faid barbarous j I; . ^ 0 „ nty 
“ and heathen countries, and for the advancement and preferment of the fame, and the com- fortWptopt- 
“ mon utility and profit of the inhabitants therein, as alfo for the encouragement of the (aid ad- 01 u <t 
“ venturers and other aftiftants in Virginia, does freely and liberally give them the fum of one ~ 

« hundred pounds. ” c 

As for the expedition before-mentioned, which was fet out under Drake and Norris, about 
five weeks after the faid aflignment, that is on the 14th of April 1589, in which Don Auto - Accompanies 
mo was by Ralegh, among the reft, accompanied to Portugal, we need not here be circum- 
ftantial thereon } efpecially as to theadlion at the Groine, the overthrow of the Spaniards at expediti- 
Puente de Burgos, the taking of Ptniche, with the caftle of Cafcais, the aflault of Lisbon, and 01U 
the burning of Vigo-, feeing our hiftorians have not diftinguifhed what part Ralegh had therein: in 
which perhaps they feem not fo grateful to himashe was to his aflbeiates; d but particularly in not 
mentioning him at the taking of that great number of eafterling hulks and other fhips laden with 
Spanijk goods, provifions and ammunition, for a new invafion of England, which from the 2d of 
June fome or other of the adventurers (none are named) continued to bring into the Englijh fleer, 
then lying in the road of Cafcais, for fix days together. e This fleet of ours was but thinly 
mann’d at firft, and having loft fomethoufands by ficknefs and intemperance with the new 
wines of thofe countries hands could not be fpared to bring home much above a quarter of 
thofe veffcls and their lading, that were thus taken : for Sir Roger Williams, who was a co* 
lonel in the land-fervice of this expedition, has faid in a letter of his, ftill extant, “ It is well 
<c known, we had above two hundred fail of all forts, of which we could not carry with us 
t( above threefcore for the want of men. ” Hence arofe at their return into England , a little 
contention between Williams and Ralegh ; for Ralegh having taken fome of thele prizes, Jill- hu coivctt 
Hams placed in one of them his lieutenant with fome of his foldiers, “without which, lays Wtl- 
liams, it could not have been carried into England: ” wherefore he would have laid claim, j t g ’ 
feems, both to the fhip and its cargo ; ‘‘ this voyage, as he goes on, having coft him a thou- 


* Sec a pamphlet, call’d, Kova Britannia : or the fruits 
of planting in Virginia, 4to. 1609. and further of this 
country in HaMtty/'s Virginia richly valued, &c. printed 
the fame year. Alfo a true declaration of the ftate of the 
colony in Virginia , by the council of Virginia , 410. 1610. 
Smith'* defcrijxkm of Virginia, Oxford , 4to. 1612. And 
the new life of Virginia , declaring the former fuccefs and 
prefent clhte of that plantation, 410. the fame year. Laws 
-or the colony of Virginia , .yto. the fame year. Account of 
the nuflacre in Virginia , about 1622. Bullock's delcription 
of Virginia , 4to. 1649. Edward Williams's tracts, cal¬ 
led, Virgo Triumphant, fcfc. with the benefit of lilk-works 
there, between the years 1650 and 1658. Nath. Sbrtg- 
relation of Virginia , ts'e. 1669. The Dutch ufur- 
pations in Virginia in Edward Cliffe* Brev, ot Holland's 
ddnerance by, and ingratitude to the crown of England y &c. 


4to. 1665. p. 40, tsfc And fome of thefe, or their extras 
in Purchas , Dr. Harris , and Dr. Helen's Colmographv. 

b See a brief relation of Sir Walter Ralegh's troubles, 
&V. p. 10. a fcarce pamphlet, of further u:c in this work. 

« See this alignment from Sir Whiter Ralegh to divers 
gentlemen and merchants of London , for continuing the 
action of inhabiting and planting our people in Vininia , 
more at large in the hrll edition ot HuUuyt's voyages, lol. 
1589. p. 81c. 

d See Ralegh' s Obfcrvruions on tl.e Portugal Voyage. 
Hifloty of the Wa ld, Book 5. chap. 1. fee. 9. 

e Sir Anthony W'.ngfcltfs true Uifcoaric ot the Portugal 
Voyage, CSc. in Hakluyt , vol. 2. fol. 149. Alfo the La¬ 
tin trad, entitled, Ephexuris expedition's Norreiii iff 
Draki in Luiitaniam, 4to. 1589. 

d d fand 


Digitized by 


Google 





1 


The L I F E of 

“ (and pounds,” as it did feveral other of the adventurers no doubt. But his claim not being 
thought reafonable, the earl of Bath, lieutenant of Dcxor.Jlire, difeharged his men from that 
veffel at Dartmouth. Williams, at this, growing very turbulent, and his clamours reaching 
the queen’s ear, procured her difpleafure againft him, which occafion’d his faid letter to three 
of the privy-council \ whence this intelligence is ex traded. From this letter we farther col¬ 
led, the atchievements of the Englijh in this voyage fo well fatisfy’d the queen, in the difable- 
ment of the enemy, efpecially as to their naval powers, that fhe honour’d the commanders or 
Honour’d chief adventurers therein, and Sir Walter Ralegh among the reft, with a golden chain •, for 

drain? Sir Roger prefum’d, the earl of EJJcx (his great friend, as appears in the hiftorics of this 

expedition) with the reft who were in the adion, would teftify, “ That I deferve a chain as 
“ well as my fellows,” fays he.® As for thecoarfe expreffion which follows, of “ Ralegh' s be- 
“ lying his hulk, as he had done the ark of Noah, the beft fhip that ever was,” tho’ it may 
betray fome impolitenefs of manners and impetuofity of difpofition in Sir Roger's civil ca¬ 
pacity ^ yet in the field, and againft an enemy, thofe rougher qualities might invigorate his 
courage and experience, and iliuftrate the military charader of the man. 

In the latter end of June this year, and fome weeks before this difpute, the EngliJJj fleet re¬ 
turn’d home j but Ralegh appears firfl to have touch’d upon die coart of Ireland, probably to 
make a fhort vifit to his feigniory there, and fee fome of his acquaintance among the new fet- 
tlements in the province of Munjler. We may be pretty well convinc’d that Ralegh was in 
Ireland this year, from his own writings •, b and that it was upon his return from a long voyage, 
out of fome verfes hereafter following in Spenfer the poet. For here we may obferve, that 
while Ralegh was a commander in the Irijh wars, under the lord Grey, as we have before re¬ 
lated, this Edmund Spenfer, then famous for thofe Paf orals he had newly publifhed, going 
over fccretary to that nobleman, had frequent opportunities, by his ingenuous converfation, fo 
to make his learning and other accomplifhments known, as engag’d the friendfliip of our Wor¬ 
th v fo fubftantially towards him, that none of the great men in queen Elizabeth’s court, after 
the death of Sir Philip Sidney , was fo great a patron to that extraordinary genius as Sir Wal¬ 
ter Ralegh. Indeed the queen her felf, in regard that Spenfer employ’d his time fo commenda- 
bly in Ireland, as afterwards more publickly appear’d, in the excellent Political View he made of 
that kingdom, gave him a confiderable tra<ft of land out of earl DefmondJ s capacious forfeitures, 
amounting, at the loweft computation diat has been made, to three thoufand acres of ground, 
ly ing in the county of Cork * the prefervation and improvement whereof engaged Spenfer to 
fettle there and a pleafant feat he had, at Kilcolman near the river Mulla , which ran through 
his grounds, and which he has fo beautifully deferib’d in fome of his poems. Here it was in 
Vifns Sfen/er this retirement that Ralegh now paid him a vifit, the circumftances whereof Spenfer himfelf has 
e moll agreeably celebrated in that poem, which, about two years after diis time, he dedicated 

To the right worthy and noble knight Sir Walter Ralegh, &c. In this dedication he has thefe 


* Copy of Sir Roger Williams's letter to the lord-trea- 
fnrer, the lord admiral, anti Mr. fecretary Walfingkam, 
dated 'July 24. 1589. a MS. in the Harleyan library. 
This copy is made on the outlklc leaf of the original letter 
which pieferves the direction, probably in Sir Roger s ow n 
hand, a molt wretched one, which might occaiion the 
tranicript; and, probably, his own leal; no coat of arms, 
hut a motto ; alio the ancient manner of fealing, by a 
paper band. I'ndcrthe letter there is a note, in the fame 
hand that transcrib'd it, confirming this expedition, fet 
lerth at the charges of Norris, Drake, Ralegh, Williams , 
with other gentlemen, and the luccefs of it, according to 
the particulars above-men:ion’d, and the publick hiltories 
of this time : concluding, M They return'd with great 
44 victory and honour to their country ; but not without 
44 heart-burnings and jcaloufics among themielves; with 
44 the queen's dilplealure againlt fome, and Sir Roger 
44 among the rell, occasion'd by fome complaint made 
“ againlt him, in relation to one of thofe hulks, which 
44 it is probable he plunder'd of more than fell to his 
44 Jhare.” There is alfo another note, containing a cha¬ 
racter ot Sir Roger Williams, out of Camden ; from whom, 
and Sir Roger* own writings, I (hall only obferve, he was 
boin in Wales \ but whetner bred at Oxford , doubtful; 
being taken by the young earl ot Pembroke tor his page, and 
then went to ierve under the prince of Conde in Germany ; 
but, having (pent all his crowns before that prince march'd 
to France , was forced to return homeward. At Brabant 
he was engaged by Julian Romero to ferve in the Spanijb 
army, before there was any diipute to his knowledge be¬ 
tween the crowns of Spain and England, Afterwards he 
did good iervice under Norris in FrieJJand, Anno 1581, 
where he fought a Spanijb captain in Tingle duel; which 
ended in a fociable drinking-bout. In 1586, he boldly 


forced the enemy’s camp as far as the prince of Parma's 
own tent before Vtnlo , and was that year knighted. He 
behav'd himlclf alfo bravely at Diepe in France 1591; but 
at Noyon loll many Englijh lives through his rafhnels. He 
died 1595, and, as Camden obferves, having obtained 
great knowledge in the arts of war, he might perhaps be 
allowed not inferior to the bell foldiers in that age, could 
he have put bounds to his courage, which ran quite away 
with his condudt and diferction. Howev er, as he goes 
on, for a man of no learning or education, and merely by 
dint of experience to write luch a clear and judicious hillory 
of the Low-country wars as he has done, is admir'd at ; 
as alfo his having to well maintain’d t iut Modern D if. ip line, 
or manner of war, againll the antiquated admirers of ar¬ 
chery, whereof Sir John Smytbe wrote in prailc, 410. 
1590. Sir Walter Ralegh has alfo touch’d upon this mili¬ 
tary argument in the "beginning of his tilth book, and 
elfewhcre, in his Htjlory oj the world. 

Where, fpeaking of the long Jives of the patriarchs, 
and fome of late memory, he lays, 44 I my lelf knew the 
44 old countefs of Defmond of lncbcquin in Munjler , who 
“ lived in the year 1589, and many years fince ; w ho was 
u married in Edward the fourth’s time, and held her join- 
•• ture from all the earls of Dejmondi ince then ; and that 
“ this is true, all the nobility and gentlemen of Munjler 
14 could witnefs.” Hijlory of the world. Jib. 1. cap. <;. 
fc&. 5. Of this old lady, lee more in lord Bacons biftory 
of life and death, and Sir William Temple's Ejfuy on health 
and long life, in his mixclJanies, part 3. (publifh'd by 
Jonathan Swift, M. A. prebendary of St. Patricks) 8vo. 
1701. p. 125, where, telling us (he lived far in king James*/ 
reign , it appears fhe mult have been alive at tlic time 
Sir Walter Ralegh w as writing that lie knew her in In land 
the year aforefaid. 

words > 


Digitized by 


Googl 


e 







Sir WAL TER RALEGH. 

words i « I jnake you prefent of this fimple Pafioral, unworthy of your higher conceipt for 
tC the meannefs of the ftyle, but agreeable with the truths in circumfiance and matter: the 
“ which I humbly befeech you to accept in part of payment of the infinite debt in which ] 
“ acknowledge my felf bounden unto you for your lingular favours and k fundry good turns 
“ Ihewed me at my laft being in England ; and with your good countenance, protect againfl 
“ the malice of evil mouths, which arc always wide open to carp at, and mifeonftrue my fim. 
“ pie meaning.’* In die pafioral it felf,* the poet gives us this defeription of Ralegh's firft ac„ 
coding him in the faid rural retirement. 

One day , quoth he, I fat, as was my trade , 

Under the foot of Mole, that mountain bore , 

Keeping my fheep amongfl the cooly fbade 
Of the green alders by the Mulla’j Jhore ; 

There a jlrange Jhepherd chanc'd to find me out , 

Whether allured with my pipe's delight , 

Whofe pleafing found yfhrilled far about , 

Or thither led by chance , I knew not right , 

Whom when I afked from what place be came , 

And how he bight ? himfelf be did ycleep 
The Ihepherd of the ocean by name, 

And faid, he came far from the main-fea deep. 

He fitting me befide in that fame fhade , 

. Prwcked me to play fame pleafant fit ; 

And when be heard the mufick which 1 made , 

He found himfelf full greatly pleadd at it: 

Tet amuling my pipe , be took in bond 
My pipe, before that /emuled of many. 

And play'd thereon , for well that fkill he con'd ; 

Himfelf as Jkilful in that art as any. 

It further appears, they now entertain’d each other with fome of their poetical compofi- 
tions; Spenfer rehearfed a pretty tale he had made of the amours between fome of his neigh¬ 
bouring rivers but Ralegh's mufe ran upon a more melancholy ftrain, which, by the tranfient 
view it gives of fome little cloud he had lately, but undefervcdly, been under at court, lets us 
into a piece of his fecret hiflory > where the poet tell us. 

His fong was all a lamentable lay 
Of great unkindnefs and of ufage hard , 

Of Cynthia the lady of the fea , 

Winch jrom her prefence, faultlefs , him debarred : 

And ever and anon with fingults rife. 

He cried out to make bis underfong, 

Ab my love's queen, and goddefs of my life! 

Who Jhall me pity , when thou doji me wrong ? 

Birr it immediately appears to have been foon blown over by fome pathetical addrefs of 
Ralegh's to the queen, whereby he was, at this time, reftored to her favour, as we may fully 
conclude from thefe words: 


■ ii. ■ . ■ Right well be fure did 'plain. 

That could great Cynthia’* fore difpleafure break , 

And move to take him to her grace again. 

• 

And this is confirm’d a little further, where, through Ralegh's afle&ion for his welfare* 
and his regret to behold fo rare a genius banifh’d to a defart, and buried in fuch a Hate of ob- 
feurity, he perfuades Spenfer to go along with him into England, and proffers to introduce him 
to the queen. The poet, knowing his intereft, embraced his ofifer. Then having given a de¬ 
feription of the fea, with Ralegh's great fhip, fuitable to the fimplicity of the chara&cr he af- 


Entitled, Colin Clout's ame home again (in the laft edition of Spenfer) vol. 4. f. 1121. 


fumes 3 


Digitized by 





Brings him 
into England* 


Introduces 
him to the 
queen's fa¬ 
vour. 


Encourages 
the publica¬ 
tion of the 
Fairy Vuce*. 


The LIFE of 

fumes; and having reprefented Ralegh's defeription of the flocks and herds of that Royal 
Shepherdefs, which were kept upon thole watry hills, under the charge of Triton and Proteus, 
he makes him further fay: 

And I among the reft, of many leaft. 

Have in the ocean charge to me afftgn'd ; 

Where I will live or die at her bebeaft. 

And ferve and honour her with faithful mind. 

H e then proceeds to the progrefs of their voyage, how they pafled by the Ifle of Lundy, 
and landed at St. Michaels Mount in Cornwall ; fo took their journey to the court, where the 
poet having expatiated on the dazling prefence of the queen, agreeable to the admiration of a 
fpeCtator, in his paftoral character, we have this further acknowledgment. 

The fhepherd of the ocean, quoth he. 

Unto the goddefs' grace me firft enhanc'd : 

And to my oaten pipe inclin'd her ear , 

That fhe thenceforth therein 'gan take delight. 

And it defied, at timely hours to bear ; 

All were my notes but rude and roughly dight. 

This honour the poet further magnifies, as the more wond’rous condefcenfion in her ma- 
jefty, in that fhe had fo many more learned fhepherds about her to glorify her name. Here 
he takes an opportunity to give a character of the feveral poets and wits then fhining in her 
court: among die reft. 

And there that fhepherd of the ocean is. 

That fpends his wit in love's confuming fmart: 

Full fweetly temper'd is that mufe of his. 

That can impierce a prince's mighty heart. 

As to Ralegh's poetical talents, we fhall hear more of them very fpeedily. In this place, 
we muft purfue his farther defign of bringing Spenfer over into England, which was to make 
him oblige the publick with what he had hitherto finifh’d of his capital work, call’d the 
Fairy Queen. For, tho’ Spenfer had begun this grand poem through the encouragement of 
Sir Philip Sidney, before he went over into Ireland j yet it was there he feems to have writ 
moft of what we have in print v and now, by the encouragement of Sir Walter Ralegh, that 
he was brought to publifli the three firft books which he had compleatcd thereof: *tis certain 
he took his advice in the publication of them, and particularly in drawing up a plan to 
explain or difeover the general intention and meaning of that allegorical poem. This he di¬ 
rected to his faid patron, The right noble and valorous Sir W alter Ralegh, &c. in a letter 
dated the 23d of January this year 1589 * concluding with “ An humble requeft for thecon- 
“ tinuance of his honourable favours, and wifhes for the eternal eftablifhment of his happinefs.” 
This letter is printed at the end of the faid firft three books of that poem, which were pub- 
lifhcd at London the enfuing year. Among the commendatory verfes thereto alfo fubjoined, 
the firft two copies are both faid to be written by Sir Waller Ralegh , and not without great 
probability, being fubferibed with the initial letters of his name. The firft of thefe co¬ 
pies, written in alternate verfe, is highly poetical ; for our author, correfpondent with the vi- 
fionary manner of his author, fancying himfelf in the temple of the veftal virgins, where his 
curiofity led him to the tomb of Laura, which was guarded by Love and Virtue , he was fud- 
denly attracted from thence, by the appearance of the Fairy Queen, at whole approach the 
Soul of Petrarch wept ; feeing thofe graces defert that miftrefs of his, to attend upon this royal 
lady, and oblivion fupply their place. • The compliment is furely fine, and perhaps the more 
judicioufly exprefs’d, in not being bounded more periodically than it is, according to the doc¬ 
trine of our modern criticks in the ftruCture of verlification •, for being the recital of one folemn 
and furprifing thought, it may engage our attention more clolely to die end of the two or three 
quadrains it is compris’d in, than if the author had affeCted to divide or bound the fenfe with a 
full period at the end of every four lines. But every reader may eafily judge for himfdf, the 
poem being in moft editions of Spenfer, and therefore needs not here be recited. His other 
verfes upon this poet are compos’d in a meafure more obfoletc to the manner of our age \ but 

what 


Digitized by 


Google 



Sir IVALTER RALEGH. 1«» 

i # . . ' 

vfhat the qufcen her felf imitated, in fome poetry ftill to be feen of her writing, being in lines 
of fix and feven feet long ; and it is no more to be objected, that an author did not in this 
particular apparel his mind to the mode of all ages, than his body. It may be fufficient there¬ 
fore to obferve, there is a diftinguifh’d conduct alfo in this performance \ for the indu&ion is 
writ with great modefty, in regard to himfelf. 

The praife of meaner wits, this work like profit brings j 
As 'doth the cuckow’s Jong, delight, when Philomela fugs’. 

And, having advertifed the poet that his portraits are to be judg’d of or improv’d by the 
originals of thofc virtues whereof he has compos’d his fi&itious queen, he very dexteroufly trans¬ 
fers or appropriates them to the real one then reigning : fo concludes with a compliment to 
him; which tho* of a very tranfeendent and abfolute nature, yet in regard to the little good 
Englijh poetry then in being, and the great fame of that poet ftill furviving among us, is ftill 
thought not more expreffive of Sir IValter Ralegh’s affection, than his judgment: 

Of me no lines are lenid, nor letters are of price. 

Of all that fpeak the Englilh tongue , but thofe of thy device. 

We further obferve among the copies of verfes inferib’d by Spenfcr himfelf, at the end of 
his faid Fairy Queen, to the fcveral minifters of ftate and noblemen in queen Elizabeth's court, 
one to the noble and valorous Sir Walter Ralegh, fftc. as he again ftyles him: and this, becaufc 
it not only informs us what a favourite Ralegh was at this time with the queen ; b,ut allb gives 
us occafion to dilate upon his own poetical productions a little more copioufly than opportu¬ 
nity has before offer’d, I muft here entirely repeat. 

To thee that are the fummeVs nightingale , 

Thy foveraign goddejfes mofl dear delight, 

IVhy do I fend this ruftick madrigal , ^ 

That may thy tuneful ear unfeafon quite f 
Thou only fit this argument to write j 
In whofe high thoughts pledfure hath built her bowre. 

And dainty love learn’d fweetly to indite: 

My Rhimes I know unfav’ry are and fowre. 

To tajle theJlreams, which, like a golden ftjowre, 

Era; from thy fruitful head , of thy love's praife , 

Fitter perhaps to thunder martial ft were, 

When fo thee lift thy lofty rnttfe to raife : 

Tet till that thou thy poem wilt make known. 

Let thy fair Cynthia’j praifes be thus rudely ftjown. 

Hence we leam Sir IValter Ralegh wrote a poem, call’d Cynthia ; that it was in praife 
of the queen, and that it was not now publifh’d. Spenfer , in his letter to Ralegh above-cited, 
allb mentions again fomething of this poem, where he fays, “ In that Fairy Queen, I mean 
" glory in my general intention •, but in my particular, I conceive the moft excellent and glo- 
“ rious perfon of our foveraign the queen, and her kingdom, in Fairy-land. And yet in lome 
“ places elfe, I do otherwife fhadow her. For confidering Hie bearcth two perfons the one, 

“ of a moft royal queen or emprefs ; the other, of a moft virtuous and beautiful lady * this lat- 
“ ter part, in fome places, I do exprefs in Belpbccbe ; fafhioning her name according to your own 
“ excellent conceit of Cynthia *, Pbcebe and Cynthia being both names of Diana.” This is 
all I remember to have met with of that poem. 

But this very year that Ralegh was in Ireland , there was a book publilh’d by a learn¬ 
ed and ingenious gentleman } in which others of Ralegh's poems, and perhaps that be- Eminent for 
fore mention’d, are quoted with great commendation j 1 as if thefe few little pieces had his own P**- 

before 


■ This treatife, now very fcarce, is call’d The Art of 
EngHjb Poefy ; contrived into three books : the tirft of poets 
and poefy ; the iicond of proportion; the third of orna¬ 
ment. Lend™, *»to. 15^9. 1 never faw but one of them, 

and this is in the curious library of that worthy owner 
Janes Weft Kftjt ot the Middle 'Temple. There is a wooden 
print 0! the queen before it \ and, tho’ dedicated to the lord 
Bui'ishf, the work is addiefs’d directly to the queen. There¬ 


fore that paflage in the firft book, cap. 26. w here the author 
is fo luxuriant upon the Epithalam.cs , or poetical manner of 
celebrating marriages; and that in the third book, cap. 23. 
where he makes the Imperia /ambailador, a Bohemian bom, 
fo bluntly expiefs in the French tongue what a gallant 
horfe-r-voman the emprefs was, will, among fome others, 
be allow'd very remarkable, in a book fo publickly and 
fo particularly tender’d to the perulal of our virgin-queen* 
c e But 


Digitized by kjOOQle 





liv 


The LIFE of 

before this time render’d him eminent, and advanc’d his name among the prime wits 01 
leading poets of the age } not that we are fure they were now in common print, or vulgarly 
known to be his •, for the faid author, fpeaking of the moil confiderable writers in Engliftj 
poetry, fays •, “ In her majefty’s time fprung up another company of courtly poets, who 
44 have writ excellently well, if their doings could be found out and made publick with the 
“ reft \ of which number is Edward earl of Oxford, Thomas lord Buckhurjl , when young, 
“ Henry lord Paget , Sir Philip Sidney, Sir IValter Ralegh , and many others j fome of whom 
“ he further names.” 4 Then proceeding to give his judgment in fhort characters of them ; and 
having diftinguilh’d the earl of Oxford for Comedy , Buckhurjl for Tragedy , Sir Philip Sidney , 
and the other gentleman who wrote the late Shepherd's Calender (meaning Spenfer) for Eclogue 
and Pajloral, he adds •, “ For Ditty and amorous Ode , I find Sir JValter Ralegh's vein moft 
lofty, infolent , and paffionate .” b But it is in the chapter of Sententious or Rhetorical Figures, 
that this critic illuftrates his obfervations, by fome examples out of Sir Walter Ralegh's poems ; 
which, becaufe rare to be met with, and not prolix, nor violating the privileges of particular and 
perfonal narrative, I lhall here rehearfe ; the rather, becaufe thefe fragments may both give further 
light into the genius, as well as hiftory perhaps of their author, and help the enquiries of fuch rea¬ 
ders, as are curious in comparing the monuments of ancient and modern wit, to recover and revive 
the entire pieces from whence they are extracted. That critic therefore, where he is fpeaking of 
fome elegant tautologies in poetry, and particularly the excellences of the Anaphora , or figure 
of Report, as he tranflates it, gives us the following example, written by Sir Walter Ralegh j 
whether in his Cynthia , I cannot yet tell; but, to his greatejl snijlrefs , in moft excellent verfes , 
fays that author. 

In vain , my eyes, in vain you wajle your tears ; 

In vain my fighs , the fmokes of my defpairs : 

In vain you fearch the earth and heav'ns abovt : 

In vain you feek, for fortune keeps my love . c 

Further fpeaking of the Epizeuxis , which he Engiijbes the Underlay or Cuckow-Spell, another 
fort of repetition, when in one verfe we iterate one word without intermiffion, he brings, as 
an example, that of Sir Waller Ralegh ; very fweet, fays he. 

With wifdom's eyes, bad but blind fortune feen , 

Then had my love , my love for ever been . d 


And in another place, to diftinguifh that form of repetition, called Ploche , or the Doubler , a 
fpeedy iteration of one word, but with fome little Intermiffion, he exemplifies the two cloftng 
verfes of a moft excellent ditty, as he calls it, written by Sir Walter Ralegh. Thefe two clofing 
verfes confirm the genuinenefs of thofe which precede them in a tranfeript of this very ditty 
I once faw in a nobleman’s library, from the copy of a celebrated lady, e who probably had 


But for the reft, it contains many pretty obfervations, 
examples, characters and fragments of poetry for thofe 
times, now no-where clfe to be met with ; which if fome 
of our modern criticks had read, they would have been 
better acquainted than they were, with certain antiquities in 
the Englijb meter, whereof they have erroncoufty fpoken. 
The author was educated at Oxford ; bom about the year 
15 30, or not long after; and wrote feveral other books, 
whereof he gives us the titles himfclf. So that if his name 
was Puttenbarr, one of the queen’s gentlemen-penfioners, as 
Anthony Wood thinks, he was entitled to a more diilinCt re¬ 
membrance in his book of Oxford writers. That he was 
a courtier, is vifible; alfo had been a traveller, and feen 
the courts of foreign princes; wherefore his illuftrations, 
both hiitorical and political, are drawn fo familiarly from 
thence, that he may be call’d the court-critic of that 
reign. 

a See the faid Art of Englijb Poefy , p. 49. 

fc lb. p. 51. Some modern authors, and among them 
Edward Philips as I remember, in his fhe at rum Poeta- 
rum , 12mo. 1675, but 1 am fure A. Wood. vol. 1. col. 436, 
and others from him, have, in the quotation of this cha¬ 
racter, changed that middle epithet for the word condolent ; 
perhaps through an unneceftary tendernefs; every word of 
that character being fpoken, and to be underllood, in a 
fenfc of praife. 

c Art of Englijb Poefy 9 p. 16$. lb. p. 167. 

« Lady Ifaoella fbymtt ; the fame who is fo finely cele¬ 
brated by Mr. Waller , tho’ her firnamc is no-where to be 


found in any of the printed editions I have feen of his 
poems : but I have had an old MS. collection, in which 
one poem is dircCted to the lady Jfabclla fhynne cutting 
trees in paper; which poem is printed among Mr. Wal¬ 
ler' but her name left out. In the print alio wc have 
only a fragment; but my copy had it entire. For the 
poem which follows it, in Mr. Waller's printed collection, 
is a compliment to the fame lady for reltoring him this 
piece, becaufe he defired to print it, tho’ the loll thought 
was torn off and lolt ; which, to his regret, he never 
could recollect; fo was obliged to print it imperfectly, in 
his own apprehenfions at leait, tho’ all the world belides 
have looked upon what is printed of it as a perfect ma¬ 
iler-piece, even of that great hand : and for our confo- 
lation it may be obferv’d, if he had not loft this conclu- 
fion, we fhould have loft that fine poem, which was the 
confequence of it. The fentiment this MS. could have 
reilorcd him, confided, as I think, of fix lines, but that 
I cannot repeat them all; yet prefume, upon the fa¬ 
vour which is due to the fair fex, that it will not be 
thought an unwelcome digreflion here to preferve what I 
can of them, and as well as I can, left they fhould be ’oft 
again, by not having an opportunity to remember them 
dtewhere. 

A port y when be would drferibe his mind, 

hy as in language , fo in fame confiti d: 

Your works are ready where-ewer there are men ; 

So far the feiffer^orj beyond the pen. 


ic 


Digitized by boogie 





: Iv 


Sir WALTER RALEGH. 

it out of the family. ’Tis there entitled. The Exctife, written by Sir Walter Ralegh, in bis 
younger years. And, becaufc by the foregoing parts of this admir’d ditty the conclufion will be 
beft underftood, I fhall here repeat the whole from the aforefaid tranfeript; not doubting but 
the modem readers will judge of it by its contemporary writings; or if by their own, after 
due confideration, how they may be judg’d of near a hundred and fifty years hence i but more 
efpecially, that the readers may fee with what artful fimplicity the author could reconcile himfelf 
to his paflion, whether real or feign’d, when he found, upon a ftrid examination, he had not 
been indiredly betray’d to it. \ 

Calling to mind my eyes went long about , 

To caufe my heart for to forfake my breajl *, 

All in a rage, I fought to pull them out i 
As who bad been fuch traitors to my reft : 

What could they fay to win again my grace ? 

Forfooth, that they had feen my miflrefs’ face. 

Another time , my heart I call’d to mind j 
Thinking that be this woe on me bad brought ; 

Becaufc that be, to love , bis force reftgn'd , 

N When of fucb wars my fancy never thought: 

What coil'd be fay when I wou'd him have Jlain ? 

That he was hers— and had forgone my chain. 

At laft, when I perceiv’d both eyes and heart 
Excufe tbemfelves, as guiltlefs of my ill ; 

I found my felf the caufe of all my fmart , 

And told my felf that I my felf would kill: 

Tet when I faw my felf to you was true j 
I lov’d my felf, becaufc my felf lov’d you. 

This poem, I have been told, is printed under Sir Walter Ralegh’s name, in a modern colledion, 1 
not much to be fulpefted of having had it from any ancient manufeript, therefore probably 
from fome old copy in print, which I have not yet met with. There is one old collodion I 
never faw, printed about the time we are now upon, with feveral of Sir Philip Sidney’s fonnets 
in it, and therefore I think under his name j b which poffibly may contain fome alfo of 
Sir Waller Ralegtfs. But in that modern colledion there is alfo printed, not over-corrcdly it 
feems, another poem of his: this I have likewife feen in manufeript, where it is call’d the 
Silent Lover ; and have heard feveral lines in it applauded, efpecially the beginning. But the 
pan, which would be moft agreeable in this place to an hiftorical reader, is that from which 
he might fancy he could make fome further guefles at the objed of Ralegh's addrefs; tho* 
after all it may be no other than the common objed of all poets: however, the lines are thele; 

But feeing that I fue to ferve 
A faint of fucb perfection. 

As all defire, and none defense 
A place in her affection •, 

I rather chufe to want relief 
Than venture the revealing •, 

Where glory recommends the grief 
Defpair difdains the healing. 

And a litde further, very perfuafively: 

Silence in love betrays more woe 
Than words, tho* never fo witty $ 

A beggar that is dumb, you know , 

May challenge double pity. 

In fhort, he has faid fuch handfome things of filence, that it were a pity any words even in 
its commendation, but his own, fhould break it. But it will perhaps hereafter be thought he 


* Entitled, IVil's Interpreter, two. printed, one edition veral of the fonnets, ditties, madrigals, paftoral-airs, and 
ofit, about 1671. fuch-like compofitions, which were fo much the mode 

k EnglatiJ's Helicon, 4to. without date, in which are fc- among the noble and illullrious wits of thole times. 

could 


Digitized by 


Google 



The LIFE of 

Could break it himfelf with as much fuccefe, as now he feems to have commanded the keeping 
it. All that I have feen more of his juvenile compofitions in this kind, is a paftoral fon- 
net, which old Mr. Ifaae Walton reciting, tells us was written by Sir Walter Ralegh, in 
his younger years, * in anfwer to another, famous alfo in thofe days, compofed by Chrijlopher 
Marlow j but as both thefe fonnets are involv’d in a collection which the book fellers or pub- 
lifhcrs have called Shakefpeap s poems, printed between twenty and thirty years after his death, b 
in which I think feveral pieces are known to have been written by other poets \ the reader is 
left at liberty to judge whether the authority of a writer, who fubferibes his name thereto, one, 
of Walton's noted fincerity, and advantages for intelligence by his acquaintance among the 
men of literature in thofe times v or that of an anonymous publication in the circumftances 
aforefaid, is to be preferr’d •, without urging the improbability that Shakefpear fhould quote a 
ftanza, from that aferib’d to Marlow , afterwards in one of his own plays, if he had been the 
author of that fonnet himfelf. e 

There is another poet befidcs Spenfer , who writ fomething of Ralegh relating to thefe 
times, tho’ near twenty years after them •, and as on a different fubjett, fo with a different 
difpofition towards him. This poet was Sir John Harrington , the tranflator of Orlando Furiofo ; 
but that which he is here mention’d for, is a little book in profe, yet not clear of poetry, d 
tho’ it was intended for a piece of church-hiflory, and as a fupply to Dr. Francis Godwin's 
Catalogue of Biffsops. This, at the time that Ralegh was under royal difplcafure in the nexc 
reign, and in confinement •, but growing into favour with the hopeful prince of Wales , Sir John 
Harrington , then a courtier, prefented to that prince : ’tis full of little jells and tales againfl 
the married clergy, and againfl fome of the laity who had any controvcrfies with them, the 
better to infinuate with that young prince, and engage his attention i otherwife the author would 
doubtlefs have written it with a gravity fuitable to the fubjett} but he tells the prince, “ he took 
“ fome kind of pleafure with die pains of writing it, fuppofing (fays he) I was all the while 
“ telling a flory as it were in your highnefs’s prefence and hearing.”* Among the ftories he 
tells, there is one concerning Dr. Thomas Godwin , bifhop of Bath and Wells , and Sir Walter 
Ralegh , it feems •, ( the relation of which, becaufe that bifhop died about the latter end of 
1590, we fhall not longer defer. This bifhop, he tells us, came to that fee, among his other 
good qualities, unreproveable for Simony, and in the queen’s good opinion: if he had held on 
as clear as he enter’d, I fhould have highly extoll’d him, fays our author 5 but, continues he, 
fee his misfortune, which firft loft him the queen’s favour, and after forced him to another mif- 
chief. For being aged, difeafed, and lame of the gout, he married, as fome thought, for opinion 
of wealth, fays he, a London widow, his fecond wife at leaft: when a chief favourite of that time 
(whom he had named before in this kind, and therefore thought by fome, 8 as perhaps it might 
be, Sir Walter Ralegh) lud labour’d to get the manor of Banwell from this bifhoprick; but dis¬ 
daining the repul fe, and hearing of this intempeftive marriage, he took advantage thereof, 
caus’d it to be told the queen (knowing how much fhe mifliked fuch matches) and inftantly 
purfued the bifhop with letters and mandates for the manor of Banwell for a hundred years. 
The good bifhop, fays he, not expetting fuch a fudden tempeft, was greatly perplex’d ; yet 
a while he held out, and endured many fharp meflages from the queen •, of which my felf, 
fays lie, carried one, deliver’d to me by my lord of Leicejler , who feem’d to favour the bi¬ 
fhop, and miflike the knight for molefting him but they were foon agreed, fays he, like 
Pilot and Herod to condemn Chrift. And further tells us, never was harmlefs man fo tra¬ 
duced to his foveraign ; as that he had married a girl; had convey’d half the bifhoprick to 
her •, and, bccaufe he had the gout, that he could not (land to his marriage.—The conclufion 
to the premiffes, he tells us, was, that to pacify his perfecutors, and to fave Banwell , he was 
fain to part with Wtlfcomb for ninety-nine years ; and fo purchafed his peace. We may hence 
obferve this matter was in agitation before Leicejler *s death, which was two years before this 
time •, but, as the bifhop feems to have linger’d before he clos’d, it might be near this time be¬ 
fore it was brought to a perfett conclufion. And, as he did not hold on fo clear as he enter’d, 
it might be with reference to the Simony before-mention’d j the rather, becaufe a bifhop who 
would not fcruple at his years to marry for money, might be reafonably thought not impreg- 


a See Ifaae Waltons Compleat Angler , 4th edition, 8vo. 
1668. p 76, idc. This Walton was twenty-five years of 
age at Ralegh's death, and Jiv'd ninety years. Belides 
th.it bcok, for which he has been call’d the Father of 
Anglers, he wrote live lives of learned and religious men, 
excellently well, being either from a perfonal knowledge 
of them, or their intimate friends ; for which he deferves 
a more liberal acknowledgment than this place will 
admit. 

b Poems by William Shakefpear, Sec. 8vo. 1640. 


« See Shakefpear s Merry Wives of Wind/or , Adi 3. 
d A brief •vievu of the C lurch of England, as it flood 
in queen Elizabeth's and king James's reign, to the year 
1608. Being the character and hillory ot the bilhops of 
thole times, Qc. wri ten by Sir John Harrington oX Ktljion, 
near Bath, publilhcd by John Chet wind, patior ot the 
parifli of Cutbert's in WtUs. nmo. 165 3. 

c Sir John Harrington's Brief Fie*zv, (Sc. p. 210. 
f Ibid. p. 111. 

8 Ant. Hood m Alien. Q.xon. vol. 1. col. 710. 


nable^ 


Digitized by 


e 




Sir WALTER RALEGH. ivii 

ruble, through the farhe motive, againft a divorcement from his bifhoprick: which way foever His manor of 
it was, the queen law it not unreafonablej but efpoufed the alienation ; fo that it was her gift. '■ 
And the bilhop’s own fon, Dr. Francis Godwin, when he was a bilhop alfo, and reviving his 
Catalogue of Bijbops , in the next reign, before Ralegh was out of prifon, makes no complaint 
againft him in the account of his father's life; tho* he might fafely, if he could juftly, have 
done it, and Ralegh had been pofiefs’d of that for which this author’s father had not, according 
to the cuftom of thofe times, received fatisfa&ion. * On the contrary, with much modefty, 
rather laments that his father fhould take upon him the duties of ccclefiaftical government, when 
his infirmiues had render’d him unable to difeharge them. b 

If this affair did any ways difpleafe the hierarchy, there was another occurrence fell out about 
this time, in which Ralegh , by (hewing a generous and charitable inftance of his power and in- 
tereft, might give fome further umbrage for its difpleafure. It was in the cafe of Mr. John 
Udall, minifter of the gofpel, a good fcholar, and a man of good parts; but very zealous for 
the reformation of the church, even under the cpifcopal government; for which he was reckon’d 
among the Nonconformifts, or rather Puritans of thofe times. He had been bred at Cam¬ 
bridge-, was feven years minifter of Kingjlon upon Thames and, through the favour of the earl 
of Huntington , about a twelvemonth at NewcaJlU upon Tine. Here he was filenc’d, fent for 
to London by letters from the lord-chamberlain Hunfdon , in the name of the council, c and 
examin’d about a book he had newly publifhed againft the clergy. d But becaufe, contrary to 
the laws, he would not betray himfelf, fays my author, he was committed clofe prifoner to the 
Gateboufe ; debarr*d of all communication with his family or others; thence convey’d to Croy¬ 
don in July this prefent year 1590 ; brought to the bar in fetters, and indifted for publifhing a 
libel againft the queen. No evidence viva voce produc’d to atteft it, but only depofitions taken 
in the high commiflkm-court, no court of record, and hearfay reports urg’d againft him, his 
witneffes not being permitted to teftify in his behalf, becaufe the court faid it was againft the 
queen: the words of the ftatute being wrcfted, fays my author, by baron Clark and ferjeant 
Puckering , as if the treadfe call’d. The Demonjlration of Difcipline, for which Udall was now 
ind idled, becaufe written againft bilhops who exercis’d their government under the queen, was 
therefore confequently written againft her royal perfon. So the faid judges directed the jury to 
find Udall author of the book without legal proof, and to leave the felony to them. The jury did 
as they were taught, being told it fhould be no further danger to the author, but tend to his good; 
of which verdid they afterwards repented. Then he was kept half a year uncondemn’d in durance ; 
and at the affizes in February following at Southwark , not relinquifhing his tenets, he had the 
fcntencc of death pronounc’d againft him by Puckering. e But it feems before Udall receiv’d this 
fentence, he had procur’d a friend to follicit Sir Walter Ralegh , that the violent and aggra¬ 
vated conftrudions which had been made of his dodrine and principles, might not be his utter 
deftrudion, till a more unprejudic’d judgment was made of them and immediately after the fen¬ 
tence was pronounc'd, the fheriff brought him a reprieve from the queen. Then Dr. Bond, one of 
her chaplains, came to him in prifon with a form of fubmiflion for him to fubferibe. After two 
days conference, they agreed upon another. But, fays Udall , ** at the fame time that Dr. Bond 
“ was with me, I receiv’d a letter from a friend of mine that did follicit Sir Walter Ralegh for me." f 
This letter he then exhibits, and thereby it appears Ralegh had advifed or encouraged Udall to 
explain himfelf to him concerning thofe imputations which had been infufed into her majefty, 
which accufed him with maintaining, the church of England and its facraments were no church 
and no iacramcnts; that its laws and her government were againft the word of God that all 


* See a trafl entitled, JV» facrilegt or Jin to alienate or 
ptrebafe cathedral lands as fucb : or a vindication of not only 
the late pur chafers, but of the ancient nobility and gentry i 
J4a y of the crown it felf isfe. 3d edit, nuitb a pofiferift to 
Dr. Pearfon, by Cornelius Burges, D. D. 4to. 1660. 
Wherein there arc feverai particularities about the church 
of Wells. 

\ 0 ilium f(tlicem % Ji feelix manrre maluiffet , quam regi- 
vtinis eccleftafici labor is turn fujeifere , cum laboribus impar 
fraQus femo necejfum illi fuerit aliorum uti auxilio, C3V. 
vtd. Godwin dt Pnrful. Angl. in vit. Pair is. 

e Dated 29 December 1589. 

* Entitled, The Demonjlration of Difcipline •which Chrijl 
hath Ortfcrib d in bis word for the government of the church 
« all times and places until the •world's end. 

The horrible treafon in this book, it feems (which was 
inferttd in the indi&ment) lay in thefe words to the bi¬ 
lhops : « Who can, without blulhing, deny you to be the 
M caufe of all ungodlinefs, feeing your government is that 
u which giveth leave to a man to be any thing faving a 
“ found chriltian: for certainly it is more free in thefe 
11 days to be a Papifi t an Anmbaptifl, of the Family of 


u Love ; yea, any wicked one whatfoever, than tin t 
“ which we (hould be; and I could Jive thefe twenty 
u years any fuch in England, yea, in a biftiop's houie 
44 may-be, and never be molellai for it. So true is that 
11 which you are charged with in a dialogue lately come 
“ forth againft you, and fince burned by you s 'Thatyou 
“ care for nothing but the maintenance of your dignities, be 
44 it to the damnation of your own fouls, and infinite millions 
44 more.” Strype's Life and Ads of Arcbbijhcp Whitgift, 
fol. 1718. p. 343. 

« See a nrw difiovery of old pontifical fradices for the 
maintenance of the prelates authority and hierarchy, e- 
vinced, by their perfection of that reverend, learned, pious 
and worthy minuter ot Jefus Chriii Mr. John Udall, in the 
reign of queen Elizabeth, isle. 410. 1643, in Pref. This 
pamphlet is UdalP s own account of the wiioie profecution 
againft him* whether printed in the nueen’s time, I can* 
not tell 5 but the fame account, I think, that is reprinted 
in the State-Trials ; tho’ the title to this pamphlet is 
adapted to the time wherein it was now printed; and 
the preface is a clear abftra£l of the whole. 

f See the laid pamphlet, p. 37, 

f f cccldiaftical 


Digitized by boogie 



lviii 


The LIFE of 


ecclefuftical matters ought to be governed by a presbytery •, and that lhe ought to be fubjeft to 
the cenfures thereof; for (fays that correfpondent) “ If ye will write half a dozen li,.es to 
*« Sir Walter Ralegh concerning thefe opinions, that he may fhcw it to her majefty, he hopes 
** to obtain your life. I know it is very eafy for you to anfwer all thofe things, therefore do 
“ it with fpeed j and in your writing to Sir Walter take knowledge, that he hath fent you 
«* fuch word.” Hereupon Udall wrote a letter, which he alfo fets forth, direfted to the 
right honourable Sir Walter Ralegh, Knt. lord-warden of the ftannaries, wherein, after the 
remembrance of his duty and thanks for his great and honourable care over him and for his 
good, he moft humbly befeeches him to be a means to appeafe her majefty’s difpleafure for 
the accufations untruly fuggefted againft him. 

“ For God is my witnefs (continues he) I have never had any earthly thing in fo precious ac- 
“ count as to honour her highnefs, and to draw her fubjefts to acknowledge with all thankful- 
‘ c nefs, the exceeding blefiings that God befloweth upon them by her majefty’s happy govem- 
** ment •, whereof I truft my adverfaries will be witnefs when I am dead. I have fent unto your 
“ lordfhip (as in perplexity I could upon the fudden) what I hold upon certain points declared 
unto me, as from your lordfhip, praying, that it would pleafe you to make known the truth 
** thereof unto her highnefs: and if neither my fubmiffion heretofore delivered, nor thefe things 
“ now fet down, will be accepted to draw her highnefs of her gracious companion to pardon 
“ me, that yet it would pleafe her majefty, that die land may not be charged with my blood, 
“ to change my punifhment from death to banifhment. Thus trufting your lordfhip will 
vouchfafe me this favour, and that it will pleafe her majefty thereupon gracioufly to confi- 
“ der me, I humbly take my leave from the While Lyon , Feb. 22. 1590.” * Herewith he 
fent the tenets he maintained, or articles of his perfuafion, which are to be feen immediately 
following the laid letter in his own narrative, and elfewhere. b After this he remain’d, accor¬ 
ding to his own expreftion, without great hope of liberty, yet without fear of further extre¬ 
mity. c Whence it may be righty obferved by fome hiflorians, that Sir Walter Ralegh, through 
His generous his generous interceflion, did procure Udall’ s reprieve, or fave him from execution. Till a 
fctAir'w!// f evv months after, being further pefter’d with drifter forms of fubmifilon, by Dr. Andrews, he 
was forced to make further applications, not only by the earl of EJfex, but Sir Walter Ralegb 
again, and dean Nowell, aguinft the menaces of the approaching aflizes at Kingjlon. d About 
the fame time the king of Scots alfo wrote a letter to the queen in behalf of the faid Mr. UJall t 
and other learned nonconformifts. e But this wrought only fo far, when Udall was brought to 
Kingjlon, that he was immediately returned to prifon before the firft day of the trials, and there¬ 
upon the unlucky difturbance of Hacket the enthufiaft enfuing, Udall was difeouraged from ma¬ 
king further follicitation till the lord-chancellor Hatton died . { The Eajler after which, he 
fued for liberty to go to church, which was denied him, being a condemn’d man: but, by 
the lord-treafurer’s means, getting a copy of die indiftment, and a pardon fram’d according 
to it, he was refer’d dierewith to archbifhop Whitgift j Unto whom (fays he) I both fent 
“ divers petitions, and dutiful letters -, and alfo got many of my friends, both honourable per- 
“ fonages and others, to fue to him •, yet could not his good-will be gotten. ” 8 And when 
the Turkey merchants apply’d to his Grace , that Udall might go over to Guinea , he would not 
confent to that, unlefs they would be bound he fhould not return till he had her majefty’s li- 
cenfe; but to this Udall would not confent. And tho’ Sir John Puckering , now lord-keeper, 


a Wc may obferve, that Udall , in this letter, here quo¬ 
ted from his faid narrative, addrefles Sir Walter Ralegb 
(as lord-warden) by the title of his Lordjbip ; but, as Mr. 
Stnpe copie* it, in his life of Whitgift, fol. 376, that 
word is changed for his Honour , as if this author, or 
thofe he takes this part of his materials from, had copied 
the letter out of Udall's narrative, and helped him ( in 
their thoughts) to a title more proper for Sir Walter Ra¬ 
legh, If Mr. Strype had ieen this pamphlet, it will make 
iomething againft the charatter of his fincerity, in advan¬ 
cing (o much his archbifhop’s chriJHan mildnefs ; fee his 
life, fol. 344 . and reprefenting him to have been moil 
active in procuring Udairs pardon, by his eftettual inter- 
ceihons with the queen ; as if the queen only was inexo¬ 
rable at Udairs endeavour to reform her bifhops; which 
is partially throwing all the cruelty Udall fuftei’d upon 
her; when it will plainly appear in the fequel of this 
pamphlet, that Whitgift was the chief author of it; and 
yet, if Mr. Strype had feen this letter to Sir Walter Ra¬ 
legb in Udalts pamphlet, ’tis to be thought, he would 
have corrected die date in his own copy by it, which is a 
whole year too late; not that he is over-corrett in other 
dates, even of this ftory (which is inconnettcdly told, 
and confufed with repetitions) for, in two places of the 
archbifhop’s life, he tells us, Udall died 1593 , fee fol. 
344 and 345; and in a third, fol. 375, that he died. 


which is mofl probable, in 1592; and a little further 
quotes a letter of UdaJPs to Uie lord-treafurer, dated in 
1591, wherein he tells his lordfhip, he had been in du¬ 
rance above three years. 

b Strype's life of archbifhop Whitgif}, fol. 373. 

« New difeovery of the old Pontif. Pratt, p. 39. 

1 d Ibidem , p. 42. 

e Herein his majefty tells the queen, 44 That hear- 
44 ing of the apprehenfion of Mr. Udall 9 Mr. Cart - 
44 'wrigbt , and certain other learned minifters of the evan- 
44 gell, within your realm (fays he) of whole good eruditi- 
44 on and fruitful travels in the church, we hear a very 
44 credible commendation, howfoever their diveriity from 
44 the bifhops, and others of your clergy, in matters 
44 touching them in confcience, hath been a mean, by 
44 their dilation, to work them your mifliking; at this 
44 prefent, we cannot (weighing the duty we owe to fuch 
44 as are afftitted for their confcience in that profeftion) 
44 but by our moft eftettual and earnell letter, interpone 
44 us at your hands to any harder ufage of them for that 
44 caufe. So requefting her eamtftly to let them be re- 
44 leafed out of their prefent ftraite, he concludes, from 
44 Edinburgh the i 2 of June , 1591. ” See this letter at 
length in the faid pamphlet, p. 43. 

f 20 Nov. 1591. 

* The pamphlet aforefaid, p. 43* 

was 


Digitized by kjOOQie 








Sir IV A L TER RALEGH. lix 


was at laft moved (who indeed had much reafon to be fo) to deal with the archbiOiop, fo 
that both promifed to obtain UdalT s pardon of her majefty, and liberty for the faid voyage ; * 
yet Udall never enjoyed one or the other, for he died in prifon before they were fully con¬ 
firmed. k 

Here we may give another inftance of Ralegh's friendly and generous excrcile of his . 
power and intereft, for an old officer in the army, fince there is no date to it, that confines us 
to any particular year; and, if we may guefs at the fuccels of his requell by the zeal of it, we 
lhall not doubt, but it effectually obliged his petitioner with the fruits thereof. This officer 
had a fum of money long owing him, it feems, from the treafury, and, knowing how well 
Ralegh was acquainted with the juftice of the debt, no lefs than what influence his applications! 
would be of for procuring it, prevail’d on him to write to the lord-trealurer’s lecretary, who 
was afterwards knighted, and well known by the name of Sir Michael Hicks , that he might 
obtain his lordfhip’s order for the payment of the money. Thefe are the words of his letter : 

“ I am mod earneftly to intreat you for this gentleman, captain Spring ; that partly for love, And (or cap- 
** partly lor honeft confideration, you will further him with my lord-treafurer for a debt of t im 
“ three hundred pounds, which her majefty owes him. It hath been long due •, and he has 
** got good warrant for it: befides, he has ferved her majefty very long, and hath received 
“ many wounds in her fervice. Theie reafons delivered by a man of your utterance, and ' 

“ having his good angel at your elbow to inftruCt you, I doubt not, but it will take good and 
“ fpeedy effeCt. (Concluding) I never wrote unto you for any man, or in any matter, 

wherein you fhall more bind me unto you, than for this bearer: and fo not doubting of 
“ your affured friendlinefs, I leave you to God j and remain your moft affured loving friend.’’ 

In a poftfeript he fays, “ Always remember you muft deal confcionably for my fake, and I 
“ will requite you.” c Examples of this kindfhew men worthy of the power they enjoy, and 
fhine brighter in their characters than many actions of a more publick and magnificent nature * 
power being lb often corrupted with pride and other paffions, as frequently render the pofleflors 
of it mi fchievous, rather than beneficial to their fellow-creatures. But Ralegh , in thefe and 
many other inftances, was fo far from mifufing, that, above die narrow apprehenfions of re- 
pulfe, or laying himfelf under obligations, he appears to have exerted it in the moft ftrenu- 
ous and generous manner, either for preventing or relieving the diftrefs of others, which 
moved the greater compaffion when his own misfortunes brought him to need, and yet to fail 
of the like liberal and fuccefsful mediation for himlelf. The truth is, Ralegh was fo fa¬ 
mous in thefe days, for fuch-like good offices, that the queen ferns to have diftinguifhed him 
by a title more honourable, in the proper fenfe it is to be here taken, than any other fhe con¬ 
ferred upon him: for one day, having told her he had a favour to beg of her, IVhen, Sir 
Walter, faid fhe , will you ceafe to be a beggar ? To which he anfwered, IVhcn your gracious 
majefty ceafes to be a benefaCtor. d With great juftice therefore feems, a certain noted au¬ 
thor of thefe times, to have adapted his work to a patron, when he dedicated a difeourfe 
upon Friendfhip, which he publilhed not long before this time, to Sir lValter Ralegh . e 

But friendfhip made fuch a rare and lading impreflion on him, that it may be faid to 
have extended beyond the life of the objeCt and he well deferves to be remembered in his 
grave, who could leave us fuch noble patterns in memory of the dead. But this place re¬ 
quires only our notice of the memorial he wrote, to clear from fome Spanifh afperfions, the 
fame and conduCi of the valiant and renowned Sir Richard Grenvill, in that bloody expedition, 
where he made fuch a glorious, tho’ untimely end. This brave commander was vice-admiral 
in the lord Thomas Howard's expedition, to intercept the Spanifh plate-fleet at the illes of A- 
zorcs in its return from America. The Englifh fquadron confifted of fix of the queen’s fhips, fix 
victuallers of London , with two or three pinnaces. They fet out early in the fpring 1591, 


1 The pamphlet aforefaid, p. 44. 
k And was not brought to execution, as ‘Thomas Fuller 
m one part of his Church Hi/lay implies, lib. 9. fett. 3 . 
parag. 31. tho’ he contradicts himfelf before in another, 
paragr. 4. where he had faid Udall died peaceably in his 
bed ; for Thomas Forde, in his colledlion of Familiar Letters 
(before mentioned) p 133, having one to Dr. Fuller in 
praife of his (aid Church Hiftory, but willies him therein to 
review that paflage, where h# fpeaks of the execution 0/ 
Lde/l j for he died, fays he, at the Whitt Lyon, juft as 
his pardon was procured, and was buried at St. George' s 
Stv.boxark ; “Of whom, fays this Fade (who was Udall' % 
“ kinlman) we have this tradition. That he was the firft 
“ man king James asked for when he came into England, 
"and being anfwered, he was dead,'the king reply’d, 
“ ij my fa! then the greatefl fcholar in Europe's shad." As 
for. the relation of Udall'/ tryal, eenfures, and fenttnee, 
•v.ntten by himfelf, which this Forde further mention^ to 


1 


have had by him, it feems to be no more than the printed 
narrative we have before ufed.. 

c This letter is printed in the baronettage of England, 
by Arthur Collins, Efq; 8vo. 1720. vol. 2. p. eg. an j’ 
as I have been told by this author, was communicated 
to him by Mr. Strife, who was favoured with it out of 
fecretary CeeiT s papers in the pofleliion of his noble def- 
cendents. 


<1 Apophthegms of the Engli/h nation, MS. alfo with 
very little variation, in a book called, Mifeellanea, or a 
choice Collection of wife and ingenious Sayings of Psinces 
Poets, Statefmen, Courtiers, and others, out of feveral 
ancient and modem authors, ide. by G. M. 8vo. 1694. 

P- 3?; . . 

* See a (park of friendfhip and warm gced-will, that 
fheweth the etfcil of good atfctUon, iaV, fly Thomas 
Churihyard, 4W. 158$. 


and 


Digitized by 


Google 



lx 


the LIFE of 


ind watted fix months at Flores, One of thofe ifiands, in expectation of the faid fleet. As there was, 
befides the Englifh Ships before number'd, one alfo of Sir Waller's in this expedition, named Bark 
Ralegh, commanded by captain thyme j and as he employ’d fome time in the latter end of this 
year to defcribe that memorable engagement they had with the Spaniards ; the brief abftnuft I ftull 
give thereof from his own words, cannot be arraign’d of prolixity, nor perhaps of digreflion ; fince, 
befides his gratitude for the paft fervices of his heroic kinfman, it fo well difplays his fentiments 
Se4?°rate f at timc ^ re ^*P ous hypocrifies and cruelties of their common enemy. The king of Spain 
fight auh« C therefore, having had intelligence of their waiting thus for his Indian fleet, fent an Armada to the 
■* xor< >- Azores of fifty-three fail to convoy it home, under the command of Don Alphonfo Bafan. This 
fleet was juft in fight of the Englifh by then they had any warning of it; and they were lb un¬ 
prepar’d for its reception, that many of their crew were on Ihore, providing ballaft, water, and 
other necefiaries ; and thofe who were on board, were half of them, through ficknefs, unfit for 
fervice. The Spaniards were now fo near at hand, that the Englifh had fcarce time to weigh 
anchor •, and Grenvill , in the Revenge, was the laft upon the place, being defirous of receiving 
all his crew aboard from the ifland, whereof he had no lefs than ninety who were fick and dif- 
eafed. So that, unable to recover the wind, and having but one hundred found men, he was 
perfuaded to cut his main-fail, caft about, and truft to the failing of the Ihip j for the fquadron 
of Seville was on his weather-bow: but he, through the greatnefs of his fpirit, utterly refufed to 
turn from the enemy •, protefting he would rather die than be guilty of fuch dilhonour to him- 
felf, his country, and her majefty’s Ihip *, alluring his company he would pafs through the two 
fquadrons in fpite of them, and force thofe of Seville to give him way ; which he perform’d upon 
divers of the foremoft, who, as the mariners term it, fprung their loof, and fell under the lee of the 
Revenge ; but while he had regard to thofe who were neareft, the huge San Philip, being in the 
wind of him, and approaching, becalm’d his fails in fuch manner, that the Ihip could neither 
make way, nor feel the helm ; fo large and high charged was th cSpanifh galleon, being of fifteen 
hundred ton, carrying three tire, of eleven pieces in each on a fide, and difeharging eight fore¬ 
right from her chafe, befides thofe of her ftern-ports. After the Revenge was thus entangled 
with this Philip , four others loofing up alfo, boarded her, two on the larboard, and two on the 
ftarboard. The fight thus beginning at three a-clock in the afternoon, on the laft of Augufi 
the year aforefaid, continued very terrible all that evening. But San Philip having received 
the lower tire of the Revenge , charged with crofs-bar Ihot, Ihifted with all expedition, utterly 
mifliking her firft greeting. Some faid (he founder’d hereupon •, but this is uncertain. The 
Spanijh lhips were fill’d with foldiers ; fome having two hundred, befides mariners; fome five, 
others eight hundred men: in the Englifh Ihip there were only mariners, with the commanders 
fervants, and fome gentlemen-volunteers. After many exchanges of great and fmall (hot, the 
Spaniards many times attempted to board the Revenge , but were as often beaten back into their 
own lhips, or into the fea *, and when a London vi&ualler, who was under the lee of the Revenge f 
offer’d to undertake any fervice for her afliftance, Grenvill bid him ** Save himfelf, and leave him 
“ to his fortune.” The fight thus continuing while the day lafted, and fome hours of the night, 
* many of the Englifh were (lain; fome of the Spanijh lhips funk; and in many others there was great 
flaughter: Grenvill , tho’ wounded in the beginning of the clofe fight, was never fo dUabled 
as to forfake the upper deck for eight hours together j and then being (hot into the body with 
a mulket, as the wound was drefling, he was again Ihot into the head, and his furgeon at the lame 
time wounded to death. Still the fight continued, and as fall as the Spaniards were beaten off 
by the Revenge , others came in their places \ fo that by morning lhe had fuftained, for fifteen 
hours together, the vollies, boardings, and entries of fifteen feveral lhips of war, and repulfed 
them all v befides the reft which batter’d her loofe and at a diftance. But with the light, in¬ 
creas’d the difeovery of her difmal condition; and the more irklome was the one, in that k 
would not let her conceal the other from her furrounding enemies. * Now was to be fecn nothing 


» As for her friends, the lord Thomas Howard, and the 
other lhips, Sir Walter Ralegh further fays of them, 44 If all 
44 the reft had enter’d, all had been loft; for the very huge- 
44 nefs of the Spani/h fleet, if no other violence had been 
44 offer’d, would havecrufh’d them into (hi vers; of which 
44 the dilhonour, and lofs to the queen, had been far greater 
44 than the fpoil or ham that the enemy could any way 
44 have receiv’d. Notxvithftanding it is true, that the 
44 lord Thomas would have enter’d between the fquadrons, 
44 but the reft would not condefcend ; and the mailer 
44 of his own Ihip offer'd to leap into the fea, rather than 
44 condu& it with the reft to be a prey to the enemy ; 
44 where there was neither hope nor poflibility either of 
44 defence or viftoir. Which alfo, in my opinion, fays 
44 Ralegh, had ill lotted with, or anfwcr’d the diferetion 


44 of a general, to commit himfelf and his charge to af- 
44 fured deftru&ion, without hope or any likchnood of 
44 prevailing thereby, to diminilh the ftrength of her ma- 
44 jelly’s navy, and enrich the pride and glory of the 
44 enemy. The Forefight of the queen’s (continues he) 
44 commanded by Mr. Thomas Vavafiter, performed a 
44 very great fight, and ftay’d two hours as near the 
44 Revenge as the weather would permit, not forfaking 
44 the fight till he was likely to be encompafs'd by the 
44 fouadrons, and with great difficulty clear’d himfelf. 
44 The rell gave divers vollies of Ihot, and enter’d as far 
44 as the place permitted, and their own neceftitics, to 
44 keep the weather-gage of the enemy, until they were 
44 parted by night.” Thus in Sir Walter Ralegh's faid 
of refort \bi\l fight. 


but 


Digitized by kjOOQie 



Sir WALTER RALEGH. 

but the naked hull of a Ihip, and that almoft a fkclcton, having received eight hundred ihot 
of great artillery, and fome under water ; her deck cover’d with the limbs and carcalles of 
forty valiant men, the reft all wounded, and weltering in, or cover’d with their own blood} 
her mails all beaten over-board, all her tackle cut afunder, her upper works razed, and all in 
eftctfl levtll’d with the water ; incapable of any further management or motion, but what the 
billows gave her. Gremnll, now finding their diftrefs irreparable, commanded the Ihip to be 
funk, that the Spaniards might not carry a fplinter home as a trophy of their dear-bought 
victory; dear-bought indeed! the admiral of the Spanijh hulks, and another great galleon, 
called the Afcen/ton of Seville , being both funk by the fide of the Revenge , another alfo in 
the road of St. Michael j and a fourth run herfelf a-ground to fave her company. 1 'here were 
befides flain and drown'd in this fight two eminent Spanijh commanders, and near a thoufand of 
their men, as one of their own officers, who was fever’d from the fight by die enfuingftorm, and 
taken by a London veflel, confefs’d. In that ftorm, as well the whole Indian fleet, which had 
now join’d them, as the reft of the Armada , were fo difpers’d and damag’d, that fourteen fail 
were c.ift away upon the IJle of St. Michael. On the reft of the illamls they alfo loft fifteen or 
fixceen more of their Ihips of war •, and of their Indian fleet, which was a hundred and odd 
fail, there were alfo above feventy confum’d and taken by our (hips of London } befides a very 
rich one which fet her felf on fire, and five others taken by Mr. IVats's fhips. Three thoufand 
carcalles were found two or three days after on the IJle of Tercera > and, by the Spaniards own 
confelfion, no lefs than ten thoufand of their countrymen were loft in this expedition.* But to 
return: Sir Richard exhorted the remainder of his company to trull in God’s mercy, and to 
none elfe ; and, as they had thus long and refolutely repulled fo many enemies, that they would 
not now leflen the honour of their country, by any overtures to lengthen for a few hours or 
days their own lives. Several join’d in opinion with him j but the majority prevail’d, who 
urg’d, the Spaniard would be as ready to entertain a compofition, as they to offer it •, and that 
there were divers valiant men yet living, who might do their prince acceptable fervice, and re¬ 
venge this adion upon the enemy} that the Ihip could be of no ufe either to one or the other, 
for upon the firll working of the fea Ihe mull needs fink, being fo crulh’d, riv’d, and leaky, 
having fix foot water in the hold, that Ihe could never remove out of the place. Accordingly 
the Spanijh general Don Alpbonfo Bapan did make very honourable concelfion ; yielding that 
all their lives Ihould be lav'd, the company fent into England , and the better fort only to pay 
a rcafonable ranfom, free from all gallies or imprifonment. Tho’ it may be thought it was not 
difficult to difliiadc men from death to life, the mafter-gunner would have flain himfclf when he 
found their refolution thus by realon over-borne } but that he was by force with-held. Then the 
general fent many boats aboard the Revenge , and divers of the Englifh fulpeding Sir Richards 
defperate difpofition to blow up or fink the Ihip, Hole away to the Spaniards. But the general pre¬ 
vail’d upon him to remove out of the Revenge , being very unfavory, fill’d as it was, like a flaugh- 
ter-houfe, with the bodies and blood of the dead and wounded. Sir Richard told them, they 
might do with his body what they pleas’d, for it was now of no ufe to him } and, as he was car¬ 
ried out of the fhip, he fwooned, but revived again, and defir’d the company to pray for 
him. The general ufed him with the utmoft humanity, and left nothing unattempted for his 
recovery i highly refpeding, or rather admiring, the wonderful and unconquerable refolution in 
fo rare a fpedacle of confummatc and approv’d intrepidity, who could make fuch refiftance 
for fo long time, and fuch havock upon fuch an Armada , with a Angle Ihip and fo few men. 
Sir Richard linger’d two or three days, and then died aboard the general, who greatly bewailed 
his loft j b but the Revenge, with two hundred Spaniards in her, being overtaken by the ftorms 


• Linjchoten, in the 99th chapter of his voyages to the 
Eafl and Weft-Indies, fays, that of the whole fleet and 
Armada , being 140 Ihips, there were but 32 or 33 arriv’d 
in Spain and Portugal ; and thofe with fuch difficulty and 
difpcrfion, that not any two arriv’d together; all the 
rell were call away upon the iflands and overwhelm’d in 
the fea by that violent ftorm : fo that for twenty days af- 
tCT it they did nothing but flfh for dead men. 

k The fame Dutch author, tho* he millakes in fome 
particulars; as making this engagement to have happen’d 
a fortnight later, yet agtees with Sir Walter Ralegh 
that Sir Richard made a wonderful onpofirion ; for he 
mentions, 4 ‘ no lefs than feven or eight ihips boarding the 
“ Revenge ; thatibe refilled them at lead twelve hours; 
“ that the Spaniards loll above 400 men in the fight; and 
44 that when Sir Richard was convey’d into the Spanijh ad- 
44 mini’s (hip the 5 /. Paul, all the captains were attonilh- 
44 ed at his llout and couragious heart, for he fhew’d no fign 
44 offaintnefs, nor change of colour; but, feeling the hour 
44 of death approach, faid in the Spamjh longue, Here die l 


44 Richard GrenvilJ, with a joyful and quiet mirJ, h&i'in* 
“ ended my It ft like a true foldicr, that has fought for his 
44 country , queen, religion, and honour, ifPc. He gives us 
44 further, as an inkance of his bravery, that while he 
44 continued amongfl the Spanijh captains, and they were 
41 at dinner or fupper with him, he would carouie three or 
44 four glafles of wine, and take the glafles between his 
44 teeth and crufh them in pieces, and fwaliow them down 5 
44 fo that often the blood would run out of his mouth, 
‘ 4 without any other harm to him.” Which I can be¬ 
lieve without fcruple, having feen an officer of the army 
in a frolick do the like, and fwaliow the glafs he had 
drank in, all but the folid Hein, or that part which is not 
mandible; but more cautioufly than Sir Richard leems to 
have perform’d it, for he diew not a drop of blood from 
any part of his mouth. As for Grenv ill's poligree, it may 
be feen in the lace collodion of Englijh baronets, i2mo. 
1728; but the memorials that are attempted of him in 
H. Holland , Fuller , and Prince, are far (hort of his actions 
and delerts. 

g g aforefaid. 


Digitized by 


Google 





lxii 


The LIFE of 

afortfaid, was funk with the others above-mention’d, at St. Michael's JJland. In this manner 
did they honour the burial of that renown’d Ihip j and thus did (he to the laft make good her 
name upon them. 

Thus have we gather’d from Sir Walter Ralegh what is here mod material of this extraordi¬ 
nary aXion} but when he further obferves the general’s former promife was not perform’d* 
of fetting the prifoners at liberty •> fo that they petition’d to be landed upon the iflands, hoping 
to be thence tranfported into England: and alfo the endeavours that were made to corrupt their 
loyalty, by Morrice Ftlz-Jobn (fon of old John of Defmond before-mention’d) who fent to the 
Englijh from fhip to Ihip, perfuading them to ferve the king of Spain , through the motives 
of trebling their pay, advancing their condition, and improving their faith, to the fifety of 
their fouls, he is moved to make fome fharp and lively reflexions upon thefc topicks; on 
Hi* reflexions die laft whereof he exprefles himfelf in this manner. 44 For matter of religion, it would re- 
pmencciQ^ " a P art * ctj ^ ar volume to fet down how irreligioufly they cover their greedy and am- 
Rtligion. 44 bitious praXices with that veil of piety j for, fune I am, there is no kingdom or common- 
44 wealth in all Europe , but if reform’d, they invade it for religion-fake: if it be, as they 
44 term, Catholick , they pretend title *, as if the kings of Caflile were the natural heirs of all 
44 the world \ and fo between both, no kingdom is unfought. Where they dare not with 
44 their own forces invade, they bafely entertain the traitors and vagabonds of all nations» 
44 feeking by thofe and their renegade jefuits to win parts ^ and have by that means 
44 ruin’d many noble houfes and others in this land, and have extinguifli’d both their lives and 
44 families. What good, honour, or fortune, ever man yet by them atchiev’d, is yet unheard of, 
44 or unwritten. And if our Englijh papifts do but look into Portugal , againft which they 
44 have no pretence of religion ; how the nobility are put to death, imprifon’d j their rich 
44 men made a prey, and all forts of people captiv’d i they /hall find, that the obedience 
44 even of the Turk is eafy, and a liberty, in refpeX of the flavery and tyranny of Spain. 
44 What have they done in Sicily, Naples , Milan , and the Low-Countries ? Who hath there 
44 been fpared for religion at all ? And it cometh to my remembrance of a certain burgher of 
44 Antwerp , whofe houfe being enter’d by a company of Spanijh foldiers when they firft 
44 fack’d the city, he befought them to fpare him and his goods, being a good catholick, and 
44 one of their own party. The Spaniards anfwer’d. They knew him to be of a good conference 
44 for himfelf > but his money, plate , jewels , and goods , were all heretical j and therefore lawful 
44 prize. So they abufed and tormented the foolilh Fleming , who hoped that an Agnus Dei 
44 had been a fufficient target againft all force of that holy and charitable nation. Neither 
44 have they at any time, as they proteft, invaded the Indies or Peru, but rather to reduce 
44 the people to Chriftianity, than either for gold or empire j whereas in one only ifland, cal- 
44 led Hifpaniola , they have wafted three millions of the natural people, befides many mil- 
44 lions elfe in other places of the Indies : a poor and harmlefs people, created of God, and 
44 might have been won to his knowledge, as many of them were, and almoft as many 
44 as ever were perfuaded thereunto. The ftory whereof is at large written by a bifhop of 
44 their own nation, called Bartholomew de las Cafas , and tranflated into Englijh , and many 
44 other languages, entitled. The Spanijh Cruelties. Who would therefore repofe truft in fuch 
44 a nation of ravenous ftrangers; and efpecially in thofe Spaniards , who more greedily 
44 thirft after Englijh blood, than after the lives of any other people in Europe ? For the 
44 many overthrows and difhonours they have received at our hands, whofe weaknefs we have 
44 difeovered to the world, and whofe forces at home, abroad, in Europe , in India , by fea and 
44 land, we have, even with handfuls of men and /hips, overthrown and di/honour'd. Let 
44 not therefore any Englijbrnan , of what religion foever, have other opinion of the Spaniard , 
44 but that thofe whom he feeketh to win in our nation, he efteemeth bafe and traiterous, 
44 unworthy perfons or unconftant fools: and that he ufeth his pretence of religion for no 
44 other purpoft, but to bewitch us from the obedience of our natural prince ; thereby hoping 
44 in time to bring us to flavery and fubjeXion. And then none /hall be unto them fo odious 
44 and difdain’d as the traitors themfelves, who have fold their country to a ftranger, and 
44 forfaken their faith and obedience, contrary to nature and religion; and even contrary to 
44 that human and general humour not only of Chriftians, but of heathen and irreligious na- 
44 tions, who have always fuftain’d what labour foever, and imbraced even death it felf /ok 
44 their country, prince, or commonwealth. To conclude: it hath ever to this day pleafed 
44 God to profper and defend her majefty, to break the purpofes of malicious enemies, of 
44 forfworn traitors, and of unjuft praXices and invafions. She hath ever been honour’d of 
44 the worthieft kings i ferved by faithful fubjeXs i and /hall, by the favour of God, refift, 
44 repel, and confound all whatfoever attempts againft her /acred perfon or kingdom. In the 

“ mean 


Digitized by boogie 











Sir WALTER RALEGH. lxiii 


“ mean time, let the Spaniards and traitors vaunt Of their fuccefs -, and we her true and obe- 
u diem vafels, guided by the fhiniftg light of her virtues, (hall always love her, ferve her, 

*i and obey her to the end of our lives.” * 

Rauch had no fooner dbne with his pen, but he took tip arms againft the Spaniards, in¬ 
tending to feek reparation of them for the foflfes afbrefaid. He had formed an enterprife upon 
Panama, with a defign alfo of meeting the Spanijh plate-fleet j was at great expence in fitting 
out a maritime force for that purpofe ; and ufed his utmofl intereft and diligence to engage 
many worthy friends in the adventure. The Icheme he laid down appear’d fo fcafible to her 
majefty, having provided no kfs than thirteen (hips of his own and his aflociates, all well 
mann’d, and plentifully furnilhed with arms, provifions, and all other ncceflaries, that fhfc 
added to them two of her own men of War, named the Garland and Forefight \ and gave hirrt 
a commWion, oonftituting him general of the fleet. b The honour of lieutenant-general was General of an 
given to Sir John Burgh, a gentleman altogether worthy of the command. And indeed all p X j^“ on t0 
his conforts, officers, foldiets and Tailors, were men of notable refolution j fuch as had given 
fufficient proof of their valour in divers fervices; and, to give them their right, fays my 
author, fo well qualified in courage, experience and diferetion, that the greareft prince might 
•repute hitnfelf happy to be ferved by the like. With thefe {hips thus equipp’d, Raiegh de¬ 
parted in February, the year aforcfaid, to the weft of England, there to ftore himfelf with fuch 
further conveniences as he thought he fhould need i but the wefterly winds blowing for a long 
time contrary to his courfe, bound him to keep harbour fo many weeks, that the fit reft feafon 
for his purpofe was expir'd, and much of his provifions confum’d. The queen, underftanding 
how unluckily he was detain’d, it being the fixthof May following, that is, in the year 1592, 
before Ralegh could put to fea, fhe fent Sir Martin Frobijher after him, who overtook him the 
Very next day, with letters of revocation. But Ralegh finding his honour fo Far engag’d Jfi Recall’d, 
die undertaking of this voyage, that, without proceeding, he faw no remedy either to falve his 
reputation, or farisfy his friends, who had contributed fo largely to this adventure j and inter¬ 
preting the queen’s letters, as if her commands had been propounded in terms of latitude, ei¬ 
ther to advance or retire at his own diferetion. Would by no means con fent to leave the fleet, 
now under fail. So he continued his courfe upon the feas, till he met with a fhip belonging to 
Monfieur Gourdon, governor of Calais, in which was one Mr. Nivel Davies , who was return’d 
from a twelve years captivity in Spain • and who allur'd him, there was little hopes of any fuc¬ 
cefs this year in the Weft-Indies ; for the king of Spain had fent cXpfefS orders to all the ports, 
both of the Iftands and Terra Firma , that no fhips fhould ftir that year, nor any treafure be 
kid aboard for Spain. But neither this difagreeable news, nor the other difeouragements, could 
deter him from proceeding} till on the eleventh of May, When hfc was off Cape Finifter, a 
mod raging tempeft arifing, fo fcatter’d the greater part of the fleet, and funk his boats and 
pinnaces, that, as the reft were driven and divided, Ralegh himfelf, in the Garland, was in In a 
great danger of being fwallowed up in the fea. Hereupon, confiJering the feafon was too far rou, ltoun. 
gone for his enterprife upon Panama , and his victuals too much confum’d ; that the fame con- 
fumption might farther difable him from lying upon the Spanijh coaft, or at the Iftands, to meet 
with the Indian fleet, for which he had received fuch little encouragement to wait, Ralegh made 
a divifion of his fleet into two fquadrons, committing one under the charge of Sir John Burgh , 
and the other to Sir Martin Frobijher -, and gave his inftruCtions for Sir Martin, in the Gar¬ 
land, with captain George Gifford , captain Henry Thynne, captain Grcnvill, and others, to lie 
off the fouth ape to terrify and keep the Spaniards on their own coaft while Sir John Burgh, His in o ruc 
with captain Robert Crofs, Thomfon, and others, fhould lie at the Azores for the carracks tions 10 hi$ 
from India. The fuccefs of thefe directions was anfwerable to the excellent judgment that con- tet ‘ 
triv*d them. For the Spanijh admiral, receiving intelligence that the Englijh fleet was cruifing 
upon their coaft, gather’d all'his naval power to watch Frobijher, and defend the fbuthern parts 
of Spain ; while the carracks, unguarded, were left a prey to Sir John Burgh. Before the 
fket fcparated, they met on the Spanijh coart with a great Bifcayan, called Sand a Clara, a 


* See a report of the truth of the fight about the ifles 
of jtsserri, Otis lalt fummer, betwixt the Revenge, one of 
her maje/ly’s /hips, commanded by Sir Richard GrenviU, 
»wl an Armada of the king of Spain: 410. 1591. re- 
priM*d> fol. in Haiixyt, vol. 2. 1599. part 2. p. 169. 
where it is /aid to be penn’d by the honourable Sir Walter 
Raltgh. 

k Sir William Men fan, in his Nerval ‘Trafh, obferves 
upon this enterprite, “ That Sir Walter Raltgh, who had 


“ tafted abundantly of the queen’s love, finding it now begin 
“ to decline, rctoived to undertake an expedition to lea ; 
“ and engaged feveral of his friends, of great quality, to 
“ be concern’d with him." ’Tu pity but this author had 
fatisfy’d us more exprefly about that declen/ion of the 
queen’s love. For, 1 think, that her lending Raltgh her 
/hips of war, and the honourable conimillion the gave him, 
to be general in this expedition, feem rather to contradid, 
than any ways confirm that insinuation. 


fhip 


Digitized by boogie 






lxiv 


The LIFE of 

Ihip t>f fix hundred ton ; which, after a fight for fome time, they mafter’d, and found freighted 
A priza. w jth all forts of little iron-work, valued by the Englijh at fix or feven thoufand pounds j but 
of treble the value to the Spaniards . This, having clear’d, they fent to England. Then 
Sir John Burgh, in a Ihip of Sir Walter Ralegh's, named the Roebuck , coafting along to¬ 
wards the fouth cape of St. Vincent -, and, by the way fpying a fail, gave her chafe ; whicli 
being a flyboat and good failor, drew him far fouthward, before lie could fetch her; at lafl 
Ihe came under his lee, and ftruck fail. The mafter confefs’d a great fleet was prepar’d at 
St. Lucar and Cadiz * for the rumour of Ralegh’s putting out ftrong for the Weft-Indies had 
lb alarmed the king of Spain , that he raifed this fleet to oppofe and encounter him -, tho* look¬ 
ing for the arrival of his Eaft-India carracks, he firft order’d thofc Ihips to convoy them from 
the Azores j but perfuading himfelf if Ralegh's fleet did make for the Weft-Indies, that then 
the iflands would be infefted only by fome fmall men of war which the carracks of themfelvcs 
would be able to cope with, his order was to Don Alphonfo de Bafan to purfue Ralegh’s fleer, 
and engage him, what courfe foever he held: and the Englijh foon found this information 
true. For Sir John Burgh , not long after his having taken that flyboat, as he return’d to his 
company, defery’d the Spanijh fleet to fea-ward of him •, which having likewife difeover’d 
him, made full account to bring him into the Spanijh harbour $ but he dexteroufly efcaped 
them, and lhaped his courfe to the Azores , according to Ralegh's directions. Here he took 
fevcral fmall caravels ; but learnt little intelligence from them. Arriving at Flores on die 21ft 
of June , and making to the lhore of a village there, call’d Santa Cruz , he found them all 
in arms ; but, (hewing figns of amity by a white flag, he was accommodated by the inhabi¬ 
tants with whatever he wanted. Here he learnt news of the Eaft-Indian carracks, one whereof 
had lately palled by for Lisbon , and that four more were behind. He made after, and foon 
difeover’d the foremoft, named the Santa Cruz *, which was prefled fo dofe upon by the 
Englijh, that fhe fir’d her felf •, but they took, befides fome fpoil, certain priloners out of her, 
who confds’d, that within fifteen days three other greater carracks would arrive at the fame ifland. 
Sir John, having taken counfel with his officers, departed fix or feven leagues to the weft of 
Flores , caufing the ihips in his company to fpread themfelves north and fouth two leagues 
diftant from each other, by which extenfion they could difeover two whole degrees. Thus 
they lay till the third of Auguft , when captain 1 ‘homjon firft faw that prodigious great 
carrack, called the Mad re de Dios, or Mother of God, one of the greateft burden be¬ 
longing to the crown of Portugal. Captain Tbomfon firft attack’d her, but with the lofs of 
feveral men; then Sir John Burgh, in the Roebuck aforefaid, intangled her; and Sir Robert 
Crofs faften’d himfelf to her at the lame inftant: but Sir John was forced to dilengage a-while, 
for fear of finking, being (hot under-water. At laft Crofs fell athwart her all alone, pre¬ 
vented her running alhore to fire her felf, as the other had done, and gave the reft time to 
come up to his fuccour j which, after he had fought with her three hours, he receiv’d by the 
lord Cumberland's Ihips: and then, having made a great daughter of the Spaniards, they 
boarded and pofiels’d themfelves of her with little difficulty. 

Another of This prize was reckon’d the greateft and richeft that ever had been brought into England ; 
great value. anc j w hen the news of her being taken arriv’d, Ralegh was no Jcls diligent to have her fafely 
condu&ed home, than the officers aforefaid had been in the taking of her. For, after confuta¬ 
tion with Sir John Hawkins, his chief partner in this enterprife, they wrote a letter to the lord 
admiral, in thele words j “ Our very good lord, we have confer’d together about the Eaft- 
“ Indian Ihip to be brought to Plymouth by Sir John Burgh', and, in our opinions, Ihe can be 
“ no lefs worth than five hundred thoufand pounds \ being a Ihip of fo great burden, and laden 
“ with fo rich commodities as appeareth Ihe is: wherefore we have confider’d, that the Spanijh 
“ men of war, lying upon the coaft of Bretagne, hearing of fo great a prize taken from the 
“ king, or the merchants of the country j and, envying that fuch a benefit Ihould grow to us, 
“ to their hinderance and difhonour, will endeavour by all polfible means, being diftant but a 
** day or night’s failing, either to recover the Ihip again, or to burn her and all her lading, 
*« rather than Ihe Hull be deliver’d here; feeing that the places of defence where the Ihip may 
“ remain, are not able to refill their power : in our opinion therefore we think fit, and do pray 
“ your lordfhip, that the three Ihips of her majefty’s which are appointed to keep the narrow leas, 
« may, by your lordlhip’s letter and directions, be appointed to go weftward, and there to 
“ guard the Indian Ihip for a time, until the Gardland and fome of the lame fleet be return’d, 
“ whole arrival cannot be any long time expefted ; or till fome order may be taken for the 
4 ‘ unlading or keeping of her otherwile ; which we pray your lordlhip may be done with 
“ fome expedition. And fo we humbly take our leave, this 27th of Auguft 1592. Your 

“ lordlhip’s 


1 


b 

1 

i. 

r 

n 


cc 


f- 

F 

J£T.': 

r 

fact 

mt. 

b- 

LTi 

u: 

e: 

1. 

bn 






'* T >; 

* % 
■4 


Digitized by 


Google 







lxv 


Sir WALTER RALEGH. 

“ lordlhip’s humbly at commandment, W. Ralegh (and underneath) John Hawkins.” * By this 
means probably fuch care was taken, that this mighty Ihip was brought fafc into Dartmouth on 
the 7th of September following, where it daily drew vaft numbers of fpeftators from all parts to 
admire at the hugenefs of it, being far beyond the model of the biggeft /hipping then known 
among us either for war or burden. b But as to the lading, tho’ Sir John Burgh did prudently 
feize upon the whole to her majefty’s ufe, to prevent all licentious fpoil; whereby the treafure 
brought home was fufficient to recompenfe the adventurers coft, and the failors peril, however, 
the dividends are not known, more than that her majefty had the largeft ftiare ; and tho’, 
through the varieties thereof, our nation was let into the difeovery of thofe merchandifes, where¬ 
of we had before but an imperfed knowledge \ yet the whole cargo, when it came to be 
landed and valued in England , fell fhort above two thirds of the computation which had been 
made by Ralegh and Hawkins , as above. c For it feems there were a large quantity of jewels, 
and of great value, which were never brought to light; and fo much of her other goods 
was alfo purloin’d by the failors, foldiers, and officers, that at her arrival in England , lhe drew 
five foot lefs water than (he did when lhe was firft freighted at Cochin in the Eafl-Indies . And 
indeed the failors themfelves, whom neither order, oath, nor proclamation, could reflrain, boldly 
confefs’d, They bad rather trujl their fouls to a merciful God by Perjury , than their fortunes to 
the hands of unmerciful men . d 

Thz latter end of this year, and beginning of next, we meet with Sir Walter Ralegh in the 
parliament houfe, whether return’d for a county or a borough, and for which, does not at prefent In parlia- 
particularly occur j but much engaged we find him there throughout this fhort feffion,' among mem ’ 
the ableft heads both in committees, and as a publick fpeaker. A late author of his life ob- 
ferves, « that his fpeeches were full of reafon and eloquence, no man in his days being more a His chamdt< t 
“ matter of language than himfelf f and matter too, he might have added •, none more fatis- a ' a 
fackorily confirming his arguments with fads and experience than he did, even in his unpre¬ 
meditated fpeeches, no lefs than in the more deliberate compofitions of his pen; fo full of ob- 
fervation he was upon all times and countries, and fo readily he could apply it upon all occa- 
fions; which now won him great regard, as a fpeaker in the houfe, and afterwards as an author, 
to the whole world. Soon after the opening of the feffion, we find him upon the committee for 
the liberties and privileges of the members, tofexamine and make report of all fuch cafes touch¬ 
ing the eledions and returns of any the knights, citizens, burgefles, or barons of the houfe, as 
fhould arife during the laid feffion of parliament: alfo in another againft popifh recufants. 

And when the bill for certain fubfidies to be granted her majefty was in debate, and fome mem¬ 
bers were for having it exprefly diftinguiih’d in the bill, that the faid fubfidies fhould be for 
maintaining a war impulfive and defenfive againft the Spaniard , that the conquefts we made 
over them might be legal and warrantable Sir Walter Ralegh feconded thofe fpeeches, and 
laid, “ He knew many, who held it not lawful in confcience, as the time was, to take prizes Argun for » 
“ from the Spaniard } and he knew, that if it might be lawful and open war, there would be opc^wa^ 

“ more voluntary hands to fight againft the Spaniard than the queen fhould ftand in need of to againft the 

Spaniard. 


1 This, from the original, among the ineftimable trea¬ 
sures in the Harlejan library ; tho* written neither. by 
Ralegh nor Han*.kins, but perhaps by fome fccretary, or 
other perton belonging to one of them; for it is fign’d by 
their own hands, as above. It has alfo a feal (on fott 
yellow wax) of Ralegh's coat of arms (hereafter men¬ 
tion’d) in a triangular efcutchcon; but the crefl (a flag, 
or other-like homed animal) is different from what he af¬ 
terwards bore, as will be alfo obferved in the fequel of this 
work. 

k This carack was in burden no lefs than 1600 ton, 
whereof 900 were merchandise : (he carried 32 pieces of 
brafs ordnance, and between fix and feven hundred paf- 
fengers; was built with decks feven ftory, one main orlop, 
three dofe decks, one forecallle, and a fpare-deck of two 
Soon apiece. According to the obfervations of Mr. Robert 
Adttnu, an excellent geometrician, (he was in length from 
the beak-head to the Aein 165 foot; in breadth near 47 
foot 1 the length of her keel 100 foot; of the main-malt 
121 foot; its circuit at the partners near it foot; and her 
main-yard 106 foot. 

« As to her lading, according to the catalogue taken 
at Ltadenball the 15th of September this year, the princi¬ 
pal wares confiAed of fpices, drugs, iilks, callicoes, car¬ 
pets, quilts, cloth of the rind of trees, ivory, Porcellan 
or China ware, ebony; beiides pearl, mulk, civit, and 
ambergris; with many other commodities of inferior va¬ 
lue. The Qargafin freighted ten of our (hips for London , 


and was, by moderate computation, valued at 150000/. 
Sterling. See a true report of the honourable lervicc at 
fea, perform’d by Sir John Burrough, lieutenant-general 
of the fleet, prepar’d by the honourable Sir Halter Ra¬ 
legh, lord-warden, tsfe. in Hakluyt , vol. 2. part 2. p. 194. 
There was alfo printed another account of this great flup, 
while it lay in the port aforefaid, in Quarto, under this 
title. The Seaman's Triumph, declaring the honourable 
adions of fuch gentlemen, captains, &c. as were at the 
taking of the great carack lately brought to Dartmouth , 
with her burden and commodities: alio the manner of the 
fight with and burning of another at the ljle of Flowers, 
of the burden of 900 ton, written for truth, to a Gentle¬ 
man of great worjhip in London. This gentleman, tho* 
his name is not prefix’d to the dedication, was Sir Walter 
Ralegh, as may plainly appear to thofe who have read it, 
and are acquainted with the hiAory of this adion. I ne¬ 
ver faw but one of thefe pamphlets, which is in the pof- 
feffion of a nobleman, curious in colledions of this kind; 
and remember to have read in it, that fome jars of civit 
were, through unadvifednefs of the failors, thrown over¬ 
board ; they not knowing what it was. But in the whole, 
this trad, as I remember, is not fo particular and accu¬ 
rately written, as that account in Hakluyt aforefaid. 

d Camden's Annals, 1592. 

c ItbegunfV£. 10. 1592. and wasdifTolv’d vf/r. 9. 1503. 

f The Lift of Sir Walter Ralegh in Lives Englijb and 
foreign, vol. 1. p. 95. 

h h «* fend 


Digitized by 


Google 




lxvi 


the L I F E of 

“ fend to fea.” Accordingly he was appointed of the committee for drawing the articles and 
preamble of the faid bill. * Further, when the necdlity of the faid fubfidy came to be enforc’d, 
His fpeech Ralegh fpake for it, “ not only (as he protefted) to pleafe the queen, to whom he was infi¬ 
ll againfhhe “ nite 'y bound above his deferts j but for the neceflity he both faw and knew.” He very well 
Spaniards . difcover*d the great ftrength of the king of Spain \ and, to fhew his mightinefs, he told 
how he poflefs’d all the world ; as alfo that his malice and ill purpofe was evident to this 
realm, he (hewed how on every fide he had beleaguer’d us. “ That in Denmark , the king being 
“ young, had corrupted the council and nobility v f® as it was very likely he would fpced 
“ himfelf of (hipping from thence. In the marine towns of the Lew-Countries, and in Nor- 
u way , he laid in great ftore of (hipping. In France , he had the parliament-towns at his 
“ command ; in Brit any, he had all the beft havens •, and in Scotland , had fo corrupted the no- 
“ bility, that he had promis’d them forces to aflift the papiffs; that they were ready to join 

“ with any foreign forces that would make them flrong, to be by themfelves and refill others ; 

“ for, as he thought, there were not fix gentlemen of that country of one religion. In his 
“ own country, there is all polfible preparing ; and he is coming with fixty gallics, befides 
“ other (hipping, with purpofe to annoy us. We muft then have no (hips, if he invade us 
“ riding at anchor; all will be little enough to withftand him. At his coming, he fully re- 
“ lolveth to get Plymouth , or at lead to poflefs fome of the havens this fummer within our 

“ land ; and Plymouth is a place of mod danger, for no ordnance can be carried thither to re- 

“ move him, the paflages will not give leave. Now the way to defeat him, is to fend a royal 
** army to fupplant him in Brit any, and to poffefs our felvcs there •, and to lend a drong navy 

“ to fea, and to lye upon the Cape and at Lamhuck to which places come all his fhips with 

“ riches from all parts, and then they may fet upon all that come. This we are able to do, 

“ and undoubtedly with fortunate fuccefs, if we undertake it.’ - h But fome divifion arifing 

upon the quedion how they Ihould make the motion for this fupply to the lords, Ralegh 
made fo judicious a diftin&ion of the caufe thereof, and fo clearly demondrated the erroneous 
manner in which it had been propounded, that it appears plainly, the fuccefsful turn which 
follow’d thereupon was owing to him alone. For, faid Ralegh, “ had the quedion but been 
“ put, whether they Ihould only yield to a conference in general with the lords ? the houfe 
“ would not have been agninft ittherefore defir’d the fpcaker to put it to the quedion, whe¬ 
ther they Ihould confer with the lords generally or not, without naming the fubfidy ? This 
motion was fo well liked, that Ralegh was defir’d by the houfe to repeat it over again, that 
it might be better heard by them alL Thereupon he (aid, “ that as it had been lately receiv’d 
“ in the negative, he would not make it a quedion again, for by the order of the houfe he could 
not but propounded it as a new quedion, “ Whether the houfe would be pleafed to have a 
“ general conference with the lords, touching the great and imminent dangers of the realm and 
“ date, and the prefent neceffary fupply of treafure to be provided fpeedily for the fame, ac- 
“ cording to the proportion of the neceflity ?” Being dated in this manner, it was aflented 
to by the whole houfe, without one negative voice. £ But one of the members, Mr. Oliver 
St. John, making fome mifconftru&ion of the vice-chamberlain’s fpeech upon this occafion. 
Sir IValter Ralegh further explain’d the matter agreed upon by the houfe to him, in thefe words. 
“ If we confer generally, it mud be of our dangers, and of the remedies, which mud be by 
“ means -, if of means, it mud be of money and aid. So our conference mud needs be of 
“ fubfidy, or rather aid : but to agree upon this with any refolution either in the matter or fub- 
“ dance, it is not our meaning.” d After this conference, feveral forms of provifion were 
propos’d by way of treble fubfidies, and like proportionable fifteenths and tenths, with other 
kinds of benevolence : and many excellent fpeeches paded upon that part of this important af¬ 
fair. Sir tbornas Cecill was for three fubfidies to be paid in four years, and to be charged upon 
men of ten pounds and upwards, to fpare thofe who were under. Sir Henry Knivet alledged 
the poverty of our country againd the reafons ufed, and imputed that poverty to the bringing 
in more foreign wares, dian we vented commodities, whereby our money was carried out of 
our country, which was thus become like a pond that was fed with a fpring, but having a 
breach, through which more paded away than came in: thereupon moved for a furvey to be 
taken of all mens lands and goods in England, and fo much to be yearly levied as might main¬ 
tain the queen’s wars, the proportion being fa a hundred thoufand pounds yearly ; or, if that was 
mifliked, every man on his word Ihould deliver in, to his power, the profits of his lands and 

a Sir Simon Dews 's Journal of queen Elizabeth's par- * Sir Simzn Dtwes, fol. 484. and Haywcrd Tow ifhend 's 
liaments, fol. 1708. p. 478. hifi. Coil fol. 65. c Drive*'* Journ. fol. 4S8. d Id., 190* 

goods \ 


Digitized by LiOoqlc 



Sif IV A L 7* E R R A L E G Hi ixvii 

goods j fo a proportion to be cefs’d accordingly. To him who argued of the poverty of the 
land, from the multitude of beggars, Ralegh gave thefe reafons: “ That the broken companies 
“ in Normandy and the Low-Countries , who returned maimed hither, never went back again 
“ to the towns from whence they came : for a multitude of clothiers, taking their looms into 
“ their hands, fpun their wool themfelves; and except we would work for them cheaper than 
“ they can make themfelvcs, they will fet none to work. This engrofiing of fo many trades 
“ into their own hands, beggars lb many as ufually lived by the trade.” As for the furveying 
of fo many mens eftates, he thought it inconvenient. “ For many, being efteemed richer than 
“ they are, would be found beggars, and increafe the opinion of their number, by lofmg their 
“ credit, which is now their wealth. He further reported of his own knowledge, that the 
“ Weft-Country, ftnee the parliament begun, had taken from them the worth of four hundred 
“ and forty thoufands pound ; and that thofe of Newcaflle lay ftill for fear, bccaufc the Bour- 
“ deaux fleet was taken this year by the enemy. ! For the enemy approaching us, and being be* 

“ come our neighbour, our trades will decay every day, and fo our poverty increafes. Thus 
“ it is moft certain; the longer we defer aid, the lefs able we lhall be to yield it *, yet in the 
“ end, the greater aid will be required ; fo fparing them now, we lhall charge them when they 
« lhall be lefs able to bear it: for it is molt true, one hundred thouland pounds would have 
«* done the laft year, that which three will not now do •, and three will do this ycaf, that 
** which fix will not do hereafter.” In the conclufion, he agreed to three lublidies •, in them, 
the three pound-men to be fpared ; the fum which came from them, to be levied upon thofe of 
ten pound and upwards; and the payment to be fpeedy . 2 Mr. Francis Bacon aflfenred to three 
fubfidies •, but not to the payments under fix years : but to his reafons of difficulty and dan¬ 
ger in a fpcedier levy, which might hazard a double peril, by making it four Ihillings in the 
pound, a double payment j Ralegh anfwer’d, “ I fee no rcafon that the lulpicion of difeontent- 
“ ment Ihould crofs the provifion for the prefent danger. The time is now more dangerous 
than it was in eighty-eight; for then the Spaniard coming from Spain , was to pafs dangerous 
“ fcas, and had no place of retreat or relief if he fail’d : but now he has in Britany great 11 ore 
“ of Ihipping; a landing-place in Scotland•, and men and horfes there as good as any we 
“ have. But for the difficulty in getting this fubfidy, I think it feems more difficult by fpcak- 
“ ing, than it would be in gathering.** b In the end, it vhs carried agreeable to his propo- 
fitionsj the grant of a triple fubfidy being agreed to, and of fix fifteenths and tenths i to be 
levied and paid in four years, by a certain form which they had fet down in articles j that is to 
lay, one entire fubfidy and two fifteenths and tehtlis at one payment' in the firft year *, and one 
other entire fubfidy, with two fifteenths and tenths at another payment in the fecond year j and 
one entire fubfidy and two fifteenths and tenths at two payments in the third and fourth years. e 

Soow after there was a bill read in the houfe againjl counterfeiting the hands of counfellors 
or principal officers \ and upon the fecond reading,- .it was committed to Sir John Woolley and 
Sir Walter Ralegb , with others. But after a meeting in the Middle 'Temple hall, Sir John made 
report to the houfe, that himfelf, and the refidue of the committee, upon the end of their exa¬ 
mination and travel therein, did all of them think it a very dangerous bill and not fit, in 
their opinion, to pafs the houfe ; to whofe confideration they further thought proper to leave it. 

And becaufe it was a bill which came from the lords, they thought good, with the faid report 
firft made, to deliver the laid bill again into this houfe, and there to leave it as it is, and not 
otherwife. But the bill againjl aliens felling foreign wares among us by retail, produced fevcral 
weighty arguments and fpeeches in the houfe, which have been tranlmitted to us. Thefe 
foreigners it feems were Dutchmen^ who had neftltd themfelves in St. Martins , anciently al¬ 
low’d for a fandhiary, and therefore ftill had this privilege: here they practis'd fpinning and 
weaving, to the great detriment and complaint of merchants and regular dealers in our own 
city; infomuch that threefcore Englifh retailers had been ruin’d by them fince the laft parliament, 
to the diminution, befides their own private fubflance, of the queen’s fubfidy and the publick 
treafure of the kingdom ; twenty thoufand pounds a year at lcaft having been carried out of the 
realm by them. They had indeed fome learned council who pleaded for them at the bar, and 
fome of the members fpoke in their behalf. One of them faid, this bill was thruft into the houfe 
by our mercantile engroflers •, that their beggaring the domeftick retailers might be imputed to 
the ftrangers retailing. But he was anfwercd by another with arguments to prove that engroffing 
was fuflerable among merchants. Others again ran upon the more univerfal topics of charity, 
in giving Ihelter and means of getting livelihood to poor deftitutc ftrangers, who fly to us for 
religion and relief; that we have been ftrangers, and allow’d the liberty we deny j that now 

• Dfwts'i Journal, fol. 492. k Id. 49}. « Id. 495. 


Digitized by v^.ooQle 


they 






/ 


lxviii The LIFE of 

they are ftrangers, and we may be fo hereafter. Again, that it was an honour for one country 
to be hofpitable to another •, would extend its renown ; increafe its riches •, ftrengthen its inte- 
reft i and induce them to a mutual return of favours: laftly, that their example is profitable, 
through the patterns of piety and induftry they difperfe among us. Other arguments were 
ufed •» but againft thefe, Ralegh concur*d with thofe who thought that denization ought not to 
circumvent birth-right; and that to behave our felves like citizens to foreigners, was but making 
Hi* fpeech our felves ftrangers to our neighbours. «* Whereas it is pretended (fays he) that for ftrangers, 
a^ain b foreign n j t [ s a gainft charity, againft honour, againft profit, to expel them j in my opinion, it is no 
“ matter of charity to relieve them. For firft, fuch as fly hither have forfaken their own 
«* king j and religion is no pretext for them, for we have no Dutchmen here, but fuch as come 
“ from thofe princes where the gofpel is preach’d ; yet here they Jive, difliking our church. 
“ For honour : it is honour to ufe ftrangers as we be ufed among ftrangers j and it is a light- 
“ nefs in a commonwealth, yea, a bafenels in a nation, to give a liberty to another nation 
“ which we cannot receive again. In Antwerp , where our intercourfe was moll, we were ne- 
“ ver fuffer’d to have a taylor or a Ihoo-maker to dwell. Nay, at Milan , where there are 
“ three hundred-pound Englijhmen , they cannot fo much as have a barber among them. And 
“ for profit •, they are all of the houfc of Almoigne, who pay nothing •, yea, eat out our profits, 
“ and fupplant our own nation. Cuftom indeed they pay paying fifteen-pence where we 
“ pay twelve-pence j but they are difeharged of fubfidies. The nature of the Dutchman is to 
“ fly to no man but for his profit; and they will obey no man long •, now under Spain ; now 
“ under Mountfort •» now under the prince of Orange \ but under no governor long. The 
“ Dutchman , by his policy, hath gotten trading with all the world into his hands j yea, he is 
«* now entering into the trade of Scarborough- filhing, and the filhing of the Newfoundlands , 
“ which is the ftay of the Wefi-Counlries. They are the people that maintain the king of 
“ Spain in his greatnefs were it not for them, he were never able to make out fuch armies 
“ and navies by fea; it coft her majefty fixtecn thoufand pounds a year the maintaining of 
“ thele countries •, and for all this, they arm her enemies againft her. Therefore, I fee no rea- 
“ fon that fuch refpett lhould be given to them: and, to conclude j in the whole, no matter 
** of honour, no matter of charity, no profit in relieving them.” 1 This fpeech we may meet 
with in fome modern writings, quoted in Sir Walter Ralegh's praife, both for his knowledge 
in the intcrcft of his country, and his unbiafs’d affe&ion in exerting it. As for the bill, he 
was one to whom it was committed, and who, after the travels of the laid committee upon it, 
offer’d it again to the houfe with the addition of a provifo. On the 27th of March following, 
that is to fay, in the year 1593, it was read the third time \ and, after many long fpeeches, 
which are not fpecify’d, paffed upon the queftion, by the divifion of the houfe, with the difference 
of fourfeore voices ; the Yeas being a hundred fixty-two, the Noes eighty-two. About a week 
afterwards there was a bill, for explaining a branch in an ati to retain the queen's fubjefts in due 
obedience , read > and many fpeeches pafs’d in the houfe before it was committed, through the 
many imperfe&ions in the preamble and body of the laid bill. For it pretended a punifhmcnc 
only of the Brownifis and other fettarics i but, alledging nothing againft them in particular, 
contained fome enfnaring claufes that might comprehend more innocent perfons. As the fpeeches 
before Sir Walter Ralegh’s, on this occafton, arc not rehcarfed, we can only guefs at them, by 
And upon the what is preferv’d of his j who faid, “ In my conceit, the Brownifis are worthy to be rooted out 
die BnwOih “ °* a commonwealth : b but what danger may grow to our felves if this law pafs, were fit to 


• Drum's Journal, fol. 509. 

k This fett was lo call'd from Robert Brown, Ton of 
Anthony Bmvn EJqi of 7 ole thorp in Rutlandjbire , and 
grandlonof franco Brown, whom king Henry VIll, Anno 
Rfgn. 18. privileg'd by charter to wear his cap in prdencc 
of himfelf, his heirs, or any of his nobles, and not to 
uncover but at his own pleaiure. This Robert lludied di¬ 
vinity in Cambridge, and was loon difeover’d by Dr. Still, 
mailer of Trinity-College , to have fomewhat extraordinary 
in him that would prove a great diilurbancc to the Church. 
He traveird to Zcland, and return’d, as we are told, con¬ 
firm’d in error and obilinacy, which he firft preach’d at 
Norwich Anno 1581, and wrote a book to juitify his doc¬ 
trine; for which bilhop ? break of that diocefe confin’d 
him : but being related to the lord Bnrghley , and he ra¬ 
ther imputing it to zeal than malice, interceded to have 
him charitably perfuaded out of his opinions, and re- 
leafed. The latter being done, he was fent home in 1585, 
but remain’d incorrigible; wherefore his good old father 
would own him for his fon no longer than hi* fon own'd. 


the Church of England for his mother; but he chofe ra¬ 
ther to part with his aged fire than his new lchifm: lo, 
with Richard Harrifon a fchoolmalter, he fet up for an 
orator againil biihops and all ecclefiallical authority. 
When gentlenefs was found ineffectual, leveriry was lo 
long, and upon fo many occafions exercis’d, that this Brown 
ufed to boait he had been committed to Thirty-two fri/ons , 
and in fome could not fee bis band at noon-day ; yet did he 
to the lalt fave his life and living, which was Acburch in 
Northampton/bire. This favour is conceived to proceed 
from the promifes he made of conformity, together with 
the interelt of his powerful kindred. He allowed a falary 
for one to difehaj-ge his cure; and tho’ he oppofed his 

e jifhioncrs in judgment, yet agreed in taking tfjcir tithes. 

e was of a nature uncontrolable, fo far from the Sabba~ 
tan an llriftnefs, afterwards efpouled by fome of his fol¬ 
lowers, that he Teemed rather a libertine therein. In a 
word, he had (Cays my author) a wife with whom he ne¬ 
ver lived, and a church in which he never preached, tho* 
he received the profits thereof; and as all the other lcenta 


Digitized by 


Googl 


e 



Sir IVA LT E R RALEGH. 

“ be confider’d. For it is to be fear’d that men not guilty will be included in it: and that 
44 law is hard, that taketh life, and fcndeth into banifhment; where mens Intentions fliall be 
44 judged by a jury \ and they (hall be judges what another means. But that law, which is 
44 againft a faft, is but juft \ and punilh the fad as feverely as you will. If two or three thou- 
44 fand Brownijis meet at the fea, at whofe charge fhall they be tranfported, or whither will 
44 you fend them ? I am forry for it, but I am afraid there are near twenty thoufand of them in 
44 England ; and when they are gone, who fhall maintain their wives and children ?” a A com¬ 
mittee was therefore appointed to revife and correct this bill, among whom Ralegh is the fore- 
moft named •, who, after many fubftradtions, alterations and debates, moved it might be read 
to the houfe for their approbation: and, after many arguments and conferences, being read the 
third time, as were alfo the additions and amendments, it pafled upon the queftion. Ralegh 
was frequently in committees upon other bills during this fclfion, till it was diffolved on the 10th 
of April following; but as his arguments upon them are not preferv’d, we fhall refer to the ti¬ 
des of thefe bills in the journals of parliament y whence we have extracted his fpeeches upon 
thofe before mention’d. 

This year we met with a notable libel in print, fet forth by a Lover of his Country , as he 
calls himfclf, to expofe and fcandalize certain minifters and counfellors of ftate, who had been 
inftrumcntal in framing that fearching proclamation againft the Seminaries which was publifh’d 
about two years before. b For the king of Spain having lately founded an Englifh cloyfter at 
Valladolid , as a nurfery to fupply us with treafon and rebellion > fo many hopeful flocks of that 
fpecies were foon tranfplantcd into England , as occafion’d the faid proclamation to extirpate 
them. Now this Anfwer was publifh’d to calumniate the fuppofed authors of if, and as 
Ralegh appears, among other very good company, to have his fhare of the (lander therein ; fo 
he might probably have had a hand in thofe wholfome articles for the fafety of the realm, 
which occafion’d it. For, to the great honour of his knowledge in the conftitution of his coun¬ 
try, and his conftant zeal for itsfecurity and welfare, he was, tho’ no counfcllor of ftate, often 
call’d to the council table; where no fmall difference was paid to his arguments and oblerva- 
dons in the various debates that arofe upon matters in church or ftate, in war or peace. After 
this libel has revil’d the greateft and wifeft minifters of the nation, it feems to have referved the 
quinteffence for him, who had the ability fo many ways to crufli the pernicious purpofes which 
were daily hatching by the viperous brood which brought it forth ^ tho* after all, by embarking 
his character in fuch an old and fhatter’d bottom of detraction, ’tis much they could fo long 
keep its weather-beaten credit ajfloat: and indeed, how they came to launch firft out into fuch 
an improbable contumely, feems a myftery comprehenfible only to the patron of their iniquity. 
For Ralegh had given fuch proofs of his found and ftneere aficChion to religion, fome of which 
have in the foregoing pages been noted, that his fentiments were made ufe of to reform or regu¬ 
late even the profeflorsof it; yet now his head mult be turn’d fo cxcefiively to its detriment, 
as to provoke this libeller’s pious fpleen againft nothing lefs than Sir Waller Ralegh 9 s School of 
Atheifm •, compendioufly inftnuating, as if truly he was not fatisfied with being a difciple, but 
fet up for a doCtor in his faculty, and won young 44 gentlemen into his faid 1‘chool ^ wherein 
44 the Old and New Teftament were jefted at, and fcholars taught to fpell God backwards.” 
Then he complains, 44 what a miferable thing it is, that her majefty fhould make laws 
44 and proclamations according to thefe mens fenfes and opinions.” * But there may need little 

pains 


of his Ji:e were ftorjny and turbulent, fo was his end ; 
tor the conitabic of iiis parilh requiring to mew hat roughly 
the payment of certain rates, his pmiion moved him to 
blows, whereof complaint being made to Jullicc St. John, 
he rattier inclin’d to pity than pumih him ; but Brown, at 
fair words aiio dilgullcd, cealed not ull he was font to 
A mbtmptw jayl on a bed in a cart, being very infirm, 
and aged above eighty years ; where loon after he ficken’d 
and etui Anno 1030. T hus the church hiltorians have 
fainted out this llory, but in larger dimenlions. See 
Futitr, t?c. As tor Brown* tenets, *tis faid one Bolton 
Jinl broach'd them among us, and that they are only re¬ 
vived from the ancient Lonatifts ; but thofe, who think it 
worth while to hunt more dittinctly after them, may 
read Dr. Full; Regers on the fix teen th article ; Dayrel 
agiairai the Brnnnifts ; BredwelP s Detection of Glcrvtr the 
BrvtKulJl ; CV:jJW£% Treat lie of Engltjh Dona tips ; with 
hi: Rcpiy to Barrow and Greenwood ; and Stow 's Chronicle i 
where it appears the Brow ni ft 's books were prohibited by 
airhoruv, and that fome were hang'J for difperfmg them, 
" ith inch like writings, There is a volume (containing 
'ome ingenious remarks) afciibed tothe earl of Angle fea, and 
fl-nred the tlafry future State of England, which iol. 280. 


quotes from this fpeech of Sir Walter Ralegh'*, his ob- 
lervation above, to what number the Brcwnips were lo 
early multiply'd ; yet, as he adds, the name of thole 
fchifmaticks is now evaporated, and their tenets ahnoit 
univerially unknown. 

a Tow>jhend's lliftorical Collections, fol. 76. and Dewes's 
Journal, fol. ^17. 

k Ehzabe/hae Reginae Angliae EdiSlurn, frotnulg. Lund. 
Nov. 29. 1591. & Andr. PbiLpains ud idem Rejpun/io. 
8vo. Lugd. ap. J . Didler. 1593. 

c See the faid Refponf ad Elijah. Rig. Editsum contra 
Catholicos, under that name of Andr. PhiLpater ; alfo an 
extract or abbreviation of the fame in Englijfj, printed at 
London in 8vo. near the fame time : and the lame extract, 
or another of it, in a late collection, named, AlifuJ/anuj 
H forte a l and Philological, C Sc. found in a nobleman's 
fludy, 8vo. 1703. p. 171. It is in this book call’d, An 
advertifement to a Jccretury of the lord treafitt er s, by an 
Engli/b Intelligencer , tec. concerning a book writ in Latin, and 
pubhjhed in divers languages, againft her majefty s late fro- 
clamation for jearch and upprehenjion of ft mi nary pritfts, and 
their receivers . 1 hat inteiiigenccv gives tiiis character of it , 
“ I aifure you, it is the moil fliaip, biturr and odious 
i i " thing 


Digitized by 


Google 


t 






lxx 


The LIFE of 

pains to blunt the point of this dart, when we lhall further confider that it came out of a jcfuiti- 
cal quiver; for by whom Ihould it be levell’d againft him but Robert Parfons , the notorious 
traitor and incendiary! however deeply he difguis’d himfelf into a Lover of his Country. So 
that, till we fhall find a more credible father for the afperfion, we may fafely enough believe it no 
genuine iflue of truth: neverthelefs, fomc ten years after, when Ralegh was trampled down by 
the court, and there was a turn of ftatc to ferve, this might be a good ferviceable obloquy 
enough to upbraid him with, and depreciate him in the eye of the populace. But thefe preju¬ 
dic’d reprefentations will probably be thought of fo little authority, that the reafons and matter 
of faft which have been produc’d in a poetical performance, may be fufficienc to make thofe 
ftains even befriend his reputation, and brighten it in clearing them away. * 

Indeed there is a traditional author who accounts for the grounds of this afperfion, in the 
following words j “Sir Walter Ralegh was die firft (as I have heard) who ventur’d to tack 
“ about, and fail aloof from the beaten traft of the fchools ; and who, upon the dilcovery of 
“ fo apparent an error as a Torrid Zone , intended to proceed in an inquifnion after more folid 
“ truths: till the mediation of fome, whofe livelihood lay in hammering Jhrines for this fuper- 
“ annuated fludy, pofiefied queen Elizabeth that fuch doftrine was againft God, no lefs than 
“ her father’s honour; whofe faith (if he owned any) was grounded upon febool divinity : 
“ whereupon Ihe chid him \ who was (by his own confeftion) ever after branded with the ti- 
“ tie of an atheift, tho’ a known aflertor of God and Providence.” k That he was fuch af- 
fertor, feems to be affirmed by an author of his acquaintance, who introduces the apparition 
of Sir Walter , fpeaking to him in this manner. “ Thou well knowtft that the world hath, at 
“ fundry times, caft a foul and moft unjuft afperfion upon me for my prefumed denial of a 
“ Deity •, from which abominable and horrible crime I was ever moft free j and not any man 
“ now living better knows the fame than thy felf; in whole prefence I was often accuftom’d 
“ highly to praife and eftcem die book of Leffius , written in proof of the being of a Deity.” 
So requefts, that he would mandate the fame into Englijh , “ which I my felf, fays theghoft, had 
“ done, if cruel fate had not untimely cut off the thread of my mortality ; and let the title bear 
“ my name •, that fothe readers may acknowledge it was done by my follicitation.” Then the 
faid trandator of that book fays in his own perfon to the reader, “ It is well known that 
“ Sir Waller was a man of great natural parts j and yet was fufpefled of the moft foul andexe- 
“ crable crime of atheifm ; how truly God and himfelf only knows yet I have reafon to think 
“ it a falfe afperfion .” c If thus much is faid of Ralegh by an author who knew him ; what 
credit diall we pay to another who wrote many years later? never knew him, produces no au¬ 
thority for the principles he charges upon him ; yet pretends to give us the tutor’s name from 
whom he imbib’d them •, and that, a man of no lefs learning and merit than the famous 
Mr. Thomas Harlot ? d This was that Englifh philofopher from whofe illuftrious difeoveries, 
he, who was the glory of die French philofophers, is not denied to have borrowed much of the 


u thing that ever I think was written by the papifts.” 
See the laid MifceUanin, p. 164. Will. Wat fen the 1 ecu lar 
pridl, (peaking of Blaonvell the arch piieli’s inhibition 
again ll certain catholic books, fays, 44 Among other er 
44 rors committed by him therein, it Has one, that he 
** would lufter all Parjlns's feditious books to pais cur- 
M rcnt * as Phihpater , fpeaking molt rebellioufly 

“ againlt her majedy and the whole ltate and nobles of 
44 the land.” See his l^uodJibets of religion and Hate, 
4to. 1602. p. 107. There was alfo the like extract of 
this Pbilofater made in fome Collections of Poetry, Hifio • 
O * ^ r - b y 7 °^ n Uncord of Gray S'Inn Elq. which I 
have feen in a Quarto volume among the MSS. of the 
late curious Viomas Granger Efq; which Collections are 
likewiie mention d in the Catalogue of the remaining pan 
of bis MSS. p. 6. N« 18. 5 

a 1 he late Dr. George Senvell, in his tragedy of Sir Wal 
ter Ralegh 8vo. 1719. Adi. Scene I. makes the fol 
lowing reflexion on the attorney general's darting fron 
the ^ucftion in debate at Ralegh' s trial, to upbraid hm 
with this imputation of athcilm. * 

When P re j udice and avei 

All whofe opinions we diflike are Athtifh: 

Now tis a term oi art, a bugbear word. 

1 he villain s engine, and the vulgar’s terror. 

1 he man who thinks and judge, (or himfelf} 

Unfway d by aged tollies, rev’rend errors; 

Grown holy by traditionary dullnefs 
Of fchool-authority; he is an Atheift > 

Tho man, who haung idle noife, preferves 


A pure religion fcated in his foul; 

He is a hlen:, dumb, diutmbling Atheift ! 

Lord Howard. 1 had foigot it—>es tiie bafe-tongu’d 
gown inis, n 

Did call him Atheid—fo men judge at home, 

\\ ho never trac’d a Providence at lea ; 

And law his wonders in the mighty deep. 

The Atheid-tailor were a monitrous thing, 

More wonderful than all old ocean breeds ! 

But I will witnefs for my Ralegh's faith ; 

Yes, I have feen him when the temped rag’d, 

When from the precipice of mountain-waves, 

All hearts have trembled at the gulph below; 

He with a deddy, duplicating look, 

Di play’d his trud in that tremendous pow’r, 

W r ho curbs the billows, and cuts (hort the w ings 
Of the rude whirlwind in its midway courfe, 

And bids the madnefs of the w aves to ceaie. 

O fellcnu-foldter f were that folly thine ; 

Tho’ thou were dearer than the love of honour 
To this old bofom ; I would pluck thee hence, 

Tho’ my heart crack’d___ 


* branni OJbcrneS Mifcellatey of fundry Ejays, Pan 

in P refacct0 the reader, among his works ti 
laitedition, vol. 1. 1 2mo. 1722. 

« Sir Halter Ralegh's Ghojt ; or his Apparition to an ii 
imate friend, willing him to tranilate into Enrhb tl 
learned book of Leonard LeJJius , entitled, De Provident* 
A umims, CfT antmi immortahtate, Hvo ifin 


light 




Digitized by 


Goog[( 










lxxi 


Sir IV ALTER RALEGH. 

light wherewith he (hone: • this was that excellent mathematician, who, fays out author Wood 
aforefaid, “ coming to the knowledge of this heroic knight Sir Walter Ralegh , was entertain’d 
44 by him in his family, who allow’d him a yearly penfion, b and was inftru&ed by him at 
44 leifure hours in that fcience.” c This was that virtuous and religious man, who, being fenr 
over by Sir Walter Ralegh with his firft colony to Virginia , but did not bear him company, as 
the laid author miftakes, to furvey the bounds of the Englijh difcoveries, with the commodi¬ 
ties and cuftoms of the country, did firft communicate the gofpel to thofe heathen inhabitants ; 
and, 44 in every town where he came, explained to them the contents of the Biblej declaring, 
44 that therein was fet forth the true and only God , and his mighty works ; that therein was 
44 contain’d the true doftrine of falvation through Cbrijt - 9 with many particulars of miracles 
44 and chief points of religion, as I was able then to utter (continues he; and thought fit for the 
44 time. And tho’ I told them the book, materially and of itfelf, was not of fuch vertue as I 
44 thought they did conceive, but only the do&rine therein contain’d ; yet would many be glad 
44 to touch it, to embrace it, to kifs it, to hold it to their breads and heads, and ftroke over 
44 all their bodies with it, to (hew their hungry defire of that knowledge which was fpoken 
44 of.” d Yet this is the man whom the above-cited Anthony Wood charges with having had 
ftrange thoughts of the feripture ; with undervaluing the old ftory of the creation ; with never 
believing that trite pofition Ex nibilo nihil Jit-, with making a philofopbical Theology , wherein he 
caft off theOW Teftament *, fo that confequently the New would have no foundation. Further, 
with being a Deift, and imparting his do&rine to the earl of Northumberland\ into whofe 
fcrvice Ralegh had recommended him, and of whom he alfo receiv’d a yearly penfion of a 
hundred and twenty pounds. Laftly, with infufing thofe principles likewile into Sir IValter 
Ralegh himfelf, when he was compiling his Hiftory of the IVorld. This laft infinuation, and 
probably all the reft, is furely a manifeft (lander, as Wood himfelf muft have own’d, if he had 
fufficiently read that Hijiory of the World-, where Sir Walter Ralegh has, in many places, given 
ftronger evidences of his Chriftian faith, than any of his detraftors ever did of theirs. And 
however Hariot might controvert certain theological matters with fome divines of thofe times, 
which made them have no good opinion of him (fays Wood) and look upon the manner of his 
death as a judgment $ not unlike the charity of fome divines in all times ; yet enough of his 
religious charaftcr c might be laid, as there has been of his patron, Sir Walter Ralegh* s, to clear 
them both from this common and threadbear calumny. 

As for Ralegh , what might not a little fharpen thefe detractions againft him, was perhaps a 
grant about this time made him from the crown of fome church-lands *, a courfe of reward ufual 
with queen Elizabeth towards fuch as had perform’d any confiderable fervices for the ftate. The 


1 This afTertion will further appear to any who (hall 
have the .curiofity to confult the late learned Dr. John 
kfa/lis, in his treatife of Algebra, where he compare* the 
improvements which Hariot made, with what Dtfcartes 
has advanced, as his own, without mentioning the name 
of this Enghjhman in his Geometry ; and give* it clearly 
on Hanot's iide. Nay, this Plagiarifm was lb well known, 
as to have been objetied againll Monfieur Drfcartes in his 
own country ; and the Frenchman , who has paid the Angu¬ 
lar honours to his memory of writing his life, having con- 
fefsM it was the op.nion of fome, that he Hole his method 
of Algebra from one Hariot , an Eglijhman* does not go 
about to contradifl it. See the life of Monfieur Defcartes, 
tranflated from the French by S. R . 8vo. Lend. 1693. 
p. 283. 

k Vid. Pref R. Hakluyt ad orbem novum , feriptum per 
Pet. Martyr. Angler. 8vo. Paris, 1587. of which I have 
met with this note, 

Editor dicat Gualtero Ralegho, quern impense laudat: 
Bibhopola *vero Cbartam Geograpbica Ricardo Hakluyto 
(heat. 

« A then. Ox on ubi fupra . 

d Sec Mr. Hanot's brief and true Report of the A r e*w- 
foundland of Virginia , Uc in Hakluyt, vol. 3. p. 277, 
278. 

* For would Dr. Richard Corbet , as orthodox a divine 
as any of them, and afterwards a biftiop of the Church, 
tell Sir Thomas Aylesbury , That Hariot’j deep mine nxas 
without drojs , if it had any fuch allay ? See his Poems, 
8vo. 3d edit. 1672. p. 56. Would another as grave and 
virtuous an author as any in thole times, Mr. George Chap - 
his contemporary, tell all who knew him, in the 
preface to his Homer's Iliad, 44 That fome places he had 
“ fown to his worthy and mod learned friend Mr. Hariot ; 
” u ;hofe judgment and knowledge in all kinds I know 
" (fays he) to be incomparable and bottomlefs; yea, to 
u ** admir’d at much, as his moft blamelefs life , and the 


11 right facred expence of bij time, it to be honour'd and 
44 reverenc'd; if this were not his true character.” Nor 
is it likely the carl oi Northumberland would alio have 
made fuch a man a domeltic, and allowed him io hand* 
fome a ialary, to have inteCkd his Ions witit atJieilli- 
cal principle*: neither would Hanoi's noble executor*, 
Sir Thomat Ay.esbury, and Ribert Sidney* vifeount Lfte* have 
bellowed on him in $t. Chrifopber'% Church, London , 
where he was buried in July 1621, a monument, fincc de- 
flroyed by the great hre, with an infeription that might 
have been contraditfed by all the town, if it had been 
falle ; beginning as follows : Omnes jcientias calluit , Cf in 
omnibus excrlluit ; Mathematicis, Philofophicis, Theologicii, 
veritatis indagator fludiofijfimus, Dei Triniunius cultor 
piijfimus , &c. As to the manner of his death, Dr. Alex. 
Rheud, in his works. Load. 1650. treat. 2. Jed. 26. lpcak- 
ing of the lip, fays, 44 That cancerous ulcers often leize 
44 on that part ; and that this grief haftned the enJ of 
44 that famous mathematician Mr. Hariot , with whom I 
44 was acquainted (fays he) but a (hort time before his 
44 death.” He adds none of thofe (candalous reflections 
aforefaid ; and whether it begun firft in his lip, fccras 
not to have known; tho* poliibly the brais inltrumenis 
which mathematicians are fo familiar with, and, for rea- 
dinefs, often hold in their mouths, might occafion fuch a 
difeale. But 1 have feen an epigram in MS. as old as the 
time of his death, which makes an allufion or compari- 
fon between the ulcer in Mr. Hariot's Nofe , and that in 
Count Gon do mar's Pojleriors (who had a Killula) and my 
reader may fee that Epigram too, if he pleafes; for it is 
lately printed by Mr. Morgan , in his Phcenix Bntanuicu. 
or Revival of fcarce Tracts, 4to. 1^31. p. 368. As to 
his learned writings, they are mentioned by Ant. Wood; 
bdt not all of them, for he wrote a Chronicle of Virg in ia, 
befldes the Brief Report thereof before quoted ; and men¬ 
tions the particulars of that Chronicle in the laid Brief 
Report. Sec Hakluyt, vol. 3. fol. 280. 


ftory. 


Digitized by CiOOQie 






The LIFE of 

ftory, as we are forc’d to gather it from thofe authors, by whom it has not been over-favourably 
told, is, That about the year 1594* the bilhop of Salisbury, Dr. John Col dwell, who had 
been bred a phyfician, gave his fee a ftrong purge, by alienating the manor of Sherborne to 
'Sir Walter Ralegh. Sir John Harrington, before quoted, fpeaks of an ominous prefiige, to 
make his tale as affefting as he can to prince Henry, and infinuate the difpleafure even of Hea¬ 
ven againft Sir Walter Ralegh ; where he obferves, “ That Sir Walter , ufmg often to ride 
“ poft in thefe days, upon no fmall employments, between Plymouth and the court, when 
“ Sherborne caftlc being right in the way, hecaft fuch an eye upon it, as Ahab did ((ays he) upon 
“ Naboth's vineyard ; and once above the reft being talking of itj of the commodioufnefs of 
“ the place- of the ftrength of the feat and how eafily it might be got from the bilhoprick - 
“ fuddenly, over and over came his horfe; that his very face, which was then thought a very 
“ good face, plough’d up the earth where he fell. This fall was ominous, I make no queftiun 
“ (fays he) as the like was obferv’d in the lord Hajlings, &c. but his brother Adrian would 
“ needs have him interpret that, not as a courtier, but as a conqueror, it prefaged the quiet 
“ pofieflion thereof. And this, through the queen’s favour, came to pal's b for after Dr. John 
Piers was tranflated to York, this Dr. Cold-well was elected to fucceed him in the fee of Salisbury ; 
but it lay vacant three years: in which dangerous juncture for denial, all the Doctor’s church- 
preferments being difpos'd of, yet before his ele&ion was confirm’d, Sir Walter Ralegh (as the 
church hiftorians have colour’d it out) aflaulted his confent j importun’d him to pafs Sherborne 
to the crown, and effected it; fo fhot the good old man (as one of them phrafes it) between 
wind and water ; tho’ indeed (confefles) a good round rent was referved to the bilhoprick. 
of Then Sir Walter begg’d the fame of the queen, and obtain’d it; much after the fame method 
Sir William Killigrew got the manor of Crediton (a bough almoft as big as the reft of the body) 
from the church of Exeter, by the confent of bilhop Babington . c We fhall leave it for Har¬ 
rington to determine whether Ralegh , who was now fo high in the queen’s favour, might with 
lefs fuit than he was fain to make to her before he could perfect this purchafe (as he perhaps at 
laft juftly calls it) and with lefs money than he bellowed afterwards on Sherborne , in buying 
out leales and in drawing the river through rocks into his garden, have compafled a better, 
without giving umbrage to church or ftate: while from others we obferve, that Ralegh embel- 
lifh’d his foveraign's bounty with great magnificence and commendation not that he was in 
danger thereby of falling under the remark he has made on common builders of fumptuous 
feats, That men are rather known by their houfes, than their hotifes by them i a it not being eafy 
for him, who had been fuch a folid architect in the temple of fame, to make his habitation 
more confiderable than its inhabitant, or raife any edifice with his fortune, which fhould be 
more illuftrious than what he had already founded by his virtue. Yet his elegant tafte in build¬ 
ing is fufficiently attefted by an author who furvey’d the improvements he made upon this 
eftate when they were frefh and in their fplendor, and who tells us, “ That the queen having 
“ granted the fee-farm of Sherborne to Sir Walter Ralegh , he began to build the caftle very 
“ fairly j but altering his purpofe, he built in the park adjoining a moft fine houfe, which he 
“ beautified with orchards, gardens, and groves of much variety and great delight: fo that, whe- 
“ tlier you confider the plcafantncfs of the feat, the goodnefs of the foil, or the other delica- 
“ cies belonging to it, it refts (fays he) unparallel’d by any in thefe parts.” * How he came 
afterwards to be juggled out of it, may alfo fufficiently appear when we arrive at the latter 
part of his life. But here, fince we have touch’d lomething upon gardening, we may take 
an opportunity of remembring a plantation of his, which is fomewhat oblervable. A late 
author mentions it with refpedt to him, but in a dirtant manner ■, where, telling us, “ That 
“ Beddington near Croydon in Surrey, is a neat curious feat, built by Sir brands Carew 
he further adds j “ The orchards and gardens are very pleafant, and elpecially famous for 


* Rubard Ifacke' s Antiquities of Exeter , 8vo. 1681. 
p. 141. 

t> Harrington's Brief View of the State of the Church of 
England, kAc. p. 92. 

« Fuller's Cbunb-Hijlory, lib. 10. p. 27. Where he 
alfo obierves, that among the ads palfed in king fames 
the firli’s parliament, none were more beneficial ior the 
church, than that which made the king himfelf and his 
fuccell’ors incapable of any fuch church-land to be convey’d 
to them; yet tome (add* he) were to bold as to conceive this 
law void in the very making of it, and that all the obli¬ 
gations thereof coniiHcd (not in the Hrcngth of the law) 
but only in the king's and his fucceflors voluntary obe¬ 
dience thereunto : accounting it injurious for any prince in 
parliament to tie up his fucceflbrs, who neither can nor 


will be concluded thereby further than it Hands with their 
owu convenience : however, it was to Hand in force till 
the fame power Hiould be pleafed to rctcind Jt. 
d Hi/loty of the World , lib. 5. fedt. 4. Cap. I. 
e See Coder's Survey of DjrJctJhire 9 fol. 1732. p. I 24. 
f Fuller , in his Worthies of Surrey, fays, it was Sir j\ /- 
cholas Carevo (put to death by king Henry Vlii. for re¬ 
torting fome (harp words upon him, with more truth chan 
difereuun) who built the fair houte, or palace rather, ac 
Beddington, which by the advantage of the water is a para- 
dife of plcafure. However Sir Francts, who was a cu¬ 
rious and polite gentleman, and lived very nobly here the 
latter end of queen Elizabeth's reign, did enrich it with 
coniiderable improvements. 


“ the 


Digitized by vjOOQie 



lxxiii 


Sir IF ALTER RALEGH. 

»* the orange-trees, which have now grown there above tliefe hundred years •, being planted in the 
“ open-ground, under a moveable covert, during the winter months : they were the firft that were 
“ brought into England, by a knight of that noble family ; who deferves no lefs commenda- 
“ tion than Lucullus met with for bringing cherry and filbert-trees out of Pontus into Italy $ 

“ for which he is celebrated by Pliny and others.” 1 Now it has been a conftant tradition at 
Beddington, that this knight of that noble family was Sir Walter Ralegh , who was allied there¬ 
to, )f not otherwife, by the lad of that firname’s adopting his near kinfinan, a Throgmorton , to 
be his heir, on condition that he would a flume the name and arms of Carcw : b and how Ralegh 
became related to the Throgmorton: t will in a little fpace appear. But that we might not here want 
fuch further confirmation, as the place will afford, of the firft planter of that famous orangery, 
whereof there are feveral trees ftill flourifhing of the original plantation, which are the ftatelieft 
and moft perfedl bearers of this fruit in England , I have been oblig’d with the gentleman’s An- 
fwer to the Enquiry , who now dwells at the feat ; and his words are, “ ’Tis the common opinion His orangery 
“ of this family, that Sir Walter Ralegh , who was related to it, brought over and planted the at nudJington. 
*« old orange-trees here.” c But in the houfe they preferv’d a fine cabbin-bed which was his, 
having furniture of green (Ilk. and legs carved like dolphins, gilt with gold. In Ihort, the feat 
was now fo frequented, that not only Ralegh and other courtiers, but the queen received here 
many agreeable entertainments j d for fome of which fhe could not cfcape the cenfure of her 
jefuited enemies. 

Of the other places of refidence which Ralegh might have, befides what is before-mcn- 
tion’d, to compafs a perfect knowledge, would need more time and pains than at laft per¬ 
haps might be thought necefiary here to bellow. As to the feat at Wejl-Horfely in Surrey , 
there is good authority that it was in the pofleffion of his fon, as will be further obferv’d, if 
not his own ■> and in the hall of that houle, there are in feveral places of the walls and ciel- 
ing the arms of Ralegh ftill viTible. e But there is a houfe no farther from London than IJling- His houfe at 
ton, about a bow’s-lhot on this fide the church, which, tho’ I think it has no fuch evidences #%»»• 
remaining upon its walls, cielings, or windows, that will prove him to have been its / owner. 
the arms that are feen there, above a hundred years old, being of a fucceeding inhabitant j is 


* Addit. to Camden % B> ran. tranflat. by the prefan bifhop 
of London, fol. 169$. p. 166. upon which wc may obferve, 
tho’ the Englijh have not been fo grateful as the Romans 
were in celebrating thofe worthy perfons who have made 
the like beneficial importations to the lading ornament and 
fertility of their country ; yet that we have had fome au¬ 
thors not altogether filent in thefe vegetable antiquities, 
from whom we learn, that Dr. Linacre firft brought into 
this land that piince of flowers the Damajk Rofe\ tnat the 
Pcrdigwen Plum , with two kinds more, Were firft made 
natives of this foil by Thomas lord Cromwell, when he re¬ 
turn'd from his travels; and the Apricock, by a prieft 
named Wolfe, gardener to king Henry VIII. In this reign 
were alfo firft propagated among us Hops and Artichokes ; 
and then were Cherry orchards firft planted here, about 
Stttingbome in Kent , with a more improv'd kind of that 
fruit, brought from Flanders by one Harris, ano her of 
that king's gardeners: but what eft'eft Cardan's recom¬ 
mendation ot Olive- trees had with king Edward VI. I 
find not. In the reign of queen Elizabeth, when Edmund 
Grindal, afterwards archbifhop of Canterbury, return’d 
from exile, he firft tranfported the Tamerisk , fo ufetul in 
medicine againft difeales of the Spleen. Then alfo after 
our opening a trade with Zant , the fhrub which bears the 
currans was firft tranfplanted hither. In 1578 the Tulip 
firft fhewed her gaudy garment in Englijh ground ; and, 
laflly, not to extend further on this fubjeft now, as for 
the profitable plant Tobacco, and that princely one the 
0r4/»^-tree, enough is faid above, in the body of this 
work, to the honour of Sir Walter Ralegh. 

h Fuller' s Worthies, as before. 

c Extrafl of a letter from Beddington, dated Dec . 19. 

* 733 * 

® Sir Hugh Plat informs us, “That delicate knight 
u Sir Francis Cornu, once making a fplendid entertain- 
" mcnt queen Elizabeth at Beddington , led her majefty, 
“ after dinner, to a Cherry-tree in his garden, which had on 
4 * it fruit in their prime, then above a month after all cher- 
u ries had taken their farewell of England. This retardation 
u perform'd by draining a tent or canvas cover over the 
“ whole tree, and wetting it as the weather requir’d with 
««obftruding the fun-beams, they grew 
J both great, and were very long before they gain’d their 
cherry-colour; and when he was aflfur’d of the 
* tune her majefty would come, he remov’d the tent, and 


44 a few funny days brought them to their full maturity.” 
See his Garden of Eden, i:mo. 1655. p. 165. 

« With a draught whereof having been oblig’d (among 
many other ufetul particulars) by the ingenious Mr. Gcotge 
y ertuc, I find that coat agree with the arms upon Sir Wal¬ 
ter Ralegh's fcal in yellow wax to the letter before exhibi¬ 
ted ; and alfo with the draught reprefented before his iiie, in 
Prince's Worthies of Devon ; where, as this author blazons 
it, he bears Gules, fee Fuftls in Bend Argent. Hut Prince 
farther adds, a Label of three Points Azure ; which the 
draught from Horfly- HaII doe* not fpccify : neither do I re¬ 
member to have obferved this diltiudion in the imprellion 
of Sir Walter Ralegh' s faid teal. Nor is it in that leal, of 
which a fair impreifton remains, upon another letter he 
wrote about this time to the lord-treafuror’s fecretarv Hcxt 
or Hicks, alfo be fore-mention’d ; and lately communicated 
to me by the obliging fames Wefl Efq; where the creft is 
the fame with that m the other leal ; but in the dtxter- 
chief of thelhield, that other family di ftindion of a martlet, 
as I takeit. As for his crclt, it appears in thofe feals as I 
before remark’d, to have been a ft ig, or other like animal; 
but at Horfcly, And under the fculpture of Sir Walter Ra¬ 
legh, before his Hijhry of the World, it is, I think, a 
Cap of Honour ; to which polfibly it might afterwards be 
chang’d for his further merits of it. And as for the motto, 
it is at Horfely, Amort iff virtute; as alio to his arms 
before the hiftory aforefaid. Hooker, in his dedication of 
the Irijh chronicles, often before-quoted, explaining or 
mythologifing the fignatures of Ralegh's arms, (hews us 
at the fame time what they w'ere. For telling him he is 
taught to be careful in relloring the houfe of his decay’d 
fore-fathers, not only by their good examples, but alfo 
by the enfigns of their and his own nobility ; he adds, “ the 
“ Fufls being an inftrument of travel and labour, adver- 
“ tile you that you are one of the fons of Adam, born to 
44 walk in a vocation, and therein to be a profitable 
44 member of the Church of God, and in maintenance 
44 of the common fociety. The white colour or iilver 
44 metal, doth teach you virtue, fincerity, and godli- 
44 nefs, &c. And therewith alio, which by thcgulieco- 
44 lour is meant—You be bold and valiant for the defence 
44 of your country, and for the fafety thereof to fpend 
44 both life and goods : fuch were your ancellors, and 
44 fo it (hall be with you,’* Cfc. which, by the way, was 
a perfedl prophecy. 


k k yet 


Digitized by CiOOQie 






lxxiv 


The LIFE of 

yet popularly reported to have been a villa of his. For the prefent tenant affirms, “ his land- 
*« lord 1 was poflefs’d of fome old-account-books, by which it appears beyond all doubt this houfe 
“ and fourteen acres of land, now let at about feventy pounds per Ann. did belong to Sir IValter 
“ Ralegh ; and that the oldeft man in the pariffi b would often declare his father had told him; 
** Sir Walter purpofed to wall in that ground, with intention to keep fome of his horfes therein ; 
“ further, that fome hufbandmen ploughing up the fame a few years fince, found feveral pieces 
4 ‘ of queen Elizabeth's money, whereof they brought, whatever they might referve to diem- 
“ felves, about fourfeore ffiillings to their mafter, the faid tenant,” in whole hands I have feen of 
the faid coin. As for the houfe, it is, and has been for many years, an inn ; fo that what it 
was, is not clearly to be judg’d from its prefent outward appearance, it being much impair’d, 
or very coarfely repair’d, and diminilh’d perhaps from what it might be when perfons of dif- 
tin&ion liv’d in it. For there is now to be feen but a narrow front, which foon coming to an 
angle, ffioots down backwards only one range of buildings ; as if another part of the front 
was wanting on this fide, for the gateway to appear in the middle, and fuch another range of 
buildings where the new parfbnage-houfe now Hands, to make the whole uniform. However, 
there are within-fide fome handfome fpacious rooms j the parlour was painted round the upper- 
moft part of the wainfeot in about a dozen pannels with feripture hiftories ; but now fo old and 
decay’d, as to be fcarcely diftinguiffiable. There is alfo a noble dining-room, the deling 
whereof is all over wrought in plajlic or fret-work, with reprefentations of the Five Senfes $ 
and the chimney-piece, with the Three principal Chrijlian Virtues. But the arms in the window, 
as well as in that of the hall, are by the prefent inhabitants erroneoufiy call’d Sir Walter Ralegh's j 
there being a date under one of the coats, which /hews it was aneal'd fix years after his death. 
So that we are not fure the decorations aforefaid were done by his direction, or that others more 
rich and elegant were not in their Head before them. As for his dwellings in London , we have 
read before that he had apartments in the court at Somerfet-boufe, and ffiall read hereafter of 
fome acquaintance reforting to him at Durham-houfe in the Strand: that he had a houfe by 
the Thames-Cide, which might be the fame j and another at St. James's , or apartments alfo in 
the court there •, but to be diftindt and particular in thefe, would be a task perhaps more 
difficult than profitable to attempt. 

' The truth is, Sir Walter Ralegh did not live fo long at court, and fo much about the daz- 
ling beauties in it, without having the wings of his glory, at laft, fome what findg*d in the 
flames thereof: yet love, which in fome other great courtiers of thofe times, was the grand bu- 
finefs of their life, feemed only an interlude in his. And tho’ a gratification of this paffion is 
ufually thought lighter of in martial men, and thofe embarrafs’d with the weight of public 
adlion, as a convenient relaxation of their cares, or reward of their toils and perils } yet a 
more feverc conftrudtion was made of a little indulgence Ralegh might about this time take of 
that kind, than was in fome others, who more frequently and notorioufly made a practice thereof! 
Whether it was that his greater merits, in other parts of his conduct, made malice more poi- 
nant in this-, or that little failings are not thought fuch in thofe where we commonly fee, and 
therefore conftantly expedt, great virtues; whereby men of fuperior qualifications undergo greater 
diferedit than their inferiors for the fame mifdeeds j as any difproportion or disfigurement in a 
ftatuc of gold or alabaftcr gives us more dilpleafure than one in ftone or common clay ; and 
we look with regret upon the flaws in a diamond, while even greater in the flint do not affedt 
us: but this feems to have been Ralegh's cafe. For there was among the queen’s maids of ho¬ 
nour a beautiful young lady (as her pidhire reprefents her) named Elizabeth t daughter of 
Sir Nicholas Throgmorton , an able ftatefman and ambaflador, whofe negociations and charac¬ 
ter arc recorded both by the French and Scotch , as well as Engli/h hifiorians of thofe times. c 
With this lady, Ralegh had it feems an amour; and, as he was a man of nervous addrefs, won her 
heart even to the laft favour (if we may ufe the phrafe of a polite author) inclufive. This in¬ 
timacy came at laft to the queen’s knowledge j whether envioufly betray’d by any female con¬ 
fident, as fome might apprehend, from a charadter Ralegh would beftow upon the ladies of the 
privy-chamber and bed-chamber ; being wont to fay, They mere like witches mho could do hurt % 
but could do no good : d or whether the intrigue could not be long conceal’d for the fruits of it, 
as fome, who manifeftly flander Ralegh in other particulars, have not fcrupled to fuggeft, the 
reader has it in his choice to believe. But in fuch colours this matter of devirginating a maid 
of honour was heighten’d, that Ralegh was out of favour again ; alfo in confinement for feve¬ 
ral months j and when enlarg’d, forbidden die court j e whence the lady alfo was difmifs’d 

* Jultice Milner, late of Hat ton -Garden. 4 Lord Bacon* Apc t hibeg met new and old, Svo. 1625. 

b Mr. Vvhitford , as I remember, lately deceas'd. P- 4 v 

9 Vide Ihuanus, liicquefort, Melvin , Camden's Annals, c Camden's Aanali, I >95 
the Cabala, and Leiccfter's Commonwealth . 

from 


Digitized by 


Google 




Sir WALTER RALEGH I 


from her attendance. Yet; as heinous as this mifderheanor was in Ralegh, her majefty did not 
punifh it in Leicefter , EJJex, and other courtiers, noted in their days for fuch intrigues ; efpe- 
cially the former, who turn’d off Douglas Sheffield, by whom he had a fon, to marry the earl 
of EJfex's mother. But Ralegh very readily made the moft honourable reparation he could; 
and cemented this flaw in their conduct, by marrying the obje<£t of his a fled ion. It appears 
they lived together ever after in the moft exemplary degree of conjugal harmony ; and when 
he was in his greateft troubles, there are teftimonies from one, who was otherwife none of his 
greateft friends, of her extraordinary diligence and fidelity in making intcrcft and applications 
to afluage them. * What his thoughts were of a married life, in comparifon with a Angle one; 
may fomewhat appear in that obfervation he made upon a certain nobleman’s growing plump 
after matrimony, who was meagre before; for another perfon in company remarking there¬ 
upon, that it fared with him contrary to what it did with other married men, who ufually at 
firft became lean after it; Ralegb very pleafantly obviated the rarity, by faying, IFljy there is 
no beajl , that, if you take him from the common, and put him into the feveral, but he will grow 
fat. b Many years afterwards, when Ralegb wrote his inflruftions to his fon, he fufficiently ex¬ 
plained this fentiment in the grave and paternal manner he is then writing, among others 
there laid down for his conduct in the choice of a wife■, which topic he concludes, with advifing 
him “ to beftow his youth fo, that he may have comfort to remember it when it has forfaken 
“ him.” And further, amongft the judicious precepts he there gives, one of them is; 
“ That his fon would evermore care to be beloved by his wife, than be befotted on her.” 
That in regard to the alterations of youthful affeftion, “ If he cannot forbear to love, yet for- 
“ bear to link” However, approves of a mature and fettled choice at laft, even while he is 
upon the ftage of his virility. “ For, believe it, the young wife betrayeth the old hufband ; 
“ and fhe that had thee not in thy flower , will defpife thee in thy fall.” But not to marry 
for beauty only ; “ left thou bind thy felf for life, to that which perchance will never laft or 
“ pleafe one year.” Nor yet an uncomely woman ; “ as much regard being due at leaft to 
** our own iflue as to any other race of creatures ; and comelinefs in children is riches, if no- 
“ thing elfe be left them. He remains perhaps pretty fafe in this opinion from many cenfurcs 
by the hard-favour*d part of the fex, becaufe he knew that few ladies would be pofitive upon 
this head in their right to reprove him j nor will widows believe he has treated them with rigor, 
while they remain in that ftate, fince he has faid, “ Leave not thy wife to be a fh.tme unto thee 
“ after thou art dead; but that Ihe may live according to thy eftate ; efpecially if thou haft 
“ few children, and thofe provided for.” Tho’ he does alfo further fay, “ Leave her no 
“ more than of neceflity thou muft, but only during her widowhood ; for if fhe love again, let 
** her not enjoy her fecond love in the fame bed wherein fhe loved thee ; nor fly to future 
** pleafurcs with thofe feathers which death hath pulled from thy wings.” 4 Not that he was 
averfe to fecond marriages, for he advifed his own wife to marry again when he was in expecta¬ 
tion of being fuddenly divided for ever from her. d Many other weighty admonitions may be 
found relating to that fex among his writings, fome of which we meet with, quoted by our moft 
accomplifh’d humanifts and critics in the manners and paflions of life, as from an author who 
had rad their harts through all their veils and difguifes: but one of thofe writers, tho’ he al¬ 
lows him all the advantageous views of life through fuch a variety of feenes ; as “ having lived 
“ in courts and camps; travell’d through many countries ; feen many men under feveral cli- 
“ mates, and of as various complexions;” yet thinks (in which every body will not agree) 
“ he fpeaks of our impotence to refill the wiles of women, in very fevere terms where Ra¬ 
legh has upon the folid ground of the greateft examples admonifhed us, to what fatal inconve¬ 
niences mankind is allur’d by their reftlefs curiofity of knowing what is unfit for their know¬ 
ledge, and the prevailing expedients to gratify it of diflimulate forrow and unquietnefs. f 

While Ralegh was under the difpleafure aforefaid, and in retirement, he projected a further 
removal from the court; the better by that diftance, and fome memorable exploit, to allay the 
malice of his enemies, and recover his foveraign’s love. Some thought this an impolitic courfe j 
as if his foreign a&ions could not work fo effectually to his advantage, as the applications of 
his adverfaries to his difparagement. 6 And hereupon Sir Robert Naunton fays, “ That find- 
“ ing his favour declining, and falling into a recefs, he undertook a new peregrination to leave 


1 Sir John Harrington , in his Brief View aforefaid. 

* Lord Bacons Apophthegms new and old, p. 295. 
e Sir Walter Ralegh's Remains , I 2mo. 1726. p. 62. 
d The arraignment of Sir Walter Ralegh, copied by 
Sir Thomas Overbuy, 410. 1648. p. ult. an d Ralegh's Re- 
mains aforefaid, p. 195. 


* See the Spefiator, vol VII. n*. 510. 
f Six Walter Ral/gh's Hiftory of the World, lib. 1. cap. 4. • 
fe£t 4. 

1 Lloyd's obfervations on the (latefmen and favourites of 
England t 8vo. 1665. p. 488. 


“ that 


Digitized by LiOOQie 






lxxvi 


the LIFE of 

“ that ’Terra infirma of the court, for that of the wars, and by declining himfelf, and by ab. 

“ fence to expel his and the pafiion of his enemies •, which in court (fays he) was a ftrange 

“ device of recovery •, but that he knew there was fome ill office done him, that he durll r.ot 
** attempt to mind any other ways than by going afide, thereby to teach envy a new way of 
“ forgetfulnefs, and not fo much as to think of him : howfoever, he had it always in mind ne- 
“ ver to forget himfelf-, and his device took fowell, that at his return he came in, as rams do 
“ by going backwards, with the greater ftrength -, and fo continued to the laft great in her 
“ grace.”* Thus alfo fays another author, “ His enemies of greater rank kept him under 
“ fometimes in, fometimes out and then he would wifely decline himfelf out of the court-road : 
“ and then you found him not but by fame ; in voyages to the IVeJl-Indies , Guiana , Kno Plan- 
“ tations, Virginia , or in fome expeditions againft the Spaniard b And thus writes a third 
to the fame purpole: “ ’Tis obfervable, that Sir Walter Ralegh was in and out at court fb 
“ often, that he was commonly call’d the Tennis-Ball of Fortune which ffie delighted to fport 
“ with. His enemies perpetually brought him into difgrace with his miftrefs, and his merit in 
“ a little time reftor’d him again to her favour : and as ffie always grew cold to the earl of 
“ Ejfex after abfence j fo ffie ever receiv’d Ralegh with greater marks of her efteem -, and he 

“ was too hard for his rivals by the very means which they intended for his deftrudion.” c 

Certainly he deferved fuch good fortune, beyond all others, of a reftitution to royal favour, 
who could fo much more hazardoufly and heroically than any of them afpirc to earn it j as now 
he abundantly manifefted, in that grand and gallant undertaking to di/covcr and conquer the 
large, rich, and beautiful empire of Guiana ; an enterprize which had baffled the repeated ef¬ 
forts of fome of the ableft and mod renowned captains and cavaliers in Spain for near a hun¬ 
dred years pad: for, in one of their own authors, we may read the names of many brave 
commanders, and their commendations for the miferics they endur'd, who within that fpace 
had trod this maze, and lod themfelves, with fome, five hundred, fome a thoufand men apiece, 
in finding out this country. d And yet none of all their own authors have more nobly and lit 
berally celebrated thefe, and other fuch like adventurers of the Spanijh nation, than Ralegh 
himfelf has done. e How judly therefore his painful and perilous enterprife for the fame dil'co- 
very, will entitle him to praifes equal with the mod worthy of them, may foon appear, now 
that we are lanching forth into the fpacious and meandrous channels thereof. 

For Ralegh, indudrious in diving into the caufes of fo many failures, having inform’d him¬ 
felf what ambient courfes the preceding adventurers had taken to arrive at the heart of die coun¬ 
try they fought, and which was the ffiorted way to make a fuccefsful difeovery, found that 
mod of the Spanifh attempts in thefe parts had fail’d, through the mutinies and difeords which 
they had fomented among themfelves ; as mod of their conqueds in others, were much owing 
to the like factions among the Americans: and if “ there was not an expert foldier or feaman 
“ but he confulted (as one author obferves upon his character in general) nor a printed or 
“ manufeript difeourfe but he perufed ; whereby it came to pafs, there were not exaefter rules 
“ or principles for both fervices then he drew 4 much more may we believe he now particular¬ 
ly made ufe of thefe helps and lights to draw thofe rules and directions by which this year (lad 
mention’d, 1594) he gave to an old officer, captain Whiddon, whofe experience he had before 
try’d, for a voyage to the country aforefaid: and this fame year that captain alfo return’d from 
thence, with feveral inducing confirmations of the grandeur and opuiency of Guiana, having 
learnt the fame from fome of the grand cafiques , or principal rulers, upon the borders thereof 
but not without complaints of fome barbarous treachery from the Spanifo governor, who had 
then got fome footing there •, and, after promifes of differing the Englifbmen to furnifh them¬ 
felves with what fupplics they wanted, decoy’d feveral of them to their dedrudion. Ralegh 


a Ft agmenta Regalia, p. 29. 

b Auluui Coquinari*, p. 78. 

• Life of Sir Walter Ralegh, in Lives Englijh and Fo¬ 
reign, vol.I. p. 98. 

^ Juan de Cajlellanos elerigo, in his book entitled. 
Primer a parte de las E/tgias de v atones illuftrei de India s. 

• Sir Walter Ralegh exprefly points at the Spanijh at¬ 
tempts upon Guiana, as any one may perceive who has 
read Cajfe/lano' s Efogies, juft before quoted, where he fays, 
•• Here 1 cannot for bare to commend the patient virtue of 
44 the Spaniards. We feldom or never find that any na- 
44 tion hath endured fo many mi fad ventures and miferies as 
44 the Spaniards have done in their Indian Difcovtries ; yet 
44 perfifting in their enterprifes with an invincible conflancy, 
44 they have annexed to their kingdoms fo many goodly 
44 provinces, as bury the remembrance of all dangers pall. 
44 Tempejis, Jbipwreck, famine, overthrows, mutinies, heat 
44 and cold\ pejii fence, and ail manner of difeafes , both old 


44 and new; together with extreme poverty and want of 
44 all things needful, have been the enemies wherewith 
44 every one of their moft noble difeoverers, at one t me or 
44 other, hath encounter'd. Many years have palled over 
44 fome of their heads in the fcarch of not fo many leagues ; 
44 yea, more than one or two have fpent their labour, their 
44 wealth, and their lives, in learch of a golden kingdom* 
44 without getting further notice of it, than what they had 
44 at their firft letting forth. All which notwithftanding, 
44 the third, fourth, and fifth, have not been dilhearten'd. 
44 Surely they are worthily rewarded with thole treafurics 
44 and paradifes which they enjoy ; and well they deferve 
44 to hold them quietly, if they hinder no: the like virtues 
44 in others, which (perhaps) will not be found.'* Htjion 
of the World, lib. 5 . cap. 1. feft. 10. 

f Lloyd*s obfervations on the flatefmen andfavourites of 
England , p. 486. 


had 


Digitized by kjOOQie 



Sir WALTER RALEGH. Ixxvii 

had thus more fpurs than one, inciting him to vifit theft regions in perfon j and the fcheme he 
form’d upon an anfwerable return, might, according to the probability of his own propofi- 
tions, which will not be pafs’d over, being founded upon the teftimonies of the belt inform’d 
writers, and intelligence of travellers into the country, hare fubjugated not only the Spanijh fVeJl- 
InJies, but Spain it felf, to the crown of England : for if we could but compals golden terri¬ 
tories in America , as the Spaniards had done, he doubted not to extend the empire of his royal 
miftrefs as far beyond the dominion of other European princes, as (he furpafs’d them in her 
magnanimous virtues. And now this golden country made fuch invitations, being then no lefs, 
if not more confidently deferib’d and attefted for fuch, than any other in thofe parts of the 
world, 1 at lead before they were perfectly difeover’d ; he chearfully determin’d, in queft thereof, 
tho’ through an ocean of difficulties, to walh away the malice of his adverfaries at court, 
and render his character more impenetrable againft the little cenfures which (warm in that thea¬ 
tre of circumvention to ding and feder fuperior merit: as if he thought no foreign expedition 
could be more hazardous to the brave, or fuch as cannot live without diftinguilhing themfelves, 
than the bufy faftions and parties which are daily undermining them at home} but that, like Cha- 
brias , and others of the greated Athenians in his time, he (hould be remov'd from envy, as far as he 
was didant from his native country. With fuch like views Ralegh very fpeedily fitted out a fleet, 
and at a great expence ; tho’ the lord admiral Howard and Sir Robert Cecyl were at the further 
charge of augmenting it •, fuch opinion they alfo had of this enterprife. We may diflinguifh 
five (hips under him, befides barges, wherries, and other necefiary tenders, in his own excellent 
narrative of this voyage, tho* he names them not at fird fetting out \ becaufe. he feems not 
to have been then accompanied with more than one of them : but, as they afterwards join’d him t 
he mentions them. Whence we underdand, the (hip himfelf went in was his own, which he 
does not name *, but the Lion's Wljelp, which was the lord-admiral’s, was commanded by captain 
George Gifford j captain Keymis had the command of a galego, befides a bark, which was com¬ 
mitted to captain Cro/s, and another to captain Caljield. The whole number of men in this fleet 
is not mention’d ; but the fele<d company of officers, gentlemen and foldiers, he us’d in his dif- 
coveries, exceeded not one hundred. Thus prepar’d, he departed from Plymouth on the fixth His voyage 
of February following, and made to the Grand Canaries , and lb to Teneriff where he waited ^ or 
a-while for the Lion's Whelp, and for captain Amias Prejlon. But this captain difappointed him, ° **** 
and went upon another adventure, which proved fome difadvantage in the profecution of his 
difeoveries. After, feven or eight days, not feeing them, he proceeded for Triniciad with his 
own (hip and captain Crofs's only (for the galego which fet out with them linger’d behind on 
the coaft of Spain) Thty reach'd that ifle on the 2ad of March, and caft anchor at Point Cu- 
riapan, which the Spaniards call’d Punta de Gallo, fituate in eight degrees or thereabouts. In 
the four or five days he continued here, he came not to the fpeech of any Indian or Spaniard. 

On the coaft he faw a fire, but for fear of the Spaniards none of the Indians dared to approach 
him. Then Ralegh , in his barge, coafted clofe along the (hore, and landed in every cove, the 
better to know the ifland, while his (hips kept the channel. From hence he remov’d in a few 
days up north-eaft, to recover that place the Spaniards call Puerto de los E/pannoles , but the in¬ 
habitants Conquerabia j and as before (revidualling his barge) he left the (hips, and kept by 
the (hore, that he might better fpeak with the inhabitants, and obferve the rivers, watering- 
places, and ports in the ifland •, of all which he took draughts as he pafled along, which he re- 


a The empire of Guiana is direflly eaft from Peru to¬ 
wards the lia, and lies under the equinoftial line, was 
then governed by the fame laws, and under the fame re¬ 
ligion. There are many alterations of the wonderful 
riches in thefe parts, efpccially the imperial city, which 
they ailed Manoa , where, Franci/co Lopez , fpeaking of 
the magnificence of the emperor’s court, fays, 44 That all 
44 the velTcls of his hculc, table and kitchen, were of 
44 gold and filver; that in his wardrobe were hollow fta- 
44 cues of gold, which feemed giants ; and the figures, in 
44 proportion and bignefs, of all the beafh, birds, trees 
44 and herbs that the earth brings forth, and of all the 
44 fflies that the fca or waters of his kingdom breeds. 
41 finally, there was nothing in his country whereof he 
44 l ad not the counterfeit in gold,” mid. Fran. Lopez de 
Gonara, Hft. g en . de lat Jnd. cap. 120. Further, that 
City o! Manca was by Juan Martinez, the firft Chtilfian 
fcho faw it, call’d El Dorado , or the GoUen City , upon 
fciirg the Gnianians there, and all about the border*, in 
thtir drunken revels, anoint themfelves with a glutinous 
ha :om, and powder their naked bodies over with gold 
dill till thjy ali glitter’d from head to foot. The fub- 


flance of which report is at the end of the navigation of 
the great river of Mar ar.non, written by Gonzalo Fernanda 
de Oviedo to cardinal Be/nbo , and printed in the Raccolta 
delle Namigazioni, c. da Giovanni Battifta Ramufto # 
rol. 3. fol. 416. We may read alfo in Martin Fernandez 
de Encica's difeourfe of the ports, creeks, and havens of 
the Weft- Indies, dedicated to Char let the emperor Ann, 
ici8. in Lopez Vaz , and feveral other authors, repeat- 
ca aflurances of the mountains and rivers in this country 
abounding with gold. And this very year, that Ralegh 
fent for intelligence thither, there were Spanijh letters 
taken at fea by captain Popham (who laid them before 
the council) wherein were many teflimonies of gold and 
jewels found there in vail plenty ; and a great idol weigh¬ 
ing forty-feven quintals, with a bark brought from thence 
to Madera , containing two millions of gold. Confirming 
alfo the natives beiprinkling themfelves over with the 
powder of gold when they entci’d their Borracheras or Bac¬ 
chanalian fcafts, which the honourable Mr. Rob. Duddely, 
in his voyage to the ifle of Trinidad, alfo mentions. See 
Hakluyt , vol. 3. fol. 634, 699, 778, 576, &c, 


11 


Digitized by CiOOQie 


duced 






lxxviii 


The LIFE of 


duced at laft to one general map. At Parico he found a frelli-water river, and at Terra de 
Brea , another port, call’d by the natives Picbe i great quantities of very good oyfters growing 
upon the branches of certain trees, here fo numerous, that he travcll’d for a dozen miles toge¬ 
ther under them ; which enabled him afterwards to reftify the ancient accounts of this tree, and 
the fond conceits of fome moderns, that it was the tree of knowledge. * In fhort, he coafted 
three parts of the ifle of Trinidad , in the month he ftaid there for captain Prejlon., the more 
exaftly to make his draught thereof aforefaid. b At Puerto de los Efpannoles he met with his 
Ihips, and found a company of Spaniards keeping guard at the defeent, who, in doubt of their 
own ftrength, c offer’d figns of peace. He fent captain Whiddon to parley with them, whom 
he afterwards left buried in die ifiand to his great grief, being a man, fays Ralegh , mod ho- 
neft and valiant. From fome of the Spanijh foldiers, whom he found means to make free of 
their tongue by the help of wine \ and from one of the Indian rulers, named Canty man, whom 
captain Whiddon had been acquainted with, he gather’d what ftrength the Spaniards were of, 
and how far it was to the city they had built under their governor Don Antonio de Berreo. 
Here he found occafion of flaying a-while ; both to have fome reckoning with Berreo for his 
treacherous dealings with the Englijh under Whiddon -, and to learn alfo the ftrength, riches, 
and paflages to fevcral other parts of the country. But when Ralegh was credibly inform’d that 
the SpaniJJj governor had fent for a recruit of foldiers, and how lamentably the natives fuffer’d 
under his cruelties •, that the very lords of the country were made his flaves j that he had put 
one of them, named Morequito , to death ; that feveral others were then lying in chains, and 
languifhing under the molt exquifite tortures, he found fufficient occafion not only to re¬ 
venge the lofs of his countrymen, but a good opportunity to gain the hearts of the Indians , by 
attempting to refeue them from this yoke of tyranny: and indeed without this attempt, in 
vain had any other been towards his intended difeoreries. For, confidering he was to enter 
Guiana in fmall boats, and to leave his fhips fome hundred miles behind, he was not unappre- 
henfive how indifereet lie fhould be thought by all men, if he left alfo a garrifon of enemies at 
his back, intcreftcd in the fame enterprife, and in daily expeftation of reinforcements from 
Spain ; therefore, taking his advantage, he boldly fet upon the Corps du Garde in the dufk of 
the evening ; and having put them to the fword, advanced with a hundred men, and by brake 
Fires the city of day took their new city call’d San Jofepb , which, at the entreaty of the Indians , he let on 
of banjojtpb. p re> Then were the natives in confinement, fet at liberty. Among them were five Cafiques t 
or petty kings in thofe parts. d Thefe, all bound together in one chain, almoft dead with 
famine, and v/afted with torments •, having had their naked bodies bailed or dropp’d over 
with burning bacon ; Ralegh alfo, to his great reputation, deliver’d from their captivity ; and 
feveral years after, when this, with Ralegh's other noble afts among thefe Indians , was men- 
Delivcrs five tion’d by fome of our Englijh adventurers to Guiana , it was frefhly retain’d and gratefully acknow- 
f:omlplr'j/F fedg’d by them to his honour when alfo one of their braveft princes, who had been in England y 
bondage. and chrillcn’d Leonard Ragapo , came above a.hundred miles to vifit them, for die great love he 
bore to Ralegh - t manifcftly fhewing, how durably he had engag’d their affeftion and defires for 
Takes B.rrto his return to be their ruler and proteftor. * But for the governor, who had imprifon’d fo many of 
pntuner. them, he was now become a prifoner himfelf and Ralegb y by his courteous treatment of 
him, reaped the fruit of that knowledge and experience he had gather’d in the many years 
he had confum’d, with great fums of money, upon the difeovery of Guiana. ‘ The fame 
day that Ralegh made this conqueft, arrived captain Gifford and captain Keymis t and in 
their fhips divers gentlemen and others, which to his little army was a great fuccour and 


a ’Tis the Indian fig, which he has curioufly deferib’d ; 
and how it bears oyjUn, by planting it ielf into the Tea; fo 
that one ilein loon becomes a grove. See Hijl. of tbt 
World, lib. i. cap. 4. led. 2. 

b Martin Fernandez de lincica, before quoted, fays this 
ifiand of Trinidad is twenty-five leagues in length, and as 
many in breadth; but Ralegh, who knew it much better, 
fays it is but narrow, and in the form of a fheep-hook; 
that the north part is mountainous; the foil excellent, and 
will hear fugar, ginger, or any other commodities the 
Indies yield ; lias llore of deer, wild porks, fruits, fifli, 
and fowl. Mr. DuJjJy, in his voyage thither before- 
mention’d, call’d the bay under the point of Curiapan , 
Pelicans Bay , from the abundance of thofe birds there; 
fays they had alio parrots in great number and variety ; 
and, according to bir If alter Ralegh's account, divers 
beads which the Indies have not, who adds, the Spaniards 
confeb’d they had found grains of gold in fonie of the 
rivers ; but he tariied not in icardi thereof, through his 
defire of entering Guiana, 


« And yet the Spaniards had now gotten fome three 
hundred foldiers there, as Mr. Dudciely , in his voyage 
above-cited, informs us, which was the realon he could 
not attempt to difplant them. Hakluyt , vol. 3. fui. 575. 

* Their names were Wannawanarc , Carroaori Maqua- 
rima , Tarroopanama , and Altrrima. 

e See captain R$h. Harcourt's voyage to Guiana , 160S, in 
Purchases Pilgrims , vol. 4. 1625. fol. I 26b and 1271. 

f This Berreo was a man of great honour, and of a 
great heart, as Ralegh acknowledes (at leait while he 
was his prifoner) tho’ otherw'ife unlit for his undertaking, 
as well for his cruelty, for which he would have been ex- 
pcil’d, as being utterly unlearn'd, and not knowing the call 
from the welt; therefore, no ways curious efter the intelli¬ 
gence he (hould have procur’d ; lor tho’ he had been eleven 
years upon this difeovery, had loll above a thoufuud men ; 
and, as he fwore to Ralegh , had fpent three hundred ihou- 
fand duckets; yet never could he enter fo far into the land a* 
my fell (fays Ralegh) with that poor troop, or rather 
handful of men. 

fulacc. 


Digitized by kiOOQle 



Sir IF ALTER RALEGH. Ixxix 

folace. Then proceeding upon his difcovery, Ralegh fir ft call’d all the chiefs of the ifland to¬ 
gether, who were enemies to the Spaniards ; for fomc of them Bcrreo had brought out of other 
countries, and planted there, to eat out and wafte the natives ; then by his Indian interpreter, " 

whom he arried out of England , he made them underftand “ he was the fervant of a queen, <p r j„j a j. 

who was the greatejl Cafique of the north, and a virgin, who had more Cafiqui under her 
“ than there were trees in that ifland: that fhe was an enemy to the Caflellani , in regard of 
** their tyranny and oppreflion ; and having freed all the coafts of the northern world from their 
“ fervitude, had fent him to free them alfo ; and withal to defend the country of Guiana from 
«« their invafion and conqueft.” Then he Ihew’d them her majefty’s picture, which they fo ad¬ 
mir’d and honour’d, that it had been eafy for him to have made them idolatrous thereof. The 
like and larger fpeeches he made in folemn manner to the reft of the nations, both in his paflage to 
Guiana and to thofe of the borders: fo as in that part of the world the queen of England's fame 
was diffus’d with great admiration. This done, Ralegh return’d to Curiapan , and tho’ he had 
learnt of Berreo , that Guiana was fome hundred miles further than the accounts he receiv’d of 
captain Whiddon had reprefented it, he kept the knowledge thereof from his company, whom 
he fear’d would have been difeourag’d thereby from profecuting the difcovery. When Ralegh 
had further gather'd from Berreo the proceedings of the part adventurers and his own, of all 
which he gives us a fuccind and curious hiftory, he told him he was come upon the fame de- Di tonrajc- 
fign, and was refolved to fee Guiana. Berreo ufed many arguments to diffuade him ; as that m " KSS> 
he muft venture in very light and fmall boats to pafs fo many dangerous fhallows, and could 
not carry viduals enough above half the way ; that none of die country would fpeak with 
him •, and, if he followed them, would burn their towns •, befidcs, the way was long, the winter 
at hand, and the rivers beginning to fwell •, but above all, that the kings and lords, who bor¬ 
dered upon Guiana , had decreed, that none of them fhould trade with any Chriftians for gold, 
becaufe the fame would be their own overdirow. Ralegh, refolving however to make trial, 
dire&ed his vice-admiral, captain Gifford , and captain Calf eld , to turn eaftward againft the 
mouth of the river Capuri, and gave them inftru&ions to anchor at the edge of the Ihoal, and 
upon the beft of the flood to thruft over; but they labour’d in vain: nor did the flood continue 
fo long, but the water fell before they could have palled the fands. Then Ralegh fent one 
King, mafter of the Lion's Whelp , to try another branch, called the Amana , if either of the 
fmall fhips would enter ; but when he came to the mouth, he found it as the reft. After him 
went John Dowglafs, who difeover’d four goodly entrances ; but all fhoal’d and (hallow in the 
bays leading to them. In the mean time Ralegh , fearing the worft, caufed his carpenters to cut 
down an old galego boat, to fit her with banks for oars, and fo as fhe might draw but five 
foot; in this went Ralegh , with gentlemen and officers to the number of threefeore. In the 
Liorfs Whelp boat and wherry they carried twenty ; captain Calf eld, in his wherry, carried ten; Yet leaves his 
and a barge of Ralegh's ten more. This was all the means they had, having left their fhips at Cu ' 
at Curiapan , to carry a hundred men, with weapons and provifions for a month, expolcd to all 
the extremes of the weather, all the hazards of the water ; to lie open to the air, and upon 
hard boards by night; in ftorms of rain, or under the burning fun by day $ to fmell the wet 
cloathsof fo many crowded together; the drefling of their food, and that moftly ftule fifh, in 
the fame place; to be in fuch a labyrinth of rivers, in fuch a remote and unknown region ; 
what prifon could be more loathfom and unhealthy ? what profpedt more fearful and defolate ? 

At firft fetting out, they had twenty miles of a high fea to crofs in thefe fcanty boats ; fo that Driven into 
they were driven before the wind into the bottom of the bay of Guanipa, inhabited by inhuman o{ 

cannibals, who fhot poifon’d arrows: and from thence to enter one of the rivers of which 
Drajglafs had brought tidings. After four days, they were paft ebbing and flowing, and might 
have wander’d a whole year about, and never been able to extricate themfelves, in fuch a ge¬ 
neral confluence or rendezvous of ftreams were they now bewilder’d ; and fo refcmbling one 
another, as not to be diftinguilh’d •, but imperceptibly circulating and driving them about into the 
fame places where they had been before; palling between many iflandsand (freights, whole bor¬ 
ders were fo thickly arched and over-lbadowed with trees, as bounded their fight to the breadth 
of the river and length of the avenue, while the gloomincfs of the profpeft added horror to the 
lonefomenels of the place. At length, on the 2 2d of May 1595, they fell into a river; which. And into the 
becaufe it had no name, they call’d the Red-crofs River, thefe being the firft Chriftians who i f c<i ' c ' 0 l‘ *»- 
ever enter’d the fame. When they drew into the creek, which led to a town upon this river, 
their Indian pilot, named Ferdinando , landing, was let upon by his countrymen, who hunted 
him with dogs; whereupon Ralegh feiz’d an old man parting that way, and threaten’d to cut 
off his head if he would not procure his pilot’s liberty: but he, by his agility, foon cfcaped 

, them. 


Digitized by LjOOQle 









lxxx ^The LIFE 0/ 

% 

them, and fwam to Ralegh *s barge: however, they kept the old man, and ufed him kindly, 
alluring themfelves of ufeful information from a native fo long converfant in thofe parts. And 
indeed, but for this accident, they had never found their way forward to the country they 
fought, nor back to that where their Ihips lay •, the old man himfelf being often in the utmoft 
perplexity which river to take, lb numerous and intricate they were. Thofe people who dwell 
in the flooded lands of this infular and broken world, or in all the trails towards Guiana , which 
the eight branches of the Orenoque falhion into iflands, are generally called fivitivas t but diftin- 
Tivftivas^ * nt0 two tribes* a hardy and valiant generation j who, though they inhabited houfes on the 

ground in fummer, yet in winter were forced to afeend and refide in the trees, where they built 
themfelves artificial towns, and whole families were to be feen lodg’d in an arm or branch of 
thofe aireal or vegetable tenements ; as, it is written in the Spanijh bijlory of the fVeJl-Indies y 
thofe people alfo did in the low-lands, near the gulph of Uraba ^ for between May and Septem¬ 
ber thofe iflands are over*flow’d in fome places twenty foot high by the faid grand river of 
Orenoque. 

Departing from this quarter of the Tivitivas , which was under the divifion or tribe call’d 
Ciawani t he kept palling up the river with the flood, and anchoring in the ebb; yet the third 
day of his entering the river aforefaid his galley ran a-ground, and ftuck fo fall, they all thought 
their difeovery was at an end, and that the greateft number of them muft live like rooks, 
and build them nefts in the boughs j but, after emptying her ballaft, and much labour, they 
^rtatAmana ^ 0t ^ er a ‘® oat at l ^ e en ^ of the fourth day, and ftruck into another river call’d the Great 
' Amana t fpacious and without winding, being one of the faireft branches of the grand Orenoque: 
but here the flood of the fea left them, and every man, from the higheft to the loweft, was 
forced to tug by turns at the oar for feveral days, againft a rapid current, and in a moft fultry 
In five de- clime ; for they were now in five degrees of the line. Many goodly rivulets they pafs’d on ei¬ 
ther fide, which Ralegh nam’d in his map, and fhewed their rife and defeent. When three 
days more were palled over, his company began as well to defpair at the length of the way, as 
In great di- to languifh through exceflive heat •, and well might their courage, now their provifion alfo began 
to fail; yet now had they moft need of ftrength and vigor, when the current of the river grew 
moft boifterous and violent againft them. Here Ralegh had a great task to keep up the fpirits 
of his difconfolate companions, which could not be done by exhortations, without example ; 
without being ever foremoft to endure labour, and the laft who gratify’d himfelf with re- 
frelhment. He alfo ftri&ly commanded his pilots to promife an end every next day $ which 
honeft deceit he ufed fo often, they were forced to allure it would be at every reach. Thus 
while he was giving them hopes of attaining the land where their patience Ihould be rewarded 
with plenty ; while he was wringing out every man’s thoughts of returning, by the ftrongeft ar¬ 
guments which could be oppos’d ; as that they were now got fo far, and reduced to fuch flender 
accommodations, they could not avoid perilhing if they return’d } but might find relief in pro¬ 
ceeding: Providence feems to have rewarded his truft in her, by happily fluffing the feene. 
Relieved, and prefenting the moft beautiful landskip they had ever beheld. For here mountains, crowned 
with garlands of fruitful trees, invited one fenfe-, and verdant plains of many miles extent, en- 
amell’d with groups of odorous flowers, regal’d another. Birds of fuch forts and colours as they 
had never feen, * tempted them to fupply themfelves by their fowling-pieces j and filhes of va¬ 
rious kinds, by their nets ; without which, having little or no bread, and lefs drink, only the 
thick and troubled water of the river, they had been in the greateft extremity. Now the old 
Ciawanian they had taken (as beforc-mention’d) perfuading them he would lead them to a 
town up the branch of a river on the right hand, where they might be fupply’d with all conve¬ 
niences, and return before night \ Ralegh leaving his galley, took eight musketiers in his barge, 
and with Gifford and Calfield in their wherries, having eight musketiers more, enter’d the mouth 
of that river > but rowed till fun-fet, and faw no fign of the town even till they were forty 
miles diftant from the galley, and the rowers were ready to give up the ghoft. They had cer¬ 
tainly hang’d this pilot, but that their neceflities were his fecurity ; for it was quite dark, and 
they knew not their way back again •, but as they proceeded, the river grew fo narrow, and 
was fo over fpread with trees from fide to fide, that they were all forc’d with their fwords 
to cut a way for their oars, being ftill in hopes of a fupper that would make amends for their 
breakfaft. About one a-clock after midnight they difeern’d a light, and heard the barking of 
dogs } foon after they found the village, and there they were ftored with provifions, according 

1 Sir Walter Rahgh afterwards made fome very ju- prove that the difference of colour or magnitude in many 
dicious philofopical obfervations on the birds and beads of them made not a difference of fpreies. See his tiijt, of 
that have been difeover’d in ilrange lands; tending to the W'orM, lib. 1. cap. j. fed. 9. 


Digitized by 


Google 


to 




Sir TV A L TER RALEGH. 



to the promifes of the old pilot. In the mean time, the company in the galley mann’d out a 
boat in fearch of them ; but next day they return’d, and continu’d their courfe, after they had 
made this hungry and hazardous voyage for fourfeore miles in that river; which, befidcs other 
ftrangc fifhes of marvellous bignefs, abounded with thofe ugly ferpents call’d Crocodiles ; whence la the ii»cr 
the people nam’d it the river of Lagartos. Ralegh had a very proper young negro attending ol LVt ' s/- ' 
upon him in his galley, who, leaping out to fwim in the mouth of this river, was, in the fight 
of them all, inftantly devour’d by one of thefe amphibious animals. Not long after, being 
again in want of victuals, they took two canoes laden with excellent bread, being run afhore by 
the Indians in them call’d Arwacas, who fled to hide themfelves in the woodsj fearing, through 
the prepofielfions of the Spaniards, that Ralegh and his company were Canibals. Ralegh pur- 
fuiug them, in hopes of fome intelligence, found, as he was creeping through the bufhes, a re¬ 
finer’s basket, there being in it quicldilver, faltpetre, and divers other materials, for the trial 
of metals-, and alfo the dull of fome ore that had been refin’d: but in two other canoes which 
efcaped them, they heard of a good quantity of ore and gold. Ralegh then landed more men, 
and offer’d five hundred pounds to any of his foldiers who fhould take one of the Spa .iards, 
whom they thought to have alfo landed in thefe laft canoes j but they efcaped while he was 
purfuing the former: however, while he was in fearch of the Spaniards, he found the Arwaca s 
hidden in the woods, who had been pilots for the Spaniards \ of which Ralegh kept the chief 
for his pilot, and carried him to Guiana by whom he underftood in what pans the Spaniards 
labour’d for gold, which he divulged to few of his company, knowing both the feafon of the 
.year and other conveniences would be wanting to work any mine himfelf. Therefore he huffed 
away from this place, his purpofe being at that time rather to dilcover what he could of the 
country, and win over the people to fubjcflion. Here Ralegh’ sown words are: “ To flay 
“ and dig out gold with our nails, had been opus laboris, but not ingenii. Such a quantity as 
“ would have ferved our turns we could not have had i but a difeovery of the mines to our 
“ infinite diladvantage we had made; for thofe mines (defended with rocks of hard flone, which 
“ we call white{par) ire not eafily broken or open’d in hafte and I could have return’d a good 
“ quantity of gold ready caft, if I had not lhot at another mark than prelent profit.” Befide s 
this reflraint from all greedinefs after their gold, there was another virtue he no lets ftritftly ob • 
ferv’d, which highly advanced him in the efteem of all thofe Indians. For, whereas the Spa¬ 
niards were wont to fatisfy their luffs without controul upon their wives and daughters, Ralegh 
fuffer’d not a man of his fo much as to touch any of their women. “ I proceft (fays he) be- His conti- 
“ fore the majefty of the living God, that I neither knew, nor believe that any of our com- ncncc ‘ 

** piny, one or other, by violence or otherwife, ever knew any of their women s and yet we 
“ faw many hundreds, and had many in our power, and of thofe very young and excellently 
“ favour'd, which came among us without deceit, ftark naked.” And becaufe he found it a 
very troublcfbme work to keep the meaner fort from pilfering and fpoil, when they went to any 
of the Indians houfes, Ralegh caufed his interpreter at every place, when they departed, to en¬ 
quire after, and know the Ioffes or wrongs that had been done •, and if he found any thing had Ami juflice. 
been ftolcn or taken by violence, either the fame was reftor’d, and the party punifli’d in their 
fight, or elfe it was paid for to their utmoft demand. 

After he was recruited as aforefaid with bread and other provifions, which greatly en¬ 
courag’d his men, who now cry’d out. Let us go on, we care not how far j Ralegh fent back 
in one of the canoes the old Ciawan, and Ferdinando, his firft pilot; giving them fuch things 
as they defir’d for their voyage, and wrote a letter to his fhips, which they deliver’d, and then 
he went on under the pilotage of one of thofe Arwacas he had taken, whom the Spaniards had 
chriften’d Martin. But the next or fecond day after, they run a-ground again with their galley, 
and fhe was very near being caff away with their new ftore of vitftuals: they lay on the fund 
one whole night, and were in far greater defpair of difengaging her than before, becaufe they 
had no tide of flood to help them. In the midft of their fears, they bethought them of fattening 
an anchor upon the land, and with main ftrength drew her off. So the fifteenth day (of their 
abfence from their fhips) they difeover’d at a diftance, to their great joy, die mountains of 
Guiana •, and towards the evening were brought by a northerly gale in fight of the great Ore- 
noque, 1 which they foon afeer enter’d •, a river of vaft extent and magnitude, lying moftly caff E 
and weft even from the fea to Quito in Peru, thought to be dirce hundred miles wide at the g arui o' r- 
mouth, a thoufand miles navigable for fhips, two thoufand for letter veflels, and difeharging "V*-* 
it fclf by fixtecn arms into the fea, whereby many parts of the Spaniflj Indies might moft eafily 

* In the langusge of Trinidad, Onnuit fignif.es water. See Mr. DuddtTy'% voyage in HalUyt, vol. 5. fol. $-8. 


m m 


be 






ixx^r 


the LIFE of 


be invaded. From other obfervations, it appears in many places of the channel to be twenty 
fathom deep } and in few that are Ihoally, lefs than two and a half. It was called by the fuc- 
Cv.il'd Pah* ceeding voyagers to this place, in honour of Sir Walter, after his name. One of them gives 
his reafon for it in thefe words: 44 Of the worthinefs of this river becaufe I cannot fay enough, 
44 I will fpeak nothing; we have prefumed to call it by the name of Raleana, becaule your felf 
44 was the firft of our nation who ever enter’d the fame. * Now when Ralegh had procur’d of 
one of the bordering princes, named toparimaca, a skilful old pilot, who was his brother, and 
who perfectly knew this river, he fail’d up a branch thereof, having on the left hand a great 
ifland which they call Affapana ; and thence along the banks of fcvcral other iflands, which 
they chofc rather to anchor at than by the main land, becaufe of the tortoifes eggs, which they 
found there in abundance, to their great relief j and for the convenience of calling their nets 
from the rocks, of a blue metalline colour, which looked like fteel ore. So keeping always well- 
ward up the river, there open’d afeer a while a land on the right fide, which appear’d a Ipa- 
cious champa in, and the banks perfectly red. Ralegh lent captain Gifford, thy mi. Calf e/d, 
his coufins Grenvill and Butfhead Gorges j all'o his nephew John Gilbert and fome others, with 
a guard of fokiiers, to march over the banks, and difeover what profpafl it a.’ibrdcd ; and 
finding it a level of an unbounded fpace, it proved, as their pilot inform’d them, the plains of 
Saima, reaching to Cumana and Caracas in the Weft-Indies, which arc a hundred and twxnty 
leagues to the north, and inhabited by four principal nations, whereof one were the Aroras , as 
black as negroes, but of fmooth hair $ a defperatc people, ufing the ftrongelt and tnofl deadly 
poifon of all others on their arrows. Ralegh was mofl curious to know the compofuion of this 
poifon, and what remedies could be had againft the dreadful efiefts of it. For, befidcs the 
mortality of the wound, the patient is afflided with moll infulferablc torment, and accompa¬ 
nied with fuch irkfome fymptoms, that the phyfician cannot abide the cure. None of the Spa¬ 
niards could ever extort this fecret either by kindnefs or cruelty ; and indeed but few of the In¬ 
dians, befidcs their priefls and foothlayers, knew it. b Ralegh was therefore more beholden to the 
Guianians than ar.y body ; for Antonio de Berrio told him, that he could never attain to the 
knowledge thereof. 44 And yet they taught me (fays Ralegh ) the bell way of healing as well 
41 this, as all other poifons.” Then he tells us thofe medicines which are vulgar, and lerve 
for the ordinary poifon, are made of the juice of a root call’d tuparaf which all’o marvclloufiy 
quenches the heat of burning fevers, and heals inward wounds \ and that thole of common poi- 
fon’d arrows were wont to be heal’d by fome of the Spaniards with the juice of garlic. But this 
he commuicatcs as a general rule for all men that fhall hereafter travel the Indies where poilbn’d 
arrows are ufed, that they abflain from drink j for if they take any liquor into their body, where¬ 
unto they will be exceedingly provok’d by drought, and drink before the wound is drefs’d, or 
immediately upon it, there is no relief but prefent death. 

After having pafs’d the mountain Aio, and a great ifland, which he mentions, he reach’d 
on the fifth day of his entering the great river aforefaid, as high as the province of Aromaia , 
and anchoring at the port of Morequilo, which is fome three hundred miles within the land, 
upon the faid great river Orenoque , he fent a meflenger to the old king of Aromaia, named 
topiowary, who came the next day before noon on foot from his houfe, and return’d the lame 
evening, being twenty-eight miles backwards and forwards, tho* himfelf was one hundred and 
ten years of age. He had many attendants of both lexes, who came alfo to wonder at the Eng- 
lifh, and brought them great plenty of flelh, fowl and filh, with divers forts of fruits, and 
among them abundance of pinas, the moll excellent of all kinds, d efpecially thofe of Guiana j 


His skill in 
the cure of 
poifons. 


■ Relation of the fecond voyage to Guiana by captain 
Laurence Keymis. 'lid. Hakluyt , vol. 3. fol. 681, 6S2. 

b Whether the poifon they uled in Guiana was the fame 
with that in fome other parts of the Weft- Indies, Ralegh 
has not told us; but Sir John Hawkins informs us, that 
about Cumana , where they are very expert archers, «* their 
•• poifon is of fucli force, that a man being flruck there- 
•* with, dies in twenty* four hours: and, that in his judg- 
“ ment, there can be no ilronger; ufing thereunto apples, 
“ which are fair and red of colour; but are a ftrong poi- 
** fon (perhaps the Manchincil ) of which with venomous 
“ bats, vipers, adders, and other ferpents, they make a 
** medley, and anoint their arrows.” See Hawkins's voy¬ 
age to Guinea and the Indies of N<rva Ilifpania, in Hakluyt, 
vol. 3. fol. 508. 

c Captain Robert Harcourt , in his voyage to Guiana be¬ 
fore quoted, fays the juice of the leaf Uppee cures the wounds 
of their poifon’d arrows. Sec Purcbas's Pilgrims , voJ. 4. 
fol. 1*76. 


d Whether Ralegb , at his return, brought of this fru^ 
into England , which is otherwiie calPd the Aranas, and 
vulgarly the pine-apple, from fome refembinnee it bears in 
fhape to the cones ot the pine-tree ; or any of that molt de¬ 
licious wine made thereof, which he there al o tailed, has ra¬ 
ther been fuggdted than confirm'd ; but afterwards, when, 
a fpeedy voyage, fome of the fruit was brought over and by 
prcfcnced to king James , in greater perleCiion than we can 
conceive from tailing what is forced out of ho: beds here, 
he difeover'd one of the noble maxims in his king-craft , 
by declaring, It was a fruit too delicious, fr a fuhjtti to tafte 
of See a book call'd, Advice to the planters of both Indies , 8vo. 
without date. But had he known the profufeneb which 
the Englijh have fincc been at to ea: them, how imperfect¬ 
ly foever, of their own raifing, he might perhaps have 
more juftly faid, It was a fruit t:o extravagant, for a Juk- 
jell to tafte of 


befidcs 


Digitized by CiOOQlC 



Sir IF ALTER RALEGH. 


Ixxxiii 


bcfules bread, wine, and a fort of parroquites no bigger than wrens. And one of them pre- 
fented Ralegb with a little bead, which the Spaniards call Armadilla , having his body fcaPd or 
plated over like the Rhinoceros , with a white horn growing in his hinder parts as big as a hunt¬ 
ing horn. This horn is recommended in medicine,* and the flcffi for food, fince Ralegh foon 
after made a feaft of it. 

When the old king had reded himfelf a while in a tent which Ralegh had cauled to be 
pitch’d for him, they enter’d, by the interpreter, into difeourfe about the murder of Morequito, His eon* 
his predeceffor, and the other violations of the Spaniards. Then Ralegh acquainted him with 
the caufe of his coming thither, whole fervant he was, and that it was his queen’s plea- mc.it. 
lure he Ihould undertake this voyage for their defence, and to deliver them from the tyran¬ 
ny of the Spaniards ; dilating at large (as he had done before at Trinidad) on her maje- 
dy’s power, her judice, and her clemency towards all opprefled nations: all which, being with 
great reverence and attention receiv’d, he began to found the old man touching Guiana ; as 
what fort of commonwealth it was, how govern’d, of what drength and policy, of what ex¬ 
tent-, with whom in alliance or enmity y ladly, the didance and way to enter the heart of the 
country ? The king gave fuch ample and perfect account of thefe particulars, that Ralegh won. 
der’d to find a man of fuch gravity, judgment, and good difeourfe, without the help ot learn¬ 
ing or breeding. After his departure, Ralegh failed wedward to view the famous river Carols 
both becaufe it was fo wonderful in it fclf, and led to the dronged nations of all the frontiers, 
whowere’enemies to the Epuremei , fubje< 5 ts to the Inga, ot emperor of Guiana and Manoa. Even 
when he was fliort of it, or lower down than the port of Morequito, he heard the roaring falls 
of this river -, but when he enter’d it with his barge and wherries, thinking to have gone up 
fome forty miles to die Ca£ipagotos y he was not able with a barge of eight oars to row one 
ftonc’s throw in an hour j and yet the river is as broad as the Thames at Woolwich. Therefore 
encamping on the banks, he fent off an Indian to acquaint the nations upon the river of his ar¬ 
rival, and his purpofe ; and that he clefir’d to fee the lords of Canaria , who dwelt in that pro¬ 
vince. Then one of the princes came down, named IVanurelond , with many of his people. Ami v- i-.h 
and brought great dore of provifions, as the red had done. By him Ralegh found, the Caro - ^^ n: “ <:ena ' 
hans were nor only enemies to the Spaniards , but mod of all to the Epuremei , who abounded 
in gold; and that there were three mighty nations at the head of that river which would join 
him againd them. He was further inform’d by one captain George , whom he Iud taken with 
Berreo , that near the banks of this river there was a great filver mine ; but the rivers were all 
now fo rifen, that it was not poflible for the drength of man with any boat to row againd the 
dream. Therefore he difpatched a party between thirty and forty to coaft the river by land, 
while himfelf, with two or three officers and half a dozen Ihot, marched over-land to view the 
drangc and wonderful overfalls of the faid river Caroli y which roar’d at fuch a didance, and 
the plains adjoining, with the red of the province of Canuri. When they had got to the top 
of the fird hills over-looking the river, they beheld that prodigious breach of waters which views 
pour’d down Caroli t and how it ran in three dreams for twenty miles together. No lefs than " -wm | e ‘‘I 1 
ten or a dozen of thefe deep cataracts appear’d in fight, each as high above die other as a church- " L ‘ 
tower i which rufhed down with fuch violence, that the very rebound of the waters maJe the 
place feem as if it had been all over cover’d with a great fhower of rain j and in fome places 
they took it at fird for a thick fmoak which had rifen out of fome great town, till they drew 
nearer down in the valley to this thunder of waters, where they better difeern’d and diftinguilli’d 
the effedls of it. And here Ralegh fays, he never faw a more beautiful country, nor more lively 
profpefts the hills fo raifed up and down about the valleys the waters winding into fuch va¬ 
rious branches; the plains fo clear of bufh and dubble, and cover’d all with fair green grafs ; Ami the i*.-.ti¬ 
the ground of hard fand, and eafy for the march cither of horfe or foot; the deer eroding in “ ,ul ^ 
every path ; the birds, towards the evening, finging on every tree a thoufand fcvcral tunes } 
with cranes and herons of white, crimfon and carnation, pearchcd along the river banks ■, the 
air refrefh’d with gentle eaftcrly breezes; and every ftone they {loop’d to take up, promifing ei¬ 
ther gold or filver by its complexion. His company, at their return, brought fcveral of thefe 
ftones home} which they rather found colour’d outwardly like gold, than any of that metal 
fixed in them} for thofe who had lead judgment or experience, kept only fuch as glitter’d, 
and would not be perfuaded but they were rich, becaufe they fhone, thereby bred an opinion, 

'that all the reft were no better. Yet fome of thefe ftones Ralegh (hewed afterwards to a Spaniard 

• yUnardui writes, that a little of the powder of that Edict, trandated by 1 . Fratnpttn, and call’d, J *ful newt 
horn put into the car cures deafnefs. See his treatiie of from the iu r w t u:orld > 4to. 1577, r*nu 1596, 
the virtues ot herbs, trees, animals, in the W r cjl- 


of 


Digitized by v^oooie 








lxxxiv fhe L I F E of 

of the Caracas, who told him it was El madre del oro , that is, the mother of go'a \ a::d that t:ie 
mine was further in the ground. 

Among the goodly rivers beyond the Caroli, there is one named Caora. Upon this branch, 
it was attefted to Ralegh by 'the moft intelligent and credible chiefs of the adjacent parts, there 
dwelt a nation of people whofe heads appear not above their fhouklers , which, bccuufc every 
body in the provinces of Aromaia and Canuri alfo affirm’d, he was inclin’d to believe. They 
His report of are call’d Ewaipanoma , and reported to have their eyes in their flioulders, and mouths in their 
MKa^ a ^ a breafts (or in a level with them.) It was further avouch’d to him, they ufed bows, arrows, and 
clubs thrice as big as any of the Guianians *, and that one being taken prifoner the year before, 
was brought into Aromaia. When Ralegh doubted of fuch a race to the prince, hereafter men¬ 
tion’d, who came with him into England , he anfwcr’d, it was no wonder among them ; tor 
they had lately (lain many hundreds of his father’s people. Ralegh obi'erves, “ That Mande-vill 
“ had before written of fuch a nation j a and that, lince the Eajt-Indian difcoverics, we find 
“ many of his relations true, which were before held incredible.” Further, that when he after¬ 
wards arriv’d at Cumana , he fpoke with a Spaniard eminent for his travels, and withal for his 
credit and veracity ; who, hearing that Ralegh had been as far in Guiana as Caroli t immediately 
ask’d him if he had feen thofc people, and declar’d he had feen many of them. Then Ralegh 
names fome French merchants of London , who were there prefent, and heard what this Spaniard 
had thus afierted. “ Whether it is true or no (fays he) the matter is nor great, neither can 
“ there be any profit in the imagination ; tor my own part, I faw them not v but am refolv’d, 
“ that fo many people did not all combine or fore-think to make the report.” After all, whe. 
ther the obfervation of any garment loofely rifing above the fiioulders of thefe people, 
or the crouching pofture in which they were fo much feen, by their conftant exercife of 
archery, might not firft give fome rife to this report, I leave for others more largely 
to explain } b and how far the fame perfbn thould here be condemn’d for an implicit faith, who 
was, as we have read, cenfur’d for the want of it. This confidcration may be further offer'd 
for what Ralegh alfo repeats, not only from the writers of all nations, concerning the modern 
And of the Amazons in thefe parts, 1 but from their very neighbours. For having told us, that Orellana firft 
difeover’d Maraunon, which is call’d the river of Amazons , d and alfo after the faid difeo- 
verers own name, Ralegh was inquifitive to know whether there were any of tho/e warlike 
women, from whom this river fhould be fo call’d, in thefe American parts, who are fo fam’d in 
ancient hiftories to have been in Ajia and Africa \ and was afiur’d by an ancient Cafique, that 
there was fuch a nation of women on the fouth of the faid river, in the provinces of Topago, whofe 
manners and cuftoms, as they deferib’d to him, did fomewhat conform with what is recorded of 
the ancient Amazons: as, that diey cohabited with men but one month in the year j fent them 
the male children, and kept only the females j “ but diat they cut off their right bread (fays 
“ he) I do not find to be true.” He Was further told, they fcrupled not to accompany with the 
prifoners they took in war at any time •, but in the end conftantly put them to death : and that, 
as others of the bordering nations, thefe women wore certain plates of gold, which they had 


• Sir John MandevilTs words, according to the old Latin 
copy of his travels, arc (fpeakingof fome /outhern iflandt) 
44 Alia infula babtt homines afpeflu defermes 9 nihil autem 
44 coll: aut capitis ojlendentes ; unde & Acephali nuncupnntur : 
44 oaths autem habent ante ad /cupulas, t?* in loco pell or is os 
4 * apertum, ad for mam ferri quo nojlt i caballi freenantur." 
See alfo the late Enghjh edition of his voyage and travel, tffc. 
8vo. J 727. printed from a MS. in the Cotton library three 
hundred years old; where it plainly appears, his defcrip- 
tion of thefe headlefs people, p. 243. is copied out of Pliny's 
A 'at. llifi . lib. 7. cap. 2. and lib. 5. cap. 8. But the no¬ 
tion of luch a people did now fo prevail, captain Keymis 
bunging frefh ailurances of men w ith mouths in their breads, 
exceeding wide, from Guiana the year after, that Shake - 
fpear 9 in his Tempeft, tells us every adventurer would now 
bring good warrant of them. He repeats the defeription 
again of thofe people; where Othello relates the wonders 
of iiis travels, to charm the attention and concern of his 
j Defdcmona: and this, as ’tis thought, in compliment to 
Sir Walter Ralegh's authority ; for Shakej k pear had certainly 
read his difcovery of Guiana , as by other palfages in his 
plays might be proved. 

b Mr. Theobald thinks, we may be able to account, in a 
few lines, for the myilery of thefe (uppofed hcadlels peo¬ 
ple : for Olcarius (‘peaking (fays he) of the manner of 
clothing of the Sar:yeds, a people of north Mufcovy, fays, 
“ Their garment* are made like ihofc call’d Cnfaques, open 
“ only at the necks. When the cold is extraordinary, 
4t they put their Cfaques over their heads, and let the 


44 llceves hang down, their feces being not to be feen but 
44 at the cleft, which is at the neck; whence iome have 
44 taken occafion to write, that in theie northern countries, 
44 there are people •without heads, having iheir faces in 
44 their breaflsThe oh a IS s Shakrfpear , Svo. 1733. vol. VII. 
P- 393- 

« rid. Fran. Lopez Hif. de las Ind. par. 1. cap. 28. 
Alfo Andrew Jhcvtt, in his Antar flick trar.il. by J . HacLt , 
4to. 1568, and dedicated to Sir H. Sidney, cap. 63. Alfo 
Lopez Vaz, in his difeourfeof the IFeJl-Indies and the South- 
Sea ; where he confirms the account of thefe Indian women, 
who fought in the wars with bows and arrows to aid their 
husbands, but not without them ; and who, (hewing them- 
felves more valiant than their husbands, agair.it the Spa¬ 
niards, they therefore call'd the riv er, upon parts w hereof 
the e women dwelt, the river of Amazcns. 

* Of this river, fee the accounts in Mart Fern, de En - 
ciza , before mention'd. Alfo Jofeph dc Ac of a, in his AW. 
and Mor. Hif. of the Wejl- Indies, lib. 3. cap. 20, and 25. 
Alfo an hiitorical and geographical deferipnon of the great 
country and river of the Ar.eizons , Loud. 3 vo. 

Which book, however fet down bv A. If hod, in the li:t 
of Sir W. Ralegh's writings, perhaps became laid in the 
title-page to be the place he intended to conquer, was writ¬ 
ten originally in French by the count of Pagan, who dedi¬ 
cated it to cardinal Mazarine ; and this tranflation i: mode 
.by W. Hamilton. At the 129^ page of this book, there is 
a chapter on the Amazons of A frica. 


fome times 


Digitized by kjOOQie 



sir Walter Ralegh. ixxxv 

fometimcs exchang'd with Other countries for fpleenjlones, which are of a green colour ; and 
whereof (fays Ralegh ) I faw divers in Guiana ; for every king or cafique commonly has one, 
which their wives chiefly wear, and efteem as great jewels. Thefe ftrange reports, however dif¬ 
ficultly digerted by thofe who had only travell’d at home; which made Ralegb afterwards pro¬ 
duce many learned authorities, both ancient and modern, to juftify himfelf from impofing any 
inventions of his own;* foreigners, it feems, thought not fo extravagant, being more fami¬ 
liar and current among them ; and Hugo Grotius , intimates as if Ralegh fhew’d no more re¬ 
gard to thefe accounts than any other traveller would have done > where, mentioning this his 
difcovery of Guiana , he fays, “ That as to the Amazons , and thofe who had their faces in 
41 their breafts, having only heard talk of them, he left it for others to find them out.” b But 
to return s , , 

Whili Ralegb , with his company, lay at anchof on the coaft of Canuri, and had taken 
knowledge of all the nations upon the head and branches of the Caroli ; had found out many 
tribes who were enemies to the Epuremei and the new conquerors, having now fail’d and wan¬ 
der’d for the fpice of near a month, difhnt from his fhips above four hundred miles; befideS the 
long digreflions up many arms and branches on every fide by the way, they found the wintcr- 
feafon advance apace, £ and the Orenoque threaten them with greater fury every day than other ; 
the time they fpent at Tirinidad, and the company they there in vain waited for, being botli 
wanted here to compleat their enterprife. For the molt violent ftorms of thunder and light¬ 
ning which now fo frequently broke out, pour’d down fuch floods of rain, as made all the 
rivers rife and rage molt fearfully ; fo that if they waded them over-fhoos in the morning out¬ 
ward, homeward they could not come, even the fame day, without wading to their necks, or 
fwimming before they could reach their boats. Befides, they all grew very uneafy to them- 
fcltes and one another for want of fhifting, no man having room to beftow any other apparel 
than what he wore on his back ; and that was wafh’d through to his skin often ten times a day. 

Thele inconveniences, with thofe of having no inftruments to try any mines, or men fufficient 
to fecure them againft the guarded nations nearer the imperial city of Manoa, captain Prejlort 
having fail’d them, as was before faid, made Ralegh conclude there was no\V no advancing 
thither, or flaying longer here j but that he might well content himfelf for this voyage with the 
various difeoveries of the fituation, products and riches of the country, which he had thus fat 1 
made; with the intereft and friendfhip he had thus fpacioufly procur’d ; and which no adven¬ 
turer to thofe regions ever had in a much larger fpace of time, with much greater aids and pro- 
viftons, the diligence and dexterity to equal. 

As he return’d therefore to the eaft, he fpent fome time in difeoverirg the river towards the 
fea which he had not furvey’d, and which he thought alfo neceffary to do. In a day’s time 
he arriv’d again at the port of Morequito ; for, gliding down the ft ream, he went without la¬ 
bour, tho’ againft the wind, little lefs than a hundred miles a day. When he came to anchor 1 , 
he was very defirous of fome further conference with old Topiowari t who foon, upon notice, 
came, with a multitude of his people, flocking down to Ralegh's tent upon the fhore, every 
one loaded with prefents. When the old king was refrefh’d, and the crowd retir’d, Ralegh, by 
his interpreter, enter’d into a long conference with him ; telling him, that as both the Epuremei h; s j a ft con- 
and the Spaniards were his enemies ; the one having conquer’d Guiana already, and the other ference with 
endeavour’d to get it from both, he defir’d to be inftrudted both in the beft ways to the golden 5,'^° 
parts of Guiana , and the civiliz’d towns, or apparell’d people of Inga. The king anfwer’d, 
he could not perceive Ralegb meant to proceed to the great city of Manoa , becaufe neither the 
feafon of the year nor the ftrength of his company would enable him $ for he remember’d that 
in the plains of Maqureguarai , the firft civil town of Guiana , where all the gold plates wer e 
made which were fcatter’d over the neighbouring nations, and about four days journey from 
his own, three hundred Spaniards were deftroy’d, who had no friends among the borderers; 
therefore advifed Ralegh never to invade the ftrong parts of Guiana , without the help of all 
thofe nations which were their enemies. Ralegh ask’d, if he thought the company he had with 
him were fufficient to take that town: the king thought they were, and proffer’d to aflift him 
with all his borderers, if he would leave him a guard of fifty men upon his departure; but Ra- 


• See Sir Walter RaMS* Hiflorj of the World, lib. 4. 

*p- 2. fed. 15. * J J 

* Grotius , having fpoken of Sir Francis Drake ’s 
dnth, lays, Quo tempore Anglin alter Walterus RaleguS 
rt .V* a futiilitio pretpfitus, Of er.ocum flumen ingrej/us, Guia* 
*om nunqucm Hifpanis perdomitam aetiit, ac not it set tradidit 9 
ex rrro qu/e •vidit ; dt Ama%ombns, IS bis queis njultus in _ 
fcchre % audita tan turn IS ah is f lentus mdaganda, Hijhr. 

Ac Rihut Bel fids, lib. 4. 


• 44 The winter and fummer here, as touching cold and 
44 heat (fays Ralegh) differ not; neither do the trees ever 
44 fendbly lofe their leaves, but have always fiuit either 
• 4 ripe or green; and mod of them, both blod'oms, leaves, 
44 ripe fiuit, and green at one time : but their winter con- 
44 dlls of terrible rains and ovei flowing of die rivers, with 
44 many great dorms mid gulls, thunder and lightnings ; 
44 of which we had our fill ere wc return’d. 

n n legb 


Digitized by k.iOOQle 




lxxxvi Tfe LIFE of 

legh knowing if they fhould efcape the Guianians , the Spaniards exporting fupplies, would re¬ 
pay upon them his treatment at Trinidad, very plaufibly excus’d himfclf. Hereupon the king 
defir’d he would forbear him and his country at this time •, for if the Epuretnei fhould know 
he had given Ralegh any aid or intelligence, he fhould foon be over-run by them *, nor could 
he avoid the Spaniards , if they fhould return, who had before led him feventccn days in a 
chain like a dog, till he paid a hundred plates of gold and fcvcral chains of fplcen-ftor.es for 
his ranfom: but if Ralegh would return in due feafon next year, he would engage all the bor¬ 
derers in the enterprife •» for that he could not more defire to make himfclf mafter of Guiana , 
than they to a (Tift him •, having been plunder’d in their wars by the Eptircmei of their women, 
whom to recover they would willingly renew the war, widiout hopes of further profit; for the 
old king complain’d of it as a matter of grievous reftraint, that now they were confin’d to three 
or four wives apiece, who were wont to enjoy ten or a dozen *, while the lords of their enemies 
had no lefs than fifty or a hundred. But they feem to have had a political rcafon for this reco¬ 
very, to ftrengthen their alliance and increafe their forces, thefe frontiers having been much de¬ 
populated between the fubjetts of Inga and the Spaniards. Ralegh, after further confultation, 
finding it abfolutely improper either to leave any of his company, or attempt war upon the Epu- 
remei till the next year, apply’d himfclf now only to learn how thefe people wrought thofe plates 
of gold which were difpers’d about, and how they divided it from the ftone. The king told 
him, that mod of their plates and images were not fever’d from the ftone •, but that on the lake 
of Manoa, and many other rivers thereabouts, they gather’d the perfect grains of gold, and 
mingling a proportion of copper, the better to work it, put it in a great earthen pot, under 
which they increas’d the fire by the breath of men, through long canes faften’d to the holes 
round the faid pot, till the metal difTolv’d, which then they call into moulds of ftor.e and clay, 
and fo made thofe plates and images j w'hereof Ralegh brought two forts into England, more to 
fhew the manner of them than their value: for he gave more pieces of gold of the twenty flail- 
ling coin, with the queen’s effigies upon them, among thefe people, to wear in honour of her 
mnjefty, and to engage them in her fervice, than he receiv’d ; fo little did he make his define 
of gold known to them. He alfo brought over fome gold ore of their mines, “ whereof I 
“ know fome is as rich (fays he) as any the earth yields, and of which I know there is fuffir 
“ dent, if nothing elfe were to be hop’d for j” but they wanted time, hands and inftruments to 
Di(corns the break the ground, without which there could be no working of mines. “ We faw (adds hej 
gold mines. t( a jj ^ ^jjj s w j t [ 1 ft ones of the colour of gold and filver, and we try’d them to be no Mar- 
“ quefite j and therefore fuch as the Spaniards call El madre del oro, or, the mother of gold, 
*« which is an undoubted afturance of the general abundance thereof \ and my felf faw the out- 
“ fide of many mines of the Sparre, which I know to be the fame that all covet in this world ; 
“ and of thofe, more than I will fpeak of.”. Now Ralegh, befides having learn’d the riches of 
the country, having alfo won the afle&ions of the people, and receiv’d a faithful promife of the 
chiefs in thofe provinces of Aromaia and Canuri to become fervants to her majefty, took his 
leave of old Topiowari , and receiv’d his fon prince Cayworaco as a pledge betwixt them, whom 
i Crm P , thc he brought into England , where he was chriften’d Gualtero with great folemnity, leaving with 
into England. the old kingtwo of his own people m exchange , the one named Francis Sparrow, who being a 
good draughtfman, and could deferibe a country with his pen, defir’d to be left for that purpofe, 
whom Ralegh inftru&ed to travel as far as he could to Manoa with fuch merchandife as he com¬ 
mitted to his care ; the other was a boy, who waited upon him, named Hugh Goodwin, for whom 
he left orders to be taught the language of the country. This done, he weigh’d anchor, and coafted 
the river on Guiana- fide, bccaufe he came towards it on the north-fide by the lawns of Saima. 

There was a powerful cafique named Putijma , who accompanied Ralegh and his men from 
Aromaia , with promifes to lead them to a mountain call’d Iconuri , which contain’d a mine of 
gold j and which (fays Ralegh ) he perform’d. Ralegh travell’d a great way towards it him- 
felf along the river Mana, till, through wearinefs, he was forced with fome of his attendants 
to reft on the banks of a lake in the delightful valley of Oiana ; where one of his guides kin¬ 
dling a fire with two flicks, * they flay’d a while to dry their fhirts, which, with cxccflivc he^t, 
were very wet and heavy upon them ; fending captain Keymis the while with a party under that 
cafique to take cognizance of the faid mine, and promis’d to meet him at die river Cumaca, in 

i 

• Succeeding voyagers have obferv’d of the Karaguata of another call’d Itnbaiba , the inhabitants kind’e their fires 
Ciutcu , a Brazilian tree about fourteen or fifteen foot high, • by linking them together, as \vc by a and llcel. See 
with yellow riowers on the top, and large long thick Nieuhoff 's voyages, vol. 2. foi. 141 ; alio Sir Ibo. Bryv.'zs 
leaves, which yield an unttuous liquor fervihg for ioap, and vu/gar errerj, tol. 131. 
lt;ing> for tuhing nccsj that with the wood thereof, and •* 

his 


Digitized by kjOOQle 



Sir IF A LTE R k A LEG//. Ixxxvii 

his way to Emeria, the province of Carapana i one of the greateft lords of the Orenoqueponii 
with whom he fought to eftablifh a league. And as Ralegh return’d by the river Man a to¬ 
wards the faid province, he faw himfelf many rocks like gold ore, and on the left hand a round 
mountain of mineral ftone. From hence returning down the ftream, he coaftcd the province o* 

Panne j but the branches of the rivers he here palled, with Aio and other mountains, he referv’d 
to the reprefentation in his map •, which, for the numerous and diftant rivers and countries Draw; a g<^ 
therein occalionally refer’d to, appears to have been a very accurate and comprchenfive per- "^country, 
formance. ■ In the river of IVmicapora he faw what they call’d the mountain of cryftal, which 
look’d at a diftance like a white church-tower of exceeding height, over the top of which a 
mighty river rufh’d down with prodigious noife. Berreo told him, there were diamonds and 
other ftones of great value thereon, which blaz’d at a great diftance. Upon this river Ralegh 
refted a while, and marched to a town of the fame name, where he found the natives all as 
drunk as beggars, it being the time of their feftival. Here Ralegh refrefh’d himfell with the 
provilions of the place, and the delicate wine of Pinas, which the people brought him and his 
company in great plenty. But underftanding that Carapana was retir’d from Emeriti ; and ima¬ 
gining, becaule he was an old fubril prince, it was to wait till lie Ihould return next year, then 
join him, if the EngUJh were ftrong enough to tempt his alliance •, if not, that he might cxcufe 
his retirement to the Spaniards, as tho’ it were in fear of thefe new vifitors; Ralegh fpent ho 
more time in feeking after him •, but making to the river Cumaca, he met with Kejtnis, and 
took his leave of Putijma , who, of all others, moft lamented his departure j for the Orencque 
was now fwoln moft dreadfully, lo that it was impoflible to return by the way he enter’d, for the 
fiver of Amana could not be failed back by any means, the breeze and current of the fea were 
fo outragious: therefore he follow’d the branch of Capuri, which enter’d into the fea eaftward 
of his /hips, that he might bear with them before the wind ; and great need there was fo to do, 
having by that way as much to crofs of the main fea, in their little boats, after they came to 
the river’s mouth, as between Gravelin and Dover. "But when they arriv’d at the fea-fide, and In a dreadful 
anchor’d in the mouth of Capuri, they were in a moft defperate condition \ for there arofe a ftorm ’ 
mighty ftorm, and the river’s mouth was at leaft a 'league broad, fo that they run before night 
clofe under the land with their boats, and brought the galley as near as they could, which had 
fnuch ado to live, and was often near finking with all her men. Ralegh was in the utmoll 
doubt what Court to take } either to venture in-tlie gilley through fix foot water on rhe fands for 
two leagues together, and that in“the channel, when Ihc drew five j or truft in fuch a raging wind 
and fea to crofs over in his barge. At laft, feeing the tempeft increnfe the longer he tarried, he 
■took Gifford, Calffeld , and Grenvil, in his bai'ge' j and about midnight thruft into the fea, leaving 
’the galley to come by day-light. Thus faintly cheating one another in flicw of courage (fays 
t$ Ralegh) it pleas’d God by nine a-Clock the next morning we di/cover'd the ific of Trinidad.” 

So they kept along the ’fhore 'to 'Cufiapan, Where they found their /hips at anchor •, “ than 
which (fays he) there was rrev’eit to' us a ffiore joyful fight V* efpecially when they found, 
upon meeting together, thby had loft but one man (before-mention’d) through fo many extremes 
of wet, heat, hunger, "want of rCft, ; fleep, lodging, and foch like violent hardftiips in this 
ftoilfom and dangerous adventure,''As ; drotfe them tb many umifual and Unhealthy fhifts, efpe. 

-cially in their diet; fuCh as feeding upon many ftrange and corrupted fruits } upon frefh fifh 
without feafoning; trocodiles, Jea-cows, h ar.id's, and armed bogs ; upon all forts, of the land 
or water ; good and bail •, without p'fder or tneafufe: and yet no calenture befell them, or other 
peftilent difeafes which are wont ttfinfefl all regions'fo near the line ; fo wliolcfbm was the coun¬ 
try, or fb happily fuited to their con'ftitUtions. ^The fiiany praifes which Ralegh further be- 
fttiWs upon the plenty and other felicities of Guilina,*'! niuft IcAve to the noble defcriplton he 
has writ of it, having here only extracted fuch . parts as more chiefly refpeCt our prefent endea¬ 
vour at the perfonal hiftory of its author. 

• This large and general map of Guiaaa and the neigh- two of Ralegh's JXovery of Guiana, hereafter mention’d, 
towing countries, kul.gb oltcn mentions; and where he i* a oontraciion of this Urge and general map; 1 do not 
is lpeaking ot the Orenowe; 4u>w iiar it is ttavlgablc ; • what ■ rfmember, when I had that tra^l in my hand, to have 
coni derabJe par s of the S panijh Wrfl-lndits are to be in- obferv’d by any infeription there may be theieon. 
vsiied therery ; to what other regions it levels, the defeent b Of thefe fia-msn/iers, other wile call’d manaii by tlie 
cl its Lrar.dics j and where ii lalis into the lea, he trbs us, Sf/i/iiards, R* *!cgb lays he had leen as big as a wine-pipe; 

• thefep.iricu!ars, that he may not be tedious, flu) 1 better be .-other* dekribe its flefh to be like heel, and to yield an ex- 
perceiv'd in the general defcriptkm of ( juiewa , Peru , j\jre- cel-lent.oil; the hide, being dreh’d, makes good bulF; ai d 

Rcym, the kingdom of Prjayan and Rvidas^ with the dried, good targets or armour; wherefore, we are roid, 
province of Vent^ucla , to the bay of Vroba y behind Car- Sir // alter Ralegh brought feveral of thefe hides into ¥av - 
tuwia weftward; and to Amawmes ibuthward. Whether land. See captain Huraurt's voyage in Purchas (before- 
thehttlc map, which I think is prefix’d to the Latin edi- mention’d) fol. 1275. 


Js 


Digitized by kjOOQie 






lxxxviii 


The LIFE of 

In his return homewards he touch’d at Cumana , to ftore and refrcfh himfdf with fuch pro- 
vifions as he wanted •, but the Spaniards refufed to fupply him, at which he threacned the town * 
and upon their refilling alfo to fave it by fuch reafonable ranfom as they had juft before off'a’d 
Purs Come captain Prejlon , he fet it on fire: the like he did at St. Mary , and at Rio de la Hack, as we 

tfamjh towns. . - , , . .. , , _ , . , , 

are informed by Camden and others; fome or whom affirm, he got not only great glory here¬ 
by, but riches ; the latter of which will be thought doubtful to thofe who have read the Spa¬ 
niards had removed their effects to the mountains, before they entered into a capitulation with 
Prejlon. On the 13th of July , when the faid captain Prejlon, with the reft of his company, 
were under Cape St. Anthony , the weftermoft part of the ifie of Cuha y “ we met (fays the 
“ writer of his voyage) with the honourable knight Sir IValter Ralegh, returning from bis 
“ painful and happy difeovery of Guiana., and his furprife of the ifie of Trinidad : fo with glad 
“ hearts we kept him and his fleet of three fhips company (for he mentions no more) till the 
“ twentieth day at night, at which time we loft them.” ‘ 

Wrii« a dif- Whbn Ralegh was arrived in England, he foon applied himfelf to digtft the obfervations 
hb*G«iW h ma ^ c his difeoveries, and they were, not many months after, committed to the 

difcoveiies. prefs. b Several authors have beftowed characters in praife of this difeourfe, which manifefts 
fuch a wonderful genius in compafling the knowledge of fo many places, productions, and 
’ people, with fo fmall a power, and in fo fhort a time. The honourable Mr. Dudd.ly , natural 

fon of the earl of Leieefler , and afterwards a knight alfo of great renown for his writings and 
adventures, fpeaking of a dilcovery into Guiana , which had been communicated to him, lays 
it was in the lelf-lame manner almoft fucb as Sir IValter Raligb hath very difcreetly writ¬ 
ten. c Camden refers thofe who would know more of this enterprize, to an ingenious book of 
Ralegh's writing, wherein he gives a mojl accurate defeiption of the countries , as if he had been 
born and bred there. d And a later author mentions this treatife as one of thofe written by 
Ralegh , which is full of proper , clear and courtly graces of fpeecb. c The aCtion it felf has 
alfo had many juft encomiums beftowed upon it by Mr. Hakluyt , caprain Harcourt , and 
others •, the latter of whom, fpeaking of the Great Orcnoque (at a time wherein he will not be 
fufpe&ed guilty of flattery to die firft of our nation who explored that river) adds, wherein 
Sir Walter Ralegh performed his worthy and memorable difeovery. f Nor could the mufes for- 
bare to celebrate fuch a glorious exploit, as well by the pens of thofe who were eye-witnefles of 
his toils and travel, as thofe who were no ways concerned in them: for captain Keymis , who 
bore him company, as we have obferved, wrote this year a Latin copy of verfes in praife of 
the Guianian expedition, deferibing the fituation of the country, with its riches, and Ralegb'% 
unparallel’d dexterity, for performing that difeovery in a month, which fo many brave Spa¬ 
niards had in vain attempted many years. 8 And another learned poet, whom I take to have 
been Mr. George Chapman , wrote at the fame time a heroic poem in Englifh upon the fama 
fubjed. Thofe who have read this whole poem attentively, which contains near two hundred 
lines, and obferved what lofty ftrokes of praife the author beftows upon this enterprize, as 
well as the cordial inftigations wherewith he animates his country to perfevere in it, may con¬ 
ceive, I have had fome conftraint upon my felf, through a regard to that proportion which 
is here neceflliry, in tranferibing no more from it, than thofe parts wherein Ralegh is diredly 
mentioned, when the whole redounds fo much to his glory. And firft, the poet, after having 
invoked his mufe to fing the atchievement of that hero’s fword, which is confecrated to his 
queen j and told us, the fubjeCt of his fong is riches with honour, and conqueft without 
blood 1 enough to feat univerfal monarchy, like the bird of Jove, upon Eliza's hand; 
and deferibed the wealthy Guiana bowing her mighty breaft, and making every fign of 
fubmiflion to become both the After and the daughter of that facred maid ; he goes on thus: 


• See Robert Davit's vift. voysge of captain A mi at 
P teflon and captain George Sommerj to the H ~efl- Indies, be¬ 
gun March 1595, in Hakluyt, vol. 3. fol. 583. 

b Under the title of, 7 he difeovery of the large, rich 
and beautiful empire of Guiana ; with a relation of the 
great and golden city o/Manoa, call’d by the Spaniards 
El Dorado , &c. performed in the year 1595, by Sir W. Ra¬ 
legh knight, captain of her mrjefty’s guard, lord-warden 
of the flannnies , and her highnelVs lieutenant general of 
the county of Cormvall . imprinted at London by Robert 
Kobinfon, 4to. 1596. reprinted in Hakluyt, vol. 3. fol. 627. 
confuting of about nine ihcets. It was aJfo tranflated into 


Latin (and perhaps other languages) with the title of 
Brevis & Admiranda Defnptio Regtn Guiarur tffc. per D*. 
Gualt. Ralegh Equtt. Anri, delect* ; ‘Tabula Geographic* 
Jcdoc. tiondii &c. Nor in. a. impest f. 4/3 I 599. 

c See his voyage to Trinidad in HaUujt, vol. 3. 
fob 576. 

* Annal. Eliz. Anno 1595. 

* Athen . Oxon. vol. I. col. 438. 

f Captain Harcourt in Purchas (as before) fol 12*0. 

* Ad Thomam llariotum Mathefeos , ijf vniwflt Phi - 
lofophire peritijfmum , de Guiana carmen. Da!. Anno I 595. 
*vid. Hakluyt , vol. 3. fol. 672. 


Then 


Digitized by boogie 



lxxxix 


Sir WALTER RALEGH. 


Then moft admir'd foveraign , let your breath 
Go forth upon the waters, and create 
A golden -world in this our iron age ; 

And be the profp'rous fore-wind to a fleety 
That fecondingyour lajl , may go before it. 

In all fuccefs of profit and renown : 

Doubt not but your election was divine - f 
As well by fate, as your high judgment order'd , 

To raife him with choice bounties who cou’d add 
Height to his height; and like a liberal vine , 

Not only bear bis inrtuous fruit aloft t 

Free from the prefs of fquint-efd envy's feet , 

But deck bis gracious prop with golden bunches t 
And Jhroud it with broad leaves of rule f er-grown t 
From all black tempefis of invafttn. 

Then having ekhorted the queen not to let the Courfe of her reign be like thofe great 
winds, which in the morning of their power tear up forrefts by the roots, raife the Teas to the 
Ikies, and make the earth tremble, yet, bury their waftful bravery in the evening} but rather 
like a river that flows from the mountains, and grows greater the further it runs, till, mixing 
with the main, it takes his titles and command : having alfo expofed thole politicians, who 
would be wife in fpight of wifdom j who think nothing can be right but certainty, and place 
their faith in incredulity j that coward’s caftle, fluggard’s cradle, and only wit of fools, which 
flovenly defaces all things fair: and laftly, having bewail’d the corruptions of nature in our 
greatefl nobility, whole bodies have choak’d their minds, which are bereaft of fenfe through 
exceflive fenfualides, dll the eflwfts of their lufts h^ve like lightning wounded her foul through 
her flefh unwounded j fo that fhe muft need incitements to her recovery even from the part fhe 
hurts •, the poet finely continues in thefe words: * \ . 

’ '••• . ' . V. 

... 0 bow moji tike 

Art thou, heroic author of this a (ft. 

To this wrong'd foul of nature! that fufiain'Jt 
Pain y charge , and peril, for thy country s good $ 

And fhe much like a body numb'd with furfeits t 
Feels not tby gentle applications 
For the healthy ufe y and honour of her powers ! 
let Jhall my verfe through all her eafe-lock'd ears 
Trumpet the noblefs of thy high intent ; 

And if it cannot into all proceed , 

The faulty and bitter penance of the fault , 

Make red fome others eyes with penitence , 

For thine are dear — and what more nimble fpirits t 
Apter to bite at fuch unhooked baits y 
Gain by our lofs y thaty muft we needs confefsy 
Tby princely valour would have purchas'd us i 
JVhich Jhall be fame eternal to thy name , 

Though tby contentment , in thy grave defires 
Of our advancement , fail deferved ejfed. 

O how I fear thy glory which I love , 

Left it ft.ould dearly grow by our decreafe ! 

Naturesy that flick in golden-gravel'd fprings. 

In muck-pitSy cannot fcape their fwallowings. 

Yet the poet confiding in the Patrician fpirits of the nation to encourage this fublime en¬ 
deavour at fuch imperial enlargements of the Brilijh dominion, and efpccially in the tempta¬ 
tions of the country it felf, Gold, like fate, giving life and law to all our atftions; prefages 
they fhould all go to Guiana } that Brilijh colonies fhould be planted, churches and palaces 
built there; and that the whole world, by this heroic conqueft, fhould pay homage to the 
queen of England; but it cannot be fo juftly deferibed as in the lines themfelvcs. 

o o Then 


Digitized by ^ooQle 








The LIFE of 


Then in the Thefpiads bright prophetic font, 

Metbinks I fee our liege rife from her throne, 

Her ears and thoughts in Jleep amaze erett. 

At the moft rare endeavour of her power. 

And now fhe blejjes with her wonted graces 
Th* induftrious knight, the foul of this exploit j 
Difmifling him to convoy of his Jlars. 

And now for love and honour of his worth. 

Our twice-born nobles bring him bridegroom-like, 

That is efpous'd for virtue to bis love. 

With feajls and mufick ravifhing the air, 

To bis Argolian fleet * where round about 
Iiis bating colours , Englifh valour fwarrns 
In hafle, as if Guianian Orenoque, 

With his full waters fell upon our fhore. 

And now a wind as forward as their fpirits, 

Sets their glad feet on fmootb Guiana’; breaft ; 

Where, as if each man were an Orpheus, 

A world of favages fall tame before them, 

Storing their thrift-free treafuries with gold. 

And there doth plenty crown their wealthy fields * 

There, learning eats no more bis thriftlefs books i 
Nor valour, oflridge-like, his iron arms : 

There, beauty is no Jlrumpet to her wants. 

Nor Gallique humours putrify her blood > 

But all our youth take Hymen’; lights in hand, 
j . And fill each roof With honour*d progeny: 

There, makes fociety Adamantine chains, 

And joins their hearts with wealth, whom wealth disjoin'd: 

There healthful recreations flrew the meads. 

And make their manflons dance with neighbourhood. 

Which here were drown'd in churlifh avarice : 

And there do palaces and temples rife 

Out of the ■ earth , and kifs tb' enamour*d Jkies ; 

Where New Britannia humbly kneels to heaven, 

The world to her, and both, at her blefl feet. 

In whom the circles of all empire meet. * 

Bur the poet was no prophet in this refpcCl j for Ralegh, with all his zeal and afliduity 
for the honour and advantage of his country, of which he could not give more lincere proofs 
than he did, by his continual forwardnefs to venture his fortune, and his life therein, could ne¬ 
ver induce the date to proceed in the plantation of Guiana i not fo much through any real in¬ 
credulity of the emoluments that would accrue from it, the fuperficial caufe of its neglcCt •, as 
through that malignant jealoufy which fo eternally biafs’d the domeftic competitors for royal fa¬ 
vour, to curb the foreign fervicesof enterprifing men, left the atchievements of the one fhouldout- 
fliine the adminiftrations of the other: and this reafon we may have further occafion hereafter more 
exprefly to confirm out of Ralegh' sown words •, whence we may here obferve, that he, whofe en¬ 
gaging qualities had gain’d him fuch influence, fuch an afcendcncy over the moft favage and uncivi¬ 
liz’d nations, found no difpofitions fo barbarous and intractable among thofe ftrangers, as he did in 
his own country like Hercules himfclf, who having, by his glorious labours, fhewed his 
power of fubduing and taming all other monfters, found envy and detraction invincible at laft 
That Ralegh’s labours were attended with the fame fate, himfclf has fufficicntly difeover’d in 
that dedication, which, with fo much eloquence, modefty, and generofity, he made of his dij- 
cottrfe upon Guiana aforefaid, to the lord-admiral Howard and Sir Robert Cecyl. For no t with- 
Handing the difficulties and dangers of the voyage, “ It appears (fays Ralegh therein) that I 
“ made no other bravado of going to lea than was meant, and that I was never hidden in Corn- 

* De Guiana Carmen Epicum, Authorc G. C. in Hakluyt, vol. 3 . fol. 663. 




Digitized by CiOOQie 




Sir WALTER RALEGH. 


“ izal or elfewhcre, as was fuppos’d. They have grofly belied me, that fore-judged I would TrahuV. 
“ rather become a fervant to the Spanifh king than return • and the reft were much miftaken, 

“ who would have perfuaded that I was too eafcful and fenfual to undertake a journey of fo 
“ great travel: but (as he generoufly continues) if what I have done receive the gracious cor.- 
“ ftruftion of a painful pilgrimage, and purchafe the leaft remiflion, I fliall think all too little, 

“ and that there were wanting to the reft many miferies.” And as he had juft before obfirv’d, in 
a delicate reflection upon the ungrateful cuftom of making one failing eclipfe the merit of many 
virtuous actions, where he fays, “ If ought might have been deferv’d in former times to have 
“ counterpois’d any part of offences, the fruit thereof, as it l’eems, was long before fallen from the 
“ tree, and the dead ftock only remain’d. ” So here he goes on ; “ But if both the times pa ft* 

“ the prefent, and what may be in the future, do all by one grain of gall continue in eternal 
“ diftafte ; I do not then know whether I fhould bewail my felf either for my too much travel 
“ and expence, or condemn my felf for doing lefs than that which can deferve nothing 
“ From my felf I have deferv’d no thanks, for I am return’d a beggar and wither’d; but 
“ that I might have better’d my poor eftate, it fliall appear by the following difeourfe, if I had not 
t‘ refpe&ed only her majefty's future honour and riches. It became not the former fortune in 
“ which I once liv’d, to go journeys of picory ; and it had lorted ill with the offices of honour 
“ which by her majefty’s grace I hold this day in England, to run from cape to cape, and from 
“ place to place, for the pillage of ordinary prizes.” The infignificancy of thefe purfuits alfo 
in our other EngUJb adventurers to diftrefs the king of Spain , he lays open a little further, in 
the following manner: “ This undertaking hath another ground and afiurance of riches and 
“ glory than the voyages of the Weft-Indies ; an eafier way to invade the beft parts thereof 
“ than by the common courfe. The king of Spain is not fo impoverifh’d by taking three or 
“ four port-towns in America , as we fuppofe ; neither are the riches of Peru or Nueva Efpanna 
“ fo left by the fea-fide, as to be eafily wafh’d away with a great flood or fpring-tide, or Icfc 
“ dry upon the lands at a low ebb. The port-towns are few and poor in rcfpeCt of thofc 
“ within the land j are of little defence, and only rich when the fleets are to receive the trea- 
“ furc for Spain; and we might think the Spaniards very fimplc, having fo many horfes 
“ and flaves, if they could not upon two days warning carry all the gold they have into the 
“ land, and far enough from the reach of our foot-men, efpedally the Indies being fo moun- 
“ tainous, fo full of woods, rivers and m&rfhds.” ‘ Here he goes on to give a large variety 
of examples, naming, befides the ports of Camana and St. Jofepbo , which he took himfelf, 
and found not therein one rial of plate, matiy 'other towns and cities which are wealthy, but of 
difficult accels through our want of good footing in the neighbourhood of them. Ami leaves 
many more iflands, ports, cities and mines in Peru and other parts unnam’d with the reft, both 
that the grandeur of thole territories might not feem incredible, and for this further reafon ; 

“ Of all which (fays he) becaufe I have written a particular trealife of the tVefl-Indies , 1 I His treati e 

“ will omit the repetition at this time-, feeing that in the faid treatife I have anatomiz’d ottl,c l '“J l 

“ the reft of the fea-towns, as well as of Nicaragua, Jucalan , Nueva Efpanna , and the 

“ iflands , as thofe of the inland j and by what means they may be beft invaded, as far 

“ as any mean judgment can comprehend.” But Ralegh was in hopes it would appear 

there was now a way found out to anfwer every man’s longing *, a richer Indies than any 

the king of Spain enjoy’d, which if the queen would patronize, he was willing to end 

the remainder of his days in reducing it to a total fubjeftion. Whatever he further advanced 

of this kind, diffidence and detraction were fo predominant, that becaufe fome of Ra- 

egb’s company brought over marcafiie for gold, as he informs us a little further, b there 

were fome who would not believe the real gold ore which he brought, and which he had 

helped to dig out of the rocks with his own dagger, was of greater value. Nay, when 

many trials had been made of this ore, c wherein fome quantities were proved by one IVefivnccd , 

a refiner in IVood-JIrecI , to hold after the rate of twelve or thirteen thoufand pounds a ton. - , 

J n r i \r , . iJIs trial of 

Other parcels, by Mr. Bulmar and Dimock, afiay-mafter, found alfo to hold after the rate of riie Cut a 
twenty-three thoufand pounds the ton ; and a third fort tried by Mr. Palmer , comptroller of 0 c - 
the Mint , and Mr. Dimock in Goldfnitbs-Hall, holding after the rate of twenty, fix thouland 
nine hundred pounds the ton j who tried alfo fome gold dull of the fame mine, which held 
eight pound fix ounces weight of gold in the hundred, and an image of copper made in 

* Thh trenrifc, was I think never printed, at lead un- (T.v.vwr/r. 2nd probably of this which he brought at this 
der Sir Walu>\ name ; nor has it ever been taken notice time, ha* been fo carefufy prcfcrvM in his family, that 
ol by ary of thofc writers ot his life, who have attempted it is now in the polVdlion ol captain Ji iilitw: E/tcn ; who, 
to K vc us a catalogue cf his writings. among other communications relating to Sir IK AW» 

b Sir W Ralegh\ preface to thedifcoveiy cf Guiom. has countoufly oblig'd me with a fight (hereof. 

f ^ Clne of the ore which Sir If'. Raft"!' brought horn 


Guiana , 







• • 


XC11 

Difcreciit:d. 


The LIFE of 

Guiana , which held a third part of gold: when all this was prov’d, there were thofe who 
would not yet believe it gold of Guiana ; but that Ralegh purchas’d it upon the African coaft, 
and carried it over thither. “ Surely, the fingularity of that device (lays Ralegh) I do not 
“ well comprehend: for my own part, I am not fo much in love with thefe long voyages, as 
“ to devife thereby to coufen my felf; to lie hard, to fare worfe, to be fubjeft to perils, to 
“ difeafes, to ill favors, to be parch’d and wither’d, and withal, to fuftain the care and labour 
“ of fuch an enterprife ; except the fame had more comfort than the fetching of marcaf.lt 
“ in Guiana , or buying of gold ore in Barbary. But I hope the better fort will judge me by 
“ themfelves, and that the way of deceit is not the way of honour or good opinion. I have 
“ herein confumed much time and many crowns, and I had no other refptct or defire than to 
“ ferve her majefty and my country thereby. If the Spar.ifj nation had been of the like belief 
“ with thefe detradors, , we fhould little have fear’d or doubted their attempts wherewith we now 
“ are daily threaten’d. But if we now confider of the adions both of Charles V, who had the 
“ maidenhead of Peru , and the abundant treafures of Atabalipa , together with the affairs of 
“ the Spanijh king now living ; what he has added to the ads of his predeceffors ; how many 
“ kingdoms he has endanger’d; how many armies, garrifons and navies he maintains; the 
“ great Ioffes he has repair’d, as in eigbty-eigbt, above a hundred fail of great fhips, with 
“ their artillery •, and that no year is lefs unfortunate, but that many veffels, treafures and peo- 
“ pie are devour’d; and yet that he begins again, like a florm, to threaten fh ip wreck to us 
“ all ; we fhall find that thefe abilities aril'e not from the trades of fuck and Seville-oranges, nor 
“ from ought elfe that either Spain, Portugal , or any of his other provinces produce ; it is his 
“ Indian gold that endangers and difturbs all the nations of Europe ; it creeps into councils, 
“ purchales intelligence, and fets bound loyalty at liberty in the greattft monarchies thereof; 
“ if the Spanijh king can keep us from foreign enterprifes, and from the impeachment of his 
“ trades ; either by offer of invafion, or by befieging us in Britain , Ireland , or elfewhere, he 
“ has then brought the work of our peril in great forwardnefs: for thofe princes, who abound 
“ in treafure, have great [advantages over the reft, if they once conftrain them to a defen- 
** five war, where they are driven, once a year or oftener, to call lots for their own gar- 
“ ments.”* For thefe and other fubftantial reafons which Ralegh produces, he declares, he 
has labour’d all his life, both to the utmoft of his own power and perfuafion of others, in the 
promotion of thofe attempts which promis’d either an enlargement of our own national intereft, 
or an abatement of the encroaching greatnefs of the Spaniard , who, in his judgment, is 
not to be more eafily reduc’d than by fucb a war ; from fo many weak nations are his treafures 
gather’d, and fo far feparated from mutual fuccour. But becaufe he thought .fuch refolution 
and preparations were not to be hoped for in hafte, he doubted not, if her majefty would em¬ 
brace the offer of thofe provinces, and that empire now by him difeover'd, before they 
were engrofs’d by the enemy ; but it would yield greater quantities of treafure than all the king 
of Spain pofleffes from the Indies , both Eaf and IVef ; and he would be contented to lofe her 
good opinion for ever, and his life withal, if the country fhould not be found to exceed what¬ 
ever had been promis’d in his difeourfe of it. b Tho’ he has therein written, he doubts not after 
the firft or fecond year that the fame fhould be coloniz’d, but to fee in London a contrafhtion-houfe 
of more receipt for Guiana, than that in Seville for the fEeft-Indies. And is pofitive, “ That if there 
“ was but a fmall army a-foot in Guiana , marching towards Manoa, the chief city of Inga , he 
would yield to her majefty, by compofition, fo many hundred thoufand pounds yearly, as 
“ fhould both defend us from all enemies abroad, and defray all expences at home; and that 
“ he would befides pay a garrifon of three or four thoufand foldiers very royally to defend him 
“ againft other nations: for he cannot but know how his prcdeceflbrs were beaten out by the 
“ Spaniards , and that they have ever fince, with the greareft cruelties, fought the entry of his 
“ country, wherefore he would doubtlefs be brought to tribute; if not, having neither 
“ fhot nor iron weapon in his empire, he might eafily be conquer’d.”' And in another 
part of the faid difeourfe, he has thefe words, “ If it be my lot to profecute the fame, I will wil- 
“ lingly fpend my life therein ; and if any elfe fhall be enabled thereto, and conquer the fame, I 
“ allure him thus much, he fhall perform more than ever was done in Mexico by Cortez ; or in 
“ Peru by Pifarro , whereof one conquer’d the empire of Mtitezuma, the other of Guafcar 
“ and Alabalipa ; d and whatfoever prince fhall poflefs it, that prince fhall be lord of more 
“ gold and of more beautiful empire, and of more cities and people, than either the king of 

• Sir IV. Ra/rpb\ preface as before. b Idem. « His difeovery of Guiana, ^to 1596. p. too. 

d VitU Pur<bas 9 vol. 4. fol. 1493. Sc 1590 


Sfain 


Digitized by 


Google 







lxxxix 


Sir IV ALTER RALEGH. 

“ Spain or the Great Turk.” 1 Concluding his whole treatife of Guiana with “ his truft, ill 
“ him who is the King of kings and Lord of lords to put it into her heart who is the Lady 
u of ladies to poflefs it; if not, I will judge thofe men worthy to be kings thereof, lays he, 

“ who by her grace and leave will undertake it of themfelves.” 

All this, and much more, would not do to raife the faternine, or rather malignant genius 
of the (fate to purfue this aCtion j and upon this occafion we might obferve, as Ralegh did af¬ 
terwards upon another b from a poet of his own time, c That feme great men cloathing their pri¬ 
vate envy in the fair colouri of the publick good t curbed the mojl needful and noble undertakings 
with dijlrufty through a fpecious care for the fervice of the Jlate. Among thefe faga and fceptical 
politicians, we may difeern Sir Robert Cecyl to be one, who, in his conferences with fome of 
the fpeculative geographers of his time, would (hew how careful he was not to be overtaken 
with any partial affe&ion to the planting of Guiana , as we are told by one of them, whom he 
would confult about the matter ; and who, perhaps therefore, admires, in a dedication to him, 
as the manner is in this fort of writing, with no fmall joy, the exatt knowledge he had ac¬ 
quir’d in matters of Indian navigation. 4 Neverthelcls, Ralegh' s advice was not wholly di(re¬ 
garded. For that part of it before-mention’d, propofing to drive the Spaniards to a defenfive 
war, but upon their own proper coafts or harbours, was approv’d of; and Ralegh hirnfelf 
chofen, with other commanders, as we fhall foon find, to put it in execution. In the mean 
time, however difeourag’d in his new difeovery, he would not relinquifh it; but within fix 
months after his return, that is, in the latter end of January following, he fitted out captain 
Kejmis with a couple of fhips, the Darling and Difcoverer j but provided, rather to continue the 
correfpondence and peaceful traffic with the Indians , than to ftrengthen them in a warlike man¬ 
ner with forces and accoutrements, which was what they mofi defir’d and expe&ed. When The fecond 
Key mis arriv’d at Guiana , he found his friends much difperfed, but yet enquiring what was t0 
become of Sir fValter Ralegh , whom they had been prepar’d fome months to join ? were 
mighty joyful to hear he was not flain at Cumana , as the Spaniards , now much increas’d among 
them, had attefted i but fadly difappointed that he had not fent a larger fleet to expel them, 
and conquer their neighbouring enemies up to the imperial city. Keymis further learnt, that 
Berreo t being left at Cumana , and lodged in the houfe of one Fafoardo ; the governors of the 
Caraccas and Margarita , confpiring together, had lent into Spain to inform king Philip , that 
Berreo, being retired to fpend the remainder of his declining days in privacy and eafe, was ut¬ 
terly unable to purfue the enterprize ; yet of what importance his majefty’s regard thereto was, 
fince fo eminent an Englifh cavalier, as Sir Walter Ralegh , had, by a vigorous progrefs and moft 
artful addrefs, made fuch conquefts and difeoveries in fome parts, and render’d hirnfelf fo ex- 
tcnfivcly engaging in all where-ever he came, that unlefs they had power given them to under¬ 
take the charge, all their paft endeavours and future hopes in thole parts would come to no¬ 
thing. * But Berrco's camp-mafter having been long before fent into Spain, with gold enough 
gotten out of Guiana, to levy and furnifh five hundred men, fo effectually follicitcd Ben eo' s 
caufe, that prefent order was given for the victualling and manning of ten fhips to be fent him j 
fo well worth his care did the king of Spain think this undertaking. And further, this gold 
bore fuch weight, that the king commanded eighteen fhips more to flop at Trinidad , and not 
follow their other directions, before they faw that place fecur’d from enemies. But Bcrreo 
hirnfelf fufpeCting that fpeedy difpatch, return’d to Carapana's port with fifteen men, the 
fcatter’d remnant that Ralegh had left him. Thofe governors follow’d him, and anticipating 
the authority they promis’d themfelves from Spain t enter’d Guiana with their men, and deter- 


* Difeovery of Cuiana, 4to. p. 9. 

S Hi/torj of tht World, lib. 4. cap. 2. fert 17. 

* Demit ?s tragedy of Fbilotas. Art 3. in the cho¬ 
rus. Which play bting writ not long after the death 
ot the earl of EJ/cx, the town fancied that favourite cha- 
ratleriz'd therein; but the poet, in his apology at the end 
Thereof, endeavours to dear himlelf from any fuch in¬ 
tention 

d Hakluyt % dedication to Sir R. Cecyl of his fecond vo¬ 
lume ot voyages, fol. i 599. 

* How much alarmed Sfain was at this attempt of 
Ralrgb'i, Count G 'endotnar is introduced thus confefling to 
his glioft, in a pamphlet, writ not long after his death. 
M 1 he tottering ground whereon my king’s title to the 
44 In diet fto-d, that it was nothing but violence and force, 
44 tyranny and Uiurpation ; and that if a ftrangcr or more 

gentle *rmy fhould enter, how eafy it was to fet us be- 
“ hdes the cuftiion : this 1 know thou kneweft, and what 
u not betide; which belongeth to fo great an attempt and 


\ 


t€ Triumph.” And a tittle further, 44 I dnre not (for the 
44 honour of my nation) unfold the woeful perplexity m 
44 which Spain Hood during this tedious vcyage; how the 
44 quaked to think of the general view which ihou hadft 
44 taken, without impeachment of all the Weft- Indies ; 
44 but moft of all, when (he was advertis’d ot thy lor,«- 
44 and laborous pafLge upon the river Orwfne, the di> 
44 tinguilhments which thou haft made betwixt it and rhe 
44 river of dmarejms, and the intelligences which thou hadft 
44 gotten for thy afeent to the gieat city of Manca and 
44 kingdom of Guiana: Dcfigns^ which if they had befit 
44 furjued , according to thy willingncf and Inzwled^c, <v. e 
44 had not at this day ackmncUd/ed one feet of earth for curs 
44 in all the Weft-Indies.” Sir W. RaleJJs G/W ; or 
England's Forewarner ; difeovering a fccret ccnfultatiun 
newly held in the couit of Spain ; together with his *oi 
menting of Count Gondcmar , f£c. L/m/v, 4to. 16:6. 
p. 14, 16. 


p p min’d. 


Digitized by kjOOQle 





xc 


His account 
of the gold 
mines in 
Guiana con¬ 
firmed. 


The L I F E of 

min’d to murder Berreo , wlyi fled towards Caroli , expecting his fon Antonio ae Xmenes with 
fuccours from the new kingdom of Granada. And now Topiowary , who had fled to the 
mountains, being dead, where the Englijh boy, Ralegh left, was devour’d by a tyger, Sanjag), a 
Spaniard, in the faftion of the governors aforefaid, took Francis Sparrow prifoner, who was 
alfo left by Ralegh , as has been related ; but having gather’d great plenty of gold, he ranfom'd 
his life therewith, yet was kept in captivity by the Spaniards fome years, as wc may hereafter 
leam. After this, the faction return’d to Trinidad, and begun to rebuild their town, where, 
unhappily to thefe new lawlefs rulers, the twenty-eight fail of fhips arriv’d from Spain in Fe¬ 
bruary following, and took Sanjago, one of the bufieft among them, prifoner, whom Keymis 
found in chains, expetting to be put to death. The other adors in this interlude vanifhing i.i 
canoes, recover’d Margarita, and Cumana again. When eighteen of thofe fhips had left all 
things in good order, they departed according to their inftrudions, leaving the other ten to 
fortify at Conquerabia , for the reception of Sir Walter Ralegh's fleet. Nor was it above four 
months after the arrival of thofe fhips from Spain , that the king had prepared feveral dthersj 
it being in June 1596, to tranfport a new fupply of whole families, to the number of fix hun-- 
dred perfons, for Guiana j fo little did this prince miftruft that the planting thereof would not 
turn to account. But thefe fhips not failing before Ralegh himfelf vifited the coaft where they 
lay } what work he made among them, and the reft of the Spanijh navy, will now in A little 
fpacc demand our attention. 

When Keymis was advanced to Topiowary' s port, he found the Spaniards under Betreo had 
planted a village there, and that a rocky ifland againft the mouth of Caroli was their fort or 
refuge i but now leaving both town and ifland, they gather’d at the mouth of that river, and 
had lent for cannon to defend the paflage to “ thofe mines, fays Keymis to Ralegh , from whence 
“ your ore and white ftones were taken the laft yearadding, “ we all, not without grief, 
“ to fee our lelves thus defeated, and our hungry hopes made void, were witnefles of this their 
** remove.” Then Keymis refolved to leek out Putiima , who, with fome friends, was retir’d 
to the high lands, not far from the mountain Aio ; intending, if the Indians fhould think 
themfelves too weak with his help to difplant the Spaniards , to fet fome of them to work, for 
hatchets and knives, to return him grains of gold and white ftones from fuch places as they 
fhould be direded to. But when he Came to the place of their aboad, they were fled, appre¬ 
hending him and his company perhaps to have been a party of Spaniards. “ Here, as Key- 
“ mis goes on, Gilbert my pilot offer’d to bring us either to the mine of white ftcncs near 
“ Winicapora , or elfe to a gold mine which Putiima had fhewed him, being but one day’s jcur- 

ney over-land from the place where we now flaid at anchor. I faw far off the mountains adjoin- 
“ ing to this gold mine; and, having meafured their paths near the fame place this laft year, could 
“ not judge it to be fifteen miles from us. I do well remember, how coming that way with 
“ Putiima the year before, he pointed to this fame mountain, making figns to have me go with 
“ him thither. I underftood his figns, and marked the place , but miftook his meaning j ima- 
“ gining that he would have fhew’d me the over-fall of the river Curwari from the mountains. 
“ My Indian fhewed me in what fort, without digging, they gather the gold in the find of 
“ a fmall river named Macawini , which fprings and falls from the rocks where this mine is. 
“ And further told me, that he was with Putiima when Morequito was to be executed by die 
“ Spaniards , and that then the chief of Morequito's friends were in confufration to fliew this 
“ mine unto them, if it might redeem their captain’s life ; but upon better advice, fuppofing 
** them in this cafe to be implacable, and that this might prove a means to fofc not only their 
“ king, but their country, they have to this day conceal’d it from them, being of all others 
** the richeft and moft plentiful.” And a little further, among the reafons he gives for his 
not bringing proofs away from this mountain of his having known the conrents of it, this is 
one, “ Forethinking withal that there being no means but our felves to make known our dif- 
“ covery, if we return’d not *, in our misfortune, the hope of following this voyage would be 
“ buried.” And further ftill, he fays, “ I could promife hope of gold mines, and certain 
*« affurances of pieces of made gold j of fpleen-ftones, kidney-ftones, and others of better 
*« eftimate: but becaufe our belief feems to be mated in thefe greater matters, and a certainty 
“ of fmallcr profits is the readieft inducement to quicken our weak hopes, I go not fo far, 
«* fays he, as my own eyes might warrant me.” Thefe teftimonies, and others which may be 
produced, a will both Ihew, that Ralegh was not more fanguine in his golden hopes and pro- 

mi fes 

* Frantit Sparro-jj* above-mention'd in the body of the t€ Orenoque y I came to the rich country of Cur an in 
work, confirms this account of the mines in thele words : 44 Guiana , where are the mines of white jlone f in which 

• 44 Within fix weeks after 1 departed out of the river 44 is much natural and fine gold, which tiie Indians call 

Cas/t i uni. 


Digitized by t^ooQle 



Sir WA LT E R RALEGH. xci 

toifes, than the experience of other men, as well as his own, would juftify ; and withal, from 

die authority of thefe profeflions, that his choice was rationally grounded in making Key mis his 

agent for the further difcovery of thefe mines many years afterwards *, when, becaufe lie was 

not fo fuccefsful as a prejudic’d and greedy government expedted, the whole undertaking 

was, with the moft flagrant ingratitude, branded as a fi&itious projeft to impofe upon his \ 

country, ftnce indeed there was no impofition, unlefs where it is moft unlikely there Ihould be 

any, none being fo great a fufferer thereby as Ralegh himfelf. But more of this in its 

due place. 

When Keymis was arriv’d at the port of Carapana , this cafique fent feme of his people 
in canoes to allure him he would come down next day and have a conference with him $ but 
not coming in five or fix days, he at laft fent one of his aged attendants to excufe the fatigue , 
bf fuch a journey, fo unfavourable were the ways, and himfelf fo difabled with years and in¬ 
firmities. This old envoy then enlarged upon the inconveniences they felt in ufing the Spa¬ 
niards afliftance againft their enemies, efpecially when he compared their condudt with that of 
the queen of England?* fubjedts under her great commander ; <c For, faid he, the laft year, 

** we doubted not but that he, being able, would have perfecuted us as the fupporters 6f 

your adverfaries; would have taken our towns, and have made us ranfom our wives and 

* children: but we found it far otherwife 5 and that none ef your well-govern’d company 

durft offer us any wrong; no, not when undifeover’d they might have done it. We then 

u believed to be true, what your grand captain reported of his princefs; took this for a good 

proof of her royal authority and wifdom, that had framed her fobjedts to fuch obedience ; 
i€ and of your happinefs, who enjoy’d the benefit thereof: wherefore Carapana , weighing die Thedfotfsof 
“ friendly courfe of thefe proceedings, doth humbly crave of her majefty, for himfelf and his ^ O among* 
w people, that with the reft of the Indians , who wholly depend on her princely regard, he thefe Indians. 
«« alfb may enjoy her favourable protection •, not as a man forfaken by the Spaniards , but one 
«« that, knowing their injuftice, hates their cruelties, and takes it for the beft courfe utterly to 

* difclaim their friend/hip.” Here Keymis breaks off, to confider it as a matter worthy of 
obfervarion, how this precedent of Ralegh's moderation and good order, which; among them, 
his countrymen, who knew him, was but his cuftomary comportment, or ordinary prattiefr, 
therefore of fmall regard with them, had yet both alienated the Indians hearts altogether from 
the Spaniard , and ftirred up in them true love and admiration thereof. After this, he difclofes 
his further knowledge of the Indian wealth aforefakl in thefe words: This old man fhewed 
ct whence moft of their gold cometh which is formed in fo many fafhions 5 whence their 
li fpleen-ftones, and others of all forts, are to be had in plenty •, where gold is to be gather’d 
u in the fands of their rivers; from what part the Spaniards^ both by trade and otherwife, have 
c< returned touch gold;” and doubts not but all this was divulged with the confent of Cara - 
pana y as an invitation to the further aid and protection he expeCted from the Englijh. 

Accordingly Keymis } finding it was in vain to hope for a conference with that well-wifti- 
ing, but wary caftjue, and, having fent him a prefent of iron, gave afTurance to all the Indians 
who repaired to him of his fpeedy return with fuecours; promifing to make them all rich in 
hatchets, knives, 1 and beads, if they would only referve good (tore of their cajfavi (which they 


11 Cal’datrii. The gold in this place runs between the 
4 * ftones like veins, of which gold I had f'ome fort ; but 
“ now the Spaniard is the better for it. In Curaa is 
u alfo gold in fmall grains, which lie in the fands in the 
“ hale rivers or brooks : I always took thofe grains for 
“ the finert gold. In thefe rivers where gold licth are 
u many AJigartos or Crocodiles/’ See the deferipcion 
of the i/le of Trinidad, the rich country of Guiana, and 
the mighty river of Orenorpue, written by Francis Sparrey 
(as my author writes him) left there by Sir W. Ralegh 
1 59 >» but taken by the Spaniards, and fent prifoner to 
Spam, who, after long captivity, got into England by 
great fuit 1602. In Purchases Pt/gr. vol. 4. fol. 1249. 

Captain Harcourt alfo gives this evidence to the fame 
purpofe; “ As I daily convers’d among the Indians , it 
u chanced that one of them prdented me with a half 
u moon of metal which held fomewhat more than a third 
“ part gold, the reft copper. Another alfo gave me a 
0 little image of the fame metal; and of another, I 
“ bought a plate of the lame, which he call’d a fpread 
u eagle for an axe. All which things they allur'd me 
“ were made in the high country of Guiana, which (hey 
" faid did abound with images of gold, by them called 
“ (arruoorj. Thefe things 1 fhewed to my company, to 


44 fettle their troubled minds, which give much content- 
44 ment to the greater part of them, and futified us all 
44 that there was gold in (Juiana. Shortly after that, my 
41 Indian , Anthony Camibrt, brought me a piece ot a rock 
44 of white [far, whereof the high country is full ; and if 
44 the white fparsof this kind, which are the purefl white 
4t of all others (for every' fort of mine hath a (par, and 

44 for the moll part white) be in a main rock, they are 

44 certainly mines of gold or filvcr, or of both. I made 
44 trial of a piece of Ipar which the fame Indian difeover’d 
44 to me, and I found that it held bo:h gold and fdver; 
44 which, altho’ it was in fmall quantity, gave me fatisfac - 
44 /ion that there be richer mines in the country to be found ; 

44 but the beft lie deeper in the earth, and we.had not 

44 time nor power to make fearch for them.” See the 
faid captain Harcourt* s voyage to Guiana, Anno i6o3, 
dedicated to prince Charles , in Purchas , vol. 4. fol. 1277. 

a Thefe inllruments were fuch preferable commodities 
among forne of thofe Indians, that Francis Sparrow, in his 
defcription of Guiana before-mention’d, tells us he bough: 
at Camalaha, to the fouth of the Orcnoque, eight y^ung 
women, the eldcll whereof was not eighteen years of ngt, 
for one red-halfted knife, which in England colt him one 
halfpenny. 


ufed 


Digitized by t^OOQle 







The LIFE of 

ufed for bread) and feme plates of gold, for exchange. And having farther Iper.t home time 
in the difeovery of above fifty feveral rivers, tribes or nations of people, towns and tafiqucs in 
this voyage, of all which he has given us a very accurate table, he dire&ed his courfe home¬ 
wards, and arrived at Portland in the latter end of June aforelaid $ having (pent five months 
in going, (laying, and returning. As foon as he got home, he found Ralegh had been gone 
upon a grand expedition out of the nation near a month* Therefore he had time to draw up 
his account of this voyage (whence the paflages which more immediately relate to our fub- 
j:< 5 t are extracted) ready to prelent him with at his return into England ; which he did, and 
dedicated it To the approv'd,, right valorous , and worthy knight Sir Walter Ralegh, lord 
warden , &c. In this dedication, he exprefies himfelf in a mod refpectful manner, and highly 
to Sir Walter's honour for the great coft and travel which he had bellowed upon tins difeovery ; 
telling him “ the fervent zeal and loyalty of your mind, in labour with this biuh of fo ho- 
c: nourable expc&ation, as it hath deferved a recompence far different (from what he had been 
“ deferibing) fo needeth it not my poor fuffrage to endear the toil, care and danger you have 
“ willingly undergone for the good and advancement of our weal publick : the praife-wor- 
cc thinefs thereof doth approve itfelf; and is better read in your living doings, than in my 
4C dead unregarded papers,” Subfcribing himfelf, lour lordfhips to be commanded in all 
fcrvice. And in his preface To the favourers of the voyage for Guiana , ameng the lenfi- 
b!e motives he ufes to remove all fig-leaves from our unbelief, and the examples he urges to 
exprobrate our remifnefs, one (which Ralegh had before touch’d upon with that modefty 
wherewith he always alludes to himfelf) is given by our author Key mis in thefe words: <c If we 
<c fhould fuppofe our felves now to live in the days of king Henry VII, of famous memory, 
41 and the ftrange report of a Weft-Indies^ or new world, abounding with great treafure, fhould 
ct entice us to believe it; perhaps it might be imputed for fome blame to the gravity of wife 
€i men, lightly to be carried with the perfuafion and hope of a new-found Utopia by fuch a 
<c one as Columbus was, being an alien, and many ways fubjeft to fufpicion: but fince the 
<c penance of that incredulity lies even now heavy on our fhoulders; the example fore-threat- 
“ ning I know not what repentance : and that we have the perfonal trial of fo honourable and 
“ fujficient a reporter , our own countryman * let it be far from us to condemn our felves in that, 
<c which fo worthily we reprove in our predeceflors, * and to let our idle knowledge content it 
c< felf with naked contemplation, like a barren womb in a monaftcry.** But in his relation of 
the voyage itfelf, which he concludes with many cogent and ftrenuous arguments, drawn from 
the juftice, profit and neceflity of profecuting it, he introduces that conclufion with a para¬ 
graph which fers Ralegh forth fo ftrongly, in his principal point of light *, having perfifted 
more inflexibly, through greater difeouragements, in more exalted purfuits than any other of 
his contemporaries, by fecking, not a private, fo much as a national benefit - 9 not a tranfient, but 
perpetual aggrandifement of his country, that this author’s grateful acknowledgment thereof 
demands an undeniable admiflion ; which therefore take as follows. 

“ Thus have I emptied your purfe, fpending my time and travel in following your lord - 
“ fhip's direftions for the full difeovery of this coaft and the rivers thereof. Concerning the 


* Yet has oar nation been reproached for our many 
neglcfts of this kind even to this day : a modern author 
oblerves, •* That none of all our late bubble projeflors fo 
M much as ever propos’d one fubfeription for making any 
44 difcoverics like Sir Walter Ralegh'* in Virginia and Guia- 
44 na. Where, fays he, was the fet of men who ofler’d 
44 to fubferibe to a fund for fearching out the north weft 
44 palfages to navigate to the pole, and folve the difficulty 
44 which all the proficients in geography fpeak of only by 
44 conjefture, viz. whether Europe and America join, or 
4 * the Tartarian ocean is to be travers’d or no ? Have any 
44 men yet fubferib’d to a company for difeovering the con- 
44 tinents or iflands of the feas, more truly call’d the South- 
44 Seas, I mean due fouth of the cape de Bona Speranza , 
“ or due fouh of the Terra del FuogoY Do we think there 
“ are any lands worth pofTdfing in all the vaft fouthern 
44 trafts from forty or fifty degrees fouth to the other pole 
44 of the world? Why are not thefe parts as well worth 
44 fearching as the bottoms and deeps of Hud/on s and 
44 Davis's Str eights, or the icy mountains of the Waggats 
44 and Nova Zembla ? The fhort is, our projeCJs are all 
“ bubbles, and calculated for Ex change‘Alley difcoverics , 
“ not for enlarging our commerce, fettling colonies, and 
44 fpreading the dominions of our foveraign from pole to 
44 pole. Why has no bold adventurer followed the glo- 
44 rious Sir Walter Ralegh upon the river of Amazon, the 


44 Rio Parano , and the Great Orenccne ? where thoufands 
44 of nations remain undifcovei’d ; and where the wealth, 
** the fruitfulnefs of the lo.I, the goodneis of the climate, 
44 and the infinite numbers of tht people, exceed all that 
44 has ever been conquer’d or dilcover’d in the American 
44 world: but all is owing to the meicenary low humour 
44 of the times we live in, who, groveling in the bafer 
44 methods of getting money by f.aLd and bite, by de- 
44 ceiving and over-reaching one another, fcorn the glo- 
<€ rious ways by which our ancellors grew rich, when they 
44 purfued, together with their private advantages, the ho- 
44 nour and interell of their native country and of their 
44 poilerity. If our fubferiptions had been for fuch things 
44 as the.e, and the management had appear’d to be as 
44 fair, as the defign was honourable, ww hrd never had 
44 an aft of parliament to fuppiel's them as public nufances 
44 and a fcandal to a Chriltian government; but the Bri- 
44 tip? nation would have been encourag’d to exert itfelf to 
44 the utmoil in them: whereas now we are all degene- 
44 rated into bubble and bite , and the Exchange as well as 
44 Exchange-Alley is become a mere gaming hnge, where, 
44 initead of merchants carrying on ir.efui commerce, we 
44 fee throngs of fetters and cullies (harping and cheating 
44 one another.” See the Humcmiji , b-ing rtfays upon 
feveral fubjefts, vol. a.Svo. 172$- p. 40, 4 1. 


«« not 


Digitized by 


Google 






Sir tVALTER RALEGH. xciii 

* not making of a Voyage for your private profit* I pretend nothing. Sorry I am, that where 
I fought no excufe, by the Spaniard’s being there, I found my defeft remedilefs. And for my 
“ own part, I do proteft, that if the confideration of the public good which may enfue, had 
“ not over-pois’d all other hopes and defires, I would rather have adventur’d by fuch fmall 
“ and weak means as I had, to do well with danger, than to return only with fafety/ Novr 
•* altho* in a caufe not doubtful, my allegation is no way needful, yet becaufe the weightinefs 
« thereof, and the expe&ation of others, feems of right to claim fomething to be faid by me, 
whom your efpecial trufl and favour have credited and grac’d with this employment: par- 
“ don it, Ibefeech your honour, if where my lamp had oil, it borrow light alfo, and my 
fpeech, which is altogether unfavory, fcafon itfelf with fome of the leaven of your own 
« difeourfe touching this difoovery. The particular relation of fome certain things I have rc- 
»* ferved as properly belonging to your felf, who only, as knowing moft, can make beft ufe 
“ tliereof. So much in general is here couch'd, as may forve, I hope, to refrefh the memory of 
« this worthy enter prize in thofc it may concern, and teftify your care and expence in follow* 

»« ing the fame: That in a fecond age (when in time truth fhall have credit, and men, won* 

“ dering at the riches and ftrength of this place, which nature it felf hath marvelloufly forti- 
“ fied as her chief treafurc-houfe, fhall mourn and figh to hold idle fickles, whilft others reap 
»» and gather in this harvefl) it be not faid. Sir Walter Ralegh was, of all men 
« living in his days, moft induftrious in feeking, mojl fortunate in attaining to the fulnefs of an 
ineftmable public good: if, knowing that for envy and private refpe<£ts, bis labours were lef- 
« fened, bis informations miftrufted, his proffers not regarded, and the due honour of bis de - 
** ferts imparled to otliers: if (I fay) feeing, knovAng, and bearing all this, be with patience 
«• bad perfifted in fo good a way in doing his princefs and country fervice , and bad but perfected Hi» perfeve 
*« bis firft dijeovery by fending a fhip or two for that purpofe j f r then furely all lets and doubts S2uded P ~ 
“ being removed, and fo large a kingdom, fo exceeding rich , fo plentiful of all things as this by 
** bis difeourfe appeared to be, being offer'd j no devices and vain furmifes could have taken place j 
no illufms could have prevail'd ; it bad been blindnefs and deafnefs in tbofe who , being near her 
majefty , do fpend their days in feroing the commonwealth, not to fee and know in fo weighty a 
“ matter •, is had been malicious obftinacy , impotence of mind, and more than treafon to the com* 

“ monwealtb ; the matter ftanding only upon acceptance, to feek either to forejlow fo fit an occafton , 

« or forfakt fo general a blejfmg : but this If is now cut off, through a fingular and incompa- 
“ rable temper, in overcoming evil with good." * 

When Keymis return’d into England, Ralegh, asweobferv’d, was abroad, being lent upon 
that enterprise which proved the moft vi&orious and renowned of any the Englifb undertook in 
thofe days againft the Spaniards. For the queen having heard they had received encourage¬ 
ment from Tir-Oen, the Irifh rebel, to threaten her with a new Invafion * that becaufe fhe had 
ftrengthned their enemies, they would take the lhorteft courfe, and begin with Eng - 
land . b Therefore had made great naval preparations, to which they might not be a little 
-embolden’d both by the death of her two brave old commanders, Drake and Hawkins $ and 
•gain by their late fucoefs, no further from her own coafts than Calais ; which taking by ftorrtl, 
under cardinal Albert , archduke of Auftria and governor of the Netherlands, the thunder df 
the Spanijb artillery alarmed her majefty's ears in her palace at Greenwich. This pofture of 
affairs made the queen determine, with the advice of her council, to ufe the moft effectual 
means for preventing the mifehiefs of an aflault, Ijy taking the ftart of them, and fending a 
force fufficient to deftroy the Spanijb (hipping in their own harbours. c Accordingly, a power¬ 
ful fleet was fitted out to the number of a hundred and fifty fail, according to Camden from 
Slow, and Speed from both. But in the old manufeript lift of this fleet, which Camden follow¬ 
ed as to the number of men, it appears there were no more than ninety-fix fhips of the Englifb 
navy, * which were afterwards join’d by twenty-four fail of Hollanders , as I gather out of Grotius 
and their other hiftorians. As to the number of men i the general calculation at the end of that lift 
aforefaid, was taken upon truft by Camden , or he would not have given it us without doubt j for 
it neither does agree with the erroneous fums under the particular heads of fhips, mariners, captains, 
and foidiers, nor with the true ones which have fince it was printed, been fobjoin’d ; and if it 
did, it would not give fatisfaftion > the lift it felf being manifeftly defective in omitting the 

* Set* relation of the iecood voyage to Guiana, per- a Earl of Ejpx's Apology, the lnft edition, 8vo. 1729. 
form’d and written in the year 1596, by Lauienee Ktftnit y p. 10. 

Gent, and dedicated to the approved right vitioriou* and * Cem 4 er:\ Anrals, 1596. 

^orthy knight Sir IValttr Raltgb t in Hakluyt > vol. 3. 4 Cctttm library. Julius F. VI. fol. 178. 


q q 


land- 


Digitized by 


Google 








xciv 


The LIFE of 

land-companies which went over in the capital fhips: fo that not to be too fcrutinom, the ad- 
count which will belt correfpond with all variations is, that this Englifh fleet contain’d about 
fourteen thoufand men, whereof one thoufand were voluntiers. For as yet the Englifh nobles 
and gentry had not learnt to live lazily and loofely at home, while their countrymen were fight¬ 
ing abroad for the fafety and glory of the nation. 1 Now if to this number of men, we add 
alfo that in the 'Dutch fhips, which according to their own computation was near twenty-fix 
hundred men, there might be enough to leave the whole fleet furnifh’d with fufficicnt hands to 
guard and work it, and allow of ten thoufand three hundred and fixty men to land upon the 
Spanifh coaft, as it is propos’d in the conclufion of the lift before-mention’d. 

The lord-admiral Howard and the earl of Effex were joined in cotnmiffion generals of this 
enterprize *, but the queen confidering what there might be wanting to keep an old head and a 
.young one, a cool and a warm one in due temper and harmony, allotted them a council of 
war in thefe words. “ For the better and more orderly execution of this your commiflion^ 
“ and of thole former articles comprifed in thefe our inftrudtions, we do ordain, that there 
44 fhall be two perfons ferving for the feas, and two dial are appointed to ferve with the forces 
Chofen of the ** for land-fervicc, to be as counfellors to you in our name, that is, the Lord Tltomas Howard, 
uunaltf var, tt an j g; r ffr a fo er Ralegh-, Sir Francis Vere and Sir Cottiers Clifford- t and to tltcfe four, we 
il do add Sir George Careys , lieutenant of our ordnance, to make the number of five $ whom 
44 alfo we charge by thefe prefents, that they will, as they will anfwer before God, give their 
“ counfels to you both, without any private refpett to either of you, for love or fear, in all 
“ addons to be put in queftion or taken in hand •, and the fame deliberately to debate, as the 
“ weight of the matter fhall require, before any refolution be made, and before the putdng 
“ of the matter in adtion. ’ b There is further to be underftood by thofe two perfons ferving for 
And admiral. ike f' ns > that the Lord Thomas Howard and Sir fValter Ralegh were alfo conflicted admi¬ 
rals in diis expedition. Hence was the whole Englifh fleet divided into four fquadrons, and fo 
it appears in the lift aforefaid, wherein we find that which was commanded by Ralegh confifted 
of twenty-two fhips, thirteen hundred fifty-two mariners, and eighteen hundred feventy-five 
foldiers. The Dutch fqundron was commanded by the admiral of Holland , named John 
Duvenvord, Lord of IVanuondt. 'How Effex relifh’d the divifion of authority, may be fome- 
what guefs’d at by the queen’s anfwer to one of his letters it feems, which fhc thought very 
ftrange. “ You mention, fays fhe, firft a danger to commit authority to any other, becaufe 
“ you are referr’d to your commiflion and inftru&ions formerly fent you, which hath no power 
44 of diputatidn *, as Who fhould fay, that if you did follow the directions of our hand, our 
44 great feal in this matter fhould be brought to difpute the validity of your warrant” A lit¬ 
tle further it appears, that he had been impatient to be gone for fear he fhould be detain’d, for 
die queen had perfuaded him to flay behind but not prevailing, fhe now gave him liberty to 
depart, and told him, “ Tho’ we meant to drive it to the laft confiderations and utmoft debates 
4< as much as could be, yet we compared times fo fufficiently, as a prince who knows what 
44 belongs to fuch a matter, that nothing fhould be done to retard you (being ready) one hour; 
44 for as we know Ralegh not to be arriv’d, fo we know after it, fome time to embark fuch an 
44 army muft be required.” 4 But Ralegh joined the fleet, and the whole army was embark’d 
wichin ten days after the writing of this letter, for on the firft of June before-mention’d the 
fleet let fail from Plymouth . d When they came to the north cape of Spain, they called a fe- 
Je£l council, by hanging out the flag of arms ; and then had the mafter and captain of every 
. fhip his fealed inftrudtions given him, or letters of rendezvous, which were not to be open’d till 
they were paft Cape St. Vincent , unlefs feparated by bad weather *, but t® be thrown overboard 
In the voyage in cafe of danger from the enemy ; and by which it appear’d the voyage was determin’d for 
to Cadiz. Cadiz. They had a fortunate progrefs, both as to the wind, and the taking of every fhip which 


* Lives Englijh end Foreign, vol. I. p. 

See the queen’s Inftrudtions to the generals in the 
Cotton library. Otbo E. IX. Alfo Rsrner's Fcrdcra, Anno 
1596. And Mr. LediareTs Naval Expeditions in that year. 

« See the queen's laid letter, dated May 21. 1596, in 
the volume of the Cotton library before-cited ; alio lately 
printed in Mr. LediareTs A aval Expeditions , fol. 324. 

* Sir Ft andj Vere , who was now marfhal of the land- 
forces, and who would incline us to think nobody’s ferviccs 
even at fca in this expedition, were fo confiderable as his 
own, tho* 4i he was not allotted to any fignal fervice, ha- 
44 ving (as he owns) till now been a llranger to adlions at 

fea, fays further, “ During this ftay of the army about 


44 Plymouth (which, by reafon of the contrariety of winds, 
44 was near a month) it plealed my lord of EJftx to give me 
44 much countenance, and to have me always near him. 
which drew upon me no fmallenvy; infoniuch as fome open 
44 jars fell out between Sir Walter Ralegh, then rear-admiral 
49 of the navy. Sir Coniers Clifford, lergcant-major-general 
44 of the army, and my felf; which the general qualified for 
“ the time, and ordered, that in all meetings at land, I fhould 
** have the precedence of Sir Walter Ralegh, and he of me 
“ at fea." Veres commentaries, fol. Cambridge, 1657. 
p. 30, and 26. But thofe jars could not fpring from fuch 
envy in Ralegh , who never coveted that favour which 
Vere courted. 


could 


Digitized by LnOOQle 









Sir WALTER RALEGH. xcv 

Could give the enemy intelligence of their approach. On the twentieth of June the fleet Carrie 
to anchor in the bay of St. Sebajlians , fliort of Cadiz half a league. The lordadmiral* 
being careful of her majcfty’s fhips, had refolved, with the earl of EJ/ix, that the town fhould 
be firft attempted, to the end that both the Spanijh galleons and galleys, together with the fortS 
of Cadiz , might not all at once beat upon the Englijh navy. Ralegh was not prcfent at this 
refolution, as himfelf has declar’d in that account of this aftion, which he difpatched foon after 
it was over to a minifter of ftate in England $ * which being the cleared I have met with, and 
eafieft to be confirmed, not only by the more indifferent pens of foreigners, but the mod partial 
ones of our own country, thofe of his competitors themfelves for honour in this engagement, 
will here be our belt guide. Hence therefore we learn the rcafon of Ralegh's abfence at that 
refolution of firft landing the army to have been, becaufe he was engaged the day before out¬ 
ward on the feas in flopping fuch Spanijh fhips as might pafs out from St. Lucar or Cadiz 
along the coaft. b When he return’d, two hours after the red, he found the earl of EJfex dif- 
embarking his foldiers, having put many companies into boats, with intention to make his de- 
feent on the weft fide of Cadiz; but the billows were fo raging, that the boats were ready to 
fink at the ftern of the earl, and divers were loft with fome armed foldiers in them * c but be¬ 
caufe this courfe had been refolved on, and that doubting, now in the danger, might look like 
dreading of it, the earl continued his purpoie of landing ; when Ralegh came aboard his fhip* 
and, in the prefence of all the colonels, protefted againll the refolution ; giving him many rea- 
fons and apparent demonftrations, that, to the utter overthrow of their armies, themfelves, and 
her majefty’s future fafety, he was running the way of a general ruin. The earl excufed 
himfelf, and laid it upon the lord-admiral, who would not confent (he faid) to enter with the 
fleet till the town was firft poflefled. All the commanders and gentlemen prefent befoughc 
Ralegh to diffuade the attempt, 4 for they all perceived the danger, and were convinced that 
the greateft part muft perifh ere they could fet foot on ground * and if any reached the fhore, 
yet would they fureiy have their boats call on their heads; and twenty men, in fuch a defperate 
defeent, might defeat them all. The earl hereupon prayed Ralegh to go and perfuade the lord Diflindes the 
admiral, who being alfo by him made fenfible, that certain definition would be the confequencc 
of purluing the former refolution, confented to enter the port. When Ralegh brought EJfex courfe. 
the news of this agreement, c and call’d out of his boat entramos> entramos , as he return’d to¬ 
wards him, the earl threw his hat into the fea for joy, and prepared to weigh anchor. The 
day was now far fpent, and it required much time to return the boats of foldiers to their own 
fhips. So as that night they could not attempt the fleet, “ Altho’ many, feeming defperately 
44 valiant, thought it a fault of mine, fays Ralegh , to delay it till morning, f tho’ we had nei- 
44 thcr agreed in what manner to fight, nor appointed who fhould lead, and who fecond; 

44 whether by boarding or otherwife j neither could our fleet poflibly recover all their men in 
41 before fun-fet. But both the generals being pleafed to hear me, and many times to be ad- 
44 vifed by fo mean an underftanding, came again to anchor, and in the very mouth of the 


• Sir Walter Ralrgh's Relation of the aft ion at Cadiz in 
the year 1596, pubhih’d by Philip Ralegh , Efq; his only 
grandfon, among the genuine remains at the end of an 
abridgment of Sir Walter 's bijlory <f (be world, 8vo. 
i;oo. 

^ In a foreign bijlory we have this circumftance thus 
further confirm’d and enlarg’d. 44 Ralegh was difpatch- 
44 ed before with certain fhips to fet upon fome great 
44 vefTels, which, as they heard, were ready to fail out of 
44 St. Lucar'i hay j but they lay fo near the fhore, that 
44 he could not approach them, and was further hinder'd 
44 by a mift in which they efcap'd ; but they were by Ra- 
44 Itgb fo nearly dialed to the land, that his own fhips 
44 were in danger to have run on ground ” See 7 be 
Triumphs of hajfau , fbl. 1613. p. 187. Iran Ha ted by 
W. Shute , gent, from the French book call'd, Lrs Laurien 
de Naffau : on deferiptian & reprefentation (en taille douce) 
de ton fet let viftoiresgagneei par let cjlats four, la conduit e (jf 
gourjernement du prince Maurice de Naffau, < 61 . a Leyden ; 
par Jean Jeanuoon Orlers, Sc Henry de Hadtcns, 
1612. 

• An author who was in the engagement, obfcrves, that 
in this hafty attempt of the earl's, a barge was funk, ha¬ 
ving fotirfeore foldiers in her, and that eight of them were 
drowned. See the Cadiz voyage in Hakluyt, and the 
abridgment in turchas , vol. 4. fol. 1929. 

4 Sir IV. Monfon , who was captain in the earl’s (hip, 
fays, he alfo diffuaded him from landing. See his A 'a val 
grafts in Cbunhil s collection of voyages. 

• Sir Fronds Vert% who was a commander of the land- 


forces, was on£ of them who was for landing with the 
earl at the Caletta, as plainly appears from his own words; 
and hiving no command in the fleer, it is no lefs viftble 
he envied thofe who had, the honour of a naval victory. 
For how malicioufly has he difguis’d and difparag'd this 
flgnal fervice of Ralegh' s! where he fays, 44 This day the 
44 generals met not together, but the lord-admiral had 
44 molt of the fea-officers aboard with him, and the lord 
44 of EJfex had thofe for land-fervice, and Sir Walter Ra- 
44 legh was ftnt to and fro hetwixt them with meffages i fo 
44 that in the end, it was refolved and agreed upon to put 
44 the next tide into the bay.” See Fere's commentaries, 
fol. 27, 28 ; but not one word, who it wa* that diffuaded 
them from their firit rafh attempt; and who brought them 
to this agreement; when even foreigners have given us 
more of the arguments wherewith the earl was periuaded 
by Ralegh alone, than Ralegh himfelf has done. See the 
Triumphs of Najfau, fol. 187. 

1 Ralegh himiclf was the £rfl who complain’d of delay, 
by that indifercet attempt of landing, both againll the fto. m 
and the enemies fhips, between them and the (hore; but 
now the delay was neceffitated, not only by the diftance of 
the Spanijh fleet up the bay, but the danger of being be¬ 
nighted* and then fighting in a flreight and among the rocks. 
See the Triumphs of Rajfau, as before; but Radgh himiclt hr:s 
given the belt reafon for their delay this night, which is, 
their having as yet agreed on no fcheme or method 
of engagement i which mult have brought all to con- 
fufion. 


44 harbour. 


• Digitized by kjOOQie 








XCVl 


Ttibe LIFE of 

** harboilr. So that night, about ten a-clotk, I wrote a letter to the lord-admiral, declaring 
theorieTtf '* l ^ ere ‘ n m 7 opinion, bow the fight Jhmld be order'd ; perfuading him to appoint to each of 
fight. 4 * the great galleons of Spain, two great fly-boats to board them, after the queen’s fhips had 
** batter’d them ; for I knew that both St. Philip and the reft would bum, and not yield ; and 
“ then to lofe fo many of the queen’s Ihips for company, I thought too dear a purchafe, and 
what would be term’d but a lamentable vitlory." This method being agreed on, and both 
the generals perfuaded to lead the body of the fleet, the charge of the van, for putting it in 
execution, was, upon Ralegh's requeft, granted and afligned to him* The fhip himfclf was 
in, called the IVarfpite, was one of the queen’s, and carried about two hundred and ninety 
mariners. The reft, appointed out of her navy to fecond him, were, the Mary-Rofe, com¬ 
manded by Sir George Carew, the Lion by Sir Robert Southwell , the Rainbow by Sir Francis l ere, 
the Swiftfure by captain Crofs, the Dreadnought by Sir Coniers and Alex. Clifford, the Nonpareil 
by Mr. Robert Dudley ; befldcs twelve Londoners and certain fly-boats.* Thus the lord Thomas 
Howard, becaufe the Mer Honeur, which he commanded, was one of the greateft Ihips, was alfo 
left behind with the generals-, but being impatient thereof, he prefied them to have the fervicc 
committed to him, and to that end exchang’d his fhip with Mr. Dudley. Hereupon Ralegh ob- 
ferves, “ For my own part, as I was willing to give honour to my lord Thomas , having both 
4< precedency in the army, and being a nobleman whom I much honour’d ^ lb I was yet refolved 
44 to give, and not to take example for this fervice, holding my own reputation deareft." 
Therefore with the firft peep of day he weigh’d anchor, taking the ftart of all others a good 
diftance, b and bear with the enemy, who was in the following difpofttion to receive him. 

Undsr the walls of Cadiz were ranged feventeen galleys, which lay with their prows to 
flank his entrance. There was alfo a fort call’d Philip, which beat into and commanded the 
harbour, befides the ordnance, which lay all along the curtain upon the wall towards the fea, 
and divers other pieces of culverin which fcour’d the channel. Notwithftanding, as foon as the 
enemy perceived an Englijh admiral under fail approaching, feveral of their galleons and other 
fhips of war, with forty great veflels befides bound for Mexico and other parts, alfo fee fail. Of all 
which, the St. Philip, Matthew, Andrew and Thomas, being four of the capital galleons of Spain, 
came again to anchor under the fort of Puntal, in a ftreight of the harbour which leads over to 
Puerto Real. On the ftarboard fide of them, they placed three frigats of war j at their back, two 
great galleons of Lisbon , befides two well fumifh’d argofies; and the feventeen gallies by three 
and three, were to interlace them as occafion Ihould be offer’d. The admiral, vice admiral, and 
rear admiral of New Spain , with the body of the fleet, e were ranged behind them towards 
Puerto Real, hoping with this great ftrength to defend the entrance, the place being no broader 
from point to point, than that their line did in effett ftrctch over the ftreight as a bridge, and 
had befides the fort of Puntal for their guard. 

Leads the ' Ralegh, as aforefaid, advancing in the van, was firft faluted by fort Philip , d next by the 
Va "- cannon on the curtain, and laftly in good order by the feventeen galleys which lay near the 

town with all their prows bent againft him as he enter’d. Ralegh anfwer’d the firing of their 


• The 'Triumph of NaJ/du having told us, that every com¬ 
mander drived to have the vanguard, further add, 44 The 
44 council, rclolving not to hazard the queen’s great fhip* 
41 but upon urgent ncccfliry, thought fit that Sir Walter 
44 Ralegh, with eight of the queen’s le/Ter fhips (indead 
44 of fcven) fi x Hollanders, and twelve EngUjh merchant-men 
44 ihould have the vanguard.** fol. 187. The reafon why 
Ralegh mention’d not the Hollanders, and the Engl jo mer¬ 
chants but (lightly, is, becaufe they were made little ufe of. 

b The Triumphs of Hajfau obferve, 44 the refolution of 
44 giving Ralegh the van being oppugned by the lord Thomas 
44 Howard, who faid that honour belong’d to him (as vicc- 
44 admiral) it was concluded that both of them fhould go 
• 4 together; but Ralegh, as foon as it was day, to lofe no 
44 time in weighing anchor, let flip, and thereby had the 
44 advantage of failing firft.” fol. 188. 

« The number of ihips in the bay of Cadiz, is not fo 
exalt)y agreed upon as their fituation, by thofe who faw 
them, which Ralegh his describ’d the bed of any, be¬ 
caufe fome take more notice, fome lefs, of the Spanjb 
merchant men. Sir Francis Vere only fays, 44 In the 
44 mouth of the bay, thwart the rocks called Los Puercos, 
44 there lay to our judgment forty or fifty tall fhips, where- 
44 of were four of the king's greateft and warlike!! gal- 
44 Irons, eighteen merchant-fhips of the Well-Indian fleet 
44 oat ward-bound and richly laden, the leftprivate mer- 
44 chants.” Comment, fol. 27. So that he faw but four 
men of war. Another who was there, fays, 44 Between five 
44 and fix a dock in the morning our (hips, with all fpeed. 


44 courage and alacrity, fet upon the Spani/b fhips them 
44 under fail, and making up the bay ot Cadiz towards 
44 Puente dt Suazo , being in number fifty-nine tall ihips, 
44 with nineteen or twenty gaiieys attending on them, 
44 forced in fuch good oidcr and reafonable diftance, as 
44 might dill annoy us, and relieve themlelves imer- 
44 changeably.” Fid . the Cadiz voyage in Hakluyt, and 
the Abridgment in Pure has, vol. 4 fol. 1929 : fo he men¬ 
tions no merchant-men. But another having mention’d 
fifty-feven great fhips, befides twenty galleys and a few 
other veflels of war, diliinguilhes alfo a fleet of thirty- 
five (ail richly lade* for tnc Weft-Indies, with as much 
wine, oil, lace, doth of gold, and other precious merchan¬ 
dize, as was worth eleven or twelve millions of ducats. 
Triumphs of Haffau, fol. 186. This was ths fleet above- 
mention’d in Ralegh's account, and near the number, 
hound for Mexico . 

4 Sir Walter Ralegh afterwards, exemplifying how lit¬ 
tle a refolutt and experienc’d man of war w ill tear to pafa 
by the beft appointed fort of Europe, with the help of a 
good tide and a leading gale of wind ; and how hard a mat* 
ter it is to flop a good lhip without another as good to en¬ 
counter it, fays, 44 The fort Sr. Philip terrify’d not us in 
44 the year K96, when we enter’d the port of Cadiz ; 
44 neither did the fort at PsmtaJ, when we were enter’d, 
44 beat us from our anchoring by it; tho* it play’d upon 
44 us with four demi-cannons within point blank from fix 
44 in the morning till twelve at noon/ Hift. cf the World, 
lib. 5. cap. », kit. 10. 

ordnance 


Digitized by LnOOQle 






Sir IV A L TE R R A LEG H. ci 

ordnance with a flourifti of his trumpets, and flill kept driving forwards, that he might draw 
up a fufficicncy of the Englifh fleet into play, and to engage thole he pafled by, while he was 
in adion upon the body of the enemy.» Accordingly the Ihips that followed beat upon the 
galleys fo thick, that they foon betook them to their oars, and got up to join with the galleons 
ih the (freight, as aforefaid ■, b then as they were driven to pafs near him, he bellow’d his bene- 
didion from feveral broadlides among them -, but ply’d St. Philip , the great and furious admi¬ 
ral of Spain, mod conftantly, as being mod worthy of his fire, accounting the galleys but as 
wafps in regard of that fea-monfter ; and being now refolved to repay the enemy’s former treat¬ 
ment of the Revenge, or to fecond her lofs with his own life, he came to anchor by the great 
galleons, whereof the Philip and the Andrew were the two which boarded that brave Erglijh 
Jhip. Here he fell to bartering of them very briskly, expeding, after a while the flyboats to 
come up, that he might board and take them. And now began the engagement to be very 
defperate. The lord Thomas came to anchor on one fide of him, tho’ pretty much be¬ 
hind, c with Sir Robert Southwell j Sir George Carew and the Cliffords on the other, and 
Sir Francis Vere was towards the fide of Puntal. At laft the thunder of the ordnance grew 
fo great about ten a-clock in the morning, that Effex, impatient to abide fir off, thruft up 
through the fleet, heading all thofe on the left hand, and on that fide, anchor’d next to Ralegh ; 
aftewards came in captain Crofs as near as he could j but Ralegh , to his great honour, held always 
Angle in the head of all. d Now after they had beat, as at two buts, one upon another almoft a (harp <*n- 
thrcc hours j fo that the volleys of cannon and eulverin came as thick as if it had been a fkir- g a g em<:nt - 
mifh of mufketcers, till Ralegh's (hip was in danger of finking in the place, he made away to 
Effex in his (kilt, to defire that he would inforce the promifed flyboats to come up, that he 
might board •, for, as he rid, he could not long endure fo great a battery. Effex was then 
coming up himfelf; to whom Ralegh declared, That if the flyboats came not , he would board in 
the queen's JiAp •, for it was the fame lofs to burn or flak, and one he mnfl endure. Then the earl 
promis’d him, That whatever be attempted, he would fecond him in perfon upon honour. In 
the mean while, the lord-admiral Howard, being alio at firft difpofed to advance, but the ri¬ 
ver was fo choaked, that he could nor pafs in the Ark , came with the lord Thomas in the Non¬ 
pareil •, and while Ralegh was fpeaking to EJJex, “ the marflial ( Vere) who thought it fome 
«* touch, fays Ralegh, to his great efteemed valour, to ride behind me fo many hours, got up 
« a-head of my (hip •, which lord Thomas perceiving, headed him again, myfelf being but a quar- 
“ ter of an hour abfent. At my return, finding my felf from being the firft to be but the third, 

“ I prefently let flip anchor, and thrufting in between the lord Thomas and the marfhal, went 
41 further a-head than all of them before, and thruft myfelf athwart the channel, fo as I was 
41 furc none fhould outftart me again for dut day.” Effex thinking his fhip ftronger than 


1 The % turn[h of Naffau fays, 44 the Spanijb gal lies 
** discharged all tiieir ordnance upon Ralgh-, but he made 
** not one foot, leaving it to thofe that follow'd him, and 
11 fo went directly towards the galleons which lay in the 
“ deepdtport olthe river, and with two other very great 
“ Ihips took up the whole breadth of it," fol. 188. 

* Sir Willtum Monjin, deferibing the fituation of the 
enemy, or manner of riding in their harbour at his firfl 
fight of them, agrees very well with this part of Ralegh' s 
account, where he lays the four galleons Tingled themfclves 
from out of the fleet as guards of their merchants. The 
go Hies were placed to flank us with their prows at our en¬ 
try ; but, when they law our approach the next morning, 
the merchants run up the river, the men of war to Port - 
Royal, and brought them,elves into a good order of fight, 
mooring their fi.ips ah end and Hem to have their broad- 
fides upon us. ’Yht galhes then betook them felves to the 
guard of the town, which we put them from, before we 
attempted the lhip<. .Sec his Naval gratis. But Vue 
takes this fcrvkc entirely to himfelf in thefe words: 
“ As the Spar.]/? (hips lookd from their anchors and made 
“ from us, their gal lies, ieventeen in number, under the 
u favour of the town made towards us, ranged in good 
“ order. My fhip was floaty, and doted with good ord- 
“ nance, whicn nrsde me hallcn towards them without 
“ flaying for any company, &r. So as 1 entered fight 
u with them alone, and fo galled them with my ordnance, 
* 4 that they gave back, keeping flill in order and fight 
“ with me, b'c." At lad, fays he, “I put them from 
4t under the town, and rook certain fhips which rode there 
f * anchor forfaken of her men, and followed continuing 
u 1 n ^ht till they came under the fort of the Puatal, 


44 where thwart the bottom of the bay lay their four great 
44 fhips with a diltance betweem them ; and, fpreading th<5 
44 breadth of the channel, were now in hot tight ot ord- 
44 nance with our fleet." Vtre' s Comment, fol. 30, 31. 

< Tho' this pailage of lord Thomas's being now far be¬ 
hind is not mention’d by Ralegh, in the letter he then wrote 
of the Cadiz action, which we here chiefly follow ; yet I, 
have it from his own hand-writing, in the printed book 
called Les Lauriers de Najfau, before mention'd, a copy 
of which hiltory falling into his hands foon after it was 
publiih'd. Sir Walter Ralegh has, in the language it is 
writ in, made ihort notes with a black-lead pencil 
throughout this whole adion, w’here himfelf is men¬ 
tion'd, which are not only dill legible, but dcmonflrable 
to be his own writing, both from the l’ente and form of 
the characters. In the margin of this copy againlt the 
words that fignify, 44 The lord Thomas to have come up 
44 to Sir Walter Ralegh with fix of the queen’s fhips as near 
44 the galleons as pcj/ible , difeharging all their ordnance, 
44 and lighting from fix a-clock in the morning till noon 
Ralegh has written with his pencil, Mats lien flrricre. 
This curioiity is in the poflcflioii of Thotnas Brian Efq; of 
the Inner-Temple , who has favoured me with the uic of 
thofe notes, the better to illullrate this part of their au¬ 
thor's dory. 

d Hence might it be, that Rah«b' s fliip loll mod men, 
and yet very few, in comparifon of the length and heat of 
the engagement; and alfo might be one of tnofe which w as 
(hot through two and twenty times, fince none feems to 
have been fo much difabled, as may appear a little fur¬ 
ther. Vide Abridgment of Hakluyt in Punhat , vol. 4. 
fol. 1930, 


r r 


the 


Digitized by knOOQie 





, Cll 


77je LIFE of 


the reft, thruft Clifford? s alkie, and (till got next to Ralegh, on the kfc hand, a-head of ail thjt 
rank, but lord Thomas •, while Vere fecretly faflned a rope on Ralegh's fliip-fidc towards him, and 
drew himfelf up equal with him •, but fome of his company advertifing him thereof, he 
caufed it to be cut afunder, fo Vere fell back into his place, whom Ralegh guarded all but his 
prow from the fight of the enemy. * 

But now Ralegh having no hopes of his flyboats, and EJJex with the lord Thomas ha¬ 
ving promifed to fecond him, b he laid out a warp by the fide of the Philip to dole, the 
wind hindering him otherwife to board her * and when the admiral thereof, with the com¬ 
manders of the other three wooden apoftlcs, found that EJfix and the lord Thomas began to 
do the like, they all flip’d anchor, and ran aground j heaps of foldiers and mariners tumbling 
into the fea like coals out of a fack, fiys Ralegh , into many ports at once j fomc drowning^ 
ThcS/j«j, 7 j f onle (licking in the mud. He alfo tells us, the Philip thereupon burnt herfelfj and another au- 
Rl 001,1 e thor more particularly in thele words: “ As Ralegh thought to have boarded the great galleon 


itroy’d. 


And taken 
by him. 


• “ St. Philip, a negro gave fire to the powder, and efcaped by fwimming ; it gave fo great a 
“ crack, that the maft was blown up into the air, as if it had been an arrow. A pinnace that 
“ lay near it was burnt, but the men efcaped in boats. The other galleon, called St. Thomas, 
“ was likewife blown up, but did no harm to the Englijh." He alfo mentions “ two eafter- 
“ lings which ran afliore, and were burnt; but, fays he, the St. Matt best and St. Andrew, 
“ of ten or twelve hundred ton apiece, were faved from running aground, and carried 
“ away.” c However, he does not inform us particularly by .whom and others feem to 
have done Ralegh more wrong, in nominating other perfons, and omitting him in the per¬ 
formance ; fince it appears under his own hand-writing, that he took them both himfelf” d And 
this agrees with die manner his letter of this a&ion in print has expreffed it, where he fays, 
“ thofe galleons were recover’d with our boats ere they could get out to fire them.’* Here he 
obferves upon the enemies running to the fhores, and thus firing their fliips, that the fpc&a- 
cle was very lamentable on their fide ; for many drowned themfelves •, many half burnt, leaped 
into the water j very many, hanging at the ropes-ends by the fliip’s-fidc under the water, even 
to the lips , many fwimming with grievous wounds, till ftruck under water, and put out of 
their pain • and withal fuch huge fires, and fuch tearing of the ordnance, in the Great Philip 
and the reft, when the flames came to them, that Ralegh thought there was here to be feen die 
mod lively figure of hell it felf. 

Thus the victory was obtained by fea, and the bay refign’d by two, fome fay, by four 
a-clock in the afternoon ; e tho’ no more of the Englijh were conftantly and clolcly engaged, than 
the fhips and commanders beforc-mention’d, againll the fix great galleons, feventeen gullies, with 
the fleet of New Spain , argofies, and frigats, to the number of fifty-five, or fiity-ieven, as 
Ralegh himfllf reckons them, befides the fort of Puntal playing upon them all the while. 
After the vi&ory, “ Ourfelves fpared the lives of all, fays Ralegh ■, but the Flemings, who did 
“ little or nothing in the fight, ufed mereiIds daughter j ull they were by myfelf, and afrer- 
“ wards by my lord-admiral, beaten off.’’ * 

Then did they ihaften to land the army, and attempt the town--* in which there were 
of all lorts about five thoufand foot, one hundred and fifty foldiers in pay, and about eight 

hundred 


1 Tliis contention of Sir Francis Vere' s for precedency 
again, he owns in thefc words : 4< Sir Walter Ralegh, very 
little a-hcad of me, cait his anchor, as did alio the ge- 
44 nerals, and as many of the fleet as the channel would 
bear; fo as the (hooting of ordnance was great, and 
44 they held us good calk, by reafon their (hips lay thwart 
“ with their bruadiides towards us, and moll of us right 
44 a head, that we could ufe but our chafing-pieces. I 
<4 fent my boat aboard Sir Walter Ralegh to fallen an 
44 haufer to wind up my (hip, which was loofed foon after 
41 my boat was put off." Veres Comment, fob 32. 

k The Triumphs of Kajfau feera to explain the reafon of 
the flyboats not coming up, where we find thofe of Lubeck 
and Dantzick fell into conteft with the Englijh ones about 
that fevvice. After which, the commanders being aboard 
the general, they refolvcd to aflail the galleons, command- 
ing, fays this hillory, the lord Howard and Sir Walter 
Ralegh tc begin . See fob 1 88. Againll which lail afieition 
Ralegh, in that which was his own French copy of this 
book, has written, A Moy feul\ as much a* to lay, that 
defperate charge was committed to him alone. Mr. Brians 
copy of Let Lauriers de Kajfau, p. 138. And as much is 
implied above, in the text, from Ralegh's own cpiitolary 
account, which fays, the lord Thcmeu promiled to ie- 
cond him. 


« Triumphs of Kaffau, fob I 89. 

d J'ay pris tout dtux 9 are Ralegh's own words in the 
margin oi his Lauriers de pirjjau, even with that period 
which exprefles the taking of tnc-le two galleons, but not 
the perfon w'ho took them. 

« I meet w ith no author but Sir William Mcnfx, who 
prolongs the vidory by fea to four a-c!ock. 

f An author, w ho was prefene at this vidory, fpeaking 
of the proclamation that wa* pubhlhal by the generals and 
council, to prevent all further bloodfheJ after the furren- 
drr by the Spaniards , fays, this honourable and merciful 
edid was, I am furc, fljictly and rcligicuily ob.'eiv’d by 
the Englijh ; but how well it was kept by the Dutch, i 
will neither affirm nor yet deny; for 1 perceive between 
them and the Spaniards thcie is an implacable heart¬ 
burning. And therefore, as foon as the Dutch fijuauucn 
was cipied in the fight, immediately both they of Soil lot* 
St. Lucar, and other places, did net only air ell ail fuch 
Dutch (hips as dealt with them friendly by the way ol 
traffick and merchandize, and confiscate their goods, but 
impri'.bn’d the merchants and owners of the lame; arJ, L>v 
report, treated many of them with ex cream cruelty. Vide 
Hakluyt , and Purchas, vol. 4. I0I.1931. 

% Cadiz was a large and beautiful cuy, and being t hcchicF 
fee of the biihop, had a good cathedral church, abbey, nun- 

rx:v. 


Digitized by kjOOQle 









Sir WA LTE R RALEGH. ciii 

hundred horfe a of the gentry and cavaliers of Xeres gather’d together upon the difeovery of 
the Englijb fleet two days before, as they lay becalm’d off Cape St. Mary . The horfemen fallied 
out to refift their landing, but were fo vigoroufly affail’d and overpower’d by the Englijh , that 
the greateft part made away to the bridge which leads to the main, called Puente de SuafO > 
the reft retreated to the town, and were fo eagerly purfued, that they were driven to forlake their 
horfes at the gate, which the inhabitants durft not open to admit them ; fo that they were 
forced to leap down an old wall into the fuburbs, which the Englijh vanguard, clofe at their 
heels, perceiving, with EJftx at their head, followed them ; and fo the town was carried with 
a fudden fury, b in a Ihort fpace of time, c and with very little lofs. d Ralegh , tho’ he had re¬ 
ceived a grievous wound in his leg, being much torn and deformed with a fplinter-fliot in the Wounded, 
fight •, yet, willing to encourage the army with his prefence, and defirous of feeing the actions 
and difpofitions of the enemy, he was carried afliore on the fhoulders of his men, where the 
lord-admiral, out of his care and regard, fent him one of his horfes; but his own being re¬ 
cover'd in due time, was made ready for him. The torment he endur’d, and the fear he was 
continually in of being fliouldcr’d by the tumultuous foldicrs, abandon’d to fpoil and rapine, 
without any refpedt of perfons, made him unable to abide above an hour in the town. c The 
lame night therefore he return’d, chiefly bccaufe there was no admiral on board to order the 
fleet, or indeed few mariners left in the navy^ ally to ufe his own words, running headlong to 
the jack and alfo becaule he was fit for nothing but reft and retirement at that time: other- 
wife he might, like the reft of the commanders, have rewarded himfelf for his fcrvices. But 
leaving them in fafe poffeflion at his departure, they promifed to preferve for him his fliare of 
the booty, and to give him a good quarter of the town ; of which, as we have it under his own 
hand, they defrauded him.* He had defired the confent of the generals, that he might go and 
fecure or deftroy the Indian fleet, which was faid to be worth twelve millions, and lay in Puerto- 
Real road ; but they defired to confider on it till next morning. At break of day, Ralegh fent 
his brothers. Sir John Gilherty and Sir Arthur Throgmorton y as alfo Sir Henry Leonard , to 
know their refolution ; but the generals fent back to defire he would come afliore into the 
town. & Ralegh very favourably imputes thefe evafions to the great confufton, in which it was 
almoft impoflible for them to order many things at once. In the afternoon of the fame day, 
the merchants of Cadiz and Seville offer’d the generals, by the Committee of the contra&ation- 
houfe, with the purveyor, corrigidor, and other officers, two millions of ducats to fpare that 


netv, and fine college of Jcfuits; was rtrongly fituated both 
by n were and art; the buildings of hard llone, all fi.u- 
loct’d, alter iutTarki/h manner; fo that having lodged 
heaps of great Hones on the tops of their houles, every 
woman could endanger the paflfengcrs in the llretts, which 
were very narrow, perhaps to avoid the great heat. All 
the houlcs had fair window* I mines, and large folding (but¬ 
ters; but were barr’J with iron, and none glazed, except 
the churches. They had few chimneys, but in fome 
lower out-rooms for necdlary ufe*; leaning to be more 
careful of keeping themfelvcs from roalting, than to have 
much of any thing roalled. Abutment of the Cadiz voyage 
ill Purchas, vol. 4. fol. 1932. 

1 Purchas alfo adds, the town had above four thou fund 
Jghting men, and fix hundred horlc, well furniih’d, no 
doubt, io many (hips being always at hand, and fo well 
flored with ammunition. Another author writes, the 
number of men and women might be eight or nine thou- 
far.d. Triumphs of Kajfuu, fol. 192. 

Veres Cinwttut tries, fol. 39. 

« Bclore eight a-clock that night, the Englijh were ma¬ 
ilers of the market-place, fort:, town, and all but the 
caftle, which held out till break of day.—Thus was this 
notable victory, as well by fca as land both begun, and 
in effeft perform'd within the conipals of fourteen hours. 
Purchas , as before, fol. 1931, 1932. 

* In all the terrible fight by Ida, not much above one 
hundred Engbjh men were (lain and hurt; one pinnace of 
Sir R. Soutlwit\ fired with the Philip aforelaid, and one 
Pltmrjh flyboat, with a hundred men, blown up by her 
own powder, as Purchas obterves. By land, Sir Walter 
Ralegh mentions Sir John // field, who was (lain in the 
market-place, Sir Eduard fling fir Id, captain Bagnol, and 
captain AM* > as the Dutch hiUorunscall him. Thefe two 
laft were knighted with Sir Arthur Savage the 21ft or 2 2d 
of June, by the earl of Efex, who the funday following 
very royally bellow'd the like honour upon at lead three- 
fcoie more, molt of than his friends and followers, and 


many, mere creatures and flatterers. The earl thought he 
ftiou.d Uiengthen his party and inccrcli thereby, and has 
warmly jultify’d himlelf in hi-, apology for (hewing them 
that dilltnciioi; ; but it weaken’d him in the queens opi¬ 
nion to fee him ape her prerogative, or play king Rjkcrt 
fo extravagantly. And what may we think (lie faid of 
this number ? when for Jus having bclore made twenty- 
four knights at the iuccour of Khoait, none of whom were 
in meaner circum(lances than many of thele, the queen 
laid, Eif hid might have done vail to have built his alms* 
houfe before he made his knights . Lord Bacon's Apophthegm c! 9 
p. 17. 

« Ralegh entered the tow n with the ford-admiral, lord 
Thomas Howard, Sir IV. Paget, Sir Robtrt Southwell, Le¬ 
vi fon, Wood houfe, Alanfell, and the mariners; Sir Edward 
Hobby, carrying the colours before them, about the time of 
the great ikirmith in the market-place, foon alter which 
the Spaniards retir’d and capitulated ; agreeing to pay fi\e 
hundred 2nd twenty according to Camden ; or, according 
to Stow, lix hundred and twenty thoufand duckets (widen 
is five times more than foreign authors mention) for the 
ranfom of their lives, and to give forty holla ges for the 
payment. Alter the fur render, order was given to trans¬ 
port the religious men and women, merchants wives, isle. 
to Port St. A tarty that no violence might be olYer’d them. 
They had alfo liberty to take as many of their clo.uhi or 
goods as they could carry with them ; vvh.c’i produced a 
remarkable example in a beautiful young Spamjh ladv, 
who, leaving all that was precious and valuable, boie 
away her old and decrepit hulband upon her back, w hom 
before (he had hidden from the danger of the enemy ; 
herein imitating the piety of the Bavarian women, alter 
the conquell of their country by the emperor Concede IIL 
See Samis' s notes on Ovid's hletam . lib. 13. fol. 449. 

f En la quelle ils mont troir.pe, as himfelf has written 
over-againll this promifc in Mr. Brian's copy of Les Las*- 
tiers de SnJ/au. fol. 139. 

s Lutuiers de Knjfatt. 


' fleet ■, 


Digitized by LiOOQle 


civ 


The LIFE of 


Forces the 

Spaniard; t3 

tire their It - 
dian fleet. 


fleet; neither could this bring them to any refolution, fo that advantage was loft. 1 Ralegh 
might poffibly inflft upon a larger conipofition, by faying, They ought firjl to be majlers of the 
fleet, and ranfom it afterwards ; for if they offer 'd two millions already, they would give four 
when it was taken ; becaufe he has not denied this fpeech where he had read it aferib’d to him. b 
But it appears plain enough to me, from the fame author, that Effex was not for having the 
fleet feiz’d upon, unlefs by Sir Chriftopber Blunt, Sir Edward Conway, Sir Thomas Cerrard, 
and other land-officers, which Ralegh would not confcnt to for the honour of the failors; as it 
does appear from Camden, that the lord-admiral would not confent to any compofition. For we 
came, faid he, to confume them, and not compound with them. But they faved him the trou¬ 
ble; for the next morning, being the 23d of June, the duke of Medina caufed all that fleet 
of merelvtnt-men to be fet on fire, becaufe he was convinced, from their being befet fo vigilantly 
by Ralegh, who had the charge of them, that they rmift needs fall into his hands. Thus both 
galleons, frigats, argofies, with the fleet of Nueva Efpana, and all except the gallies, which 
it feems efcaped, were confumed to allies. Good ftorc of the enemy’s ordnance was recover’d 
out of their fliips, and great quantities of merchandize, plate, jewels and money, out of the 
town: their whole lofs being computed at twenty millions of ducats. c Many rich prifoners 
were given to the land-commanders, “ fo as that fort were very rich, fays Ralegh j fome 
“ had for their prifoners fixteen or twenty thoufand, fome ten thoufand ducats, d befides great 
“ houfes of merchandize. What the generals have gotten I know leaft (concludes he 3) they 
“ proteft it is little: for my own part, I have gotten a lame leg, and a deformed; for the 
“ reft, either I fpoke too late, or it was otherwile refolvcd. I have not been wanting in 
“ good words, or exceeding kind and regardful ufage ; but have pofltflion of nought but 
“ poverty and pain.” 

Thus have we related this aftion chiefly from Ralegh's letter before-mention’d, the credit 
whereof is the lefs obnoxious to any doubt, in that it either here is, by our endeavours, or might 
be by thofe of an able pen, fufficiently corroborated out of other writers upon the fame fubje<ft. 
But there is one letter more, written by another ocular witnefs of all his behaviour in this victory, at 
their leaving of Cadiz , early enough for the perfect memory thereof; to the lord Burghley, a 
man dangerous to deceive with mifreprefentations 3 and further, written by an old land-com¬ 
mander, under the carl of Effex, who even never faw Sir Walter Ralegh before this voyage: 
therefore a teftimony, that carries many marks of truth, and none of partiality in his favour. 
For which rcafon, and becaufe it has never yet feen the publick light, I ffiall here tran- 
feribe all that is faid, being concife, not only of one, but every commander mention’d therein, 
that my reader may, unbiafs’d by me, diftinguilh what a principal fhare of honour is paid to 
the merit of Sir Walter Ralegh's councils and courage throughout the whole engagement: but 
thefe are my author's words. “ My lord, this I muft fay, that never prince of England hath 
“ receiv’d more true glory and reputation than our foveraign in this, wherein thefe two nobles 
“ have commanded with fuch valour, love and good intelligence, as we, that have been under 
** them, received thereby Angular comfort; and truly, my lord, they deferve as much honour 
“ as may be heap’d on them. We furpriz’d the enemy, whereby this mighty and rich Indian 
“ fleet of forty-five fail of good, and fome of them mighty fhips, have been confumed to 
“ allies • a ruin to this king, not to be recover’d in all his days ; befides the cutting off this 
«* year’s voyage, and confequently the next. By this voyage, if no other gain, this only hath 
“ much fatisfied me, that I have thereby feen and known the men of worth of our nation. Of the 
“ carl I will fay nothing, but of the lord Thomas , the lord marfhal Vere, and Sir Walter Ralegh , 
“ I muft fay, that in no bickering where I have been, I ever faw men more forward and valiant 


• Par la refit fe TKu$a e vont perdue deux million /, fays Ralegh, 
sgainft this paflage in the ferae copy of that French hiltory. 

b Jn the faid book. 

c r l'\x earl o( Effex, in a brief narrative ofthcadvan- 
tnges accruing to England , and lofles to the Spaniard, by 
tins expedition, fays, 44 the Englijh took two galleons, 
44 routed fifteen galleys, with an unequal number of fliips; 
44 freed many of their countrymen condemn'd to the gal- 
44 levs, and releas'd feveral Spaniards from imprifonment; 
44 took the belt fortify'd city in all Spain , and Itaycd thir- 
44 teen days in their country; brought home, befides the 
44 galleons aforefnid, a hundred brals guns, with a rich 
44 booty ; and the failors, but efpecially the foldiers, 
44 great plunder; the enemy loll thirteen of his molt k r- 
4i viceable fliips forty Indian merchant men, and four 
“ others, befides vaft quantities of ammunition, provi- 
44 fions, tffc. rendering it aimolt impofiible he ihould in 
44 fome time appear agrinat fea in a formidable manner.' 1 
ride Camden, Anno 1596. Tho' luch was their lofs, and 


computed as above ; yet the earl wrote a paper of objec¬ 
tions hereafter mention'd, agamft his colleagues, for not 
doing more. 

r \ he Triumphs of Nojfau fums up the Spanijh lofs thus : 
44 Three and thirty great (hips laden for the Indies were 
44 burnt, befides five fhips which came from St. Lucar , 
44 three of which ran aground. It was the greateft and 
44 wealthieft fleet ^that ever went to the lKd.es.” And 
a little further, 44 The wealthy town was wholly fack'd, 
44 and the booty great, which was carried to the fhips. 
44 *Twas thought the king loft at the fame time 5200 
44 pieces of ordnance, befides armour lufticient for five 
44 or fix hundred men, which was taken out of the arfc- 
44 nal,” fol. 191, 192. 

d Sir Francis Vert lays, 44 I got three prifoners worth 
44 ten thoufand ducats; one of which was a church man, 
44 and prefident of the contra&ation-houfe of the Indies ; 
44 the other two were ancient knights,” whom he names. 
Comment, fol. 42. 

“ in 


Digitized by knOOQle 






cv 


Sir WALTER RALEGH. 


“ in the matter of combat between our /hips, and their fhips and galleys, wherein jlood all (be 
44 fucce/s of the viclory, which my lord of EJfex did give beginning to by anchoring in the cne- 

my’s face, Sir Walter dole by his fide-, and fo the reft before-named; alfo the general of 
«* the artillery (Sir George Carew) with his Mary-Rofe, a proper gentleman, full of good things, 

« and, above all, of diferetion. When all thefe aforefaid had placed thcmfelves, and the reft, 

“ as the channel would give us leave, the thunder of the artillery on both fklcs began at ten in 
“ the morning, and lafted till two and a half in the afternoon ; at which time her majefty’s fhips 
44 made the enemy give ground, and the three great fhips of war, the Philip, Alatthe to, and 
44 Andrew , ran themfclves alhorc *, and the Philip they fir’d, the other two we bring you 
44 home. Sir Walter Ralegh did, in my judgment, no man better i and bis artilUry -mojl ejj'cft ; 

44 I never knew the gentleman until this time, and I am forry for it, for there are in him excel- 
44 lent things befides bis valour \ and the obfervation be bath in this voyage ufed with my lord 
44 tf EfTcx, hath made me love him.” A liede furdicr he fays, 44 In the Due Repulfe {EJfex'% 

“ Qiip) we loft only feven men •, in the Warjpite (which was Ralegh's) fourteen, and 
* Sir Walter cut in the leg with a fplinter.” * Laltly, he mentions his true and faithful 
«< friend. Sir John Wingfield, who loft his life in the town-houfe, and thereby was rid of a 
44 mighty mifeontent which all the way had much afflicted him,” having one day told my au • 
thor, “ that he had rather leave his life here, than carry it again into England .” b 

It was long difputed, whether the town fhould be held or no, fays Sir Francis Vtre j who 
adds, that my lord of EJfex feemed to affett to remain there in perfon v as, we may add. Fere 
did too •, becaufe, he fays, he offer’d to defend it with four thoufand men, till her majefty’s 
pleafure fhould be known c when, in truth, die queen’s pleafure, in this particular, was 
known before they left England : for EJfex himl'elf informs us, he fent letters from Plymouth 
(before they fet fail) by his fecretary Edward Reignold , to die council at Greenwich ; wherein 
he purpofed 44 to dwell in a port of the enemy’s, and to make a continual diverfion of die 
44 wars >” but, fays he, “ My letters were neither anfwer’d, nor liked of.” i And much lefs 
was the fame propofal now rclifh’d in Cadiz, when fo many wanted to guard and fecure the 
treafures they had got; and it was computed, they would all foon grow in want of proviftons 
pay, one of his own knights advis’d him to mafter and deftroy fhip6 rather than towns, as 
what would make the enemy more unable to molcft them, and procure him wealth and folid 
honour, without riot and ruin of the innocent \ bcfidcs, the riches in fhips could not be fo eafily 
conceal’d and convey’d away, as in towns y alfo they might be brought into England, and 
would be vifible monuments to his glory •, but towns, tho* foon won, could not be long en¬ 
joy’d.® For thefe and other reafons EJfex was prevail’d upon, tho’ with great .reluctance, to 
leave Cadiz , but they firft of all caufed the city to be raz’d, and, with the caftles and fortifica¬ 
tion*, fired, all but the churches and religious houfes-, together with all the naval tackle and Thc cj , 
provifion they coold meet with, whi^h they either needed not, or could not conveniently carry and naval 
away. Their cotirtcfy however to the people, efpccially of diflinftion, and all who had made flurei fireJ 
no oppofition, was fuch, that, at their departure, the Spaniards did the Englifh the jufticc to 
fay, Tho' they were herrticlri as to religion , yet as to the rejl, they bad behaved tbemfelfves with 
generous bravery. 

On the 5th of July the army embark’d t and in council, it was infilled on to lie out at 
lea for intercepting thc Wefi-Indian fleet -, 44 but die fcarcenefs of our victuals, fays Fere, 
u overthrew that purpofe.” So refolution was taken to make for England, and vifit the 
Spanijb coafts in the way, to deftroy their fhippihg. The firft place they made to was Faro, 
a good large populous town, but unfenc’d, and a bifhop’s fee of Portugal. Here the Englijb 

, . tf I . 


1 Ralegh afterwards made a very good remark oport 
Shipbuilding (which probably the memory of this froart 
might induce him to) in thefe words : M Men may not 
4f expett the eafe of many cabbing , and fafety at once in 
u lea-fervice. Two deck* and a half are fufficient to 
44 yield (helter and lodging for men and mariners, and 
“ no more charging at all higher; but only one low cab- 
41 bin for the maiter. But our mariners will fay, that a 
44 fhip will bear more charging aloft for cabbins; and 
44 that is true, if none but ordinary mariners were to 
44 ferve in them, who are able to endure, and are ufed to 
44 the tumbling and rolling of (hips from fide to fide, 
44 when the ica ia never to iittk grown : but men of bet- 
44 ter tort would be glad to find more lleadinefs and lefs 
44 tottering cage-work. And althb 1 the mariners do covet 
44 ftore of cabbins, yet indeed they axe but flutthh dens. 


n that breed feknefs, or ferve to cover Jlealths in peace* 
u and m fight are dangerous to tear men with their 
44 fplinters." Sir IV . Ralegh'* cbferuatijns upon the royal 
navy, p. 14. 

b Sir Anthony Standgn 's lei ter to the lord high-treafurer 
of England, dated from Cadiz , Jth of July 1596} the 
original. With the ufe of this rarity, among many others 
in that art of literature , the Harley an library , where 
forr.ething of every kind is preferved, I have been fa- 
▼cur'd by the earl of Oxford, whofe laudable difpofi- 
tion to recover the unpublifh’d memorials of our renowned 
ancejlors is only to be excelled by his noble courtefy in 
communicating them for the benefit of fojlcnty . 

« Sir Francis Vere's commentaries, fol. 42. 

1 * The earl of EJfex'* Apology (as before) p. 12.’ 

• Sir W. Monfon's Naval Tracts. 


f f 


landing l 


Digitized by kvOOQie 



CV1 


*The LIFE of 

landing, and marching up to the town, the inhabitants deferted it, and left them in full pof- 
fcflion j who, after having refted and refrelhed themfclves five or fix days, brought good 
ftore of provifions to the (hips j alfo fome pieces of artillery, and the valuable library of the 
late famous bifhop Oforius. * There is an author who mentions the taking of this town, and 
lifh’d. confequently that library, among Ralegh's victories ; defcribing the buildings to have been lefc 
fo demolifh’d, as to yield no covering for their idols. b But fince that library is obferv’d by 
Camden to have been thought by right EJfex's prize, as if this earl had fomehow contended 
to engrofs it to himfelf; it may fomewhat direft us, to whofe greater value for the labours of 
the learned, and more publick fpirit in this particular, 'tis owing, that it was more commenda- 
bly beftowM j being brought into England , fays Monfon y and made (it fcems) an exemplary 
foundation of the publick library which was begun by Sir Thomas Bodley the enfuing year at Ox¬ 
ford . What lhare Ralegh had in this difpofal, towards the fald renowned undertaking of that 
learned knight, his countryman and acquaintance, authorities are wanting, further than by fur- 
mife from thefe premifes, to certify. But this we have exprelly enough tranfmitted to us of 
him by Bodley himfelf, even in the next reign, about nine years after this time, when Ralegh 
was under great misfortunes; and therefore, when an aft of munificence mull fhine with the 
greateft fplendor, that he generoufly contributed towards the improvement of that library the 
A benefaftor fum of fifty pounds \ “ for which, fays Sir Thomas Bodley , I will intreat the vice-chancellor 
/WanTibnuy ** to move t ^ e univerfity for their letters to him (and the other benefaftors mention’d with 
** him) of publick thanks }” c which, doubrlefs, they gratefully paid : but to return. 

When die forces were got again on board, they failed to the Groyne } and looked into the 
bay ; but the wind being unfavourable, they thought it dangerous to enter j therefore, and 
becaufe their viftuals daily grew more fcarcc, fo that in fome (hips there was already extreme 
want, fays Sir Francis Vere , it was rcfolved to make homewards : d however. Sir William Mon- 
fon, in favour of EJfex's impatience to go on upon frefh exploits, computes they had enough 
provifion to fupply them feven weeks. Monfon alfo imputes the general declenfion of the 
officers from any further invafion of the Spaniards at this time, to the covetoufnefs of thofc 
who wanted to fecure the treafures they had amafled.* And indeed Vert difeovers not any 
concurrence now with EJfex's new fehemes of adventure, as might have been expefted towards 
a patron who had fhewn him fo much favour and countenance ; but vifibly haltens home upon 
the complaint of fcarcity aforefaid. And yet that which might be thought Vere' s true motive 
for returning, was never imputed to the lord-admiral nor Sir Walter Ralegh, tho*, both by 
fjieech and writing, they argued for it as much as any $ for they had engrofs’d no booty that 
might be endanger’d by entering upon further engagements abroad. Yet had they other ob- 
jeftions to thefe inconfiderate projefts, than the want of viftuals or ficknefs of men } for af¬ 
ter both thefe inconveniences in Ralegh's fhip were propos’d to be redrefs’d by EJfex, as Mon- 
faji tells us, Ralegh was as refolute againft hazarding the honour, as others the riches that was 
got at Cadiz ; and in this entirely agreed with the lord-admiral, who perfuaded them to confidcr 
how fubjeft they might be to great Ioffes in little enterprizes,f which would not add much to 


■ This was Hieronymus Oforius, a native of Lisbon , 
and biihop of Sylves and Algarva ; characteriz'd by 
foreigners to have been a man of ftriCt virtue in his 
morals, and mailer of a florid pen in his writings; which 
were publifh’d at Rome in four volumes, by his nephew, 
who alfo wiote his life. See more in Thuanus, Anno 1580, 
when he died, aged feventy-four years, and in Anthony Ttf 
fier\ additions to that hiftorian’s Eloges dts Hommes Scavanj, 
lfjc. 8vo. vol. 1. Utrecht 1694. p. 502. This biihop 
was, for none of his writings, more noted with us, than 
his Epiflolary Admonition to queen Elizabeth, and his coni 
ttoverfy with that learned orator and civilian Dr. Walter. 
Haddon ; who dying in the year 1571, before he had com? 
pleated his lad book againft Ojorius , it was finifti’d and 
publilh’d by John Fox the martyrologifi in 1577, and four 
years after tran/lated into Er.glifi? ; wherein Fox charges 
the bifhop’s book againlt the DoClor with being full of 
lies, calumnies and errors: and the lord Bacon, where he 
notes, among the diflempers of learning, that luxuriancy 
of Ityle which began to prevail in Luther's time, with the 
caufes thereof; which introduced an afleCled ftudy of elo¬ 
quence, and grew to fuch excefs, that authors regarded a 
roundnefs of period more than richnefs of invention, found- 
nefs of argument, or depth of judgment; and were charm¬ 
ed rather with foltncfs than ft-engtn, fweetnefs than folidity, 
and fulnefs of words than weight of matter ; he inllances, 
among others then growing into cftccm, the flowing and 


watery vein of Oforius. De Augment. Scientiarum% 
lib. 1. 

b Sir Walter Ralegh'* Ghofi, 4to. Utrecht 1626. p. 17. 

« Sir Thomas Bodlefs letter to Dr. Thomas James , the 
firft keeper pf his library, in Reliqui* Bodleiana, pub- 
li/h’d (by Mr. Hearne) Svo. 1703. d. 133. ’Tis dated 
from London , April $. and written, as 1 compute, in 1605 ; 
becaufc the fame letter mentions the progrefs which king 
James , not long after, made in that year to Oxford ; 
where he pronounced that brave fpcech, If I was not a 
king , I would be a univerfity-man, tsV. as we have it in 
Sir Ifaac Wake ’s Rex Platonic us, 4tO. 1607. 

* Fere's Commentaries, fol. 44. 

« Monfon s Naval Tradls aforelaid. 

* One of the lord admiral’s objections to EJfex's defire of 
making a defeent upon Lagos in Algarva, is given us by Sir 
William Monfon as aforefaid ; and part thereof, which is to 
this fenfe, is in thefe words : “ The winning of it, after 
11 fo eminent a place as Cadiz , could add no honour ; and 
“ if it fliould be carried, yet it would be with the lofs of 
“ his beft troops and gentlemen ,* who would rather defire 
“ to die, than receive the indignity of a repulfe and the 
earl, tho’ againft his will, fays that author, was forcad to 
yield to thefe reafons. Yet neither FJfex, nor Vere, nor 
Monfon , have been fo particular in Ralegh's reafens ; tho* 
under his hand he deliver’d them, as well as by word of 
mouth; but thh oznifiion in them is not to be wonder’d at. 

their 


Digitized by CiOOQie 





CV11 


sir Walter ralegh. 


their praife if tliey fuccecded ; but furely would to their diferedit if they fail’d. This being 
the fenfe of the greater or the wifer part, tnoft of the fleet return’d with the lord-admiral to 
Plymouth on the eighth of Auguft following *, and the reft, with the earl of EJfex, two days 
after; who thence took his journey to court, as Ralegh probably did at the fame time. On 
the thirteenth of the fame month, we find by a letter from the council of ftate to the lord- 
admiral,* then advanced with the fleet to the Downs , that Ralegh as well as Efficx had been 
with them, and probably with the queen ; from whom we hear of no objections made to 
Ralegh's condu& in the whole aftion : therefore probably he was among thole principal aCtors 
therein, whom Ihe diftinguilh’d with liberal praifes and rewards. Yet that letter does difeo- 
ver her majefty’s diflatisfadhion towards the lord-admiral, that he did not lie in wait for the 
carracks or the Weft-In Han fleet, as Efficx had intreated him to do. And whereas Sir Francis 
Vere lays, that when EJfex landed in the weft, and left orders with him for diflolving not only the 
land-forces, but the Ihipping, there arofe much ftrife between the laid mariners and his Low-Country 
troops at their parting, the failors being determin’d to Ihare in the chells and packs wherewith 
the foldiers had moft unproportionably enrich’d themfelves in the late fpoil; at which Vere 
complain'd to the lord-admiral for redrefs, adding, that forne other principal officers of the fleet 
tpok the failors part; and, as if they thought them unreafonably dealt with, who had made way 
by the fea-fight, for the foldiers to get thofc riches by land, ask’d him, “ whether the mari- 
“ ners Ihould have nothing ?" To which he anfwer’d, “ their hopes in the Indian fleet 
were more to be defired than that tralh (as he calls it) which the land-men had got in the 
town; fo as they had none to blame but their officers, and their bad fortunewhich an- 
« fwer, fays he, was taken to heart, and is not forgotten to this hour, of which 1 feel the 
« fmart ;” b If Ralegh was one of thofe principal officers here pointed at, who thus flood the 
Jailors advocate, as he might be, notwithftanding his expeditious progrefs to court, the indifle-. 
rent manner wherewith Vere has treated him is very accountable to me. But Vere has fur¬ 
ther betray'd his partiality, in not telling us the confequencc of his laid application to the lord- 
admiral, which appears in that letter and others, from the council aforefaid, to have procur’d 
the difpofal of the Spanijh plunder towards the payment of the Englijh navy ; and that Vere's 
Low-country regiments Ihould not return before they were fearch’d both in Ihips and perfon. 
As for Effiexy he wrote a Cenfure of the omiffions in this voyage, c ,which he imputes to the dif- 
fenfions of his council and colleague. Whence the common hiftorians have been led indiferimi- 
nately to arraign the fetting forth fuch expeditions under, commanders of equal authority, and 
have fo much neglefted giving thefe their diftindb commendations for what they did, as to cavil 
at them for what they left undone; while others more gratefully obferve. That nraer was fo 
much riches and renown acquir’d with the like naval fuccefs ; well juftifying the honours which 
were paid to Sir Walter Ralegh both by the authors who dedicated books to him this year; d the 

painters 


• * In the .CctIonian library, and lately printed by 
Mr. Lediari, in his Naval Exftditions, fol. 344. 

* V ires Comment, fol. 44, 45. 

« An ancient and fair copy whereof I have feen in the 
Cottonian library, Julius F. VI. Tradl. 103. printed in 
fecretaty Burcbet'h Naval Hiflory , as I remember, and in 
Mr. Ltdiarf $, fol. 337, being here about half a (beet of 
paper ; wherein the earl raifes four objections to their con- 
dud in this voyage: firft, that they did not pofllfs the 
Indian fleet : fecondly, that they abandon’d Cadiz : 
thirdly, that they did not wait for the carracks and 
Indian (hips: and laftly, that they did not a flail the 
enemy in their other ports. To all which omiffions ho 
makes anfwcr, laying them to the charge of the other 
commanders; but names Sir Walter Ralegh only in ihe 
two laft articles. Here we may obferve, Sir H- Wot ton 
did either bimfelf mifluke the drift of this paper, or, ha¬ 
ving a courtly pen, would incline his readers to do fo. 
For where he is giving a character of the earPs feveral 
employments, and has allowed this at Cadiz to have been 
the mod fortunate , he is further for having it that in which 
the earl alfo fhewed the greateft modejly ; Decaufc, fays he, 
there he wrote with his own hand a cenfure fhis omiffions : 
whereas indeed ’tis a cenfure of his allbciates, for what 
EJfex imagin’d, how juflly let others lay, to have been 
their omiflions. Which plainly reverfes one of the cha¬ 
racters by which that autnor would diitinguifh the earl’s 
Ihare in this expedition. See his Parallel of Robert earl 
of EJfex with George duke of Buckingham, 

i Befides captain Ktymis's voyage to Guiana before- 
mention’d, in which he has fpoken, to Ralegh' s honour, 
of the viflflry at Cadiz ; there was another piece printed 


this;year, which I Arid alfo dedicated to him; and at 
this time, before Ralegh was recover’d of the wound he 
had receiv’d there, with great propriety, in regard to the 
fubjed thereof: for it it entitled, A hundred and fourteen 
Experiments and Cures of the famous phyfician Phil. Aureol. 
Tbnphrajlus Paracelfus : To which are added, fome pro¬ 
fitable works, by B. G. a Porta Aquitano: alfo the fecrets 
of Ifaeu Hollandus ; and the Spagiric Antidotnry for Gun- 
jhot % by Jofcphus $htercetam*t: Colleded by John Hejier , 
printed 410. 1596. This Hejier w r as the learned chymiil 
of Paul's Wharf whofe preparations were famous in other 
Countries as well as his own for many years, as I find in 
others of his works. But, as I obferve in fome of them, 
he is faid to have been dead two years before the printer’s 
date of this which he dedicated to Ralegh ; and as the 
title he herein ufes, is only To the vcorjhipful Walter Ra¬ 
legh Efq\ I conclude the book was dedicated by Hejier to 
Ralegh before he was knighted, and now feafonably repub- 
lifh’d with a new title-page, or Aril pubhlh’d from Hejier % 
polthumous Remains, without altering the author’s title 
of his patron. However it is, Hejier , in his ingenious 
dedication upon the motives to the purfuit and improve¬ 
ment of fcience , tells Ralegh , “ Tho’ divinity is bounded 
“ with precepts in the old law, and promifes in thegofpel, 
“ fo that obedience to one and faith in the other is fulfil- 
“ ling of either ; yet all other faculties tending to the 
** government or ornament of life do fo carry a privilege 
4t of more liberty in fearch, and feepe in practice, that 
“ to re(l contented with the inventions of other /, is as odious 
“ to the learned , as it is for frank hearts to feed at other 
“ mens trenchers ; or fine wits to be fit to tell the clock , 
f( while grojfer heads are better employ'd: and not without 

•• caufo 


Digitized by boogie 




cviii The LIFE of 


£nihter} and fculptors, who have appropriated this fea-fight to his portraits •, * and thofe other 
advancers of the like honorary arts, who, m their difcourfes of medals and intaglias , have thought 
him worthy, for this, among his many other actions and excellencies, of that metallic com¬ 
memoration, which is more ufually among us confined to princes and crowned heads. b 

About two months after Ralegh* s return from the conqueftof Cadiz , we find him making a 
new attempt to continue the intereft and correfpondence he had fo hopefully begun in Guiana. 
To this end, he mann’d out and ftor*d, with all proper conveniences and merchandize for 
trade and difeovery in thofe parts, a handfome pinnace which had been with him in the late 
engagement, called after his own name, the Wait, therefore probably one of his own fhips. 
The command of her he committed to captain Leonard Berrie ; tut, through contrariety of 
winds, and other accidents, they made it the latter end of December following before they got 
The third out of Weymouth. In the beginning of March they difeover’d the coaft, and fell into the 
W Wiapouco , a river almoft in four degrees north of the line, and about fixteen leagues in length j 
but not being able to find the head of its fells, nor meeting with any of the inhabitants to fup- 
ply them with provifions, they return’d* and made towards the great town called Aramalto , 
where they ftored themfelves to their defire. After this, feveral of thofe natives came in 
canoes, and traded with the Englijh in their (hips. Then captain Berrie hired fome of them, 
with a prefent of knives, to go back unto the river Cawo J and invite the ruler of that place, 
named Ritimo , on board, who accordingly came to them in the river Cbiana , where he and 
his train were feafted, and tra flick’d with the Englijh much to their fetisfaSion: and thither 
alfo flock’d, from their feveral towns, great numbers of a civiliz’d race of Carribes t who 
brought great plenty of victuals and tobacco, which they exchang’d for fuch commodities as 
the Englijh were well inftru&ed to carry thither. After they had declar’d their unanimous de¬ 
fire to have the Englijh come and rout the Spaniards , take command of the Orenoque t and 
dwell in the bordering nations, they departed-, and the Englijh made away to the Careres , or 
triangular iflands, and kept trading on with the people of the neighbouring towns, who fa¬ 
miliarly reforted to them. Then they pafied along through the river Maraw'tn, to Quip aria 
and Macirra, for about forty or fifty leagues upward to the fells of that river, and’to the fight of 
a rich country above, where the people were of an extraordinary ftature, and carried bows 
halfted with gold -, but were forced to Teturn without compleating that difeovery, for want of 
provifion j tho’ my author, one of the adventurers, thought the palmito’*, and other trees in 
the woods, would have fupported them till they could have rewarded themfelves with what 
** might have done us good, fays he, as long as we had lived.’* On the 15th of April 1597, 
they returned from that river, and wander’d through feveral others-, till, about four days after, 
they fell into the Coritine. In this river they met a bark, called the John of London , 
commanded by captain Leigh (the fame, I fuppofe, who afterwards made other voyages to 
Guiana j and took further pofieflion of the country, not by force, the Spaniards title, but con- 
fent of the people -, tho’ for a prince indeed, who deferved no right there which he had not 
the fpirit to maintain.) And falling down fome five leagues from the mouth thereof, upon in- 


44 caufe, for by fuch reftraint, <wit on the one fide fuf- 
44 tains too great an injury, in not ranging o'er the fields of 
4i nature; and nature too bafe a ditgracc, in not being 
*• fet forth by wit as fhe has been; but mull be accounted 

old, which (he refutes; or barren, which fhe abhors* 
4t To avoid this inconvenience, examples of antiquity 
“ have left feveral patterns of emulation for pollerity to 
4t imitate ; wherein our age cannot be condemn’d for neg- 
44 ligent, as having exceeded the number of writers m 
*• any age pail; among whom the undertakers in phy- 
•« fick have been fo numerous, that the blunted wit can* 
«« not complain of fcarcity, nor the deeped head of tho 
“ want of variety.*' Then he fays, out of thefe writer*, 
he has chofen fome, for their merits held in their own 
country, very dear, to tranflate for the benefit of his coun¬ 
trymen : and as heretofore he had fought the authority of 
other patrons; fo now he prefumes, under the comfortable 
(hield of Ralegh 's favour, to fhadow this work ; befeech- 
jng him, out of that bountiful courtejy for which he is fo 
generally commended, to pardon hu prefumption, and 
accept of his performance. 

• Of the pictures and prints which have been drawn 
of Sir Walter Ralegh, more will be fpoken a few leave* 
following. 

k Mr. Evelyn, in his book of Medals , gives us the 
fculpture of a large one that was flrack this year, having 
the arms of England, franc*, and ttolkfid, in a throe-fold 


knot on one fide, reprefenting a triple league againd Spain 
with this infeription, Rumpitur baud facile; and on the 
reverfe a navy of great fhips at fea, under the name of 
Jehovah, with this Epigraph, Quid me ptrfequeris, 1596. 
Hence thought by fome to have been m memory of the 
vi&ory at Cadi s ; but, as he cells us, it was druck upon the 
alarm menacing thofe three nations on the furprize of Ca¬ 
lais this year. Therefore where he is fpeaking of thofe 
adventurous Argonauts in thefe times who delcrved the 
honour of Medals for their exploits at fea, among whom, 
he reckons chiefly thofe who found ©ut/»ru> •worlds, plani- 
ed colonies, and enlarged the Britijb empire: he adds, I* 
know not whether there was any medals of the earl of 
EJfex'% expedition to Cadiz , and of the heroes who ac¬ 
companied him. So recommends Sir W. Ralrgh to that 
didindlion, as being 44 a perfon of extraordinary merit for 
44 his learning and experience: and who is he, continues 
44 my author, that deplores not his being fo unhappily 
44 cut off (and our fince want 0 1 fuch as Ralegh was) to 
44 gratify the crafty and malicious?*’ Further, where he 
is fubfiding from arms to arts, lie mentions Ralegh again 
among the foremoft of thofe illuflrious perfons, of whom 
he fays, 44 How fhould one rejoice to find in more Lifting 
• 4 matter than painted cloth, the true effigies of fuch a» 
44 were famous for both , n Kumfmata, fol. 1697. p* 99* 
160, 161. 


diligence 


Digitized by LiOOQlC 










Sir WALTER RALEGH. 


telligence that the Dejfekcbe, with which that river meets, would lead them within a day’s jour¬ 
ney of the lake Perima , whereon Manoa was fuppoled to (land, they meant to difeover a 
paflage to this rich city. But, having rowed in their boats about fifty leagues from the mouth 
of the Coritine to the falls of the faid river, where, having been credibly inform’d that five days 
journey further there was a fall impafiable} and, finding withal fome of the towns bordering 
thereon fo importunate to engage them in wars againft their enemies the Waccawaes , which 
would turn greatly to the difadvantage of the Engltjh, when Sir Walter Ralegh fhould again 
return thither, becaufe he would have occafion to pafs that river, which was reported to have 
gold in it ; they therefore were conflrained to return. So, clearing themfelves of this coafl, 
they took their courfe to the iflands of the WeJI-Indies. Here my author, who was a gentle¬ 
man of the company, after having fpoke in praife of the climate, how temperate and wholfome 
it is, tho’ within the Tropic , and fo near the Equinoctial *, as alfo how docible the natives, and 
humane (efpecially to Englifhmen ) tho’ a favage and uncultivated people } he proceeds to fpeak of 
their riches in thefe words. “ In the upper countries they go apparel’d, being, as it feems, of a 
** more civil difpofition} having great (lore of gold, as we are certainly inform’d by the lower ln- 
“ diansy of whom we had fome gold, which they brought and bought in the high country of Wiana- y 
«* being able to buy no more, becaufe they wanted the things which now we have left among 
“ them.” 1 Then, having taken a little further notice of their manners, with the plenty and 
variety of their provifions, he Ihews what courfe his company took homewards, and how they 
arriv’d fafe at Plymouth on the 28th of June following. b 

Thus have we abftra&ed, after fuch manner as in this place may be mod pertinent to our 
purpofe, all tire voyages Sir Walter Ralegh fet forth for difeoveries, as well as the warlike ex¬ 
peditions in which he was engag'd, as far as they have been preferv’d in Hakluyt's colled ions. 
Nor was it without juft reafon, that his faid naval enterprises were thus carefully gather’d 
therein} fince Ralegh's encouragement was fuch, of this extraordinary undertaking, to raife a 
grove of laurels, in a manner out of the leas, that fhould overfpread the ifland with glory, and 
might be (till made to fhoot more fpacioufly afrelh, were the author and his work reviv’d in a 
manner fuitable to their deferts, c that when even the firft edition of tliefe Englijb voyages was 

publilhed. 


* That there are many rich mines and minerals in 
Guiana, as well as mountains and rivers impregnate with 
gold, is not only thus conllantly intimated by ihe Englijb 
travellers thither of thefe times, but attelled by the Spa¬ 
niards themfelves, in their further difeoveries many years 
after; as may be feen in father O' Acuna' s relation of uic 
river of Amazons, and other Spanjk authors. But as for 
the rich city of Manoa , juft betore fpoken of, which they 
had called El Dorado, it feems now to have been invented 
by thefe Indians, as a gilded bait to draw the Spaniards into 
league with them again!! their enemies j and piopagatcd 
by the Spaniards themfelves, to inhance the merit of their 
tiavcls, and (haTpen the appetite of their iucccilors to pur¬ 
sue the enterprise; for no luch city having been found, it 
has been reputed a kind of Philofophers Stone in Cofmogra - 
grafhy : yet, like that in Chjmijlry , tho* undifcover’d it 
Telf, it was, and may further be the means of many pro¬ 
fitable difeoveries. If fuch a metropolis had been diftinCl* 
ly afeertain’d by Antonio de Herrra, and in John de 1 .art's 
excellent accounts and maps of thefe parts, and had not 
appear’d doubtful even to father D' Acuna himfelf; I fee 
not how Monfieur Sanfon, who, in t68o, graved a little 
map to explain the French translation of the faid Jefuit's 
ditcourfr , could have omitted it; and for the new edition, 
publilhed in 1715, another map was graved by Mr. De 
Ifjie; which, tho' more copious and compleat, is not, as 
1 can hear, more particular in this refneCl. 

Mr. Thomas Majbam'% relation of the third voyage, 
fet forth by Sir Walter Ralegh, to Guiana, in Hakluyt, 
vol. 3. fol. 692. 

c For the confiderable intelligence we have receiv'd from 
this Collection of Voyages, it may not be improper here, at 
parting with, to fhew our gratitude towards the laborious 
author, in a fhort obfervation or two, which may fomc- 
what amend what has been faid by others of him, and re¬ 
commend his moll laudable work, long fince out of print, 
to a new impreflion. And, firtl: This Richard Hakluyt 
might be of a Herefordjhire family; but whether born 
there, too doubtful tor Fuller to fettle him a native of that 
county. He was fent young to Wejlminjler- fchool, and 
became one Of the queen's Icholars ; when vifiting his 
couhn Richard Hakluyt of Eiton , in the faid county, at 
his chambers »n the Middle Temple (but never lludying 
the municipal law there, as A //Wmillakcs of him, in- 
Head of his (aid coufin) this relation, a great proficient in 
colmography, ar) d promoter of navigation, communica¬ 
ting and explaining certain books and maps to him, 


wrought fuch impreflions in young Hakluyt, that he re¬ 
vived, if ever he fhould go to the L’niverfity, to prole- 
cute thefe ftudies. Accordingly, being removed to Cbrijl - 
Church in Oxford about I 570 (fays Wood) he fell to l'earch- 
ing after, and reading over, in any of feven languages, 
all the voyages and difeoveries in print or MS. that he 
could meet w ith ; and became fo eminent for thefe lludics, 
that he was chofen to read publick lecturer of navigation in 
the fchool?, w herein he W’as the firft that fhew'd the imper¬ 
fections of the old, and improvements of the new maps, 
globes, and other inftruments in this branch of feience, to 
the great fatisfaClion of his auditory. By his further en 
quirics of this nature, he alio became acquainted with die 
chief feaofhcers, merchants and mariners of the nation. At 
length he travelled to France with Sir Edward Stafford, her 
majefty's legicr ambaflador, and refided there five years ; 
during which time, he heard other nations miraculoufly 
extoll’d for their difeoveries and notable enterprizes at fea ; 
but the Englijb, for their fluggifh fecunty and negleCt of 
fuch attempts, through their long peace, much condemn'd ; 
and not only in common diitourie, but read them alfo 
more durably branded in the writings of their authors; 
particularly in La Popliniere'% book, called VAdmiral de 
France ; all which animated Hakluyt , at his return into 
England with the lady Sheffield about the year 1 5 S8 (after 
having publilhed P. Martyr, tranilated the French difeovery 
of Florida , and before them, duly celebrated Sir IV. Ralegh) 
to ftop the mouths of thefe flanderers, by collecting together 
the naval achievements of his countrymen ; which he 
perform’d fo expeditioufly, that by the latter end of 1589, 
he publifti’d a fair volume in Folio of the Englijb naviga¬ 
tions, which he dedicated to that great encourager of them. 
Sir F. IValfwgbam. The work was fo univerfally ap¬ 
proved, that the author was prevail’d on to enlarge and re¬ 
print it, which he afterwards did in three volumes; the firft 
two commonly bound together in one book, fol. 1599, and 
the laft fol. 1600. 44 A work of great honour to England, 
“ as Fuller jullly obferves, it being poffible that many 
44 ports and iflands in America , which are now bafe and 
44 barren, and known only by a bare name at prefenr, 
44 may prove rich places hereafter: and then thefe Winces 
44 will be produc'd, and pleaded as good evidence of their 
44 belonging to England, as firft discover'd and denomi- 
44 nated by Englifimm" 'Ihe author was made a pre¬ 
bendary of lVeJlminf er about the year 1605 , and reftor of 
Hetheringjtt in Suffolk, as ll'cod tells us; who alfo men¬ 
tions his other writings as hi$ edition of Piter Ma*tv ’s 
t t book 


s 


Digitized by 


Google 


cix 






Tlx LIFE of 


H:? encou- 
r«ig?ni?iit of 

Mr. lhiklu\t's 
Coll t tt ion of 
Englijb navi¬ 
gations. 


publifhcd, and before they could receive any luftre from the GuidKi&n milcveries, the Lid au¬ 
thor, in his preface, acknowledges Sir Walter Ralegh to have been one of thofe benefactors, 
from whom he had received his chief light into the weftern navigations. Nor did he only oblige 
Hakluyt with communicating divers maritime adventures in which he himfelf and countrymen 
were concern’d ; but procured for him, at no fmall expence, fome very fcarce voyages and difeo- 
veries of foreigners which were unprinted * and was moreover at the charge of rewarding 
fome perfons of learning and leifure to tranflate them into Englijh y for the further enrichment 
of the faid collections. One inftance of this kind he (lightly mentions himfelf. For in his 
learned enquiries into the name of the Red fea, he fpeaks of a voyage made thither by the 
Portugal viceroy of the Eajl-Indies , named Stephen Gama y the narrative whereof was written 
by CaJlro y one of his principal commanders; which dilcourfe, fays he, I gave Mr. Richard 
Hakluyt to publifh. a Now, tho’ I remember not to have met with this dilcourfe in Hakluyt j 
yet the author, who, after his death, recover’d fome of his papers, and continued his under¬ 
taking, has given us an abridgment of it, and inform’d us, that the original manufeript had 
coft Sir Walter Ralegh threcfcore pounds, who alfo caufed it to be trandated out ot the Portn- 
guefe tongue ; and was at the pains of making feveral corrections of the phrafe, and marginal 
notes upon it, with his own hand. b Further, we might expatiate upon tills care he had for 
the preservation of other mens fame j but here a gallant exploit follicits our regard, by which 
he much increafed his own. 

For the earl of EJJex, grown difeontented to fee his party of fuch little power at court, 
dnd the Cecilians carry all before them * that he could not advance feveral of his friends and fol¬ 
lowers to certain ports in the army, nor even Sir Thomas Boclley to the office of fccretary, 
whom he had perhaps prejudic’d with his prodigal praifes to the queen, fhe having prefer’d 
Sir Robert Cecyl to that place, in his abfence at Cadiz, whom he had as intemperately traduc’d, 0 
refolvcd to feck, by further fervices abroad, to ftrengthen that intereft at home which he now 
found fo weak and unfcrviceable ; in which, if his experience and diferetion had been an- 
fwerable to the activity and bravery of his fpirit, he might not have been difappointed, norout- 
fhin’d in martial expeditions, as he was outwitted in court-intrigues. But he had now a fair op¬ 
portunity to purfue this fcheme. For the king of Spain , enrag’d at the late overthrow and deft ruc¬ 
tion of Cadiz , had immediately thereupon mutter’d up the naval powers from all his ports, at Lif- 
lon , for a new expedition upon England and Ireland $ but his old enemies the winds and the 
waves fo fpeedily difabled and difperfed them, that the queen heard of their fate before fhe had 


book de Novo Orbe, with notes. Wherein, as we have 
before obferved, Hakluyt has fo highly applauded Sir Wal¬ 
ter Ralegh for his advancements of navigation : bolides 
fome other things which are chiefly vcrfions from the Por- 
tuguefe. But tnc notes of certain commodities in requeft 
in the Eaji -Indies, tsfe. by R. Hakluyt, amorg Mr. Set- 
den $ MbS. at Oxford, I take to be written by theTcmplar, 
who has c'hcr fuc hdifeourfes, and, I think, this in his kinl- 
man's celLfluts. And whereas the French difl’ertation on 
the rivet of Amazons , prefix’d to M. de GombervilJe't t.anf- 
lation of halier D' Aacuna'% relation above-mention’d, has, 
among orker errors relating to Sir Walter Ralegh, faid, 
That the hifl~ry of the fccond voyage he made in perlon 
to Guiana, was written and given us by this celebrated 
compiler Mr. Hakluyt, in his faid collodions; out of 
which hi (lory the French author pretends to quote fome 
particulars: We null here obferve, this aflertion of Hakluyt's 
writing fuch a hiltory, is notorioufly falfe; for he died in 
1616, which was before Sir Walter Ralegh went his faid 
Jail voyage to that part of America. All we fhall mention 
more in this place of him is, Firll, the wilhes, that 
fome other fuch able pen would continue his eolleeiions 1 
which may be read in Robert AJhlefs dedication to Sir Mau¬ 
rice Abbot, of his Cochin-China ; a fcarce trad, printed 
above a hundred years fince, and which I have feen in a 
volume of luch other choice pieces among the curious 
colledicns of the right honourable the lord Coleraine . 
Secondly, fince to the continuation of fuch colledions, a like 
ferie*> of fuch brave adventures as are the fubjed of them, 
would be requir'd, which may not, in any proportion, be 
readily produced, that other wifh, which may be gathci’d 
from \lr. Bohan's complaint above forty years ago, in his 
character of queen Elizabeth, of the icarcity of this col¬ 
lodion, that it may, after fo long a negled, be prefer’d to 
a fecond imprcflioni in juftice to the author, in honour of 
the heroic examples it commemorates, and for the profit 
of fuch imitation as it may infpire. 

* Sir If '. Ralegh's Hijl.of \pe World, lib. 1. c. 3. feft. 


k See an abridgment of Don John of Caflro's Rattier of 
a voyage made by the Portuguese from India to Zccz, de¬ 
dicated to prince buys ; (hewing the Hate of Sccatoria, and 
the parts on both hdes of the Red fea, as they were m 
1540, with the harbours, iilands, depths, (helves, and 
other particulars pertaining to the hiltory of that lea, 
land and people: in Purchas, part 2. fol. 1122. 

c Sir Thomas Bod ley informs us, that before he return’d 
from the united provinces in 1597, and after, the carl of 
EJfex ufed him fo kindly, that uio* he meant to iettle hi* 
dcpendance only on the lord Burghley, as belt able, and 
moil willing to work his advancement with the queen; 
yet the earl, who fought, by all devices, to divert her 
liking both from the father and the fon cfpecially ; did 
often, to withdraw his affedlion alfo from both, entertain 
the queen with prodigal lpeeches of his futfiuency for a 
fccretary ; whicn were accompanied with fuch words of 
difgrace againlt the latter, 44 1 hat nei:her lhe her felf took 
44 any great plealure to prefer me the fooner, fays Bodleyi 
“ for (he hated his ambition, and would give littlr counte- 
44 nance to any of his followers; and botn the lord Burgh- 
44 ley and his fon waxed jealous of my courfes.” And a 
little further, 44 when I had throughly bethought me, hrft 
44 in the earl ; of the (lender hold-fait he had in the queen ; 
44 of an endlefs oppoiition of the chicled of our ilateimcn, 
44 likely Hill to wait upon him ; of his perillous, feeble, 
44 and uncertain advice, as well in his own, as in all the 
44 caufes of bis friends; and when I had fully coniider’d 
44 how untowardly thefe two counfellors were aftedled to 
44 me; how ill it became my natural difpoiition to be- 
44 come a (lickler in publick fadlion; and how well I was 
44 able to live of my felf, isle. I was refolvcd to take 
44 my farewell of (late employments, and fo retire from 
44 court.” See the account of his life, written by him¬ 
felf, printed 4t0, Oxon. 1647. reprinted in David Lloyd's 
State Worthies ; and ng un, in Rehqu<* Rodin an a r. before 
quoted. 


Digitized by 



any 














CXI 


Sir WALTER RALEGH. 

any advertifement of their defign: and as lhe then took care to fortify fuch caftles as lay molt 
obvious to any fuch invafion ; fo now that flie heard the ftorm was gathering again, by the re¬ 
pair of the faid flutter’d fleet, and recruits added to it, threatning a new defcent upon Ireland, 
lhe refolved alfo to recoiled her forces by fea. At firft indeed, before lhe was well inform’d 
of the enemy’s ftrength, fhe had only arm’d and viftuall’d ten of her bell fliips, and caufed the 
IjrubConntr'us to provide the like number under admiral Duvemori . Bur when the lord 
Thomas Howard and Sir Walter Ralegh, who were pitch’d upon for the command of this fleet, 
declared their hopes of doing any great fervice with it to be weak and uncertain, and the news 
of the Addantaio’% ftronger preparations at her oil and the Groyne were daily confirm’d, a new 
council was call’d ; in which it was refolved, that this naval force, which the queen had ap¬ 
pointed, was too great for a difcovery, and too little for an attempt; as in the earl of EJfex’s 
apology is rightly obferv*d. * Therefore, palling over the addition, fo unaccountably deficient 
in the faid apology that I cannot think him the author both of one and the other, there were 
added to the firft prepared fleet about ten fhips more of the royal navy j which, with die other 
men of war, viftuallcrs, tranfports, and many flout veflels belonging to the nobles, knights, 
and gentlemen, who were adventurers in this voyage, amounted to about one hundred and twenty 
fail, as we are informed by Sir Arthur Gorges , an officer in this enterprize, whofe mod excellent 
hiftory thereof wt Hull here principally follow. Thefc fhips then being all fufficiencly mann’d 
with failors, received an army alfo on board of five thoufand foldiers, with ten pieces of artillery 
for the field, and five hundred volunteers moft gorgeoufly equipp’d. The proportion of victuals 
was for four months at large allowance, and double apparel both for the foldiers and mari¬ 
ners. c The lord-admiral Howard, being indifpos’d, declin’d the command •, which therefore 
was granted in chief to the earl of EJJex •, but the lord Thomas Howard was made vice-admiral, 
nnd Sir Walter Ralegh rear-admiral in the expedition ; and thefc three, with four others, made Rear-admiral 
up the council of war. The purpofe of this grand preparation was, to defeat and deftroy the 
■Spani/h fleet afore faid at Feroll, as well as in other ports of the enemy ; alfo to feize upon fuch 
Indian fleets of treafure as they fhould meet with belonging to the king of Spain ; but efpe- 
fcially to conquer, retain, and engarrifon moft of the ifles of the Azores ; 4 and above all the 
Ttrctra: wherefore this enterprise was called the Island Voyage. I" the Ifmnd 

Sir Francis Fere, who was marfhal again of the army, difeovers hsmfelf much nettled at the * 
queen’s having made the lord Mount joy lieutenant-general ; and cannot forbear expofiog his pa¬ 
tron Ejfex'i difingenuity towards that lord, in retrenching him to the mere title of a fuperior 
command, rather than not let himfelf be known to have got the authority of it. And, notwith¬ 
standing this, further betrays fo much his ftomach and jealoufy of EJJex s confent to that prece¬ 
dency, as to define the earl would not ufe him at all hereafter in any adtion wherein he was to 
go m chief; yet unrefervrdly confefies, the earl took thefc fpeeches of his as proceeding ra¬ 
ther from a paflionate difeontentment, than a refolution fram’d in cool blood ; and with fo little 
lharpnefs, that when they came to Weymouth, the earl thinking there might remain fome grudge 
of the laft year's falling out, caufed Sir Walter Ralegh and Sir Francis Vere to (hake hands: 

** which we did both, fays he, the more willingly, becaufc there had nothing pafled between 
“ us that might blemilh reputation.” e 

About the 9th of July following, the whole fleet fet fail from Plymouth, and, for two days, 
had a fair leading wind; in which time all the fhips received their directions from the council 
©f war, with the meeting-places from time to time in cafe of reparation by temped, fight, 
chafe, or any other accident. But being now advanced'about fixty leagues, there arofc fuch an 


* Reprinted under the title of the earl of Effex's vindi¬ 
cation ot the war with Spain, in an apology, tsV. 8vo. 
1729. p.13. 

k Idem, p. 14. where no more than fix (hips are men¬ 
tion'd to have been added to the former twenty ; yet, 
ifctre pages farther, he mentions thirty lail of the fame 
fleet. 

* Sir Arthur Girges’s relation of the IJIami Voyage, Ife. 
in Purehar, vol. 4. lift. 1938. 

* Thffc iflands are fituate in the Atlantic k, or wellern 
ocean, between thirty-(even and forty degrees; and dif- 
tant from England about four hundred leagues. They 
were fo named by the Portuguese, from a kind of hawks, 
call'd by them Afore 1, by the Romans Accijiitres, and by 
us Gt/b&xh ; thefc illunds breeding abundance of thole 
“fck ■ tho’ Ortiliut derives the name from a French word, 
fignifying to J.y or wither, without giving reafon for his 
etymology. They arc nine in number, and named 


St. Mary's, which is near thecoaft of Spain j St. Micheeeti, 
winch is the largelt of them, being about twenty miles 
long ; the Tercera, fo called, becaufe lying the third from 
Spain, is the ftrongeft ; Gratiofa, from the fertility of the 
foil, and p'.eafant temper of the air ; St. George's, like the 
two firft, from the faint's name on whofe day it was dis¬ 
cover'd ; the Pike , from the wonderful (harp mountain 
thereon, which riles fteeple-wifc three miles high, is fix or 
feven miles in circuit at the bnfe, and reported to have Vul- 
tano's in its bowels, difgorging flakes and Hones of fire ; 
Fay all was fo call’d (torn Faya, the beech-tree, which 
grew in plenty there ; Flores, from the abundance of 
flowers which overfpread the ifland ; and Cuervo, frcnn 
the vail flocks of crows or ravens which were cblerved to 
breed therein. Sec Gorges, as above, alfo more largely in 
Linfchoten and Hakluyt, vol. 3. 

« Vert's Commentaries, fol. 47, 4$. 


exceeding 


Digitized by LnOOQie 





:xn 


The LIFE of 


exceeding high ftorm full in their teeth, and continued with fuch violence for four days toge¬ 
ther, that all the fhips were driven, with great detriment to feveral, back into Plymouth-, and 
many died of the ficknefs it had brought among them. While they lay here w r ind-bound for a 
month, and their provifions much damaged and conlumed ; Ejfex , in company, as he tells as 
himfelf, with Sir fValter Ralegh, rode port to court.* The earl was very forward in his 
propofals to let out again with the fleet as foon as it fhould be repair’d, or at lead one half of 
it, being fure the Enemy fhould have felt the weight and charge of the journey. But her Ma- 
jefty not accepting his offer, it was more advifedly refolved, to proportion their expedition to 
the opportunities which remain’d -, the feafon being fo far elapfed, and their provifions fo much 
exhaufted ; therefore Ejfex had orders from her Majefty to difeharge the land-forces, all but dtc 
thoufand Low-Country foldiers, then thought the beft and nioft experienc’d of this army; where¬ 
by, tho’ they were difubled of difembarking at Ter oil, and attacking the enemy there by land- 
yet Ejfex offer’d to fend certain fire-fhips into the bay, and fecond them with the two Spanijb 
galleons lafl year taken, with fome great flyboats and merchant-men, to deftroy their {flipping ; 
and leave the queen’s own Englijh- built fhips at the mouth of the harbour, with a principal 
commander, to fecure their retreat > and this was allow’d of, but with fome limitations, as 
Ejfex confefles in one place, b which in another,' we find to be an abfolute bar to hazard any 
other of the {hips, and as abfolute a reftraint of the earl himfelf from going into the harbour 
to put this project in pra&ice -, but that it fhould be done by that principal commander he would 
have left behind •, whether through care of his perfon as a nobleman, or to have it attempted by 
one of the greateft abilities and experience for fuch a naval exploit, I cannot fay j but Sir tValler 
Ralegh was prefer’d to the execution of this fervice, and, as Sir Francis Vere obferves, the 
charge of fil ing the fleet was undertaken by him. d 

Durinc this abfence of Ejfex and Ralegh at court, which was not above feven days, 
there fell out fuch exceeding tempefluous weather as very much diftrefs’d the fleet both in 
Plymouth-Road and the Calwaler ; infomuch that one of Ralegh's own fhips, named the Roe- 
of his luck, of three hundred tons burthen, ran aground, and bulged her felf, fo became unferviceable 
bu 's’ <1 - for that voyage ; tho’ much pains and care were taken by all hands, and efpecially the lord 
5 Thomas Howard himfelf in perfon, to have preferved her.* On the 17th of Augujl following 
they all weighed anchor, and, with much labour, fet fail again, being becalm’d j but the wea¬ 
ther growing fomewhat favourable, they held their courl'e for the North-Cape. Six days 
afterwards they fell acrofs the bay of Alchajher, or £ if cay ; and at lafl: bore full into it, 
much to the diflike of Ralegh's pilot, a fkilful mariner, named Broadbent , who thought it very 
perillous for fo great a fleet fo wilfully to imbay there, and upon an enemy’s coaft ; yet as ic 
beaten was the general' s courfe, they comply’d. The next being Bartholomew-day, they were here 
iwy of f or feveral hours beaten and fcatter’d about by a prodigous ftorm, wherein one of the late 
taken prizes, named St. Matthew, falling into a head-fea, and having her fprit-fail our, broke 
her bolt-fprit and fore-majl overboard, clofe to the partners. The fall of her mafts alfo broke 
two anchors, and carried the third away^ and her main-majl , with her rolling and tumbling, 
had fo loofen’d it felf, that it was in danger of breaking in the Jlep , whereby ffle would foon 
have been funk, had not her captain, Sir George Carew , with great refolution and hazard, car¬ 
ried her into England , and exchang’d her for another. In the feme ftorm the other Sgauijb 
prize, the St. Andrew, fpent her main-top-mafi , and loft company for fome days > but all the 
reft of the fleet kept labouring in the bay, till firft Ralegh , and fome fhips of his fquadron which 
happen'd to carry the Low-Country foldiers, clear’d out, and made the beft of their way to the 
next rendezvous, as we (flail hear: and afterwards feveral of the earl’s lofing him, failed thi¬ 
ther alfo in fearch of him. This gave rife to a mifreprefentation by Ralegh s adverfaries, that 
he had defignedly withdrawn himfelf and that part of the fleet -, f while Ejfex himfelf incurr’d a 
more juft cenfure throughout the whole fleet, by making the high land of Portugal , and bear¬ 
ing in fo clofe to the (Aore, that he alarm’d all the Country to make defence againft him. Af¬ 
terwards as the fleet, being join’d again, was pafiing together towards the fouth, almoft as far as 
the ifles of Bayou , Ralegh's (flip, the IVarfpitef being then in the centre of them, on the 27th tf 


* EJfex's Apology, as before, p. 17. b Lit at. 
c Keiation of the voyage to the Azores by the (aid earl 
and the other commiiiioncrs, •viz. Thomas lord ihniard, 
Charles lord Mountjoy, Sir V'alter Ralegh, Sir Frauen Cere, 
Sir Anthony Shirley, and Sir Chrijlopher Blunt: in Pur (.has, 
vol. 4. fol. 1935 * 

d Vert's Commentaries , fol. £0. 

« Sir A. Gorge*, as before, fol. 1944. f hi- fol. 1946. 
l Tho* the fhip Ralegh was now in, is everv-wherc cal¬ 
led the Wajlffiu in Pur das' % edition of Sir Auhur 


Relation of this voyage, who fhould indeed well know its 
name, being captain thereof under Ralegh ; yet as 1 meet 
not with any flap of the royal tra-jy io named el fe where,' 
as that which Ralegh was in the la It year, at the conqueft 
of Cadiz, was called the A’arfyite ; and, as Sir HWiam 
Alonfon and others, call that alfo by chi> name, in which 
Ralegh, this year, perform'd flic Jy 'and Voyage ; I con¬ 
clude the ether leading to have been an error of the 
prvft. 

Augujl 


Digitized by LnOOQle 




• • • 


Sir WALTER RALEGH. 


cxin 


Augufi broke her main-yard afunder in the very midft by the parrel. This difafter was no Diftrek'd. 
fooner made known, than Effex difeover'd a greater in his Ihip, a defperate leak being broke out in 
her, by which he had much-ado to efcape drowning. Here it was agreed, thar, till Ralegh's 
Ihip Ihould be repair’d, he might keep cruifing about the height of the Rock, where they were to 
unite, and pafs to the South Cape ■, yet the next morning, before that reparation could be made, 

Ralegh had a meflage to attend EJJex with all fpeed, that they might put in with the land, 
which it was impoflible for Ralegh to do, being unable to work upon a wind, as having but a 
fore-fail and mizen, and the wind almoft of the land ; befides, if he could have made the land 
with that fail, it was thought a madnels to put upon the enemies coaft in that condition ; when, 
if the wind Ihould change to the weft, he mull, in want of his main-fail , have yielded or 
perilhed: fo found himfelf neceflitated to ply up and down for two days, till the foid fraction 
was mended. In this diftrefs, there was no diredion given for any other of the fleet to attend 
upon Ralegh ; yet Sir IVilliam Brook in the Dreadnought, out of his friendly difpofition, tar¬ 
ried with him j alfo the vice-admiral himfelf, lord Thomas Howard , very affedionately offer’d 
all the afliftance he could give and feveral other of the fea-captains voluntarily did the like: 
but Ralegh would admit of no more than three or four fmall men of war to accompany him ; 
and order’d the reft, even of his own fquadron, to repair to the admiral; fo far was he from 
projeding a divifion of the fleet, by entreating any to forfake Effex and abide with him, as it 
was aftewards very falfely reprefented, to incenfe Effex againft Ralegh , for contriving thereby 
the fruftration of their firft refolv’d attempt •, and as Ralegh himfelf, when they met at the 
Azores , fo fatisfadorily made evident, that the faid imputation turned only to the fhame of its 
contrivers. * 

"Whin Ralegh had repaired the damages of the ftorm, he bore in with the coaft, making Divided from 
all the enquiry he could after Effex and the fleet, but could hear no tidings of them ; he lent the fleet ' 
into the ifles of Bayon, and towards the South-Cape , well knowing the earl could not then put 
into Feroll or the Groyne, as was afterwards colourably pretended he would have done had they 
united, the wind being flat againft him ; and the whole fleet having over-fhot that coaft near 
twenty leagues before the main-yard of Ralegh's Ihip was broken} and befides, that they could 
not recover it again, both thofe Spanijh prizes were wanting which only were to have been ven¬ 
tured in the Service. Hereupon Ralegh fhaped his.courfe to the Rock, which was appointed for 
the general rendezvous; expecting, not only with good reafon, to meet Effex there, but with 
great defire j his own force being lb fmall, and the enemy, as he heard, out at lea with a 
powerful fleet. Yet thole who could fufpedt Ralegh would prefer a feparation, dangerous and 
diladvantageous as it was now, would needs have had it thought there was much more reafon for 
that fufpicion, when there came to Ralegh at the Rock near thirty fail more, moft of them his own 
victuallers and tranfports ; but the truth is, that having loft Effex during the ftorm in the bay, and 
miffed him alfo at the North-Cape , they came hither according to their inftruCtions •, where, 
cafually meeting with Ralegh , he held them together, and conducted them to Effex at the 
IJlands: otherwife they had all return’d home, after they had failed at the South Cape, which 
was the third and laft meeting-place, of fome admiral to command them, and of whom they 
would have fail’d, fincc none of the fleet went fo far fouthward. 

Soon after he had determin'd, in fcarch of the fleet, to pafs on towards the South-Cape , he 
was travers’d by an Englifh bark, which aflur’d him they had learn’d from an Englijh man of 
war which had lately taken an lndia-man , that the Adelantado was gone for the lfands to con¬ 
voy the Indian fleet fafe home. This feeming very probable, and no one fufpeCling that any 
of their countrymen would traiteroufly delude her majefty’s fleet with any falfe informations in 
a purfuit of this confequence, Ralegh earneftly befought the captain of the faid bark to hunt 
after EJJex , and apprife him of this intelligence : but he anfwer’d, in the hearing of the whole Receives ft!fe 
company, that the captain, who had taken that India man, had already fent a letter to Effex thereof. ln ‘ eI %nce. 
Ralegh, doubting it might have mifearried, or that none was fent, commanded one of the fmall 
men of war attending upon himfelf with all diligence to feck out the fleet, and make report of 
what they had heard. This Ihip, by good chance, met with the fleet next day, and deliver’d 


* Effex himfelf', in his Apoloyy, imputes the Defeat of 
their uefign upon the Sfari/h navy at Feroll, to die Joiing 
of Raltgh'% company by the Mil chances which happened 
to their Chip?, and to the further feparation of the licet ; 
without any ways infinuating that it was occahon’d by any 
aicifice to overthrow the fcheme they had concerted. But 
irom the moll accurate hillorian of this voyage, Sir Ar¬ 
thur whom I now chiefly follow, it will appear. 


a few fines further, there were other accidents befides, which 
hindered them from landing at Feroll \ and thel'c alfo arc 
acknowledg’d by EJfex, in that relation of tnis voyage 
which is fubferibed by himfelf and his council of war 
before named; See Purchat, vol. 4. fol. 1936. SuiRcicnt, 
in the whole, to clear Ralegh , both from the ccnfure of 
any wilful defertion, and, confequently, for not putting 
in execution the lirit intended aflauJt. 


the 


Digitized by 


Googl 


c 


u u 





CX1V 


The LIFE of 

the news. Two days after, Ralegh received two letters from EJfex, which, fomewhat taxing his 
abfence, and not writing, requir’d that-he would prefently follow him to the Iflands: “ Where- 
“ unto (the earl faid) he was haltening to find the Adelanlado ; not doubting but to give his 
“ miftrefs a better account of that fervice, than he Ihould yield his nvafter.” 

In pafiing to the Iflands , Ralegh encounter’d many new difficulties, by which he was fo 
much in danger of lofing his main-maft , that he was forced to fend the fhips in his company 
before, becaufe he thought Eflflcx might be in want of them, if he fhould meet the enemy > and, 
if they had joined the fleet without Ralegh , who was principally depended on, in cafe of any 
engagement, it would have much ftrengthned the rniiconftru<ftions that had been nourifhed againlt 
him •, but Ralegh fo fpeedily and effectually repaired his crazy mart, and fo brifkly ply’d his 
fails, that he overtook his conforts next day, and on the eighth of September they all made the 
ifland of Tercera ; yet here could they meet with no news of the fleet, tho’ they enquired 
of an Engliflh merchant who had traded about thefe Iflands above fix weeks, and tho’ it had 
pafled that way but two days before. By this merchant Ralegh wrote into England, to acquaint 
the ftate in what fituation they were •, then pafled on to St. George's ifland, where they found 
the weather exceedingly hot, and were vexatioufly becalm’d for a day or two, before they could 
get foward to Gratio/a. Here, as they coafted along, on the tenth of September about mid¬ 
night, they faw a large and perfect rainbow by moon-light, in the ffiape and bignefs of thofe 
formed more commonly by the fun, tho’ in colours not fo various, but chiefly inclining to a pale 
or whitiffi flame :■ this made the generality of the feamen expeCt fome extraordinary tempeftuous 
weather ; but it fell out, on the contrary, to be very calm and hot, 1 The fame night they alfo 
e/pied, by the light of the moon, then upon the border of the horizon, fome fail of fhips 
gliding towards the eaft of Gratio/a j at which Ralegh hung out two lights for his company to 
follow him in chafe of them } but they not taking his courfe and the moon being loon after 
quite fhadow’d and intercepted by the earth, he was left in darknefs and folitude, having loft 
all fight both of the new-difeover’d fhips, and thofe of his own company, till, in the fpace of 
four days more, a leifurely breeze of wind brought him, after all thefe impediments, to the 
reft of the fleet, then gather’d at the ifle of Flores. 

As foon as Ralegh had defery’d the fleet, he took his barge, and, with our author Sir Arthur 
Gorges , as alfo fome other of the officers and gentlemen in his company, went aboard the earl 
of EJJcx's (hip, with whom they all din’d ; and “ who feemed, fays Gorges , to be the joyfulleft 
«« man living for our arrivalprotefting, that “ he never believed we would leave him, al- 
“ tho’ divers perfuaded him to the contrary j” and acknowledg’d, “ that he was forry for a 
“ letter which he had written, by Mr. Robert Knolles , into England againft us; b promifing 
“ prefently to make a difpatch on purpofe, contrary to the former.” Further, when EJ/ex 
had fully fatisfied himfelf, that all the tranfports and victuallers which returned with Ralegh , 
had not been inveigled away by him ; and how commendably he had thus drawn them to 
the Iflands , againft their inclinations, being, moft of them, in great diftrefs; he open’d himfelf 
to him in a very amicable and communicative manner. He told him, “ how he had fpent the 
“ time of their reparation wholly in ranging the feas to meet with the Adelanlado he acquaint¬ 
ed him with “ the many conjectures and furmifes that had been vented of his abfence, and, 
“ withal, named to him fome of thofe men who had taxed him fecretly with ftrange reports, 
«* yet pretended to love him; which he protefted he never believ’d, but thereby the better ob- 


* This rainbow by the light of the moon, is the rather 
to be obferved, becaufe Pliny, in his A ’atural Hijlory, 
fpeaking of meteors, denies any rainbow to be feen, but 
oppofite to the fun , and never in the night-feafon ; yet tells 
us, Anftotle reports, for a rarity, that in his time there 
was a notfurnal rainbow feen; but, withal, that it could 
only be at the full of the moon. Neverthelefs, in thefe 
parts, they are very ordinary, as well when the moon is 
not at full, as other wile : for no longer than a week after 
this time, Ralegh and his company obferved another Ju- 
nary rainbow, as they rode at anchor before Flores; and 
there could not be two full moons in feven days, which 
makes it probable thefe iflands were not known to the 
Creeks and Romans y or thofe meteors not fufficiently obferved 
by them. 

b Tho’ Sir Arthur Gorges does a little further both re¬ 
peat the fending of this meffuge into England, as if it was, 
in very ftrong terms, againll Sir Walter Ralegh ; and alfo 
Effex's promife to him, that he would now lend another 
of Recantation; which promile giving feme fatisfadtion 
to Ralegh, and the mefiage into England being perceptibly 
fent to colour over the dii appointment of his promife to 


the queen; 44 wherefore we drove the Iefs to publifh our 
4 ‘ apologies, fays Gorges, or to corned with a man of Efix's 
*• place and credit; but left him to his bell excufe and our 
44 apparent innocence.” Yet in the copy of that mtffage, 
or infractions to Mr. Knolles, which my laid author exhi¬ 
bits verbatim, this abfence of Ralegh's (and consequently 
that omiflion again!* the enemy) is no ways laid to his 
charge, or mention’d as any fault or contrivance of his ; 
all the words that exprefsthe fame, being thefe : 44 If her 
44 majefty ask you, why there was no attempt upo i the 
44 fleet at F roll? You may fay, I neither had the Sr. Mat- 
44 tbew', the principal fliip lor that execution, nor the 
44 St. Andrew, till my own (hipwas almolt funk; and I, 
44 not able to make fail, till Sir Walter Ralegh with his 
44 own fhip, the Dreadnought, and very near twenty fail, 
44 were gone.” So that the mefienger was further inftruft- 
ed, it feems, to expound this part of his melfagc to Ra¬ 
legh's difadvantage, by word ot mouth; tor this fuppoli- 
tion will render EJfex's promile to Ralegh rcquilite, of 
fending another advertifement how they were all met ag.iin, 
and had been formerly fever'd by Misfortunes only, and not 
by any wilful default in the rear admiral, as was doubttd. 

“ ferv’d 


Digitized by boogie 

















cxv 


Sir IFALTER RALEGH. 

“ fcrv’d their fcandalous and canker’d difpofitions.” In this manner did the earl of EJfex re¬ 
ceive and welcome Sir Walter Ralegh with the greateft kindnefs and familiarity, as well as all 
the gentlemen of his company ; to the great diflike and heart-burning of fome, who much en¬ 
vied that liking, which, of his own difpofition, EJfex bore to Ralegh: For tho* the earl had 
many doubts and jealoufies buzz'd into bis ears againjl him ; yet I have often obferv'd (fays Gorges) 
that both in hisgreateji actions of fervice, and in the limes of his chiefs]} recreations , he would ever F.Jftx. 
accept of bis counfel and company , before many others who thought themfelves more in his favour, 

’Tis true, the earl, of his own unperverted nature, was a man, prone to gracious and generous 
principles; but no lefs eaftly blown up to prejudice and indignation againft his real friends, 
by his pretended ones; whence we may conceive, as Sir Arthur Gorges has well obferv’d, upon 
giving an inftance of his moderation and bounty to fome of thefe iflanders, Tho’ he was en. 
drned with many good gifts, how it came to pafs, that he at lajl fail'd in the ufe of them. 

Here, as they lay before the ifle of Flores, they held a council of war, to conquer and pof- 
fefs, or lay wafte fome of thefe i(lands j they being the chief places of retreat and rcfrelhment 
for the king of Spain's Indian fleets, by the treafures whereof his boundlefs ambition fo much 
difturbed and tyranniz’d over Europe. In this council, the admirals and commanders had their 
charge allotted, after the following manner. EJfex and Ralegh were to undertake the ifland The enter- 
of Fayall-, the lord Thomas Howard and Sir Francis Vere were to fecure Gratiofa ; the lord 
Mounljoy and Sir Cbriftopher Blunt were to attempt St. Michael's \ and the Netherland fquadron fix. 
was quarter’d to Pike, 1 where grew the greateft ftore of wines, therefore prelumed no unwel¬ 
come portion to them. And thefe places were the firft refolved upon, that they might after¬ 
wards attack the Tercera it felf; for Ralegh’s arrival, contrary to all mens expeditions, and 
many mens hopes, gave their refolution upon this ftronger ifland a fecond life ; but it was firft 
diought expedient to ftrengthen and fuppiy themfelves with whatfoever thofe weaker ones would 
afford: and to this end the fleet was divided into four fquadrons. 

But Ralegh's mariners having obtained leave to go alhorc at Flores , to water and furnifh them¬ 
felves with fuch other ncceflaries as they wanted j while he himfelf, attended by fcveral other of the 
commanders and gentlemen, walk’d a mile or two into the ifland to ftretch their legs and refrefh 
themfelves, where they all dined in a little village, the bare-legg’d governor having caufed fuch 
fere to be brought them as the country afforded, which they very honourably paid for, without 
offering them the leaft injury; becaufe the earl had before given them an indemnity, under his 
own hand, from all manner of violence : when EJfex , impatient to be in aftion, all of a fudden, 
and before the failors could get their casks of frefh water aboard, fent, on the 16th of Septem¬ 
ber , captain Arthur Champernon to tell them, “ That the general was borne up for Fayall, mean- 
“ ing prefently to take it in ; therefore required them to follow him inrtantly; and tho’ they 
“ fhould not overtake him, yet to find him there as foon as they could, and there they 
“ might fuppiy their wants.” Hereupon they haften’d away, with all the fail they could 
make, after him ; but no general could they overtake. The next morning they got j, 0 f„ the 
fight of Fayall , and mifs’d of EJfex alfo there, to their great diflatistattion, he being fix earfi cam- 
leagues nearer that ifland when he fent for them, and fet fail thither fix or eight hours be- pany ' 
fore them. 

Biinc enter’d the road, they beheld before them a very fine town, pleafantly feated along Arrives at 
the fhore; from whence the people, upon fight of their fhips, began to pack away both bag 
and baggage: their friars, nuns, other women and children, they alfo fent away in carts and 
carriages: fo continued tranfporting all up into the country for two days together. There was 
befides a ftrong fort at one end of the town, and another on the top of a very high mountain 
near adjoining, by nature very inacceflible, and artificially fenced with flankers, rampiers, and 
a ditch; alfo fix pieces of artillery, and two hundred Spaniards in garrifon; not reckoning 
others quarter’d about the ifland. They fir’d upon Ralegh’s fhips as he anchor’d in the road, 
tho* without much damage, and fet a great red ftandard up in defiance before his eyes. They 
fent moreover fix companies with their colours to entrench upon the fhore, in order to oppofe 
his landing. However Ralegh , in his barge, accompanied with Sir Arthur Gorges and captain 
IFilliamMorgan, rowed clofe along the fhore-fide, and by the high fort towards the town, to 

1 Sir Francis Vert , and Camden, mi fled bv the MS. of of the council , in one place; yet incur all their difplcnftire, 
his Commentaries, inform us, “ The general only, with by ulurping that of the general in another. Bui the dif- 
u his Squadron, was to go to F<*yal ; and Sir Walter advantageous representation which Vue has given of R a - 
** Ra/rgb, with his, either to the Pike or St. Georges iflind.” legh, in the feqticl of this action, may pretty well direct 
But it teems not likely, that Ralegh fliould have a com- us how we fliould credit his introduction to it. 
nund in chief, which he might execute, with approbation 


acquaint 


Digitized by 


Google 




cxvi 


The LIFE of 

acquaint Kitnfclf with the moft proper place for making a defcent when EJfex fhould arrive •, 
from whence they were faluted with divers musket-fhot, which they very fortunately efcap’d, 
having with them neither targets nor armour for their fafeguard. 

Upon thefe provocations, and the want they grew in of thofe necefiaries, wherewith they 
were both lately hurried from accommodating themfelves, and promis’d they fhould be fup- 
a coun -plied here *, Ralegh called a council of the captains and officers to conlult about taking of the 
town, if EJfex arrived not •, thinking it afhame to forbear fo fair a prize, fo near at hand, till 
they had carried all off; efpecially fince the enemy had begun the war upon them, and fo proudly 
dared them to their own defence. Further, thefe bravadoes, with the hopes of wealth in this 
goodly town, and the ranfom of houfes and prifoners, made all the mariners and foldiers not 
only ready to mutiny that they were fo long reftrain’d -, but refled on their commanders, as if 
this forbearance was the efTed only of their fear. And what made them the more eager was, 
that they faw no likelihood of other benefit by this voyage, than what was thus to be gotten 
afhore. Notwithftanding thefe murmurs, and that they heard no news of EJfex in two days, 
the council was divided and fome of the captains who were his moft flattering and fervile de¬ 
pendants, as Sir Guilly Merrick,* Sir Nicholas Parker , and others, were by no means for landing 
without his knowledge $ but Ralegh , with Sir JV. Brook , Sir A. Gorges, Sir JV. Harvey 1 
and many other commanders and gentlemen of his own fquadron, were of a contrary opinion * 
judging the general would repute them idlers and cowards to lie fo long before fo good a town 
with fo many (hips and men, and do nothing, but let them convey away their effeCls. This 
was the general voice both of the land and fea-forces •, yet the violent perfuafions of Merrick did 
fo prevail, that they agreed to delay the enterprize one day longer j when, if the earl did not 
come, they all agreed to land together. 

Now, the wind tacking about, fomewhat unfit for the road they lay in, Ralegh , and divers 
of his fquadron, with many other of the fhips after him, weighed, and coafied about the point to 
the north-weft fide of the ifland, fome four miles further from the town than they were before, 
and there let fall their anchors, being a better road than the firft, as the wind fat. But Mer¬ 
rick, with fome five or fix fhips of his conforts, would not advance with them. They were 
now in the fourth day of their arrival before Fayall , and no general appear'd j but the profpedt 
of a moft inviting country, full of little villages and fruitful fields, which fharpen’d the general 
defire of landing, to fupply their want of vi&uals, and efpecially of water, wherewith they had 
not been recruited fince their firft fetting out from Plymouth •, therefore, by agreement, they 
mann’d out a barge, a long-boat and pinnace, with threefcore muskets and forty pikes, rather 
to guard themfelves in watering, than in expectation of any encounter from the town or forts 
on the other fide of the ifland. But they were no fooner ready to put off from the fhips, than 
they difeover’d fix enfigns of foot, and fome dozen horfe-men, marching down fpeedily from 
the town and forts to meet them *, and made fuch haftc, that they foon poflefs’d the trenches to¬ 
wards the fhore where the Englijh lay, and where, with brandifhing fwords, and waving 
colours, they flood daring them to a rencounter. Hereupon, Ralegh found it neceflary to aug¬ 
ment his force, which Brook , Harvey , and other fea-officers, readily fupply’d, to the number 
of one hundred and fixty men more. Then faid Ralegh to them, ** feeing thcle Spaniards and 
“ Portuguefe are fo gallant to feek or follow, and keep us from watering, we will try our for. 
“ tunes with them, and either win our landing, or gain a beating.” As Ralegh then rowed 
along by his fhips, he was greeted by Bret, Sidney, White, Berry , and other captains of the 
Low-Country foldiers, who call’d out and advis’d him, “ to take them and fome of their com- 
“ panies with him j for, if he ventur’d to make the fhore only with mariners and his own at- 
“ tendants, without their land-foldiers, he might receive a difcreditable repulfe.” But Ralegh 
excus’d himfelf, faying, “ he did not know for what fervice the earl might defign them; there- 
fore wasrefolv’d, with his own company, to make the defcent, and then fhould fend for their 
, “ recruits ; by which he would undertake to lodge them that night in the town, and the next 
in the forts: befides, he was willing to make the attempt with thofe of his own fquadron, 
“ that neither the general nor his train fhould have caufe to be afham’d of them for under- 
“ taking that in the face of their enemies, which they durft not of themfelves follow and 

CC 



a Tin’s Guilly Merrick of Hanfcard ill Pemhrokejhirc, 
the Ion of Rtrwland Merrick , Bifhop of Bangor , who 
died 1566; was knighted by EJfex at the fack of Cadiz,, 
and one of his creatures and evil counfeJlors, as Camden 
has obferved. Jnfomuch, as having been a bufy pro¬ 


moter and partaker of the faid earls treafons, he receiv'd 
the reward which is richly due to all Juch-like fomenters 
of great mens pride, paflions and prejudices, between three 
and four years after this time, at bum. 


Then 


Digitized by LxOOQle 






CXV11 


\ 

) 

Sir WALTER RALEGH. 

Then Ralegh, having thus a party of two hundred and threefcore men, not half the num- Hisdange- 
ber of the enemy, made forward ; and while fome ordnance, he had judicioufly placed before rous c 
him in pinnaces, as clofe along the fhore as they could lie, were beating upon their trenches, 
he rulhed through or under them as fad as his oars could ply to the landing-place; which was 
guarded firft with a mighty ledge of rocks, fome forty paces long into the fea, and after¬ 
wards trench’d and flank’d with earth and ftone, having only a narrow lane between two walls 
left for their entrance. But now, as they approached (till nearer to the fhore, the enemies fhot 
flew down fo thick among them, that not only feveral of the common men, but of thofe who 
would before have pafled for very forward and valiant leaders, were much difmay’d ; infomuch 
that Ralegh, who moft glorioufly approv’d himfelf no lefs their chief in courage, than he was And fuperior 
in command, did not fpart openly to rebuke them aloud with many reproachful words. At coura S c - 
laft, when he faw them ftill linger, through confternation, as much to their danger as their 
difgrace, he commanded, with a loud voice, his watermen to row his own barge full upon the 
rocks, and bad as many as were not afraid, to follow him. Hereat fome boats ran in with us 
(fays my author) and out of them were landed Mr. Garrett , then a penfioner, afterwards earl 
of Kildare , Sir JV. Brook , Sir W. Harvey , Sir John Scott, Captain Henry Tbynne, Captain 
White, Captain Arthur Radford , Captain W. Morgan , Mr. Duke Brook , Mr. Thomas Rudge- 
way, Mr. Walter Chute, Mr. Henry Allen , Mr. Charles Mackart , and divers other gentlemen. 

So, clambering over the rocks, and wading dirough the water, he made his way pell-mell, Climbs the 
through all their fire, with fhot, pike and fword, up to the narrow entrance; where he fo re- rocks ' 
folutely purfued his afiault, that the enemy, after a fhort refiftance, gave ground *, and, when 
they faw his forces prefs falter and thicker upon them, fuddenly retiring, they caff away their 
weapons, and betook themfelves to the hills and woods. The like alfo did thofe who were in¬ 
trench’d higher: and thus did he win this difficult and dangerous landing, together with the wins a land- 
trenches of the enemy. A few of his men indeed were drowned and flain, more hurt, and a fog the 
couple of long-boats funk ; yet was not his lofs fo confiderable as to detrad from the juftice of trenches ' 
thofe congratulations which were paid him by the officers of the Low-Country forces, when, 
with fome of their companies, they arrived upon the ifland, and found the footing he had won 
fo ftrongly fortify’d and guarded. 

Ralech, thus recruited, being now near five hundred ftrong, thought beft to go through 
with the matter, and prepare the town in readinefs for EJJex. Therefore, he appointed Bret to 
the office of ferjeant-major, directed the other captains to advance their colours, marlhal the 
companies, and fo, in order, marched to the town, about four miles diftant from the landing- 
place. In their paflage divers of the enemy, who had before braved them with the greateft in- 
folence, came with white napkins at the end of (laves, and voluntarily abafed themlelves to offi¬ 
ces of the greateft fervility. There was indeed a way, two miles about, by which they might 
have paffed to the town, and avoided the high fort where the Spaniards lay in garrifon. But 
Ralegh, confldering the trouble of their march, the fultry heat of the weather, the hazards of 
delay, and, above all, the necelfity they were under of immediate fupplies, took the Ihortell 
courfe; refolving to bring fort and town all into one day’s work. Thus, at the head of about Marches to 
forty gentlemen of the bell rank, Ralegh led on the companies in a gentle regular manner, full d* high fort, 
in the face of the fort, having only his leading-ftaff in his hand, and no other armour on but 
his collar, for which he was fome what cen hir’d by his friends*, for, when they came within 
reach of the fort, they were (hrewdly encounter’d with feveral fierce dorms of great and 
fmall fhot, which came thundering down upon them from all parts of it, wounding feve¬ 
ral,* killing fome, and putting moft of his men into diforder : infomuch that Ralegh himfelf, 
with his little vanguard, was no fooncr pafs’d, and enter’d under the covert of their trenches and 
barricadoes at the declivity of a little hill, but the reft, compofing the main body of his forces> 
which, till now that they found themlelves under the mercy of the enemies fire, advanced in 
good order, begun to break their ranks, and, from marching, fell to running on in a draggling 
and confus’d manner till they were under the walls and trenches almoft as foon as their leader. 


a Among the reft, there was one captain William Mor- 
a brave old foldier, in this march; who, being re- 
proved by oar author, Sir A . Gorges , for coming to the 
fold only in his doublet and bofe, without either armour or 
target, anfwcr’d, That bis fitjb was of musket proof. Im¬ 
mediately after a musket-ball llruck him point-blank upon 
his belly, and, with the force of its own blow, fell fiat 
at hii feet, leaving only a black fpot or bruife upon his 


fkin; — thanks to the buckle that join’d his girdle; de- 
ferving to be repofited among thofe trophies in the temple 
of Mars, which witnefs he wants not one brother-foldier’i 
impenetrable fuit of mail, nor the fcven-fold fhicld of ano- 
tf , who can encounter his enemy behind the curtains only 
of a pair of proverbs, attefting How little armour will 
fuffice, that is well plac'd ; and, Ho w much fortune favours 
the bold . 


Digitized by 


Google 


X X 


who 




CXVIH 


The LIFE of 

xyho caipe fctPC iyelyfi-fcprc ypjds before them in a fteady and deliberate march. Ralegh was 
forfie^hat moved tP ftp fhi$ tumultuous and timorous courfe ; and more, to think that the 
enemy faw thepfelves ^fre the occafion of it ; therefore he cry’d out to Bret, Berry , and other 
cjjpjaips, demanding, «* If thefe were the men that fhould have done him fuch fervice in land- 
«« ing, and faved him from difhonour ? or this the manner of their Low-Country troops, to 
«« fhfvy fuch bafe cowardice at the firft fight of an enemy, and at the musket-fhot fo far off 
«* from a fort ?” The captains, who were thcmfelves brave enough, knowing die truth would be 
the beft apology, anfwer’d, “ That thefe companies who had behaved themfelves with fuch 
«* irrefolution, were indeed men taken out of Fluffing and Brill , the cautionary towns ; fo were 
“ raw foldicrs, who had ever lived in a fafe garrifon, and feldom or never feen an enemy, or en- 
“ counter’d with lhot in the field.” 

Being thus got under covert of the trenches and walls which the Spaniards had abandon’d, 
and retired to their fortifications on the top of the hill, Ralegh commanded captain Bret to ap¬ 
point a ferjeant or two, with a few fhot, to go view and difeover tfie way to the town, which, 
in many places, lay open, as well to the high-fort here in the way towards it, as to the other 
fort at the end thereof: and where the ways were fenced, they were ftill more dangerous ; it be¬ 
ing with low-piled walls of loofe ragged Hones, which Ralegh juftly fufpedted would incrcafe, 
rather than obftrud. the mifehiefs of their enemies artillery. Bret brought word of a general 
unwillingnefs in the lieutenants and ferjeants to undertake this difeovery, fo much under the 
command of the fort and hill j and that the troops were rather defirous of flipping by, in the 
moft hafty, difperfed and unobferved manner they could; which Ralegh wouid by no means 
luffer, through confideration of their fafety, without urging the regard he had to their credit 
ip this enterprize } for being by this time well inform’d, die ifland could raife a thoufand armed 
men, and, reafonably believing they would gather their greateft ftrength for the defence of their 
beft town, towards which he was now marching, he concluded they would have it more irv 
their power to defeat him, advancing in little diforderly and fcatter’d parties, than in a regu¬ 
lar united body. Bret did make fome offer himfelf to go and furvey thefe pafiages, if he 
fhould be exprejly commanded j but indeed it was found he could not be wanted, or fpared 
among his own raw and unexperienc’d troops. 

When Ralegh, therefore, faw all men fo fcrupulous of this undertaking, and efpccially 
t,liofe garrifon-foldiers, he told them, “ That he would not offer that to any man which he 
*.* would himfelf refufe: that tho’ it were not the duty and office of a chief commander to un- 
“ dergo fo ordinary a fervice, but what duly appertained to the inferior officers and foldiers j 
His fingular “ and, notwit hjlanding (faid he) that I could therefore enforce, others to do it , they J,hall well perm 

va our. ce ' ive ij Mt j m y g 0 i/ jal which they dare not attempt *, w;herein I am afham’d on their 

“ behalf, that our general and we arc all thus abufed in our opinion of thefe Low-Country fol- 
« diers.” Then he called for his cuirafs and his cask , and laid, “ he would both go view 
«* the way for them, which they made fb nice of, as alfo the paffages and afeents to the hill-top; 
** and, as well as he could, obferve the ftrength and fortifications thereof, for their better direc- 
“ tion the next morning.” Hereupon, captain Berry was very ready to go, “ and earneftly. 
“ defired me (fays our author) to divert our rear-admiral from undertaking it j and I there- 
“ upon (continues he) did openly difluade jiim, who commanded in chief, from putting his 
*« own perlbn to thefe inferior offices of hazard, fitter for a lieutenant or ferjeant, than himfelf to 
«* perform ; knowing that all the direction, as well of thofe troops, as allb of a whole fquadroti 
“ of die navy, did, at tint time, only reft upon him, in the abfence of the admiral and vice- 

“ admiral. Notwithftanding he was obftinate therein ; as well in fcorn of thofe who had refufed, 

“ as alfo, indeed, out of a defirc to be better inform’d of the ftrength and fortifications of the 
“ high fort. When I faw him refolved, I told him that I would, out of the love of a kinf- 
“ man in particular, and alfo out of an honeft regard, take fuqh part as he did, from whom 1 
“ had received many kind favours, and accompany him - y but notout of any great defire I had 
«* to go about a piece of work, which confided of much danger, and little honour in the per- 
“ formance. He thanked me for my offer, but yet wiihed me not to go, if it were againft 
“ my will: notwithftanding I accompanied him, and fo did fome eight or ten more of our 
** fervants and followers. But I fay truly, and fo afterwards it was much fpoken of, that there 
“ was not any one more of quality that did accompany him in that bufinefs.” 

I h> defyerate In this manner, and with this number, did Ralegh in perfon go *, the only one, it fcems, who 
diicovery. defpaircd not of fuccefs, to difeover the afeents to the hill; the cannon-fhot of the enemy, and 
thereby the ftones of the batter’d walls, flying on every fide thick about him all the while. He 
ftill proceeded, with an undaunted pace, to compafs this knowledge of the fafeft way by which 

lie 


Digitized by LiOOQle 














CX1X 


Sir WALTER RALEGH. 

lie was to lead the reft, tho* he perceived wounds and death dealt On either hand, and his own 
danger at every ftep, more unavoidable. Some of his company, in the march, were hurt, and 
two had their heads taken from their fhoulders \ Sir Arthur Gorges had his left leg (hot through 
with a musket-ball, who, without remembering any pain it gave him, obferves the bullet burnt 
both his filk (locking and buskin, as if they had been findged with a hot iron. “ I was then 
“ hard by die rear-admiral (continues he) who alfowas (hot through the breeches and doublet- ^^ wrr<111 
44 fleeves in two or three places. And dill they ply’d us fo faft with fmall-fhot, that, as I well 
4 * remember, be wifhed me to put off a large red fcarf which I then wore •, bring, as he fa id, a 
“ very fair mark for them. But I, not willing to do the Spaniards fo much honour at that 
44 time, tho’ I could have wi(hed it had not been on, anfwerM the rear-admiral again, 7hat 
“ bis white fcarf was as eminent as my red - and therefore I would now tollow his example.*’ 

Having, by this time, made a fufficient difeovery, both of the way for his troops to 
pafs, as alfo of the avenues to the high fort on the mountain, which he intended to attempt, af¬ 
ter he had fecur’d the town \ captain Berry , with Allen y and fome others, advanced to hirru 
Hereupon he fent fomc guides to captain Bret y with orders for him alfo to march up with the 
companies, that they might unite before they came to the town, becaufe he there expedlcd an 
engagement 9 or, at lead, fome falley out of the fort at the end thereof, which they muft needs 
pafs before they could get at the town and which feemed to threaten refinance, being a very 
fine fortification, all of ftone-work, with curtain, flankers, and ditch, very artificially caft. 

But immediately, upon Ralegh's approach with the body of his men, tbe Spaniards , it feems, 
abandon’d it* for when he enter’d it, he found they were newly departed. In like manner, as liters the 
fie marched on, he found the inhabitants had alfo forfaken the town, and left him in pofleflion tovvn * 
of it, with fucb wares and (lores as could not fuddenly be remov’d. Thus, tho* with much 
danger indeed, and fomc lob of about half a fcore men, with the hurt of little above double 
that number, Ralegh made himfelf matter, in efied, of the whole ifland j which fupply’d him, 
from his own experience, with an example to confirm the afimion, he afterwards took occalion 
to maintain, and which we have, in part, touch’d upon before; allcdging, 7hat a Country 
cannot prevent an enemy* i fleet from landing its army y without as good a fleet to eppofe it. * And 
this example* in his own fummary account, we have here fubjoin’d, as what may give the rea¬ 
der a double faris&ftioa, both in confirming the veracity of that which has been here exrra&ed 
thereof from Sir Arthur Gorges , and adding to the many other inftances of Ralegh's modefty 
and reftriftion* who could, in the recital of' this adiion, be fo much lefs particular in the brave 
fteps he took to this vi&ory, with the dangers and difficulties he furmounted by fea and land, 
thaa thathwoHrabJe hittorian has been* who was a witnels of them. 


44 * Tho difHcult landing of our Englijb, fays Raltgb % 
44 ztFayai, in the year 1597, is alledg’d againft this: 
44 VkihicK example ipoves me na way to think, That a 
u large Goa ft may be defended againfl a ftromg flat. I 
44 landed chofe Englijh in Fayal mylelf; and therefore 
44 ought to take notice of this induce — There were, in- 
" deed, lome in that voyage, who advifed me not to un- 
a dertake it, and I hearken’d to them fomewhat longer 
tc than was requifite; dpocraily. winlit they deli red. me to 
u oeferve the title of fitch an exploit, though it were 
•* not great, for a greater perfon. But when they began 
u ‘ tq. tel] me of dificvJtyj JL gaye them ta underltand the 
44 fame which I now maintain, That it were more difficult to 
14 defend a Coafi than to invade it. The truth is, that I 
44 could have landed my men with more cafe than I did; 
u y*** without finding any refinance, if I would have 
44 rowed to another place; yea, even there where I landed, 
44 if I would have taken more company to help me. But, 
44 without fearing any imputation of ndhnefs, I may fay, 
44 1 had more regard of reputation m that bufinefs than 
44 flfcty: for, I thought it belonging to the honour of 
u our prince and nation, that a tew iflanders fhould not 
44 -think any advantage great enough againft a fleet fet 
44 forth by ELIZABETH. And turther, I was un- 
44 willing that fome Low- Country captains, and others, not 
44 of my own fquadron, whole aftiftance I had refufed, 
44 Ihould pieafe themfelves with a fweet conceit (tho* it 
44 would have been Ihort, when I had. landed in lome 
44 other place) That, far want of their help, I was driven 
44 to turn tail. Therefore, I took with me none but 
44 men allured, commanders of my own fquadron, with 
44 fome of their followers, and a few other gentlemen vo- 
44 lunhers, whom I could not refofe ; as. Sir W. Brook , 
41 Sir W. Harvey, Sir A. Gorges , Sir John Scott , Sir Tho- 
44 mas Ridgeway, Sir Henry Thyme , Sir Charles Morgan, 
41 Sir Wat. Chute, Marcellas Throgmorton , captain Lau- 
44 rewe Key mis, captain William. Morgan, and others ; 


44 fuch as well understood themfelves and the enemy,, by 
44 whofe help, with Goj’s favour, i made good- the en- 
44 terprizel undertook. As for # the working of the Jia, th^ 
44 Jh*pneft of tho cliffs, and other troubles, that were not 
44 new to us, we overcame them well enough. And thelc 
44 (notwithlianding) made five or fix' Companies of the 
44 enemy, who fought to impeach our landing, abandon 
44 the wall where tneir musketier* lay on the rcA for us, 
44 and won the place of them without any great lok. 
44 This I could have done with Id's- danger, lb that ir 
44 Ihould no: have ferved for example of a rule that failed 
44 even in this example. But the rcafons before alledged, 
44 together with other renions well known to the gentle-' 
44 men above-named, tho* more private than to bo here 
44 laid down, made me rather follow the way of bravery, 
44 and take the fhortell courfe; having it Ail! in my own 
44 power to fall off when ] fhould think it meet. *fisea- 
44 Jily faid, the enemy was more than a coward, which was* 
44 more than we knew; neither will 1 magnify fuch a* 
44 fmall piece of fervice, by leeking to prove him better 
44 whom, had I thought equal to my own followers, L 
44 would otherwife have dealt with. But, for fo much as 
44 concerns the proportion in hand, he that beheld this, 
44 may well remember, that the fame enemy troubled os 
44 more in our march towards Fay at, than in our taking 
44 thefhore; that many of our men uere (lain or hurt by 
44 him, among whom. Sir Arthur Gorges was (hot in that- 
44 march ; and that fuch as, thinking all danger was pa A 
44 when we had won good footing, would needs follow u*> 
44 to the town, were driven by him to forfake the pace of 
44 a man of war, and betake themfelves to a hally trot.** So- 
he ends the curious digrefiion which introduced this exam* 
pie, with advice to employ, againft thofe that fhould ai.ail • 
us, our good Jhtps on the fa, and not truft to any intrench - 
ment upon the fhore, Hij/ory of the Wot U, lib. 5, cap.-1. 
fe&. 9. 

This 


Digitized by kjOOQie 




cxx 


The LIFE of 

This town, of which Ralegh was thus poflefs’d, was called Villa Dorta , as I find in Lin. 
fthoten •, who alfo informs us, the people were moftly of the Dutch offspring, yet ufing the Por- 
tuguefe language. Others, who likewife defcribe it, reckon that it contain’d, even fome years 
before this time, at leaft five hundred houfes, built all of ftone, with tiled roofs, and difpofed 
into fine ftreets; befides a handfome church, nunnery, and friery ; interfpers’d with many plea- 
fant gardens of delicate fruits, and wells of frefh water: infomuch that, for bignefs, it has 
been compar’d to Plymouth or Yarmouth ; but, in fituation, to Dover j and might probably now 
have been of as good advantage to Sir Walter Ralegh , as it was, eight years before, to the 
earl of Cumberland ,* had he not, in compliment to the earl of EJfex, oblig’d himfelf to fo 
difadvantageous a delay in the conqueft of it. However, becaufe the town was unwall’d, and 
he was to expeft, if he lay there open and carelefiy refrefhing himfelf, while his foldiers were 
fcatter’d about in queft of provifions, he might eafily be furpriz’d, without fome good orders 
and directions given before they fell to reft and repaft, he iffued forth, at his entrance, a procla¬ 
mation, that none fhould ftraggle twcnty-lcore yards from the town, without leave of an officer, and 
then go upon their guard, with fit weapon and company. He then made fome ftrong barrica- 
does * planted a good watch in proper ftadons, and a ftrong corps de garde in the market-place, 
that others might, in fafety, bring together fuch booty as the inhabitants had left behind. 

Thus, having refrefhed and repofed themfelves all night, the next morning, being the twenty- 
fecond of September , even before break of day, they difeover’d, bearing in with full fail towards 
the road of Fayal t the earl of EJfex and his fleet > he having been, all this while, making a 
kind of wild-goofe chafe after Indian fleets, and the Adelantado , who, it feems, never ftirr’d 
out to fea this year; with other-like uncertain adventures. Now, Sir Guilly Merrick, Sir Chri - 
ftopher Blount, Sir Anthony Shirley , and fome other fatal friends and cheriffiers of the earl’s in¬ 
firmities, foon interrupted, by their aggravating and diftorted reprefentations, all Ralegh's fur¬ 
ther intentions to fecure the ifland. They prefently poflefs’d his lordfhip’s head, that Ralegh 
had taken this opportunity to play over his parts, and fhew the world how well he could aCt the 
conqueror , only to fteal honour and reputation from the general and they knew the earl’s 
temper was as ready, as tinder, to catch fire at the leaft fpark of any fuch fuggeftion: for, as 
no man alive was a morepaffionate courtier of fame, or moredefirous to be reputed matchlels 
for magnanimity and enterprize ; fo none was more jealous of rivals than EJfex , or could lefs 
endure that any man fhould obfeure his glory, how highly foever he might otherwife be in his 
favour. b Bat in divers other difagrecable colours, this gallant aCtion was further disfigur’d to 
the earl, as the contempt and violation of authority; from whence they infus’d, that the pre- 
fumption of landing fuch forces without his lordfhip’s leave, was not to be pafs’d over without 
fevere punifhment; and that it was fit a court-marfhal fhould be call’d, to cenfure the offence 
and breach of order and difeipline. In fhort, the unpardonable crime was, that Ralegh dar’d 
to render himfelf more confpicuous than any body elfe. And he had been lefs culpable, had 
he been lefs fuccefsful •, they feeming rather willing to have endur’d blame for any ill fuccefs 
which might have occurr’d to him by their abfence and reftraint of aid, than allow of any praife 
for his being victorious without them. Nay, there were not wanting fome, among EJfex' s com¬ 
manders, who would needs fhew the violence of their zeal for his lordfhip in fuch extreams, 
as to throw out, that Ralegh was well worthy of lofing his head for his labour. All which 
might well infpire thofe folid and durable expofures which he has, in feveral places, made of 
fuch envious and infolent ufage. e Essex, 


• In a brief relation of the feveral voyages undertaken 
in perfon by, or at the charge of Geoige Clifford, earl of 
Cumberland ; gather'd by Purcbas into his fourth volume: 
we have it affirm’d, page 1143, that in 1 589 the earl took 
this town ; that he mipped, from the platform, j8 pieces 
of iron ordnance; and that he had a ranfom paid him of 
2000 ducats, moftly in church-plate : but the fortification, 
which he raz’d, was now new-built, and more ftrongly 
fortify’d, being the high fort on the hill, by which Ralegh 
made his dangerous paflage, as is above related. 

b ** And that this is true (continues Sir A . Gorges) 
ft thofe who underftood his humour beft, cannot jitftly 
44 deny; which, I proteft, I do not fpeak either out of 
«< any negleft of one that is dead, or to pick thanks of 
44 any that lives; but Amply out of a refolution to write 
44 an impartial truth, or elfe be fllcnt. For thofe fpi- 
41 rits that bafe flattery or fervile fear doth tranfport, in 
“ faffiioning their hiltories, are, of all others, to be re- 
44 puted the unworthidl and molt pernicious in a well pol- 
44 licy’d commonwealth; for we fee that thofe heathens 
44 who have written the Stories of Cyrus, Pyrrhus, Altxan- 
44 der , Hannibal , Scipio, Ctfar , and all other great kings 
“ and renowned heroes, do as well tax them for their 


44 vices, as glorify them for their virtues: for who lives 
44 without fault ? And fo fincerely and boldly do they fol- 
44 low the truth in their writings, that they are thereby 
44 freed from malice or revenge, becaufe they are free 
44 from all partiality ; or, if any fpleen arife, yet it is fe-. 
44 cret; for the prolecution of fuch fincerity, is reputed mere 
44 impiety in all forts, and flat tyranny in princes. And, 
•* to conclude; this impotent humour of enduring ri- 
44 nsality, and other menspraifes, is very incident to men in 
•* high places ; efpccially, if they are of great courage, 
44 or tickled with ambition.” 

« “ There are multitudes of men (fays Ralegh) efpe- 
** dally of thofe that follow the war, who both envy 
44 and malign others, if they perform any praife-worthy 
•• aflions for the honour and fafety of their own country, 
44 tho’ themfelves may be allured to bear a part of the 
44 fmart of contrary fuccefs; and fuch malicious hearts 
44 can rather be contented that their prince and country 
44 fhould fufFer hazard and want, than that fuch men as they 
44 miflike fhould be theauthorsora&orsofany glory or good 
4t to either.” Hijl of the IVarld, lib. 2. cap. 13. fed. 5. 

And in another place he has thi> reflexion — 41 Jn 
44 actions which promife either publick glory or private 

•• honour. 


Digitized by boogie 




CXX1 


Sir WALTER RALEGH. 

Essex, thus exafperated, fpenr all the forenoon in reprehending, difpl.icing and confining 
all the land-captains and officers who accompanied Ralegh ; whillt he, expecting rather thanks, 
than fuch a perverfe interpretation of his fervices, made ready his barge to go on board the 
general and guide him to the land. But, being entered his fhip, he found all mens counte¬ 
nances eftranged as he paffed through them j and when he came to his cabbin, the earl, after a 
flint welcome, began to accufe him with “ the breach of order and articles. ’ Ralegh anfwer’d, Accufrd 
“ he knew not wherein he had been guilty of fuch breach.” EJJex replied, “ there was an article 
“ that none fhould land any of the troops without the general’s prefence, or his order.” Ralegh 
defired leave to defend himfelf by tbofe laws which himfclf as well as others had nude, anil 
his lordftiip, with the council of war, had authoriz’d > then he Ihould find that no mifdemcanor 
had been committed. “ For, faid he, there is an article indeed, that no captain of any fhip, 

♦« or of any company, if he be feparated from the fleet, (hall land any-wberc without direc- 
“ tion from the general, or fome other principal commander, upon pain of'deatli. But I take Hisjufimca- 
my felf, faid Ralegh , to be a principal commander under your lordfhip, and diercfore not fob- tl0n ' 

“ jedt to that article, nor under the power of the marflul-law becaufe a focccflivc commander 
«* of the whole fleet, in her majefty’s letters patents, your lordfhip and my lord Thomas Howard 
failing. Befides, you agreed I (hould land at this ifland with your lordfliip, whom I liave 
«* attended thefe four days j and, finding that you came not, tlio’ you were half a dozen leagues 
« before me in your way thither, I weighed anchor, and could not but conclude, both that you 
“ thought me ftrong enough to take this ifland, and were gone your felf to take in fome other*. 

«« Yet I refrained fo long from landing, at Sir Cuilly Merrick's entreaty, that 1 heard my 
« own company, even at my back, murmur j and fay that I durft not attempt it. And, to 
tell you the plain truth, ray intent, at firft, was only to water, till I law them follow me in 
“‘that braving manner 5 which, with our reputations, we could not then lhun and giver over, 

“ being already in our boats for that purpofe: for, if I had intended the taking of the town, 

“ I would never have removed lb far from our firft road, which lay right before it” As for 
thofe officers and gendemen who had been committed, Ralegh defired “ they might receive no 
*« hard meafurc in his caufe; whatfoever his lordftiip conceived to be mildor.e, he mull take it 
wholly on himfelf to anfwer, being, at that time, commander in chief.” 

With thefe and other arguments EJJex was fo well pacified, thar he went afhore into the 
town, and refted himfelf in Ralegh’s lodging. There Ralegh invited him to fupper, and of 
fet’d, if he meant to call the matter further in queftion, to claim no privilege or favour ; but 
would anfwer for himfelf more amply in the morning. Sir Cbrijlopher Blount, taking the earl’s an¬ 
fwer from him, faid, “ hethoughttny lord would not fop at all.” To which Ralegh reply’d, “ That, 
for his own appetite, he might, when he was invited, difable ft at his own plea fore; but if the 
“ earl would ftay, he Ihould be glad of his company.” In the mean time, the lord Thomas Howard, 
very nobly taking care that no difrcfpedlfol treatment Ihould be offer'd to Ralegh , by the practice 
of his enemies, dealt with EJJex to find how he flood rcfulved ; and, the next morning, allured 
Ralegh, that his lordftiip fought only fome acknowledgment j becaufe the reft would think him 
a weak and tame commander, if he had not fetisfadlion. Ralegh , confidering he had done 
nothing unjuftifiable, and very certain that be was fucceflively in the coramiffion for the whole 
command of the fleet, therefore not fubjed to any corporal danger, as alfo of the lord 
Thomas Howards finccre and honourable dealing, came again in the morning to vifit EJJex : 
otherwife, remembering the little truft that men ought to repofe in fuch reconciliations, and the 
ftrong malice borne him by others in greateft favour with hi* lordfhip, had defign’d to betake 
him to his own fquadron ; and fo to have defended himfelf, or forfaken the earl. But the 
lord Thomas , after having given his honour with great kindnefs and refolution, diat he would 
make himfelf a party if any wrong or violence were offered, a contrary to his lordfhip’s pro- 


“ honour, men may be rcafonably perfuaded to adventure 
“ lile and living, becaufe great hope there is to die with 
“ reputation, or live to recover that peace which war hath 
“ conlum’d: but, where men axe no lefs opprefs’d by 
“ iofeicucy of commanders, than by infolency of foes, 
“ there is tlie calamity double ; and, of two evils, the 
“ danger of war teems leail; for that has end, the other 
“ is iiii.nite." Sir W. Ralegh's Jrts of Empire, and My- 
frnn ol Shut etifcabinaUel, 8vo. 1692. p 1*2. 

* Sir Tranus Vert fays, that every one being to deliver 


his opinion of Ralegh's crime, it was grieroufly aggra¬ 
vated by the moll : And adds; " for nty part, no man 
“ thew’d lefs fpleen againft him than my (elf.” Which lalk 
expreflion may imply a truth in relaticn to himfclf, by grant¬ 
ing, that he (hewed Ralegh feme fpleen ; yet a fallhood, in 
regard to others 1 becaufe, as here we fee, the lord Thomas 
HnvarR was fo far from bearing Ralegh an) fpleen, that he 
reiolvod to take his part againtt any "inju'-y that Ihould be 
ofter'd upon this occation. 


y y 


mile, 


Digitized by boogie 




cxxn 


The town 
fir’d 


Three Spa- 
nijh prizes 
taken. 


The LIFE of 

tnife, perfuading him to go and fatisfy the earl, Ralegh took his counicl j and all tilings, aftei 
a little debate, came to a calm and quiet conclufion. * 

The promoters of this difturbance, however thus difappointed of their end, fcrupled not 
to (hare in the benefits of this reproved victory, by lodging and refrefhing themfelves not only 
that night, but three or four days after, in the goodly town aforefaid $ yet were they juftly 
punifh’d for their envy and ingratitude. For, had that time which they fpent in carping and 
cavilling at Ralegh' s condudt, throughout this brave a£lion, been employ’d, according to his 
meafures, in purfuing it •, the birds, which thereby they fuffer’d to fly out of their cage, had 
well rewarded their unanimity in taking them} and they would not have loft, as now they had, 
the ranfom of fo many Spanijh prifoners out of the high fort; nor the fpoil which diey had 
convey’d out of the town for fafety to that place: fo that inftead of aftiftance to advance the 
profit of this conqueft, EJfex's arrival brought only means, as far as in them lay, to deftroy 
the honour of it. 

After the army had plentifully regaled themfelves with the beft provifions the ifland would 
afford, and the difgrac’d captains were receiv’d again into favour and command, they hoifted 
fail; having firft, in honour of their loft men, made the town it felf their funeral pile, and 
carried all the artillery, and other ftores they found therein, or in the forts, to their fhips. 
Qn the 26 th of September , they caft anchor at Graciofa , where the chiefs of the ifland coming 
on board the general, fubmitted themfelves with very acceptable humiliation, and willingly 
brought fuch provifions as were requir’d for their compcfition. This homage of thole people 
banifh’d all thoughts in the earl of further repairing, in that place, the great charges he prin¬ 
cipally had created by this voyage: for, whether it was through a generous valour, or the cap¬ 
tivation of fome inferior quality, I pretend not to decide ; but he feemed fo charm’d with fub- 
miffion, as to have difregarded the advantages it might have yielded ; and fonder of having a power 
over his enemies, than of making any effectual ufc of it. When they came to St. Michael's ., 
they heard tidings of th t Indian fleet $ at which, moft joyful acclamations rung through all their 
fhips: within few hours after, they encounter’d and took three Spanijh prizes, bound from the 
Havanna. The greateft of them, being about four hundred tons burden, was a very rich 
fhip, as well for the lading, as the paflengers in her j and this, if not the other two, was ta¬ 
ken by Ralegh *, who, being neareft, gave chace, caufed her to ftrike and to yield. Thcfe 
three fhips, efpecially the laft, were laden with cocheneal, and other profitable merchandize, 
befides the filver, gold, pearl, civit, musk, ambergreafe, found among the paflengers, 
and acknowledg'd, by the merchants in them, to be richly worth above four hundred thoufand 
ducats. When Ralegh had enquir’d, from the gallery of his own fhip, of thofe who had com¬ 
puted the value of thefe commodities, and been fatisfy’d it would at leaft amount to that 
fum, he privately faid to our author; “ Altho’ we fhall be little the better for thefe rich 
“ prizes, yet I am heartily glad, for our general’s fake; becaufe they will, in great mea- 
«* fure, give content to her majefty •, fo that there may be no repining againft diis poor lord 
“ for the expence of the voyage.” Thefe fhips made a difeovery of forty fail of Spanijh India- 
men , whereof fome were freighted with the king of Spain's treafure j and it was reported, that 
while three or four of the Englijh fleet, which were fallen among them, were rifling one that 
founder’d, the reft efcaped, and recover’d the fere era. EJfex , upon this mifchance, call’d a 
council of war ; and fome of the colonels, with other land-officers, made liberal profeffions of the 
daring feats they would attempt, if boats, pinnaces and men were allow’d, how vain and im¬ 
practicable loever they feem’d to the fea-commandcrs. For they offer’d, with fifteen hundred 
men, to take both that ifland and the forts ; but thefe, knowing the difficulty of landing them, 
with their artillery, on fo dangerous a place, in fo bad a feafonj befides the ftrength of the for¬ 
tifications, fo well furnifh’d by this new arrival, could not, cordially and ferioufly, give their 
confent, but urged many realons to the contrary ; b yet, when the lord Thomas Howard per¬ 
ceived this incompliance would be ufed as a handle at home for their lofing the Spanijh fleet 


• Sir Henry Met ton, having given us one example of 
fJTix'b Ji(verity in thi* voyage, where he threw a foldier, 
with his own hand, out ol a (hip; produces another of 
his facility , as he calls it, in conniving at this bold trefpafs 
of Ra/rgb's : At which time he let tall (continues he) a 
mbit word, being prefs’d by one (whole name he needs 
not remember) that he would put Ralegh, at leaf*, upon a 
marlhal-court. That I would Jo, anfwer'd EJfex, if be were 
not n:y f iend ; for fo wc have it in the hrft edition* of 
Sir Henry's Parallel, both in 4 to and l 2 mo ; but in the 
fuccceding editions wc read, as I remember, EJfex 's 


anfwer to be, Mat I would do, if he were my friend; which 
laft, if the right reading, being ftill perhaps capable of 
more conftrultions than my author has m*de of it, accord¬ 
ing to the difpofition ol the readers towards the perfons 
concern’d, I therefore leave to their paraphrale. 

k Tho* our author Gorges, for brevity, omits thefe rea- 
fons; yet they may be partly gather’d from the oblerva- 
tions Ralegh himielf afterwards made on the ftrength of 
the Tercera , badnefs of the harbour, number of the torts, 
and efpecially the fituation of that at Angra ; in his Hifl . 
of the World, lib. 5. cap. 1. fc£l. 9 and 10. 


and 


Digitized by 


Google 










Sir WALTER RALEGH. cxxiii 

ahd treafure, he told EJJex, that if he was fo forward to have it attempted, both himfelf and 
Sir Walter Ralegh were ready to venture as far as any of them j and that they wotild undertake 
to fpare three thoufand able men out of the fleet for the lervice: but this fecond offer, thus ab- 
folutely and folemnly made, tho’ of double the number, cool’d their courage, upon a little 
deliberation, who had made even the firft \ and fo the vapour was difpell’d. 

Hence they return’d again to St. Michael’s ifland, which they had left upon the intelligence 
aforcfaid •, and in this road EJJex, with a great number of his officers, coming on board Ra¬ 
legb' $ (hip, hung out the flag of council; wherein they confider’d about landing, and taking of 
the fair town which lay fo temptingly before their eyes, being unwall’d, and having but a flight 
fort for its defence by the fea-fide. EJJex was for landing all the companies immediately } but 
Rulegh defired that himfelf might firft go and furvey the place > becaufe k the billows were here, in 
fome parrs, no lefs dangerous than where he had made the experiment: at Fay a l: the earl, at firft, 
confented; but, as Ralegb was putting off, EJJex (landing in his gallery with Sir Cbrijlopbrr 
Blount , called him back in great hade, and faid he would go himlelf. As he was defeending 
into his barge, Ralegb , feeing him altogether unarm’d, except with his collar and fword, called 
aloud to him, and “ defired him to take his cask and target of proof with him, if he dc- 
« figned to approach the fhorc ; feeing fo many muskets (above four hundred) lying there on 
«* •* the reft to oppofehim.” But EJJex anfwcr’d, “ That he would have none, becaufe he dif- 
“ dain’d to take any advantage of the watermen who rowed him for which our author cen¬ 
tres him, 1 as he had before done Sir IValter Ralegb. However, in viewing of thofe landing- 
places, EJJex and his officers kept cautioufly enough beyond the reach even of culverin-fhot j 
therefore, no fuch temerity in leaving the armour behind. Thus, after many offers and furveys, 
made aloof ((ays Gorges) the conveniences of that place for landing were excepted againft. “ Al- 
«* beit, adds he, in truth it was a fair and fandy beach (as all the fleet might well perceive) was 
«* fome four or five miles from the town or fort, and much more eafy than that of Fayal, where 
“ we before won our landing: and that this was true, many now living tliat were prefent, and 
“ faw both, can juftly affirm.” Yet our author proceeds to diftinguilh, that the earl was re- 
folute enough of himfelf, and ready to undertake any good occafion of fervice ; but “ was then 
“ fo led and accompanied with fuch politick land-captains, that, of all the fervices which fell 
** under deliberation, thofe commonly, which were inoft unfeafible, were offer’d to be under- 
“ taken, and thofe mod practicable rejefted j whereby our affairs ((ays he) fped accordingly. 

This defeent being thus difliked, it was prefontly, in another confultation, refolv’d, that Ra¬ 
legb (hould, with all the great (hips, lie as near before the town of St. Michael as he could 
to keep them in continual alarm •, while EJJex, in a pinnace of Ralegh's , call’d the Guiana , with 
about two thoufand men in boats, (hould, by night, convey themfelves about fix miles fur¬ 
ther than their firft determin’d landing, to the town called Villa Franca. Accordingly, they all 
landed the next morning at this town, without any manner of refiftance, while the fleet 
kept the other in fuch conftant dread and confiifion, that they could not regard their neigh¬ 
bours ; to the end that the Englijb army, having fecured thofe, might the better fall on the 
back of thefe. But in vain did the fleet look over the hills and plains, in expectation of them j 
for that other plealant town of Villa Franca , had fo enchanted the army, being full of fruits, 
wines, and frelh victuals, that the commanders, as well as their foldiers, were content there to 
take up their quarters, without further thoughts of St. Michael's town ; and, for fix days together. 

Jay fealling, and carrying on board the wheat, fait, woad, and other merchandize, into cer¬ 
tain private mens (hips that followed the fleet for fuch purpofes. While Ralegb lay thus at an¬ 
chor, there came into the road a fhip of Brafil laden with the woods of that name, and of 
Fernambuc, with fugars as well as other merchandize ; and anchor’d full in the midft of the 
Englijb fleet. This (hip, as Sir Francis Vere alfo informs us, was taken by Sir Walter Ra¬ 
legh ; b and her cargo, when brought into England, was very faithfully difpos’d of by our au- dier'prizeT 
thor, Gorges , to defray the expellees of all the men in Ralegh's own (hip, to the number of four 
hundred, reckoning foldiers as well as mariners. Soon after, a huge carrack, of eighteen hun¬ 
dred ton burden, and infinite wealth, fays Gorges , being laden with the riches of the eaft and 


• 49 In my opinion (fays Gorges) tho* that anfwer 
4 * much (hewed his valour; yet became it not the place 
“ that my lord held : for, in truth, a general ought 
“ not to be lo adventurous and carelefs of himfelf upon 
“ f v « r Y (light occafion, nor to go unarm'd to places of 
imminent peril. Homer deferibes the valiant heroes and 
“ brave leaders of the Greeks , to be bed arm’d ; as 

•* A Lilia, Jjjx t &c. — Infomucii that their very arms 


44 are famous to thefe days, the ufe whereof we make 
44 now fcornful. But they are no beaten foldiers in the 
44 wars who hold thefe opinions; for it is truly faid. That 
44 a great and wife general Jbculd die old ; and I have 
44 read, that Efaminondas was lin’d by his countrymen 
44 the Thebans , for being too forward and ferving in a 
44 battle unarm’d, tho* he won the vitfory.’* 
b Vcri s Commentaries, fol. 6o. 


weft. 


Digitized by 


Google 


j 




CXXiV 


A rich car- 
rack fir’d. 


His dangers 
and diitrefs i; 
returning 
home. 


The LIFE of 

weft, came bearing in with all her fails, aJfo among them \ whom (he miftook for die 
Spanijb Armada “ For the king of Spain’s men of war, when he made fleets, were 
“ compounded of (hipping of divers nations (as this author continues) and therefore more 
“ difficultly diftinguifh’d from ours, • which at that time confided of Englijb and Holland 
“ bottoms, befides a great galleon (before-nam’d) and other Spanijb veffds they had taken.” 
At fight of this carrack, Ralegb gave orders throughout his fleet to take in all their flags j alfo that 
none (hould weigh anchor, fire a gun, or put off a boat without leave. But, as (he was bear¬ 
ing in, one of the Holland fquadron, contrary to dire&ion and to all diferetion, fuddenly 
weighed anchor, hoifted top-fail, and, as (he approach’d, made rwo or three (hot at her j 
whereupon, perceiving her miftake, (he nimbly changed her courfe - t at which inftant, the wind 
changing alfo, fo that (he could not efcape outwards ; “ (he, with the help thereof, and the 
“ fear of falling into our hands, fays Gorges, run herfelf a-ground clofc under the town and 
** fort.” Here, finding Ralegh follow her, and her danger inevitable, (he diftharg’d her men 
in the boats that flock'd about her, with fome of her wares, and was then inflantly fet on fire 
in many places at once. Ralegh and his men (till purfued to board her, and prevent her lofs > 
tho’ not without great danger in his row-barge as he was, tl\e furge being very outrageous •, but 
by then he could get up to her, (he was all over thunder and lightning * her ordnance difeharging 
from every port, and her whole hulk, mafts, cordage, and furniture, over-run with (uch a 
thorough, yet diftinfl and unconfus’d blaze, as reprefented the figure of a (hip more per fed ly 
in fire, than could be done by any painter with all his art and colours: and, when (he was con. 
fumed even to the furface of the water, (he exhal’d, as her laft breath, fuch clouds from her 
fpicy entrails, as, for a great way, and for many hours, perfum’d the air and coaft around. 
Had the army then been at St. Michael?% town, as was expeded, it might have fecured this 
(hip before (he could have difembark’d her men, or, if it had terrify’d her back to fea, (he 
muft have been taken by the fleet; and then the treafures (he contain’d, with thofe in this town, 
might probably have reimburfed the charges of their voyage ; fince our author, laying this 
lofs upon the faid land-forces, thought it fo much to be lamented, that they were not to be 
excufed. h 

Neither EJJtx nor his army being heard of in all this time, Ralegh was in a confutation 
about drawing up the fleet towards him, when he perceiv’d the earl’s (hip, by her flag, turn¬ 
ing out from the point of Villa Franca. Then Ralegh , taking captain Morgan in his barge, 
rowed to him, and, the fame night, fent the captain back with diredions, in the general’s name, 
to command all the fleet to weigh and come to that town. It much grieved the mariners, to 
fee the unprofitable meafurcs which were thus taken, and that they muft relinquifh the advan¬ 
tages they might have nude of the town before which they lay. When the fleet was got up 
to the army at Villa Franc a, a general command was given that all the companies (hould re¬ 
pair to their refpedive lhips, for the time of year was approached that the winds and waves be¬ 
gan to rife too high for them to ride on thofe coafts any longer: fo they left this town alfo en¬ 
tire, upon what confidcrations our author knew not, but thought the woad-mongers and corn- 
merchants might be molt likely to refolve the queftion. 

On the ninth of OElober they fet fail for England. , and, after three or four days, were vio¬ 
lently tofs’d about and difpers’d in a moft tempeftuous fea. Ralegh’s (hip was near being 
ftemm’d by the (hock (he received from another that was driven againft her, whereby (he be¬ 
came fo leaky, that he had much ado to keep her above water. He was further in fuch great 


a Sir iValter Ralegh, in li la diftourfc tombing a <war <witb 
Spurn, and cur protection of the Netherlands has difcover’d 
many other difadvantnges in the Spanijb fleets of thefe 
times, thiough this medley of dipping whereof they were 
compos’d ; a* the diverfity of conduct and fwiftnefs in 
them, whereby they could not cither a flail or defend in 
grofs as the Englijb or Dutch could. Alio the confufion 
among their manners, of fo many different countries, and 
confequcntly languages ; fo as not to underfland diredions, 
ami take them io general, or even miiiakc them, to tho 
lofs of their lhip: befides, being of fuch ilrange nations, 
unconcem d in the quarrels they were forced into, they 
fought with their hands, but not their hearts; and defir’d 
liberty rather than vidory. See Ralegh's Three di/courfes, 
fcvo. 1702. p. 13, 14. 

w “ for (as Sir A.Gorges continues) no good reafon could 
• 4 be yielded, as was thought, nor durlt be demanded. 
4i why fo gallant a company, foeafily landed, for fogood 
“ a purpoic, fbould fo long linger in a little town, fur- 
" kiting ilicmiclves and the whole army upon fruits and 


44 wine, to the negled of the fervice determin’d ? But it 
44 wasmanifclf, that, befides their plea lure and good cheer, 
44 the great ftore of woad, com and fait, did entice fome 
44 land-men of good credit, who hnd fhips there of their 
4 * own, rather to take the peaceable and private benefit 
44 thereof, than to undergo iome pain and peril for the 
44 winning of St. Michael's town for the publick good. 
44 This was a piece of fervice very unfortunately neglc&t- 
44 cd, but upon what good reaion I could never learn; 
“ and I am perfuaded, that if his lordlhip had built lefs 
44 upon fome mens violent counlcls and vain conceits, he 
44 might have done many things better, and long have 
44 lived in great profperity : but all his care was to content 
44 and win unto him certain politicians and martial-men, 
“ whom, notwithllanding, he found many times ungr*tc- 
44 fully to dcA with him, to leive their own turns ; draw- 
•• ing him, withal, into ambitious humours and aifcfta- 
“ rions of popularity ; which, with our great men, rarely 
“ iuccecd well. 


diftrefs 


Digitized by 


Google 












cxxv 


Sir WALTER RALEGH. 


diftrefe for want of drink, that Sir Arthur Gorges proffer’d one of the victuallers fix cherts of 
fugar for fix hogfheads of frefh water, but could not obtain it: infomuch that they were forced 
to fet their great ftills on work to furnifh themfelves in the beft manner they could. During this 
ftorm, ’tis alfo obferved, many forts of birds flew into his fhip •, and the dove, that came among 
them, was look’d upon to prefage the calm that enfued two days after. When they began to 
meet again, they defery’d, at a great diftance, the earl of EJfex, accompanied with only two 
little barks; who, about a week before, was attended with fourfeore fail of good fhips. 
** A true type, fays Gorges , of this world’s inconftant pomp, which the wind and feas did 
“ faithfully teach us not to build too much upon! And I wifli our noble general, adds he, 
“ for his own fake and better fortune, had made that good obfervation thereof.’’ 

After hailing and faluting one another, they confulted with their mafters and pilots about 
the beft courfe homewards, wherein they of Ralegh'% fhip varied much from thole who guided 
the earl’s: and tho’ EJfex had the directions of John Davis , a navigator of much experience 
and repute, who could have carried them, without error, to many diftant parts of the world > 
yet, in conducing the fhips home to their own coaft, did he ftrangely fail in his pilotage and 
conjecture for the Jleeve. However, all follow’d the admiral, and when he thought he was not 
far from the entrance of the Channel , all hands fell to founding for ground j and, at laft, found 
it; tho’ indeed “ I faw few the wifer thereby, fays our author, or the more aflured of the 
“ coaft,* except the fkilful mafter of Ralegh' s fhip, old Broadbent, who knew it to be the 
« banks of Scilly .” But there was no convincing of EJfex ; fo all followed his erroneous light j 
yet Ralegh kept at fome diftance behind all night-long. At break of day, tho’ it was clofe 
and foggy, he perceived how providentially he had efcaped deftruCtion in the dark and dange¬ 
rous paflage he had made clofe by thofe fatal rocks call'd the Bijhop and his Clerks. Soon af¬ 
ter he alfo difeerned EJJex, and many with him, about three leagues before, bearing in with all 
their fail north eart, inftead of eaft and by north, full upon the fands of the IVtlJb coaft ; on 
which, in that gloomy weather, he had certainly ftruck and perifh’d, had he held on a little 
longer j and had not Sir A. Gorges , who was then upon the latter watch ( Ralegh being retired 
to reft) forced the mafter-gunner of his fhip to difeharge a warning-piece three or four times, 
much againft his will, and that of the mafter himfelf, who, contrary to all duty and humanity, 
«* faid they deferv*d to tafte the peril of their own wilfulnefs, having brought themfelves and 
“ all the fleet clearly our of their way into fuch danger. 

Upon this admonition EJfex, with all his train, fbon tack’d about, and, afterwards, con- 
fefs’d their error. With much ado, they beat up to double the cape of Scilly , and enter’d the 
Sleeve. Ralegh, by this time, was fhot along the north-fide of Cornwall j for his fhip was fo 
crazy, and his provifions fo fcanty, he durft not put again to fea, but flood along the coaft •, 
and that night anchor’d before St. Ives , where he found the Cornijh people all in alarm, feveral 
Spanifb caravals and fly-boats, which lay there, having made fome defeents by ftealth, and put 
them into great fright and confufion. For EJfex, becaufe he met not with the Adelanlado, had 
both believed and reported into England , that he never (birr’d out to fea this year ; whereas, 
indeed, while the ftrength of the Englijh navy lay before the IJlands, he had fet out with a 
puillant fleet for the invafion of England ; and thefe lefler veflels, which were fent before, did 
here attend his coming. But that ftorm aforefaid, which fo roughly fcatter’d the Englijh , was 
more favourable to their country, than, when they felt it, they imagin’d ■, by difperfing, and 
driving back at the fame time, this Spanijh Armada utterly difabled for the intended enter- 
prize. Ralegh arriving at this juncture, gave great joy to this part of the kingdom ; and, be¬ 
ing landed, he immediately took fuch order for the fafeguard of the county, whereof he was 
her majefty’s lieutenant, as foon difpell’d the fears of its inhabitants. Then, having fupply’d 
his fhip with proper neceflaries, he fent her round to the fleet, and (he was paid off at Brijlol , 
with the profits that arofe from one of the prizes he had taken before-named. Had as good 
an account been given of the other prizes, this expedition, for all the cafualties and overfights 


1 This founding of ours, fo much in praftice, con¬ 
tinues Sir Arthur Gorges, and yet, many times, bringing 
do great certainty, makes me call to mind an odd conceit 
and iperch of a fyantjb prifoner, which the general gave 
me in u*is journey. He was a gentleman, a loldier, and, 
of late years, traded to the Wifi- Indies : with whom 1 one 
day talking and diicourling ot their voyages (wherein he 
was very well experienc’d) he told me that, in their na¬ 
vigation from the India, they fought out Spam in a mote 
certain anti gallant manner than we did England. For, faid 
h*,Wefeek out our cop fi a left with out t yes by /be heavens, by 
the fun or liars, and with the ufe of art and inllrumcnts, 
nubicb Jtldotn or un tr fails : But you , laid he, that feck for 


England, when you art forced to run into narrow fens, are 
forced , for your Jureft di reel ions, like men blindfold, to fenrch 
under the water, and /crape with lead and tallow to the hot - 
tom for banks, fands, and /helves, as if \ou Uou’d rake hell 
for infractions, to find out the channel, which you call the 
ilceve ; and yet, for all your founding?, ere oftentimes rr.if 
taken. I answer'd him ; Indeed it was true, that cur hu¬ 
mility taught us to go by the ground ; whereas their pride ltd 
them to gaze above the cloud 1 ', and thereby fo dazzled their 
eyes, that they often fumbled upon thoje men of war which 
now ujedas well to Jound the Spanilh pocket, as the Engiifh 
fleeve. 

Z Z which, 


Digitized by kjOOQie 


The LIFE of 


H'hich happen’d in it, would have return’d her majefty double the charge Ihe had been at in 
fetting it forth. “ But it was ftrange to fee what carelefs courfes were held in thofe actions fet 
“ out by the ftate, fays our author \ and what poor returns they made into the Exchequer. 
“ Thus, for the merchandize in the prizes now brought home, a compofition was made with 
«« the queen, which was not a third part of the real worth i becaufe the full freight and 
“ value thereof never came to publick light, not being faithfully certify’d under the hands of 
“ fufficient officers when firft taken $ nor any part fold, but to the buyer’s advantage.” He 
concludes, “ That they, who had fo play’d the wife ftewards, in thus providing for themfelves 
“ and their followers, reaped all the grace, as well as gain, from thofe who had more carefully 
“ and juftly intended the publick fervice: and that this general neglect of truth and merit 
** throughout the world , is the caufe why fo few apply themfelves to thofe fincere and unprof table 
“ courfcs ; efpecially , feeing how many do daily t by fraud and flattery, find forler and fmootber 
“ ways to honour , wealth and preferment, even beyond all meafure and expectation.”* 

Ralegh took his journey to Plymouth , where a commiffion came down from the ftate to 
lord ‘Thomas Howard , lord Mounljoy , himfelf, and Sir F. Vere, with monies for repairing, 
vidtualling, and fending about the fleet to Chatham j and for maintaining the thoufand Low - 
Country foldiers which were now quarter’d along the coaft of Cornwall and afterwards fent 
into Ireland. Lffcx , in the mean while, polled away to London ; but, whatever advantage he 
might have in firft fhaping out the ftory of their adventures to the queen, it little avail’d him % 
for Sir Francis Vere foon after arriving alfo at court, underftood his lordftiip was retir’d to his 
houfe at Wanfep in great difeontentment: for the queen was fo incens’d againft the earl, that 
fhe laid the whole blame of their evil fuccefs on his lordfhip, both for not burning and fpoiling 
the Spanifo fleet at Fooll, and miffing that which came from India. Vere fays, he juftify’d 
his lordfhip, and laid the blame upon thofe who deferv’d it, with fuch earneftnefs, that die 
ftanders-by (her majefty then walking in the garden at Whitehall) might hear him : infomuch, 
that he quieted the queen, as he tells us ; who then difeourfed with him ©f the earl’s humours 
and ambition, and, at laft, conftrued all fo gracioufly, that fhe fell into commendation of him ; 
fo that he foon after came to court. k But he ftaid not long there, nor with any eafe or con¬ 
tent i fo infupportable was it to find Cecil made mafter of the wards , the lord-admiral Howard 


• Thus ends Sir Arthur Gorges's accurate relation of the 
JJJa d-Voyage \ concerning whom, as lbme Imall return of 
comaxmoration, it may not be ungrateiul here to join a 
few dilt cried particulars, as follows, lie was the fon of 
Sir lit warn Gorges , who, about the year 1580, was vice- 
adn:i>al in a fleet fet out by the queen to guard the lnjh 
coatl from the Spanijb forces then coming to aid the bef 
moulds: In his return, he took that famous Englijh pirate 
Drnvall ; who, tho' he laved the admiral, Sir John Perrot'% 
life, his lhip, with all her crew, when iu a llorm (he was 
calt upon a land ; by directing all her fails to be hoifled, 
contrary to all other judgments; and bad the admiral's 
promiie, on his faith and honour, to get his pardon, who 
did intercede for it; yet were his deferts over-look’d, and 
hb offences pumfhed with death. As to that vice-admiral^ 
fon Arthur , he was both a valiant and a learned gentle¬ 
man ; was one of the voluntiers againft the Spanijh Inva¬ 
sion, as we have before oblerved, and afterwards in feve- 
ral other engagements. He married Douglas Howard, 
daughter and nor of Henry lord Ho*ward, vilcouftt Byndotti 
which lady d>ing young in 1591, the famous Spen/er 
wrote a fii.e palloral elegy upon her, which is primed 
aroorg his works, by the name of Daphnaida\ and the 
poet, in his dedication thereof to the lady Helena, mar- 
thionefs of Northampton, tells her, " The occafion why 
“ 1 wrote the lame was, as well the great good fame 1 
“ heard of her deceas'd, as the particular good-will I bear 
** umo her husband, mafter Arthur Gorges , a Itrjer of 
«• learning and virtue ; whole houfe as your ladyfhip, by 
“ marriage, hath honoured ; fo do 1 find ihe name of 
4t them, by many notable records, to be of great antiquity, 
and luch as have ever borne themfelves with honourable 
“ reputation to the world, and unfpotted loyalty to their 
4t prime and country. Befides, fo lineally dei'cended from 
" the Howards, that the lady Anne Howard, eldcil daugh- 
“ ter of John duke of Norfolk, was wife to Sir Ed- 
“ mund, mother to Sir Edward , and grandmother to 
“ Sir William and Sir Thomas Gorges, knights.” Now, as 
to the relation of this voyage to the ifes of Azores , in which 
Sir A . Gorges was captain of Sir Halter Ralegh' s (hip, tho* 
we are not exprefly enough told by Purchas , it was print¬ 
ed before he gave it us in his collections; yet he lays it 
was written by Sir Arthur in 1607, and dedicated to that 
great hope of Grtat-Britain, prince Henry . He has omit¬ 


ted th cepifle to him, and the preface; but not defalked any 
of the author’s narrative, which fills near eight lhcets of 
paper in his fourth volume of voyages. It is adorn'd with 
many good military and marine reflections i tho’, with krji4 
other paflhgcs, of too general import to be interwoven in 
any particular account ol Sir Walter Ralegh. Purchas 
further informs us, that Gorges alio added to this trcanle. 
Notes touching tbs navy royal, “ which are worth the noting, 
“ fays he \ but perhaps not to he permuted to every vui- 
“ ga 1 and notclcfc eye: bccauk, as he goes on, veritas 
41 odium farit ; Pains may caufe pains, and bufy-labour 
t€ reap the reward of a buly-body. u From hence it (houlti 
feem that Purchas followed a copy Ids common than any* 
thing which had then paftbd the prefs. But, tho* Sir W. Ra- 
legh might have read u in MS. i cannot think it is this he 
points at; where, introducing his own account of the cqa- 
queft of FayaL, which we have given in a note before; h# 
lays* “ Whereas I find an allion of mine cited with oxnifi' 
“ lion of my name, I may, by a civil interpretation* 
** think that there was no purpoie to defraud me of any 
€i honour; but rachen ait opinion that the enter prize wa* 
€i fuch, or fo ill manag'd* as that no honour could be due. 
0 unto, it.*' Becaufe, as Mr. Lediard ha# very juftly ob- 
ffcrveds “ Sir A* Gorges, in. the tircmaftantial accqunu 
•* he has given us of this allion, difplays the condull and 
44 courage of Sir IV. Ralegh in feveral particulars, very 
“ much to bis honour and advantage.” Naval Exfid .. 
fbl. 356. Then, as to his name. Gorges mentions it more 
than once, and at the beginning, with his title of command 
to it: fo that tho' he may ufe this only all the way after, 
it is, in efteft, as much as if he ufed his name; for it 19 
then obvious enough who is meant by the rear-admiral . 
Nor need we fuppofe Gorges was herein tender or cautious 
of making Ralegh 's name appear too glaring, when hi# 
ferfon was under a cloud; for EJfex and the lord Thomas 
Howard ipoken of in the like manner, and fcarcejy 
mention'd but by their titles of general and vice-admi/al . 
Befides Ralegh's own word, that the allion was only cited, 
rauft refer to feme ocher fhorter account than this Original 
and copious hiftory of it. All I (hall obferve more of 
Sir A. Gorges is, that he tranftated into Englt/h Sir Francis 
Bacon % learned and ingenious book, De S apientia Vfterum. 

* Vere 's Commentaries, fol. 65, 66, 67. 

created 


I 


Digitized by knOOQle 






CXXVll 


Sir WALTER RALEGH. 


created earl of Nottingham, for his fcrviccs againft the Spanifh Invafion, and at Cadiz ; and 
now Ralegh' s aCtions at the IJlands, efteem’d alfo more confiderable than his own ; tho’ indeed 
by the fewer number ; for the populace were eaftly led to believe the late dilappointment of 
EJfex's great expectations, was owing to Ralegh’s regard of his own glory more than that of his 
country; whereby Ralegh loft their opinion, even tho’ victorious againft their enemies, while Flow received 
EJfex was fure to return with triumph, however he mifearried in his attempts ; and was always ^°' u 
received by them with fuch joy, as if his great fleets and armies came laden with fufficient fpoil 
and conqueft, if they only brought him fafe home again. Still both enjoy’d a liberal (hare in 
the queen’s favour, but it only ratify’d the veneration of the multitude to one, and their difuf- 
feCtion to the other.; 1 yet was their efteem more fatal to EJfex, at lcaft more fpeedily lo, than 
their prejudice to Ralegh. However, the queen was little influenc'd with their partiality to ei¬ 
ther ; till EJfex too zealoufly cultivated that which fo unreafonably increas’d in his favour ; 
for lhe loved her people without jealoufy, nor was offended at his being the darling of their 
eyes, till lhe found him inclin’d to be the darling of their hearts. b And, as for the blame 
which Camden fays they now laid on each other of the late mi fad ventures, and which, he in¬ 
forms us, grew to a more open rupture, it feems to have fallen moft upon EJfex, and that Ra¬ 
legh's conduCt was approv’d j becaufe EJfex was never after trufted with the command of any 
naval expedition, but Ralegh was. Yet whatever mifconduCt in others Ralegh might be now 
driven to objeCt, in his own defence •, his generoftty to EJfex, and feme of his followers, whom 
he might have laid it upon, many years after their death, when there was little fear of being 
controverted, is fo much above moft of theirs to him while they were alive, that, having then 
occafion to mention this voyage, he does not drop the leaft inuendo againft any of them } but 
aferibes their difeppointments in it to the moft unblamable caufe. * 

Before Rulegb could well arrive, I think, at London, to give an account of this expedi¬ 
tion, the parliament was met at Wejlmsnfler ; for we read, that the queen went thither in an 
open chariot, all cover’d over-head canopy-wife with filver tiffue, and begun the feflion on the 
twenty-fourth of Oflober this year. Ralegh , making but a fhort ftay in town, went to his feat 
at Shtrhourn > of which he muft have had but little enjoyment for two or three years part. 

Towards the latter end of November following, we find Mr. Adrian Gilbert, now a burgefs 
for Bridport in Dorfetjbire , obtain’d licence of the fpeaker that he might retire to his brother 
Sir Walter Ralegh, in that county, for die benefit of his health. About a month afterwards, 
that is, on the twentieth of December, we meet with Ralegh in the houfe ; for what place re¬ 
turn’d, I find not; and that day the parliament was adjourn’d till the eleventh of January . 

When they met again, Ralegh appears frequently in committees, upon feveral bills of the 
greateft confequence that were then read* as that againft lewd and wandering perfons pretending 
to be foldiers or mariners v another for an aCt to increafe people for the fervice and flrength of 
the realm > one to explain an aCt for the maintenance of the navy } one for paying the queen’s 
debts; one for ereCting houfes of correction and punilhment of rogues, vagabonds, and rturdy 
beggars; befidea many others* whofe titles are more proper to be lought in the parliamentary- 
journals of this reign, than here barely to be recited; for the clerk of this houfe, whofe inaccuracy 
we have before obferv’d, feeming to have melted down moft of die fpeeches in this feflion, for 
brevity, into a narrative of its proceedings, little or nothing of Sir Walter Ralegh's arguments 
is to be particularly extracted. Nor only in the fpeeches, but other circumftances, has that clerk 
been deficient, particularly one, in which Ralegh was concern’d, relating to lome nice diftinc- 
don of form or ceremony wherewidi the lords are wont to receive the commons on certain oc- 
cafions; which therefore we muft take, as from the journals of the upper houfe it has been repre- 
fented •, and there it appears, that fome condefcenfion in the lord-keeper Egerton had raifed an 
objection in the commons on its being now omitted. For, on the fourteenth day of January, 

Sir Walter Ralegh, with divers other knights and burgefies, being fent to defire a conference 
with the lords, upon fome amendments of the bill for creCting houfes of correction before- 
mention’d j and fignification being given, that they might come in to receive their anfwer, it 
was thought proper that the lord-keeper fhould now deliver it fitting in his place (the lords alfo 
fitting) and not by going down to the bar, as the form is when the lords receive bills or mef- 


In parlia 
ment. 


* CamJeris Ann. 1 597 . 

* Sir Henry Holton* Parallel of the carl of EJfex and 
duke of Btuhngbatn. 

* ** That the dUfevering of fleets hath been the over- 
u throw of many actions, I coaid give many examples 
" (fays Ralegh) were it not in every man’s knowledge. 
u f n the lad enterpri/c of worth, undertaken by our Eng- 
,4 lijh nation with three fquadrons of lhips, commanded 


“ by the earl of EJfx , the earl of Suff.lk (who was lord 
“ Ibomas Howarel) and mylelf, where was alfo picienc 
“ the earl of Southampton 5 if we, being ltorm-beaten in 
“ the bay of Aleajhar t or Bifcay, had a port under our 
“ lee, that we might have kept our tranfporting (hips 
** with our men of war, we had, in all likelihood taken 
“ the InM an fleet and the Azores'* See Sir l Pa Iter Ra¬ 
legh's Apolgy for his voyage to Guiana, p. 11, 12. 

luges 


Digitized by kiOOQle 


cxxviii ‘the LIFE of 

fages from them •, and as the lord-keeper had fometimes before done, it feems, in delivering an- 
fwers. This reception being reprefented to the houfe of commons, they fent fome other mem¬ 
bers to defire Citisfa&ion, as for an innovation derogatory to their liberty. Here Sir Walter 
Ralegh's part in this difference ending, we (Hall refer our readers to an abftradt of its confequcncc 
at the foot of the page,* {hat too much interruption may not appear in the thread of his ftory; 
and only obferve, as to the remainder of this feffion, that it was clos'd with a grant to the queen 
of three fubfidies, and fix fifteenths and tenths. b 

The parliament beingdiffolv’d on the ninth of February , Ralegh feems not to have rtfided 
long in town *, for, foon after, fome regulations being made for the publick good of thofe peo¬ 
ple over whom he prefided, by his offices of power, in the Weft of England , we find him cele¬ 
brated, for his exercifc thereof among them, as a very worthy patriot in feveral inftances. The 
lord Burghley is mention’d in one of them, who died about fix months after the faid parliament 
broke up, that is to fay, in Augufl 1598 j therefore we mud here relate it, as occurring before 
this time. It concern'd the reftoration of certain manors to their ancient tenure in Cornwall j 
for there arc feventeen appertaining to that dutchy, which took or renew’d their Holdings , as 
they call it, every i'even years of certain commiflioners, for near three centuries paft^ whereby 
the tenants reckon’d a kind of inheritable eftate, accruing to them. But, notwithftanding 
this long prefeription, a bold and bufy perfon in thefe times, getting an Exchequer-lcafe of one 
or two fuch tenements, called the whole right in queftion; but, failing of fucccfs, another, 
foon after, refumed the broken title, and profecuted it even to a Nifi prius. Hereupon, the te¬ 
nants deputed certain gentlemen, among whom was the author of this paflage, Richard Carew 
of Anthony Efq; one of the deputy-lieutenants of the county, to repair to London with a peti¬ 
tion to the faid lord-treafurer Burghley ; who, calling to him the chancellor and barons of the 
Exchequer , found (befides this long continuance, and the importance thereof, as touching the 
ruin of above a thoufand inhabitants) that her majefty poffcfled no lands which yielded her fo 
fair a benefit as thefe, in rents, fines, heriots, and other perquifites. Thefe reafbns found fa¬ 
vourable allowance, but did not procure an effe&ual remedy, till the faid gentlemen became 
fupplicants to her majefty in perfon j who then, having been prepared, it feems, by Ralegh's ap¬ 
plications and intcreft, teftify’d her diflike of the attempter; and exprefly order’d theceflation 
Reftores the of his attempt. For, fays this author, herein we were beholden to Sir Walter Ralegh's ear - 
•n CmwT wrtiul &' w ^° was c ^ en * n country •, alfo to the advice of Sir Henry , and the follicita- 
to their an- tions of Mr. W. Killegrew. c Another example of his zealous affe&ion for the eafe and advan- 
cient tenure. ta g C 0 p t h c fe people under his jurifdiction, appears in his lightning them of a certain bur- 
denfome tax, which carried many other inconveniences with it. For, as the produds and 
commodities in thofe wejlern parts had been anciently very much opprefs’d with tributes to the 
earls of Cornwall , whereby the condition of a Cornijh inhabitant and a French peafant differ’d 
very little \ fo latterly, while Ralegh was lieutenant of that county, there wanted not fome, who, 
through favour at court, and plaulible reprefentations to her majefty, did, in part, revive the 
fame ; and, under pretext of reftoring a rent decay’d ever fince the ninth of king Henry II, to 
the pretended detriment of the crown, procured letters patent, that none fhould fait, dry, or 
pack any filh in Devonjhtre or Cornwall , without their licence or warrant j the ill confequences 


• Upon this meflage, the lords confulted touching the 
ulage of their houle, as it had been oblerved by thoie of 
Jongcit continuance therein; and it was rciolved, that their 
Cultom was and is, “ When any bill* qt me]fages be brought 
44 from the houle of commons to the upper houle, the 
44 lord keeper and the reft of the lords are to rile and go 
44 down to the bar to meet thole who come from the com- 
41 mom, and there receive their laid inefiages or biils : 
44 but, contraiiwile, when any anjhver is to be deliver'd 
44 by the lord-keeper, in the name and behalf of the houfe, 
44 to luch as come from the commons, thefe members are 
41 to receive the fame Handing towards the lower end of 
44 the laid upper houle, without the bar ; and the lord- 
44 keeper is to deliver it fitting in his place, w ith his head 
44 cover’d, the other lords alfo keeping their places ; and 
41 that whenever it had been ocherwile done, ic was by er- 
44 ror or miitake, and therefore not to be drawn into pre- 
44 cedent.” Then the attorney-general and Serjeant Ure<w 
being tent to the lower houfe, Jignify’d, that if they would 
fend for an anfwer to their demands, it fhould be given. 
The commons accordingly fent the fame perfons who had 
before demanded fatisiaction. But, being come to the houfe, 
and having placed themfelves at the lower end of the out¬ 
ward room, as at other times, except the lord keeper and 
other lords came and met them at the bar to deliver their 
anfwer, the laid keeper moved them to approach and re¬ 


ceive it: then they, not perceiving the lords advance to the 
bar, protelted, by Sir IV. Knolles, that they had not com- 
miiiion to receive any anfwer in that form ; ;o departed. 
Hereupon, a motion w'as fent from the lords to die com¬ 
mons for a conference in the outward great chamber, to 
reconcile this matter; where the alorclaid members, meet¬ 
ing the archbilhop of Canterbury , Jord-treafurcr Burghley, 
and others of the moll ancient peers, were aflurcd by them, 
that the true and right form of receiving bills or mcilages, 
and delivering anfwers by the lord-keeper, was as is above 
related ; and that fome late inadvertency in the regard 
thereof, w as the occaiion of their prelent imfconltruction. 
Hereupon, the houle of commons was fatished; and the 
lame form was afterwards kept accordingly. Sir htmon 
De*we's journal of queen Elizabeth's parliaments, fol. 1708. 
P- 539* 54°- * 

k Of thefe taxes, Camden gives us this explanation. 
A fifteenth and a tenth, is a certain tax on every city, 
borough and town, not upon every man in particular ; but 
a general funi, in proportion to the fifteenth part of tne 
wealth of the refpective places: a fubjidy , we call that 
which is impos'd on every lingle perion, as they are al- 
fefs’d by poll, according to the value of their goods and 
lands. Elite, anno 1563. 

c C/trru's Sut^vej of Cornwall, ato. 16 02. p. 36. 
b. 37. 

whereof 


Digitized by U.OOQ 1C 












cxxix 


Sir WALTER RALEGH. 

Whereof grew fo apparent, as being what would have made that patentee an abfolute difpofer of. 
all the wejlem Clipping and traffick, with their fea and land-dependants, that the CorniJfj 
juftices, whereof Mr. Carew aforefaid was one, made fuit to the. privy-council for redrefs - 7 . 
and, through the never-failing forwardnefs and backing of Sir IValter Ralegh, fays the fame . 
author, obtain’d a revocation thereof.* Here, not to divide from this head, what properly Procures the 
falls under it, we may alfo add Ralegh's good offices, the two following years, for freeing the 
Inhabitants of thefe parts from thofe heavy impofitions, with which the trade and manufac- curing of/'* 
ture alfo of their tin-works were very much embarrafs’d. Thefe impofitions were occafion’d 
by the merchants and ufurers who advanced money to the tinners, upon whom their encroach-. 
nients were now grown fo exorbitant, that Ralegh was importun’d to revive the privilege of 
pre-emption, founded on that claufe in the charter of king Edward I. allowing them to vend. 
their tin to their belt behoof, tiift nos ipft emere voluerimus. It had been attempted by others, 
before him, who alledg’d many reafons how it might prove advantageous, not only to her 
majefty, but the country, and prejudicial to none but thole extortioners, who practis’d a far 
worfe kind of pre-emption. b But tho* this means of redrefs was by thofe perfons hotly be-, 
gun, and a reafonable price offer’d, it foon cool’d again, till it receiv’d a new life in Michael¬ 
mas term 1599 ; for then the Cornijb men, being in London , were call’d before the principal 
lords of her majefty’s council, and the matter was there debated by Sir IValter Ralegh in be¬ 
half of the country, againft thofe advocates deputed for the merchants who had promoted this, 
fuit; and he brought it to fuch a conclufion that articles were fign’d. Indeed it did not im¬ 
mediately take effect: yet, it feems, the privilege was afterwards inverted in Ralegh, and that Revive* the 
he put his power in execution. In November , the following year, he held a court at Loft- tff" n P“ on 
vsitbiel , the ufual place for Stannary caufes •» where having fignified her majefty’s pleafure for 
a new tax of fix pounds on every thoufand weight of tin that Ihould be tranlported, befides 
two pounds and fixteen (hillings already payable, he told them allb, that. her majefty had 
been prevail’d on lb far to difengage them from dealing with the merchants and ufurers, that 
fhe would dilburfe four thouland pounds in loan to the tinners for a year’s fpace, and was- 
contented to be repaid in tin: c and Jaftly what appears totally to have excluded thofo mer¬ 
chants from the exerdfe of their impofitions is, that, by the time of the enfuing parliament, 

Ralegh appears to have had the power of pre-emption granted him ; becaufe, in a fpeech of v 

his, which we lhall take notice 'of, having juftly maintain’d his title thereto, from the charier 
before-mention’d, he. yet no lefs generoufly offers to refign it, as indeed he not long after vo¬ 
luntarily did, d if thofe, who had privileges of far lefs ancient eftablilhmcnt, would follow his 
example. But, as thefe and his other eminent fervices to thole people, are bed to be judg’d 
of by fuch as beheld and tailed the benefits that flow’d from them : fo we lhall here only, 
add the publick acknowledgment thereof which Mr. Carew made, a few months after that 
parliament rofe, in the following dedication to Sir IValter Ralegh , of his excellent Survey of 
Cornwall. “ This my ill-hulbanded furvey, long fince begun, a great while difeontinu’d, 

*‘ lately review’d, and now haftily finilh’d i appeals to your lordlhip’s direction, whether 
“ it Ihould pals to your correction, if it do pafs i and to your protection, when it is pafs’d. 

“ Neither unduely ; for the lame intreats of the province and perfons over whole bodies and. 

“ eftates you carry a large, both martial and civil, command by your authority j but in, 

“ whofe hearts and loves you poflefs a far greater intereft by your kindnels. Your ears aind 
41 mouth have ever been open to hear and deliver our grievances •, and your feet and hands 
“ ready to go and work their redrefs •, and that, not only always as a magiftrate of yourfeJf, 

• Carrrv’i Surrey of Cornwall, p. 79, b. 80. 

k “ When any weftern gentleman (fays Mr. Came) 

** wants money to defray his expences at London , he re- 
“ forts to one of the tin merchants to borrow fome j but 
** fhall as foon wreft the dub out of Hercules' s fill, as one 
" penny out of their fingers, unlefs they give bond for 
“ * v «y twenty pounds fo taken in loan, to deliver 1000 
** pound weight of tin at the next coinage, which fhall 
** he within two or three months, or half a year at far- 
** theft- At which time the price of every thoufand will 
** n °t fail to be at leaft 2j, perhaps 25 pounds; yea, and 
” after promife made, mull be driven with fome indigni- 
“ ty to make three or four errands to his houfe, before 
“ he (hall get the money deliver’d. Thus fome one 
" merchant will have 500 pounds out before-hand, reap- 
“ ’ n g thereby a double commodify, both of excefiive gain 
" his loan, and of afTurance of being ferv’d with tin 
** for his money. This they fay is no ufury forfooth, be- 
** the price of tin is not commonly known before- 

a a a «« but 


“ hand (for once only, within thefe twelve years, on 

purpofe to efcape the penalty of the law, they brought 
“ it a little under 20 pounds the thoufand) but,’if to take 
“ above fifty in the hundred be extremity, whatfoever 
“ name you lift to give it, this, in truth, can be no other 
“ than cut-throat and abominable dealing.*' Su/vyot' 
ConrtvaU, p. 14, b. 16. 

« Idem, p. 17. b. 

* Then it was recommended to king James ; however, 
he had juft before made a proclamation againft all mono¬ 
polies ; for in 1604. there were fevcral fchemes and efii- 
mates drawn up on this projefl of pre-emption ; one where¬ 
of fets forth the profits of it, and difadvantages of putting 
it down. In another we find this particular 5 “ There 
“ are two coinages of tin every year, and about eleven or 
" twelve hundred tun coin’d at each time ; and if the 
“ king farms the pre-empti<M for 10000 /. then there will 
“ remain to the farmers 9500/." Cotton library Lit us 
B. V. towards the end of the volume. 


Digitized by boogie 


fcxxx 


The LIFE of 

“ t>ut alfo very often j is a fiiitor and follicitor to others of the higheft place. Wherefore I, 
** as one of the common beholden, prefent this token of my private gratitude. It is duty, 
“ and not preemption, that hath drawn me to the offering *, and it muft be favour, and 
** not defat, that (hall move your lordfhip to acceptance: and fo I take humble leave, reft- 
*« ing no left willing to ferve you, than under you.” 

This author (Mr. Carew) fubfcribes himfelf, to that dedication. Sir Walter Ralegh's kinf- 
man ; but was no Ids innobled and honour’d for his accomplifhments than his family, as 
Camden has obferv’d •, who further acknowledges the great affiftance he receiv’d in his de-, 
feription of Cornwall from this author’s curious Survey of its antiquities and natural hiftory. * 
For his abilities in thefe ftudies he was admitted (as upon a very modeft occafion he mentions 
himfelf) an affociate of the Antiquary College . fc A fragment of the fpeech he made at his in- 
troduftion to the faid fociety, among other materials relating to him, I communicated, about 
a dozen years fince, to the learned and ingenious writer of his life before the new impreflion 
of his works.' And now that he was in London , folliciting one of the aforefaid caufes (for 
the Cormjb tinners) I find his name mention’d in a lift of near twenty other antiquaries, who 
were fummon’d to a meeting at the houfe of a Garter King of Arms (which, I fuppofe, was 
Sir William Detbicke , at the Heralds Office) in order, probably, to receive fome queftions, or 
bring his opinion in writing to others which had been propounded, as the manner then was. * 
Now, perceiving Sir Walter Ralegh to have patroniz’d the antiquities of Cornwall , written by 
one member of that fbciety, and that Mr. John Hooker, another gendeman learned in the an¬ 
tiquities of this realm, and perhaps a member alfo of the fame body (for their names are not 
all yet known) addrefs’d his Hiftorical Record of Devonffiire to a perfon of honourable place in 
the commonwealth , who is conceived by one that had feen it, to have been alfo Sir Walter 
Ralegh >* to which honourable perfon the faid work being deliver'd at its author’s death, he 
committed it to Mr. Dodderidge , another member of the faid fociety (who had leifure to fit 
it for, and did recommend it to the prefs, tho* it never was printed : f ) finding alfo that Sir 
Walter Ralegh was acquainted with, and honourably lpoken of by others of this aflembly, as 
Sir Henry Spelman t alfo Sir Robert Cotlon y from whofe library we find Ralegh afterwards bor- 
Towing fome manuferipts, and thatMr. John S el den was oblig’d to Ralegh's library forothersi 
thefodety of * Cou ^ not but think him fomehow related to the faid fociety, and at laft have found, that 
Antiquaries, he iikewife was a member thereof. This intelligence I receive from another lift of thefe aflo- 
ciates, in a manufeript addrefs’d food after Ralegh's death to king James ; which alfo further 
contains this obfervation upon that fociety. “ There was a time, moft excellent king, when 
«* as well under queen Elizabeth , as under your majefty, certain choice gentlemen, ' men of 
“ known proof, were knit together, ft at is temporibus , by the love of thefe ftudies, upon' 
“ contribution among themfelvies: which company confifted of an elective Preftdent and of 
** Clariffimi , of other Antiquaries and a Regifter. Bjt this their meeting, whofe profeflion 
** reached only to the matter of our antiquities , deferved to have an incorporative connexion, 
“ by way of authority royal ; for want whereof, they being depriv’d of the benefit of fuf- 
** feftion and fubftitution, a few of their friends and perfons dying, the thing itfelf is abfo- 
n lutely vanilh’d: fucceflion performing that in civil bodies , which generation does in na- 
«« tural.s . 

But, 

• J. Prince's Worthies of Devon in the Life of J . Hoo¬ 
ker , fol. 388. 

t Idem. % 

* Their name*, however, deferving to live with ho¬ 
nour, the faid author fets them down, as they arofe to hit 
mind; promifeuoufly, in the following manner— 1 homos 
earl of Dorfel , Henry earl ef Northampton , Fitxalen the lalt 
earl of Arundel, William lord Burgh ley, the Herberts earU 
of Pembroke , the learned lord Lumley i Sir Philip Sidney , 
Sir Henry Billingsley, Sir Gilbert and Sir William Dethicie 9 
Sir Henry Fanjhanv , Dr. Bartholomew Clark , and dean 
Coufins ; Sir Daniel Donne , Sir Walter Cope and Ralegh i 
Mr. Benedict Bamham , Dr. Covuel, Francis Ihynne Efqi 
Lamafier ; Mr. Glover, Somerfet ; Heneagt , keeper of the 
records ; Benefield\ Erdfiwick , Lambert, Valence, fee. Efq?. 
Mr. Talbot, and Mr. John Stove, Sec. Then telling the 
king how juftly the dillolution of fo well an intended ex- 
erciie was lamented by all thofe worthy patriots, who 
knew his majefty’s realms afforded living perfons ol prime 
worth, fit to keep up and celebrate that Round Table, he 
cites fome of their names; as, lord William Howard, 
lord C<?’w, Sir Fulk Grevile. Sir Robert Cotton, Sir P. 

Manwood, 


* Camden's Britannia in Cornwall. 

\ Carew s Survey of Cornwall, p. 61. b. 

• In quarto, 1723. # 

4 This fummons dated anno dominre Eliz. XLI. is pub- 
)ifil’d from a M S. in the Afmolean Mufctum at Oxford, 
by Mr. Thomas Hearne: See his Preface to a ColleLlion of 
Curious Dijccurfes by eminent Antiquaries, 8vo. Oxon. 
1720. p. 41. Thefe dtfeourfes were written between the 
year 1590 and 1605 ; therefore do, I think, fomewhat 
difprove Sir Henry Spr/man's computation (at leaft that 
fummons does) that this fociety of Antiquaries was difeon- 
tinued for twenty years and then reviv’d in 1614. King 
James was about this year, or foon after, fo hot upon his 
college of controverfial divinity at Cbelfea, that I wonder 
not at his difeourngement of the faid fociety , thro* I know 
not whjit fufpicion or pretence of their troubling matters 
of date or religion, whereby their meeting was wholly 
broke of ; tho’, as Spcbnan affirms, they had refolved to 
forbare all arguments on thofe fubjetts. Set Sir Henry 
Spclmans Pref. to his law terms, as printed from a MS. 
in the Bodleian library, by Dr. Gibfon the prefent bijhoj^of 
London , in his life of Mr. Camden. 


Digitized by 


Google v 









CXXX1 


Sir WALTER RALEGH. 


But, to return a little into the mtore open and publick current of aftion, we rnufl here ob- 
ferve, that king Henry the fourth of France having, about the end of the laft parliament, in¬ 
formed the queen of England, by an ambaflador, that he had held fome conferences with the 
Spanijh mincers about a peace, but would come to no oonclufion without her confent, and that 
of the united ft ares •, her majcfty font fome commiffioners over: and, while they were negotia¬ 
ting this bufinefs in France, Ihe had the argument very clofely debated in her council at home. 
Here EJfex was one of thofe, who would by no means liften to any manner of accommodation > 
and, while the matter was upon the carpet, was fo expeditious as to produce a formal apology t 
in writing, for his reafons $ it being dated in 1598, and written before the king of Spain's death 
in the beginning of September the fame year. Yet, upon this topic, there enfued a warm dif- 
pir^ Jays Camden , betwixt the queen and EJfex ; as alfo upon her chufing fome able minifter 
to fuperintend the aflairs of Ireland. She look’d upon the earl’s uncle, Sir William Knolles, as 
a proper perfon for that charge. EJfex pretcr*d Sir George Carew , perhaps on purpofe, fays 
Camden , to get rid of him: and, when the queen would not be perfuaded to approve his 
choice, he, quite forgetting all doty, turn’d his back upon her in a contemptuous manner. The 
queen, unable to bear his infolence, difmifs’d him her prefence with a box on the ear. The 
fury this threw the earl into, is betcer conceiv’d than exprefs’d j but having, with his hand on 
hk fword, told the queen, «« He would not have taken fuch a blow from her father,” he re¬ 
tired from court. The lord-keeper Egerton fent him a prudent and pacifying letter ; in which, 
among other wholfome motives to fubmiffion and complacency, he fays, “ In this courle 
« you hold, if you have any enemies, you do that for them which they could never do for 
** themfelves $ while your friends you leave to fcorn and contempt.” The earl return’d a long 
and piflionate anfwer, as Camden calls it; in which it appears, he had alfo fuffer’d fome 
imprifonment j and wherein he makes this reply to thole objections: “ In this courfe do I any 
** thing for my enemies ? When I was prefent, I found them abfolute j and therefore I had 
rather they ftiould triumph alone, than have me attendant upon their chariots. Or do I 
«« leave my friends ? When I was a courtier, I could fell them no fruit of my Jove; and 
** now I am a hermit, they fliall bear no envy for their love to me.” * But the lord-keeper 
foon brought him out of his hermitage j and he was, in a little time, re-admitted into the 
queen’s favour. However, his friends, according to Camden , were apt to date his ruin from 
this unlucky cincumftance: and indeed, it hence appears, he had no enemies fo great, or who 
fb much confpired to his foil, as his own pallions, his unreafonable expectations of an abfolute 
conformity to his own will, and impatience to behold any body afpire to diftinCtion, who did 
it not thro’ his patronage and protection. Of this he gave a molt notorious example about this 
time} in which he made Ralegh a publick object of his oppofition, tho’ it ended in his own 
dilgrace, and kis rclapfe into the queen’s difpleafure *, which he might have prevented, had he 


MtmrntJ, Sir J*it Dm?u, Sir Henry Savile, Mr. Cam- 
den. Sir Entry Spelman, Dr. John Hayward, late, Whit¬ 
lock, Selden and Bolton. Thus in a MS. entitled, an Ad- 
+*fs fir a Corporation Royal, to be founded under the title 
of hu* James bis Academ* or College of Honour. 
Fol. eleven {beets, p. 6 , 7, 8 , 9. My reafons that it 
pas written in 1619, and conjectures by whom, I have 
given in the book itfeJf; which is in the poffeflion of 
Mr. George Vrr/ur, whofc readinefs to impart from his own 
cunow colirdicni, and procure from thofe of hig learn¬ 
ed and worthy friends, whatever might be ufeful to my pre¬ 
fent undertaking, deferves more frequent acknowledgments, 
w having in feveral other places conduced to the illuftra- 
tion thereof. This lid of otfr primitive antiquaries, and 
that in the learned Dr. Smith's life of Sir Robert Cotton, 
together with tbofe in Mr. Heamt s Pre/dee, p. 41 afore* 
(aid, and p. 112, may perhaps fomewhat alleviate this 
laft author's 44 defpair of getting a perfect catalogue of 
“ thofe eminent and excellent men, tho’ feveral of their 
“ names were induftrioufly conceal'd fince the diffolution 
u of the fociety." And this remark will lead us to obferve, 
how obfcurely even Sir Walter Ralegh is huddled over 
in the lifi here above exhibited. It was furely intended 
as a courtly compliment, thus to lop off all dillin&ion or 
title of honour, by faddling him behind another Sir IValter , 
and (hewing his very name headlefs, to that perfon who 
had newly made his body fo. Another obfervation which 
occurs to me from this lift is, that it feems to carry the 
antiauity of this fociety higher than is commonly appre¬ 
hended : for if Robert Glower , who was made Somerfet 
herald in 1571 (as I find in a MS. written by the late 
Peter Le Neve, Efq; Norroy, upon the fucccflion of the 
heralds from queen Marys reign) died in 1583, as I think 
the lame MS. demonftratfs, or at icaft as Dr. Fuller in¬ 


forms us; the faid fociety muft have been exiftent in this 
year, how much more early loever it was before. As to 
its interrupted progrefs down to our time, it would de¬ 
mand, as it does deferve, an ample hiilory to dilplay it. 
This general view we may here (pare room for ; That in 
the former part of king Charles's reign it bloom'd out 
afrefh; but droop’d in the civil wars. It feems to have 
(hone forth again after Oliver Cromwell's death; for then 
Mr. Ajfjtnole, in the Diary of his own Life, mentions the 
Antiquaries Fenjl\ but, during the fa&ions in the 
clofe of king Charles ll’s reign, to have been under a 
cloud. It was revived in the reign of his late majefty, 
anno 1717* and has continued to this day. Having ga- 
thci’d in this fpace to a body of fifty or fixty members, 
nobility as well as gentry, and clergy as well as laity » 
fome of whom are well known in the Republick of Letteri 
for their own labours, and many highly deferving from ir, 
for contributing to the improvement of other mens ; among 
which, gratitude cannot omit the Life of Sir W. Ralech. 

* Thefe quotations # I have made from the ancient 
and fair copies in a volume of State Letters , written 
between the years 1533 and 1629, among the valuable 
colle&ions of th« right honourable the lord Coleraine, fol. 
345 * 3 S 1 » where EJfex'% letter to the lord-keeper concludes 
with thefe words : “ Let Solomon’/ foot laugh when he is 
“ ftricken ; let thofe who mean to make their profit of 
44 princes (hew to have no fenle of princes injuries; let 
44 them acknowledge an infinite ablolutenefs on Earth 
44 who do not believe an abfolute infinitenefs in Heaven, 
41 &c.” But hereby difeover’d himfelf an ill imitator of 
his old tutor in court-conduct, Leicefier, who had attained 
to the art not only of pocketing all affronts, but of coo- 
ftruing them into favours, and even converting them into 
benefits. 

kept 




Digitized by knOOQie 



cRxxil 


His *'x':cr 
tiiumph. 


The LI F E of . 

kept his word to the lord-keeper, and fuffer’d Ralegh to have triumph'd alone : lor, during Uiij 
reconciliation, or laft blaze Ejfex made with any credit at court, this memorable conteft Items 
to have been promoted by him, at the martial exercifes perform’d on the queen’s birth-day, 
which was the 17th of November : At leaft, I think it could not happen later dun the yearabove. 
cited in this reign; becaufc Ejfex’s violent courfes throughout the remainder of it, allow of no 
opportunity or countenance for his farther appearance at thofe entertainments: and, as for the 
preceding birth-days, Ejfex feems not have been fpirited up by his incendiaries enough for 
raifmg fuch a divifion or party, as appeared upon this occafion, till the laft year, when drey 
return’d from the ijland voyage •, and then it muft have happen’d during the fitting of the 
parliament, which may not be fo probable. Therefore, I fhall here recite the fcatter’d cir- 
cumftances I have met with, relating to this event, till I am better inform’d in what year more 
certainly to fix it. 

These martial exercifes were they'///?; or lurnaments wherewith the moft active nobles and 
cavaliers of thofe times celebrated die queen’s birth-day every year, in the Tilt-yard , near her 
palace at Whitehall. Here her majefty was commonly herfelf a lpedtator of them, with her at* 
tendants of both lexes •, as likewife all the foreign ambafladors, and a numerous concourfe befidea 
both of the court and city. Hiftory has not been very particular of Ralegh’s appearance at 
thole aflemblies ; as by what colour or imprefles he diflinguilb’d himfelfj with what fuccels he 
ran the carreers, or what favours he bore away : but, as upon all other publick occafions, he 
made a moft rich and fplendid figure; fo we find, upon thefe days of triumph, none furpais’d 
him in military bravery. I have lomewhere read of his curious fine armory j and, as I re¬ 
member, that part of it is, or was preferv’d in die Tower of London j but it is more apparent 
that, probably tor tome of thefe grand entertainments, he either made himfclf, or was prefented 
by his royal miftrefs with, a fuit of armour all of folid filver: for there are ftill in being, not 
only ancient paintings, reprefenting him about this part of her reign in that glittering and war¬ 
like habiliment, as hereafter will be farther deferibed ; but mention is alfo made in fome wri¬ 
tings of his being thus arm’d at all points, and lhining in thofe polilh’d plates of filver *. Yet 
who were his competitors, and what his fuccefs in thefe robuft exercifes, there is little, I fear, 
remaining to fatisfy us, more than thofe dark and difperfed hints of that extraordinary oppo- 
fition or contention which Ejfex raifed againft him about this time, as was obferved : and this 
being the original or copy of a like contrivance, pradtifed not long before or after it in France 
(by marlhal Biron , as I remember to have read) may, from thence, and the correlponding 
teftimony of an author, whole credit and intelligence are not to be doubted, be prefumed to 
have happen’d in the following manner. 1 . . 

About the time that Ejfex, by other like inftanceg of his incurable humour to monopolize 
the multitude, fell into, or confirmed, the queen’s difpleafure, he had by fome of his followers 
learnt, that Sir Walter Ralegh, with a very gallant train, gorgeoufly accoutred, was to make 
his appearance the next tilting-day in orange-colour plumes. Hereupon Ejfex provided a much 
more numerous cavalcade , and deck'd them out exa&ly in Ralegh's colours: then the carl him- 
felf appearing at the head of all, arm’d cap-a-pee in a compleat fuit of orange-colour, not only 
pafs’d for the foie knight or champion of that diftinttion, by drowning all diftinction in Sir Walter 
Ralegh , but thereby incorporated him and his train only as fo many more of his own efquires* 
pages, and other retinue or fervants, who made up the parade upon thefe occafions. The ear 1 
of Clarendon certainly points at this malignant ftratagem, where, fpeaking of thofe dangerous 
indiferetions which were the harbingers of Ejfex' s ruin, he mentions among them “ His glo- 
“ rious feather-triumph ; when he caufed two thoufand orange-tawney feathers, in defpite of 
“ Sir Waller Ralegh^ to be wome in the Tilt-yard , even before her majefty’s own face b .” But 
it muft have been fomewhat furprizing to fee them enter the lifts, and orange-tawney running 
againft itfelf. Yet the earl’s fuccefs, which is alfo come to light, feems not to have been much 
regretted, being fo agreeable to the merit of ufurpers ; infomuch that it proved Ralegh’s feather 
triumph in the condufion. . For, tho’ the lord Bacon might have reafon not to mention the 
earl’s name, where he tells us a gentleman, who came to the tilt all in orange-tawney, and ran 
very ill, came again the next day all in green , and ran worfe ; c yet another author, inftead of 
this gentleman, names Ejfex j d and goes on, as the lord Bacon does, with obferving, that 
“ One of the fpedators hereupon asking, HTy this tilter (who feemed to be known in both 

* Sir Walter Ralph's Ghoft, 4to. Utrecht 1626. p. 10. printed in Rtliquier 'IVcttmianer. 4’h edit i 63 j. p. 190. 

b The Di/parity between the cltates and Conditions r f « Lord Bacons apophthegms i.ew and old, p. zc6. 
George duke of Buckingham, and Robert earl of £ (fex, writ* Apophthegms of the Rngkfi nation, MS. 4to. p. 11. 

ten by the earl of C/uienJ** in his younger years, and 

habits) 


Digitized by 


Google 







CXXX111 


Sir WALTER RALEGH 

“ habits) changed his colours ; another anfwer’d, Surely becaufe it may be reported., that there 
“ was one in green who ran worfe than be in orange-colour.” 

Such like difturbances and ill blood as thefe contefts muft have bred, might well make the 
queen weary of having EJfex any longer about the court, and defirous of removing him to fome 
employment where he might more commendably cxercife his martial qualities. A good occa- 
fion offer’d itfelf in Ireland, where Tir-Oen’s rebellion had now overfpread almoft the whole 
kingdom. A confultation was therefore held for lending over the fitteft perlbn to fuppreis 
it. The lord Mountjoy was firft propos’d: but EJfex himfelf made exceptions againft his 
want of experience and aftivity ; alledging, Ireland requir’d a perfon of the firft rank, who 
was an old general, and confiderable for honour, intereft and eftate, to gain him refpeft and 
influence there \ by which Camden thinks he would have recommended himfelf, and adds, 
that when the queen therefore refolv*d on EJfex, he flightly refus’d it, advifing her to fome 
abler perfon; tho’, continues that hiftorian, he had an objection ready againft any perfon fhe 
Ihould have named. Notwithftanding this authority, and that EJfex s fmooth-tongu’d adver- 
laries were for lending fpurs to the ambition that wanted a bridle, * he feems to me, by a letter 
of his own genuine ftyle, in profe and verfe, to the queen, at his going over in the end of 
March 1599, to have look’d upon the government of that kingdom as the moft irkfome 
kind of banilhment, and to have enter’d upon it with the utmoft averfion. b His conduct 
in it was anfwerable to the expectations of judicious men *, and one of his own lervants, who 
attended him thither, fays, it was his blackeft employment, that Ireland was ordain’d to be 
the fepulchre of his father, and the gulph of his own fortunes. c 

About four months after EJfex was thus difpofed of, there were great apprehenfions in Eng¬ 
land of an invafion; but from what quarter is not well diftinguilh’d: fix thouland loJdiers were 
fuddenly raifed to guard the city and queen’s perlbn. Chains were drawn acrols the ftreets of 
London , watches fet, and lights hung out at every man’s door for above a fortnight. “ By 
fea lixteen or eighteen /hips of the royal navy were fitted out with wonderful Ipeed, under the 
command of the lord Thomas Howard , as admiral, in the Elizabeth Jonas, and Sir JValter, 
vice-admiral, in the Ark-Royal, Whether occafion’d by any miftruft the Englijb and Spa- ral. 
niards had of one another, or a policy held on both fides to make peace with fword in hand, 
my author does not itlblve j but is fure the preparation on both fides was very great, as if 
one expe&ed an invafion from the other : and yet it was generally conceiv’d not to be intend¬ 
ed by either •, but that our fleet had only relation to the earl of EJfex , then in Ireland, as if 
he had fome defperatc defign to try his friends in England t and to be revenged of thofe he 
thought his enemies. However it was, the care and coft was not fo great as necefiary; for it 
was known, that the Adelantado had drawn, both his lhips and galleys, to the Groyne ; which 
was not ufual, but upon fome aftion intended for England or Ireland: and, feeing we were not 
to be furpriz’d, he diverted them afterwards to a different ufe. Another benefit that arole to 
the nation, by putting it into this fudden pofture of defence, was the great dexterity and expe¬ 
dition wherewith it was taught to fpring into arms: for the incredible Ipeed and order of the 
commanders, in raffing fuch a land army, and fitting out fuch a royal navy, was fo admired, 
both by Spain , France and Holland, that all foreigners confefs’d. Her majejly's deeds in war 
were not heretofore more dreadful to her enemies than , now only her preparations for it. Infomuch 
that, it is faid, an envoy was fent by the Archduke from Brujfels with overtures of peace, tho’ 
they did not then fucceed. Whether a defign’d invafion from Spain was hereby blown over, 
or her majefty was better fatisfied about the earl of EJfex , we find not j but fhe commanded 
her fleet home, after it had been about a month at fea. * 


* Camden t Eft*.. Anno 1599. 

* To the $ueen. 44 From a mind delighting in forrow, 
u from fpirics wafted with paftion, from a heart torne 
“ in pieces with care, grief and travel, from a man that 
44 hareth himfelf and all things elfe that keep him alive j 
14 what fcrvicc an your majefty expeft, fince any fervice 
44 paft deferves no more than banilhment and profeription 
“ into the curfedil of all i(lands ? It is your rebels pride 
44 and fucceflion muft give me leave to ranfom myfelf out 
44 of this hateful prifon, out of my loath'd body ; which, 
44 if it happen fo, your majefty fhall have no caufe to mif- 
44 like the fafhion of my death, fince the courfe of my 
44 life could never pleafe you. 

Happy he, could finifh forth his fate. 

In fome unhaunted defart moft obfeure 
From all fociety, from love and hate 
Of worldly folk, then fhould he fleep fecure * 


Then wake again, and yield God ever praife : 
Content with Heps and Haws and Brambleberry t 
In contemplation palling out his days. 

And change of holy thoughts to make him merry. 
Who, when he dies, his tomb may be a bulh, 
Where harmlefs Bobbin dwells with gentle Tbru/b. 

Your majefty s exiled fenvant, 

Robert Essex. 

This from the HarUian library, B. H. 90. C. 70. fol, 
5*7- 

c Sir Henry Hatton, in his parallel. 

* Stowe'* Annals, edit. 1615. fol. 788. 
c Sir William Mon fori* naval tratts in Church: IT 1 col¬ 
lection of voyages, Vol. III. 1732. fol. 170. 

b b b • Near 


Digitized by k-xOOQle 


CXXX1V 


His embafly 
to Flanders. 


Ciovcrnor of 
the ifle of 

j* r h- 


The LIFE of 

Near a month after this, EJfex returned privately out of Ireland , with fome of his choice 
friendsj one whereof, named Sir Cbrijlopber St. Lawrence, offer’d to murder the lord Gray, 
whom they met upon the road, and to difpatch fecretary Cecyll when they came to courtbut 
EJfex would not encourage fo bafe an a<fl. The queen was now at Nonfucb: hither EJfex ha- 
ften’d to prefent himfelf on his knees before her, in her privy-chamber early in the morning, 
and when her majefty leaft dreamt of him, fays Camden ; who adds, that fhc entertain’d him 
with fome marks of her grace and favour, tho’ not with that freedom he ufed to find. But no¬ 
thing of that unfeafonable furprife and fatal difeovery upon this vifit is mentioned either by 
him, or any of our other hiftorians, which a foreigner, with the air of romance, natural to his 
country, reports to have then happen’d, and which I lhall therefore refer to his own words. * 
The queen indeed order’d EJfex to his apartment, and thereto continue, as Camden goes on • 
for the earl had not only difoblig'd her before, but now given frefh provocation by leaving 
Ireland without her permiflion, and for lhuffling up a truce there, which might be broke at a 
fortnight's warning j whereas he might have made an efte&ual compofition with the rebels, and 
was impower’d to give them a general a£t of indemnity. The cxcuies he offer’d before the 
council, were fb unfatisfadiory, and his behaviour fo contemptuous, that the queen thought pro¬ 
per to commit him to cuflody j but appointed it to be in the lord-keeper’s houfe rather than a 
common prifon, chiefly to obllrudl the infuflonsof his pernicious adherents, to whom he was fd 
infatuated, that he could not relinquifh them, tho’ one of the objedlions, which would be rai- 
fed againfl him, was by his own hand pre-fuppofed to be, the leaving of that kingdom in fuel* 
an unfettled pofture, and returning into this, with fuch a pack of fwordfmen at his heels. b 
Thus much was thought necefiary here to relate of him, that it may appear, his own paflions, 
with the counfels of his pretended friends, and not thofe, who were vulgarly thought his ene¬ 
mies, prov’d his overthrow. 

While EJfex was thus in reftraint, commiflioners were fent over to Bulloigne to negotiate 
the peace with Spain. This was in May t6oo. And about the fame time we find Sir Walter 
Ralegh was alfo fent, with the lord Cobbam , upon an embafly concerning the fame, into Flan¬ 
ders. Their bufinefs was kept very fee ret -, yet, Albert arch-duke of Aujlria , and governor of 
the Netherlands , having charged the queen of England , it feems, with relieving the Hollanders % 
and being likely to take fome umbrage at fo many perfons of flonfiderable rank going over vo* 
lunteers to prince Maurice , as the lord of Northumberland, , lord Rutland , and others ; fecrc- 
tary Cecyll wrote to the laid commiflioners at Bulloigne , that if the arch-duke fhould object in 
the like manner to Cobbam and Ralegb , they were to return anfwer, “ That thefe had no 
“ charge, nor carried either horfe or men, except fome half a dozen of their own attendants j 
“ and finding the queen fo refolved to have a peace (if good conditions could be had) diey 
“ obtained leave, with importunity, to fee that one ad ion (then expefbed ) before they might 
“ dcfpair of feeing any more of the like kind in her majefty’s time. ” Thus much of this 
matter we have in a letter of fecretary Cecyll's to thofe commiflioners. In another written by 
Sir Henry Neville , who was one of thole commi/fioners, to Mr. Winwood, he mentions it as a 
report, that Cobbam and Ralegb were gone over upon pretext to fee the camp and fiege of 
the fort Ifabclla near Qjiend , before which prince Maurice lay \ but thinks they had fome other 
end ; and that in England there was fome alarm taken at thefe matters, altho’ he was not wor¬ 
thy to know it. The faid Sir Henry , in another letter to Mr .Winwood, lays, that the journey 
of Cobbam and Ralegb was not upon curiofity only ; but that they carried fome meflage (to 
prince Maurice it feems) which did no harm, and that he would reveal the particulars when 
he was better informed of them. Thefe three letters were written in July this year, and in 
the firfl: of them we perceive Ralegh was returned into England by the fourteenth day of the 
faid month. c / 

When he arrived at court, the government of Jerfey was, it feems, vacant by the death of 
Sir Anthony , fon of Sir Amias Paulet. The queen had many addrefiors for this preferments 
but fhc thought none fo worthy of it as Sir Walter Ralegh. About fix weeks after, that is, in 


• La Royne ejfoit uncart lors tn fa coiffure 9 il entre dans 
fa chamhre : mats il luy en prit comme cTAdeon a Diane : 
it vit la Royne en fa nudite de tefte , iff en fon Alopecie : 
fts Dames ont did depuis , que s’il euft attendu encore un 
peu, il avoit gaigne fa cauie. La Royne le voyant, etle 
ft Iri'i, ejlonnce, iff s'cfcrie : luy fe prof erne a fes puds : 
etle s'efrit encores d'avantaffe, luy difant, Quoy, voulez- 
vous prendre ma couroone ? 11 s'humilrt encore plus, trai- 
tiant le ventre par trrre . EUe saigrit encore xTtnvantage, 
fi bint que Its dames qvi 1 nvoient faid entrer , profemtes de 
rnoux pc:tr demaaUer fa grace, my pttrnu riot gaigntr ; 


etinfe ts limes m fur mt fancies, if Its esutres ehafflesdv fervict 
dt la Royne : frllement que le comte fut cvntrainjf de fe rC- 
tirer fans efre ouy Chronologies Sqxenaire dc 1‘HiJloire 
de la Paix *mre les Roys de France & d'F.fpagne. Par 
F. Vieior Cayet* Svo. Paris 1605. p. 214. 
k Camden's Eliza. Jnno 1599. 

« See Memoirs of Affairs ot State in the reigns of queen 
Elizabeth and kioe *James, xxdleded from the original 
papers of Sir Ralph Winnwod, by E. Sayrr of Lincohts- 
Inn, Efq; 1725 Vol. 1. fol. 21j, 250, 23!. 

the 


Digitized by 


Google 






CXXXV 


Sir WALTER RALEGH. 


the latter end of duguft % his patent was pafled, with grant of the manor or lord/hip of Si. 

Germain in the faid illand, and all the lands and tenements therein, d There is a learned in¬ 
habitant of this illand, who in his curious andexaft hiftory of it, giving us a fucccffion qf the 
governors, fays, “ Sir Walter Ralegh came in after the Paulets* the year only before his royal 
44 miftrefs queen Elizabeth died \ and was attainted the firft year of king James: fo that we 
44 were foon bereaved of. the happinefs we promifed ourfelves under fo excellent a perfon. His 
44 bare name in the lift of our governors does honour to the ifland. 5 * c Yet, as the fame author 
further obferves out of the faid patent, 44 When Sir Walter Ralegh himfelf had this govern- 
44 meat given him by queen Elizabeth , (be (truck off thre^ hundred pounds a year from ir, 

4C which £be took into her own difpofal \ and made that great man, fo renowned fo r pui- 

44 nent fervices to her and to the whole nation , be contented with the remaindvr. *’ a 

Efcx had now been called before the council at the lord-keeper’s, where, for the matters laid 
to his charge, he was ftifpeqded from fome of his offices. But the courfe of penitence and rs- 
figrutioa, which he held for a while, gave great hopes, after he had obtained hi* liberty, that 
he would recover himfelf alfo at court j tijl his creatures ble\j him up again with their poifopous 
counfels, and led him to expeft not only a reftoration to favour, but with unrcafopablq inrereft; 

44 infomqch, that he neglected the queen’s pardon, becaufc it came not accompanied with, a 
44 new grant of his leafe for th$ farming of fweet wines/* as a noble author qbferves: Who 
adds, 44 if ever that uncouth (peech fell from him of the queen, which js deliver’d to u* by 
44 one who was then much cotivcrfant in the fecrets of the court, c that Jbe was as (rooked in 
44 her difpoflion % as in her cartafs i ajl my wonder at his deftrudlion is taken from tne.” 

After this fpeech, the queen did as good as deny him the ww-licences aforefaid, as Camden re¬ 
lates, Then Ejfex threw himfelf open to all ill impreffions, renewing die project he had begun 
in Ireland of removing by force his enemies at court. He curried favour with king James Prejudic’d in 
iq Scotland, by feveral rrfpcftful letters > wherein he labour’d to prejudice the king againft 
thofe who had any influence in (he Englijh court, and was very particular in acquainting him Ejfex. 
with the incereft of his adverfarics i as one of whom he failed not to fet forth Sir Walter Ra¬ 
legh* with the formidable power he had in the weft of England , and now again in the ifle of 
Jcrfey \ that Cobbam was warden of the Cinque-Ports \ lord Burgbley , prefident of the north, 
and Sir George Carew, prefident of Munfttr y ;in the fouth of Ireland : That thofe were places 
commodious for the Spaniards to land} and thefe, perfons well-afFofted to the king of Spain , 
and altogether, with the lord-treafurer, admiral and fecretary, fleer’d the helm of govern¬ 
ment. Then he praftifed with the faid king to fend ambaflTadors into England , to prefs a 
publick declaration of his title to the fucceffion, prepares inftrudlions for that purpofe, ftill in- 
ftancing the exorbitant power of his enemies, their difaffeflion to the king of Scots , and great 
veneration for the infanta. Thefe proceedings were outwardly varnifh’d over, all this while, 
with die glofs of conference and religion ; he won over the puritans and their preachers to his 
party, eommifertated the afflifted condition of the papifts, retained a crew of Dcfperado's to 
guard his houfe, and left none uncountenanc’d, who had nothing to hope for* but changes and 
revolutions. 

Thus thefe ill humours kept gathering till Sunday the 8th of February following, and then 
broke out, as may be feen at large in our hiftories of thefe times. At court the guard was 


d Cmrjfo pro Waltfro Ralegh Ahlite, OJjvii Gubena- 
tor is 1 st Capitanei Infulee de Jerfey. Veil, •vicefimo fexto 
it/Aiiguij, anm 1600. Apud Rym. Feed. tom. XVI.. 
fol. 59 #. 

« See an account of the ifle of Jerfey, by Philip Falle, 
M. A, 2d Edit. 8vo. 1713. p, 190. 

* This rekrvanon is thus ex prefled in the patents— 

» yditmus nibilo minus, KA per pretfemes rtftrvamus nobis, 
baredtbus, & Huc/jforibus noftrif, dor ante tot i viti ipfius 
WaJteri, pro Iff ex cujiumis d;dx xnjulst, revent ion thus, 
frofeuis, & tmohmentis, ceeterifqiie omnibus tA Jingulis pret- 
Wjffis pr<tcQ*ctJis y animatem rtdditum trcceniarmn librarum 
Ugalis moneta Anglia,*, jbhrndum annuatim per pr erf at urn 
Waiter uni Ralegh, nobis , herredibus & fuccejfsribiu nojiris, 
ad duos anm terntinos ufualts ; •videlicet, ad fejia Sandli Mi¬ 
chael is Archangeli, & annunciationis Beat.c Mari* Vir- 
Vmis, per equates portivnes, ad rtceptam face aril nojlri, 
ha'ridjM iff fuccefforum nojhontm: provifo Jcrnper, quod fi 
frydiel us annuatis redditus, aid ah qua inde parcel/a, no¬ 
bis, bared 1 bus iff JucctJpjribus noth is, per frafentet refirva- 
fki > * ntro fuerit tff injo/utyj , in parte •veJ in toio, per 
J^atium quadraginta din urn pop aliquoj JcJium feji or um 


ftrediftorum in quo fd<vi debeat , tunc quotiefeunque Tbefau- 
rarius nojier Anglirr, <vel Subtbefiurat ius fcaccarii nojlri pr<f- 
difli, pro tempore txijteutes , aut eorum a/tquis , notitiam inde 
dederint met dederit dido Waltero aut fuo de potato p ret dido, 
fi prerdielus annualis redditus , aut aliqua inde pa reel la, no¬ 
bis, beer edi bus, iff fuecejfioribus uefris, a retro fuerit iff in¬ 
fo tutus per fpat sum trigmta durum poft aliquant notitiam fee 
ut prevfcrtur data in, ex tunc her litter er noJlr<t patentee, & 
omnts audoritates , jurifdidiones % res & (OncejJiones in eif- 
dem contentet, vacua? (runt , Uf nullius in lege •vigorit, alt- 
quo in prerfentibus non objlante, &c. See Fa/;t'$ Jirfiy, 
p. 315. from Rj/nir as above. 

* 'J be earl of Clarendon's disparity before cited. 

# This was Sir Walter Rough, who menuoas this paf* 
fnge in the following manner. 4< Undutiful words of a 
“ fcibiett do often take deeper root than the memory of 
“ ex it deeds. The duke of firon found it, when the 
“ king had him at advantage. Yea, the late carl of 
“ Ejfex told queen Elizabeth, Tb^t her conditions iv/re as 
“ crocked as her canofe ; but it coll him his head, which 
“ his inturreftion jiad not done, but for that lpecch.” 
Sir Waiter Ralegh's Prerogative of Parliaments. 


doubled, 


Digitized by 


Googl 


c 


\ 


cxxxv'i 


The LIFE/ 


doubled, being appris’d of this eruption > and the morning it happened, Sir Waller Ralegh 
fcnt, out of particular kindnefs, to Sir Ferdinando Gorges , one of EJfex* s adherents, and gover¬ 
nor of Plymouth fort, to come in all hafte to him at Durham-houfe to fpcak with him, and, 
as the more private way, that he would come by water. Gorges, in the Manufcript he writ 
to vindicate himfelf from the imputation of betraying EJfex by this meeting, avers, that he ad- 
vertifed his lordlhip of this meflage, and that upon council the earl was willing he fhould go , 
but directed him to appoint his meeting with Ralegh upon the Thames , and not to land at 
rence°wUh Sir ^ u, 'ham-boufe ; alfo to take with him a guard for fecuring his return. The conference that 
JW Gorges, pafled between them, as Gorges relates it, was only this : “ When Sir Walter Ralegh's boat 
an accom- ^ «» cartie to me, he being all alone, and I having two gentlemen, he told me, that he had 
f ent f° r me to admonifh me to make all hafte out of the town down to my charge; there 
“ being a warrant out for the fending me to the fleet. For his kind advertifement I gave 
“ him thanks ; but told him withal, becaufe I knew the prefent occafion would foon difeover 
“ itfelf, that it came too late * for I had engaged myfclf in another matter. He further in- 
“ quiring of me, what it was ? I told him, there were two thoufand gentlemen who had re- 
folved that day to live or die free-men. He protefted unto me he heard not of it until that 
•“ morning, but did not fee what they were able to do againft the queen’s authority. My 
** anfwer was, it was the abufe of that by him and others, which made fo many honeft men 
“ relolve to feek a reformation thereof. His reply was, that no man is without a colour for 
his intent} and advifed me to look to myfelf, and to remember my duty and allegiance. 
' “ I anfwer’d, tint I knew not any man who did not more refped his allegiance than his life, 
** as the end would make apparent > and thus we parted ; he to the court, and I to Effex- 
“ houfe." d In the confcffion made by this Gorges, eight days after that of their infurredtion 
above-named, before fome of the privy-council, it appears. Sir Chrijlopber Blount had per- 
fuaded him to murder or feize Sir Walter Ralegh at this meeting upon the water. * For not 
doing either, Gorges apologizes in the Manufcript aforefaid after this manner. “ If it be de* 
“ manded of me why I did not then take Sir Walter Ralegh. Firft,it was not a matter I ever 
“ propos’d j tho’ many perfuaded me fo to do. Secondly, I never held it an ad fitting among 
“ men to betray any that report truft in us ; and he putting himfelf into my hands, with what 
“ honefty could I have avowed fo barbarous a deed, unlefs he had given me the firft occafion 
“ by violent deeds or unkind words j for either of which, I was both refolved and prepared. 
“ And at my return, I deliver’d unto my lord what had palled • between Sir Walter Ralegh 
“ and myfelf, which he received with applaufe, as may be teftified by thofe who were prefent, 
“ and yet alive.” 1 Laftly, in another part of the laid Manufcript , Gorges fays, *« The 
“ rcafon why I acknowledge l had means to have taken or killed Sir Walter Ralegh was, the 
better to make it appear, that there was neither malicious or butcherous courfe intended to 
“ him or any j and alfo to give him caufe to acknowledge himfelf in that refped beholden 
“ unto me *, whereby to take from him occafion to exercife his power (which I knew to be 
“ great at that juncture) to my ruin. For I did believe, he could not in reafon be fo void of 
“ human refped, as not to requite one courtefy with another •, as alfo it was no matter of 
«* treafon againft her majefty, but rather a manifeftation of the contrary, approving this in- 
“ tent to be particular againft Sir Walter Ralegh , and others.” 8 This is the conference which 
“ pafled between them a few hours before the infurredion, as Gorges has reprefented it. 

After EJfex , with his party, had made feveral excurfions, and fome perfons had 
been (lain both on his fide and the queen’s. After he had been proclaimed a traitor 
by the king of arms in feveral parts of the city } and was driven, by water, to feck 
garrifon in his own houfe j we find Ralegh mentioned among the feveral nobles and knights 
who inverted it; tho’ he appears in no particular adion againft the faid earl or his company. 
But, when the earl foon after furrender’d himfelf, and was brought to examination, he pro- 
fefs’d that he was to have been aflaulted or aflaflinated by his private enemies j of this we have 
the following account publilh’d by authority. “ As in all former difeontentments, he had 
“ gone the beaten path of traitors, turning their imputation upon counfellors and perfons of 


d A brief anfwer to certain falfi , jlanderous , and idle 
objections made againft Sir Ferdinando Gorges, Knight, 
as if be bad been a man on purpofe employed to praflife the 
ruin of the late earl of LfTex, &c. written by himfelf in 
the Gate*houfe, June 14 1601. Containing 4 Sheets: 
In the Cotton library, under the Effigy of Julius F. VII. 
fol. 428. cap. 2. 


e See a declaration of the practices and treafom, at¬ 
tempted and committed by Robert , late earl of EJftx, and 
his accomplices, againft her majefty and her kingdoms, 
and imprinted by Robert Barker , the queen’s printer. 4to% 
1601. 

f Sir Ferdinando Gorges'> brief anfwer (as befo C ) 
t Idem, cap. 5. 


credit 


Digitized by 


Google 






Sir WALTER RALEGH. cxxxvii 


“ credit with their foveraign : fo now he was forced to defeend to the pretext of a private 
44 quarrel •, giving out, how that evening, when he fhould have been called before the lords of 
44 the council, there was an ambufeade of mufketeers placed upon the water, by the device of 
“ my lord Cobham and Sir Waller Ralegh, to have murder’d him in the way as he pafs’d. A Slander’d by 
“ matter of no probability (continues my author) thofe perfons having no fuch defperate eftates 
“ or minds as to ruin themfelves and their poftericy by committing fo odious a crime. On the 
“ contrary, it was certain, Sir Ferdinando Gorges accufed Blount of perfuading him to kill, or 
“ at lead apprehend Sir Walter Ralegh and that Gorges rejecting this advice, Blount fent fou r 
4 ‘ fhot after him in a boat, which Blount deny’d not} and afkcd Ralegh forgivenefs for it at 
“ the time of his death.” 1 But there were other improbabilities to diferedit this flandcr (as 
we may fafely call it, fincc the ftate call'd it by a grolTer name) befides that the perfons fo 
accufed had reputations and eftates better eftablifh’d, than to overthrow them by fuch a detefta- 
ble deed -, “ as Ejfex’s declining to produce or name any author of fuch an information : bc- 
“ fides his varying from himfelf (like the judges, in the ftory of Sufannah , from one another) 

“ in the place *, as one while he was to have been murder’d in his bed ; and another, on the 
44 water: alfo in the time and perfons j as that it was to have been done by Jcfuits , and fome 
44 days before : fo that in the end, this accufation by EJfex was refembled to the adtion of Pi- 
« fijlratus , who proceeded fo far in this kind of fiction and diffimulation, that lie lanced his 
44 own body, and came wounded before the people, as tho’ he had been afluulted by his 
“ private enemies •, thus obtained a guard about his own perfon, whereby he afterwards ufurped 
“ upon the ftate.” b Further, what may perfectly clear up the innocence of Cobham and Ra- Clear«. 
Itgb from this unworthy calumny, is the acknowledgment which Blount made at his own trial '» 
when, being afked by fecretary Cecyll, 44 Whether he thought my lord Cobham and Sir Wal. 

44 ter Ralegh intended any fuch aflafllnation of the earl ? he anfwer’d, that he did not believe 
44 they ever meant any fuch thing, nor that the earl himfelf feared it; only, it was a word cajl 
44 out to colour other matters . c ” And laftly, what may tend to prove, that Ralegh did rather 
compallionate and incline to befriend the earl, than harbour any enmity that was implacable 
againft him, is, that one of die earls own faction, captain ’Thomas Lee, fhould have fuch hopes, 
that Ralegh might be perfuaded into the danger of difobliging the queen by importunity, or 
other violent means, for retrieving both EJfex and Southampton from the jaws of death, as, by way 
of propofidon, to tell Sir Robert Crofs, who had been an old officer under Ralegh in feve- 
ral engagements at fea, 44 That Sir Walter Ralegh might get himfelf eternal honour and love, 

44 more than ever he can otherwife, if he would procure her majefty’s warrant to free the lords ■, 

44 which he might compafs, by undertaking her perfon: d ” for this does not only fhew the 
opinion that was held of Ralegh's power with the queen, but the probability thac he might be 
induced to exert it for the refeue of thofe noblemen. We find he did ufe his intcreft for fome Procures * 
who were drawn in unawares, and got a pardon for Sir Edmund Burnham j alfo for John Little - f 0 /j, e 
tort, and Orell a brave old foldier : the two former were men of fortune, and their purfes might confederate,, 
bleed, or be threaten’d upon this occafion. But, as Camden obferves, few paid the fines laid 
on them. 

On the 19th of February, EJfex was arraign’d at Wejlminjler 1 and we find, in his trial, 
that Sir Walter Ralegh, with forty of the queen’s guard, was, as captain thereof, there prefent 
upon duty.” Ralegh was here examin’d about the conference before-mention’d } and all he fud 
was, 44 That Gorges told him on the water, EJfex had put himfelf into a ftrong guard at his 
“ houfe j and this would be the bloodieft day’s work that ever was ; wifhing he would fpeed 
44 to court for the prevention of it •, and that he himfelf wilhed Gorges to refufe their company, 

“ elfehe would be undone/” This is all Ralegh faid of that conference -, which Gorges , here 
alfo in court, confirm’d. But EJfex feems to charge Gorges with prevarication, where he re¬ 
plies, “ Whatfoever Sir Walter Ralegh hath faid, differeth altogether from that which Sir Fer- 
44 dinando told us at EJfex-houfe , upon his return from the water.” And indeed it is not likely 
he fhould tell EJfex he advifed Ralegh to go to court and prevent the infurre&ion. Six days 
after, EJfex was beheaded in the Court-yard of London Tower, Among the many perfons of 


1 See the firft con/ciJion of Sir Ferdinando Gorges in the 
dtilarati'm of Ejfex\ treating *> bciore, in ihe Jail leaf 
of the letter E. 

. * Idem, in the 2d leaf of H. Sec alfo Mr. Fra, Ba- 
(tn* fpeech at the carl of EJ/lx's trtai, in the hr it vol. of 
State-Trials, 2J edit. 1730, fol 197. 

e The trial of Sir Cbrijtop^r Blaunt, &c. from a very 
old MS. of Pcttr Le Stvt, iifq; Ntrrvy, in the additional 


collection of State-Trials , vol. VII. now at the prefs, fol. 
5 ° 

4 The arraignment and judgment of captain TUmas 
Lee , Arc. in the lame volume, iol. 4;. 

« The earl of EJfex* Ttial in the lull vol. of Trials as 
before, fol. 100. 

* Idem, fol. 194. 

diftindHoft 


c c c 


Digitized by boogie 




cxxxviii "The LIFE of 

diftin&ion, there prefent was Sir Walter Ralegh, probably in his charge again as captain of 
the guard. He flood near the fcaffold, according to his own afiertion ; that he might better 
anfwer, if EJfex fhould be defirous of fpeaking to him. But his enemies expounded his pre¬ 
fence there in fuch a barbarous fenfe, fays Camden, as if he had prefled near the place of exe¬ 
cution, only to feaft his eyes with the tragedy of the earl’s fufferings i and the greateft or molt 
notorious of Ralegh's enemies (who is known to us) he who betrayed him to his own untimely 
end, as will be obferv’d, did after Ralegh's death, when he could not anfwer forhimfelf, infinu- 
ate, that he not only infulced upon EJfex being dead, but even plotted his downfal, as that 
** he had called the earl’s faintlhip in queftion,” had writ in fome letters, “ that the great boy 
“ died like a calf, and like a craven and that, foon after the execution, a gentleman, re¬ 
turning from Spain, touched at Sherborne, who, being alkcd by Ralegh, •« what they laid in 
“ Spain of EJfex's death ?” anfwered, “ They had not heard of it; but he was lorry to hear, 
“ that in the IJland voyage the earl had brought him to his mercy ” to which, that Ralegh anfwer’d, 
“ but I trufl I am now quit with him i” and, as a more evident demonftration, fays, that the 
night before the earl’s fuflering, “ Ralegh gave inftrudions to the lieutenant of the Tower for 
“ the execution of the warrantwhich furely he did not do without authority. But thefe 
particulars, it muft be obferved, come from the perfon ftigmatiz'd with having enfnared Ra¬ 
legh to his deftru&ion, and to the perfon who dcftroyed him, with endeavour to palliate the 
conduit of both to the world. 1 And as we find thofe obloquies gave not fatisfadlion to their 
author‘s contemporaries: fo we have produced them, that they may not efcape the reception 
they defcrve of pofterity. As for Ralegh's comportment to EJfex, we may guefs what it was 
while the earl was alive, fince he made no exceptions to it at his death, when he had free liberty 
of fpeech ; and when Ralegh came to the fame end, it appears by his laft words, that he had 
relented more at the earl’s fate, than any thing we hear of in his pretended friends ; and that he re¬ 
tir’d from the fight of the earl at the time of his death, in compliance with the mifconftrudtion of 
the populace, tho’ he afterwards repented it; fince the earl had a dcfire to fee and fpeak with 
him before he took his farewel of the world. 

This defire was, in all probability, toalk Ralegh forgivenefs, for having fo difhonourably 
treated and traduced him, to countenance his own ralh purpofes. For juft fuch a defire had 
Sir Cbrijiopher Blount, when his own execution approached on the iSth of March following 
at Tower-bill ; where, underftanding that Ralegh , as captain of the guard, was near the leaf- 
fold, he faid, “ Sir Walter Ralegh , I thank God that you are prefent: I had an infinite defirs 
«« to fpeak with you, to afk you forgivenefs e’re I died ; both for the wrong done you, and 
Blount a flu «» for my particular ill intent towards you : I befeech you forgive me.” Ralegh anfwer’d* 

nefe. l0r8 VC * “ d 1 * 1 he molt willingly forgave him, and befought God to forgive him, and to give him his 

“ divine comfort ; protefting before the Lord, that whatever Sir Cbrijiopher Blount meant 
«« towards him, for his part, he never bore him any ill intentand further faid to him, *« I 
“ pray you, without offence, let me put you in mind, that you have been efteemed not only a 
“ principal provoker and perfuader of the earl of EJfex in all his undutiful courfes, but elpe- 
« daily an advifer in that which has been confefs’d, of his purpofe to tranfport a great part of 
“ her majefty’s army out of Ireland into England, to land at Milford, and thence to turn it 
«* againft her facred perlbn : you will do well to tell the truth herein, and to fatisfy the world.” 

Blount reply’d, “ When I was brought from Reban to Dublin, and lodg’d in the caftlc j his 

** lordlhip and the earl of Southampton came to vifit me ; and he began thus plainly with me ; 
“ That he intended to tranfport a choice part of the army of Ireland into England, and land them 
** in Wales , at Milford, or thereabouts: and fo fecuring his defeent, would gather fuch other 
“ forces, as would enable him to march to London .” I anfwer’d, “ I would that night con. 
“ fider of it.” Next day the earls came again ; I told them, “ Such an enterprize, as it was 

inoft dangerous, would coft much blood ; fo as I could not like it. But I rather advifed 
“ him to go over himfelf, with a good train, and make fure of the court, than make his own 
“ conditions; and tho’ we never rcfolvcd to hurt her majefty’s perfon, yet I know, and mull 
“ confefs. If we had failed of our ends, we fhould, rather than have been difappointed, reen have 
“ drawn blood from herfelf ” Then giving a few farther hints of their progrefs in general, he 
leaves the reft to his confeffions made before the privy-counlellors, whom he names, and to 
whom he belecches Sir Walter Ralegh to commend him for their favourable and charitable 
dealing. Laftly, having alfo declared he died in the Catholic faith, and bid farewel to the 

* The humble pethion and information of Sir Lewii StucUy, Kt. tsf c. touching his behaviour, in bringing rp Sir 
TJ’ahr Rat.^b, &C. To the king 's molt excellent mnjeily, 410. 1618, p 9, 10. -or 


lords 


Digitized by LnOOQle 





Sir IV A L LE R RALEGH. cxxxtx 

lords Gray, Compton , and the reft, he made a decent end. * Thus have we conne<fted all the 
paflages of EJcx's infurredtion, wherein we have found Ralegh any ways mention’d or con¬ 
cern d i which, with feveral other remarkable parts of his ftory, thofe authors, who had read 
many of the trafts, letters, records, and other manulcripts whence it is here drawn out, have 
vifibly curtail’d and fupprefs’din their annals and chronicles of this reign, which were publilh’d 
in the next. 

The following fummer, in the year 1601, it appears, that Ralegh attended upon die queen 
in her progrefs i and, when tire king of France came to Calais , on the alarm of the archduke’s 
befieging of Ofiend , her majefty was at Dover, Ambaflidors were fent over to each other on 
this occafion •, and, in that private difpatch of the marquis of Rofney , afterwards duke of Sully, 
related only by himfelf, we find, that upon his landing at Dover , he was received by Ralegh , Receiver the 
in company with the lords Cobbam, Sidney , and others. b The interview, then expected be- 
tween thefe two princes, was not brought to pafs ; nor feem the propofals, made to her majefty JUutr. 
about the war with Spain, to have had the foil eftetft that was hoped for ; becaufe, not long 
after, on the 5th of September , there arrived at London another ambaflador from France , named 
the duke of Biron, with a very noble, numerous and ftately equipage, to the number of three or 
four hundred perfons. The queen was then in Hantjhire j and, during the thirteen days /lie 
was entertained at Bafing, the marquis of JVwchejler’s feat, the duke of Biron , with his retinue, 
was brought to the Vine, a fair houle in the faid county of the lord Sandys, which was furni/h’d 
with feven fcorc beds by the neighbouring gentry, and with all other accommodations from the 
queen’s palaces, for the reception of the faid ambaflador. I leave this entertainment to the de- 
feriptionof the French and Englijb hiftorians, whoobferve it was one difeoncinued feftival, and 
that the like was never made by any of our princes in a progrefs. ’Tis more particularly to 
be expefted, that Ralegh did here attend upon the court, becaufe he was commonly appointed 
to entertain the foreign minifters, efpecially of France or the States, being fo well acquainted 
with thofe people and their policies : and when the queen left the country, we find, among the 
ten perlbos fhe there knighted (a greater number than ever fhe had confer’d that honour upon 
at one time) that one of them was Carew, c the brother of Sir Walter Ralegh. But as for 
that paflage, in a French hiftorian lately quoted, between the queen and the ambaflador when 
they were in London, of her /hewing him, among the heads of thofe rebels which were ftuck 
Upon the Lower, that of the earl of Ejfex ; d it has been proved fabulous by Camden, * who 
would doubtlefs have detected other fuch falfities in the faid French author, relating to our Eng¬ 
lijb Hijlory, and in particular to Sir Walter Ralegb t had his Annals extented to the year, in 
which we /hall be obliged to take notice thereof. 

Soon after the queen’s return from this progrefs, her laft parliament met at Wejlminjler, and 
that was on the 27th day of Otlober. This was a feflion full of important bufmefs, and Ra¬ 
legh appears frequently engaged in it.- The firft or mod ancient lift of the members of the 
houfe of commons, at leaft extant, is, as I have been told by an eminent antiquary, that which 
we have of this parliament •, ( and herein it appears, that Sir Walter Ralegh was one of the r n patlia 
knights of die /hire for the county of Cornwall, John Arundell , Efq> being the other ; and mtnt - 
that Sir Carew Ralegh was one of the burgefles for Foway in the fame county. The firft 
fpeech we have of Sir Walters, upon record in this parliament, was on November the 4th j and in Oppofes the 
oppofuion to the ad for lowing of hemp, “ For my part, faid he, I do not like this conftraining 


• Sir Cbrijlopher Blount's dying fpcech, in the declara¬ 
tion cf the Dea/ant of tllcx and his complices, a$ before, 
fW. penult. 

^ fc Mime.ret, ou Oeconcmirt Rora/et d' E tat de Henri U 
Grand, par Maximdicn de B^hunc Due d: Sully, in 12 
volume* 12®. Amjlnd. 1725, vol. p. 60. 

* John Stow* Amah, edit. 1615, fol. 797. This is 
that tir Carenv RaLgh, who appears, in the court-rolls of 
Gillingham- in Ghee Urjfhire, to have been one of the Rew¬ 
ards, his brother Sir If alter being the other of that manor, 
in thefe times belonging to the crown ; as I have it from 
a letter of fome obliging remarks npon the family of the 
Retttgbj, written by William Kichoias, Efq; of Weji'horfe- 
A in Suffix. This mull be alfo the fame Sir Carew Ra• 

who had, in 1616, for what confederation is not 
mention'd, a hundred pounds paid him from the govern¬ 
ment, as I f.nd in an Abf.iad of tbr State of his Majefly s 
Revenue, reprinted 8vo. 1692, p. 30. I.ikewife the lame 
who ibid Hiddycombt Ralegh to one of the Martyns, as is 
before oblerved ; and the ancient patrimony of Fardel to 
Walter He ale, E(q; of Brixtcn, as John Prime informs us 
in the Worthies of Devon, fol. 402. Luitly, the fame Sir 


Carew Ralegh, who married Dorothy , daughter of Sir Wil¬ 
liam Wrougbiott, and relidl of Sir John ‘Ibynnt, by whom 
he had Gilbert , heir of Dtnintom and he, by Eu(y, daugh¬ 
ter of Sir Gilly Wroughton, of Broad hint™ in Wilts, Had 
feveral child/en, as Gilbert , George, Walter , Katharine , 
Anne, &c. This I gather from a pedigree of the Raltgbs* 
in the pofleflion of Brown Willis, Eiq; mention'd at the 
beginning of this work; wherein it farther appears, the 
faid Sir Carew, his fon and grand-children, were all alive 
in 1623. And hence the Wiltjbire Ralegbt have flourifh'd 
to theie latter times. 

d Chronologic Sep/enaire de PHiftoirt de la Paix entre Its 
Roys de France, tsf d'Efpagne, par P. Vidor Cayet, 8vo. 1605, 
p. 233, b. 

« “ Whereas certain French writers have mention'd, 
“ fays Camden, that the queen fhe wed to Biron the earl of 
u EJJex'% fcull in her clofer, or according to others fixed 
“ upon a pole; it mull needs be a ftory as ridiculous as 
“ fir He; fmee that was interred with Jus body.'* Amai 
u FAiz. 1601 . 

f At the end of Heyzvood TownJhcncTs H if! or ical Collec¬ 
tions of q. Elizabeth'* ioar laft parliaments. 


“ of 


Digitized by LxOOQle 







cxl 


The L I F E of 

“ of men to manure or ufe their ground at our wills; but rather let every man ufe his 
ground to that which it is mod fit for, and therein ufe his own difcretion. For halfiers, 
“ cables, cordage, and the like, we have plentifully enough from foreign nations •, and we 
** have countries here in England that make ufe thereof in abundance : and the bill of Tillage 
«« may be a fufficient motive to us in this call*, not to take the courfe that this bill intends. For 
“ where the law provides, that every man muft plough the third part of his land \ I know 
“ divers poor people have done fo, to avoid the penalty of the ftatute, when their abilities have * 
“ been fo poor, that they have not been able to buy feed-corn to fow it withal j nay, they 
“ have been fain to hire others to plough it * which, if it had been unplough’d, would have 
“ been good pafture for beads, or might have been converted to other good ufe.”* Upon 
this motion, all the houfe bid away with the bill: but it was put to the qucftion, whether it 
fhould be committed or no ? Some doubt arifing, the houfe was divided *, and the lea's were 
103, the Noes 162 : fo the bill was not committed. It was afterwards put to the quedion for 
ingrofling; and, notwithdanding Mr. Comptroller’s fpeech for the weight of it (which is not 
preferved) it was deny’d, and fo abfolately rejected. Three days after, Sir Walter Ralegh was 
at the committee in the houfe, touching the fubfidy. Here he moved them to confider for what 
Hij fpeech intent they came thither, and now in their coming, what was to be confider’d. “ For the 
for th c/uA. (< fubfidy, faid he, the manner and quality thereof, I -will now only intimate thus much to you •, 
“ that the lad parliament, only three fubfidies were granted, upon fear that the Spaniards were 
“ comings but now we fee they are come, and have fet foot even in the queen’s territories 
“ already j therefore, are the more of us to be refpetted and regarded. And feeing the fale 
“ of her majedy’s own jewels j the great loans her fubje< 5 ts have lent her, yet unpaid} the continual 
“ felling of her lands, and decaying of her revenues j the fparing even out of her own purfe 
“ and apparel for our own fakes, will not ferve ; but Ihc mud yet be fain to call her court of 
“ parliament for our advice and aid in this cafe ; I wilh, for my part, as a particular member 
“ of the common-wealth, that we may not do lets than we did before ; and that we may alfo 
“ bountifully, according to our edates, contribute to her majedy’s neceffities, as they nowdand.” 
This fpeech was confirm’d by many other members, and met with no oppofition that we read 
of. But the manner of raifing this fubfidy created fome lhort debate > in which Sir Francis 
Hafiings moved, that the three pound men might be exempted ; and all others, above that rate^ 
to pay according to the rate , to make up a full fubfidy. To this Sir fValter Ralegh anfwer’d, 
«* If all pay, none will be aggrieved ^ if any be exempted, doubtlefs it will breed much grief; 
«* the feeling will be great to thofe three pound men that will feel any thing, but it will be no- 
e« thing to them that know any thing.” Sir Edward Hobby, who, it feems, lit near the door^ 
not hearing well this fpeech, faid, “ You diould fpeak danding, that the houfe might hear 
“ you.” Ralegh anfwer’d, “ That being in a committee, he might fpeak fitting or dand- 
« jngfo (without rifing) repeated his former words. In the end this propofal was agreed 
to, and fecretary Cccyll reported to the whole houfe, “ that mod voices concluded, there diould 
“ be no exception of the three pound men, becaufe, according to their rate, fome were adefs’d 
“ under value > befides, feparation might breed emulation, fufpicion of partiality and confu- 
“ fion.” Yet when Cecyll, among thofe who lanched out, b carried the matter fo high, as to 
fay, “ that neither pots or pans, nor difh nor fpoon, diould be fpared, when danger is at our 
“ elbows > nor would by any means have the three pound men excluded, becaufe he’d have the 
“ king of Spain know, how willing we are to fell all in defence of God’s religion, our prince 
“ and our country and when Mr. Francis Bacon , in his fpeech, concluded it was “ Dulcis 
“ trail us pari jugo •, therefore the poor, as well as the rich, not to be exempted Ralegh did 
anfwcr ; ** I like it r.ot, that the Spaniards , our enemies, lhould know of our felling our pot s 
«* and pans to pay fubfidies ; well may you call it policy, as an honourable perfon allcdg'd ; 
«* but I am fure it argues poverty in the date. And for the motion that was laft made, Dulci s 
«* trallus pari jugo : call you this par jugum , when a poor man pays as much as a rich ? and 
“ peradventure his eftate is no better than it is fet at, or but little better ; while our eftates ar e 
“ three or four pounds c in the queen’s books, and it is not the hundredth part of our wealth - t 


• ‘Tonvnfenets Hift.C.olf. fol. iSS. Sir Simon Drwes 
omits this fpeech by Sir M'altcr kcUpb upon that bill, and 
nukes fome errors in his account of iti commitment. See 
/’//Journal, fol. 1708, p. 626. 

b Of whom, none more remaikablctlwn fcijcant Ifea/e; 
who marvelled much the houte fhould demur upon g;am* 
ing this fubfidy, or in the time of payment; “ When all 
“ we have, faid hr, is her majefly’s; and flic may iaw- 
“ fully, at pleafure, fake it fiom us: yea, flic har as 
“ much right to all our lands and gouu>, as to any ie- 


“ venue of her crown.” At which the hou r e humm’d 
and laugh’d. Well, all you z bumming, laid tJie .erjeant, 

11 (hank put me out of countenance.” So to meiui the 
matter, he told them, 44 he could prove his former poftion 
44 in the time of king Ht'iry 111 , k. John , k. Stephtn, 
44 &c." At this, the bou e was louder than before, till 
they hummkl the le.jeant into his feat; but he was after¬ 
wards more particularly expos’d for thefc flavifh principles. 

« So Hwmocd v tWHjbcrdy fol. 204. But, thirty or forty 
found, in Sir Sin:m Lewes, fol. 633. 

«* therefore 


Digitized by kjOOQle 







Sir WALTER RALEGH. *xli 

therefore it is hcither dutch nor par'' . This might flow as well from die natural fource of 
his own benignity^ as from any compliance with the. queen's inclination to favour the poorer . 
fort, lor whom Ralegh Teems, by her command, to have before indeed been a chofen advocate: * 
but he knowing, as well as the reft of the members, by former experience, that fuch a fupply, 
as her majefty now wanted, being no lefs.than three hundred tboufand pounds , according to 
CecylPs reprefentation, could not be raifed, if fuch an exemption were admitted of ", the former 
propofition prevail’d, and the three pound men were neceflarily included. 

Whek the complaint againft: monopolies was made oh the 20th of November, and Dr. Ren¬ 
net mention’d that of cards, I can't perceive how it could be juftly obferved in the journals,. 
to make any change in the countenance of Sir Walter Ralegh ; fince in the fame journals it is 
alfo obferved, that the patent for cards was now granted to Edward Darcy. b But, when Mr. 

Martin l'poke of a “ country that groaned under the burthen of monltrous and unconicionable 
“ fubftitutes to monopolitans of ftarch, tin, fi(h, cloth, oil, vinegar, fait, and what not.” Sir 
Walter Ralegh reply’d, “ I am urged to fpeak in two refpe&s j the one, becaufe I find my fell 
«* touched upon in particular $: the other, in that 1 take fome imputation and flander to be 
« offered unto her majefty: I mean by the gentleman who firft mention’d tin. For that being 
« one of the principal commodities of this kingdom, and being in Cornwall, it has ever (fo 
« long as there were any) belonged to the dukes of Cornwall } and they had ipecial patents of 
“ privilege. It has plcaied her majefty freely to beftow on me that privilege, and that patent ; 

«« being word for word the very fame the duke's is. And becaufe, by reafon .of my office of 
*« Lord-warden of the Stannaries , I can fufficiently inform this houfe Of the ftate thereof, I will 
« make bold to deliver it unto you. When the tin is taken out of the mine, and molten and 
«« refin’d, then is every piece, containing a hundred weight, fealed with the diiktfs feal. And r n right 
«* by reafon of this privilege (which I now have) he ever had the refufal in buying thereof j ° f r 
“ for the words of the patent are, Ntfi nos emere voluimus . Now 1 will tell you, that before fin. 

« the granting of my patehtj whether tin were but at feventeen /hillings, and To upward to fifty 
•* /billings a hundred; yet the poor workman never had but two /billings a week, finding him- 
•* felf: but fince my patent, w hofoever will work, be dn at what price foever* they have four 
« Ihillings a week truly paid: there is no poor that will work there, but may, and have that 
•* wages.” But, notwithftanding his merit, as well as right, Ralegh concluded, fay ing; «« Yet if 
•* all others may be repeal’d, I will give my confcnt as freely to the cancelling of this, is any 
«• member of this houfe/’ It is noted, that a great and uncommon filence followed this fpeech. 

At laft Sir Francis Hajlings laid, in fefpeft thereto: ** I joy to fee fo great a reformation, that 
•* we may fpeak quietly, and be heard peaceably \ every man has not alike fenfe or judgment* 

** neither is every man’s memory alike. I wifh, that if any gentleman, who fpeaks of this, 

*< or any other fubjetft as curious, fhall let fall any word amiis or unpleafing, that it may be 
*« attributed rather to earneftnefs, than want of duty.” Throughout the further proceedings 
againft the numerous monopolies now in force, we find not any mention made of his patent 
afbrefaid, among thofe which were particularly promis’d to be revok’d or abolilh’d as grievances 
to the ftate. On the 24th of November , Sir Edmund Morgan and Mr. Pemberton, both mem¬ 
bers of the houfe, being ferved with fubpeenas to appear in the court of Chancery , the fame 
day, at the fuit of Sir Walter' and Sir Carew Ralegh, they had the privilege granted them. 

The officers, who ferved thofe fubpeenas , were taken into the cuftody of the ferjeant, but foon 

releafed, upon pleading they knew not thofe gentlemen to be members of parliament.« This 

is all I find of that fuit concerning Sir Walter Ralegh. On the 2d of December, he fpoke And againft 

againft the defeats and hardfhips in a bill that was read for reformation of abufes in inns ; as 

that, “ it would deprive thofe, who, by their lordfliips or manors, had right to enquire into firming «/ 

“ the defaults of felling liquors by full meafure, of their privilege j that, by difabling a man 
** for ever after of being an inn-keeper, how detrimental it might be to the inheritance of 
“ thofe who had inns, fome at a hundred pounds per annum * and how dangerous to inn-keep- 
“ ers, who might, by the negligence of a fervant, fuffer : all which he lefc to the diferetion 
“ of the houfe.” 4 After other like objections, by another member or two, we hear no more 
of it. Soon after, the means of fuppreffing the pirates of Dunkirk, now grown ftrong both 

’ *Sir W*ktr, fpeaking of a parliament in the reign of ** books, we found the fum but fmall* when the 
king Richard II, wheiein a fubfidy was given only by •• pound men (perhaps the cypher is added by millake) 

the better fort, and the commons ipar’d, fays (in the per- f * were left out." bee Ralt^b's Prerogative of Par ha- 

foo of a jultice of peace) 44 1 myielf once moved it in ments . 

“ parliament, in the time of queen Eli*utbetb 9 who dc- * Heywood Tcwrr/ 7 :eitd f fol. 244, 245. 

" fired much to fpare the common people, and I did it by * Dexvn 's Journal, fol. 651, i?e. 

u her commandment ; but, wften wc caU ep uc fi.otidy- * Towffeend' s Hilt. Coll. 10I. 278. 

d d d in 


r 


Digitized by 


Goog[< 



cxlii 


Againft 
the tranfpor- 
tation of ord 
nance . 


for repealin' 
the ftacuteoi 
tillage. 


' ■Tie L X F ' E */ ! - • • 

in arrtis arid Shipping’ came under the confideration of this houfe. As one remedy againft therrT 
it was proposed, to rejlrain the. tranfportalion of ordnance, and a bill to prohibit the fame was 
read a fecond time on the 8th of December ; but, before it was committed, ther^ palled many 
ipeeches upon this important argument. It feems, a patent for tranfporting them had been ' 
granted to Sir Henry Nevill , and the queen’s duty thereby role to three thoiifand pounds a year 
yet this profit no ways ballanc’d the inconveniences. ' For, being carried into all countries that 
were friends with Dunkirk , and confederates'with Spain, the Spaniards had fuch plenty, that 
they now ufually fold a hundred, weight of iron ordnance for feven ducats and a halt. The 
laws were moreover urg’d in 33 of Henry "V III, and 2 of Edw&rd'Vl, which prohibited the 
tranfporting of gun metal} and tho* guns were not then made of iron, they now werC •, therefore it 
was within the power of thofe laws. Sir Walter Ralegh , in approbation of this motion, laid, 
“ lam fure heretofore one fhip of her tnajefty’s was able to beatten Spaniards ; but now, 

. “ by reafon of our qtfn ordnance, we are hardly match’d one to one. And, if the Low Coun- 
“ tries fhould either be fubdued by the Spaniard , or yield unto him upon a conditional peace, 
“ or fhall join in amity with the French, as we fee them daily inclining, I fay, there is nothing 
“ does fo much threaten the conqucft of this kingdom, as the tranfportalion of ordnance j and 
“ therefore, I thipk it a good and fpeedy courfe to proceed by way of petition, left we be cut 
“ off from our defires, either by the Upper Houfe , or before, by the fhortnels and fudden end- 
“ ing of the parliamant.”* The generality agreed With him in the ncedfulnefs of reftraining 
this privilege i however, they proceeded byway of bill,, which palled the commons, but 
not the lords*, for other buftnefs interfering, it fell afleep till the end of the feffion, and then the 
fpeaker Crook 9 who was tqrcprefent it to her majefty, forgetting his promife, it came to no¬ 
thing. 

On the 5th of f)ecc inter the difpute was renew’d, whether the ftatute of tillage Ihould be 
continued? This ftatute was made in the time of dearth, and Sir Walter Ralegh agreed with 

• Sir Walter Ralegh has alfo written upon this fubjett 44 into all corners of America as they do, and the Span's- 
in two or three places. In YiiiAifcturfe, tombing A war "ards and Portuguese .employ more Jhips by many (hlh- 
nvith Spaia, and the protesting of //^Netherlands, written 44 ing trades excepted) than the Netherlands: but it cornea 
not long after he n\ade the alcfrefaid fpeech, having told 44 from Che deteftable covetoufncfs of fuch particular per¬ 
king Jantes how he«rctnemher'd, that within thefe thirty 44 Tons as have gotten licences, and given way to tha 
years, two of her majdly's fhips would have commanded 44 transporting of Englijb ordnance, butt b*c fapientia 
one hundred fail of theirs; and' that when he was a cap- kt quondam, fublica privatis fecernere, facra profanu ; antf 
tain in Ireland^ a hundred foot arid a hundred hoi fe would 44 that in io great abundance, that not only our good 
have beaten all the force of the ltrougert provinces : he 44 friends, the Hollanders and Zelanders , have furmlhed 
*dds, 44 but of late * I have known an Euflerlmg light, 44 themfelves, and have them lying on their w harfs to 
“ hand to hand, with one of her majerty’s fhips; and that 44 fell to others ; but all other nations have had from us* 
4 « the Irijb have, in this lall war* overthtown with even 44 not only to furnifh their fleets, but to garnilh all their 
44 or far lefs number. The Netherlands (continues he) in 44 forts -and other places, fortifying their toalls; without 
44 thofe days, had wooden guns, and the Irijb had darts; 44 which, the Spanijo king dont not have demounted fo 

44 but the one is now furniih’d with as great a number of 44 many pieces of brafs in Naples, and elsewhere, to arm 
44 Englijb ordnance as ourfclvcs, and the other with as 44 his great fleet in 158*. But it was direct ly proved in 
<4 good pikes and mufkets as England hath.” See Ra - 44 the lower iiouie of parliament. Anno .... of queen 

lego's three Dijcsu/fs, 8vo. 1702, p. 16. In another drf 44 Elizabeth, tha: there were landed in Naples above 140 
courfe he afterwards writ, touching a marriage between $t Culver ins Engljb; fmee which time, and not long iince, 
prince Henry of England, and a daughter of Savoy, fpeak- 44 it is lamentable tnatlo many have been tranfported into 
ing of the Netherlands, he has theie words; 44 Whereas, 44 Spain. But thoie belike who then determin'd it, and 
• 4 in my tinfe, I have known one of her majerty’s fhips 44 tire trareporters, have now forfaken the country ; and 
44 command forty of theirs to ilrike fail; they will now 44 tho* the procurers remain, 1 am reiolved they aifo have 
44 undertake us one to one, and not give us a goed mor- 44 forfaken the care of his majerty’s elbtc, and the ho- 
44 row : they mailer us both in their number and in their 44 nour of this nation. I urge not this point, as thinking 
44 mariners ; and they have our own ordnance to break 44 it unfit to fumilh his majesty's good friends and allies, 
44 our own bones withal. We had reafon to help them; 44 who have hud with us one common enemy for many 

44 but not to help them up to that height, as to make 44 years. But all politic flates have well obferved this 
44 them able to tread upon our own heads.” Thus in the 44 precept, Ut fic traclarent amicum , tanquam wimictat 
old MS. of that difeourf, communicated by the noble earl * 4 futwum ; for, what are all the iliips in the world to be 
of Oxford . Laftly, in another difourf Sir Walter Ra* 44 valued at, other than a company of fimting tubs, were 
Ugh wrote after this, I mean that on the Invention of Ship- 44 they not furniih'd with ordnance, either to offend others, 
ping, he has more copiouily argued upon this head. Theie 44 or defend themfelves ? If a fliip of 1000 tons had in 
arguments I fhall here alio annex, both as what will ex- 44 her 1000 mufketcers, and never a great gun 5 with one 
emplify the conllancy of his judgment, and prove the 44 Crumfter, carrying ten or thirteen Cuherins, (he may 
genuineness of thefe difeourfes; tho’ two of them are 44 be beaten to pieces, and her men flaughtci'd. Certain - 
pollhumous publications, and the other was never pub** 44 ly the advantage, which the Englijb had by them bow's 
liih'd. 44 There is no llate, fays he, grown in hafle, but 44 and arrows in former times, was never io great as wc 
44 that of the United Provinces , efpecially in their lea- 44 might now have had by our iron ordnance, if wc had 
44 forces; and by a contrary way to that of Trance , or 44 either kept it within the land, kept it from our ene- 
44 Spain ; the latter by invafion, the former by oppreflion. 44 mics, or imparted it to our friends moderately : for, 
44 For I myfelf may remember, when one fh;p of her 44 as by the former, wc obtained many notable victories, 
44 majerty’s would have made forty Hollanders ftrike fail, 44 and made ourfclves mailers of many parts of franca 
44 and to come to anchor; they did not then difpute de 44 fo by the latter, wc might have commanded the leas, 

44 mar; libera; but readily acknowledg'd the Englijb to 44 and thereby the trade of the world i tic If. But wc have 

44 be Domini marts Britannia?' And a little lurthcr : 44 now, to our future prejudice, and how far to our pre- 

44 But whence comes this difpute? not from the encreafe 44 judice I know not, forged hammers, and deliver'd them 

44 of numbers, not bccaufe our neighbours breed more 44 out of our h inds to break our own bones withal.’* See 

44 mariners than we do, nor from tne greatnefs of their judicious and fleet Euays by Sir Walter Kulegh. 8vo. 
44 trade in all parts of the world; for the Trench creep 1650, p. 27,32, bV. 

4 ' thofe 


I 

1 I 

I 

I 

I 

ft 

ft 


ft 

II 

ft 

f 

i 

t:: 

a 

c 

F 

Is 

b 

F 

«i 

It 

II 

Cl 

II 

J 

fc: 

k 

it 


F 

fc; 

fc; 

b 

C: 

ti 1 . 
£ 


II ~ 

"d 

*£ 

1-: 





Digitized by 


Googl 


c 


s' M 



Sir WALTER RALEGH. c#4 

thofe who were for having it now repeal’d. His reafon for it was, becaufe “ many poor men> 

M are not able to find feed-to fow to much ground, as they are bound to plough, which they 
• 4 muft do, or incur the penalty of the law. Befides, all nations-.abound with*corn. Trance 
*• offer’d the queen tofcrve Ireland with corn for fixteen fhiilings a quarter, which is but two 
flrillings the buftfel.; if we fhould fell it fo here, the ploughman would be beggar’d. Th$ 
Low-countryman and the Hollander , who never fow corn, have, by their induftry, fuch plen- 
** ty, that they will ferve other nations. The Spaniard, who often wants corn,, had we never 
fo much plenty, would never be beholden to .'tbe Englijhman for it, neither, to CntLowcoun? , 

« tryman , nor to France ; but will fetch it even: of the very Barbarian \ and .that which the 
“ Barbarian has been fuing for thefe two hundred years (I mean for traffkk of corn into Spain) 
this king, in policy, has fet at liberty of hiralclf, becaufe he will not be beholden to oilier 
“ nations. And therefore, I think, the belt courfc is, to fet it at liberty, and leave every m«B 
« free, which is the defire of a true Englijhman:” * After other fpeeches, it was put to the 
queftion, whether the bill of tillage Ihould be committed ? and it pafs’d in .the affirmative. 

But, it having pleas’d her majefty to licenfe Mr. Dormer, under her letters patents, with a Noth 
objlante, this ftatute, to endofe three hundred acres of ground, he prayed the houfe to admit 

of this provifo \ therefore it was put to the queftion, and carried. The Noe's demanded a divifion 

of the houfe: whereupon Mr. Richard Martin obferv’d, the Noes had always carried it in this 
parliament when they came to a divifion * many flaying with the Tea's, becaufe they would not 
lofe their places. Sir Walter Ralegh- role to anfwer him ; but.fnany hurrying out to the divj- 
fion, he and Cecyll, it feems, took fome difpleafure ; for, after, the divifion, when Mr. Dormer ’s 
provifo carried it again by a majority, whereby the houfe was fet quiet. Sir Walter Ralegh (aid, 

“ I thought I had deferved of the houfe to have been heard to fpeak, as well is he that fpake For liberty of 
“ before the divifion; and in that I offer’d to fpeak, and was not heard, I had wrong : for *P ecch- 

44 him that laft fpake, it was out of humour, and not out of judgment. Notwkhftandiog, I Againft an 

“ think it a monopoly , and the fpeech to be both perfuafion, and to lay a great imputation up- endol'ure. 

«• on the houfe: and this is all I would have faid before.’* •» t .. ; . f 

Next day came on the queftion, whether the tax for Dover-baven fhould be continued by 
force of the ftatute; which was three-pence a ton for the burthen of every fhip. One mem¬ 
ber, Mr. Swale, objected, that the charge amounted to at leaft a tboufand marks a year, yet 
the haven was never the better $ and that it was grown a proverbial wifh of any tax, diat-ic 
would not continue like that of Dover-haven. But Mr. John Boys ftieWed the conveniency of this 
haven, and how many hundred pounds worth of ftones were ‘ready to repair k : Sir John For- 
tefeue alfo obferv’d, what large fhips of burthen it would receive j how neceflary It is for die 
paflageof all merchants : as all'o that the tax was fmall, and the time might be when it would 
need a great tax at one time. Laftly, Mr. Comptroller having likewife exprefs’d how impru¬ 
dent it was to take away this tax, now they were debating how to defend themfelvcs from the 
Dunkirhrs, which would weaken the molt neceflary haven of England, Sir Walter Ralegh was 
more particular in thefe words : “ There are divers havens which have been famous, and now p or ^ 

44 are grown to decay, as Tinmouth, Seaton and Wincbelfey ; Rye is of little receipt j Sandwich to repair Do- 
“ (as a burgefsof that town, Mr. Peak , faid this parliament) is even a going. The tax being " Jtr - ba ‘ ven - 
44 employed as it fhould be, I hold it both good and neceflary •> and there is no trade of fifher- 
men to Newfoundland , but by this haven of Dover •, which, if the tax be taken away, and 
4 ‘ that go to decay, her majefty ffiall lofe one of the beft and mod neceflary havens of Eng- 
** land , which hath all the commodities that Mr. Comptroller /hewed, and lies oppofice to all 
** our enemies countries, who may foon be with us, and we not able to refift them, or help 
44 ourfelves, fhould we want this haven. I think it therefore fit this nutter Ihould be con- 
41 fider’d of, and committed :” and fo it was. b 

The nth of December was read, the third time, a bill for the more diligent refort to church 
on Sundays , which produced feveral fpeeches in the houfe. The rccufants were very numerous 
at this time, no lefs than fifteen hundred in lorkjhire , as Dr. Bennet affirm’d, which might be 
one reafon for now urging diis bill} but thofe, who were no ways popiflily inclin’d, perceived 


• Ttnvnjhend, fol. 299. 

k idem, fol. 309. See further on this fubjeft, Sir IVal - 
ter R«Jrgb'i Memorial to queen Elizabeth , touching the 
ftrt of Dover; being a brief difeourfe, declaring how ho- 
iiourable and prufcable to her majeity, and how neceflary 
and commodious icr the re.ilm v the making of Dover- 
haven fhall be, and in what fort; with how lirtle charge 
and great pcrfe&ion die lame may be accompliih’d: pruned 


in a pamphlet, entitled. An Ejfay on Way: and Means f 
maintain the Honour and Sajity ^/‘England, tsc. publifli’d 
by Sir Henry Sheers , Knt. 4to. 1701. 'l’here was a certi¬ 
ficate, touching Dvvtr-baicn , fiom Mr. William Bcrcu*b 9 
author of feveral other maritime difeourfes, in a volume 
of Sir Francis Waljingbatn s State-Pcjtrs, relating to the 
navy, fol. 216 ; as I fcnd in hU FubU-Uoh of their con* 
tents (before-mention'd) p. 41. 

(ovcral 


* kjOOQie 





cxliv 


We LIF E. of ■ 

feveral infufierable defedb in it *, as Mi*. John Bond> who, among other arguments, Was not 
fbr cxpofing the Ecclefiaftical authority among their enemies, as more impotent than a twelve- 
penny fine. At laft there was a provifo added to it, “ That if any man came eight times a 
4 ‘ year to church, and laid the ufual divine fcrvice twice every Sunday , and holy-day in his 
*' houfe, with his whole family, that (hould be a fufficient difpenfuuon.” But the bill, weak 
enough of itfelf, was overthrown by this conjunction, after Sir IValter Ralegh had Ihewcd* 
defeafin^the ** church-wardens of every Ihire muft come to the aflizes, to give information to 

Sabbath bill. *' the grand jury. Say then there be a hundred and twenty parilhes in a Ihire, there muft now 
« come extraordinarily two hundred and forty church-wardens i and fay, that but two in a 
*• parilh offend in a quarter of a year, that makes four hundred and eighty perfons (with the 
« offenders) to appear: what great multitudes this will hring together I what quarelling and 
danger may happen, befides giving authority to a mean church-warden ! how prejudicial this 
«* may be ! ’* with divers other reafons againft it, and inftances of the ambiguities and equi¬ 
vocations in it: and as for the provifo newly added, “ it was a plain toleration from coming 
« to church j and the parfon could not prevent or conftrain any, if they read fervice at home.’* 
Hereupon it was put to the queftion, and the houfe was divided ; the Teas went forth, and 
were a hundred and five, and the Noes within were a hundred and fix : fo it was throwa 
out by one voice. But the Teas urging they had the fpeaker’s voice, which would nuke it 
even •, this grew a queftion, whether he had a vote ? Sir Edward Hobby thought he had one j 
but Sir Walter Ralegh argued, “ that be was foreclos’d of his voice, by taking that place 
“ which it had pleafed them to impofe upon him i and that he was to be indifferent for both 
parties j** withal fliewed, “ that by the old order of the houfe, the bill was loft the 
fpeaker himfelf confirm’d his obfervation, and confefs’d, he had not, by cuftom, any vote. 
Then Mr. Boyer t fecretary to the lord-treafurer Buckhurjl t would have retrieved it, by fugged- 
ing, there was fome foul play ; declaring, a member was pulled back by the fleeve at going 
out, and charged Mr. Dale of the Middle-T;mple: to which Sir Walter Ralegh anfwcr’d, in a 
humorous manner, «* Why ! if it pleafe you, it is a fnull matcer to pull one by the fleeve, for 
“ fo I have done mylclf oftentimes i’V which, tho’ a familiar phrale for checking or reproving 
one’s fclf for any weaknefs or error, yet. a very difingenuous and incongruous conftrudtion wa* 
forced upon it by the Comptroller and Cecyll ; as if, ** large was his confidence, or very flexible, 
that, in a matter of this conlequence, would be drawn backwards or forwards by the fleeve,’* 
Ralegh took no notice of them, and the fpeaker being allowed to have no voice, the bill was 
thrown up, and they took their leave of it. Befides the fpeeches Ralegh made in parliament, 
which we have thus drawn together, as far as they are upon record, he appears in the com¬ 
mittees of many other bills, and in feveral conferences with the lords, as may be feen in the 
journal books of both houfes; but being only mention’d in general, we need not here be fo 
particular as to recite them: therefore lhall only observe, that the commons, having granted 
the queen a liberal fubfidy, and her majefty given her royal aflent to nineteen publick and tea 
private afts, this laft parliament, in her reign, was diflolv d on the 19th of December. 

In the beginning of the year 1602, Mr. Carew’s Dedication of his Survey of Cornwall is 
dated, as was before intimated \ wherein that author has, with fuch energy, copied forth the 
mod amiable diftindtions of Ralegh's mind : this agreeable picture thereof, and the many other 
noble attitudes in which we have feen it difplay’d, have made me inquifitive what portraitures 
ilis piflure. remained of his perfon. that we might better judge of the correfpondence between them ; how 
well, in one afpedt, the fprightlenefs of genius confortcd with the folidicy of judgment j how 
well, in one figure, the roughnefs of war, with the fplendor and magnificence of courts. I have, 
at laft, had the fatisfadtion of feeing thefe characters united in that portrait of Sir Walter Ra¬ 
legh. ftili remaining with the defeendants of his family.» It is a half length, reprefenting him 
in the filver armour before-mention’d, and richly adorn’d in the lkirts, the fword and belt with 
diamonds, rubies and pearls. It feems, by the darkneis and fulnels of the hair, with the frefli- 
nefe and clearnefs of the countenance, to have been the pidture of him before his Guianian ex¬ 
pedition above related > but the infeription, upon another very old draught in the fame pofture 
and habit, mentions his government of J or fey. b Farther, to deferibe this piece here, will 
be needlcfs, fince it is now brought into fculpture by an excellent hand, and ready to be made 
publick. Another painting I have alfo fcen of him, and this is at full length ; probably an 

• ’Tis in the pofleflion of captain William Ehwes , ne- ty of bringing the fame into print, 
phew of the lady Elaves, grand daughter of Sir tialter * Among the collections of his grace the duke of Dor - 
Ralegh ; and to that gentleman we arc oblig'd for the liber- fet at KnoavU in Ken/. 

original. 


Digitized by ^ooqic 





\ 


Sir W A LEER RALEGH. 


cxlv 


original. It agrees very well with the foregoing, in the form of the face, and colour of the 
hair and beard ; at leaft as far as may be expected from the hands of different artifts, lome 
alteration perhaps by repairs, and fome difference of years in the object; whereby he feems, 
in this laft, more ruddy and tann’d than the other. For, by the infeription thereon, partly dill 
legible, it appears, that this picture was painted in this laft year of the queen, above-mention’d ; 
and that his fon Walter, who is likewife here drawn by him, was then eight years of age_ 

Further, in this pieflure the ftature of Sir Walter Ralegh meafures about fix feet, is well fhap’d, 
and not too (lender: he is apparcll’d in a white fattin pink’d veft, clofe (leev’d to the wrift ; 
and over the body of it a brown doublet, finely flower’d and embroider’d with pearl j his belt 
of the fame colour and ornament, in which hangs his fword \ and on the other fide, over the 
right hip, is feen the pommel of his dagger. In his hat, which he has on, is a little black 
feather, with a large ruby and pearl-drop at the bottom of the fprig in place of the button. His 
' trunks or breeches, with his (lockings and ribbon-garters, fring'd at the end, are all white •, and 
buff (hoos, tied with white ribbons. His fon, (landing under his left elbow, is fair and pret- His fon’s. 
tily featur’d ; drefs’d in a blue filk jacket and trowfes, guarded down with narrow filver gal¬ 
loon •, (lockings blue, and white (hoos •, gloves in the right hand, hat or cap in the left, and a 
filver fword by his fide.* A year before this, the lady Ralegh's picture was alfo painted, as 
appears by the date upon it. It is a half-length like the firft, but painted on board ; a high 
finifh’d piece, in the labour’d manner of thofe times, by fome mallerly hand ; has been well 
kept, and is doubtlefs an original. It reprefents her a fair handfome woman, turn’d perhaps And hi* 
of thirty. She has on, a dark colour’d hanging-(leeve robe, tuffted on the arms ; and under * aJ f rs ’ 
it, a elofe-bodied gown of white fattin, flower’d with black, with dole fleeves down to her 
wrift •, has a rich ruby in her ear, bedrop’d with large pearls •, a lac’d whifk rifing above the 
(houlders; her bofom uncover’d, and a jewel hanging thereon •, with a large chain of pearl 
round her neck, down to her waift. b Thefe arc all the paintings I have feen of them, that 
I can count authentic, or mod likely to bear any true refemblance. But have been credibly 
inform’d of a picture of Sir Walter Ralegh , in miniature, taken not long before his death } 
and another at large, reprefenting him alfo in a white fuit, which he had, befet with jewels, to 
the value of threefcore thoufand pounds ; and that one diamond thereof, worth a hundred His rich ap- 
pounds, remained in the family till the beginning of- the late queen’s reign. In this picture P are ^* 
there is a ribbon-garter, fring’d at the ends, ty’d about his left arm. This, according to the 
tradition that remains in his family, was his lady’s (otherwife might be thought one of the 
queen’s favours at the Tilt-Yard) which he brought one morning, when he was oblig’d to at¬ 
tend her majclly early, as a token, that, for difpatch, he had rode a hunJred and twenty miles 
fince he took leave of her late the night before. But fuch a number of jewels, which might 
be call’d extravagance in others, was no expence to Sir Walter Ralegh , who had many other 
kinds of treafure, as well as this in Spaiiijb prizes, or otherwife in traffick with foreign nations ; 
and as for his (lately appearance in, by wearing of them upon fome fpecial occafions, it is noc 
only confirm’d by circumftances, in part beforc-mention'd, but alfo by fome authors; who arc 
not expected to take notice of it with great commendation: yet the Jefuit Drexelius might per¬ 
haps have found more dazling examples to drefs out his Dialogue upon Attire , nearer the time 
he wrote it, c and to have parallel’d with the Roman emperors he produces, than Ralegh • even 
tho’ Sir Walter might, upon fome great aflemblies at court, have his very Jkoos bedeck’d with 
precious Hones, that exceeded the value of fix thoufand fix hundred pieces of gold , as that author 
relates. d All I think here further obfervable upon the pictures of Sir Walter Ralegh , is, that 
after fo many which may be called genuine, and many more pretended to be fo, dill in being, 
there have been fuch frequent occafions of engraving his effigies for his books ; yet we have 

* This pifture of Sir Valter and his fon, did belong to iC fuits of cloaths made, the richcft that embroidery, lace, 

the Carets of Bcddivton, whence, by marriage with a ’ 44 filk, velvet, filver, gold and gems could contribute : 
daughter of the late Sir Stephen Leonard Baronet, it was 44 one of which was a white uncut velvet, fee all over, 
removed to Vejl V'Ukam in Kent ; near which place, at 44 both fuit and cloak, with diamonds, valued at four - 
* gentleman's feat, where there is a copy that was taken 44 fore thoufand pounds , betides a great feather lluck all 
from it, I lately law it. 44 over with diamonds; as were alfo his fword, g:rdle, 

. k T his aho remains with captain E/vues before-men- r 44 hatband and fpurs.” This from a MS. in the liur/cyan 
tion’J. library. B. H. 90. C. 7. fol. 642. 

* As lord Max and others in king James's reign,. but * His words are, 44 Gualccrus Raioltcus, UU apud An* 

alx>ve all the duke of Buckinghams with whom it was , 44 glicanam Clcopatram niinis gratiofus homo , vijus eft in 
common, at an ordinary dancing, to have his cloaths trim- # 44 aula crcpidas gefarc ita gemmis dijlinfias, ut 6600, hoc 
rod with great diamond button:, and to have diamond 44 ell, fex millium fextentorum aureorum , et am pit us, afli- 
Intbands, cockades ai.d earings ; to be yoked with great 44 marentur. Vide Trifmcgiilus Chriltianus : leu triplex 
and manifold ropes ar.d knots of pcml ; in (hort, to be 44 cultus, confeicntirv, c*l:turn, corporis." Authore Htertmia 
manacled, fetter’d and imprifon’d in jewels j iutomuch, Drexeho. Duaci 8vo. 1633, lib. 3. cap. io. fedt. 5. p. 
that, 44 at his going over t q Pa>h in 1625, he hed 27 469. 


e c e 


never 








cxlvi 


J& LIFE of 

never had, till now, more than two fculptures t which can pretend to have been taken from any 
paintings; that even thefe arc different from any above defcrib’d *, and that all the reft of the 
copper prints we have of him, whereof near half a fcorc might be reckon’d, are copies only 
^rom the laft of thofe two. * 

Among the reft of the particulars, we (hall briefly relate of Sir Walter Ralegh , in this laft 
year of the queen’s reign; a voyage, which he now fet out for the fupply of his colony in 
Virginia , is principally to be remember’d. For tho’ he had made an afljgnment of his patent 
to other undertakers, as is before obferv’d j yet they making no fuccefsful progrefs, he was fo 
regardful of the Englijh he had planted there, that he fent to them almoft every other year, 
Jj—te even from the time of the faid aflignment. For, befides the five voyages before epitomiz’d, 
he fct'forth to which himfelf chiefly was at the expence of, for the firft plantation of Virginia , we are well 
Virginia. inform’d of five voyages more ; which, fince thofe, he fet forth thither b for the relief of his 
countrymen, as well as for further difeoveries of thofe parts, and alliance with the people ; and 
that the laft of thefe voyages, under the command of captain Samuel Mace , was made this 
year. In all which. Sir Walter Ralegh might very well have dilburs’d forty thoufand pounds, 
as was before obferv’d; fince, in a French author (lately come to hand) I have found the 
two firft voyages only to Virginia coft him and his friends threefcore thoufand crowns: 1 yet 
were not the Englijh lo fecurcly eftablilh’d in this moft promifing plantation, as Sir Walter Ra¬ 
legh would have had them ; for, from the Ihort account we have of this laft voyage, and other 
circumftances, we may obferve the faid colony was much impair’d by the barbarous Indians , 
as indeed Ralegh's purfe feems alfo to have been by thefe frequent communications to it. Nor 
was it without much blood, as well as money, that this fettlement was at laft fix’d by the fuc- 
ceeding undertakers in the next reign : and all owing to the want of that timely and competent 
afliftance from the queen or ftate, whereby the moft worthy attempts for the publick good 
were even in thefe, as well as other times, fo generally ftarv’d. But Ralegh afterwards gave 
fome emphatical reafons for this unhappinefs j whence we may evidently pe rceive,it was to 
the queen’s confulting fo much, and relying upon the perfuafions of her feribes , men unexpe- 
rienc’d in all warlike or adventurous enterprizes, narrow domeftick politicians, or mere cour¬ 
tiers, who were moft conftant at her ear j that fhe fo frequently did things by halves,* as 
well in conquefts and difeoveries, as in rewards and preferments, efpecially of military men. • 


* Of thefe two fculptures or prints of Sir Walter Ra - 
Ugh, the firft is an extraordinary rarity; infomuch, that 
many virtuofi and antiquaries, who have fearched after, 
and col letted the graved heads of eminent perfons, for 
many years together, have not fo much as ever heard of 
it : the felicity and the favour arc therefore the greater, 
that 1 have been oblig’d with the fight of it by general 
Dormer, who has procur’d a frefh and fair impreilion of 
it from France into his choice and coftly collections ; for it 
is a French piece, in the Octavo fire, and graved by Tho¬ 
mas Lean, an artift, who was encouraged by fome of our 
nobility in thefe times for the excellence of his hand. It 
reprefents him in a clofe-bodied filk coat, laced ; agrees 
pretty well in the features with thofe before defcrib’d, ef¬ 
pecially the high forehead and cornering up of the hair 
above the right temple. It has a compartment or group at 
the bottom, difplaying his vittory over the fleet in the 
bay of Cadiz ; yet, in the large Latin infenption, expref- 
fing his titles and offices of command, there is mention 
made of his government of Jer/ey : fo I conclude it was 
graved between his preferment thereto, and the queen’s 
death. The other print of him, is that which we fee 
prefix’d to moft of the editions of his Hiftory of the 
World, whether to the firft edition I am not yet certain, 
the oldeft that I have feen being among the heads, annexed 
to Henry Holland's Bafilogia , was graved by Simon Pafs 
in the year 1617, reprefenting him in a clofe-bodied fuit, 
thickly laced; a full laced ruff and truncheon in his 
hand : alfo when he was more aged and corpulent, than 
we fee him in any of thofe before-mention’d. By thevi- 
fible erafement of a long infciiption that was at the bot¬ 
tom, for the fubftitution of that which is more brief, the 
plate fhould feem to have been graved before that year; 
but by the truncheon in his hand, not till he had his com¬ 
mand as general for his laft expedition ; yet, being pro¬ 
bably token from fome authentic painting, it lay moft 
ready to be copied, when any print was wanting for his 
lefler works. This is all I (hall here obferve upon the 
pittures of Sir Walter Raleeh ; and, for much of this, 
we are obliged to the knowledge and induftry of the in¬ 
genious Mr* Fertne. 


% See an excellent difeourfe upon the benefits that may 
grow to England by American plantations, entitled. Fir - 
ginia' s Fergeri in Parc hat's Pilgrims , vol. 4. 

c This particular I find in that fcarce book, mention’d 
before in this life, fol. 34. entitled, L'HiJfoire Hot able de 
la Floride , Ufc. 8vo. Paris 1586, dedicated by M. Baja- 
nier , an eminent mathematician, A illujtre et vertueuzs 
Seigneur Walter Ralegh Chevalier Anglois , Arc. That edi¬ 
tor, in this dedication, exprefling, among other commen¬ 
dations, the laudable and unfhaken conltancy wherewith 
Ralegh perfever’d, in advancing the honour and profit of 
his country, inftances as moft evident and frefh in memo¬ 
ry, Let deux voyages /aits depuis deux ans en$a, par vos 
vajjeaux, vers Its parties occidentals ; ou vous & aucusu 
de vs amys n'avez tnoins employe de Soixante Mil’ efeus. 
This dedication is followed with fome Latin veries on Sir 
Walter Ralegh , by Johannes Jurat us , the French king’s 
poet and interpreter of the Greek tongue, an epigram in 
Latin , and an anagram upon Sir Walter Ralegh's name, 
in French, by Martin Bafanier : And laftly, another 
Latin poem, in praife of thofe who had made difeoveries 
in tht new world, by Richard Hakluyt, then in France ; 
from all which it will appear, how highly Sir Walter Ra¬ 
legh was diftingaifh’d by his (aid contemporaries among 
and even above the preceding difeoverers of unknown 
countries. For the fight and ufe of this fcarce treatife 
among others, as well as feveral curious obfervations rela¬ 
ting to Sir Walter Ralegh , I mull acknowledge myfelf 
much beholden to the rare library and courteous commu¬ 
nications of Sir Hans Sloane. 

d Sir Walter Ralegh's difeourfe, touching a marriage 
between prince Henry of England and a daughter of Savoy, 
fbl. MS. p. 14. 

• 44 That her majefly, in her advancement of her men of 
44 war, fays Sir Walter Ralegh , did fooner believe other 
“ men, than herfelf; a difeafe unto which many wife 
11 princes befide herfelf have been fubjett: I fay, that 
41 liich a confidence, altho* it may feem altogether to ex- 
41 cufe her noble nature, yet can it not, but in fome fort, 
44 accufe her of weaknefs. And exceeding ftrange it 
V were, were not the caufe minifeft enough, that where 

44 the 


Digitized by kjOOQie 






cxlvii 


Sir WALTER RALEGH. 

Thus thofe l'peculative counfellors, tho’ they could not hinder brave and a&ive (pints from 
budding out into noble beginnings, of mod hopeful benefit to the common-wealth ; yet could> 
by (topping the channel of fupplies or encouragements, blite them from advancing to any fruit¬ 
ful or profitable conclufions *, and this, only to bring down thofe of fuperior lcrvice and merit, 
to a level with themfelves. 

Whether the expence of thofe voyages was the caufe of Sir IValter Ralegh's feJling > 
about this time, his eftate, or fome part of it in Ireland , is not fo exprefiy told us, as that it 
was become lefs advantageous to him fince the late rebellion in that kingdom. But we find, chat 
a little before Sir George Carew , now prefident of Munfter , took the cattle of Carrigfoyl Ker¬ 
ry , Mr. Richard Boyle (afterwards earl of Cork ) not only bought a (hip of Sir lValter Ralegh's, 
call’d the Pilgrim , but foon after the (aid prefident conquer’d Bere-haven caftle, he, having 
advifed the faid Mr. Boyle to buy alfo Sir Walter'% lands in Munfter, fent him into Eng¬ 
land with two letters j the one to fecrctary Cecyll, giving an account of Mr. Boyle's abili¬ 
ties, defired, that he would introduce him .to Sir IValler Ralegh , and recommended him to this 
great man (fays my author) as a proper purchafer of his faid lands j the other letter was writ¬ 
ten, by Sir George Carew , to Sir IValter Ralegh himfelf, acquainting him, that the bearer was 
capable of making the purchafe ; and that he thought he might be willing to difpofe of it, fince 
the management thereof, in thofe turbulent times, gave him a great deal of trouble, and the 
income it produced was very inconfiderable: lb, after a meeting, the bargain was (truck up, and Sells his eftate 
conveyances executed. Thefe lands, foon after in the peaceable times, became a great eftate to ,n Irtland ' 
Mr. Boyle: and this purchafe, as he afterwards gratefully remember’d in the Memoirs he wrote 
of his own life when he was earl of Cork , was the third addition and rife to his eftate. 1 

As for the eftate at Sherborne , it appears, he now fettled it upon his fon Walter ; and that Settles hit 
the deeds were drawn in Midfummer , this prefent year, for fo we have it from his own words. *> 

This fettlement, as I underftand it, was of the remainder of the leafe for ninety-nine years : 
for tho’ the biihop of Sarum, Dr. Henry Cotton , had the laft year aflign’d over to the queen, 
the fee and inheritance alfo of the (aid premifles, and her majefty granted the fame by her let- 
ten patent to Sir Walter Ralegh before her death, yet he did not make them over to his fon, 
till the feventh year of her fucceflor. 6 The reafon of fettling his eftate upon his fon at this 
time, appears alfo to have rifen from a challenge, which he had lately received from in a chai- 
Sir Amias Prefton (who had been knighted at Cadiz by the earl of EJfex fince we laft (poke Ien ^ 0 ' 
of him) and which Ralegh fays himfelf, “ he intended to anfwer." d The C3ufe of their quar¬ 
rel I never could meet with in print or manufeript •, yet conceive Ralegh had good reafon on 
his fide, becaufe he afterwards (hewed publickly himfelf, how deliberate he was in his prepara¬ 
tions for it, by forting his writings, and how refolved, by fettling his eftate. e But from what 
excellent hands foever Dr. Fuller received his information, that, upon fome diftafte. Sir Amias 
fent Ralegh this challenge; we may be pretty certain from what Ralegh has mention’d, that 
the (aid information, or this author’s account of it, is erroneous, where he adds, “ that Sir Wal- 
** ter declin’d it.” Indeed, I agree he might do fo, “ without any abatement to his valour, 

“ wherein he had abundantly (atisfied all poflibility of fufpicion, and with great advancement 
“ of his judgment for having (continues Fuller) a fair and fixed eftate , with wife and children 
•* (child he (hould have (aid) being a privy-counfellor (here he miftakes again) and Lord-warden 
“ of the Stannaries my faid author thinks, “ Sir Walter looked upon it as an uneven lay 
** to flake himfelf againft Sir Amias, a private and ftngle perfon, tho’ of good birth and cou- 
« rage} yet of no confiderable eftate."* But if Ralegh did accept of the challenge, as it ap¬ 
pears plainly he did, when he might have had fuch fair reafons of evafion > thofe inequalities 


“ tit profttroiu attims art fo excteJingly prix'J, the atlors 
artfi unprofperous and negltBtd. The caufe, I fay, 
44 which hath wrought one and the fame effeft in all 
41 times, and among all nations, is this; that thofe, who 
“ neareft the perfon of princes (which martial men 
44 feldom are) can, with no good grace, commend, or at 
49 kail magnify, a profeffion hr more noble than their 
u own ; feeing therein, they (hould only remind their 
44 mailers of the wrong^they did unto others, in giving 
41 lefs honour and reward to men of hr greater deferving, 
44 and of far greater u(e, than themfelves.** Hifiory of 
ibt World, lib, 5. ca^>. 6. fed. 2. 

• See an extract of the (aid Memoirs , in the life of the 
fete earl of Orrery , by Euftace Budgell, Efq; 8vo. 1732, 
p. 13, 18, 19. But, it feems, the faid earl of Cork was 
afterwards fadly plunder’d of hfe great eftate; for, at 
the breaking out of the tivil wars, he wrote thefe words 
in a letter to another nobleman. •« Thus your lordfhip 
44 fees in what mifcrablc condition we arc fighting, night 


0 and day, to preferve ourfelves and our cattles; for all 
«* we had without doors is loft; and poor I, that, befides 
“ my houfe, demefhes, parks, iron works, fiftiings, 
c « and other commodities, had a revenue of fifty 
€€ pounds per diem , cannot now truly fay, that I have fifty 
t€ pounds per annum in certain revenue.'* Thus in the 
earl of Cork's letter to the lord Neivbourgb, chancellor of 
the Exchequer in Irtland MS. in the Harleyan library, 
B.H. 90. C. 7. fol. 706. 

b Sir IValter Ralegh's letter to his lady, Anno 1603. in 
his remains (laft edition 12®. 1726) p. 194. 

c The cafe of Carnv Ralegh, Efq; at the committee 
for fale of delinquents eftates, MS. from the collections 
of the Reverend Mr. Thomas Baker, of St. John's Col¬ 
lege, Cambridge, 

* See the trial of Sir IValter Ralegh . 

« Idem. 

i Fuller's fVortbies of England in Somerfetjhr e . 

in 


I 


Digitized by boogie 



cxlviii 


Circumftan- 
ces prelimi¬ 
nary to his 
fail. 


The LIFE of 

in P reft on will either prove Sir Waller a generous adverfary, or that the injury he received from 
Sir Amias was indifpenfablc. Now this reprefentation feems to have been officioufly andunne- 
ceflarily ftiaped to make Ralegh's adtions conformable with his writings; for (continues our 
faid author) “ this is confonant to what he has written fo judicioufly about duels., condemning 
“ thofe for ill honours 'where the hangman gives the garland.” 1 However, they were after¬ 
wards reconcil’d, as Fuller concludes ■, and, upon the whole, Sir Walter Ralegh feems to have 
fhewn a much more creditable condudt herein, than Sir Francis Vere a little while before had 
done in the difference between him and a certain nobleman. b 

But here we are no longer to take notice of fuch open adverfaries for now, in the very 
clofe of this year, on the 24th of March , ends the long reign of glorious Elizabeth , and now 
fets the fun of Ralegh's external honour and felicity; yet, like that ever adlive planet, will 
fhine refplendently to the heavens, when he is clouded or eclipfed to mankind. How he fell 
into this eclipfe, record, the only, or greateft luminary of time pafl, does but dimly or doubt¬ 
fully difeover. All we can do, is diligently to alfemble every unextinguilh’d fpark which darts 
any light this way ; then fee if they will afford that guidance to the truth, by being congregated, 
which they have not yet been obferv’d to yield afunder. And firft, we may remember to have 
before read of the prepoffclfions which EJJex is affirm’d to have inftill’d unto king James 
againft Ralegh > and, after the earl’s death, there are feveral circumftances implying that Ce- 
cyll did the like. For tho’ Cecyll and Ralegh join’d againft EJJex and his faiftion ; yet, when 
thefe were overthrown, they divided, and feem to have had a trial of fkill with one another. 
And one author fays, that “ Ralegh, wanting ftrength, tho’ not wit, to be tire treafurer s rival, 

** perilh’d, becaufe not thought to own humility enough to be his fervant j it being more fafe 
“ at court to have many enemies of equal power, than one falfe ambitious friend that has at- 
“ tained to the abfolutenefs of command.” c In fhort, Cecyll feems to have ufed thofe arts of 
infinuation with king James before his coming into England ; to which Ralegh could not bend 
himfelf. That he then held clandeftine correfpondences with Scotland , is apparent from that 
ftory in Sir Henry Wot ton, who tells us, “ that her majefty, taking the air on Black-heath , 

“ attended by Cecyll when the poft rode by ; and, hearing he came from Scotland , fiie called 
“ for his packet: Cecyll, tho’ he knew it contained letters, which, to difeover, were as fo 
“ many ferpents, yet, making more fiaew of diligence than doubt, to obey, called in great 
“ hafte for a knife to rip it up ; but, approaching at fome diftance with it, he told the queen 
it looked and fincllod fo ill favour’dly, coming out of the filthy budget, that it muft needs ' 
«* be air’d firft, becaufe he knew how offenfive ill feents were to her majefty : fo got opportu- 
“ nity to feparatc what he would not have feen,” d and fhe fmelt nothing of the matter. One 
talent above the reft Cecyll was not wanting in to recommend him to this new foveraign ; and 
this was fuch a faculty of difeovering plots, as if he thought he ftiould be looked on as ufelefs 
without them. For, as a noble author obferves, “ It feemed as neceftary for him, that there 
“ ftiould be treafons , as for the ftate, that they ftiould be prevented. And, tho’ he created 
“ none, yet he fomented fome confpiracies, that he might give frequent evidences of his Ioy- 
“ alty *, having not the advantage of others in perfon to gain eftimation, therefore did it by 
“ thefe eminent fervices c and as for king James , he was fo apprehenfive, fo fufceptible of 
fuch impreflions, that, when he was but crofs’d or difturb’d in his fports, he would charge peo¬ 
ple with trcajon: nay, we are particularly told by thofe who were otherwife friends to his me¬ 
mory, that his carver, once at table, giving him accidentally a nick on the finger (as he was 
routing in the difli) his majefty, at the fight of his own.blood, could not forbear calling out 
treafon > and that Gttftavus Adolphus, king of Sweden, was wont to make himfelf merry with 
this exprefiion : and all diis inftunccd, by my faid author, to fhew, that for any clamour of this 


* This curious and copious digreflion againft duels, 
which that author alludes to, is in Sir Walter Ralegh's 
Hijlon of the World , lib. V. cap. III. S. XVII. fed. 2. 
Sir Walter has alio, in his inftru&ions to his fon y written 
a chapter againft Private Quarrels ; in which he no lefs 
wifely, than bravely, fays, “ Thou llialt be in as much 
«« danger in contending with a brawler in a private quar- 
» rd, as in a battle, wherein thou may’ll get honour to 
«< thvTelf, and fafety to thy prince and country ; but, if 
«« t ho U be once engaged, carry thyfclf bravely, that they 
«« m ay fear thee alter.*' And a little further, “ 1 would 
<< not have thee, for any refpeft, lofe thy reputation, or 
a endure publick difgrace i lor better it were not to live. 


V than to live a coward, if the offcnee proceed not from 
“ thyfelf; if it docs, it (hall be better to compound it 
“ upon good terms, than to hazard thyfclf; lor, if thou 
overcome, thou art under the cruelty of the law; if 
<€ thou art overcome, thou art dead or Jilhonour’d, 

b See the earl of Northumberland’s challenge , fent to Sir 
Francis Vere, «i vith a narrative of the whole proceedings 
upon it , in the Cottonian library , Titus c. IV. %. 

« See the mifcellancous works of Francis Ojbome y Efq: 
the eleventh edit. 1722. vol. 2. p. 75. in his political de¬ 
ductions from the hillory and death of the earl of EJfex. 

* Sir Henry Wottons parallel, &c. 

• Iiarl of Clarendon s difparity, trV. 


kind, 


Digitized by 


Googl 


e 




cxlix 


Sir WALTER RALEGH. 


kind, king James's word was no Jlandtr. * But more direcftly to our purpofe there is another 
writer, who, making fome critical enquiriy into the preliminaries of Sir Walter’s fall, lays, 
“ Sir Robert Cecyll , principal fecrctary of date, fearing the great abilities of Ralegh, and being 
wearied with the troublefome impertinences of Gray and Cobham ; all which had joined with 
«« him in defign againft the earl of EJfex, their common enemy i had done their errand to king 
“ James (whofe counfels he defir’d to engrols to himfelf alone) before bis coming into Eng- 

“ land.’* b And when the king was arriv’d, there was matter enough to exafperate CccylL 

againft Ralegh , if, through any defign of recrimination. Sir Walter did prefent to his majefty 
a memorial wherein “ he reflected heavily upon Cecyll in the matter of EJfex j and, vindi- 
« eating himfelf, threw the whole blame upon the other : further laying open (at the end 
“ thereof) the conduct of Cecyll and his father alfo, in the matter of the queen of Scots (his 

« majefty’s mother) bitterly charging the death of this unfortunate queen upon them.” How¬ 

ever, fays my author, “ this had no influence over the king, and only irritated Cecyll the more 
« againft Ralegh .” c But what feems fufficicnt to have incenfed the king alfo againft Ralegh, 
was his being of that party, who, in regard of the inveterate feuds between England and Scot¬ 
land, defircd the king might be obliged to articles ; for, as another writes, “ among thefe 
« noble and publick fpirits, were Sir John Fortcfcue, Sir Walter Ralegh , the lord Cobham » 
«* £*?r. all jfrowned upon after by die king, who had yet the luck to live fo long as to change 
« his opinion, and wifli the number of his countrymen had been limited, and they not fuf- 
« fet'd, like locufts, to devour this kingdom.” d There were not wanting ftill other particu¬ 
lars, which might render Ralegh obnoxious to a man of the king’s jealous difpofition ; for 
«« he had (at the time of his majefty’s acceflion to the throne) the daughter and heir of Baffet 
“ to his Ward, who was to be married to his fon Walter , her eftate worth three thouland 
« pounds fer annum j but Ihe was (after his condemnation, we fuppofc) taken from him, 
«« and married to Mr. Henry Howard , who died fuddenly at table ; and Ihe was afterwards 
«« married to the earl of Newcajlle, who profefs’d he would never have wedded her, if young 
« Walter Ralegh had been alive; conceiving her, before God, to be his wife, for they were 
“ married as much as children could be.” • Now thefe BaJJets, as we find elfewhere, were 
thofc of Umberlegh and Heanton-Court in Devonjhire j who, being defeended from the Planta- 
genets, laid fome claim at this very time of the king’s entrance to the crown of England. f But 
whatever difcountenance Ralegh might receive at his firft meeting of the king, in his journey 
from Scotland ,8 whence he fet out on the 5th of April 1603, and arrived at Theobalds, which 
was Cecylfs feat, on the 3d of May, and at London four days after \ it leems not to have 
amounted to a peremptory difmiflion from his majefty’s fervice or prefence : for we are told, 
“ the king ufed Ralegh for fome weeks with great kindnels, and was pleafed to acknowledge 
“ divers prefents which he had received from him being in Scotland j for which he gave him 
“ thanks. But, finding him a martial man, addicted to foreign affairs and great actions, he 
feared left he lhould engage him in a war.” * That Ralegh was in company with the king ) 


* Stt the Regal /polo-y ; or, the Declaration of the Com * 

&c. cturva/s'd 1 wherein every objection, and their 
whole charge againft his majefty, is clear’d, and for the 
moft part retorted, 410. 1648, p. 24, where that inftance, 
of king Jamts' s fearfulnefs above related, is mention'd, to 
dear king Cbarltt for continuing Buckingham in favour, 
after king James had charged die encreafe of his Jail fatal 
illnefi to Buckingham's apply ing a plaifter, and adminiitcr- 
ing a poflet-drink to him. 

h Dr. Peter Hi) lists Ex amen Hiflericum : or, a difeovery 
and examination of the miftakes, falfitics and defeats in 
fome Modem Hipries , 8vo. 1659. in his animadveriions 
on Fuller's Church Hitlcry, p. 170. 

* Dr. IVeliLood 's notes on Arthur Wilfon 5 hiftory of 

7 ar *u t in the fecond volume of that collection, 
which is ail’d Dr. Kcnnet's com pleat Hiftory of England, 
iol. 1706, p. 664; and in a note on the preceding page, 
thedottor tell us, that ir.cmoml of Ralegh's to the kjng 
againft Cecyll above mention’d, is fpoken of in a manu- 
Jcript written by one Buck, fecretary to chancellor Eger- 
tan. 

* Francis O/borne' S Trad. Memorials of the reign of 
king James , in the fecond volume of his works, p. 102. 

e Obfernjations on fome particular perfins and pef/'ages, 
in a book lately made publick (by Wo Ilians Sandujtu) en¬ 
titled, a Ccrr. pic at Hiftory of the lives and reigns of Alary 
queen of Scotland, and her fon Jan es the lixth of 
and htft of England, fjc. by a lover of truth, 4to. 1656, 
p. ia. 


f 44 Sir Robert Baffet , by his grandmother, defeended 
44 from the Plantagenets , and of the blood royal, in the 
44 beginning of king James's reign, made fome preten- 
44 fions to the crown of England ; but, not being able to 
44 make them good, was forced to fly into France to favo 
44 his head ; to compound for which, together with his 
44 generous way of living, he greatly exhauiled his eftate* 
44 felling off no lefs than thirty manors of land ; tho’ there 
44 is now a fair eliate belonging to the heir of the family.’* 
Prince's Worthies of Denton, fol. 114. See alfo Wood** 
Ath. Oxon. vol. I. col. 366. 

a Sir Richard Baker's Chronicle. Alfo Sir John Hanvles, 
in his Reply to the Magi/lracy and Government of England , 
•vindicated. See. fol. 1689. more exprefly fays, 44 Cobham 
44 and Ralegh were not permitted to come at the king, 
“ upon his journey into England, and had word fern them, 
44 they might /pare their labour." But Stow fays, when 
the king came towards York , his train increafcd by fuch 
numbers of gentlemen from the South, as made provifion 
fo dear, that he was fain to publifh an inhibition againft 
the inordinate accefs : fo that many were Hop’d in their 
way. Thus perhaps the countermand might not be par¬ 
ticular of any perfon; however fome, as we fee, apply 
it to Ralegh , as others have alfo done to Cobham ; affirm¬ 
ing, the king check’d him for his abfcnce from his charge 
at that dangerous time, being then Lord-warden of the 
Cinque-Ports. Dr. Heylin as before. 

* A brief relation of Sir Walter Ralegh's troubles, £sV. 
4to. 1669. p. 1. A fcarce traCl in the Harley an library, 
B. H. 

iff and 


Digitized by L,OOQle 





cl 


His writings 
agr.inft ho 
peace with 
hpain. 


He LIFE of 

and that foine of his converfation turned upon this-fubjeA we have from his own words, whefe 
he fays, “ I offer’d his majeffy, at my uncle Caret*?s, to carry two thoufand men to invade 
“ the Spaniards without the king’s charge.” * And this agrees with his writing a difeourfe, 
which lie did or intended to deliver to his majeffy againjl the peace with Spain now in treaty, 
which feems to be the fame that was a hundred years afterwards publifli’d by his grandfon. 
Herein he advifed his majeffy to proteft the Netherlands ; for, fays he, a poor neighbour’s 
houfe , fet on fire, is to be better guarded or watched, than a great city afar off. Herein he per- 
fuadcs the king to deliberate, and not come to a hafty concluffon of peace with the Spaniards j 
for, when the houfe is built, it is ill mending the foundation. Herein he fays, “ I dare not 
“ write all I defire i for I know not to whole hands thefe may come. This I befeech your 
«*' majeffy to know, that it proceeds from an humble and a faithful heart, which your majeffy 
“ cannot beat from the love of your royal perfon and good eftate.” c And laftly, I fhall ob* 
ferve, that herein he alfo mentions another difeourfe, “ how war may be made againjl Spain 
*' and the Indies *, which I will, fays he, alfo prefent your majeffy, if you will vouchiafe the 
“ reading thereof:” 11 but this, I think, has never appear’d in print. The former of thefe 
difeourfes is humbly and difcreetly addrefs’d with variety of arguments and obfervations from 
his own knowledge and experience ; alfo ftrengthened with many hiftorical examples of foreign 
countries, and political maxims or fentences from the ancient clafficks : all which he had plen¬ 
tifully at command in any topic he undertook to write, or even fpeak of: fuch the extenfive- 
nefs of his remarks and his reading ; fuch the felicity of his memory and talents of applica¬ 
tion. But, if reafon would have prevail'd, it was not wanting alfo from other hands \ fo that 
Sir Walter Ralegh was not fingular in his difiuafions of the king, but had the fit is fad ion of 
feeing foreigners, as well as his own countrymen, fubffribe to his fentiments i* and the lord 
Henry Howard , tho’ otherwife brought into the court-meafures, yet could not, it feems, eon- 
fent to thefe of a general pacification ; therefore was, as well as Ralegh, excluded from the 
benefit of thofe rich prefents, which the marquis of Rofny , ambaflador 1 from France , made to 
all thofe courtiers who promoted the fame ; infomuch that Howard, being afked by the king 
How it happen’d he had not a jewel as well as the rcjl ? anfwer’d, in allufion to Efop’s fable. 
Non fum gallus, ilaque non reperi gemmam. f The caufes, which moved the king of Spain to 
fue for dais peace, Ralegh did afterwards, with great perfpicuity, lay open j 8 but his prefent 
oppofition of it, and the confequences of that, feem to have been the hinges upon which his 
•whole fortune now turn’d j I fay, the moft apparent caufe to me of all thofe forrows and fuf- 
ferings which fill up the melancholy remains of his ftory. This unfortunate event, which he was 
above fhunning, by trimming and temporifing in a matter which he knew fo highly concern’d 
the honour and advantage of his country, he has himfelf fo excellently accounted for, where he 
flicws the ill fuccefs which attends fuch fincere conduft, and how profperity is the fruit of 
fiavifh or hypocritical compliances i h that I could not, but from the faid occafion of the greateft: 
viciflitude in his life, form the introduction to this account of it. 

Thus 


■ Sir Walter Ralegh' s Remains, thelaft edit. 12•. 1726. 

p. 190. 

b Being one of the three Difeourfes »f Sir Walter Ralegh, 
publifli’d by Philip Ralegh , Efq; 8vo. 1702. 

c So in a MS. of this Difeourfe, with which I have 
been favour’d by a noble hand ; but the latter part of the 
period is wanting in the printed copy, p. 45. 
d Idem, p. 2b. 

« The learned Dcminicus Baudius, among his poems, 
reprinted at Le\din, 8vo. 1607, has one elaborately wric- 
ttn to kiig James againft this peace. At the end of his 
Epifilrs alio, reprinted at Amfterd. 8vo. 1642 p. 523. there 
is a long oration by this author to that prince on the fame 
subject. And at home, beiides others, a dhcourfe agninft 
this pence with Spain was written, and dedicated by John 
Aft ham to his majeily, Jnno 1603. the MS. whereof is 
extant in the Harleyan library, 35. C. 18. 

f Ix>rd Bacons Apophthegms, new and old, p. 222. 
c Ralegh lays down live reafons for the king of Spains 
making this peace with England and the Ketherlands: 
44 as frft, his having fo exhaulfed his treafure, that he 

44 was no longer able to maintain the archduke’s army. 

44 Secondly, the great interruption of his trade, and lofles 
99 of his merchants, to the breaking of both his banks at 
49 Seville. ‘Thirdly , his fear that the Englijh and Nether- 
49 lands would plant in the W\ft Indies. Fourthly , to re- 
44 emit his coffers, and enable himfelf to break into w ar 
44 again. Fifthly , that the Englfh may decline, and for- 

44 get the palfages and pilotage to the Weft-Indies, and 

41 their fca* officers may be worne out# for 7 except a little 


99 trade for tobacco, there is not a (hip that fails that way: 
99 and feeing the Spaniards may bang up the Engliffi, or 
99 put them to death by torments, as they do ; and that 
44 the Engltjh dare not offend the Spaniards in thofe parts, 
44 a molt notable advantage gotten in the conclusion of 
41 the peace ! it is certain, that the Englijh will give over 
44 that navigation to the infinite advantage of the Spanijh 
99 king both prefent and future. For thefe caufes of im- 
44 portance it was, that the Catholic king fought the 
99 peace of England and the Netherlands ; and fo much all 
99 men of judgment difeern.” See thele reafons more at 
large in Sir Walter Ralegh's Dialogue between a Jefuit 
and a Recufant , among the genuine Remains, publilh’d at 
the end of an abridgement of his Iliftoty of the // or id, by 
Philip Raltgh , Efq; 8vo. 1700. 

h in a curious difeourfe, where he learnedly and rcligi- 
oufly reconciles fortune with icafon and providence, ka - 
legh has thefe words. 44 But it may be objected, that, 
44 if fortune and ehance were not fometimes the cauies of 
44 good and evil in men, but an idle voice whereby wo 
44 exprefs fuccefs, how comes it then, that fo many wor- 
44 thy and wife men depend upon fo many unworthy and 
94 empty-headed fools ? that nches and honour are given 
44 to external men, and w ithout kernel ; and fo many 
44 learned, virtuous and valiant men, wear out their lives 
44 in poor and dejected eflates ? In a word, there is no 
44 other inferior or apparent caufe, befidcs the partiality 
44 of men’s aflfc&ion, but the ftjhioning and nit fejhioning 
44 ourfelvcs according to the nature of the times wherein vet 
44 live. For whoioever is moll able, and bdf fufficicnt 

to 


Digitized by 


Google 






Sir WALTER RALEGH. cli 

Thus have we Teen feveral circumftances, and thefe are all I have met with in this interval, 
tohenhy Ralegh might undelignedly and unluckily become difagrecnble to a man of king 
James's temper j but, on the other fide, little or nothing that could fo inflame Ralegh againft 
the king, as to make him run headlong into fuch violent confpiracies, as could only end in 
hi> own ruin. Suppofe the king did difeourage Ralegh's attendance upon him at his entrance, 
diflike his patenc for wines, or removed him from the guards, to oblige Sir Thomas 
Lrfcin, his countryman and favourite, whom he afterwards preferr’d to higher dignities ; and 
thb is all I have met with that could give offence on the king’s part: will this be thought fuf- 
fici/nt provocation for a man of Ralegh 's reafon and judgment, fo tender of fame and reputation, 
fo letcled in family, fo well fituated in his fortune, no lefs than three thoufand pounds a year, as 
was confcfs’ti at his trial, befides many other profitable, and I may fay princely poffcfllons on the 
feas, as well as the land, to plot commotions or infurreftions j yet enervate himfelf for the execution 
of them, by refigning, as he fays himfelf he did, his office of chiefeft power, the wardfhip of the 
Stannaries ? Nay, further, to herd with a rnotly and disjointed crew of priefls, alfo with profefs’d 
enemies to himfelf, not to mention knaves and fools j and, on a fudden, refolve to turn rebel, 
ruffian and cut-throat *, to be the Coryphaeus , to murder the king with his own hand, and all 
his innocent progeny! for this is the charge that the fertile pens of French writers have heap’d 
upon him. Indeed, I was fomewhat ftartled, when I read it in a hiflory that bears the name 
and charafter of Tbuanus> tho’ I thought he might pofiibly come at it by miniflerial direction 
to an Englijh refident, till at laft I found his author to be no other than one of his own coun¬ 
trymen, whom Camden , as 1 have before obferv d, has refuted in other paflages that are even 
more credible. Now thefe tell over this delperate ftory thus. In the month of June Sir JValter Accounts of 
Raleghy a man equally dexterous at confutation or atlion, fays Thuanus , and famous for his me - ^^ lcn c 
morable expeditions to the Indies , taking leave of his fitter at London , intreated her to commend 
him to God in her prayers, for he was going to a place from whence he expedted never to re¬ 
turn. She, fulpedting that he was going to fight a duel, with the fame Icv.ty difpers'd it among 
the ladies of her acquaintance, till the rumour came to court. Then Ralegh's friends and re¬ 
lations flock’d about him to know this enterprize ; he, apprehending himfelf detedled, readily 
made a whole confeffion and difeovery of the matter. The king was inform’d, and greatly 
altonifh’d, but would needs have Ralegh before him, who, then afking his pardon, acknow¬ 
ledg’d, that feeing his majefty give more countenance to the Scots than the Englijh > and had 
depriv'd him of his command in the guards, and that many great men expe&ed, when he 
was eftablilh’d on the throne, he would be reveng’d for the death of his mother, he had there¬ 
fore enter’d into a confpiracy with others, whom he named, to fhed his royal blood \ and that 
they had unanimoufly deputed him to be his majefty’s executioner, when he rode a hunting. 

Hereupon the faid confpirators were taken up and try’d, as thefe authors proceed to relate. * 

If there had been any truth in this ridiculous ftory, which I think no one has before taken the 
pains to relate in Englijh , that confcfp.on had neither efcap’d the attorney-general Coke at Ralegh 's 
trial, when they were fo lamely put to it to bring him in guilty without fufficient proof, nor 
king James's apologctical Declaration after Ralegh's death, in which his majefty, and his coun- 


" to difeern, and has withal an honed and open heart, 
u and loving truth; if princes, or thole who govern, en- 
“ dure no otner difcourle than their own flatteries ; then, 
“ I fay, luch a one, whofc virtue and courage forbids 
41 him to be bafe, and a dillembler, dull evermore hang 
u under the wheel; which kind of deferving well, and 
9t receiving ill, we always falfely charge fortune withal : 
41 for wholocver (hall tell any great man, or magiftrate, 
41 that he is not jufl; the general of an army, that he is 
* 1 n °t valiant; and great ladies, that they are not fair ; 
“ (hall never be made a counfeilor, a captain, or a cour- 
4 * tier. Neither is it fufficient to be wife with a wife 
4< prince, valiant with a valiant, and juit with him that 
41 is juft; for fuch a one has no ellate in his profperity ; 
41 but he mud alfo change •with the fucceffor , if he be of 
41 contrary qualities ; fail with the tide of the time, and 
44 alter form and condition, as the (late or dates-mailer 
44 changes: otherwife, how were it poflible that the mod 
** bafe men, and feparate from all imitable qualities, 
44 could fo often attain to honour and riches, but by fuch 
44 an obfervant flavilh courfe ?” A little further, having 
quoted out of Menander, 41 That every fool is won 
44 with his own pride, and the flattering applaufe of 
44 others:” he infers, 44 That whomever will live ahoge- 
44 ther out of himfelf, ftudy other men’s humours, and 
44 obictve them (hall never be unfortunate. On thecon- 
V trary, that man, who pr.zes truth and virtue, except 


44 the fcafon wherein he lives be of thefe, and all forts of 
44 goodnefs, fruitful, lhall never profper by the pofleilion 
44 or ptolelfion thereof.” So, after other learned autho¬ 
rities and proper examples, concludes with the follow¬ 
ing ingenious allufions, 44 Whoioever therefore will fee 
44 before him Machia<vcPs two marks to ihoot at, riches 
44 and^/o/y, mull Jet on, and take off t a back of it on to a 
44 nveak •wooden h<rw, that he may ht both the Jhon^ and 
44 the feeble, p or as he, who iiril deviled to add tails to 
44 rowing vefiels, did either fo proportion them, as, be- 
44 ing fattened aloft, and towards the head of his mad, 
44 he might abide all winds and dorms, or cite he fome 
44 rime or other penfli’d by his own invention : fo thac 
44 man, who prizes virtue for itfclf, and cannot endure to 
44 hoifi and Jirike fail, as the divers natures of calms and 
44 ftot ms require, mull cut his fails and his cloth of mean 
44 length and breadth, and content himfelf with a flow 
44 and furc navigation ; to wit, a mean and free ellate ” 
Sir Walter Ralegh's Hiflory of the World, lib. 1 . cap. i. 
fedl. ic. 

• Cbronologie Septenaire de VHiftoire de la Pair, entre 
les Roys de France et D'Efpaigne ; par P. Vtdor Cayet, 
8vo. Paris 1605. p. 424. alio, L’Lnziefme Tome du 
Mercure Francois: ou UHtjloirt de nofire Turps. 8vo. Paris, 
1626. p. 352. alfo Tbuauus, Tom. V. Ub. CXX 1 X, fol. 
1056. 


Cil 


Digitized by kjOOQle 



The LIFE of 

cil together, have no Iefs lamely offer’d weaker reafons for taking away his life, as will be 
fully reprefented in its proper place. 

By our Englijh accounts it appears there was lbmewhat of a plot, but it was never prov’d that 
Ralegh was engag’d in it \ however, his great enemy, the attorney-general Coke , affeffed to com¬ 
pare him with the confpirators, “ to Sampfon 's foxes, which were join’d in the tails, tho’ their 
“ heads were fever’d.” What (hare he had in that plot may further be judg’d by the promotions 
which the confpirators intended themfelves upon the fuccefs of it; for whereas one was to be 
lord chancellor, another lordmarfhal, this lord treafurer, thatmafterof the horfe, and t’other Ic- 
cretary of ftate : how comes it, as one author well oblerves, that Ralegh, able to officiate any, 
had no office in the ftate aflign’d him ? 1 But perhaps the belt means to clear him, may be the 
very trial , by which he was condemn’d. ’Tis too common, and too tedious, to be thought 
needful of tranferibing it here at length j not to fay fo full of barbarous partiality and foul 
language, efpecially by Coke himfelf, that he was expofed for it upon the publick theatre;*> 
and thofe, who revere the laws of our country, have been fo afhamed of it, as rather to wifh. 
the proceedings have been fajfely related, than believe fuch a fentence could pafs upon fuch 
unfufficicnt evidence. But the character of this trial , and of that attorney-general , I leave to 
others *, c and fhall here only, from the feveral copies or accounts of it I have met with, draw out 
a fhort regular narrative of the moft material matters of fa£t, wherein Ralegh appears any way 
concern’d $ and it is as follows: 

There was one Matthew de Laurencie, a merchant of Antwerp, attendant on count Arem¬ 
berg, who now, about the beginning of June , came over ambaflador-extraordinary from Al¬ 
bert, archduke of Aujlria, to congratulate king James , and affift in compofing the general 
peace. With this merchant the lord Cobbam had held intelligence fomc years before, upon 
matters of ftate, with licence. Five days after Aremberg’s arrival, that is to fay, about the 9th 
of the fame month, Cobbam repair’d to him with Laurencie, and that night Cobbam fupp’d, 
with Sir Walter Ralegh, at Durbam-houfe in the Strand •, whereby Ralegh came to undcrlland, 
that Cobbam had frefh negotiations with Aremberg ; and was, as the chiel of thole who oppofed 
the peace, offered a fum of money by Cobham to be a promoter of it; tho’ that offer, alio 
made to Ralegh before Aremberg came, e was afterwards pretended, as will appear, to have been for 
treafonable purpofes. In the next month, thofe perfons with whom Cobham tranfacted the confpi- 
racy (or part of it) then on foot, were difeover’d ; either by the Spanijh fattion in revenge to Ra¬ 
legh, the greateft enemy of Spain alive, thinking he was then too far hamper’d in, or acquainted 

I 


• Fuller Church Hiflory, lib. X. 

V See Mr. Theobald's Shakcfpear , 8vo. 1733. vol. II. 
in the comedy call’d. The Twelfth-Night ; act 3. p. 503. 

c The learned and ingenious author of the preface, to 
Che collection of State-Inals in fix volumei folio, having 
ipoken of fuch counfcl as are wont to prefs nothing illegal 
againlt the prifoner, or unreafonable, nor ufe any artifices 
to deprive him of his juft defence, adds, 44 Thefe will 
•« appear in a different light from thofe, who, with rude 
44 and boift’rous language, abufe and revile the unfortu- 
44 nate prifoner, who flick not to take all advantages of 
44 him, however hard and unjuft, which either his lgno- 
44 ranee, or the flriCt rigour of the law, may give them ; 
44 who, by force or ftratagem, endeavour to tillable him 
44 from making his defence ; who brow beat his witneffes 
44 as loon as they appear, tho’ ever fo willing to declare 
44 the whole truth ; and do all they can to put them out 
44 of countenance, and confound them in delivering their 
44 evidence, as if it were the duty of their place to con- 
44 n,ritt all who are brought to trial\ right or wrong, 
44 guilty or not guilty ; and as if they, above all others, 
44 had a peculiar difpcnfation from the obligations of 
44 truth and juftice. ouch methods as thefe ftiould be be- 
44 low men of honour, not to fay men of confcience; yet, 
44 in the perufal of this work, fuch perfons will too often 
44 a rife to view : and I could wifh, for the credit of the 
44 law, that that great oracle of it, the lord chief juftice 
44 Coke, had given lefs reafon to be number’d among this 
44 fort.” So, as a moft notorious example, refers us to 
the trial of Sir W'alter Ralegh . 

Another author before this, having (hewn us with what 
temper and fuperior command Sir Walter Ralegh behav’d 
himielf under all the fcurrilities which the attorney general 
threw upon him, goes on thus. 44 We have given the 
44 reader a tafte of the eloquence of the bar in that reign, 
44 to {hew how far the hopes of places and preferment 
44 will fometimes Carry men of fenfe and learning from 
44 reafon and juftice. This Billing/gate way of arguing 
44 is the more remarkable in a perlon of the lord Coke's 
44 character, whofc writings are Hill oracles in Weftminfttr - 


9i hall ; and fcolding and calling of names were commonly 
44 the refuge of fuch w'retched lawyers as were the tools 
44 of a party » who, having neither fer.le, law, nor lan- 
44 guage on their fide, thought to iupply the want of them 
44 with railing and impudence : which kind of baiting 
44 and worrying of ftate prijoners to death, by the king’s 
44 eounfel , was reviv’d by judge Jefferies in king Charles 
44 and king James II’s reign ; and it being much caficr to 
44 call a man rogue, than to prove him fo, the example he 
44 fet was followed by too many, till the reverend bench of 
44 judges in the reign of king Willtam and our prefent 
44 foveraign queen Anne , frown’d upon that cruel piaCtice, 

44 and put an end to it.” The Life of Sir Walter Ra¬ 
legh in Lives Englijh and Foreign . Svo. 1704. vol. I. p. 
124. 

And before all this, even to Coke's own face, as much 
was objected, when he himfelf was humbled, and fallen 
into difgrace, by one of his own acquaintance, who told 
him, 44 As your pleadings were wont to inlult over miferv, 

44 and inveigh bitterly ag.iinft the perfon, fo arc you llill 
44 carelefs in this point, to praife and diigrace upon llight 
44 grounds, and that fuddcnly ; fo that your reproofs or 
44 commendations are for the moft part neglected and 
44 contemn’d, when the cenfure of a judge, coming flow, 

44 but fure, fhould be a brand to the gu»lty,-ar.d a crown 
44 to the virtuous. You will jeft at any man in publick, 

44 without refpeCt to the perfon’s dignity or your own. 
44 This difgraces your gravity, more than it can advance 
44 the opinion of your wit; and fo do all actions which 
44 we fee you do dircftly with a touch of vain glory. 
44 You make the laws too much lean to your opinion ; 

44 whereby you (hew yourfelf to be a legal tyrant , Sec." 
Thus in a letter admonitory to the lord Coke , MS. fign’d 
A.B. in a volume of State-Letters , among the curious 
collections of the lord Coleraine, fol. 772. This Lettir 
is alfo printed in the Cabala , and an cxtraCt of it in Ar¬ 
thur Wilfon'% Hiftory of king James . 

« The arraignment of Sir Walter Ralegh , printed in 
J . Sherley'% account of his life, 8vo. 1677. p. 124. 

with 


Digitized by 


Google 



cliii 


Sir JVA LEER RALEGH. 


with it to efcnpc ; or by fome one of the Englijh confpirators to fecure hinifelf: and, when the 
lord Cecyll (for he was lately made baron of Ejjenden) Found, upon the firft news of Anthony 
Copley, one of thefe confpirators, who was apprehended the 6th of July, • that the king’s per- 
fon was to be furpriz’d by the lord Grey of IVilion, and George Brook , brother to the lord 
Cobham , he fufpefted Cobbam himfeJf was in the fecret j and Cobban's great intimacy with 
Ralegh at this time, who was now buying an eftate for<him, and fettling his houfhold affairs, 
drew Ralegh alfo into fufpicion. Hereupon Cecyll, meeting Ralegh upon IVindfor terrace, tells 
him, “ the lords of the council had fomething to fay to him:” fo he was examin’d about the 
Jurprizing treafott , and particularly about Cobham, as appears front his own words, b whom 
he fully cleared. After examination, Ralegh further faid : “ Whatfoever correfpondence there 
« was between Cobham and Aremberg , Laurer.de might be better able to give account of it, thcre- 
« fore advifed to the calling upon him *” tho’, as he further explain’d, “ he knew of no intelli- 
»« gence between them, but fuch as might be warranted :” c and that advice he wrote alfo in 
a letter to Cecyll. When Ralegh return’d from examination a private prifoner to his own 
houfe, Cobham fent to him to know what had pafs’d ; Ralegh writ an anfwer by captain 
Keymis, “ that he was examin’d, and had clear’d him of all and Keymis bid Cobham “ be 
« of good comfort, for one witnefs could not condemn himthis precaution, to arm Cob‘ 
ham againft making difcoverics, vras, after his confeflion of it, objetted againft Ralegh ; but 
he utterly deny'd, that he fent any fuch verbal meffage . i Now when Cobham was brought 
to his examination at Richmond, one date whereof appears to have been July j 8 ; and after lie 
had, by a confront denial, cleared both himfelf and Ralegh of all that was qudlion’d againft 
them, Cobham was, by device, fays my author (in an epiftolary narrative of his trial, at which 
he vras prefent c ) induced to think, that Ralegh had firft imjieach’d and betray'd him. For 
that part of Ralegh's letter aforefaid to Cecyll, referring the lords to Laurcr.de for C.cblw. w’s 
Iran fad ions with Aremberg, being (hewed to Cobbam , anti accompanied, it feems, with fuch 
artful fuggefiions as were proper to inflame a man of Cobbam's weakoeis, h id the defined cf- 
fcft > for lie being led thereby to imagine that Ralegh had accus’d him of all, or more than 
he knew, burft out into vehement exclamations againft Ralegh , and in his rage, or madnels, Accukd t.y 
made the following confdTion. “ That having a pafsport to go to the Spaidj/j king, he in. * or ^ L 'd''um. 
“ tended firft to confer with the archduke ; and, becaufe he knew lie h id not money to pay 
his own army, meant from thence to go to Spain, to deal with the king for fix hundred 
** tboujand crowns, then to return by Jerfiy ; and that nothing Ihould be done about the 
“ diftribution of that money to the difeontented in England , till he had fpoken with Sir U r aL 
“ ter Ralegh: Further, that he had never enter’d into tliefe courfes, but by his infligation. 

“ He fpake alfo of plots, but of the particulars could give no account j yet acknowledg’d he 
** was afraid that Ralegh , upon his return to Jerfey, would have him and the money to the 

king.”* After all this, before Cobbam departed to the ftair-foot, he retraced his confeflion. Who retrafta 
and profefs’d he had done Ralegh wrong: 8 nor does it appear, fays my author, that lie did the atcu.a- 
fubferibe it. h In another branch of his examination, Cobham faid he had of Ralegh a book, lKm ’ 
written againft the king’s title, which he gave to his brother Brock , and that Ralegh faid it was 
Foolifhly written. But this he alfo retraced, as we Jhall hear.- Upon this, and other parts 
of his confeflion more foreign to Ralegh, concerning the advancement of laJy Arabella 
Stuart to the crown, as alfo from that of George Brook, a known enemy to Ralegh, as Cecyll 
could not deny; “ aflerting his brother Cobham told him (the* Cobham , in his confeflion, re- 
“ fufcd to own it) the lord Grey and others were only on the bye, but he and Ralegh were 
" on the main -, thereby meaning, faid Brook, the taking away of the king and his ifl'ue to¬ 
gether with what Ralegh acknowledg’d in his own examination ; “ That Cobham offer'd him 
“ eight thoufand crowns for his furtherance of the peace, tho’ the lord Cecyll and carl of Nor- 
** tbumberland were to have the fame proffers and that in fome difeourfes he might have 
faid, « the way to invade England was to begin with ftirs in Scotland .” Upon thefe circum- 
ftances, I fay, Ralegh was indided at Stains on the 2 ift of September following ; k and from hence 
that heavy indictment appears to have been accumulated upon him, which we fee prefixed to 


• Wi Annals, fol 8s6. 

J Arraignment, in Shtt ltys Li fit of Sir H'atur R 
P- 98. 

• W- p. no 
d Id P- MO. 

• letter from a mcml>er of parliament to Mr. 
~° nnc » concerning the arraigrmcnr of Sir Waltrr R, 
•MS. among the culk^tiuns of Rid/tty I ant , E,q; 


fame is alfo printed in Sir Toly la/fazc s's col legion of 
letters, 8vo. t66o. p. 281. 

f Arraignment of Sir Walter Ral^oly as before, p. 07. 
t Id. p. too. ** 

h Sir Thomas Ovetbury's copy of Sir Walter Ralph's 
arraignment, printed 410. p. 15. 

* Idem, p. 12. 
k St<rw\ Annals, foi. 850, 


his 


Digitized by 


Google 


ass 








cliv 


The L I F E of 

his trial. Three days afterwards Cobbam and Grey were alfo indicied at the fame place •, and, 
not long after this, they were all three return’d prifoners to the tower oi London. When the 
time of their trial drew nigh, that is to fay in the beginning of November, Ralegh got a poor 
fellow in the tower to caft up a letter, faften’d to an apple, in at Cobbam' s window, while the 
lieutenant was at fupper, to intreat him (becaufe he then knew not but Cobbam might be ar¬ 
raign’d before him :) “ for God’s fake, to do him juftice by his anfwer, and fignify to him, 
Andacknow- “ that he had wronged him in his accufation •” and Cobbam did, by an anfwer under his hand, 
wrong.* 1 '* c °nfcfs the fame; which not being perhaps fo full and txprelfiveas Ralegh expeded, lie afterwards 
lent Cobbam another letter, defiring’he would publilh his innocence at his arraignment. But, not- 
withftanding that Ralegh did not now requeft any further juftification under his hand, Cobbam 
fent him another anfwer,® clearing him in the moft folemn and perfect manner, as will pre- 
fently appear. Now by reafon of the plague, which raged fo violently in and about Loudon, 
the term having been proclaim’d to be held at Winchejler , the ftate-prifoners, who were thus 
indidled for the plot, were conveyed thither in great pomp. I find, that Ralegh went in his 
own coach, under the cuftody of Sir Robert Manfell , on the ioth of November , to BagJfjot in 
Surrey , twenty-four miles from London ; and, two days after, from thence, the other thirty 
miles, to the caftle at IVincbejler. The confpirators conducted thither at the fame time, were 
George Brook , under the charge of Sir William fVade •, Sir Grijjin Markham , under Sir Robert 
fVrotb j befides Sir Edward Parham, Bartholomew Brookjly , Anthony Copley, alfo William 
Watfon and William Clark , two priefts, under-wardens of the Tower, and the keeper of the 
Gate-boufe , together with a guard of fifty light horfe ; as for Cobbam and Grey, they fetout fix 
days, and arrived three days before, at the faid caftle, under the like guard. 0 

And here Cobbam having been prevail’d on to make frelh accufations in a letter to the 
Arraign’d at lords, at leaft fubferib’d with his name, which will be produced a little further, Ralegh's trial 
Winebtfttr. was fi r ft brought on j and this was on the 17th of the month aforefaid. He excepted not 
againft his Jury, being all ftrangers : but we are told by one, who feems to have had good in¬ 
telligence of this matter, “ That there was appointed for Ralegh another jury, the foreman of 
“ which was Sir Michael Stanhope, the next Sir Edward Darcy, the next Sir William Kille- 
“ grew, all men of honour, and near fervants to the late queen Elizabeth : but thefe bc- 
“ ing found not for their turn, they were all changed over night, and thofe others (named in 
«* the common printed trial) put in their places.” c After the indidtment had been opened, 
and aggravated by ferjeant Heath and attorney Coke, in fpeeches, manifeftly fathering the trea- 
fons of the reft upon Ralegh, for no other reafon that I can fee, but becaufe he was a man of 
wit, and a fwordfman: Cobham's examination was read as before quoted. Here Ralegh firlt 
(hewed the unreafonablenefs and improbability of the accufation therein againft him, as follows : 
“ It is ftrange for me, faid he, to devife with Cobbam, that he Ihould go to Spain to perfuade 

“ the king to difburfe fo much money, he being a man of no love in England and I 

** having refign’d my room of chicfcft command, the wardenlhip of the Stannaries ; it is ftrange 
«« for me to make myfelf a Robin Hood, or a Ket, or a Cade, I knowing England to be in 
“ better ftate than ever it was. I knew Scotland united, Ireland quieted, Denmark allur’d, 
“ which before was fufpefted. I knew, that having a lady, whom time had furpriz’d, we 

“ had now a lawful fucccflbr. The ftate of Spain was not unknown to me. I had written a 

«« difeourfe, which I intended to prefent unto die king againft the peace with Spain. I knew 
“ the Spaniard had fix repulfes, three in Ireland, and three at fea j and once in 1588, by my 
“ lord-admiral, alfo at Cadiz. I knew he was difeourag’d and difhonour’d. I knew the king 
“ of Spain to be the proudeft prince living, but now he comes creeping to my mailer for a 
«* peace. I knew, whereas he had before in his ports fix or feven fcore fail of Ihips, he has 
“ now but fix or feven. I knew, of twenty-five millions he had from his Indies, he has fcarce 
“ one left. I knew him fo poor, that the Jefuits in Spain were fain to beg at the church-door. 
«* Was it ever read or heard, that any prince Ihould dilburfe fo much money, without a fuf- 
“ ficient pawn? I knew her own fubjedls, the citizens of London, would not lend her majefty 
“ money, without lands in mortgage. I knew the queen did not lend the Hates money, with- 
out Flujhing, Brill, and other towns, fora pawn ; and can it be thought he would let Cobbam 
“ have fo great a fum ? I never came to the lord Cobham's, but about matters of his profit, 
«» as the ordering of his houfe ; and I had of his, when I was examin’d, four thoufand pounds 
«* worth of jewels for a purchafe, a pearl of three thoufand pounds, and a ring worth five 

* Oterlury's Arraignment, p. 23. and king Jamtt, a fcarce trafl in the liar lei an Jib: ary, 

k Sim’s Annals, fol. 828, 829. printed 4to. 1656, p. 8. 

« Obfervations on the hiitory of Mary queen of Scots 

“ hundred 



Digitized by 







civ 


Sir WALTER R A L E G H. 

“ hundred pounds. If he had had a fancy to run away, he would not have left fo much 
“ money to have purchas’d a leafe in fee-farm. I faw him buy three hundred pounds worth 
“ of books to fend to his library at Canterbury, and a cabinet of three hundred pounds to 
“ give Mr. Attorney for drawing the conveyances; and God in heaven knows, not I, whe- 
“ ther he intended to travel: but for the practice with Arabella, or letters to Aremberg , or 
« any difcourfe with him, or in what language he fpake unto him ^ if I knew any of thefe 
tl things, I would abfolutely confefs the indictment, and acknowledge myfelf worthy of a 
“ thoufand deaths.” And a little further concerning Cobbam's examination : “ He that hath 
“ been examin’d, has ever been afked if it be according to his meaning, and then to fubfcribe. 
« Methinks, my lords, when he accufes a man, he fhould give fome account and reafon of it} 
“ it is not fufficient to fay we talked of it. If I had been the plotter, would not I have 
“ given Cobbam fome arguments, whereby to perfuade the king of Spain, and anfwer his 
“ objections ? I knew fVejlmoreland and Bolbwell , men of other underftandings than Cob - 
“ bam, were ready to beg their bread.” 4 Here being obftruCted by other matters, the 
attorney fell at lad into that pafiage of Cobbam's telling Brook, “ You are on the bye, Ralegh 
and I are on the main." But Cobbam would not confirm his ever having faid fuch words. b 
Brook, who had pretended he did fay them, was allowed to have been Ralegh's enemy * c fo 
the expreflion was not proved. Another matter they kept fome coil about was, the book 
Cobbam faid he had of Ralegb, written againft the king’s title. This was nothing more than 
a Defence of the queen’s Proceedings againfl Mary queen of Scotland, written by one Robert 
Snag, a lawyer, and found by Ralegh in the library of the late lord-treafurer Burgbley , which 
he had liberty of fearchingfor fome geographical deferiptions of the Weft-Indies. Ralegb had 
declared to Cobham that it was foolifhly written, but deny’d that he gave it him •, and tho’ 
Cobbam, in his examination, faid it was given him by Ralegh , he revoked that confeffion upon 
being further queflion’d about it (as one of the lords of the council own’d j) and laid, the 
truth was, “ he took the fame of himfelf out of Sir Walter Ralegh's ftudy when he was 
“ afleep -,” d fo much to be depended on were lord Cobbam's accufations. But there was nothing 
afted thereby to the king’s prejudice, for the book was burnt. 0 As for the evidence of a ru¬ 
mour in Lisbon, brought into court by one Dyer, a pilot, who anfwering to a queftion, “ when 
“ the king would be crown’d ?” made by fome-body or other there, that “ he hop’d ’twould 
“ be IhortJy " was told again, “ it fhould never be, for Don Ralegb and Don Cobbam would 
“ cut his throat firft Ralegh made light of it, as of fuch a rumour and fuch a witnefs he 
might; and faid, “ If Cobbam had pra&ice with Aremberg, it might well be known abroad : 
“ and that the duke of Buckingham was named with Jack Straw's treafon to countenance it.” { 
But none of thefe little circumftances were much infilled on ; and we are told by one who 
was prefent, that, “ touching the Jetting up of Arabella, nothing at all was proved j nor 
“ touching the invafton here, or /edition in Scotland, or even the deflruBion of the king, &V. The 
“ proof againft Ralegh (as the fame writer continues a little further) did reft only upon Cob- 
“ barn's accufttion, and fome prefumptions, whereof that only was the ground : therefore Ra- 
“ legh fpent mod of the time in difabling that accufation, as being only utter’d in fury and 
“ paflion,”* through the device aforefaid, of making Cobham believe that Ralegb had firft 
accufed him. Befides, that he had renounced and repented it; and altho’, “ afterwards by 
“ practice, fays my faid author, he did affirm it, yet would he never be brought to fet his 
“ hand to the examination : all which was clear.” Then Ralegh, feeing this retraction fo un- 
jultly overlook’d, “ labour'd to prove thefe two points out of feripture, civil law, ftatute 
“ law, common law and confcience ; in every of which he had been plentifully read (as the 
“ fome auditor of his arraignment goes on:) firft, that there ought to be produced againft 
“ him two witnefies : fecondly, that his accufer might be brought to accufe him face to face.” 
Agreeable hereto are Ralegh's own words, after he had urged the ftatutes of Edward III, 
Edward VI, and queen Elizabeth s produced the opinions of judges in the law, and precedents 
from their writings; bcfidcs teftimonics from the Old and New T eft ament; where he fays, 
“ If by the ftatute, civil law, and God’s word, it be requir’d that there mult be two wit- 
“ nefles at leaft, bear with me, if I defire but one.” h But truly it was an unreafonable rc- 
queft ; thofc ftatutes were repeal’d, and the law would not allow of it now; tho* we are inform’d 


* Arr.i'gimfnt of Sir Walter Ralegh, in his Life afore- 
fc'd, p. 101, ic.{*. 

k l&m, p. 133. 

* Arraignment of Ralegh, p. 7. 

4 akin, p. 8. 


e Ault cut Coquinarier , 8vo. 1630, p. 83. 
f Arraignment of Ralegh in Sherley, p. 147, 148. 

* Letter of a member of parliament in Sir Tohy Mat * 
thews as before, p. 280. 

h Arraignment in Shirley , p 115. 

that 



Digitized by 



dvi . The LIFE of 


4 


Accufed by 

CMam 

again. 


Cleared by 
him again. 


that king James himfelf, taking notice how Cohbam was with-held, fhould fay, “ If he could 
«* have fpoken any thing againfl Ralegh^ they would have brought him from Conflanlinople 
44 tdhave accufed hint.” * Well therefore might he defire the jury to confider, “ There is no caufe 
“ lb doubtful, which the king’s counfel cannot make good againlt the law . b Thefe men do 
44 ufually defend bad caufes every day againft men of their own profdTion, and as able as 

41 themfclves : if they can do fo, what may they not do with me, who never lludied law till 

41 I catne into the tower of London * who have been practis’d in other affairs ; am weak of 
44 memory* anti feeble as you fee ? (for lie was fain to have a pen and ink to help him in the 
41 long fpeeches that were made againft him.”) Then faid he, more clofely to them, 44 If 
you would be content to be judg'd upon Sufpicions and Inferences : if you would not have 
44 youf accufation fubferib’d by your accufer : if you would not have your accufer brought to 
44 your face (being in the fame houfe too) where you are arraign’d: if you would be con- 
44 deitth’d by an accufation of one that has recanted, and is truly lorrowful for it: if you, 

44 in my cafe, would yield your bodies to torture, lofe your lives, your wives and children, 

44 and all your fortunes, upon fo (lender a proof \ then am I ready to luffer all thefe things:” 6 
or (as the common trial has it) 44 If you would be contented to be fo judged, judge fo of 
44 me. H 3 Now tho’ Ralegh at laft put himfelf on it, that if Cobham would only fpeak before 
God and the king, 44 that ever he knew either of Arabella'*, matter, or the money out of Spain, 
* 4 or of the furprizing treafon, or would accufe him with things equivalent, in any main point, 
44 Or any ways to have been an inftigator of him to deal with the king of Spain yet would 
they not let Cobham confront him, or give his teftimony viva voce : and tho’ Ralegh did not 
dire&ly confent to be determin’d by Cobham 's acculation, if they Ihould now produce it jufti- 
fit'd under his hand yet he was forced to fubmit to what they had in referve of this kind. 
Which Was the letter above-mention’d, written to the lords at IVmchcJler the day before the 
trial. Some fay, this letter was hot written by Cobham himfelf •, but that Sir JVUliam Wade, 
One of Cccyll’s creatures, tampering with his weaknefs, got Cobham to write his name to a 
blank •, to which, fays my author, Wade no qu eft ion Wrote the accufation. S Others imply, 
that Cobham did himfelf write it •, tho’ after he was inftru&ed by a letter from his lady, that 
there was no way to fave his own life, but to accufe Ralegh j and that it was fo reported upon 
the going together of the jury. h This letter was read with great triumph and exultation by 
Coke, as follows. 44 I have thought it fit to fet down this to my lords, wherein I profefs on 
44 my foul to write nothing but the truth. I am come now near to the period of my timej 
44 therefore I confers the truth before God and his angels. Ralegh, four days before I came 
44 from the Tower, caufed an apple to be thrown in at my chamber window •, the effe<ft of it 
44 Was, to intreat me to right the wrong I had done him, in faying that I would come home 
* 4 by Jerfeyt, which under iny hand to him I have retraced. His firft letter was thrown in 
44 the fame manner •, wherein he prayed me to write him a letter, which I did. He fent me 
44 wdhl the judges meft at Mr. Attorney 's houfe *, and that there was good hope the proceed- 
44 ings againft us fhould be ftaid he fent me another time a little tobacco. At Arembcrg 's 
44 coming, Ralegh dealt with me to procure him a penfion of fifteen hundred pounds a year, 
44 for which he promifed, that no aftion fhould be againft Spain but he would give knowledge 
44 before-hand. He told me the ftates had audience with the king. He hath been the origi- 
44 nal cauffc of my ruin •, for I had no dealing with Arembcrg, but by his inftigation. l ie hath 
44 been the caufe of my di (contentment^ he advifed me not to be overtaken with preachers, 
44 as Effete was } and that the king would better allow of a conftant denial, than to accufc any.” * 
flut this advice to a denial, hnd by that example, and the defire of any fuch penfion from Spain , 

.Ralegh preceded to be falfe. And further, to fhew them what a bafe dilhonourablc recreant 
’Cobham was, he pull’d out the letter Which Cobfsam a few days before wrote to him voluntarily 
ih the Tower, defiring the lord Cecyll to read ir, becaufe he knew his hand •, and that the jury 
Would obferve, if Cobham'i teftimony were of anry credit with them, how much more folemnly 
it was writ to clear, than the other to condemn him being in thefe words : “ Seeing myfelf 
44 fo hetir my end \ for the difdharge of my own confcience, and freeing myfelf lrotn your 
44 blood, which elfe will cry Vengeance againft me : I proteft, upon my falvalion, I never 
44 practis'd with Spain by your procurement ■, God Jo comfort me in this my aJfiPlion, as you are 


* Obfervatiom on Sanierfons Hifiory of Mary queen of 
Scots and king James , 4to. as before, p. 8. 

Arraignment in Sheriey , p. 148. 

« O'vtrbury s Arraigment, p. 21. 
d In Sheriey, p. 149. 
c Idem, p. 145. 


f Overbstry, p. 19. 

* Sir Anthony lie Lions court and character of king 
James , Svo. 1650, p. 3$. 

fc 0 *i>er (surfs Arraignment, p. 24. 

* The Arraignment in Sheriey, as before, p. 156. 

a true 


Digitized by kjOOQie 




Sir WA L TE R RALEGH. clvii 


“ a true fubjeft for any thing that I know. I will fay‘with Daniel , Purus Turn a fanguine-hujus; 

“ So God have mercy on my foul, as I know no treafon by you. * This was the laft evidence 
given*, yet the jury brought in their verdict guilty : this letter, lajlproduced to acquit Ra- Condemn J. 
legb, not prevailing with them fo much, it Teems, as the letter before, which was lajl, tho* 
lefs forcibly, written by Cobbam to accufe him, ** which, all things confider’d, fays the 
“ perfon, who heard the whole trial, was no more to be weigh'd than the barking of a dog ; and 
“ / would not (continues he) for much, to have been of the jury , to have found him guilty .” b 
“ Some of his jury, we are further told, were, after he was cart, fbfar touch’d in confidence, 

“ as to demand of him pardon on their knees j” c and even Coke , the attorney himfelf, being 
“ retir’d into a garden to take fome air, when his man brought him word that the jury had 
“ condemn'd Ralegh of treafon, anfwer’d. Surely thou art miflaken, for I myfelf accufed / 

“ him but of mifprifion of treafon j and this relation, upon the word of a Chriftian, I have 
“ received, fays my author, from Sir Edward Coke's own mouth.” d Sentence being given, 

Ralegh humbly defir’d, the king might know the proofs againft him > that he dill pepfifted in 
his loyalty, notwithftanding that verdidl ; which he would pray, that his faid jury might never 
anfwer for: and only craved pardon for concealing lord Cobham's ofler to him, which he did 
through a confidence that he had diverted him from thofe humours. So accompanied the 
Iheriff to the prifon “ with admirable eredion, yet in fuch fort as a condemn’d man Ihould 
«« do.”* 

Thus was he “ tired out of his life, as one obferves, by the bawling of the king’s counfel 
“ on one fide, and the bench’s infilling on a confelfion, extorted from the lord Cobham out 
“ of fear, on the other, rather than convinced ‘ and thus did his adverlaries reap dilhonour 
and reproach in their vidory, while he received triumphant applaufes in his overthrow, like 
fome flowers which are Tweeter in their fall, than others in their bloom. He flood at a bay 
with them from morning till night, “ to the great admiration of the hearers, 8 who all thought 
“ that a man of fuch underftanding and experience, would hardly be drawn into a plot fa 
“ foul and fo foolilh." 1 ' “ Divers, who went thither his enemies, went away with commife- 
“ ration of his injuries and misfortunes, thinking never man fpake better for himfelf.” 1 One 
of his auditors fays, “ He behaved himfelf fo worthily, fo wifely, fo temperately, that in half 
“ a day the mind of all the company was changed, from the extremeft fate, to the extremeft 
“ pity;” k and another fays, That “ Sir IValter Ralegh’s carriage was moft remarkable; 

“ firft, to the lords *, humble, yet not proftrate : towards the jury -, affable, but not fawning j 
“ rather (hewing love of life, than fear of death: towards the king's counfel ; patient, buc 
“ not infenfibly negleding ; not yielding to imputations laid againft him in words : and it was 
“ wonder’d, that a man of his heroic fpirit, could be fo valiant in fulfering; that he was 
“ never overtaken in paflion, CsjV.” 1 On the other fiJe, as to Coke’s behaviour, we (hall, to 
what has been faid, only obferve, as one means to account for it, that if EJfex was known to 
have ever been in any wife a friend or patron to him, as it appears he was in a private me¬ 
morial of an honourable perfon, who was of the fame college in Oxford with Ralegh, and 
almoft of the fame (landing *, then Coke might perhaps think of retrieving himfelf in the eye 
of the world, and making atonement for his ingratitude to the faid earl, alfo at his trial, and 
to his memory after his death, by his inhumanity now to one of the contrary faction. Cecyll, 
on the other fide, play’d a fmooth edge upon Ralegh throughout the trial; his blade Teemed 
ever anointed with the balfam of compliment or apology, whereby he gave not fuch rough 
and fmarting wounds, tho’ they were as deep and fatal as the other. But Ralegh could diftin- 
guilh crooked friendfhip, and perhaps the grounds of it, in this place, as well as he has done 
crooked wifdom in another; m when, to thofe fpeeches, where Cecyll faid, “ My afteClion, 

“ to you Sir IValter Ralegh was not extinguilh’d, but flaked, in regard of your deferts : 

“ and, excepting your faults (I call them no worfe) by God I am your friend lie anfwer’d, 

“ Whoever is the workman, it is reafon he fhould give account of his work to the work- 
“ mafter.” n As to any impertinences that occurr’d in the trial, they appear no-where fo 
much as in the perfonal reflections made by the faid attorney Coke, and the lord chief juflice 


• The Arraignment in Sherley, as before, p. 160. 

In Sir Tcb) Matthezcs as bdore, p. 283. 

« F. OJLorne s Memoirs of king James , in the 2d vol. 
of his works, p. 108. 

4 Observations on the hiltory of Mary queen of Scots , 
and her fon James, as before, p. 9, 

* Overbuy $ Arraignment, p. 25. 
f O/bonte, as before. 

I SptceTi Chronicle, fol. 1243. 

b Bdhop Cartoons Hill. Colled, of Deliverances, t&c. 


4*o. 1624, p. 179. 

* Oblervations on the hillory of the queen of Scots and 
her fon, tsfe as before. 

k In Sir 7oby Matthews, p. 279. 

1 See this character more at large in Sir Vernas Over¬ 
tures Arraignment of Sir Walter Ralegh , p. 6. 

Htjiory of the World, lib. V. cap. VI. Srd. VII. 
n Jryaigtiment of Sir Walter RaUgh in his Life, as be¬ 
fore, p. 144, 146. 

h h h Popbam , 


Digitized by CnOOQie 


7 le LIFE of 


Popham, whom Camden juftly calls a cenforious man j • they being foreign to the matters Ra¬ 
legh was charged with, therefore he wifely looked over them. But thefe, and the other irre¬ 
gularities throughout the whole proceedings, which have left men fo unlatisfied in the juftice 
of them againft Sir Waller Ralegh , and fo little inclin’d to believe him the criminal his ene¬ 
mies made him, 0 being fumm’d up by an able hand, and one whofe province it more pro¬ 
perly was to judge of them, I lhall take my leave of the faid trial, with a reference to his 
obfervations on it. c 

That Ralegh expected nothing lefs than this kind of treatment from thole hands, is plain 
by the letter which he wrote to the king himfelf juft before his trial ; wherein having laid, 
** I know, that, among many prefumptions gather’d againft me, your majefty has been per- 
“ fuaded, that I was one of thofe who were greatly difcontented, and therefore the more likely 
44 to prove diQoyal j but the great God of heaven and earth difclaim me from both worlds 
44 if I were not the contrary, and if I took not great comfort to behold your majefty; al- 
44 ways learning fome good, and bettering my knowledge by your majefty’s difeourfe: and 
“ having humbly befeeched him not to believe any of thofe, who, under pretence of offences 
44 to kings, do eafily work their particular revenge $” he fays a little further, 44 For my part, 
44 I proteft before the ever-living God, that I never intended treafon, confented to treafon, or 
44 perform’d treafon againft you \ and yet I know I lhall fall into their hands, e quibus non 
44 pojfum evadere, unlefs by your majefty’s gracious companion I be fuftain’d.” d Another letter, 
which he wrote to the lords, gives us fome further light or aflurance, that the offer made to 
him for one intention, and to others for another, was conftrued as made to him for both \ where, 
fpeaking of the two principal accufations againft him, he fays, 44 the firft was, that money 
44 was offer’d me with a pretence to maintain the amity, but the intent was to have aflifted his 
44 majefty’s furprize : the other, that I was privy to my lord Cobham' s Spanijh journey. For 
44 the firft, it feems, this money was offer’d to others long after it was offer’d to me, and 
44 upon other conftdcratiom than it was to me. For myfeJf I avow, upon my allegiance, 
44 that I never knew or fufpc<fted either the man or the new intention. To me it was but 
44 once propounded, and in three weeks after I never heard more of it *, neither did I be- 
44 lieve that he had any commiflion to offer it: for, if that word amity had been ufed to me 
44 colour ably , I mull have been alfo made acquainted with the true end for which it fhould 
“ have been given •, which it feems was for the furprize : but of any fuch horrible purpofe, 
44 if ever I had fo much as a fufpicion, I refufe your lordlhips favour, and the king’s mercy. 
44 I know your lordlhips have omitted nothing to find out the truth j but, as you have not 
44 err’d, like ill furgeons, to lay on plaifters too narrow for fo great wounds, fo I truft that 
44 you will not imitate unlearned phyficians, to give medicines more cruel than the difeale 
44 itfelf. For the journey into Spain, 1 know I was accufed to be privy thereto ; but I know 
44 your lordlhips have a reputation of confcience, as well as induftry. By what means that 
44 revengeful accufation was ftirr’d, you, my lord Cecyll , know right well, that it was my 
44 letter about Keymis and your lordlhips all know whether it be maintain’d, or whether, out 
44 of truth, and out of a Chriftian confideration, it be revok’d.” A little further he fays, 
44 God knows, and I can give an account of it, that I have fpent forty thoufand pounds of 


a Anna l. EHz. 1592. 

b Dr. Heylins Examen Hiftoricum , as before, p 171. 

« Sir John Hawks, foilicuor general to the late king 
Wiliam, in his Reply to a Jheet of paper, entitled, The 
A Jagiftraey and Government of England vindicated ; prin:ed 
in tol. 1O89. having obferved, that the accufations of Sir 
IV. Iter Rairgh did not amount to a legal proof ; fays fur¬ 
ther, p. 35, as follows. 44 Not to mention all that might 
44 be eAtepted to in the trial of the cafe cited ; I would 
44 know, by what lavs is the depofition of a perfon, who 
44 might be brought face to face to the prifoner, read as evi- 
44 dcnce ? I would know, by what law it is forbidden, 
44 that the accufer Jhould be brought face to face to the ac- 
44 cufed ? I would know, by what law Brook’s depo- 
44 fition of what the lord Cobham told him of Ralegh, 
44 was evidence againft Ralegh ? I would know, by what 
44 law the floty Dyer told of what an unknown man faid 
44 to him at Llfbon of Don Ralegh, was evidence againft 
44 Ralegh ? I would know, by what ftatute, the ftatutes 
44 of the 25th of Edward III, and 5th of Edward VI. are 
44 repeal'd? This trial was fo very irregular throughout, 
44 that I would willingly believe it was not io as it is re- 
44 lated ; but, if it were fo, I am fure none can defend it : 
4 and even for that reafon, if any fuch refolution was in 
44 the cafe, as is cited, 1 am fure it ought to carry no credit 
44 with it : and there is no reafon to believe there was 
44 any fuch refolution; there being no occalion for it; 


44 the queftion being only faft, which Sir Walter de- 
44 ny’d. The circumllanccs of his trial, in which the 
44 court always over-rul'd the prifoner, were lomewhat 
44 like the lord Ruffel's ; he complained of the ill ufage 
44 of the king’s counlel, as well as the lord Rujfel; and 
44 both had reafon fo to do. Hearfay w'as admitted to be 
44 given in evidence againft both; all that either of them 
44 laid for themfelves, tho’ very material, was llightcd. 
44 The one was put in mind, at his trial, of the death 
44 of the earl of EJftx ; as the other was, of the 
44 death of the vifeount Stafford; both, in their dying 
44 fpeeches, vindicated themfelves of thofe alperfiom. 
44 The principal witneffes, in both cales, had, before the 
44 trials, affirm’d, they knew nothing againft them : they 
44 were both accufcd with having heard what other per- 
44 Tons had faid in their eompany, and had not difeover’d 
44 it; they both gave the fame anfwer, that they could 
44 not help other men's talk. I think it is plain, at this 
44 day, that of Sir Walter Ralegh is thought a Sham - 
44 plot ; what the lord RuffcR s is thought, let the author 
44 lay.” 

d Sir Walter Ralegh's letter to king fames, before his 
trial at Winehefter ; in the fupplement to the Cabala, call’d, 
Scrinia Sacra , ^to. 1654, p. 85. and in Ralegh's Re¬ 
mains, edit. 1726, p. 185. collated with MS. copies 
thereof, in the Harleyan library, tAc. 

my 


Digitized by CjOOQie 



Sir WALTER RALEGH. 


“ my own againft that king and nation •> • that I never referved fo much of all my fortunes, 
“ as to purchafe forty pounds per annum land ; that I have been a violent perfecutor and fur- 

therer of all enterprizes againft that nation: I have ferved againft them in perlon *, and how, 
«* my lord-admiral and my lord of Suffolk can witnefs. I difeover’d, myfelf, the richeft part 
“ of all his Indies ; I have planted in his territories. I offer’d his majefty, at my uncle Ca- 
“ rew’s, to carry two thoufand men to invade him without the king’s charge. Alas ! to what 
“ end fhould we live in the world, if all the endeavours of fo many teftimonies lhall be blown 
“ off with one blaft of breath, or be prefented by one man’s word ?” ** Think therefore (fays 
“ he a little further) I befeech you, on my great affliction with compafflon •, who have loft 
“ my eftate, and the king’s favour, upon one man’s word j and as you would that God fhould 
“ deal with you, deal with me.” He concludes in this manner: “ Your lordfhips know, 
“ that I am guildefs of the furprize intended ; you know, or may know, that I never accept- 
*• ed of the money, and that it was not offered me for any ill j and of the Spanijh journey, 
«* I truft your confciences are refolved. Keep not then, I befeech you, thefe my anfwers and 
“ humble defires from my foveraign lord, qui ejl rex pius et mifericors , et non leocoronatus .” b In 
another letter which he wrote to the king after his trial, he has thefe words: “ Loft I am for 
“ hearing a vain man, for bearing only , and never believing or approving; and fo little 
« account I made of that fpeech of his, which was my condemnation, that I never remember’d 
“ any fuch thing, till it was at my trial objected againft me.” This letter he nobly concludes, 
with a defire only to repay a lent life with a love and affeCtion equal to the goodnefs wherewith 
his majefty fhould pleafe to beftow it. c 

If thefe letters had any good effeCt, it appeared not immediately, Ralegh being kept near 
a month at Wsnchefler after he was condemn’d, in daily expectation of death. We find, that 
when the report of the arraignments was made to the king in his privy-chamber at IVilton, he 
carried himfelf fo refervedly, that no-body could guefs how well he was fatisfied with the equa¬ 
lity of condemnation, till he made, himfelf, a difference in the punifhment. The two priefts 
were executed on the 29th of November , and George Brook on the 5th of December following. 
His majefty alfo fign’d warrants for Cobbam, Grey and Markham , to be beheaded on the 9th 
day of the faid month. But, in the particular narrative of this proceeding to execution, Ra¬ 
legh is not fo much as mention’d ; and this might be owing to the extraordinary difappoint- 
ment of that purgation, which was expeCled from one of thofe three next to be executed : for 
the day aforefaid being come, Markham was firft brought to the fcafiold j and, having ended 
his fpeech, prayers, with all he had to fay, and being on his knees, ready to receive the ftroke 
of the ax ; up fteps John Gibb, groom of the king’s bed-chamber, to Sir Benjamin Ticbbourne, 
the fheriff of Hampfhire, with his majefty’s warrant to ftay the execution •, fo Markham was 
told he muft withdraw a while into the hall, to be confronted by the lords. Then lord Grey 
was brought upon the ftage ; and he is laid to have poured out his prayers and his confeffion, 
tho’ not one word of them recorded in our narrative aforefaid i then was he alfo call’d afide. 
Laftly, Cobham was brought, and expos'd in the lame manner ; and his devotions to God 
are mention’d } but not a word of the treafon, his guilt or innocence, or concerning any pro¬ 
moter of his difloyalty or difeontent: Vo when he had done, the fheriff found it time to un¬ 
ravel the plot , by proclaiming and magnifying his majefty’s mercy, as we have it in the fame 
author j who yet cannot forbear comparing his own relation to a comedy , “ reprefenting fo 
“ many lively figures of juftice and mercy in a king, of terror and penitence in offenders, 
“ and of lb great admiration and applaufe in all others as appear’d in this action , carried on 
“ only and wholly by his majefty’s own direction.” d But whereas Coke had (after his outra¬ 
ges manner) charged Ralegh in the trial frequently with being the chief plotter and traitor 
in all this confpitacy : we now fee the king, in his warrant aforefaid, contradj&ing him, where 
he fays, toufehis own dialed, that, «« the tuo prieftis, and George Brooke, vaire the principall 
“ plotteris and intifairs of all the reft, to the embracing of the faidis treafonabill machina- 
“ tions:”* and yet you find, in the trial again, that Brook’s treafon was diftind, and to be 


• As the king’s counfel, in Ralegh's trial , ufed argu- 
mems, grounded on prelumptions, to prove him guilty ; 
fo did he there alfo ute others to clear himfelf, grounded 
on thefe of his great cxpences againft the Spaniards, and 
his having always been fuch a noted enemy to their faftion. 
But the lum of 40,000 A in this letter above, is only 
caird fo many crowns in the faid common trial. 

* kahgb's Remains, the lalt edit, as before, p. 188, 
csV. 

•Idem, p. 192, t$V. 


<* The copy of a letter , written from mafter T. M. 
near Salijluty , to mafter H. A. at London , concerning the 
proceeding at lVincbffter y where the late lord C oh ham, lord 
Grey , and Sir Grijfin Markham , all attainted of high trea¬ 
fon, were ready to be executed on Friday the 9th of De¬ 
cember , tffc. imprinted at London by R. B (#. t. Barker 
the king’s printer) 4to. 1603. reprinted in Sfew's Annals, 
and lately in Mr. Jofcph Morgans Pbacnix Bntannicus. 

e See king James's warrant in the pamphlet aforefaid, 
p. 11. 


kept 


Digitized by knOOQie 



clx 


Prifoncr in 
the Tower of 
London. 


The LIFE of 


kept fecret from Ralegh, becaufe there Brook tells Markham “ take heed how you make 
“ lord Cobham acquainted •, for, whatever he knows, Ralegh the witch will get it out of 
him.” 1 In lhort, the whole proceeding is fo full of inconfiftences, flunders, and other like 
odious e Reels of a falfe and malicious profecution, that we may well conclude with that hi do¬ 
rian, who fays, «« the king had ground enough to fhew mercy, which fome of the condemn’d 
“ party obtain’d.” *> 

But Ralegh , it feems, did laft tafteof it, and for no other apparent reafon, but becaufe he 
was the only one whom his enemies ftill wanted matter to exclude from it i as may be 
gather’d from what Cecyll wrote to a correfpondent three days after the king's warrant of fuf- 
pence, to the others before-mention’d ; where, among thefe wonderful inftances of his maje- 
fty’s clemency, we are told, “ He pretended to forbear Sir Walter Ralegh for the prefent, 
“ till the lord Cobham' s death had given fome light how far he would make good his accufa- 
“ tion :** c and tho’ we hear not that he ever did make it good, yet was the pretended time 
of Ralegh's execution fo determin’d, however we find not, that he, like the reft, was ever 
brought to the place •, that he wrote, what he intended for his laft words, to his wife, the night 
before he expefted to be put to death, in a very moving letter, full of the moll generous ac¬ 
knowledgments, of the wifeft, moil religious and affe< 5 lionate advice to her, no Jefs than of the 
moil heroic and magnanimous fentiments in regard to himfelf, and to that fuflering which ordi¬ 
nary fouls fo naturally Ihrink at. It is too long to recite in this place, befidcs has been often prin¬ 
ted, and may be eafily met with in his works. The hiftorical paflages in it acquaint us, that 
his lands were conveyed to his fon, as is before-mention’d : that he intended his wife the pro¬ 
fits of his wine-office, half his goods, and all his jewels, except fome one to his fon : that 
Baily owed him two hundred, or, as other editions have it, a thoufand pounds j d and his 
brother Adrian Gilbert fix hundred : that he had alfo much money owing him in Jerfey, be- 
fides the arrearages of the wines, which would pay all his debts. Towards the condufion, he 
intreats her “ to get thofe letters, if it be poffible, which I writ, faid he, to the lords, where- 
“ in I fued for my life. God is my witnefs, that it was for you and yours that I defir’d 
“ life. But it is true that I difdain myfelf for begging it j for know it, dear wife, that 
** your fon is the fon of a true man, and one, who, in his own relpe<fl, defpifes death, and 
“ all his mifhapen and ugly forms. I cannot write much •, God knows how hardly I Heal 
«* this time, while others deep \ and it is alfo high time, that I Ihould feparate my 
thoughts from the world. Beg my dead body, which living was deny’d thee, and either 
“ lay it at Sherborne , if the land continue, or in Exeter church, by my father and mother. 
*« I can fay no more ; time and death call me away.” And as, in the former part of this 
letter “ he trufts that his blood will quench their malice, who had thus cruelly murder'd him 
fo in the condufion, “ he prays to God, that he may forgive his perlecutors and accufers.” * 
But after all this ufage, Cobham never confirming his accufation of Sir Walter Ralegh , 
they both were, with the reft of the prifoners, returned, on the 15th of December , to the 
Tower of London : f thofe, of whom the leaft profit was to be made, were either acquitted, 
or did afterwards get their liberty ; among whom was Markham , who travell’d abroad, but 
endured greater diftrefs in his ftate of freedom, than he had in his reftraint. 8 But Grey , it 
feems, died in the Tower , h and with Cobham it went nigh to fare ftill worfe; for he would 
have ftarved there, being fo clofely fleec’d as he was by the court-beggars of his great eftate, 
had they not alfo laid thereby a kind of a fine upon his majefty for his offences •, the crown 
being impofed upon to fupport him in his many years confinement, as Ralegh himfelf has fuf- 
ficiently difeover’d. * And here, to difpatch what more remains of this lord relating to our 

prefent 


• The Arraignment in Ralegh'% Life, as before, p. 91. 
b Rujfawth's Ilillorical Collections, vol. I. fol. 4. 
c Sir Ralph Wi/twood's Memoirs, vol. II. fol. 11. 
d See tiiis letter in the edit, of Ralegh's Remains, 1 


1651. 

e Idem, and, befidcs the other editions of his Remains, 
alfo at the end of Sir Thomas Over bury's relation of his 
Arraignment, and at the end of Ralegh'% Lite in Prince's 
Worthies of Dt'von, fol. 543. 
f Stow s Annals, as before. 

l James Wadfworth, in his Engli/h Spanish Pilgrim, 
4to. 1650, p. 66, fpeaking of the ftate and demeanor 
of the Englifi fugiiives under the king of Spain's domi¬ 
nions, fays, “ This Sir Griffin Markham , at his ftrft ar- 
“ rival in Bruxels, being kept under by the Jefuits, was 
“ driven to fuch an exigency, that he was conftrain'd to 
pluck out the inlaid liiver of the hilts of his fword, to 
«« buy ftour to make a hafty-pudding for his dinner : 
“ but he afterwards (fays the fame author) took the bell 


“ way to raife his fortunes; having got into favour with 
** the duke of Suburge , who gives him the furelt pen- 
“ fionof all.** 

h O/lforne's Memorials of king James , p. 106. alfo Sir 
William Dug dale, who fays, that this Thomas lord Grey (fon 
of Arthur before*mention’d in this Life) died in the Tower 
on the 6th of July 1614, being the laft lord Grey of 
W'ilton. Baronage of England, vol. I. 1675, fol. 716.. 

* The lord Cecyll., who was created earl of Sahjbun in 
1605, and lord-treafurcr, upon the death of Buckhurfi, 
earl of Dorfct, in 1608, did very much engrofs the re¬ 
venues of the crown, as Ralegh made appear to the king 
himfelf, in an excellent Dialogue he dedicated to his ma¬ 
jefty ; where, among the particulars, of CccxlL s neglect¬ 
ing an increafe of 40,000 pounds to the king’s ellute, the 
conferring a 10,000 /. fine upon DevonJbire and his mi- 
flrefs, the engrofling to himfelf many goodly manors, 
and the exchange of TljcobaU's for Hatfield, which the 
greateil fubjedt or favourite queen Elizabeth had, never 

durft 


Digitized by CjOoq le 














clxi 


Sir WALTER RALEGH. 

prefent hiftory, we may obferve, that fome years after their confinement, Ralegh is faid to 
have himfelf procur’d a re-examination of Cobham , and to have been abfolutely cleared by 
him. Butthcpradices which were ufed againft him therein, are reprelented To foul and wicked, 
to have given fome, whofe intereft it was to favour the adminiftrations of thefe times, oc- 

cafion to fufpeft the aflertion ; tho 1 it is corroborated by feveral material circumftances, as 

Well as the teftimony of coeval writers. The author, in whom we fir ft meet with this paf- 
fage, and whofe (horter account of it is before related, to (hew that Ralegh's life was furrep- 
titioufly taken away, gives it us again more circumftantially, and as a true ftory, thus, <c Queen 
44 Anne, that brave princefs, was in a defperate, and fome believed incurable difcafe, whereof 
44 the phyficians were at the furtheft end of their ftudies to find the caufe, at a non plus for 
“ the cure. Sir Walter Ralegh being, by his long ftudies, an admirable chymift, 1 undertook His cure of 

44 and perform’d the cure j b for which he would receive no other reward, but that her majefty <luccn 

44 would procure, that certain lords might be fent to examine Cobham , whether he had accufed 
44 Sir Waller Ralegh of treafon at any time under his hand ? the king, at the queen's requeft 
44 (and in jufbice could do no Icfs) fends fome lords and others of the council (which, as our 
44 author goes on, were the duke of Lenox , Salijbury , IVorcejter , Suffolk , Sir George Carew y 
44 and Sir Julius Ccrfar) to demand of Cobham , whether he had not, under his hand, accufcd 
44 Sir Walter Ralegh at Wincbejler , upon that treafon he was arraign’d for ? Cobham cjjd pro- 
44 teft, never, nor could he; c but, faid he, thtit villain Wade did often follicite me, and, 

44 not prevailing that way, got me, by a trick, to write my name upon a piece of white 
44 paper, which I, thinking nothing, did; fo that, if any charge came under my hand, it was 
44 forged by that villain Wade, by writing fomething above my hand, without my confent. 

44 or knowledge. d Thefe fix returning to the king, the reft made Salijbury their fpokefman ; 

44 who faid : Sir, My lord Cobham hath made good all that ever he wrote or faid. Where it is 
4 * to be noted, that this was but an equivocating trick in Salijbury •, for it was true, that Cob- 
44 bam had made good whatever he had writ , but never wrote any thing to accufe Ralegh ; by 
44 which you fee the bdfenefs of this lord, the credulity of the king, and the ruin of Sir Wal- 
#< ter Ralegh ” 0 As for the miferable end this lord Cobham made, the fame author relates 
it i £ and it isalfo confirm’d by others, who were well acquainted with thehiftory of thefe times, 

and 


durft have named to her; he farther inrtances, that, 44 It 
“ had been an honeft fervice to the king, to have alfo 
44 added 7000 /. lands of tht lord Cobham % , with his 
“ woods and goods, worth 30,000/. more. For thofe 
m lands, remaining with George Brook's children but 
44 during their lives, had been the king’s for ever in ef- 
44 fikt; but to wreft them from the king, and draw the 
44 iniieritance upon himfelf, the trea lurer perfuaded his 
44 majefty to rclinquifh his intereft for a petty fum of 
u money ; and, that there might be no counter-working, 
44 he fent Bfook fix thoufand pounds to make friends; 
4i whereof lord Hume had two thoufand pounds back 
4( again, Buckhurfi and Berwick had the other four thou- 
“ knd pounds, and the treafurer and his heirs the mafs 
44 of land for ever.’ 1 H'bat then came to the king by this 
conjifiation ? (fays one of the correfpondents in the faid 
Dtaloyue .) “ His majefty (anfwers t’other) by all thofe 
4t goodly pofTcflions, woods and goods, lofts five hundred 
44 founds a year , which he gives in penfion to Cobham 
44 to maintain him in prifon.” See Sir Walter Ralegh's 
Prerogative of Parliaments in his Remains (laft edit.) p. 
* 49 » &V. 

* The author here quoted, feems to have been well 
acquainted with Sir Walter Ralegh's character, by this 
circumilance ; for there is ftill in being a volume of 
Chymical ar.d Medicinal Preparations , in Ralegh's own 
hand-writing, as will more particularly be obferv’d a few 
pge< farther. 

^ The author of Aulicus Coquinaria thinks, he fufE- 
ciently anfwers this paiTage ; where he fays, p. 97, 4 4 the 
41 queen was never cur’d of her difeafe, but by death, 
“ that ends all maladies.” Now the dileafe, which this 
q'jcen Anne died of, was a drop/y, but not till after Sir 
^ft[ ier Ralegh's death, and above fifteen year after this 
his iroprifenment; whereas the difeafe, from which Ra - 
hgf> recover’d her, was a fever, as Dr. Welwood informs 
os in hi? Poles on Wi Ijon's H ftory of king James» In tho 
fame place he fays, it was fome time before the illnefs 
of prince Hrr:?y; ar.d Camden, in his Annals of king 
James, telling us, when Sir Julius Co'far was made a 
Pnvy counfefor, we may conclude this cure was perform’d 
“tween the yc?.rs 1607 and 1612. 

• Thus much is confirm’d by another writer, who ob. 


fervtt, 94 that Ralegh and Cobham being prifoners, upon 
44 the fuit of queen Anne (who was thereunto preiTed by 
44 Sir Walter Ralegh) Cobham was re examin’d before 
94 fome of the lords of the council at the Tower, and did 
** clear Sir Walter Ralegh from all treafons whatfoever.” 
Objervations upon fome perfons and pajfages in the Com - 
pleat Hiftory of Mary queen of Scotland, and her foil 
James , 410. 1656, p. 12. 

* An author before cited, has attempted to difprove 
this particular thus: “ How could Wade tamper with 
99 Cobham to write his name to a bl ink, to which Wade 
99 framed the accufation againft Ralegh ; when it appears, 
99 Cobham never figned at all to his examinations ?” Auiic. 
Coquin. p. 190. But it is plain this trick of Wade's, if 
fuch he committed, could not be meant of Cobham's ex¬ 
aminations, for they were taken at Richmond and at Lon¬ 
don ; but the queftion put here was. Whether Cobham had 
not, under his hand, accufed Sir Walter Ralegh at Win- 
thefter ? which could relate only to this letter of accufation 
before quoted, which was fubferib'd with Cobham's name, 
and pretended to be written by him the night before Ra¬ 
legh's trial there. 

« Sir Anthony Weldon's court and character of king 
James, p. 38, 39, 40. 

f He tells us, that, “ as lord Grey died pitied, Cobham 
99 died fcorn’d, and his death as bafe ; for he died loufy 
44 for want of apparel and linnen ; and had ftarv’d, had 
49 not a trencher-lcrapcr, fome time his fervant in court, 
49 relieved him with fcraps, in whofe houfe he died, be- 
49 ing fo poor a houfe, as he w'as forced to creep up a 
49 ladder into a little hole to his chamber; which was a 
49 ftrange judgment, and unprecedented for a man of 
99 feven thoufand pounds per annum, and of a perfonal 
99 eftate of thirty thoufand pounds ; of all which the 
44 king was fo cheated (or of what (hould have efeheated fo 
44 him) that he could not give him any maintenance, as 
94 in all cafes the king docs, unlefs out of his own rc- 
44 venue of the crown ; which was the occafion of this 
44 lord's want (his wife being very rich, and would net 
94 give him the crumbs that fell from her table) and this 
44 was a juft judgment of God on him.” Thus Weldon, 
p. 37, OJlome alfo, much to the fame fenfe, tells 

us, from the authority of William carl of Pembroke, 

i i i 44 that 


Digitized by 


Google 




He LIFE of 

and from whom we learn, that Cobham furvived not Sir Waller Ralegh above two or three ; 
months. * 

But to return to more early pnfiages in Ralegh’s imprifonment, and to confider his date, 
as it appears at his entrance therein, we may very eafily believe, he was at firft in very great, 
trouble to be fo fuddenly, and in fuch a manner, depriv’d of power, fortune, liberty and re¬ 
putation j but find nothing to confirm the extraordinary dejection one writer, who has been# 
before fpoken of, deferibes him under $ where he fays, “ In the publick joy and jubilee of the 
“ whole realm, when favour, peace and pardon were offer’d even to offenders; he, who in 
“ wil t in wealthy in courage , was inferior to few, fell fuddenly (he cannot tell how) into 
“ fuch a downfall of defpair, that his greateft enemies would not have wifhed him fo much 
“ harm, as he would have done himfelf " ,J lor we have fecn he had enemies, who would, 
have done him the injury that could not be exceeded, had not the king, in fome degree of 
juftice, rather than mercy to him, interpos’d, and fecured him, as well from being quite de- 
ftroyed by, as taking revenge on them : befxdes, that letter to his wife before-mention’d, when 
his fate appeared ncareft and molt unavoidable to him, demonftrates the firmnefs and fortitude 
of a man, who could receive death as an acquaintance, rather that a ftranger, or one, who, 
having fo often gone to face him among the foes to his country abroad, could, with equal 
fteadinefs and compofure of mind, meet him from thofe at home. Indeed, the affairs of a per- 
fon, wfio had fuch various and extenfive dealings or commerce with mankind, could not but 
be fomewhat perplex’d and embarrafs’d, upon a fall fo fudden and precipitous; therefore, to 
find him employing agents for colledling in debts, and fatisfying creditors, is to be expedited. 
Thus, in one of his letters to Sir Michael Hext , he defires him to fpare John Sbellbury for a 
little time, he being bound for him in a fum of fifteen hundred pounds > and, if he was re- 
ftrained, fo that he could not recover the wine-arrearages, which (as we find from Ralegh’s 
letter before to his wife) would clear all his debts, they muft remain unpaid. The date en¬ 
dors’d upon this letter, probably by Sir Michael himfelf, is November 12, 1604. c In the 
middle of February following, we find a grant made by the king, to that John Sbellbury and 
another perfon, to this effedt: “ That Sir Walter Ralegh, late of Sherborne, &c. being at- 
“ tainted of high treafon, whereby all his goods and chattels, real and perfonal, moveable and 
“ immoveable j debts, duties, fums of money, bonds, tdc. are forfeited. His majefty therefore, 
« in confideration that the faid debts, which Sir Walter Ralegh did truly owe before the faid 
“ attainder and conviction, may be juftly and truly paid $ as alfo for the help and maintenance 
«* of dame Elizabeth his wife, his child and family *, and for other confiderations, grants to 
“ John Sbellbury and Robert Smith of London , gentlemen, all the faid goods, idc.” 

Thus we fee a great diftinCtion made already between him and Cobham , and fhall find 
more favour extending towards him in a little while. ’Tis faid to be much owing to the ear- 
neft and unwearied intercefiions of his lady at court, who, that fhe might be more fervice- 
able to him, foon after he was committed to the Tower, petition’d the king, that fhe might 
be a prifoner with her hufband, or live with him there in his confinement *, and her requeft was 
granted. Here, manifeflly after the grant aforefaid to Ralegh’s truftees, becaufe that mentions 
but one of his fons, fhe was deliver’d of the other, and he was chriften’d Carrw, who was yet 
born, as authors compute, within the year above-mention’d. To this fatisfaClion, Ralegh had 
others afterwards, which greatly alleviated the lofs of his liberty \ So that his reftraint, which 
was intended as a mortification, his prudence in time fo converted, that it proved only a retire¬ 
ment, or the quiet enjoyment of a domeftick life ; and he felt certain comforts arife from the 
conftant company of his little family, which, in the pomp of courts, the pride of conquefts, 
the glory of difeoveries, and the fweetnefs of freedom itfelf, he had never tailed. But this 
tranquillity appears not to have fuddenly arriv’d, being for a while diverted of all his 
ertate; and, having fome contentions at law with thofe who were confiderably indebted to 
him, and could not otherwife be brought to account j one inftance whereof we have in Wil- 

• Camden's Annals of king Janus, and Dugda.V s Ba- ^ 
ronage. 

b Sir John Harringtons Brief View of the Church, p. 93. 
c Sir Walter Ralegh to Sir Michael Hext, the original 
in the choice and valuable library of James lfed, feiq; 
F.RS. 

d De ConceJJione Johanni Shelbery et Roberto Smvth, 
de Bonis et Catallis qua fuerunt Walter] Rah’gli Mi litis 
Attintli . In Rymer's Fcedcra, Tom. XVI. fo1. 569. 


44 that Cobham died in a room afeended by a ladder, at 
44 a poor woman's houfc in the Mintrics , formerly his 
“ laundrefs, rather of hunger, than of any more natu- 
“ ral difeafe. Thus miferable was his fate, in meeting 
4 ‘ with a prince fo inconfiderately profufe to ftranger:., 
44 that he forgot the owner, not leaving him wherewithal 
44 to buy bread : an impiety not found among infidels, 
44 nvho rver deem'd it lefs injujlice to take aixay life, than 
44 the means to maintain it. 


Ham 


Digitized by CnOOQie 









Sir W A LTER RALEGH. clxiii 

liam Sanderfon the elder, “ who was of kin to Ralegh ; 4 and (as we are told) in the time of his 
44 profperity and greatnefc, was his fervant, intruded with receiving great l'ums of money for 
“ him out of his office of wines, and his other places, by which he became in arrear to Ra- 
44 legh in divers great fums , which, after his troubles, he fent for to Sanderfon , who was fo far 
“ from paying them, that he pretended Ralegh fhould owe him two thou fa. nd pounds : where- 
“ upon Sir Walter , in great anger, commenced a fuit againft Sanderfon , which was managed 
44 by his fervant and follicitor John Shellbury j and Sanderfon , being overthrown, and found in 
44 arrear to Ralegh in very great fums, was call into prifon, where he died a beggar. Hence 
44 fprung all the fplecn and malice of IVtlliam Sanderfon the younger (in his hiftory of king 
44 Jamets reign) towards Sir Walter Ralegh as the author of the pamphlet whence this paf- 
iage is extracted, and which was written many years after Ralegh' s death, to deteft the errors 
and falfities in that hiftory, continues. b Now this expofure both of that author’s father and his 
own hiftory, fo enraged the fon, that he forthwith publifh’d an anfvser to fhe faid pamphlet , 
in which he not only endeavours to fupport what he had written of Sir Walter Ralegh in his 
hiftory, tho’ with no authorities or fatisfa&ory reafbns, but falls mod foully upon Carezu Ra¬ 
legh, as if he was the author of the pamphlet aforefaid againft his hiftory ; and that, with 
fuch womanilh fpleen and Hander as might have betray’d, had not himfelf own’d, that his 
wife had a hand in writing it. But of the paflage here laft quoted, tho’ he contradicts feveral 
particulars, he does not deny the main point; which is, that Sir Waller Ralegh , now after his 
reprieve, did commence fuits by Sljellbury againft his father, which might naturally fharpen 
the fon’s pen, and warp his impartiality, when he was reprefer.ting him in his hiftory, and 
the rather if Ralegh was fuch a debtor befides to his father, as he deferibes him. c But, who¬ 
ever was the author of thofe obfervations on the faid hiftory, he has not more unfavourably 

treated it, than others who examined it afterwards. d 

When Ralegh had got over chefc troublefome contefts, all things appear’d, for a while, 
about him as ferene, as in fuch a gloomy ftate could be hoped forj and he, who lately was 
upon the very brink of dilTolution, had all his offices, lands and goods, feiz’d upon, and 
was himfelf committed a clofe prifoner, had not only his life repriev’d, and his confinement 
fweetned with fome degrees of latitude, but even his eftate alfo reftor’d to him. For thefe ^ se .j a { l e im 

lands (as lhould have been before obferv’d, had Carezo Ralegh's cafe , whereof I had then K ° r ^ 

but an imperfeift extraift, been, as it is now at hand) were actually made over by Sir Wal¬ 
ter Ralegh to his fon, both inheritance and fee, before queen Elizabeth died, as formerly was 
alfo the leafe for years j* fo that, as he obferves again in another place, “ being entail’d on 
44 Sir Walter’s heirs, he could not forfeit them, but during his own life ; and the king, finding 
44 in himfelf the iniquity of Sir Walters condemnation, gave him all what he had forfeited 
44 again.”* Herewith agrees likewife Sir John Harrington , who not only tells us by whofe 


1 For the laid William Sanderfon the elder, who was 
much among the merchant-adventurers in queen 

Elizab(tb\ reign, and one of her comnufiioners lor the 
tyanijh prize-goods; aLo of note for the great globes, 
which, by his encouragement, were brought to perfection; 
married, about the year 1571, Margaret*Sncdalc or Snmv- 
dalt, the daughter of Sir Walter Ruiegh'* filler Mary , by 
her hufband Hugh Snedule, a commander in the queen’s 
royal navy, as we gather from a pamphlet written by 
their fon William Sanderfon, more particularly mention’d 
a little lower. 

* Obfervations on the hiftory of Mary queen of Scot - 
land, and her fon James , &c. p. 2. 

•See an Anfiutr to a fcurrilous pamphlet, entitled, 
Obfervations upon a compleat Hijlory, isfe. of Man queen 
of Scotland, and her fon king James, by William 
Sanderfon, Efq; 4m. 1656. 

4 The character he gives of Sandrrfcns faid Wflory of 
king James, is as follows : 44 Hid whole Hijiiry is a 
u Ebapfody of notes and fcatter’d papers from other men, 
“ colle&ed without order or method ; exceedingly defec- 

live both in time, place and nominations ; and written 
u kt fo unfecmly and disjointed a Jhle, that you may 
u eafily perceive he has taken up other mens words with- 
u out underftanding their matter and unlcfs it be where 
11 he rails on perfons of honour (which he does plainly, 
“ often, tho’ fometimes very falfcly) his language 
u is dark, harfh and unintelligible.” Dr. Heyliu thought 
this character fo juft, that he has recited it in his Survey 
of Sander fin s Hiftory of Charles \, annexed to his ad<ver- 
tifemtnts on the laid author's Hiffor y of the quern of Scots 
and king J amts, in his Ex am in lUjloricam bviurc men¬ 


tion'd ; and farther confirms it with this character of his 
own : 44 Sander fan s method is intricate and perplex’d, 

44 backwards and forwards, without care of time or or- 
44 der; telling the fame tning over and over, and many 
44 times dilagreeing in one place, frem that which was 
44 affirm’d in another : his language rough and unpolifh’d 
44 in moft parts of the book, and in fome parts ungrani- 
44 matical; fo that no fenle can be pick’d out ef it, bat 
44 by circamftances, and in the way of conjedure only.” 
A little further he alfo gives it as the opinion of a judi¬ 
cious friend, 44 That Stindufon writes nothing like an 
44 hiftorian, either for ftyle or compofure : his fencences 
44 many times nonlenie, and his digreftions tedious and 
44 impertinent.” 

And Dr. liihvood, in his notes on lVilfcn'% hiftory of 
king James , fays, nothing could inhancc the value of it 
more than 44 a molt wretched one publiih'd by one Wt /- 
44 Ham Sanderfon ; who pretends, in feveral places, to 
44 fome fecret memoirs or difeourfes with great men, to 
44 make good the pallages of his hiftory. iiut the truth 
44 is, the whole is nothing clfe but an ill*compii\] collcc- 
44 tion out of other authors; wherein he, for the moft 
44 part, miilakes or perverts their meaning. In curforily 
44 reading over this hiftory, I have fometimes taken 110- 
44 tice of above four or five grofs errors, either in names , 
44 things or chronology, in one fingle page.” 

* Carrw Ralegh' s cafe at the committee, for fale of 
delinquents eftates, MS. before quoted. 

f A brief relation of Sir Walter Ralegh** troubles ; 
with the taking away of the lands and caftle of Sherborne 
in UorjetJfAre , ifc. 4to. 1669, p. 6. 


mediation 


Digitized by LiOOQle 



xiv 7 he L I F E of 

mediation Ralegh recover’d his faid eftate, and his enlargement in prifon, but how laudably, 
he employ’d himfelf there at the time of this author’s writing, which might be about the year- 
1607 •, where he fays, “ God put it into the king’s mind, againft man’s expectation, to fave- 
«« his life j and fince, by the fuit of his faithful wife, both to prcferve his eftate, and to cafe- 
*.* his reftraint, in fuch fort as many, who are at liberty, tafte not greater comforts than he doth 
“ in prifon \ being not barr’d of thofe companions, meaning books, that he may, and per- 
“ haps does, take more true comfort in them, than ever he took of his courtly companions in- 
“ his chiefeft bravery.” 1 

But this profped was foon overcaft ; for there was a young Scotchman , named Robert Car, 
who, foon after the faid reftitution, fprang up in great favour at court} and, having no fortune 
of his own, it was contrived by thofe who had gaped in vain for Ralegh's eftate thcmfe)ves» 
to lay the foundation of this favourite's future greatnefs upon his ruin : for, being thus fruftrated 
of the effeds of Sir Walter's attainder, they pretended to find a flaw in his laft conveyance of 
the fee and inheritance of Sherborne to his fon j and to this purpofe an information was exhibi¬ 
ted in the Exchequer by the attorney-general Hobart , to which Ralegh put in his anfwer j and 
therein the faid grant or conveyance was let forth to be made over, as above : yet, for want of 
a fingle word (which was found notwithftanding in the paper-book, and was only the overfight 
taken 0 f the clerk) they pronounced the conveyance invalid, and Sherborne abfolutely forfeited to the 
" crown } a judgment to be forefeen without witchcraft; fince his chief judge was his greateft 
enemy, and the cafe argued between a friendlefs prifoner and the king of England . b 

Then was Sherborne given to this Car , afterwards earl of Somerfet. The lady Ralegh and 
her children earneftly petition’d the king for compaflion $ but could jiow obtain no other an¬ 
fwer from him, than that he mun have the land , he mun have it for Car. And fhe, a womaa 
of high fpirit, on her knees, prayed to God, that he would punilh thofe who had thus wrong¬ 
fully expofed her and her children to ruin. c We have an elegant letter of Ralegh's extant, to Car 
himfelf, upon this occafion ; but, having been corruptly printed, as I have elfcwhere obferv’d, \ 
it may appear from feveral ancient manufeript copies more correCt, as follows : “ After fomegreaB 
11 lofles, and many years forrows, of both which I have caufc to fear I was miftaken in the 
«< end •, it is come to my knowledge, that yourfelf, whom I know not but by an honourable 
“ fame, has been perfuaded to give me and mine our laft fatal blow, by obtaining from his 
“ majefty the inheritance of my children and nephews, loft in the law for want of a word. 
«* This done, there remains nothing with me but the name of life, defpoiled of all elfe but 
“ the title and forrow thereof. His majefty, whom I never offended (for I ever held it un¬ 
it natural and unmanly to hate goodnels) ftay’d me at the grave’s brink ; not, as I hope, that 
« he thought me worthy of many deaths, and to behold all mine call out of the world with 
«* myfclf v but as a king, who, judging the poor in truth, has received a promife from God, 
“ that his throne ftjall be eftablijh'd for ever. And for yourfelf. Sir, feeing your fair day is but 
“ now in the dawn , and mine drawn to the evening , your own virtues and the king’s grace 
*« alluring you of many favours and much honour, I befeech you not to begin your firft build- 
«« ing upon the ruins of the innocent; and that their forrows, with mine, may not attend your 
“ firft plantation. I have been ever bound to your nation, as well for many other graces, as 
“ for their true report of my trial to his majefty, againft whom had I been found malignant* 
“ the hearing of my caufe would not have changed enemies into friends , malice into companion, 
“ and the minds of the greateft number prefent into the cotnmiferation of my ftate. It is not 
“ the nature of foul treafon to beget fuch fair paflions ; neither could it agree with the duty • 
“ and love of faithful fubjedls, efpecially of your nation, to bewail his overthrow, who had 
“ confpir’d againft their molt liberal and natural lord. I therefore truft, Sir, that you will 
“ not be the firft that lhall kill us outright, cut down the tree with the fruit, and undergo 
“ their curfe, who enter the field of the fatherlefs j which, if it pleafe you to know the truth, 
“ is far lets fruitful in value than in fame ; but that fo worthy a gentleman as yourfelf will 
“ rather bind us to your fervice, being. Sir, gentlemen, not bafe in birth or alliance, who 
** have intereft therein * and myfclf, with my utmoft thankfulnefs, will ever remain ready to 


* Brief View of the State of the Church of England, 
P' 93 » 94 - 

b Thus in the brief Relation of Sir Walter Ralegh's 
doubles, and Carrw Ralegh's Cafe as before. Ralegh has 
himfelf alf> made fome (harp reflexions upon judges for 
their deprivations of this kind. In his Difcourfe of the 
ordinal and mifery of invafive war, p. 19. 

« A brief relation of Sir Walter Ralegh's troubles, as 
before, p. 7. 


• In an Effay on Epi/lolary Writings , &c. MS. p 3 1 • 
from archbimop 7 cmfon't Obfervaiion in his R a cor. iana, 
printed 8vo. 1679. p. 77. where, (peaking of the cor¬ 
rupt and embafed copies, from which feveral of the let¬ 
ters in the Cabala were printed, he gives a particular in- 
(lance in this letter of Sir Walter Rafcgr's to Sir Robert 
Car ; having compared it with the original, and found no 
fewer than forty differences between them, of which fome 
were of moment. 

obey 


Digitized by kjOOQie 




clxv 


Sir WALTER RALEGH. 


« obey your commandments.” This letter, in one or two old copies, is dated December 
1608.* But this fo little prevailed upon Car, or any other applications Ralegh might make 
to the king, with his majefty himfelf j that befides Sherborne, and the manors belonging to it, 
thofe other lands which Ralegh himfelf had purchafed, call’d, Pinford and Pri?nejly, Barton, 
and the manors appertaining alfo thereunto, forfeited with the reft by his attainder, were alio 
granted the following year 1609, or the feventh of his majefty’s reign, to the faid favourite. u 

But now, or not long after, Ralegh was grown into high efteem with that great hope and How much 
heir of thcfe kingdoms, prince Henry Frederick , the king’s eldeft fon, who, being fatisficd [jjjj^rince of 
of his loyalty, and well inform’d of his great qualifications and experience in civil and military Halts. 
affairs, with his hazardous fervices for the honour and defence of his country, no lefs than his 
many publick-fpirited adventures, both to enlarge and enrich it, teftified not his own merits 
more in any one particular, than in diftinguifhing thofe of Sir Walter Ralegh •, and, notwith- 
ftanding the many little envious de trad ions of fome undermining courtiers about him, did both 
encourage his epiftolary addrefles to him from the Tower, and fend for his counfel or opinion 
upon feveral emergent occafions. It was, perhaps, one of the brighteft rays in the fhining 
orb of this rare prince’s adions •, that he never left invading the king with the mod perfuafive 
felicitations, that he would beftow Sherborne upon him, with full defign to return it to its 
juft owner, till his majefty at laft granted his requeft: but by what cruel fate Ralegh's hopes 
were edipfed again, and indeed thofe of the whole kingdom, we fhall fuddenly hear. 

In the mean time, we mult here endeavour to give fuch light of that intercourfe which pafled 
between the faid prince Henry and Sir Walter Ralegh , as thofe letters and difeourfes , which he 
addrefied to his highnefs, and are extant, will afford •, and firft, when he found how com- 
mendably the prince was inclined to the ftudies of navigation ; how much delighted he was 
•with a view of the fleet at Chatham ; how inquifitive, or defirous to inform himfelf, by con- 
fultation with the moft experienced commanders, in the knowledge of building fhips moft art¬ 
fully, fitting them out moft commodioufly, failing them moft dexteroufly, and fighting with 
them moft luccefsfully, in order to execute thofe great defigns he had upon the Weft-Indies 
and Spain itfelf, whenever the king thereof fhould give caufe of publick hoftility, as one of 
his own fervants acquaints us, and would have done more diftinttly, had he not been mana¬ 
cled in a courtly maxim fo diferepant with all perfonal narrative That to publijh particulars , 
agrees not with rules of ftate : * Ralegh compofed and communicated to his highnefs feveral 
traflates upon thefe fubje&s. Such was his letter touching the model of a fhip, which the prince 
intended to build; d and fuch his difeourfe of a maritimal voyage, with the pajfages and in¬ 
cidents therein,* which he feconded with fome neccflary obfervations on the royal navy and 
fea fervice, ( alfo dedicated to his highnefs; and wherein he appears to have been a moft 
worthy and earned counfellor of the prince, to a due regard and regulation thereof. For, fays His advice :o 



a fleet, in the perfection and readinefs which he recommends, now in times of peace : “ Tho’ AVt?. 
“ the fuiord is put into the ft. calh , we muft not fuffer it to ruft, or (tick fo faft, that we fhall 
not be able to draw it readily when need requires j” and, a little further, u we may be affur’d, 

“ that if thofe powerful means, whereby we reduced our enemies to the courtefy of feeking 
“ peace of us, were negleCted, fo as we could not again, upon occafion, readily affume the ufe 
“ and benefit of them, as we have done •, thofe proud mattering fpirits, finding us at fuch 
“ advantage, would be more willing to Jhake us by the ears as enemies, than to take us by the 
“ hands as friends . Therefore, far be it from our hearts to truft more to that friendfhip of 
“ ftrangers, which is but diflembled upon policy and neceflity, than to the ftrength of our 
“ own forces, which has been experienced with fo happy fuccefs. I confefs, that peace is a 
“ blcffing of God, and blefled are the peace-makers > therefore doubtlefs blcflcd are thofe means 
“ whereby peace is gain’d and maintain’d. For well we know, that God works all things 
“ here among us, mediately and by a fecondary means •, the which means, of our defence and 
“ being flapping and fea-forces , are to be efteemed as his gifts and then only available 
“ and beneficial, when he withal vouchfafes his grace to ufe them aright.” £ To this end. 


* One copy is in a thin folio volume of Sir Walter Ra * 
W’s Letters, among the MS. collections of Sir Hans 
Moane ; and the other, in the library of 'James If eft t Eiq; 
Carntu Ralegh' s Cafe, as before. 

* 1 A Difeourfe of the mod illufttious piince Henry, late 
prince of Wales, written Jtmo 1626 by Sir Chat Its Carn- 
Kt. fome time treafurer of hia highndV* houfe. 


Dedicated to prince Charles by J. B. printed 4to. 1641. 
p. 12, 13, 

d In Sir Walter Ralegh's Remains (lattedit.) p. 160. 
e Mention’d by Sir Walter Ralegh in hi* Obfbrvations 
on the Royal Navy, &c. p. 1. 

{ Printed in his EJfays , gvo. i6co. 

1 id. p. 44, fcV. 


Ralegh 


Digitized by LiOOQle 






clxvi 


And concern¬ 
ing ti e bell 
flan of go- 
verntr. cnt. 


The L I F E of 

Ralegh alfo wrote another difeourfe for the faid prince, Of the art of war by fea ;* But the 
untimely death of his highnefs, as we (hall too foon find, deprived both him and pofterity ot 
the advantages which a fubjeft fo ufeful and uncommon, from an author fo able and experi¬ 
enc’d, did promife. 

There is nothing in thefe difeourfes, or any other I have met with, which fhew Ralegh 
any ways concerned in writing thofe propofitions or arguments for foreign wars, which were 
delivered to prince Henry by fome of his military fervants, and which were afterwards ab- 
Jlrattedly publilh’d, together with an anfwer at large, written, very conformable to the tafte 
of king James, by the learned Sir Robert Cotton •, b tho’, to the firft edition of this treatife, 
the bookfellers, having prefixed Sir Walter Ralegh's picture, have thereby milled fome writers 
of his life, carelefly to infert this book into the catalogue of his writings. c *Tis true, Ralegh 
has obliquely and fubordinately touch’d this branch of the fubjedt in fome of his difeourfes 
upon war, but in other arguments than are here anfwer’d, nay after this anfwer was written ; 
nor are they addrefied to the prince, but indeed written all'o after his death. 4 In fome places, 
he has given the greateft difeouragements to a milita: y life, from knowing, how many are de¬ 
luded to be the executioners of other men’s ambition, and to lay down their lives for what they 
Ihoujd not venture them yet withal, the greater difpropvcion of honour and reward which 
attends that profefiion, than others of lefs perfonal hardlhip and danger, as was before partly 
obferved. f In other places, he has written again It wanton and caufelels invafions, for the mere 
fake of brutilh and vain-glorious victory ; againft waging war with our enemies, till we beat 
the art of it into them ; till cowards are learnt to be couragious, and defenders become af- 
failants : yet has elfewhere, in a very ingenious fimilitude, Ihewn, that martial policy is one of 
the principal fupports of government. 6 However, wlicn a prince has thereby got authority, 
or the fharpejl means in his power, he would have the mildeft ufe i and the one acquired in 
full ftrength, only that die other may be exercifed with perfect fafety : for he ever preferr’d rea- 
fon and Jove as ftronger chains of government than conftraint or violence, h and thought that 
royal dealings was ever fureft of meeting with royal fuccefs. * Such were the principles 
Sir Walter Ralegh infus’d not only into the prince of Wales , but all other readers throughout 
his writings i and agreeable hereto is the tenor of that letter he wrote to the faid pi ince, Augujl 
the 12th 1611, concerning the moft eligible power in an Englifh foveraign, where lie has, with 
the fpirit of a true patriot, faid : “ Let me not doubt but all plans, which do not carry in 
“ them the mutual happinds of prince and people, will appear as abfurd to your great under- 
“ (landing, as difagrecable to your noble nature.” k 

But now Ralegh's pen was engaged upon a different fubje£t in the prince’s fervice, and by 
his command: for, “ the firft overtures of a marriage between this prince and the eldeft 
“ daughter of Spain being put off,” 1 the like motion was now made by the Savoyan am- 
baffador, not only for a marriage between prince Henry and a daughter of the duke of Savoy, 
but for another, of his fon Don Pbillibert, prince of Piedmont , with princefs Elizabeth, the 
daughter of England. Ralegh wrote two difeourfes , upon this occafion, in the year laft men¬ 
tion’d j and that he particularly was requefted by the prince to give his opinion of the faid 


* Hereafter mention'd more particularly in the cata¬ 
logue of his writings. 

b H ’an with foreign princes dangerous or reafons for 
foreign wars anfwerd, Svo. 165— reprinted under the 
title of An anfwer to fuch motives as were offered by cer¬ 
tain military men to prince Henry , inciting him to affed 
arms more than peace , publiih'd by Sir John Cotton, Bart. 
8vo. 1665. But this lccond edition has very properly 
exchanged Sir Walter Ralegh 's pidure for Sir Robert Cot - 
ten 5. 

c Anthony Wood in Athen. Oxon. vol. I. col. 440. and 
Prince's Worthies of Devon , fol. 541. 

As in his Difeourfe of the original and miferies of 
invafivt war, 8vo. 1650, lAc, 

« His words are : “ It may be affirm'd, the'number of 
44 thofe that have been flaughter'd by their fellow-crea- 
«• cures, exceed the number of all the inhabitants that 
€i ever were atone time living upon the face of the earth ; 
“ yet very few of this infinite number, thus untimely 
«« (lain, were ever mailers of the grounds of the difputes 
“ for which they fuffer'd, or the true reafon of their 
«< being led to the battle ; the truth, with much artifice, 
« being kept from all, but what were parties to the de- 
<* fign refolved on. What deluded wretches then have 
•« a great part of mankind been, who have either yielded 
« themfelves to be (lain in caulcs, which, if truly known, 
«« their hearts would abhor, or been the bloody executio- 
<* nm of ocher men’s ambition ! It is a hard fate to be 


4t fain for what a man fhould never willingly fght; yet 
«« few foldiers have laid themfelves down in the bed of 
«« honour under better circumllances.” Ralegh's 'Three 
Difeourfes , p. HO. 

V From his reflexions on the unhappinefs of a military 
profeffion, in his Hillory of the World, lib. 5. cap. 6. 
fed. 2. 

a It is as follows : 44 They fay, that the goodlieft cedars , 
44 which grow on the high mountains of Libanus , thrull 
4t their roots between the clifts of hard rocks, the better 
€< to bear themfelves againft the ftrong ftorms that blow 
44 there. As nature has inftruded thole hinge of tree, fo 
44 has reafon taught the kings of men to root themfelves in 
** the hardy hearts of their faithful fubjeds. And, as 
44 thofe kings of trees have large tops, fo have the kings 
4t of men large crowns; whereof, as the firft would loon 
“ be broken from their bodies, were they not underbornc 
44 by many branches; fo would the other eafily totter, 

were they not fallcn’d on their heads with the ftrong 
44 chains of civil jullice and martial difcipline.” Ralegb\ 
Remains (laft edit.) p. 116. 

h Idem , p. 119. 

* Ralegh' s Prerogative of Parliaments , in the faid edit, 
of his Remains, p. 236. 

k See this letter of Sir Walter Ralegh to prince Henry, 
in Sir Richard Steele' s Englifhman, 8vo. 1 714, p. 9. 

J Sir William Cornwallis's Difeourfe of the moft iliuftri- 
OU 5 Prince Henry , as before, p. 19, is c. 

offers. 


Digitized by 


Google 












clxvii 


Sir WALTER RALEGH. 

offers, appears in his introdu&ion to the firft of thofe difcourfes, infcrib’d to fome minifter of 
ftate about his highnefs; in which Ralegh has fo notably difcover’d what a tool for “ avarice 
«* and ambition moft of the Catholic princes in Europe had made of this facrament of matri- 
“ mojiyand how notorioufly “ the Cajlilians, with thofe of whom thefe princes are de- 
«* fcended, have gotten no lefs by the trajfick of their marriages, than they have done by the 
«« trade of their Indies that I wonder thefe excellent political difcourfes were never made 
publick, for the more eafy advertifement of our fucceeding princes upon this topick. The 
fecond of them, upon the match for prince Henry, is treated under eight heads j and, in the 
fourth page of it, Ralegh has thefe words : “ There is a kind of noble and royal deceiving in 
« marriages between great kings and princes ; yea it is, of all others, the fairejl and moft un- 
« fufpefled kind of betraying: it has been as ordinary among them to adventure or cajl away 
«« a daughter to bring fome purpofe to pafs, as at other times, for faving of charges , to make 
«* them nuns” A little farther, having reprefented the duke of Savoy fo tied to the fee of Rome , 
both by religion and benefit, that he could no more be feparated and fubfift, than if his foul 
was divided from his body, he goes on thus, more direfUy, concerning the marriage : “ What Hisargu- 
“ then remains of profit to our prince by this alliance ? A fum of money , and a beautiful lady* 

«* For beauty (fays he) it was never more cheap in any age; and it is ever better loved in propoieu for 
“ the hope, than when it is bad; for the million of crowns offered, which makes but two of 1 * 

“ our fubfdies, I fpeak it confidently ; when thole dukes, lords, and great ladies, who will 
attend the princefs in her paflage hither, fhall be all prclented with gifts according to their 
“ degrees and the king’s honour} when the preparations , triumphs and feafliogs are paid for, 

« there will nothing remain but a great encreafe of charge, and, perchance, a great deal of me- 
«« lancholy.” And a little further, Ralegh comes clofer ftill, to the prince himfelf, in thefe 
« words: “ Now, if by thefe diflikes of the former alliances, you make judgment that it 
«« is my defire that the prince fhould not marry at all j I fay, my defire is nor, that the prince 
« fhould not marry at a 11 , but not as yet; and I am exceeding forty that the prince has not 
“ the fame defire. For feeing his majefly is yet but young, and by God’s favour like to live 
“ many years *, and that his highnefs, if he fhould now marry, may have many children born 
«« to him, before he be thirty years old ; and, feeing all his children fhall be princes, and 
« muft be provided for as princes, I think it will much perplex him to find himfelf fo invi- 
«* ron’d, till his majefty has fomewhat repaired his eftate, and provided beautiful gardens to 
plant thefe olive branches in. While the prince is unmarried, all the eyes of Chrijlendom 
•* are upon him * for, with what king foever he fhall be ballanc’d, he will call the fale j but, 

“ to have him weighed with a little prince , I fhould be forry, and he himfelf will be as forry 
“ after. All the princes in Chrijlendom woo’d Charles , duke of Burgundy, while his daughter 
** was unmarried ; and while our prince is free (our enemies not knowing upon what ground 
“ to build their pradices) his majefty’s fafety is in the mean while infinitely allured > but, the 
•* prince once difpofed of, they will prefently mufler our forces, ineafure our fortunes, found 
“ us to the bottom, and make their approaches accordingly : they will then fay, we have 
“ feen the utmojl of the Prince of Wales /” Then having obferv’d, that “ fince there is none but 
“ a Catholic lady for us, let us have a king on our fide (fays he) to bootfo, in confideration of 
the many motives to enmity between France and Spain, which he enumerates; as alfo the 
many obligations which France then lay under, of gratitude to the crown of England, and the 
advantage of retaining the Netherlands, he propofes the daughter of the French king. On the 
other fide, that it would be a necdlefs hazard both to negleft this love and union, and fuftain 
withal the hatred of the archduke, tiie pope, and the king of Spain together ; however dif¬ 
un i ted, they were not to be feared : “ For then, if they fhould combine againft us, from whom 
“ fhould we hope for help ? If it be from Savoy or Florence , God help us! Our friends in- 
“ habit beyond the mountains, our enemies at hand! We leave thofe that are ftrongeft and 
“ neareft us, for thofe who are wcaktft and furtheft off! We leave thofe that can help us, or 
“ harm us, for thofe that can do neither! Thofe we leave who depend on themfelves, to 
wit, the French , for thofe who depend on others, to wit, the Savoyans and Florentines!” 

Thus ends Sir Walter Ralegh’s difeourfe upon the marriage propofed for prince Henry. 

In his other difeourfe, on the match that was offered for the ingenious and accomplifh’d lady 
Elizabeth, that prince’s fitter, having copioufiy exemplified, as we have obferv’d, what mer¬ 
cenary fucrifices had been made, by crown’d heads, of their children, in this grand market of 
matrimony-, and anfwer’d the objection heforefaw fome cfpanioliz’d courtiers might make, that 
feeing the kings of France, and efpecially of Spain, had fo often match’d themfelves with the 
dukes of Savoy, Why fhould not the king of England alfo accept of their alliance ? He pro¬ 
ceeds 


Digitized by 


Google 




clxviii 


And againfl 
the match for 
princci's Eliz¬ 
abeth. 


The LIFE of 

ceeds to examine what encreafe of honour and dignity , or what great comfort or contentment 
this excellent young princefs could expedt or hope for by this match? “ For the firjl, to wit, 
“ honour and dignity (fays he) as Ihe is born the cldeft, and now only daughter of one of the 
“ mightieft kings of Chriftendom, fo is Ihe thereby of higher place and date, than the wife 
“ of a duke of Savoy. Befides, in her birth and blood, both of father and mother, defeended 
“ of fuch royal races, as Savoy cannot add any greater grace or glory to -, and by nature and 
education endow’d with fuch princely perfections, both of body and mind, as may well de- 
“ ferve to be reputed a worthy fpoufe for the greateft monarch of Chrijlendom, efpccially con* 
“ fidering the pojfibilities of a daughter of England , whereof we have had many precedents; 
“ and, at this time , is happily manifejlcd in the king’s majefy, our foveraign, being defeended of 
“ a daughter of England ; whereby the whole ifland, formerly divided, is again now made 
“ one Great-Britain, to the mutual ftrength of either. Now to confer the pojfbility of 
** fuch a fortune, upon a poor popifh duke of Savoy , that can return no recompence of benefit 
“ to this ftate, were greatly for his glory, tho’ little for the advancement of this noble prin- 
“ cefs, and lefs for the fafety of this kingdom, confidering the dangers that it may draw upon 
“ our worthy magnanimous prince and the noble duke of l'ork, if the ambition of this match' 
“ Ihould tickle the Savoyan to look after pojfibilities , wherein there would want neither means, 
“ perfuafions nor pardons from Rome, to pra&ife any villany in that behalf, whereby to bene- 
“ fit or ftrengthen an appendix of Spain, and fo devoted a fon to the Romijh fee. For the 
“ fecond , namely the comfort and contentment of this worthy young lady by this match, as there 
** is little in appearance prefently, fo there is lefs to be hoped for in the future. For, as firft, - 
“ Ihe mull be removed far from her neareft blood, both by father and mother, into a country 
“ far eftranged from our nation, as any part of Chriftcndom , and as far differing from us in 
“ religion, as in climate. And what true corrcfpondence, or matrimonial affedtion, there can 
“ be maintain’d between thofe perfons, whofe minds are different, and oppofite in the religious' 
“ points of their Chriftian faith, is greatly to be doubted. Moreover it is greatly to be feared,* 
«* with what fafety and fecurity Ihe can long live free from fecret practices and treacheries, 
“ in a country fo near the pope’s jurifdidtion, inviron’d with the plots of the Jefuits, who, wtf 
«* fee, do daily traffick the lives and fortunes of all princes who are not wholly devoted to the 
«« Romijh obedience i and therefore how they will entertain or tolerate the race of our king, 
«« were too great an error and prefumption to truft to : fo as when the worthy lady, hereafter 
« by her children or otherwife, has furnilh’d their defire, and fully ferved their turn, file lhall 
«* be then either forced to wound her confcience, by forfaking her faith, or elfe to undergtj 
« the fcorns and danger which (hall be daily caff upon her and her family, for the exercile of 
« her religion. And this alfo we may be well affured of, that, if (he lhall have any iffue by 
the prince of Piedmont , they muff all be bred and brought up contrary to her confcience, 
“ which can be no fmall grief to a virtuous and natural mother, and as little comfort to our 
“ juft religious king, their grandfather. Laftly, the very binding caufe of amity between all 
“ kings, princes and dates, is their trade and intcrcourfe of their fubjefts. Now there is noC 
“ any prince or ftate of Europe , the inland countries of Hungary and Tranflvania excepted, 
“ but the Englijh have trade withal j yea even with the Turk, Barbarian, Per fan and Indians-, 
“ only with the fubje&s of Savoy, I do not know that we have any medling or interchange at 
“ all: for the duke has no port, his ditch of Villa-Franca excepted, which is only capable 
“ of a few galiies, either to furnifh fhips from, or to receive them, being ftrangers. And 
« therefore for his majefty of England to match his eldeft and only daughter with a prince, 
« who has his dependance on other kings a prince jefuited, who can neither head us in time 
«< of war, nor trade with us in time of peace-, a prince, by the ficuation of his country, every 
“ way unprofitable to us j and that, no lefs perilous for his majefty’s daughter to live in: I re- 
** folve myfelf, that he is of too excellent a judgment ever to accept of it, and his honourable 
“ council too wife and provident to advife the profecution thereof. Now, if his highnefs Ihould 
“ be pleafed to alk my opinion, with what Chrijlian prince he Ihould match his filter, were it 
«* in his own power and choice to make election, I humbly defire to be excufed herein for, 
“ would it become me to prefume fo far ? It is true, I have heard it, that lorne overtures have 
** been made for the prince Palatine of the Rhine } certainly he is as well born as the duke of 
“ Savoy , and as free a prince as he is. The nation is faithful he is of our religion, and by 
“ him we Ihall greatly fallen unto us the Netherlands : and, for the little judgment which God 
“ has given me, I do prize the alliance of the Palatine of tie Rhine, and of the Houf c of 

“ Nassau, 


Digitized by 



t 

i 

c 

f 

v 

F 

be 

tit 

th 

tit 

to 

t 

B 

«c: 

taw 


rrr 

pro 

ltd 

P COi 

j?r;c 

fc: 

err 

hr. 

Li 

a 

F- ; 

ttir 

c:,: 

n?.; 

be; 

ufc. 

Pi 


'C 

»:-V 

itll. 

[ ir. 
















eixix 


i 


* | 
f 1 

3 

13 

» 

^ ; 
w 

“j 

(7, j 

3 * I 

er 

ill 

3». 

of 

by 

ce, 

3ur 
all! 
act ! 

A 

Hi 

•it 

ft r 

d ( 


nt 


:tl 

it- 

•: 

ill 

:it 

"ofi 


by 

J 

if 

4 Cl 


Sir rv ALTER RALEGH. 

“ Nassau, war* than I do the alliance of ten dukes a/ - Savoy.” And thus ends his dlfcourfe 
oo the marriage of princefs Elizabeth. a 

What follow’d was, that about a twelve-month after the writing of thofe Difcourfts , the 
laid princels was married to Frederick , eledor palatine of the Rhine , b afterwards king of Bohe¬ 
mia } a match which might have well anfwer*d all the advantages expected from it, at leaft 
one that had never been attended with fuch a feries of calamities, were king James to have 
been moved, if not through honour and power, as a fuveraign, yet through nature and affec¬ 
tion, as a father , to have granted them a feafonable fupply againft their enemies. In Head of 
which, his indulging, beyond all apprehenfion of poflibility, at leaft all production of precedent, 
a blejfed peaceable temper, as his flatterers called it, to the fitting down a quiet fpedtator of his 
childrens overthrow, and their fortunes, occafion’d, not only all the lamentable wars which 
fuccecded throughout Germany , to the utter ruin of his faid fon-in-law , and all the princes 
who aflifted him •, but alfo thofe of his fucceffor at home, throughout his own dominions : 

For, daring not to draw his fword, through fear of offending the Spaniard , he fat mufing at 
home, one while, how to rail'c money by privy-feals, benevolences, crown-lands and woods, 
either to cram his infatiable favourites, or elfe to fit out more prodigal and frivolous embaflies, 
than would, by arms, have fettled his children unmoveably in their throne -, and, at other 
times, how to improve his foveraignty or pick quarrels with his parliaments, and entail them 
to his htirs-gencral . c 

As for the prince of Wales, he is faid to have firft encourag’d the prince Elector to attempt 
his filler v defiring more to head an army in Germany , than he durft make fhew of, and 
would, no doubt, have been bravely follow’d : d but alas! that fate, which fo often fuffers the 
unworthy to flourilh, deprived this kingdom of prince Henry in lels than a month after the 
arrival of the laid Elefior. Some have infinuated, as if the Spaniards , becaufe his highnefs ap¬ 
proved Ralegh's Difcourfe touching a war with Spain, had a hand in his untimely end > al¬ 
ledging, that,. if Philip the fecond cut off his own hopeful fon Charles , for but pitying the 
people of Handers, it can be no wonder he (or his fon) fliould promote the deftruftion of a 
ftrangcr, who did fo far applaud the advice of Ralegh, as to fay, No king, but his father, 
would keep fuch a bird in a cage. • But, from more inteftine and unnatural lources, his hidden 
death is furmifed by others to have fprung •, the difeafe being fo violent, that the combat of 
nature againft it, in the flrength of youth (he being almoft nineteen years of age) lafted but 
few days. Here it is fomewhat remarkable, that after Sir Theodore May erne, with Dr. Butler, 

Hamond, and other moft eminent phyficians, had ufed the utmoft of their (kill in vain, and 
had the leaft hopes imaginable left of the prince’s recovery, that thefe fliould be at laft center’d 
in fome relief that might be had from Sir Walter Ralegh, and that a cordial from him (a ftate- Hi; grr.it 
prifoner) fhould be fent for, and, with confent or approbation, adminifter’d, when all other CWW lent 
means had failed, and were given over, as we may gather from Sir William Cornwallis, 1 and at t ), e 
other hiftorians of thofe times. As to the effeft, tho’ it came too - late, fo that it might rather P oi,lt 01 
prolong pain than life for a few hours, and truly muft have been a kind of miracle to have dca ‘ h ' 
reftored one fo far exhaufted, and on the point of expiring, for he died the fame evening, 
being the 6th of November 1612 : Yet, to obfervant readers, it is enough to manifeft, firft, 
what high reputation Sir Walter Ralegh's medicinal knowledge, through this Cordial , had now 
gained (and it afterwards encreafed 6) among the moft fkilful of the faculty j and fecondly, 

the 


* Of thefe two MS. Difamrfes, by Sir Walter Ralegh, 
on the Marriage betwixt England and Sevcty ; more will 
be fpoken a few pages further, in the Catalogue of his 
Works, 

k This marriage was celebrated on the 14th of February 
161 z, in fuch pomp and fplendor, that the jewel* only, 
which were worn by the king, queen and prince, were 
valued that day, by his majelly hinifelf (upon occafion 
of difcourle happening of the bravery then appearing) at 
*i* e hundred thou/and founds S:erling. Sir 'John Fines'* 
Obfervations touching foreign ambaifadors, 8vo. 1656, 
p. 11. 

e See the Life and Reign of king Charles , &c. 1651. 
in Pref. Alio Obfervations on the Hillory of Mary 
queen of Scots , and her fon J antes, p. 5. 

4 OJlome s Memoirs of king James, p. 154. 

9 Idem , p. 165. 

f Sir William Corrr.vaUis'% Life of Prince Henry, in 
8 vo. a different and more copious work than his Dif- 
tourfe in 4U). on the faid prime before quoted, tho’ printed 
the fame year 1641. See alfo Aulkvs Coquinarice, and 
SanJcrfon* Hijlery of King James, 


f Infomuch, that there has been a diftinft volume writ¬ 
ten upon this Cordial ; whereby I find it is not to be taken 
for that which is called Sir Halter Ralegh's cordial , in a 
book entitled, as I remember, The Lady s Ctofet open d ; 
for that is only a fimple fra-wberry water. But this here 
meant, was his Great Cordial, as I find Ralegh, in 
one of his manuferipts , has ftyl’d it himfelf. This Cor¬ 
dial rofe into fuch high repute, for its foveraign virtues, 
in the reign of king Charles II, and was fo much re¬ 
commended to and admir’d by him, that he commanded 
Nicholas le Feb v re, the royal profefTor in cbymtflry , 
and apothecary in ordinary to his majefty's houfhold, to 
prepare a quantity of this precious remedy after the exa&dl 
manner* which the faid chymift not only did, but com- 
pofed in French alfo, under his majelly’s au fp ices and 
command, a Treatifc entitled, Difcours fur U Grand 
Cordial de Sir Walter Ralegh, which he dedi¬ 
cates to the faid king: and this was at the fame time 
tranflated into Engljh by Peter Bel on, ftudent in 
chymiftry. For they were both licenfed on the 23d of 
April 1664; tho* the tranflation appears to have been 
printed firit, bccaufc it is dated that year; and the original 
111 Uit 


\ 


Digitized by CiOOQie 



clxx 


The LIFE of 

the unfteady and incoherent opinions which were entertain’d of one and the fame man's loy¬ 
alty ; that he, who was accuied at his trial of a plot to extirpate the royal family, fhould yet 
be fo far relied on to fave it, as to have the lives fird of queen Anne, as was before related, 
and now of prince Henry, trufted to his experiments. But, in a modern author, we have 
fome further circumftances of this paflage, which I have not elfcwhere met with. For, having 
fpoken of the particular efteem which prince Henry had contracted for Sir Walter Ralegh, 
the conftant correfpondence he kept with him by letters and meflages, and of the follicitations 
he had fo repeatedly made to the king for his liberty, as what might contribute towards his 
majefty’s perfonal prejudice againft Ralegh, he adds: “ When the prince fell into his lad 
“ illncfs, the queen lent to Sir Walter Ralegh for fome of his cordial , which fhe herfclf had 
“ taken in a fever fome time before, with remarkable fuccels. Ralegh lent it, together with 
“ a letter to the queen, wherein he exprefs’d a tender concern for the prince ; and, boading 
“ of his medicine, Humbled unluckily upon an exprefllon to this purpole, That it would cer- 
“ tainly cure him, or any other, of a lever, except in cafe of poifon. The prince dying, tho’ 
“ he took it -, the queen, in the agony of her grief, (hewed Ralegh's letter, and laid fo much 
“ weight on the exprelhon about poifon, that to her dying day Ihe could never be difluaded 
“ from the opinion, that her beloved fon had foul play done him.” * If this was true, there 
might be a drefs too confidently laid on this medicine, in fuppofing that nothing but poifon 
could refill the power of it, and perhaps fome inadvertency in darting fuch a fufpicion in a fond 
mother, which (in the faid modern writer’s opinion) there might pofilbly be no ground for, 
and might, in the confequence, prove fatal to Ralegh himfelf \ tho’ the fame author alfo 
knew, Ralegh was not the only man who darted that fufpicion i for he knew what the prince’s 
domedic chaplain preach’d at St. Jama's on the diflolution of his highnefs’s family j and he 
knew what the lord chief judice Coke not long after faid in open court about the poiloning of 


the year after: The French is in i 2®, the Fnglifh in 8vo. 
After the dedication, follows this introduction of the 

Recife: - Eximium Cordiale Kegium mu It is 

rebus nfccjpiriii auflum, ftcundum confilium iff approbation 
vem illujtt ijfimorum virorum, D. D. Kenelmi Digby, Equi - 
tis Aurati y iff fertuiffimet Remitter mat ns Canctllarii, iff 
J). D. Alex, l railer, Equitis Aurati , iff fereniffimt ac poten- 
tijftmi Regis Caroli Secundi, Sec. Archiatrorum Comitis. Next 
follows the Receipt in thefe words :— 4t Recipe Rafttr/r 
“ Cot nu Cervi, libram unam ; Carnis Viperarum cum Cor- 
«« dibus Sc Hcpatibus, uncias /ex ; Riorum Boraginis, Buglof 
«< Roris-Marini, Calendul/r, Fetonic<r, Coronarise rubrer, 

<< Rcris fol:s ♦ Rofarum fubrarum, iff Sambuci, fingulorum 
a hi ram femijfm ; Hob arum Scordii, Cardui Benedicts, 
«< Me lfix, Dttfamni Cretici , Mentha, Majoranec, Beto- 
«< nicer, (in- ularum manipulos ducdecim ; Granorum Kermes 
tt rt center in rob redactor um, (dubibarum, Cat damoini 
i* major is, Baccarum J uni peri. Mater is, Kueis Myrifiic/e, 
« Car jophy llorum, Crcci, fingulorum ten a as duas ; Cinna - 
•• fnomi aeutij/imi, Cortids hgr.i Sajfafas, fiavedmis md- 
44 lerum Citrioi um iff Auranfiodtm, fingulorum untias trts ; 
44 Lignorum Aloes iff Sajfufras uniufcujufque uncias fix ; 
44 Radi cum Angelic/t, Valert atur. Car It rue, Fraxinelhe 
44 j fU Piclamni a/bi, Serpmtari/r Firginianef, 7 *edoariet, 
“ Ferment ilia, Riflort*, Arijlolochi «* longer, rotunda iff 
t* caver, Gentian* iff 1 taper at or i*, fingulorum unciam 
t* unam iff femijfm. Omnia incifa iff grojfo mo do con tufa 
“• in vafe idonto pefita cum fpiritu visit reChficato extrahan- 
tf tur fecundum Artem. Finfiur* Jilt rater in extra flum 
** mediant e, in Maria balneo , difii Hat tone evaporentur. 
“ Magma exfre/jum combur atur ; einerts reverberati per 
“ aquam elixtvientur, unde fal purum lege Artis pare tur, 
44 quod ext radio mifetatur. His it a perattis, buic ext r ado 
“ adde, ut Artis ejl , Pulverem frquenUm caterdque ingre- 
44 dientia. Recipe Lapidum Bcr.oardicorum Orientalium 
•« iff Oceidentalium vercrum uniufcujufque unciam femiffem, 
“ Magifterii folubilis Perlarum Orientalium uncias duas, 
“ Magifterii folubilis Core llorum rubrorum uncias tret ; 
44 Bolt Orientals, Ferrer figillat* verge. Unicornu Mine- 
“ ralis. Cornu Cervi Pbilofipbice pneparali, iff Cornu 
Cervi calcinati , fingulorum unciam unam ; Ambragri- 
“ ft/e eleSliJfimte in EJfentiam redaft/t, unciam unam ; 
4 4 Mofchi Orient a lit opt: mi ejfentificati drachmam unam iff 
44 femiffem ; Croci filis cum tin blur a Antimonii Bafilii Va- 
41 lentini par at i drachmas duas. Sac chart candifati albi 

l< fubtili/fime pulverifati, libras duas. Ex his omnibus 
“ mixtis iff ex arte unit is fiat Confcfiio were Regia , qu<r 
“ a d ufum refervetur in pixidibus apprime claufis." Then 
the author aforefaid begins his Difiourfe with examples 
among the ancients of thofe who have made themfelves 
famous by their remedies, ai Mitbridates, iffc . and among 
the moderns. Math coins , B . Valtn tint t Parattlfus, and 


others; but finds none more worthy, in this particular, 
than Sir 1Falter Ralegh, becaufe he has not only felctted 
jnoft judicioufly whatever is moll choice and loveraign in 
the animal, vegetable , and mineral world ; but has alio ma- 
nifefted fo much art and experience in the preparation of 
this great and admirable Cordial, as will, of itfelf, 
render him immortal: wherefore he fays, he could not 
reftrain the applaufes owing to his honour and glory, 
which he his more than merited by that noble labour and 
profound fludy, that acquired him the fublime know¬ 
ledge he had in the virtues and qualities of ail thofe in¬ 
gredients, which unite to the compolition of this incom¬ 
parable remedy. So he proceeds to explain, firfi the vir¬ 
tues of every individual drug, vubich , together, caufe thofe 
rare efiedls this Co RDI aL daily produces (fays he) as well 
towards the heathful, as the fick. Secondly, He fpe- 
cifies how art helps nature in the harmonious and ex- 
ouifite method of the preparation. Thirdly, Diilinguifhes 
the efficacy of it in maritime or ifiandic and northerly 
countries. Lafily, What a prefervative it is, as well as 
re flora five ; and concludes with the expedition of the dofe, 
the quantity , time and method of ufmg it. Thus much 
concerning this Difiourfe on Sir Walter Ralegh's 
great Cordial, of which the following particulars may 
be here farther obferved : That the author le Febvre ac¬ 
knowledging, he had inferted two ingredients, by the coun- 
fel and approbation of the abovefaid Sir Kenelm Digby 
and Sir Alexander Fraifer, which were not mention'd in 
the firft prefeription, and which I have marked above in 
a different charader, being the flefh, heart, and liver of 
vipers , and the mineral unicorn which fome would have 
to be the white loadfione ; it may induce the curious to 
enquire whether more liberties have not been taken with 
Sir Walter Ralegh's own genuine Recipe. To this end, 
fhould be confulted the Engli/h copy thereof, in Sir Ke¬ 
nelm Di\>bys Collection of Receipts, printed a few years 
after le Febvre's book. Alfo Sir Walter Ralegh's book of 
Chymical Receipts, an original MS. in Sir Hans Sloan* * 
library, marked B. 387, In which book (all written 
with Ralegh's own hand) there are, p. 63. b. thefe 
words, Our Great Cordial, and underneath, feveral ingre¬ 
dients fet down, tho* not near the number above cited; 
but fcor’d out again with a pen, tho* not illegibly. The 
next leaf is torn out, where \is fuppofed Ralegh had writ it 
more complcatly ; and that, from this leaf, le Febvre' s 
copy was taken. Laftly, There is a receipt of this cor¬ 
dial remaining with a lady, who is a defendant from Sir 
Walter Ralegh ; but, whether agreeing with thofe in 
print, I have not, at this jun&ure, the leifure for making 
a requeft to be fatisfied. 

• Dr. James WebwoodT s Notes on Wilfin'sW\[\oxy of King 
James, in the Compleat Hiflory of England, vol. 2. f. 714* 

Sir 


Digitized by CiOOQle 







Sir WALTER RALEGH. 


Sir Thomas Overbury: that it was to prevent the difeovery of another crime of the fame nature , 
committed upon one of the kighejl rank y whom he termed a facet prince • and indeed fcveral 
hiftories of thefe times make no fecret of it, where they fhew the bickerings between prince 
Henry and the aforefaid favourite Car, in regard to the countefs of Ejfcx, not to mention other 
motives. However, the phyficians about the prince gave it under their hands, which was 
fpread abroad in feveral copies, that he died of a ftrong malignant fever , after they had anato¬ 
miz’d him to amufe the world (fays another writer) and clear the fufpicion of poifon, as if 
no venoms could produce the like cffe&s ; while the king, to difpel the clouds and monitors 
of forrow, commanded that no man fliould appear at court in mourning. b 

Whatever was the caufe of this excellent prince’s death, Ralegh had no common /hare in 
the lofscf him j his highnefs having, but a few months before he died, obtained Sherborne, with 
intention to return it him, as is already obferv’d ; and we are further inform’d, that king James , 
to fatisfy his favourite Car, who was now vifeount Rochcf.er, gave him, inftead thereof, twen¬ 
ty-five tboufand pounds in money : fo far was the crown from gaining by this purchafc. c But 
now, after the prince’s death, this Rocbejler got Sherborne of the king again •, however (as 
fome kind of compofition or amends) his majefty, wc are told by Ralegh himfelf, alio gave 
his wife and fon eight tboufand pounds for the laid efface. d But how it thrived with Rocbejler , 
is evident enough in the Hijlories of thofe Times ; where it appears, that in little more than 
three years from this prince’s death, the faid favourite, by the title of earl of Somerfet, was 
arraign’d and condemn’d for that black and fhameful bufinefs of poifoning Sir Thomas Over¬ 
bury j whereby he not only loft Sherborne , but all thofe other pofleffions which the king had 
fo lavifhly heaped upon him ; for what merits or fervices, may better appear in thofe IHJlories i 
than it is needful they (hould do here. As to Sherborne, on whom it was next beftowed, and 
upon what confideration, with the attempts made after Ralegh’s death by his fon Carew to re¬ 
cover it; fince the accounts thereof would carry us too far beyond the period in thefe fheets 
propofed, and indeed do more properly relate to the ftory of the fon, than the father, I (hall 
here refer to an abftradt thereof, in a brief memorial of the faid Carew Ralegh, at the bottom 
of the page *,* for as to his elder brother Walter , whofc right it had firft been to have pur- 

fued 


The 

gift 

ejiatc 


• Idem, fob 6^9. 

I Arthur H'iijon'% Life and Reign of King James I. in 
the feme volume, fol. 600. 

• Relation of the Troubles of Sir Walter Ralegh, &c. p. 8. 

8 Sir Walter Ralegh's Apology, p. 47. 

• Carew Ralegh was born, as is before obferv’d, in 
the Tower, in the latter end of 1604 (or beginning of 
the next year) being aged about thirteen years at his la¬ 
ther’s death, as he tells us himielf: became a gentleman- 
commoner of Wadhan college in Oxford in 1620, as An¬ 
thony Wood informs us; but indeed rather fooner, becaufe 
Carnv Ralegh' 1 own words are, that, after having been 
five years at Oxford, he came to court, and, by tne fa¬ 
vour of William earl of Pembroke, his noble kinlman, 
hoped to obtain fome redrefs in his misfortunes; but the 
king, not liking his countenance, faid, he appeared to 
him like \f\h fathers ghojl ; whereupon the earl advifed 
him to travel, which he did till the death of king fames, 
which happen’d about a year after. Then returning, and 
a parliament fitting, he, according to the cuftom of this 
land, petition’d to be reftor’d in blood, that he might be 
enabled ro inherit whatever lands might fall to him, as 
his father’s heir, or any other way : but his petition 
having been twice read in the houl'e of lords, king Charles 
fem Sr James Fullerton (them of the bed chamber) for 
Mr. Ralrgh, who being brought into the king’s chamber 
by that knight, his majefty (after ufing him with great 
civility) told him plainly, that he had formerly promi- 
fed Sir John Digby , now earl of Drifiol, to iccure his 
title to Sherborne (it being contcr’d on him 14 of Joe.) 
againft the heirs of Sir Walter Ralegh ; whereupon Digby 
had given him, being then prince, ten thoufand pounds ; 
fo rhat now he was bound to make good his promife, 
being king; and therefore, unlcls he would quit all his 
right and title to Sherborne, he neither could, nor would 
pal's his bill of reftoration. Mr. Ralegh urged the jullice 
of his caufc; that he defir’d only the liberty of a fubjeft, 
and to be left to the law, which was never deny’d any 
freeman : but the king was poiitive, and fo left him. 
After this, Sir James Fullerton ufed many arguments to 
perfuade lubmiflion, as the impofiibility of contelling with 
kingly power, and the many inconveniences of not being 
reftor’d in blood : all which confidcr’d, together with 
fplendid promiles of great preferment in court, and par¬ 
ticular favours from the king, not improbable, wrought 
much in the mind of young Mr, Ralegh, who, being not 


full twenty years old (as he fays himfelf) left friendlcfs 
and fortunelefs, it prevailed fo far, that he fubmitted to the 
king’s will. Whereupon there was afterwards an a it 
pafied 3 0 Cards for his reftoration; and, together with 
it, a fettlement of Sherborne to the earl of Hrijlol ; and, 
infhcwol fome kind of recompcnce, four bundled pounds 
a year pcnfion, during life, was granted to Mr. Ralrgh 
after the death of his mether, who had that fum paid 
during her life, in lieu of joy mure. About a twelve¬ 
month after this, Mr. Carew Ralegh married the lady 
Philippa, relief of Sir Anthony Ajhley, a rich young widow, 
by whom he had two fons anu three daughters, and was 
not long after, at leaft before the year 1635, made one 
of the Gentlemen of the king’s privy-chamber , Among 
the ingenious poems of Thomas Carew Efq; (who was 
another of thofe gentlemen) printed 8vo. 1640, p. 80. 
there is a compliment, To his coufsn C. R. marrying the 
lady A. by which letters arc to be underftood this Mr. 
Ralegh, and that lady Ajhley . As for the kind token, 
which Anthony Wood lays the king honour’d him with at 
his majeily’s leaving Hampton- court, and going into the 
JJle of Wight anno 1647, it was no more than a picture 
of the lady Stanley, as 1 remember, which was Air. Ra¬ 
legh's own property ; therefore the king, among the letters 
he left on the table, delired, in one of them, the laid 
pi&ure might be returned him, as may appear by thofe 
Utters which were then printed, or the extraft of them 
in Heath's Chronicle. In the year 16^0, ar.d afterwards, 
fcveral little tra&s of hbfathci’s were publilh’d and dedica¬ 
ted to him. In 1651, there was a committee for the falc of 
delinquents eftates ; and about that time the earl of Digby be¬ 
ing fted to Fiance, Mr. Ralegh had a fair profpeit to recover 
his ellate, therefore deliver’d his Cafe in to the faid com¬ 
mittee 5 and it was order’d, “ That this Cafe be reported 
“ to the houfc with the opinion of this committtec ; That 
11 they conceive him a fit cbjeil of their mercy.” He alio, 
about the fame time, drew up a brief Relation of Sir 
Walter Ralegh's troubles , and addrefs’d it to the parlia¬ 
ment. But whether printed before his death I know rot, 
(the edition here uled being dated three years after) nor 
wherefore his cafe and petition were laid aline. In 1656, 
came out the Obfervations on SanderJ'ons hiftory of king 
James, which this hiltorian fuppoling to be writ by Carew 
Ralegh, publifti’d an Anfwer to it the lame year, with fome 
fcandalous and unworthy rcllc&ions therein upon him : But 
no one has given heed to them. He certainly made his 

court 


Digitized by CnOOQie 


clxxii 1 'he LIFE of 

Cued whatever profpcct there was of retrieving the faid eftate, he died before their father, as 
will be more particularly remembred towards the conclufion of this work. 

But which of thefe two fons was attended on in his adventures by Ben Jobnfon , is not eafy to 
diftinguilh from the words of an author, who writes, 44 That Jobnfon* s mother, having married 
44 to her fecond hufband a bricklayer, took her fon from IVeJlminJler fchool (where he had 
44 made a hopeful progrefs under the. learned Camden) and made him work at her hufband’s 
44 trade: till being pitied by fome generous gentlemen, Camden got him a better employment ; 
44 which was to attend or accompany a fon of Sir Walter Ralegh in his adventures, whereby 
44 gaining experience, he made his company acceptable among many.” * Now if this hap¬ 
pen’d before Ben Jobnfon took to a&ing or writing of plays, as our faid author relates it did, 
then Sir Walter Ralegh's eldeft fon was fcarce old enough to go to fchool, much lefs upon ad¬ 
ventures. Befides, this fon never made, that we can hear of, more than one adventure abroad, 
from which he never return’d therefore he could not part with his attendant or companion 
Ben Jobnfon in the manner our faid author intimates he did after their return. Then if we l'up- 
pofe it the other brother, Carew , he never made any adventures at all, nor ftir’d out of Eng¬ 
land till fix years after his father’s death, and then only upon a lhort tour for about a twelve- 
month ; which was near thirty years after Ben Jobnfon became a dramatick poet or writer for 
the ftage j and when he feems rather to have wrote himfelf into his penfion from the crown, 
or otherwife into fuch eafy circumftances, as render it unlikely he Ihould attend even on Carew 
Ralegh in thofe forrows and difficulties he was then under ; and confequently in the whole, that 
either one or other fliould part with him not in cool bloody as our (aid author thinks, after their re¬ 
turn. Had the time of his going abroad with the younger or the elder brother been better adjufted, 
that particular of their parting would need no regard *, feeing by what trifles, what mifunderfiand- 
ings between themfelves, or mifreprefentations by others, fuch divifions are made between per- 
fons, who would, or might otherwife be mod ferviceablc and beneficial to one another. If Ben 
Jobnfon was of fuch a furly and hypercritical difpofition, as fome men’s writings, and indeed 
fome of his own, have reprefented him; as it makes fuch parting the more plaufible, if there 
had ever been any fuch meeting, fo it is probable it would have diftill’d with more acrimony 
from his pen, when he was giving a character of Ralegb as an author, than that he could find 
nothing to condemn either in bis judgment or bis ftile. b But as for Ralegh's temper, to all 
Hh great who had dependance upon him (and they were very numerous in the time of his felicity) efpe- 
ward»^his°* c ‘ a % towards thofe of any liberal knowledge and education, it appears to have been of finga- 
drftn.iaatil lar candor and benignity. There are examples, further than what have been beforemention’d, 
of his courtefy, fuperior to that of many other great perfons in his time, towards fuch men of 
parts as any ways relied on his patronage or prote&ion j and publickly aliened by thofe them¬ 
felves, who had tafted the benefits thereof. c He has alio, under his own hand, recommended 
fuch generous treatment, as moft coercive, efpecially to fuch as live under the power or com¬ 
mand of others •, and exploded the auftere, the imperious regimen, as what is liable to betray 
its practitioners no lefs into peril than difdain ; where he (hews, how contemptibly the vain , 
with affeCted fournefs , counterfeit the gravity of the wife ; becaufe the lhadow of reverence , 
thereby obtain’d, has power to delude the eyes only of underlings > and how thus, the time, where¬ 
in, by ufing it well, men might attain to be fuch as they ought, they ufually mifpend, in feek- 
ing to appear fuch as they are not: yet withal, not only how deceivable, but dangerous a courfe 
this is ; procuring, inftead of the refpett that was hoped for, more indignation than was fear’d d . 
Many other weighty counfels and ufeful precautions to this purpofe, are difperfed up and 
down his writings, both in print and manufeript, which (for brevity) I forbarc, here, to 
recite. 


court to the commons of England, in hopes of getting 
Sherborne by their means. Hence Wood fays, he cringed 
to men in power, and was made governor of the l/le of 
Jerfey, by the favour of general Monk, in the latter end 
of January 1659, as Whitlock has recorded. At the 
rellorarion of king Charles II, his mnjelly would have 
confer'd fome pcrfonal honour upon him, but he declined 
it in hopes of fomething better; the king therefore knighted 
his eldeft fon Walter , who died foon after at Weft Horfely, 
in Surrey , his father’s feat, which had, I think, been the 
carl of Dorfet's ; for his will is dated from thence, as 
a friend who has fecn it informs me. This was fold after 
Mr. Ralegh' s death to Sir Eduard Nicholas, fecretary to 
king Charles . He had another feat at Kenton-Park near 
Hampton-Ccurt, which, I think, he fold himfelf; and 
dying in 1666, was buried in the month of December, 


according to A, Wood , in Viis father’s grave; who further 
fays, he has fecn fome fonnets of his compofition, and 
certain ingenious Difcourfes in MS. alfo a poem let to 
mufick by Mr. Henry La*wes. Sir Henry IKotton , in his 
letters , gives him the chara&er of a gentleman of dextrous 
abilities , and he is by others mentioned with honour; but 
far, God ivct (fays Woe A) *was he from Lis fathers parts, 
either as to the fword or pen. 

* Athen. Oxon. vol. 1. col. 608. 

* Ben Jobnfon s Difcoveries. 

c See Thomas Cburcbard's dedication of his Spark of 
Friend/hip to Sir Walter Ralegh : a fcarcc old tratt, lately 
communicated from the Bodleian library at Oxford, or it 
had been more particularly made ulc of in the place 
where it is before mention’d. 

* Hiftoty of the Wot Id, lib. 2. cap. 22. fo£l. 10. 


Digitized by 


Google 


But 





clxxiii 


Sir IV A LTE R RALEGH. 


But here, as Ralegh has been occafionally mention’d in the character of an Author , we arc 
reminded, that it is high time he fhould be confider'd more particularly in that light; which 
cannot in any place more properly be done, than in this fedentary part of his life, when mod 
of his works were written. Here then we are arriv’d at that part of his ftory, wherein he 
will appear, rather a collegian than a captive * a fludent in a library, than a prifoner in the 
Tower. On this occafion, we cannot but rcfleCl, how well fuch productions, in fuch a fit na¬ 
tion ! Such fpacious exercifcs of genius, in fuch a contracted Hate! will prove, that, Tho* the 
foul of man, by a fly, or a hair, may be feparated from the body, tyranny itfclf cannot con¬ 
fine it to the body •, and, at the fame time, how trifling a calamity confinement mud be, to thole 
who have well employ’d their liberty. Some men, impatient under fo many years reftraint, 
would have pined obfeurely away with defpair j and others, with rage, have made their bonds 
more galling: but Ralegh , as in many other difaltcrs, fo in this, has left us no common ex¬ 
ample of an heroick mind. In him we may obferve, there is no levelling a fublime fpirit with 
the fuballcrns of Nature: prefs it on one part, it will ftill rife in another ; and be like fome 
hardy plants we may have feen, whofe beads will Ihoot forth and flourifh in the fight of man¬ 
kind, tho’ their roots arc clofely fetter'd in walls of fione. Happy then are they, who in their 
youth have fo fortified themfelves with knowledge, and attained to fuch a relilh of literature , 
that, wherefoever they are driven by the perfecutions of power, they can make the contem¬ 
plation of wifdom beguile the fenle of their l'ufferings! Who out of the mod prevailing exam¬ 
ples in all ages, of patience and prudence in all exigences, can fet themfelves lefions of forti¬ 
tude, and talks of imitation! Who can, out of the misfortunes of others, excraCt confolations 
lor themfelves j or partake in their profperity, and make it tributary to their own contentment! 

Such carry with them an infallible, an undeprivable folace which can relieve them in poverty 
with ineftimable treafure, and manumife them in prifon with intellectual liberty : for the multi¬ 
tudes of anxieties which furprife illiterate and uncultivated minds, even in the midft of the 
molt fplendid affluence or adulation, are inacceffible to them, under the darkelt clouds of 
indigence or reproach. 

That Ralegh, in his greener years, did attain to fuch a talle of letters as all his fucceeding 
avocations could never remove; and which proved not only an ornament to thofe his earlier and 
happier days, but a relief in his age and afflictions, even fo as to render him under his darker 
fortunes and condition more illultrious than he was in his brighteft profperity, may appear by a 
furvey of his writings from the juvenile productions of his pen, to the more numerous and mature His Writing!. 
offsprings of his prefent confinement. But in this furvey, we think not the fimple chronological 
method will be either needful or acceptable •» which tho’ eaficft and readielt for tranferibing, would 
be molt crude and disjointed in reading ; and yet be incapable of admitting all into their true 
order, becaufe we have not the time that feveral of his pieces were written. Therefore, that we 
may carry on our difeourfe with fome coherence, we lhall attempt at fuch a digeflion as, upon a 
little review, will naturally arife, or molt conveniently, at leaft in this place, lead us, as out of 
a Howry garden, into the high-road again of publick aCtion : for I might, perhaps, recommend 
fome variation, in this arrangement, of the fame pieces if they were to be reviv’d in a unilorm 
and methodical edition of Sir Walter Ralegh'% Works ; fo that the junior efforts of his mufe, or 
more extemporary products of his epijlolary correspondence might not, as here fordifpatch, lead 
up the reft. 

Now as for thefe productions of his mufe, fince feveral of them arc mention’d in the former part p 0c . it a[ 
of thefe Iheets, they need be here only recapitulated •, as his poem on Cafeoign's Steele-Clafs •, 

The Excufe, The Silent Lover , the Anfwer to Marloe'% Pafioral ; with his poem of Cynthia , and 
two more on Spencer’s Fairy Queen.' Since the time that thefe feven were before fpoken of, 1 have 
met with four other fuch like poetical pieces, which feem alfo to have been compos’d by the 
lame hand, from thofe elegant taulologies or retornellos wherein his fennels and madrigals are 
ufually fo correfpondent with one another. * Thefe were all written long before this his im- 
prifonment, as were probably fome alfo in the Afhmclem library j namely, Erroris Refponfio , 

and 


• V>rtt of thefe pieces are to be found in an old Collec • 
tivu of federal ingenious Poems and Songs by the Wits of the 
Age: printed in 8 uo. 1660, and annexed to a comical 
fpcech in proi’c, call’d Le Prince Amour, printed the 
lame year; which, by the latter part thereof, entitled 
A \‘?n Templar ice ; or, A brief Chronicle of the dark Reign 
of the bright Prince of burning L>ve, appears, in a volume 
of the Harley an KlSS, 90. C. 7. fol. 556, to have been 
written by Sir Benjamin Rudyerd. The poems publilh'd 
with this fpeech are improperly faid, in the title, to be 
written by the wits of the age in regard to the time they 


were publilh’d : for, as the publiiher owns, in his dedica¬ 
tion to the honourable feenty of the Middle'Tcnple\ tne 
nvit in this collection was born loug Lf»e our unK\ippy tn- 
tefline divifions, and as much in the poems themie at* is 
evident; there being among them leveral written in the 
time of king James and queen Elizabeth ; and one, or 
more, as old a> king Henry VIII. Among the re:l, one we 
have page 131 entitled, The Leners Maze, a poem of 
four ltanzas, beginning thus: Her Fa.e, her Tsxgur, her 
Hit, &c. *Tis all compos’d of monoly liable;, and with 
that ingenious intricacy or tranfpofurc which happily an- 
pi m m iwcr> 


Digitized by LiOOQle 




The LIFE of 


and his Anfwer to the Lie , &c. Befides, we find there is a fatirical elegy on the death of the 
treafurer Cecyll, earl of Salisbury , written within this period, likewife afcrib’d to him j a and 
we have ftill three pieces more of his poetry written afterwards, and but a fliort time before 
his own death. Thefe are of a folemn nature j as his Pilgrim , his Epigram in Allufton to the 
Snuff of a Candle, i laftly, a divine flanza, which is call’d his Epitaph. b 

Next we might fpeak of thofe fhorter pieces alfo in profe, his Letters ; and thefe, being writ¬ 
ten in all parts of his life, cannot perhaps be improperly enumerated in this. I have feen of 
them in print and manufcript to the number of twenty-eight: Fourteen or fifteen of them have 
already been made ufe of in the foregoing fheets ; and the reft, as they likewife are of perfo- 
nal import, will be ferviceable in the remainder, fo they need not be more particularly diftin- 
guifh’d in this place. 

But thofe more condnued compofitions which.were the refult of experience and occafion in 
his feveral publick profeffions or engagements of life, will, perhaps, firft demand our obferva- 
tion $ fuch as relate to his charader as a warrior , a failor, a difcoverer of unknown countries, 
and a politician vers’d in the intereft of nations and the arts of government. Among thefe, we 
may firft mention his military difcourfes, and thefe concern either a defence of England in par¬ 
ticular, or contain general arguments and examples of the caufes and reafons of war among 
mankind. On the former fubjedt, he feems to have drawn up feveral remonftrances which are but 
fparingly and (lowly come to light. However, from what has before been obferv’d, of his 
having had a principal hand in the determinations of the grand Council of JVar for putting the 
nation in arms when it was under immediate apprehenfions of the Spanijh Invafion, there is 
good reafon to believe he was alfo the author of a treatife, containing Notes of Direction for 
fuch Defence of the Kingdom: written three years before, when the faid enemies were beginning 
to (hew their defigns. To this treatife was alfo join’d a Direction for the bejl and mojl orderly 
Retreat of an Army , whether in Campaign or Straits. And thefe were then prefented in MS. 
to the privy council. Herein, one advice is, fince frontier forces are unlikely to prevent 
an enemy from landing, that if they ftiould land, through the deficiency or abfence of our 
{hipping (for this is the force Ralegh was ever for having firft us’d againft fuch foreign inva- 
fions) it were better by driving or clearing the country of provifions, and temporizing , to endea¬ 
vour at growing ftronger, and rendering the enemy weaker, than to hazard all by a confufed 
and diforderly defcent of the populace to oppofe the firft landing, as their cuftom heretofore was p 
But this, chiefly, among the faid reafons and pofitions, for preventing an invading enemy, 
was a little before the approach of the Spanijh Armada oppugned by nomas Digges , Efqj mtifter 
mafter-general of her majefty’s forces in the Low-Countries , in a Difcourfe of the bejl Order for 
repulfing a foreign Force, &c. which he then exhibited in print. This produced an Anfwer , 
which, having been found in an old manufcript copy among others of Sir IValter Ralegh s Dif¬ 
courfes, has lately been publifhed j and which, by feveral circumftances therein, agreeing with 
many in his life as well as with feveral orders in the aforefaid council of war , feveral paflages in 
his Hijlory of the World, and his other vsritings, offers many reafons to believe it was written 
by him. c But if we would fee his opinion upon this fubjeft in a more extenfive and univerfal 


fwers the title. This is follow'd in the next pnge with 
another, of three ftanzas, entitled Farewel to the Court ; 
beginning thus: Like truthlefs dreamt , fo are my Joys ex¬ 
pir'd: this is again fuccceded in the enfuing page by 
another of equal length, call'd, The Advice ; with this 
beginning : Many define , hut fnv or none dejerve ; and all 
three fubteribed IV. R. T hey are apparently, by the 
file, written at the time that Sir Walter Ralegh was cele¬ 
brated for fuch kind of compofitions, and from the ful¬ 
fill, of the two laft efpecially, no lefs manifeitJy to me, 
written by hirafelf j the one juft before his firft Guianian 
expedition, the other, to the lady that was his wife. 
Laftly, the fourth poem above refer'd to, is lately printed 
in a mifcellany call’d. The London Magazine , for Aug. 1734. 

* This PaJ!oral Elegy a n the earl of Salisbury, who died 
in May 1612, was firlt printed by F. Osborne in his Me¬ 
moirs of king James , and it begins thus : Here lies 
Hobinol our Pajior while e'er , See. That author tells us, 
44 It came from fo fmart a pen, in the king's fenfe, that 
“ he faid, He hop'd the author would die before him : who 
44 he was (con inues he) God knows.” The firft perfon 
I have met with who aferibes it to Sir Walter Ralegh is 
the author of his life, printed in 8 vo. 1677 (and after¬ 
wards in folio) whom Anthony Wood calls John Shirley, 
the writer of feveral romances and fuch like things. 
This writer in that life, page 179 fays, that Ralegh for 
Cecylt s kindnefs, bellow’d upon him that epitaph , 44 Which 


manner, 

44 I* am, fays he, upon very good grounds, aflur’d to be 

44 his.” 

b Thefe are printed in Sir Jf alter Ralegh's Remains . 

* ’Tis entitled, A Military Difcourfe : whether it he better 
for England to give an Jnvador prefent Battle, or to tem- 
poiijearvi defer the fame. Sec. Now publifh’d by Natha¬ 
nael Booth, of Grays-Inn, Efq; 8 vo. 1734. containing 52 
pages. The Author, io his introduction, tells us, 94 He 
44 has thought good, firft to fee down the reafons alledg'd 
44 on both fedes, as he finds them collected by his ant3go- 
44 nift ; and after a reply to his objections, refers himlelf 
44 to the ccnfure of the reader who is a foldicr ; not caring, 
44 in this caufe, for the difallowance of any, who will 
44 bring a pound of antique ufages and cuftoms to weigh 
• 4 down only an ounce of true reafon and frefh experience.” 
Then he fets forth that Brief Difcourfe of the Left Orders 
for repulfing foreign Forces , fcc. abovemention’d ; which 
having been reprinted under the title of England's Defence, 
a Treatife againft Invafion , Folio 1680, and under the 
name of Thomas Digges, as I have found in the copious 
library of a learned acquaintance; it is therefore aferibed 
to him above. That diicourfe of Digges'5 which in this mi¬ 
litary difcourfe begins at page 4, and ends page 13, is ac¬ 
company'd in almoft every article with our refpondent' s mar¬ 
ginal notes, and attended at the end with a reply to the 
reafons therein; the whole winding up with the chief 
points of his former treatife, collected into brief notes of 

dtreBion, 


Digitized by 


Google 









clxxv 


I 

i 

IT 


i 


f 

r 

) 

It 

n 

i 

J 

f 

: 


i 


l 


\ 


Sir WALTER RALEGH. 


manner, it mud be in his -Difcourfes of the original and fundamental caufe of natural and necef- 
fary t arbitrary and cujlomary , holy and civil wars ; which tho’ alfo publifh’d feveral years 
after his death, have fufficient marks of genuinenefs upon them. There are other writings of 
his befides, which relate to this topick. But as war in them is treated of fubordinately, and 
rather with refpett to fome national advantages wherewith it might have been maintain’d againft 
our enemies as the pofture of affairs then was, or the perfonal behaviour of fome particular men, 
fo we may think it more proper to fpeak of them under other divifions. 

Among thcfe, that which admits of his Maritime Difcourfes , may not perhaps be lead obferva- Maritimai. 
ble, being a fubjedt fo fcarcely handled by men of fuch learning and experience, yet of fuch 
importance to a people in our fituation. And under this head, that which fhould here be per¬ 
haps firft fpoken of, tho’ indeed one of the laft pieces he wrote in this date of durance is, his 
Difcourfe of the Invention of Shipping, &c. b wherein he treats of the ufe, defefts, and improve¬ 
ments 


direflion, as is above obferv’d, which he had prefented to 
lome of the lords of the council in 1585 j and which 
gave occahon to Digges his faid Brief Difcourfe in or near 
the year l^HS, and that pioduced this Military Difcourfe 
about or loon af:er 1590, including the fame, and com- 
prifrng the whole of the controverfy. The Editor of this 
pamphlet, in his dedication to the Duke of Argyle, has 
thefe word* to his Grace: 44 Having lately, among fome 
44 other valuable papers of Sir Halter Ralegh, found the 
44 following diilertation in manufeript, I thought the 
44 publication thereof was a debt due to my country, as 
44 well as to the memory of that great man." And I 
have in the copy which the faid gentleman communicated 
for my perulal, mark’d out near twenty paflages 
and exfrcjfui w, which fo well agree with others in the 
life and writings of Sir Walter Ralegh , that I cannot think 
any other perlon to have been the author of thole notes 
and reply. Such among the reft are hjs being in the tvars 
of France and Flinders, particularly the battle of Mou- 
eoun/or, and that of Rimenant ; his pcrfe& knowledge of 
Dover haven, and other incidents mention’d before in his 
life: betides his hiftorical observations of other perfons ; 
Which, with Several reafons and arguments about landing 
of forces, and the urproportionable fpced of marching up 
an army to keep pace with the failing of a fleet, almoit 
in the lame words as we have before obferved out of his 
Hiftory of the World) and his Other writings. 

» So l fiAl two difcourfes of Sir Walter Ralegh's pro¬ 
perly titled. The firft is printed in his eflays, 8 vo. 1050, 
and has been reprinted in the Three Difcourfes of Sir Walter 
Ralegh fo#. 1702, beginning thus: 44 The ordinary theme 
44 and argument of hiftoTy is war; which may be defin'd 
44 the cxercife of violence under foveraign command, againft 
41 nuithftGliders force; authority and refiftance being the 
41 eflei'.tial parts thereof.” But in this laft edition, im¬ 
properly divided) and the laft divifion entitled of Ecclefiaf 
tical pov:er ; whereas in the firft edition, and the leaf F 2 
b, which would have been page 40 had it been number’d, 
this new titled divifion appears only a continuation of 
the Original Caufe of War; tho* indeed, through the papal 
power and difpeufation% by that dillindlion which is called 
holy war. .This divifion is alfo mifplaced in the faid laft 
edition ; for there is another difcourfe of unnatural or 
civil war interfering. This, tho* never before printed, I 
have alfo reafon to believe genuine from fome paflages in it 
that might be parallels with others in his Hiftory of the 
World and elfewhere: but it fhould be placed or printed 
laft, becaufe the very firft words of it are, 44 The laft 
“ kind of war we (hall treat of is the unnatural, otherwife 
“ called the inteftine or civil war ; and tho* it has the 
“ fame motives of ambition, avarice or revenge as the 
M arbitrary and cuftomary war, yet is of a quite different 
“ n *ture, and muft be otherwife defin'd, &c." 

* This appears in feveral parts to be a genuine piece of 
our author, but incorrectly printed ; as moft of his poft- 
humous works are, efpccialJy in the proper names. 'Tis 
the firft difcourfe in a book call'd. Judicious and felett 
Effays and Obfcrvations of that renowned and learned 
Knight Sir Walter Ralegh; printed in 8 vo. 165a 1667, and 
(this Difisurfe of Shipping) reprinted again, among the 
Genuine Remains of Sir Walter Ralegh , at the end of an 
Abridgment of his Hiftory of the Worlds 8 vo. 1700. That 
book of Effays is dedicated, by the bookfeller, to the 
much honoured Carew Ralegh, Efq; iffc . And this firft 
Difcourfe therein confills of 42 pages; yet feems an un- 
finifh’d piece, and at the end, to our great regret, no 
more than the firft chapter of a larger work. As the 
time when the Difcourfe beforemention’d of the caufes of 
war was written, may be guefs'd from that paffage in it 
mentioning the maritime controverfy between Se/den and 
Crotius ; io the time when this Difcourfe of Shifting was 


compos'd, may be likewife infer'd from Sir Walters refe¬ 
rence page 39, to a pamphlet call'd The Trades Encreafe, 
which 1 have feen and obferv'd to be printed, 4 to. 1615: 
unlefs there was a prior edition. Of both thefe Difcourles 
I have been oblig’d with two old manufeript copies by 
Nathanael Booth) of Grays* Inn, Efq; beforemention'd. 
They feem to have been corrected from the printed copies 
in fome places, and indeed will not yield many confidera- 
ble correclions of them in others. There may need no 
apology for the following extraft from this laft difcourfe 
of our author's obfervations on the Improvement of Shipping 
in his own Time ; fince he is affirm’d to his immortal 
glory, to have had himfelf fo great a {hare in it. 

44 Whofoevcr was the inventor, we find that every age 
44 has added fomewhat to flips, and to all things elie. 
44 And in my own time , the fhape of our Englifb (hips 
44 has been greatly better’d. It is not long lince the 
44 fir iking of the top-maft (a wonderful eafe to great fhips 
44 both at fea and harbour) has been deviled, together 
44 with the chain-pump, which takes up twice as much 
44 water as the ordinary one did. We have lately added 
44 the bonnet and the drabbler . To the courfes we have 
44 devifed (ludding fails , top-gallant fails , fprit fails, top- 
44 fails . The weighing of anchors by the capflon is alfo 
44 new. We have fall’n into the conlideration of cables , 
44 and thereby refill the malice of the greateft winds chac 
44 can blow; wititefs our fmall Milbrook men of Cornwall, 
44 that ride it out at anchor half leas over between England 
44 and Ireland, all the winter quarter : and witnels the 
44 Hollanders , who were wont to ride before Dunkirk with 
44 the wind at north well, making a lee - fore in all 
44 weathers. For true it is, that the length of the cable 
44 is the life of the {hip in all extremeties; and the reafon 
44 is, becaufe it makes fo many bendings and waves, as 
44 the fliip riding at that length, is not able to ftretch it, 
44 and nothing breaks that is not llretch’d. In extremity, 
44 we carry our ordnance better than we were wont; be- 
44 caufe our nether-overloops are railed commonly from the 
44 water between the lower part of the port and the fea. 
44 In king Henry Vlirstime, and in his prefence at 
44 Portfmouth, the Mary Rofe, by a little fway of the {hip 
44 in calling about, her ports being within fixteen 
44 inches of the water, was over-fet and loft, and in her 
44 that worthy knight Sir George Carew, coufin gcrmain 
44 to the lord Carew now living; and with him, befides 
44 many other gentlemen, the father of the late reuowned 
44 Sir Richard Grenvile. We have alfo raifed our fecond 
44 decks , and given more vent thereby to their ordnance 
44 lying on our net her-over loops. We have added crof-pillars 
44 in our Royal fhips, to llrengthen them, which being 
44 fallned from the kelfon to the beams of the fecond deck, 
44 keep them from fettling or giving way in all diftreffes. 
44 We have given longer floors to our fhips than in elder 
44 times, and better bearing under water; whereby they 
44 never fall into the fea, after the head, and {hake the 
44 whole body or fink ftern nor ftoop upon a wind, by 
44 which the breaking loofe of our ordnance or difufe of 
44 them, with many other difeommodities are avoided. 
44 And to fay the truth, a miferable Ihame and dilhonour 
44 it were for our fhip-wrights, if they did not exceed all 
44 other in fetting up of our Royal {hips; the errors of 
44 other nations being far more excufable than ours: for 
44 the kings of England have for many years becu at the 
44 charge to build and farnifh a navy of powerful {hips for 
44 their own defence, and for the wars only ; whereas the 
44 French , Spaniards, Portugal and Hollanders , till of late, 
44 have had no proper fleet belonging to their princes or 
44 Hates.” Thus far Sir Walter Ralegh, in his faid Dif 
courfe of Shipping, p. 16, tsfe. And thus much of it may 
not be thought impertinent in his hfe , at lead in this fub- 
jun&ive manner, fince thefe improvements, or fome of 

them 


Digitized by kjOOQie 


clxxvi 


ft LIFE of 


ments thereof the ltrcngth and deficiency of the fea forces of England, France, Spain and 
Venice , with five caulcs of the rife of the Hollanders: his encouragement of a mutual friendpip 
between than and England , as aifo of the Nevccafile trade. This might lead us more particu¬ 
larly to his excellent Olfervations and No ter concerning the royal Navy and Sea Service , * which 
he dedicated to the prince of Wales as is before mention’d ; therefore all we need obferve more 
ol it in this place is, that herein he difeourfes under diftinft heads, of the officers of the navy, 
of fome errors to be reformed in pip-building ; and others, in harboring and manning the fleet; 
of furcharging them with great ordnance ; the defeats in fheathing and calking ; the ..bules in 
victualling ; inconveniency of the cook-rooms ; of mujlering and prefling mariners ■, ol arms and 
munition j and laftly, of captains to ferve in his majefty’s fhips. With the fecond head or chap¬ 
ter in this tract, agrees his letter to prince Henry before fpoken of, concerning the model of a 
Pip. 0 And in his introduction to the faid Obfervations, as was alfo faid, our author mentions 
a Difcourfe of a marilimal voyage, with the paffages and incidents therein , c which he had for¬ 
merly written to that prince. This, if it is now in being, muft, I think, remain (till in manu- 
leript; for no other knowledge of it have I elfewhere met with j therefore it has, I fear, endu¬ 
red the fame fate with that other work, probably, more copious and confiderable, and to which, 
as what might feem defign’d to bring the others into practice, they may appear only preparatory. 
This work, tho* taken notice of by no*other author who has written of him, is thus mention’d 
by him fell. “ Of the Art of War by Sea, I have written a treatife to the lord Henry , prince of 
“ Wales. A fubjeeff, to my knowledge, never handled by any Man ancient or modern: but 
“ God has (pared me the labour of finilhing it, by the lofs of that brave prince •, of which, like 
“ an edipleof the fun, we (lull find the effects hereafter. Impoffible it is to equal words and 
“ lbrrows: I will therefore leave him in the hands of God that hath him: Cures leves loquuntur • 
“ ingenles Jlupentf ’ d This may lead us up to fuch of his difeourfes as reprdent this art in 
execution, particularly thofc two gallant naval actions wherein Sir Richard Grenvile loft his life, 
and himfelf won a molt fignal victory, of which his own pen has preferved the faithful memo¬ 
rials in his Report of the Truth of the Fight about the IJles of Azores, • and his epiftolary account 
of the Action at Cadiz ; f both of them before abftraCted into this work. Nor did his care 
terminate in the beft advice for the regulation and maintainance of our pipping , or in recording 
fome of the moft notable atchievemenls perform’d therewith, but extended to the choice and re¬ 
paration of the moft convenient harbours for their reception $ and that not only by his fpeeches 
in parliament, as we have already feen, but alfo by a memorial he prefented to queen Elizabeth 
touching the port of Dover in particular •, declaring how honourable and profitable to her majefty ; 
how nccefiary and commodious for the realm, the rebuilding it would be j with the lead ex- 
penfive, and moft per fed manner of performing the fame. 8 

But if we advance to his more extenfive purfuits and performances relating to that topick. 
Graphical they will lead us into a new Geography, into difeoveries and deferiptions of unknown countries, 
with the Voyages which himfelf and others under his charge and diredions made to that purpofe. 
And under this head would fall thofe papers and difeourfes of his, concerning tire difeovery, plan¬ 
tation, and fettlement of Virginia, which were in the pofleflion of Sir Francis Walftngham, as 
was before obferv’d ; h but whether now recoverable I know not, nor what is become of his Trees- 


them feem to have a nearer relation to him, than, through 
his prudence, in die llate he now was, or perhaps the 
notoriety of his flu re in thefc improvements, it w as need¬ 
ful further to expref*; for 1 have read in the Appendix to 
a H'JJoty of the Invent on of Arts and Sciences , printed 
lino. 16H6. That we owe the (crviceable model of our 
modern jhip building to the inventions or directions of Sir 
U alter Ralegh. And to the fame purpofe of effectually 
employing this his fuperior knowledge in naval architecture 
to the iateguard and Ilrength of the nation, we may 
prefume thole grants were made him by queen Elizabeth 
■for felling of limber ; one whereof is extant, entitled a 
Warrant Xo Sir Walter Ralegh for t<wo hundred Oaks, to 
be taken in Sir Francis F.n^lesfield's woods ; and it is pre¬ 
ferved in the AJhmolemt Mu/aum at Oxford . 

• Printed 8 vo. 1650, in the collection of Sir Walter 
Ralegh's F.Jfays abovemen tion’d ; confuting of 46 pages. 

b Printed in Sir Walter Ralegh's Re»atnj, 12 mo. 1651, 
and the fubfequent ed Lions, containing between 3 and 
4 P*S«- 

« His Obfervations on the Royal Navy, p. I. 

d Sir Walter Ralegh’/ Hijlory of the World, lib. 5. 
^ap. 1. (eCt. 6. 

« Of this Report of the Fight about the Azores , contain¬ 
ing about two lheets, fee, in this narrative of Sir Walter 
Rahgh's life, the abltraCt and references from fol. 60 to 
63, alfo the note to the firlt reference in fol 47. And 
here further concerning the feme, we may obfcrvc that it 


feems to have given matter for an hcroick poem ; which 
wis, a few years after the faid Report , publiihed : Entitled 
The mofi honourable Tragedy of Sir Richard Grenvile, Knt . 
8 vo. 1595, dedicated to the lord Monjoy by Jervis Mark¬ 
ham. * fis compofed in fianzas of eight vcrfcs, and 
near ninety pages in length. 

f This Relation of the Cadiz Atticn^ contains near 7 
pages, among the Remains at the end of an Abridgment 
of Sir Walter Ralegh’/ Hijlory of the World , 8m 1700, 
was then firft publilh’d by Philip Ralegh , Efq; and is 
apparently a genuine piece, as may be gather’d from 
thofe other accounts interwoven and agreeing with it, 
where it is (moltly) before inferted, fol. 95. 

* This Memorial touching Dover Port is ft lib before 
refer’d to, fol. 143. It confills of about two fliects in the 
pamphlet there mention’d, call'd An EJfay on Ways and 
Means to maintain the Honour and Safety of England, 
publiihed by Sir H. Shears, 4 to. 1701. The publiiher 
fays, page 9, for the part aferibed to Sir Walter Ralegh 
goes no Uirther; that he found this part of the memorial , 
drawn up by Sir Walter Ralegh or Sir Dudley Digges 9 
among the rubbifh of old papers, while he ferv’d in the 
office of ordnance . But I think it could not be writ by 

Sir Dudley Digges , becaufe the author directing himfelf 
to queen Elizabeth , \peaks familiarly of things he had 
feen in the Low Countries in her time, when Sir Dudley 
Digges had not left the univerfity. 
k Sec fol. 33* of thefe flieets. 

tife 


Digitized by LiOOQle 







Sir WALTE R RALEGH. clxxvii 

life of the Weft Indies, which feems to have been a very Comprehenfive work by the fhort fketch 
himfelf has given of its contents before quoted. * Better luck feems to have befal’n his writings 
upon Guiana j for we have at Ieaft four of his difcourfes on that country in being, tho’ they, 
probably, are not all he writ thereonj as firft, his Confiderations on the Voyage for Guiana, which 
I never faw in print. b Secondly, his Difcovery of the large , rich, and beautiful empire of Gui¬ 
ana, which he printed himfelf, and being, before, largely ufed and fpoken of, the lefs need 
be laid of it here. c Thirdly, his Journal of bis fecond Voyage to Guiana. This remains ftil! in 
manufcript, and perhaps fhould do fo ; it being unfinifh’d and full of chafms, feeming to con¬ 
tain only notes and obfervations for his own memory, when he fhould have leifure at his re¬ 
turn into England to digeft and fill up the particulars in a continued difcourle: accordingly it 
feems to have fupply'd him therewith, when he wrote his Apology for the faul Voyage. But as 
both thefe will be made ufe of in the fubfequent part of our narrative, ’twill be then time enough 
to fpeak more diftin&Iy of them. And there alfo will be mention’d the four or five letters 
we have of his extant concerning the faid laft expedition. 

After his writings, becoming the chara&er of an able commander both by land and fea, if 
we look for him as an author in the civil or political capacity, we may find him there alfo no Political, 
lefs eminent; we may behold him in this light no lefs qualified to govern nations, than in the 
other to conquer and. defend them. Some of his coinpofitions under this diftribution, are of a 
general nature •, as that call’d the Seat of Government , /hewing it to be upheld by the two 
great pillars of civil juftice and martial policy and how this is fram’d out of the husbandmen, 
merchants and gentry of the realm. The firft of thefe ranks or degrees he calls the fruit trees 
of the kingdom •, or thofe who gather the honey, yet hardly enjoy the wax: and as thefe feed, fo 
the fecond fort enrich it *, nourilhing fuch trades as have afliftcd our kings with great fums of 
money, and great fleets, upon occafion; while the third fort, our gentry, he calls the garrifons 
of good order throughout the realm j or means rather they have been, or fhould be fuch, more 
than they were in thefe latter times, to agree with a note he has elfewhere dropt upon them. d 
But this little eflay appears, by one expreflion towards the conclufion (mentioning fomething to 
be hereafter prov'd, which is not) to be no more than a fragment. * The like we apprehend of 
his Obfervations concerning the Caufes of the Magnificency and Opulency of Cities , from a word in 
the very firft paragraph, referring to fucb people as feem to have been before mentioned. f Tho* 
in the main this is a general difcourle,. it bears fomo particular references to a rude and bar¬ 
barous people and might poffibly be therefult of fuch confiderations as muft have engaged his 
mind, when thofe propofitions were on foot for founding the City of Ralegh in Virginia , as 
was before intimated. In this little eflay, after having fpoken of the means to civilize and reform 
fuch a people, he proceeds, under diftinft heads, to treat of the beft fituation of cities for fafe- 
ty and plenty ; of the multitude of inhabitants , religion, academies, courts of jujlice, artificers. 


1 Sec fo!. 91, of thefe fhects. 

k The contents of this manufcript may be conceived 
from the words wherewith it begins, which are as follows: 
41 Touching the voyage for Guiana , it is to be confided d ; 
“ fbft, Whether it be to be undertaken ? fecondly, The 
“ manner of fubduing it; and lallly, The means how to 
44 fubdue it, and annex it to the crown imperial of Eng - 
44 land." It confiJb of eight leaves in quarto, and is, I 
believe, a rarity; having no w here met with it but among 
the magnificent colleftions of Sir Hans Shane, 

• Alter the extrad from this treatife, of what more 
perfonally concerns Sir Hatter Ralegh , before inlerted in 
this life, from fol. 77 to 88, follows a charailcr of his 
faid difcQurJe upon the di/covery of Guiana from feveral 
authors •, which might ftill be augmented from the further 
teftimony of one of them, namely, Robert Hqrcourt of 
Stanton-Harcourt, Efq; whofe voyage to Guiana in 160S, 
having met with, in his own edition, primed 4 to. 1613, 
among the collections of that learned and worthy gentleman 
Mr. George Sale, l find a preface prefixed thereto, omit¬ 
ted in Purchase edition be tore ufed ; in which captain Har- 
mrt, having declared how effectually and faithfully Sir 
If alter Ralegh had publiflfd what he then and there dif¬ 
fer'd, recommends to the reader’s perufal 44 This excel- 
u lent diftzurft, proceeding, fays he, from fo wife and 
“ judicial an author; who, if foxne known fortunes (mean- 
" his engagements at Cadiz, in the Ijland voyage, 
“ sjc.) had not crofted his firft intendments, for the pro- 
“ fccuting that emerprize, had, in all likelihood, long 
“ before this time, cncreafed the honour of our nation, by 
u the molt famous and rich difcovery and conquefi that the 
41 world could afford.” Befides the two editions in Englifh, 
the firft whereof publiih’d by Ralegh , contains about 13 


fhects, and the other in Hakluyt, about 9, alfo one in Latin 
before mention'd, printed in ±t°' at November^ with a map : 
there arc accounts of tw’o editions of Sir Walter Raltgh'% 
voyage to Guiana in Dutch, one 4 to. 1612, which mult be 
this of his difcovery, and the other in 1619. Edmund 
Hovers, in his Addition to Stovu's Annals, fays, it has been 
tranllatcd almoll into all languages. But whether the exqui- 
fite tran flat ion into Latin, he fays there is of it in one of 
Theodore de Pry's volumes of Modern Navigations, is the 
fame with the Latin edition in 4 to. before mention’d, 
or any fuch there is among thofe valuable volumes, I am 
not yet certain ; tho’ J remember much in one of them, 
printed at Frankfort, Fol. 1590, relating to the firft Firgi- 
nian voyages ; whereby it appears, Sir Walter Ralegh was 
a great patron and cncourager of the faid author, and 
which would have confirmed or embeilillied fome pillages 
in that part of thefe fhcets which gives account thereof, had 
the intelligence, I have fince been favour’d with by an 
honourable gentleman, arrived timely enough to have 
been admitted in its proper place. 

<* Deduced from a Char after of the Carthaginians , in 
his Hijtory of the World, Jib. q. cap. 1. feft. 2. 

• r \ his Seat of Government was piloted firft, I think, in 
Ralegh's Remains, \zmo. 1651, and in the Jaft or largcft 
edition is not above 4 pages, beginning thus: They fas 
that the good lie ft Cedars, Sec. as is in a note before quoted. 

* Thefe Obfervations were printed at the fame time, 
in the fame eolleftion , and contain about 11 pages : Begin- 
ningthus: That the only v:ay to civilize and referm the 
favagt and barbarous lives and corrupt manners of fuch pif¬ 
fle, is, Sic. 


privileges^ 


Digitized by 


Googl 


e 


n n n 


! 


clxxyin 'The L I F E of 


privileges^ and triumphs y fo concludes with thofe three caufes of confirming a city in her greatnefi, 
jujlict, peace and plenty. Of a more extenfive nature {till is that treatife we have of his, called 
j Maxims of State ; 1 being a methodical compendium of government in all or mod of its 
forms and branches \ with many of its chapters analytically digefted for the fake of brevity and 
pq-fpicuity. Herein having explain’d and defin’d the words government , policy y ft ate and the office 
of foveraignty , he proceeds to diftinguilh the feveral forts of monarchy , ariftocracy y free ftate , 
tyranny , oligarchy , and commonwealth. Then of the founding a ftate, with its parts, and of 
preferring it under thofe feveral forms, by myfteries or fopbifms y rules or actions. Laftly, die 
converfion of ftates, general and particular, by foreign invafion y domeftick fedition y or alteration 
without violence. Thus ends this treatife* •• to which is join'd, as a kind of corollary for the 
better ufe of the book, two or three pafTages in the ftory of David : from whence an inference 
js drawn, that old age is not always unfit for government * and alfo a defence of that prince for 
marrying Abifhag: fo clofes with a portrait of political nobility , in the ftory of Adonijah afpiring 
to the kingdom *, with obfervations of the marks to difeem fuch practices* and another of the poli¬ 
tical prince y in a farther example of the faid king David * who, tho’ aged, deferred, and rebell’d 
againft by many of his nobles, ftir’d up himfelf to publick aCtion, and thereby fhew’d his vigor 
and fufficiency to manage the affairs of his kingdom. Herewith may be mention’d that larger 
freatife bordering upon thefc fubjeCts, which is call’d The Arts of Empire , &c. b but handled in 
a different manner. It is divided into twenty-fix chapters, defining publick weals y anddifferen- 
ciesof foveraignty ; more particularly the three kinds of monarchy , and hoy/ to perpetuate them. 
Alfo of councils and counfellors y officers , commiffioners , magiftrales and minifters of ftate. Of 
juft ice , treafure and war. Of neighbouring princes. The character of an excellent prince. Art 
of ruling. Ol princely authority , power and force. Of confpiracy and treafon , publick hatred 9 
diffidence and diffimulation. Of wcir y defenfive and invafive, law of qrms y foldiers and their 
dijeipline. Of generals and commanders y councils of war y directions tactic and ftratagemic ; with 
advice how to make an honourable peace. Of civil war * .with the caufes and remedies thereof. 
And the two laft chapters contain a collection of political obfervations y and maxims of ftate - 9 or 
prudential grounds and polemical precepts concerning all ftates and forms of policy, &V. con¬ 
firm’d by feleCt narrations and hiftorical parallels v 

Rut if we defeend to thofe political writings of our author, which were occafionally compos'd; 
and with more particular regard to the exigents of ftate in his own time, through the virtues 
of a penetrating eye into the drift! of every, neighbouring nation, and an undifcourageable heart 
for the fccurity and intereft of his own; we lhall find them ftiil more numerous. And thefe, as they 
moft of them have a fpecial regard to Spain , might prpceed from the perfeCt knowledge he had 
of that kingdom and its tyrannical practices. One inftance hereof we have in that difeourfe of The 
Spaniards Cruelties to the Englifh in Havanna * which is aferib’d to Sir Walter Ralegh y with 
other traCts, in a volume among the manuferipts of a late perfon of honour. c His many other 
obfervations of this kind might well produce his Confutation about the Peace with Spain, and 
our protecting the Netherlands , of which fome account has been before given * d as alfo that other 
treatife, How War may be made with Spain and the Indies, mention’d in the lame place. Di¬ 
rections for fuch an emerprize may be eafily prefumed to have been effectually enough given by 


• Firft publifil'd under the title of Vh Prince , or Maxi/ns 
of Stale. London , 4 to. 1642, in 7 fhects, with.Sir Walter 
Ralegh's picture before it; publifh'd again in his Remains » 

1 2mo. 1651, and all the fucceeding editions thereof. A. 
Hood f a y Sf *tis the fame with Aphortfms of State, ttvo. Lend. 
|6(>I ; publifh'd by John Milton. It begins in this man¬ 
ner— Government is of two forts. See. 

b This alfo had the fame famous editor, being firft pub¬ 
lifh'd with the title of The Cabinet-Council, containing the 
chief Arts of Empire, and Myfteries of State difeabineted. Sec. 
By the ever renowned Knight Sir Walter Ralegh : pubhjhed 
by John Milton, Efq\ Svo. 1658, who prefixed this motto, 
^uis Martem tunica tectum, Adamantina digne fcrip/eritP 
The editor's opinion of this book and its author , he farther 
offer s to the reader in thefe words, “ Having had the MS. 
•« of this treatife written by Sir H alter Ralegh many years 
«« in my hands, and finding it lately by chance among 
« other books and papers; upon reading thereof, I 

•• thought it a kind of injury to with-hold longer the 
“ work of fo eminent an author from the publick ; it 
«« being both anfvverable in ftile to other works of his 
«« already extant, as far as the fubjed would permit, and 
** given me for a true copy by a learned man at his 
*• death, who had collctted feveral fuch pieces John 
** Milton In the fecond edition it was titled. The Arts 
if Empire, and Myfteries of State difeabineted. See. Svo. 
Land. 1692 ; containing 238 pages, and beginning with 


thefe words, A commonwealth is a certain frveraign go¬ 
vernment of many families , &C. 

« See a Catalogue of tljt Library of a Perfon of Honour, 
tAc. with, near a tboufand choice tnanufripts relating to 
the ftate of England and Ireland, 4 to. withoat dnre, p. 
10. This library was fold, in the former part of the 
late queen's reign, by Chriftopher Bateman, a noted book- 
feller, who once told me to whom thofe manulcripts did 
belong; and if my memory fails not, they were a part 
of Henry eail of Clarendon's vaft collections, yet a diffe¬ 
rent part, I think, from that which is in the pofTeftion of 
his grace the Duke of Chandos . 

* See before in thefe fhcets, fol. 1 50, where there is a 
manuferipe of this Confutation quoted ; which in fome 
places is more perfeft than the printed copy, and is the 
property of the reverend ani learned Mr. Harbin. It 
begins thus: Mas it pleafe your majefty ; It belongs not to 
me to judge whether the king of Spain hath done wrong to 
the Netherlands, or the Netherlands have fail'd in alle¬ 
giance towards the king , See. 47 pages in the printed copy, 
publifh'd by Philip Ralegh, as was before obferv'd, "Svo. 
1702. That manuicript has, annexed to it, the Deter¬ 
minations ef the Council of War in 1587, before mention'd 
fol. 39. A manufcript alfo of the faid Confutation, 
there was in the library of the earl of Angle fea \ another 
in the HarUyan library ; another in that of Dr. John More, 
late bilhop of Ely ; another in Sir Hans Shane's, Sec. & r - 

the 


Digitized by 


Google 







Sir WALTER RALEGH. 

the feme hand that was alfo author of The preftnt State of Spain, with a mojl accurate Account of 
hii Catboiick Majcftfi Power and Riches: alfo the Names and Worth of the mojl confiderable Per- 
f«m in that Kingdom: a manufcript which I have not hitherto been fo fuccefsfuJ as to meet with. 1 
Yet take it to be a different performance from that alfo written hy our author, and entitled, 
She prefent State of Things, as they now Jland between the three Kingdoms, France, England, and 
Spain ; whereof there is a copy in being. b Further, it was this intimate knowledge he had in the 
ftate of all the European princes, which fo well qualified him to give the approved advice he 
did in thofe two Difcourfes he wrote upon The Match propounded by the Savoyan, between the 
lady Elizabeth and the prince of Piedmont: And that between prince Henry of England, and 
a daughter of Savoy, of which we have feveral manufcript copies, and, as I have heard, the 
original alfo extant. e The fame knowledge likewife, enabled him fo dexteroufly to evifeerate 


the corrupt doctrines, and pernicious defigns 
and a Recufant ; Jhrxing how dangerous their 
excellent trad we have of his in this way of 

t Anthony Wood tells us, this treaufe, faid to have been 
written by our author Sir Walter, is a MS. going about 
from hand to hand; and before him, Shirley, iu his Life 
of Sir Walter Ralegh, calls it an excellent manufcript . 

k In the HarUyan library, N*. 38, B, 3. ’Tis a traft 
of about three jbuts and a page in folio, copied, as appears, 
about the reign of king Charles 1 , and begins with thefe 
words, The three great kingdoms, France, England, and 
Spain, at they wrw ft and, may he compar'd to the tied ion 
ef a king of Poland, where there are three fad ions, and in 
the end, two of them join'd together, are able to overcome 
the third. 

t The firft of thefe difcourfes by Sir Walter Ralegh on 
the Marriage of the Princefs Elizabeth begins thus: To obey 
the commandments of my lord the prince, 1 have fent you my 
opinion of the match lately drjved hy the duke of Savoy, &c. 
It makes about five fheets and half a page w the MS. be¬ 
fore me, which (beau to have been a good old copy taken 
(boo after this difeourfe was hrft com po fed by our author i 
tho* four of the leaves cowards the beginning are now much 
damag'd. Join'd to this, is the fecaod Difcatcrfe, touching a 
Marriage between Prince Henry and a Daughter of Savoy j 
beginning with thefe words. There is no body that perfvade; 
oar prince to mated with Savoy for any love to the ferfon of 
the duke , mr, as I hope, for his religius t 6cC. and this, in 
the Came hand, is about fix Aeets in length. They were 
both originally written in the ninth year of king Janus' s 
reign; or anno Dom. 1611, as was before ©bferv’d ; and 
cbisoopy of thefe difcourfes , was by the intercii of a noble 
pericnage procured, for this ule, from the colleftjons of 
that worthy dwioe lately fo thefe notes mention'd. There 
is 1 copy of this lad Difeourfe on the Prince's friar riage a- 
moog the MS. colle&ons of Sir Hans Sloane\ mark’d in 
his library, B, 61 z; and another in the library of Trinity 
college in Dublin . In the Cottonian library alfo, there is 
a copy of this la ft difeourfe , but I think not of the other. 
It was once a fair one, but fcarccly fo ancient as that above 
us'd, and by miftake, the amanuenfis had aferib’d it to Sir 
A. Gorges ; for this name is (truck out and Sir Walter Ra¬ 
legh's inferted in the lame hand. By another millake, of 
the binder, there is but half of this traft to be found in 
one volume, the remainder being bound in that mark'd 
with the preceding number. See the faid volumes under 
the bull of Vitellius, C, N«. 17 and 16. But the greateil 
millake of all was, the (offering of women fervants to get 
up their linnen in rooms underneath thofe where the Royal 
library, with this of Sir Robert Cotton , were Jatelykeptat 
A/hbumhani-hoafc, in iVeflminfler ; for thereby, a man fe- 
tree caking fire, (which lay acrofs a (love-grate) on the 
23d of Oltober, 1*731, it made fuch deilruftion among 
the laid manufetipts, that of nine hundred forty-eight vo¬ 
lumes, whereof the Cottonian library confilled, jeven bun- 
dred firty-fix only efcaped the flames ; a hundred fourteen 
being quite loll or intirely (poll'd, and ninety-eight dama¬ 
ged : fo that this library now contains eight hundred forty four 
volumes, intire and defeftive ; as may be gather’d from 
Mr. Wbijhm' s Narrative of the faid Fire ; printed in A 
Retort from the Committee appointed to vievu the Cottonian 
Lilrari, and the other pubhek Records of this Kingdom. 
Publijted by Order of the Houfe of Commons, Fo/. 1732. 
Now among thofe damaged volumes, were the two above 
mention’d, which contain this Difeourfe of Sir Walter 
Ralegh's, and which l have obferved to be fo burnt all 
about the margins, even into the writing, that I queftion 
if the fenfe, Specially at the top of the leaves, can from 
thence be, every where, perfectly recover'd. The belt 
13, that we may hope in the truth of an information I 


ot the papifts, in his Dialogue between a Jefuitc 
Principles are to Cbrijlian Princes . d Another 
writing is, his Dialogue between a Counfellor of 

have received from a gentleman who has great intelligence, 
as well as great collections of fuch like cunofities, that Sir 
Walter Ralegh 's original MS. of one, or both thefe Dif 
courfts , is preserved in the noble family of the Paulets ; tho' I 
have not yet had opportunity of requeuing a fight, where¬ 
by to facisfy rayfelf and others in the certainty thereof. 

k This Dialogue (as has been before faid) was firft pub- 
li(h'd by Philip Ralegh, Efq; among the Genuine Remains , 
at the end of an Abridgment of his grand-father’s Hijlory of 
the World, 8 vo. 1700, &c. where it makes 43 pages, and 
begins thus: frly moft reverend father, you are voell returned 
into Eugland, tic. The conference herein is held, plainly, 
by two real perions, as may be gather’d from the hillorical 
particulars our author makes them deliver in fome places 
of tliemfelves; and in many places there arc obiervati- 
ons, almofr verbatim , the fame with feveral in others of 
Ralegh's writings. . As the defeat of the llugonots at me 
battle of Moncounter: r fht deiiruftion of levera) millions of 
people in Htfpawnla: The Spaniards never performing 
any enterprise again/1 our nation by fea or land. Our 
driving away the invincible armada with Jquibs ; arming 
all nations of Europe againfe ourfelves, by the cranfportation 
pf our iron ordnance ; and, not to initance any further, 
his argument proving that, be vcho commands the fea may 
command the yuor/d, in the both page of thefe Genuine 
Remains, compared only with the 9th page of his Dif 
tourft of Shipping in the fame collection, may prove fu£ 
hciently they were both written by one hand. The time 
when this Dialogue was written, might alfo be found in it * 
for it was, both after Sir George Somers' s death, and 
the publication of Anticoton, a treatife againll the Declara¬ 
tory Letter , written to the queen regent of France, by Peter 
Coton, confeflor to king Henry I V ; in which letter he 
having apologiz’d for, or too gently and tardily reprov’d 
the king-killing doftrine of frlariana and other Jcfuitcs, 
the faid Anticoton was publilh’d in French, and Iran Hated 
into Engljh 4 jo. 1611, to prove them the authors of that 
execrable parricide the foregoing year on the faid French 
Jcing, by the bloody hand of Ravillac . Among the holy 
champions mention'd in this pamphlet, for the laid doc¬ 
trine of regicide, I find Andreas Eudxmon Johannes Cydo¬ 
ts i us, as he wrote himfelf in his books: but lie was a 
French Jefuitc, and his true name Jean VHeureux . This 
father John publilh’d in Latin, that fame year the laid 
king of France was ftab'd to death in his coach, an Apology 
for father Garnet, and the powder-plotters, 8: 10. Col. Agrip. 
4610. And this was anfwered by the learned Dr. Robert 
Abbot, three years after in his Antilogia. But as there 
is a part in the faid Apology, which touches upon Sir Wal¬ 
ter Ralegh, he has taken care to anfwer that himlclf: for 
that Jefuite writing himfelf of Cydon, a town in Cute , 
Ralegh takes occalion, where he is giving the known 
char after of the Cretans, not to except this Eud^mon Jack 
Andrew, as one of them, 44 Who, (continues our author) 
“ in one of his late (hamelefs libels, wherein he traduces 
44 our king, religion, and country, with all the good 
** and worthy men of whom he could learn the names, 
44 has, by inferting my name, twice belied me, in calling 
44 me a puritan , and one that has been dangerous to my 
44 foveraign. It is an honour to be ill fpoken of by fo 
44 diligent a fupporter of treafon, and archiceft of lies; 
44 in regard whereof I may not deny him the commen- 
44 dation of Creticifm , no lefs voluminous, than he in 
44 multiplicity of names, is beyond any Cretans, in elder 
44 times; who were always liars, evil beads, and (low 
44 bellies." Hijlory of the World* lib. 5.. cap. 5. feft. 2. 

Staff, 


Digitized by kjOOQie 


clxxx 


The LIFE of: 

State, and a JuJlUe of Peace, better known in the printed copies, by die title of his Preroga¬ 
tive of Parliaments ; dedicated with a true and generous fpirit of wildom and loyalty to king 
James. * Thefe two dialogues will give a perfedt tafte of our author’s manner in thefe his 
Idler compofitions, and are anfwerable to the character before deliver’d of his Confutation about 
the Peace, abovemention’d. The laft traft we have to fpeak of under this partition, except 
perhaps a fljort unprinted Difcourfe of the Words Law and Right alfo aferibed to him, and to 
be found in the Aflmolean library, is entitled, Obfervations touching Trade and Commerce with 
the Hollander, and other Nations, as it was prefented to King James ; wherein is prov'd, that 
our Sea and Land Commodities ferve to enrich and Jirengtben other Countries againft our own. 
But as there are fome reafons to doubt whether Sir Walter Ralegh was the author of this treadle, 
I need fay no more of it in this place •, yet lhall throw them into a corner of the page, k where 
they may leaft interrupt the progreilive view of his remaining writings. 

Thefe 


• This excellent Dtabuc is, by fome dclcrihers of its 
title, from certain manulcript copies that were in the 
Libraries of Sir William Cibme, Kart, and the lare bifhop 
Mart, laid to have been written by our author in 1610. 
But this l <ake to be an error that may be reCliried by 
tiic very hrd Ipecch in the laid Dialogue, which is as fol¬ 
lows. 44 Now Sir, what think you of Mr. St. John s 
4 ‘ //7/7/in the jiur-chatnbrr ? I know that the bruit ran, 
“ that he was hardly dealt withal, becaufe he was im 
44 p iron’d in the Tower ; feeing his difluaiion from grant - 
44 ing a benevolence to the king was warranted by law.” 
Whoever knows any thing of tne parliamentary proceed¬ 
ings ol thcie times can tell, that this Mr. Oliver St. John 
(a her wards lord Grandifon , and lieutenant of Ireland) was 
lin’d in the flar•chamber 50CO /. in April, and made his 
fubmiflion in May 1615 for oppoiing that benevolence, 
moved in the foregoing fefiion of parliament, which was 
fo abruptly diffolv’d. This is enough to prove the faid 
Dialogue was not wriaen before that year; and, as our 
author, in his dedication to the king, mentions himfclf to 
be Kill under reftraint, this will prove it was written in that 
year. The beginning of his addrefs to the faid king is 
as follows, according to the mod corrett copies I have 
feen of if. 44 Mojt gracious Soveraign , Thofe who are 
44 fuppieis’d and helplefs, arc commonly filent 5 wifhing 
44 that the common ill might, in all things, fort with their 
44 particular misfortunes: which dilpolition, as it is un- 
44 charitable in all men, fo it would, in me, be more 
44 dog-like, than man-like, to bite the ftone that flruck 
44 me, to wit, the borrow'd authority of my foveraign, 
44 mijinfirm d, feeing their arms and hands that flung it, 
44 are, moll of them, already rotten. For 1 mult confefs 
44 it ever, that they are debts and not di/contentments , 
44 that your majedy hath laid upon me ; the debts and 
44 obligations of a fricndlefs adverfity far more payable in 
44 all kinds than thofe of the protperous. All which, 
44 nor the lead of them, tho’ I cannot diichargc, I may 
44 yet endeavour it. And notwitldhnding my redraint 
44 has retrenched all ways, as well the ways of labour 
44 and peril, as of all other employments , yet has it left 
44 with me my cogitations ; than which 1 have nothing 
44 elfc to offer on the altar of my love. Of thofe, rnofl 
44 gracious foveraign , 1 have uied fome part in the fol- 
44 lowing difpute between a counfellor of fla/e and juflice 
44 of peace ; the one difluading, the other perfuading the 
44 calling of a parliament. In all which, lince the Nor - 
44 man conqueit, at lead fo many as hidories have 
44 gathered, I have in fome things, in the following 
44 dialogue, prefented your majedy with the contents and 
44 fucceiies.” Upon collating an old manufeript of this 
Dialogue in the Harleyan library, with the common printed 
copies, the moll material difference I obferved was, that 
thefe in print fometimes confound the arguments of the 
two fpeakers together, or blend one with the other, by 
not regarding the proper divifions of the colloquy. Whe¬ 
ther the fault of an ignorant tranferiber, or of a carelefs 
compofitor at the prefs of the firit edition, 1 cannot fay, 
but we are pretty fure it was not printed before the au¬ 
thor’s death. The carlied edition I have feen, feems to 
be the firlt (however Anthony Wood mentions one to have 
been printed feven years before it) for it runs thus: The 
Prerogative of Parliaments in England, proved in a Dia¬ 
logue pro et contra between a Counfellor of State and a 
juflice of Peace. Written by the worthy, much lacked 
and lamented Sir Walter Ralegh, Knt. deceas'd: Dedi¬ 
cated to the Kings Majefty and to the Houfe of Parliament 
wpw affembled , preferred, to be now happily, in thefe 
ditiraCted Times , pubhjbed: printed at Midelburge, 4 to. 
16/S. 1 think it was alfo reprinted in the fame fizc in 


1642. In 1651 it was printed in 1 zmo. and remitted 
into the collection call’d his Remains ; fo has deicended in 
the fcvcral editions thereof, and in the lad makes about 4 
fheets and a quarter, if this piece, or any other of Sir 
Walter Ralegh's writing, were to need a character, we 
might refer to that fliort, but /hiring one, which may 
ferve for one and all , in bifhop Nicbolfon's Englijh Hiflorical 
Library , where he fays, 44 Sir Waiter Ralegh has written, 
44 as he ufed to do upon all other fubjefts, molt judicioufly 
44 and accutely upon the prerogatives of our parliaments 
fo refers to Sir Henry Spelman s Glofjmy, p. 451. From 
the noble endeavours to reitram all violent courles of ad- 
minidration, to heal the wounds of government, to cultivate 
a mutual harmony between prince and people, and deteCt 
the milapplications of his revenue by a few greedy and 
deceitful courtiers, wherewith this and other like writings 
of our author abound ; we may account for the rtadineis 
which has been fhewn fo univerfaily, even down to our 
times, of affuming the name of Sir Walter Ralegh when 
any character of a patriot , or perlon of a pubhek fpirit 
was to be reviv’d or perfonated by our political writers 
for reforming erroneous meafures in the date, or recom¬ 
mending advantageous ones to it. To this purpofe we 
meet with him, in Andrew MarvelT s poems, in Tom 
Brown's Belgic Hero ; and his name fubiciib’d to feverat 
Epiflolary Eflays in pamphlets, news papers, and other 
like occafional writings, that animadvert upon the occur¬ 
rences of the times. Not that his real character is perhaps 
always judly maintain’d, or he made to efpoufe the 
party he would really have Tided with; for his name has 
been ufed to parronife the principles of oppofite parties, 
and we fometimes meet with one rebuking the other, for 
making fo free with fuch an honourable fhelter. Thus 
among fome Poems on Affairs of State, collected from 
the daily, evening and weekly papers , Sec, 8vo. 1733, 
there is one, page 9, To a Perfon who fubferibes his Wri¬ 
tings with the Name of Ralegh. Wherein that 
part which concerns our fubjeCt is as follows. -\ 

Hear you, who, fearlefs of the brand of fhamc. 
Subscribe your treafons with a Ralegh's name : 

He rofe a blelling to Eliza's reign, 

And fpread her glory o’er the land and maini 
O’er aidant Teas aflerted England's fway. 

And fought New Worlds beneath the burning day : 

He toil’d unwearied for his Country's peace, 

To make her honour and her wealth encreafe; 

All mercenary views his foul defpisd , 

He bravely praflis'd what he fird advis'd. 

When his great Miftrefs from her throne retir’d, 

With the lame ardor which his youth infpir’d. 

His pan he aCted on the world’s great*dage. 

Nor droop’d beneath the weight of cares or age ; 

To the lall hour was his allegiance try’d ; 

Loyal he prov’d to him by whofe commands he dyd. 

Such Ralegh was-whofe fame compar’d with thine. 

Is fuch as Milton's when compar’d with mine. 

k Roger Coke 9 Efq; in his Deteflion of the Court and 
State of England during the four lafl Reigns , printed too. 
the third edition, 1697, fpeaking of Ralegh page 83, 
fixes thefe Obfervations on T*ade and Commerce upon h m 
in thefe words : 44 While he was thus confined, he was 
44 the firft who made publick the growth by fea of the 
44 Dutch , and the riches they deriv’d from their flfhtng 
44 upon the coads of England and Scotland , and the con- 
44 fequence which would neceffarily follow, not only 
44 to the lofs of the king’s foveraignty of the B*itijb fea 5 * 
44 but to the trade and navigation of England otherwise. 

44 After 


? 

i i 

r 

r 

in 

w 

k 

a 

ire 

li 

l 

tr 

F 

ft 

u« 


it 

u 

(( 

it 

U L 


M- 

“at 

“a:. 



u*. 


K& 

P-' 

k 

fck- 


C* : 

iy. 




-v. ■ 



Digitized by 


Googl 


e 



clxxxi 


Sir WALTER RALEGH. 

Thtfe we (ball divide but into two parts, and then perhaps one of them may be beft compre¬ 
hended under the topic of Philofophy. This way feems to look, by its fubjett, that fhort Treatife philofophica'. 
of tbc Soul aferib’d to Sir 1V> alter Ralegh, whereof there is a copy preferved among the AJhmo-- 
lean manuferipts. It was never publilh’d, I think, and I have not yet feen it ; therefore can lay 
no more, at prefent, of it. But we have in print, another treatife which may be admitted un¬ 
der this head, being built on the dodtrine of Pyrrho the Greek philofopher, entitled, Sir Walter 
Ralegh's Sceplick or Speculations. This dodlrine, fhewing how much may be (aid for and a- 
gainjl the fame things ; fuch an ingenious exemplification of it ns this little trad contains, may, 
if difcreetly ufed, prevent many rafii, dogmatical determinations, and inure us to a wary or 
prudent fufpence of judgment: for the fceplhk, as our author deferibes him, does neither 
affirm nor deny any pofition, but doubts of it, and oppofes reafons againft that which is af¬ 
firm’d or deny’d, to juftify his not confenting ; becaufe he may report how things appear, but 
whether they are fo he knows not. This little trad, as it is here handled, relates chiefly to our 
fenfcs •, a but another we have, upon a more dignified topic, as concerning our manners , or 
virtues and vices t therefore what might be more particularly fubdivided under the diftindion 
of moral philofophy ; and it is call'd, Inflruflions to his Son , and Pojlerity. A treatife well 
becoming an author, who had feen the world in fo many climates, and life in fo many changes. 

It is written in a perfpicuous ftyle, with forcible arguments, and on the mod pradical fubjeds. 

Thefe are interfperfed with feveral memorable admonitions, the fruits of his particular experience 
therefore may claim a part in his perfonal hiftory •, and being apt to rivet in the mind, may 
prove of conftant ufe and fervice > as touching upon the mod incidental engagements in life. 

Thus, in his firft chapter upon the choke of friends, he fays: “ Tbo’ I perfuade thee to aflociate 
“ with thy belters , or at lead with thy peers ; yet remember always, that thou venture not 
«« thy eftate with any of thofe great ones who (hall attempt unlawful things; for fuch men. 

« labour for themfelves, and not for thee; thou (hall be fure to impart with them in the 
« danger, but not in the honour ; and to venture a fure eftate at prefent, in hopes of a bettef 
«* in future, is mere madnefs: befides, great men forget fuch as have done them fcrvice wheri 
«« they have obtained what they would, and will rather hate thee for faying, thou haft been a 

«• After that, one Tobias Gentleman fet forth another 

treatife of this nature, and how this ffoery might be 
u carried on from the ports of England ; and dedicated 
44 it to the king. But the king, wholly giving himfelf 
u up to pleafure, neither minded one, nor regarded the 
/•« other." That Gentleman was a filherman, or other like 
fea faring man, and 1 have feen his treatife ; but publifh- 
cd long before this, I think, was, which that hiftorian 
aferibes ihus to Sir Walter Ra/egb . The firft edition of 
thefe Obfcrvations I could ever meet with in print, 
is in lima. 1653, and it was bound up with the fecond 
edition of Ralegh'* Remains, 1656. Its anonymous pub- 
lifher appears to be the bookfcller; who had no other 
authori y for appropriating it to Sir Walter Ralegh, but 
the opinion of a perfon who recommended it to him as a 
genuine piece of his writing. ’Tis true, our author has 
touch'd, after a different manner, upon the topick, in 
fome of his trails, and particularly at the end of his Difi 
courfeof Shipping ; where he laments “ That ftrangers 
•** thould be permitted to eat us out, by exporting and 
“ importing both our own commodities, and thofe of fo - 
“ reign nations.” But I think no treatife of his will be 
found that defeends fo much into minute examples, cal¬ 
culations, However, not to except at this, becaufe 
a treatife upon trade may require observations fuitable to 
the fuhjoft, it does not appear probable that the author 
of thele Ob/ervations , whole projc& was, as he tells us, 

41 To ereft twenty buffet in fome fea-port town, fo by 
u degrees to extend a thoufand or two over the nation ; 

44 who was one that had traced this bufinefs, made his 
Ai endeavours known not only to the king, but his no- 
u blemen, merchants and others, who had made him 
44 fublcriptions to difburfe large fums of mony for building 
44 up this great 3 nd rich fea-aty (hould be a prifoner all 
this while in the Tower of London. No* this projector, 
further propoiing to conftitute a fiate merchant, for thefe 
purpofes; and praying, in the conclufion, that the king 
would give him leave to nominate the commiffioners for 
conferring upon, and making report thereof to his ma- 
jdly, feems to have been fome manufa&uring or mercan¬ 
tile man, one ambitious of that office himlelf, and con- 
fequently none of Sir Walter Ralegh. But if from the 
fibjtfl whereon, we bend our confideration to the time 
^hen this trad was written, we ftuli find further objection 

000 •< mean* 


againft entitling our author to it. For the very firft word* 
of the dedication are, 44 According to my duty, I am 
44 embolden’d to put your majefty m mind, that, about 
44 fourteen or fifteen years paft, I prefented you a book 
44 of fuch extraordinary importance for honour and pro- 
44 fit of your majefty and pofterity, and doubting it has 
• 4 been laid afide, l$c. I am encouraged to preient you 
41 with one more, ts'e." Now if we allow the firft book 
to have been prefented in the very firft year of the king’s 
being in England, then this fecond mull have been pre- 
fented in 161? or 161S, when Sir Walter Ralegh was 
out of England , or his thoughts far differently engag'd. 
But the greatert objection of all is, that there are feveral 
manuferipts of this treatife in the libraries of our nobility 
and gentry (more ancient than the earlieft edition in print) 
which, as I have oUerv’d, do all entitle it to one John 
Keymer , poffibly the merchant or vintner of that name, 
whom Ralegh many years before had licenled to retail 
wine in Cambridge, as is related in the foregoing part of 
this life. With one of thefe manuferipts (the molt ancient 
I have feen) among the collections of the late Mr. Gran - 
ger, there was another, written alfo in the fame little neat 
old hand, aferibed to the fame Keymer , and which I take 
to be that firft mention’d in his dedication laft quoted ; 
and alfo to agree in its contents with John Keymer'* Ob - 
fervatiom made upon the Dutch Fifhery, about the year 
1601. Demon]}rating there is more wealth raiftd out of 
herrings and other ft fh in his majefty s fas ar.d the neigh¬ 
bouring nations in one year, than the king of Spain hath /root 
the Indies in four : And that there were twenty thoufand 
fhips and ether we/felt, and about four hundred thoufand 
people then fit on woi k by fea and land, and maintained 
only by fifhing upon the coafis cf England, Scotland, and 
Ireland. Printed 8w. bond, (from the orginal manufeript) 
for Sir Edward Ford, in the year 1664. Whoever has. 
read thefe two pieces, will allow that one hand writ 
them. 

• Of this Seeptick I remember rot to have met wiji 
any copy in manufeript, nor any edition more ancient 
than that in the firft collcftion of our author’s Remains, 

1 2mo. 1651 : fo has been reprinted in all the fucceedir.g 
editions thereof. ’Tis about 12 pages in the lall an*( 
largeft edition. 


Digitized by LiOOQie 


\ 


clxxxii 7he LIFE of 

«« means of their advancement, than acknowledge it. I could give thee a thoufand examples; 
“ I myfelf know it, and have tailed it in all the courle of my life.” From his next chapter* 
on the choice of a wife , we have before given extracts in this work. His third, againll flatte¬ 
rers, ends with this reflexion: “ Thou may’ll be fure, that he, who in private will tell thee of 
*« thy faults, is thy friend; for he adventures thy millike, and hazards thy hatred: few can 
endure it, every man for the moll part delighting in felfpraife ; one of the moll univerfal 
«* follies which bewitches mankind.” From the fourth chapter on private quarrels we have 


already given a talle ; and here, the chief caution he further urges to prevent the inconveniencies 1 

thereof, is ever to beware of unadvifed fpeech. “ He that cannot refrain from much fpeaking, * 

“ fays he, is like a city without walls.” And a little further, “ In all that ever I obferved # 

** in the courfe of worldly things, I ever found, that mens fortunes are oftner made by their 1 

“ tongues than by their virtues , and more mens fortunes overthrown thereby alfo, than by their 1 

“ vices.” In the fifth chapter, among the rules recommended to preferve an eflate, the moll prelling 
is againll furetif/jip ; advifing rather to give a part of what a man has, than live in continual appre- ‘ 

henfion of lofing both it and his friend. “ If thou art bound, fays he, for a fir anger, thou art a Cj 

“ fool j if for a merchant , thou puttell thy eflate to learn to fwim ; if for a churchman , he has no 0 

“ inheritance ; if for a lawyer, he will find an evafion by a fyllahle or a word to abufe thee if » 

“ for a poor man, thou mull pay it thyfelf} if for a rich one, he needs it not: therefore from 10 

“ furetilhip as from a man-flayer or enchanter, blefs thyfelf *, for the bell profit and return will & 

“ be this, that if thou force him for whom thou art bound, to pay it himfelf, he will become F 

“ thy enemy ; if thou lhalt ufe to pay it thyfelf, thou wilt be a beggar: and believe thy father fc 

“ in this,, and print it in thy thoughts j that whatever virtue thou hall, be it never fo manifold, . I* 

** if thou be poor withal, thou and thy qualities lhall be defpifed.” In the fixch chapter, upon M 

fervants , he has this advice : “ If thou trull any fervant with thy purfe, be fure thou take his ft 

“ accompt e’er thou fleep •, for if thou put it off,, thou wilt then, afterwards, for tedioufnefs T< 

“ negle< 5 t it; I myfelf have thereby loll more than I am worth. Whatever thy fervant gains f' 

V thereby, he will never thank thee, but laugh thy fimplicity to fcorn ; befides, *tis the way »-• 

** to make thy fervants thieves, who elfe would be honelt.” The feventh chapter is only a ffle 

word or two againll exceeding in the bravery of gay garments , “ as what will foon wear out & 

•* of fafhion, when money in the purfe will always be in falhion.” The eighth is upon riches 
(and as it feems by the beginning, Ihould follow the fifth) Herein exhorting againll the at- if;; 

tainment of them by bafe or evil means, he charges his fon, as, never to dellroy any man for K; 

his wealth, fo, by no means further to impoverilh the poor; but above all things, to exercifc f 

compalfion towards them, as the bell way to profperity and peace of mind. «* Ufe, fays he, 

“ thy poor neighbours and tenants well > pine not them and their children, to add fuperfluity fir 


«« and needlefs expences to thyfelf. He that has pity on another man’s forrow, lhall be free 
“ from it himfelf; he that delights in, and fcorns the mifery of another, lhall, one time or 
«« other, fell into it himfelf.” The ninth is againll the inconveniencies of delighting in wine, 
as being the greatell enemy to health, trull, honour and preferment; and the laft chapter begins 
thus: “ Now for the world , I know it too well, to perfuade thee to dive into the practices 
«t thereof; rather Hand upon thy own guard againll all that tempt thee thereunto, or may t. 

“ praflife upon thee in thy confeience , thy reputation , or thy purfe ; refolve that no man is wife a, 

“ or fefe, but he that is honell.” So concludes with advifing him to make Cod his director in arc- 

all his anions. Uj 

With thefe Inflrutliom to his Son , which have, I think, been oftner printed • than moll other 
of our author’s Idler pieces ; there is ufually join’d, in all the ediuons I have feen, The dutiful 
sldvice of a loving Son to his aged Father. ’Tis a religious and rhetorical exhortation to prepare 'if-. 

for his latter end ; written in a general manner, but how probably by our author, or by either c;, 

of his fons, it is left to the critical and difcerning reader. ^ All the works I have met with 


• /W'editions of this trafl, call’d, lnflruSitmi to bit 
Son, were pubhfh’d before the firit collection was made 
of Ralegh' s Remains . The earliefl edition of it I have 
met with, was printed I2w. 1632, in a larger charadler 
than we have it in the modern editions. The fifth edition 
(laid in the title to be) corrected and enlarged according 
to the author's own copy, is printed in the laid colle&ion 
of his Remains > i2w*. 1651, and has been reprinted five 
or fix times at leail fince with thofe Remains , that is, in 
1656, 1660, 1664, 1675,1679, tsfe. and 1726. It fills, in 
this Jail edition (which has a letter or two of our author’s 
more than the others) about 20 pages. And begins thus: 
7 hire is nothing more becoming any wife man than to make 


choice of friends f for by them thou fait be judged what 
thou art . We arc informed there is a MS. of Sir Walter 
Ralegh to his fon, which I take to be thefe Infir unions, in 
the library at Grays-Inn, Vid, Catalogi libror um manu- 
firiptorum Angliae et Hiberni*. FoL Oxon. 1697. tom • z. 
part 1. page 253. 

* This Dutiful Advice of a lowing Son to his aged Father 
was printed alfo in 1632, with thofe Infractions, and 
with them admitted into Ralegh'* Remains, izmo. 16 J1 - 
From which time it has been reprinted in the fucceeding 
editions thereof, and makes about a dozen pages. Begin¬ 
ning thus : Sir , 1 humbly befeech )ou, both in refped to the 
honour of God, &C. 

further 


% 

if f 

hi 



Digitized by 


Google 







Sir W4LTER RALEGH. clxxxiii 

further afcribed to Sir Walter Ralegh , hearing any affinity with this clafs, arc two manufcripts, 
which might be diftinguilhed under the branch of Natural Philofopby. The firft is his treatife 
Of Mires, and the Trial of Minerals ; a fubjeft on which he very probably might write, both 
from his own obfervations in the JVefl Indies , and thofe engagements he might alio have in his 
native county of Devon, with his brother Sir Adrian Gilbert , who firft, in queen Elizabeth's 
reign, begun to work the long-neglefted mines in Comb-Martin (whence king Edward 111 . had 
fupply’d his wars againft France ) and was followed by Sir Beavis Buhner , who from thofe 
mines recover’d a great quantity of fiver, out of which, he caufed two maffy goblets to be 
made \ one whereof was prefented to the earl of Bath ; and the other, weighing one hundred 
thirty-feven ounces, to the lord mayor of London in the 35th of the queen’s reign. a So that 
what Cicero fays to his friend of this ifland, that it yielded not a drachm of that metal, was falfe 
in Ralegh’s time, and what he could not be fure was true in his own. b But whether the 
faid treatife is fo particular as to mention any thing of this I know not, having never feen it. c 
The fecond manufeript is Sir Walter Ralegh’s Co lie It ion of Chymical and Medicinal Receipts for 
fixing Mercury , preparing Antimony, and for the Cure of feveral dil'eafes. d His application 
toftudies of this kind, may perhaps be fomewhat accountable from the patronage, which, as in 
a note before cited, it appears he had Ihewn to John Hefler, the famous chymift, with the 
converfation there might probably pafs between them, and the knowledge he had learn’d from 
the Guianiaus of curing all manner of poifons, fsfe. ’Tis apparent, that he bellow’d fome 
portion of his time upon the ufe of lembicks and crucibles while he was in the Tower , and 
feems to have had a kind of laboratory there for his faid operations. A view of him in this 
light will explain the expreffion in a character of him given by Dr. Jofepb Hall , the venerable 
biihop of Norwich (whom Sir H. IVotton calls the Englifh Seneca ) where he fpeaks (among other 
things, which will be hereafter obferv’d) of Sir Walter Ralegh's philofopbical experiments in the 
Tower. And other authors might be produced, who, in their chara<fler of him, alfo refer to his 
profound knowledge in the myfteries of nature, or his inveftigations thereof, through the ani¬ 
mal, vegetable, and mineral world, for the benefit of hip countrymen, notwithftunding fonjc 
memorable attempts to adyaqce their prosperity in the political world , had met with much 
difeouragement: as if, tho* he could not abfolutely recover them from fome indifpofitions or 
corruptions of the mind, he was hereby refoly’d to try bow fcrviceable and fuccefsful he could 
be againft the maladies of their body. 

How elaborately foever many of thefe pieces are allowed by others to have been written, our 
author look’d upon them but as little excurfions, or f 'allies , as he calls them, from his grand 
labour, I mean that Ocean of Hijlory , wherein he has out-done all tint went before him, and Hiftorical. 
given fuch lights to futurity as mud ever be grateful. A voyage, which, “ If begun even in 
“ the dawn of his day, when the light of knowledge firft broke out upon his younger years, 

“ and before any wound received, either from fortune or time, he might yet well have doubted 
“ (as he obferves himfelf) that the darknefs of age and death would have overtaken him long 
“ before the performance.” * But being undertaken, as it was, in the evening of a tempeftuous 
life, a life fo far run out in travels and confiderations of fuch oppofite nature > for one under the 
foul-piercing privations of honour, fortune, freedom! One buried alive! to attempt fuch a 
univerfal revival of the dead ! And, while his body, under all thofe preflures, was fo long in¬ 
carcerated, for his brain to be deliver’d of that Minerva , as one calls it, f his H 1 s t o r y of 
the World! is an example, that might puzzle fuch an Hiflorian even as Ralegh himfelf to 
parallel. For, beginning at the creation, he has given us the flower of recorded ftory down to 
the end of the fecond Macedonian war. Thus having reviewed the three firft monarchies of the 
world, he leaves Rome in the fourth, triumphant, about a century and a half before the birth of 
Chrift, comprehending a period of near four thoufand years. This work was divided by our au¬ 
thor into five books, who annexed to it a very copious and ufeful chronological table ; and it was. 


* Princes Worthiei of Devon, in the Proem, p. 2, 3. 

1 Cicero ad Attic, lib. 4. epift. 15. 

* Anthony Wood aferibes it to our author : but he feems 
alfo not to have feen it. 

d This Collection of Cbymical and Medicinal Receipt !— 
as was before noted, is an original, in the iibiary of Sir 
Ham S/oant. It contains about 70 leaves in 4 to. and in 
the 63d leaf, as was alfo obfetv’d, Sir Walter Ralegh 
has written Our Great Cordial, with a line ur.dcr it, 
*hich he ufually drew under his own name. The lift 
of ingredients which follows, may, I think, be diicerned 
through the fcratches made by fome hand or other to 


obliterate it: and may, perhaps, be the moft genuine 
Recipe of that Great Cordial, extant in the world, not¬ 
withftanding it is fuppofed our author had written it more 
completely in the emuing leaf which is torn out. f or as 
to the Rctipi in te Febn/rt s Diftourfe upon this Cordial, I 
have, upon a more diligent examination of that diicourlc, 
found, that he acknowledges at kaft a dozen more ad¬ 
ditions to Sir Walter's Recipe than is before taken notice 
oh 

c See the preface to his Hijlory of the World. 

1 Olbome's Memoirs of King James. 


with 


Digitized by LnOOQie 


ft L I F E of 

with the further decorations of maps, tables of geneaology , &c. publifh’d in the month of April 
juft before the meeting of the parliament, 4 in a large volume folio , 1614. The approbation it 
has met with fince the author’s death has been fo univerfal, that if they are different editions of 
the book to which we may fee different dates printed, we may venture to fay, no work, of any 
author in England , has been fo often reprinted that is of equal fize and antiquity. b The fe- 
veral characters and commendations which have been beftow’d on this hiftory as well by mif- 
cellaneous writers, who have frequently quoted it with great deference and relpcdt, as by 
hiftorians and criticks who have clofely traced and throughly examin’d it; and as well in verle, 
as profe •, would be too numerous to be here inferred, could they be recover’d. To provide 
therefore as well againft the ignorance as the fatiety of thofe readers who have not met with 
them, a few are prefented in the annotation here direded to. * He took no ordinary care to 

deferve 


* Camden*/ Annals of King James. 
h Be lido* this fiiJl edition in 1614, printed by W. Stansby 
for I 1 r . Bur rtf 1 have fecn copies by the Tame printer bear ing 
dace 1617. This edition, 1 think, has thepitture of our 
author, grav'd by S. Pufs, and the frontilpiece by Ren. 
£ if rack. Another is dated 1628; and perhaps there is 
one between thofe. Another in 1634; another 1652; 
another in 1656, printed by Robert White, Sec. another 
in 1661, printed tor Rcbcrt White, &C. Anthony Wood 
mentions one in 1666, in which edition, or perhaps in 
one or two before it, it was lirlt printed in double columns. 
Another (now before me) printed for George Danes 1671 ; 
another in 1678; and another in 1687. Alter which, 
there was none, I think, rill this lail 1735. 

c This may not perhaps be better introduced than in 
the re licit ion of bifltop Hall, lately abovemention’d, who, 
in his ingenious book of Conflations , has theft* words, 
44 A wile man, as Laurentius the prefbyter obferved well, 
44 docs much in folitude. So rnay’lt thou employ the 
44 hours of thy clofc retirednefs, and bleis God for fo 
44 happy an opportunity. How memorable an rnftance 
44 has our age aflorded us of an eminent person to whole 
44 imprifonment we are all obliged, befides many philofo- 
phtcal experiments , for that noble History of the 
World now in our hands ? The Court had his 
44 youthful and freer years, and the Tinier his latter age ; 
44 the Tomer reformed the Courtier in him, and produced 
44 thofe wortly monuments of art and induftry, which we 
44 fhould have in vain ex petted from his freedom and 
44 jollity. It is obferved, that Alining wood, when it is 
44 kept within doors, lofes its light: it is otherwife with 
44 this, and many other attive wits, which had never 
44 fhin'd fo much, if not for clofenefs. n Thus in a trea- 
tife call’d, Balm of Gilead ; or. Comforts for the Di- 
Jirefs'd, both moral and divine , by Dr. Jofeph flail, bijhop 
of Norwich, 1 zmo. 1652; afterwards reprinted under the 
title of The Art of Patience, Sec. 8 *vo. 1684, and by a 
bafe plagiarifm, aferibed to the author of The whole Duty 
of Man, who wanted not the reputation of this book; 
tho* he, from whom it is Aol'n, had enough to fpare. In 
the familiar Letters of James Hoavel, Efq; fpcaking of 
this rare and renowned knight, he fays, 44 His fame 
44 (hall contend in longevity with this iAand itfelf, yea 
44 with that great World which he Hiftorifes fo gallantly." 
In another well-known book of his, call'd Dcdona' s 
Grove ; or. The Vocal Foreft, difcourfing of Ralegh, and 
deferibing him to have been, 44 A cavalier of a fpacious 
*• underfanding and of no vulgar reach in policy i feienti • 
44 fcal, and full of alftrufe notions he adds, 44 T hat 
44 tho' his body was under rellraint, and coffin’d up fo 
44 many years, yet he never travers'd more countries than 
44 then ; for his brain ran over all the World, as appears 
44 by that famous Monument he tranfmitted to pofterity and 
44 hung up in the Temple of fame, while he was as it 
44 were buried alive." But in the Life of the lord Staf¬ 
ford, written by Anthony Stafford, Efq; 4/0. 1640, this 
author goes fo far as to fay. That if Sir Walter Ralegh's 
Hiftory of the World had been written in the Indian 
tongue, w r e Aiould not have fcrupled or avoided the pains 
of learning that language, only to read it. If we confult 
what character the hiftorians give it, we may find many 
of them who never name it without fome epithet or 
fentence in its praife. Thus Dr. Heylin in one place 
calls it an excellent hiftory ; in another, the fir ft or chief 
of hiftorics. And tnus in the preface of Dr. ll'illiam 
HowePs Univerfal Hiftory , who muft have had continual 
occafions of infpetting our author’s, 'tis faid, That Sir 
Walter Ralegh is never to be mention'd without honour . 
Shirley, in hii Life of our author , gives it as his judgment 


of his Hiftory, 44 That for the exnttnefs of its chronology, 
44 curioulnels of its contexture, and learning of all Jorts, 
44 it feems to be the woik of an age." And a little 
further, 44 That a man, who had been the greateft part 
44 of his life taken up in attion, Aiould write lo juduioujly, 
44 fo critically, of times and a cl ions, E as great a wonder 
44 as the hoik itfelf; and it lb 11 remains in doubt, whe- 
44 ther the age he liv'd in was more oblig'd to his pen or 
44 his fword, the one being bufy in conquering the nev:, 
44 the other in fo bravely describing the old worldA And 
Mr. Echard, in the preface of his Roman Hiftory, admires 
that part of Ralegh's HiAory which treats of the Roman 
Aory, 44 Efpecially the lail hundred years, which, fays 
44 ho, are written with very much fpirit and judgment, 
44 and all of it with as much jlill and cleamcfs : yet that 
44 all before the fir A Punick war is not proportionally 
44 copious to the reA.” But how ducly it was con- 
fider'd by this particular hiAorian, whether that was 
not a judicious difproportion in our general hiAorian, may 
be left to the examination of others. If we fearch what 
the criticks have faid of this HiAory, we /hall And their 
commendations exceed the reA. Among thefe we may 
mention Degory H hear, the full Camden-Profcffor of Hi • 
ftory at Oxford, who, fpeaking of fuch univerfal hiftori- 
ans as are moA worthy and before all others to be read ; 
and having only named Herodotus, Diodorus Siculus and 
Polybius, he goes on thus : Hos autem fequi pffurtt nonnulli 
ex reccntioribus : quos inter, principem locum obtinere meretur 
Gualtcrus Raulxus noftras, eques auratus, vir clari nomi¬ 
nis, it oh ftngularem fortitudinem ac prudentiam, meltori fato 
dignus. Is univerfalem hiAoriam ab initio mundi ufque ad 
Macedonia imperii, five tertia monorchia occajum, ex 
probatiffimis au ftoribus coagmentavit ; noftra quidem gtntis 
idiomate vemaculo, fed accurato admodum judicio, me- 
thodo perjpicua, ftylo elegante ac vir Hi. Method us le- 

gendi hiltorias, 8i*. Cantab . 1684. p. 28. To this 
we may join the charatter of Dr. Henry Felton in his 
Diffcrtation upon the Claffics, where he fays, 44 Sir 
44 Walter Ralegh's Hiftory of the World is a work of fo 
44 vaA a compafs, fuch endlefs variety, that no genius 
44 but one adventurous as his own, durA have undertaken 
44 that great defign. I do not apprehend any great diffi- 
44 culty in collecting and common placing an univerfal 
44 hiftory from the whole body of hiAorians; that is nothing 
44 but mechanick labour. But to digell the feveral au- 
44 thors in his mind ; to take in all their majeAy, Arength 
44 and beauty; to raife the fpirit of meaner hiAorians, 
44 and to equal all the excellencies of the beA; this is 
44 Sir Walter's peculiar praife. His Ayle is the moA per- 
44 fett, the happieA, the moA beautiful of the age he 
44 wrowe in ; majeAick, clear and manly ; and he appears 
44 every-wherc fo fuperior rather than unequal to his fub- 
44 jett, that the fpirit of Rome and Athens feems to be 
44 breathed into his work." 

Or if what the Poets have faid upon this performance, 
may be more entertaining to the reader, fome pins have 
been taken to do our author honour alfo by 1 hem. As to thofe 
copies of verfes which were written upon this hiftory in a 
fair MS. epitomy of it in 4 to. which was among the col- 
Uilions of that remarkable virtuefo Thomas Britton , late 
of Clerkenwell, as we find in the printed catalogue of that 
part of his library which was fold towards the latter prt 
of the late king William's reign ; I never faw, nor knew 
where to recommend any one to the fight of them. But 
have, before me, a MS. collection of Orations and Pot ms, 
written moAly by a Audent of New-College in Oxford, 
about the middle of the la A century (who was afterwards 
a perfon eminent in his profeflion) Among thefe, there 
is an elegy on his dear friend Mr. George Franklin ; wherein, 

having 


Digitized by kjOOQle 






Sir IVA LT’E R RALEGH. clxxxv 


dc&rve thcfe encomiums*, for befidcs his own learning, knowledge and judgment, which 
many would have thought fufficient for any undertaking, he with that caution, wherewith we 
have beheld fo many others of his great enterprizes temper’d, would fuller no part of this 
hiftory to pals his own hand, before fome of the molt able fcholars, whom he aflemblcd, it 
fcems, for this purpofe, had debated the parts he was moll doubtful of, and they molt con- 
verfant in, before him. Thus in the Mofait and Oriental antiquities, or fainter and more 
remote footlleps of time, he would fometimes confult the learned Dr. Robert Barhill. » In all 
puts of chronology, geography, and other branches of mathematical fcience, he wanted noc 
tlie opinions of the learned Hariot , and the earl of Northumberland s three Magi, b long his 
neighbours in the Tower *, and wherever he fcrupled any thing in the phrafe of didlion, he 
would hear the acute and ingenious Sir John Ho/kyns y fometime alio refident in thcfe confines j 
who viewed and reviewed the faid hiftory * as we are told, before it went to the prefs, and whom 
Ben Jobnfon i proud of calling others his font, could gratify that humour in calling father. c 
Thus having fpared for no labour, and negleded no means to bring this work to the per¬ 
fection wherein we behold it, ’tis no wonder that fothd fcribbler or other Ihould, upon finding it 
fo univerlally read, endeavour to raife himfelf a little profit of credit from it, by pretending 
that the world needed an abridgment of its hiftory, d as if that wherewith Sir Walter Ralegh lias 
prefented us, either is, or was intended for any thing more. But this more fpecious kind of 

detraction 


having elegantly deferib’d hi? great proficiency in other 
icience*, the poet directs ir as the higl.ell compliment he 
couid make to his perfection in this we are now (peaking 
of, that . 

In Universal Ht story, *t\va$ clear, 

He had approv’d himlelt Great Ralegh*/ hen. 

But among S. Sheppard'* Epigram , written about the 
fame time, and publifh d %vo. 1651, thcrc is, in the third 
book, one, On that imcenpHrable Hero Sir Waiter Ralegh ; 
which Ipeaks of him and his hiftory in the following 
words. 

Like the Athenians, when with furious ire,. 

Againit learn’d Senates they did confpire; 

After his deatfi, them'elves were like to llay, 

For (orrow they had made him fo away ; 

And, having carv’d his Jlatue out in brafs, 

ErCded it within their market-place; 

And to him offer’d myrrh and tpicery, 

Adoring him as if fome deity : 

So we, while thou on earth with us did’ft live. 

Slighted thy wortu; no: having hearts to give 
The# thanks and honour for that Gift of mine. 

The lovely iffue of thy brain divine; 

But now tnou art net with us, we look on 
Thy book, and wonder at Thee being gone. 

Rell, (acied (pint, while thy work fhall be 
Devoutly honour'd by potterity. 

There is alfo in b.ing, a picture of our author, drawn 
with a pen and ink, having an emblematical device with 
an epigram under it, which relate partly to his Hiftory of 
the H'qtU. That device, in an oval frame of laurel or 
bays, prefents a globe iupported by a fzvordl and a pen ; 
the fword broken by a ftepter in a hand on one tide, 
and the Tower in proipect on the other: and thcfe are 
the lines, as they are printed in Rhacnix Britannicus , one 
uord only rcfior’d, according to the author’s original, of 
which I have obtain’d a fight. 

O ! had’ft thou ferv’d the Heroine all thy days ; 

Had hcav’n from tiorms of envy Ikrcen’d thy bays; 

Had’Jt thou flill flourifh’d in a warlike reign ; 

I hy fword had made a conqueil like thy pen ? 

But nought to fuch untimely hate could bring 
1 he valiant fubjed, but a tim’rous king. 

But that which of late years did much Tevive the pub- 
lick regard to this hiftory was, th$ ingenious Dr. George 
SrwelP ,> Tragedy of Sir Walter Ralegh, pub'.ilh'd 3 r vo. 1719, 
and the much-admired character he has therein given of 
u. Confidering under what disadvantages that dramatic 
penormancc appear’d, as written by a poet who had no 
practice or fame in this kind of writing ; one infufficicntly 
read in the pcrfonal ilory of his hero, to form that plot, 
and enliven it with thofe characters and incidents whereot 
it was capable; befides, aded at the Now-Theatre in 
Lincoln*.Inn Fields, which then had lels the favour of 
the town, cfpecially for tragedy ; and when another new 
play was at the feme time acting at the Old Houft in 
Otery Line. Couiidcring all this, and, noewithflanding, 
how many nights this tragedy fucccihvely drew a noble 
and numerous audience, aiul how many editions of the 
copy fqon paifcd the prei 1 ; wc may perceive, not onjy, 


what general and grateful refped flill furvives towards 
the particular memory of this famous man, but alto how 
inclinable we are to dear ouriclves of die imputation 
nun ; times thrown upon us of alienating our encomiums, 
and transferring the honours which arc due to the worthies 
of our own ijland , upon examples out of heathen or foreign 
hiilorics, which bccaufe leu alluding to our patiions, and • 
Ids applicable to our inilrudion, are Ids meritorious of 
luch celebration. In the laft ad of this tragedy, where 
the poet brings in Jiis hero deliberating or icilecting upon 
this capacious work, his Hijlory of the // 01 hi lying on a 
table before him; the femitnents are fo well afTembled, fo 
noble and natural, that it has been doubted, whether 
there was fo much of fidion in tne Johijquy, at leatl 
the votive part of it, as truth : But it is as tolloWs. 

Now my long toil is done, my foul at cafe 
View’s her pad travels through the various heap 
Of truth and fable. All that meafur’d time 
Records of nations, governments and laws. 

Of heros, conqueror and purpled kings. 

Lye here compris'd. O may the tohiome talk 
Anfwer the labourer’s care with due returns ? 

May men grow wifer by their fedier's follies. 

Or learn to emulate the virtuous de.id ? 

And thou, my country, ncarefl to my heart. 

Dear land of liberty and heavenly truth. 

As thou furvcy’fl the various models here 
Of earthly power, their rile and infant date, 

Their progrefs and their period ; mark the flaws 
Of every frame, and value much thy own : 

Secure, while monarchy flill bears the fway. 

And joyful fubjeds pay a free obedience. 

* See Anthony Woofs Account of Dr. Robert Burhi/I, 
in Athen. Oxon. vol. 2. 

Idem, in the Life of T. Hariot, Vol. 1. col. 460. 

c Ibid in his Account of Sir John Hojhyr.s , col. 615. 

d The fir A attempt we have of this kind was by Alexander 
Rofs, a Scotch divine, and fchoolmafler at Southampton, in 
a book call'd, The Marrow of Hijlory ; being an Epitome of 
Sir Walter Ralegh*/ Hiftory f the World, \zsno. 165 2, 
fSc. certainly a moll unconncded, enervating, and inju¬ 
dicious performance. His fallacious argument for this un- 
acccp able trouble 44 of a dwarf feeing further upon a 
44 giant’s fhoulders than the giant himfelf* 9 may be his 
cafe in the ftature of his wit, but not the advantage of 
his profped. And there is as much rcafon for clipping of 
feeling money as fuch mens wriiitigs. ’Tis true, Sir 
H alter Ralegh has made fome derations ift his hillory’, 
but they are the digreffions of Sir Walter Ralegh ; by‘ 
which the life, fpint, air and complexion of the author 
are known; and above all, the great defign of this 
work, thofe examples and thofe documents wherewith he 
moft ftrenuoufly endeavour’d to feaion that hopeful pr luce's 
mind for whom it was written. Therefore has made 
apology fufficient for the fame, where he fays, *• That 
44 feeing we digrefs in the ways of our lives, and that 
4 * the life of man is nothing elle but digrclfion, I mav 
44 the better be excus’d in writing their lives and adions.” 
And indeed, men of fuch eminency, erudition and expe- 
P P P rience. 


. Digitized by UnOOQie 


The L I F E ,of 


detraction meeting with no countenance, the author of it threw out another, of Animadverfms 
Upon this hiftory ; but as infignificant and no lefs difregarded than the other, being agreeable to 
that unhappy fpirit of contradiction which ever harrafs’d him to oppofe the grcatcft writers in 
his time, a 

But that which is more confiderable concerning this hiftory is, whether our author ever con¬ 
tinued it down to his own times ; and whether, on fome pretence that this firft part did not meet 
with encouragement, he ever deftroy’d the faid continuation himfelf, as we have it in the mouths 
of every-body when they (peak of him, but in the belief of no-body who knows any thing of 
his ftory or his character. All that he lays himfelf, in the lead glancing this way, is firft in 
his preface , 11 That he propos’d to confine his difeourfe with this our renowned ifle of Great - 
44 Britain ” And u That he forbears to promife a fecond or third volume, which he intends 
c< if the firft receives grace and good acceptance, for that which is already done may be 
“ thought enough and too much.’* Laftly, iq the copclufion of the hiftqry he fays,* 44 Where- 
44 as this book by the title calls itfelf The fitjl Part of, the General Hiftory of the IForld, ftnply- 
44 ing a fccond and third volume, which 1 alfo intended and have hewn out $ befides many 
“ difeouragements perfuming my filence, it has pleafed God to take that glorious prince out 
c * of the world to whom they were directed ; whole unfpeakable and never-enough lamented 
44 lofs has taught me to fay with Job , Verfa eft in luClum cither a mea y et organum meum in 
44 vocem fientium” From hence it feems plain enough, that our author had only fome plan, 
or perhaps a few rough draughts of fome fucceeding parts of the hiftory at this time drawn up, 
and that he was difeouraged from making any further progrefs in them. Allowing his mind 
might change, and that there was time enough to finifh the remaining volumes between this 
year, and that of his death, which is fcarcely allowable $ yet as we know how moll of that 
time was employ’d by him, it will admit of no room for any fuch performance. For in 1615, 
the year which followed that wherein he publifh'd his hiftory, two at Jeaft of his mod elaborate 
tradls beforemention’d were written. The fame year he was alfo bufy, as we lhall find, in 
writing letters and making other intereft for his releafement, which he obtain'd before it was 
quite expir’d. After this, it will no lels appear, that he made himfelf too eminently the fubjed of 


rience, may well be trufled with fuch liberties, and 
thanked for taking them. But tbo* when fuch prove 
•wandering guides , it is more to our inltruXion than if 
they kept the ilreight and beaten road ; yet they may be 
no patterns, in this particular, for writers of a private 
and inferior charaXer. Another Abridgment we have of 
this hiftory , in 8 vo. i 700, &c. the author of it un¬ 
known ; but the preface is written by Mr. Echard, vtfio 
fays, “ The great knowledge and learning, the accurate 
" (kill in penetration, the lublime wiidom and piety, 
«■ together with the curious remarks and obfervatioas, 
44 which fo fignally appear in Sir Walter Ralegh's Hiftory, 
44 have fufticiently recommended it to the judicious part 
44 of the world : yet that his too frequent and long di- 
“ greflions and observations, tho feveral of them very 
44 hne and ingenious, are, too many, foreign to his lub- 
“ jcX : and yet that his moral and religious reflexions, 
** tho' fometimes long, arc generally too excellent to 
44 need a vindication.'* But llill 44 That thefc faults 
44 were the faults of the age, and have made many curious 
*• perfons wifti for an epitomy, &'c." fo Ro/s' s attempt' 
being executed with fmall (kill and fuccefs, he recom¬ 
mends this. But thofe obfervations and digreffions which 
thefe perfons were fo curious as to wifti retrenched in 
this hiftory, archbiftiop Ufher, or the learned Dr. Bain- 
bridge, had the curiofity to prefer, it feems, as matter 
of choiceft note : as may appear by the excerptions made 
out of this hiftory in a manufeript which has the writing 
of both thofe authors in it, and is preferved in the library 
of Trinity-College in Dublin. And luch another preference, 
as the moil delicate paflages in this hiftory, has lately 
been made by an ingenious hand in London , in a col¬ 
lection of many Divine , Moral, and Political Reflexions 
out of it; which, if made with that choice, and brought 
into that order it is, capable of, will do our author 
more juftice than all the epitomies of his hiftory that the 
•world (hall be troubled with. 

* Sucli as the lord Bacon and Sir Thomas Brown in 
pliilofophy ; Eernelius and Dr. Harvey in phyfick; be- 
iides others. As for thefe Animadversions which the faid 
Ro/s publifti'd a few months before his death upon our 
author’s Hiftory of the World, they are join’d to his Levia¬ 
than drawn out with a Hook, againft Mr. Hobbes, 12 mo. 
1653 5 and were manifeftly publifti’d to help off his 
foregoing wretched performance, The Epitomy . They 


contain about feventy pages, and about as many obferva¬ 
tions on our author's hilloi/; pretending to note his mif- 
takes, and clear fome doubtful pafiages therein. 1 no’ 
whoever (hall examine them may find, that he has made 
more paftages doubtful than 11c has clear'd; and as for 
miftakes, the greateft arc thofe which himfelf makes of 
his author; fometimes perverting his fentiments; fome- 
times oppofing his citations as his opinions ; and at others, 
correXing his opinions out of the citations he had approv'd 
of. In iome places, he is fo poor a correXor as to fall 
upon his author for the lapfes of his printer; in many, 
labours about things of no confequence ; and in molt, 
notes no miftake, nor clears any doubt, according to his 
title, but recites a paftage only to make fome fuperfluous 
additions to it, from his own bottomlcfs fond of pedantry, 
or fome reference to others of his own ftupid writings. 
So that he feems throughout like fome broker, who has 
all his life been ftoring his upper rooms with a great deal 
of old lumber, that he may be able, when any curious 
antique is produced, only to oppofe others of a different 
form, how inferiour foever in ui‘e or application, rather 
to puzzle the ignorant in what they fhould prefer, than 
convince them of what they ought to rejeX ; having no 
opportunity fo creditable to difclole the variety of his own 
trifles, pr hopes of making them pafs for (ometliing of 
value. This man might have fwcil’d out an article or 
two more in his faid traX, from what Ralegh himfelf has 
obferv’d upon his own hiftory when it came from the prels, 
could that critic have come at his remarks. For there 
is fuch a curiofity remaining in his family, as one of the 
firft printed copies, which had been his own book. *Tis 
printed on large paper, with the maps colour’d, bound 
in red leather, with gilt leaves, and his crcft, the Cap of 
Honour, ftampt on the covers. In this copy Sir Walter 
has made two or three correXions with his own pen; 
particularly in the 535th page of the three /aft books, there 
is one efcape whicn has not been correXed in any of the 
following impreflions, wherein I have particularly looked 
for it; where fpeaking of the Roman army which was to 
face Hannibal, Ralegh has, under the words five hundred 
horfe, drawn a line; and, in the margin, written, 44 It 
44 mud needs be five thoufand horfe ; for ftiortly after, 
44 Nero carries with him a part of his army to his col- 
44 legue, in which there was a thoufand horfe." 

* modern 


Digitized by 


Google 





Sir W A LTE R RALEGH. clxxxvii 

modern hiftory, to be any further an author of that which is ancient. There is, indeed, a little 
intimation of the defign he had upon fome ancient part of our Englifh ftpry, preferved in a let¬ 
ter of his own, written it feems, tho’ undated, before his great work w^s publifh’d, to that ac¬ 
quaintance, whofe library was moft likely to accommodate him with thofe uncommon books which 
he wanted for his purpofc. This letter is as follows. “ Sir Robert Cotton , If you have any of 
«« thefe old books , or any manuferipts wherein I may find any of our Britijh antiquities $ if you 
“ pleafe to lend them me for a little while, I will fafely reftore them, and think myfelf much 
“ beholden unto you ; or if you have any old French hiftory, wherein our nation is mention’d ; 

“ or any elfc, in what language foever. (So fubferibes him felf) Your poor friend, W. Ra- 
“ Ugh." * But this does not fufficiently afiiire us, whether the ufe of thefe books was to continue 
his General Hijlory, or furnilh him upon fome more particular fubjeft, however, we may in¬ 
cline with the writer of Sir Robert Cottons life to the former opinion. And as for the 
reafons of one ingenious author, why Sir Walter Ralegh was the tfloft proper perfon to write 
the hijlory of bis own lime b and the opinion of another, “ That his admirable performance 
“ already publifh’d, fufficiently fhews, that if he had attempted the hijlory of bis own country , 

“ or bis own times, he would have excell’d even Livy or Thucydides j and that the Annals of 
“ queen Elizabeth by his pen, without diminifhing from the ferious, judicious Camden , had 
“ been the brighteft glory of her reign ; and would have tranfmitted his Hiftory as the ftan- 
“ dard of our language even to the prefent age:” c Thefe arc ftill no affirmatives that he did 
finifh fuch a fecond part. So that his own intimations in the firft. part, referv’d and inconclufive 
as they are, feem to have been the only foundation of that formal ftory, “ How Sir Walter 
“ Ralegh, a few days before his death, fent for Walter Burre, the bookfeller who had printed 
“ his firft volume, and taking him by the hand, alked him, hpw that work of his had fold ? 

“ who anfwer’d, fo (lowly that it had undone him ; hereupon Ralegh ftepping to his defle, 

“ reach’d out the other part of his hiftory, which he had brought down to the times be liv’d in, 

«» then faying, with afigh, Ah friend! has the firft part undone thee ? the fecond volume fhall 
4 ‘ undo no more} this ungrateful world is unworthy of it * fo ftept to the fire, threw it in y 
“ and fet his foot on it till it was confum’d.” But, as we obftrved before, Ralegh had no 
leifure to finifh fuch a fecond part of his hijlory down to his own time. In the next place, ’tis 
no ways probable that he, who, in regard to the firft part, could follow the rule of Seneca that 
he, who having fatisfied bis own confidence, could difregard the cenfure of others , ffiould facrifice 
fo great a part of his labours, or any part, in fuch a rafh and inconfiderate manner, to the 
fudden reprefentations of a bookfeller, without ever fufpc&ing any mercenary ends in him. 

Further, it does not appear true that the firft part did fell flowly, for there was a fecond 
edition of it fet forth by that very bookfeller, within three years after the firft, as we have in a 
note before obferVd , and laftly, the firft man we can meet with who reports the fame, is a. 
trifling and fuperficial writer, who produces no authority for his aflercion. d 

As to the unfinifh’d parts he might have of fuch a continuation, to admit that they were 
thus deftroy’d would, moreover, in no wife agree with an account we have more fatisfa&orily 
attefted of that great quantity there was in being of Sir Walter Ralegh’s unprinted writings, 
feveral years after his death. For it is affirm’d to us, “ That the famous Mr. Hamden , a 
“ little before the civil wars , was at the charge of tranferibing three thoufand four hundred 
“ fifty two Jhttls of Sir Walter Ralegh’; manuferipts , as the amanuenfis himfelf told me (fays 
“ my author) who had his clofe chamber, his fire and candle, with an attendant to deliver 


- Sir Walter Ralegh to Sir Robert Cotton , the Original ; 
in the Cottonian library, Julius C 3, at the top of this 
letter there is a lift of the old authors, above a dozen in 
number, which in the beginning of the letter we fee, as 
above, he refers to. And for the fati^fa&ion of the 
curious, they are here fet down as follows. Sigebert's 
Chronicles, Vincent is Speculum Hifloriale, Gtmjafsus Tihjbcrius, 
Phillip Bergomus , Natalis Talipes, Amandas Xtrexcns, 
Cains Lon din ins, John Major de gejlis Scot or um, Left bt us 
cf Henault , Alex. Evrjham, Brute Book, Chronicle of Tfux- 
l>erry t p/ter de lcham. This is the letter which Dr. 
Thmas Smith made ufe of when he was fpeaking of the 
great men who fought the aflillance of Sir Robert Cotton's 
library; and having felc&cd from the reft, as moft wor¬ 
thy of note, Sir Francis Bacon and Sir Walter Ralegh , 
goes on thus : Quorum hinc , carerris in turn Londinenft 
peenam luens, in feennda umverjalis hifioriar ptfrte ar.tiqut- 
tates Britannicas indaga turns, ut quofdam codices turn typis 
itirprrjjos, turn manu ex strut os, fibi utendos date ve/let Cot to¬ 


nus, Uteris petit. Vita D. Rob. Cot torsi, fol. 25. 

b See the Paradoxes of Dr. John Donne, in the more 
enlarged edition, among his EJfays, as ] remember, 
printed 12 mo. 1651, at leaft in ievcral MS. copies of 
them ; one whereof was in the library of Bafil Lari of 
Denbigh. 

c Dr. Henry Felton , in his Dijfertation on the ChJJlcks, 
as before. 

d Will. Wittjlanley's Worthies of England, Ra'o. 1660, 
p. 256, in the Life of Sir Walter RaJcgli; wheicin it is 
true, as the author owns, there are moil material errors, 
one whereof he rectifies in his table of errata j but leaves 
others as grofs uncorre€ted. This writer, in another 
fuch like performance, call’d The Lives of the Englifh 
Poets, %<vo. 1687, has repeated this ftory of Sir Hatter 
Ralegh's burning the fecond part of his hijlory in the fame 
manner as above, and with equal probability, being here 
alfo filent of any authority for the truth thereof. 


him 


Digitized by LiOOQie 


fhe L I F E of 


ic him the originals, and take his copies as fad as he could write them” 2 Yet wlut is be¬ 
come of this treafure now, I have not ! been able to learn *, for, if vve fuppofe that Mr. Hamden 
would not be at the trouble and charge of tranfcribir.g any of our author’s writings which had 
then been printed ; and grant that all of his which have been printed ffnee that time, as well as 
all we can hear of remaining in MS. which are allow’d to be his, were part of that collection 
or quantity, they will not, both join’d together, as might be computed from what is here ob- 
fervedof them, amount to a fourth part thereof, tho’ we fhould admit two or three pieces more, 
alfo aferibed to him, which have not yet been named, and happen to fall under this hiltorical 
divifion. The firft of them is call’d, A notable and memorable Story of the cruel War between 
the Carthaginians and their own Mercenaries: Gather'd out of Polybius and other authors , by 
that famous Hifiorian Sir Walter Ralegh. b Tho* this was indeed written by him, it is no 
different work from what he-had before publifh’d, but reviv’d during the civil wars, to refleft 
with fome authority upon the diftraClions of thofe times. The other two pieces might feem to 
fall within the intended continuation of his Univerfal Hijlory •, but the firft of them, call’d The 
Life and Death of Mahomet; the Conqueft of Spain ; together with the Rifing and Ruin of the 
Sarafcn Emp\re y aferibed to Sir Walter Ralegh near twenty years after his death, by the book- 
feller who dedicated it to his fon, c is, except a few leaves about that of Mahomet , no more 
than a tranffation of an epiromy made by fome ignorant Spanxjh author, chiefly from what one 
of his own fabulous countrymen had written of a fictitious prince named Jacob Almanfor^ d 
as I have been affur’d by a gentleman of great knowledge both in the Spanijh and Oriental 
writers, whofe anfwer, having fatisfy’d me with the intelligence I was ambitious of procuring 
about this book, I here take'the liberty of fubjoining for the futisfaCtion alfo of the publiek. c 
But the (tile itfelf, fo uncouth in fome places, fo meagre in others, and incorrcCt, efpecially 
in known things, places,' and perfons, might of itfelf exclude our author from having any 
.hand in it. The other piece is (tiled, An IntroiuZlion to a Breviary of the Hijlory of Eng. 
land ; with the reign of King William I. entitled the Conqueror , written by Sir Walter Ralegh. 
]t was near fourfeore ^ears after his death before this was publifh’d. Yet there are feveral 
old manufeript copies of it iri the libraries of the curious, * which entitle him the author of 
' • ' '. 1 * it; 


* Olfet vat ions on the State/men and Fav ourites of Eng¬ 
land fence the Refoemation. By Divid Lloyd, Ml'A . 8vi>. 

.1665, p. 49 °- . t i 

b Printed 4 to. 1647, and is no other Chan a tranfenpt 
.frem the Hifory cfethe World % lib. 5* cap. 2. iAc. 

e Printed t imo . 1637, with Sir Walter* picture before it. 
d There fiems to be other tranfiations of the life of 
this pretended piince than that which follows this life of 
Mahomet in the book alcribcd to Sir Walter RaLgh* as 
Almanfor* tie hatned and •victorious Ki g that untun'd 
Spain, bis Life and Death ; tranfeated /torn the Spamih by 
Robert Alhlev, 4 to. Lend. 1627. La vie de Jacob 
Almanfor roi d’Aiabie 8 vo. Pan's, 1638. Almanfor’/ 
Life, with th Cinqurfe of Spain by the Moors, 8 vo. 1693, ts'e. 
e “Sir • * * * * * The greater part of thk> book, 


•“ containing The Hijlory of the Ccn/jurfl rfe Spain* and 
«* the Life of the Caliph Jacob Almanfor* in whole reign 
«« the author iuppofes that conqucll to have been made, 
«{ with an account of his immediate prcdecciror and 
“ fucceflbr?, is fa id by the author, page 34, to be 
“ abbreviated cut of tiro Arabian writers , tr a.fluted into 
»« Spanifh in the year i6c6 ; both the authors living in the 
«« time 0/’A!man(or; the one, a caftain in that war* and 


♦ « the other J'or 20 years together of bit chamber* and af- 
“ ter his death a provincial governor in Arabia Felix. 
«« gut it appears to be no other than an abftraft, or tranf- 
«« lation ol an abflraft made in Spanifh* of the firft 
t « book of the firft part, and the firft book of the fccond 
v «< part of Miguel dc Luna's Hijlory of the Lofes of Spain, 
«< entitled, Htjhria verdadera del Rey D. Rodrigo , &c. 
** which hiftory he pretended to have translated in 1589 
-for that is the date of the firft part) from the Arabic of 
“ Abuhatim Far if Abentarique* written in the year of 
the Hijra 140, who appears to have inferred in his 
•« work The Life of the Caliph Jacob Almanfor, written 
« in the fame language by another author, named Alii 
*« Abtn^ufun* vice toy and governor of the piovince of 
«* Deuquc in Arabia , in the year of the Hef ei 110.” 

u Whether there ever were two fuch Arabian hillorians 
“ as thefie, is very uncertain ; but certain it is, that de 
«< Lutin '5 hiftory can be no trar.ilation of any genuine 
*i Arabian writer, but mult be wholly a forgery of his 
n own : for there never tv. is any fuch caliph of the 
“ Saracens in Aft.it as Ja>ob Almanfor ; the whole account 
** of him, his lather, fon and grandion, being a mere 
ft romance in every particular. Spat \ was conuucrM in 


44 the reign of Al VCalid Ebn AheF alma lee* the Vlth of 
44 the Atabian Khalifes ot the family of Omexya* who 
44 died in the year 96. The only Kbaitfe in Apia who 
44 took the Surname of Al Manfur , was trie lecond of the 
44 family of Ad Abbas* named Abu Jaafar Abdalla* and 
44 began his reign in the year of tne Hejra 137, which 
44 i> 35 years alter de Luna 5 Almanfor is laid to have 
44 died. Nor did any Arabian ever write in the manner 
44 of de Lnua* or lend fuch letters as he has inlerted in 
44 his hiftory ; wherein tho’ feme particulars relating to 
44 the war and conqueft of Spain may be true, yet what- 
44 ever he lays of the Arabians in Afia , or the Khalifr 
44 there, is utterly falfe, and without die leali ihadow of 

tiurh." * '• 

44 As to the life of Mahomet, which takes up only 
44 the full 24 pages of this book, it was prefixed either 
44 by the tmnibtor or abbreviator, and extratted from the 
44 accounts given of that pretended prophet by chrillian 
44 writers; and being for the 010ft part falie and ri- 
44 diculous, deferves little regard.” 

44 1 cannot think therefore, notwithftanding the opini- 
44 on of the book'.cllcr in his dedication, that a perfon of 
44 Sir Halter Ralegh's learning and judgment was ever 

44 any way concern'd in this book: we hear nor, chat 

44 any copy of it was ever found in his ftudy, or that any 
44 MS. of it, aferib’d to him, is prelerved, asot his genu- 

44 ine pieces, in the libraries of the curious. And had 

44 the author or tranftacor look’d ever fo little into the 
44 Saracen hiftory, even as given by the Byzantine hi- 
44 llorians, and the Latin writers of the middle age, he 
44 mull have known better than to be impos’d on by 
44 fo bare*fac’d an impollor. Whether the llile and lan- 
44 guage of this performance confirm my opinion or not, 
“ you • • # • • * 

1 am. 

Sir, 

your moll humble Servant, 

G. Sale. 

f As the Cotton library, Titus F 3, 17. that of Sir 
Kenelm Digby i the Harlexan library ; that of Dr. Thomas 
Gale* &c. But the copy from whence thi> book was 
printed in 8 vo. 1693, being among the manuferipts cf 
archbilhop Sancrqfi* was committed to the prefs by Dr. 
John Moore* afterwards bilhop of Ely* as I have it atteft- 
ed under the hand of Robert Kfck , E(q; late of the Temple* 

in 


Digitized by 


Google 






WALTER RALEGH. clxxxix 

jt ; but it was written at leaft two years before he publiih’d his Hijlory of the World, becaufe 
it is inferibed to a perfon who died fo long before the faid publication, in thefe words: “ I 
“ intend by the help of God and your furtherance, right noble earl of Salisbury, to write a brief 
“ hiftory of England from William the firft, entitled the Conqueror, to the end of queen Elizabeth 
•* of perpetual memory.” But by then his Hijlory of the World was finifh’d, he was, as we 
have obferved, alfo from his own words, difeouraged from all continuation. Tothofe difeou- 
ragements might be added, the ungrateful treatment which was fhewn to this Part he did pub- 
li(h, at its firft appearance: for tho’ we have obferved what univerfal approbation it has met 
with fince the author’s death ; yet how it was receiv’d as foon as it came abroad and made its 
firft vifits at court, we are yet to relate. 

Those, who thought the king mull needs be a patron of authors becaufe he was one of the 
number, have been ready to infinuate, that his favour encreafed towards Ralegh in proportion 
to the proofs his pen had given of his abilities j therefore, that his many excellent Writings, and 
efpccially this Hijlory of the World, were the moft powerful interceflors for his releafment out of die 
5 Tower \ as if his majefty, in refpeft to his own honour, thought it in vain longer to confine his per¬ 
fon, fince no condition could confine his fame ; or, in regard to Ralegh' s merit, that he had well 
deferved no place Ihould be a barrier to his liberty, who had given filch extraordinary teftimony 
that no age could fet a bound to his knowledge. Sanderfon has aferib’d the freedom which not 
long after enfu’d, to one of thofe motives *, where he fays, “ Sir Waller Ralegh, wearied with 
“ long imprifonment, and having there fpent his time well in the Hijlory of the World, made 
4 ‘ his petition more paffable to the king ; whofe love to learning granted him now at laft his 
“ liberty •, and, not long after, leave to wander after a defign to the weftern world, where 
“ he had been in feveral climates before.” * But others, who feem to have known the matter 
much better, or have more ingenuouffy imparted it, afiure us, that Ralegh's excellent talents 
were fo far from ingratiating him with the king, “ that tho’ his majefty had been intemperately 
“ praifed by flatterers for fbme of the weakeft of his own compofitions, yet he could not forbear, 

“ out of an impertinent emulation, to affed Sir Walter Ralegh the lefs, becaufe of the great 
“ repute which followed him for his excellent pen.” b Nay, we are elfcwhere told, in anfwer 
to Sanderfon above, that Ralegh's Hijlory of the World gave the king fo much difpleafure, «« that 
“ at its firft publication it was forbid j and particularly, for fome paflages in it which offended 
“ the Spaniard ; as alio for being too plain with the faults of princes in his preface." c For it 
is, indeed, replenilh’d with many remarkable examples of divine vengeance pour’d forth on 
princes of many other nations as well as our own, who ftrove to eftablilh their thrones by 
sppreflion and iniquity. That pafiage in anfwer to Sanderfon , is fo far from being deny’d 
by this writer, that he afterwards confirm’d it in contradiction to what himlelf had written as 
above, about Ralegh's petition being made more paffable by his Hijlory ; where, after his grofs man¬ 
ner of interpretation, he lays, “ King James and all other princes had caufe of complaint, becaufe 
“ his whole book fets out the eaftern monarchs with much glory, and exclaims againft chriftian 
“ princes as moft inhuman •, tracing all the Englijh foveraigns from the conqueft, efpccially Henry 
“ the eighth; whom, for his daughter’s honour, Sir Walter Ralegh might have fpar’d from gall 
“ and bitternefs” And a little further, “ King James might perhaps obferve more, to reprefs 
“ the wickednefs of fuch a perfon, who, under pretence of taxing a vice in the father, intend- 
“ ed cunningly to ftain the whole race, tfc." d This objedion againft Ralegh's charader of 
that king, is more particularly aferibed to king James by another writer alfo before-cited, who 
tells us, « That after much fcorn caft upon Ralegh's Hiftory, the king, being modeftly de- 
“ manded What fault he found ? anfwer'd, as one furprifed, ’That Ralegh had fpoken it - 


in one of the printed copies of the faid book in my 

e firflion. The laid Dr. Mooit'i preface to this piece, 
*ever fome have thought it father'd on our author, is in 
thefe words, 44 This life of William the Conqueror writ by 
44 & r Walter Ralegh , was found in the library of a perfon 
41 of high quality. Whofoever has been converfant in the 
“ works of that accomplifijd knight , and a little acquainted 
“ wth his great genius and fpirit, and hra manly unafFeXed 
“ ftile, will make no doubt but what here is prefented unto 
41 the world was his genuine iflue. For the comprehenfive 
" an d penetrating thoughts, the lively imagination, and 
“ the mature exad judgment of Sir Walter Kalrgh y do all 
“ mauifelUy appear in this fmall treatife. It may be 
“ ma tter of fome wonder that a work fill’d with fuch a 
number of judicious reflexions upon the nature of govern- 
“ ment in gei eral, and fo many wife obfervations relating 
“ to the particular Hate of our own country, fhould have 
“ been thus long condemn’d to obfeurity ; had not an ill 


44 fate attended the learned compofitions , as well as the brave 
41 actions of this renowned gentleman. But by what unhap- > 
14 py accident foever it has hitherto been confin’d to privacy, 
44 it was thought it would be an injury to the publick 
44 any longer to conceal a jufi and true account of the 
44 reign of William the firft y wherein fo many remarka- 
44 ble matters and great revolutions happen’d, and to 
44 which the writers of government and policy in our 
“ nation have very frequent recourfe ; fince the tranf- 
44 aXions of that time, unto which they fo commonly 
44 appeal, are here related with that faithfulnefs, brevity 
44 and clearnefs, that become an exatl hifiorian." 

• Sanderlon’r Hiftory of King James, fbl. 459. 

b Ofborne’/ Memoirs of King James; in his works, voh 
2. p. 111, 112. 

* Obfervations on Sanderfon' s hillorv, 4 to. p. 9, 10. 

4 Sanderfon’/ flnjhxey to the Ob/ef <vations on his hillory, 
F- 9 > 

q q q “ reverently 


Digitized by kjOOQ le 


cxc 


The LIFE' of 

“ reverently of king Henry the eighth /” 1 as if he would have refle&ed a breach of gratitude 
upon our Hiftorian towards his benefadtrefs the late queen, in fpeaking fuch truth when he was 
to give a character of her father as, not only others who read it mull concur in, feeing the 
Hiftorian has fo many proofs at his finger’s end to confirm it j but what that king himfelf, 
were he alive, on whom it was written, mud alfo have allowed ; fince it is only a paraphrafe 
upon his own dying confeflion, that he had been a Prince , who never Jpared man in his anger , 
nor woman in his lujl. But if king James could thus objedt againft Ralegh for one charadlcr, 
and pay him no thanks for another which follows in the fame paragraph of that Preface, and in 
fome parts of the Hiftory itfelf j this may perhaps beft fhew where lay the breach of gratitude. But 
however his majefty might think it a kind of blafphemy, that any below the dignity of princes 
fhould be the cenfors of them : yet that objedtion aforefaid feems not to be the natural caufe, 
fays our laft-quoted author, of his diflike to this hiftory, “ fince none ever exclaim’d 
“ more againft that prince than ufually king James himfelf did.” And others, more particularly 
ftill, are inclin’d to believe, that any liberty Ralegh may have taken with the characters oi 
other princes, was not fo much the real caufe of fuch difguft in king James, as, through the 
infmuations of fome mifehievous fycophants about him, who well knew what humour might 
be moft agreeably fed, that feveral parts of the hiftory contained an oblique and artful expofure 
of himfelf and his miniflry * as if, truly, the general Ilijlory of the IVirld was chiefly a fecret Hiftory t 
or fatire upon his Court $ and Scotch faces were to be feen in it, ftuck upon old Jewifj, Babylonian or 
Affyrian fhoulders. For, as one has oblerv’d, “ There was a time, when one of our moft 
“ renowned Hiftorians could not comment upon a piece of the Old Teftament, without being 
“ thought to write a libel upon his own times : and the king was almoft led to fancy he faw 
** his own features in the face of Ninias the Ion of queen Semiramis j but furely, if he could 
“ think his juftice cenfured in the ftory of Achab' s taking away Naboth's vineyard, and not 
“ commended in that of the French king’s conduct towards his judge and admiral of France ; 
“ he muft not only have been a very captious and felf-tormenting reader, but have fatiriz’d himfelf 
“ more fharply by engrofling of applications, or acquiefcing in refemblances, than he could 
«* have been by that author, had he really intended any.” b But the truth is, that confeious 
minds can find in every example fomething to chaftife themfelves ; and, to ftomachs vitiated, 
through foul and unwholfome adminiftrations, with evil habits, the moft innocent diet is up- 
braiding. That Ralegh forefaw his enemies would make fuch perverfe conftrudtion and mifufc 
of his Hiftory, is evident enough in his own words > where, mentioning the choice he had 
made, as leaft exceptionable, of the elder times to deferibe, he yet anticipates this objection, 
“ Againft this choice alfo; Why may it not be faid, that in fpeaking of the pafc’d I point at the 
«* prefent j and tax the vices of thole who arc yet living, in their perfons who are long fince 
•* dead, and have it laid to my charge ? But this I cannot help, tho’ innocent and certainly, 
“ if there be any, who, finding themfelves fpotted like the tygers of old time, /hall find fault 
“ with me for painting them over anew, they fhall therein accufe themfelves juftly, and me 
“ falfely.” e Yet fuch fault there was, we fee, found and fo falfely was he accufed. Thus 
the honour which Ihould reward a publick benefit, is ftifled by private prejudice. 

We are therefore to feek fome other mediator for Ralegh's deliverance out of prifon than his 
merit by this publick benefit *, and that, we (hall at laft find to be his money, tho’ other caufes 
in our common hiftories are alfo fuggefted, efpecially that which fee tried moft effedlual, the 
offer he made of fitting out an expedition to fecure, and poflefs for the crown, a gold mine in 
Guiana , which he had himfcll difeover’d when he was formerly in that country, and which, 
fince that time, had been by others fo amply teftified, that further confirmation was not now 
requir’d. So that Ralegh's being deceiv’d by Key mis with ore of a golden complexion, which 
he brought from thence, or by any chymical tricks, fuch as fecrctly flipping real gold with the 
ore into the melting-pot, are foolilh untruths. d Now that offer Ralegh had made at leaft 
three years before he obtain’d his liberty, with no unreafonable expectation of its being accepted, 
fince king James had fo publickly aliened and confirm’d the right of England to that Country ^ 
through Sir IValter Ralegh's conqueft and difeoveries dicrein, with the fubmiftion he had gain’d 
from the chief lords thereof, as to have given commiflions and patents for the poffeflion of the 
fame, that is to fay, all from the river of Amazons to the Deffequebe, and all the iflands for 
twenty miles about, in his majefty’s name *, which were accordingly executed in all due form by 
captain Charles Leigh and captain Robert Harcourt, which laft left a colony there of thirty 

• CJborne, as before. ... i tfl/fon's life of king Janet, in the Corrp.’taf Hifcry 

b a (hort review of the life of Stjai:ui, MS . inttr Cot/cc. of England, vol. 2. 161 . 71 2 ; and Sandufon'i hiltory of 

P. Le Ntnie, Aim. p. II. . king Jama, fee. 

• See the Prtfiut to his H'Jhrj in the laft page. 

perfons 


Digitized by L.OOQ le 







CXC1 


Sir WALTER RALEGH. 

perfons for three years, as may be read at large in the narratives of their fevcral expeditions. * 
Befulcs, the publick invitations and encouragement which afterwards enfued, to all who would 
again fettle and plant in that new-difeover’d part of America , b gave the Di/coverer himfeJf no 
doubt, the greater hopes that his own propofitions, being not for his private, but the publick 
benefit (yet at his own expence, and that of fuch friends as he Ihould engage in the adven¬ 
ture) could not but be embrac’d. Add to this, the advantages of his further knowing the riches 
■©1 this country, even while he was in prifon, not only by the long converfation he had with 
thofe Indians , whom we find here with him in the former part of his confinement, but others 
who from time to time came over to him. For during this long imprifonment, he held con- 
ftant intercourfe with Guiana , and was at the charge every year, or every fecond year, of fend¬ 
ing a Ihip or more thither, to keep them in hopes of being relieved from the Spaniards , c 
who had again encroach’d upon them, and cruelly mafliicred both leveral of the natives, and of 
his own men. d So that the number of Voyages he fet forth for Guiana , was at lead as 
many, if not more, than thofe he is before obferved to have fitted out for Virginia. 

But all this experience, which Ihould have recommended his offer, ferv’d at firft only to 
render it unacceptable. For the Treafurer Cccyll being then alive, he, with two or three others 
who bore the fway at court, were refolved to difcountenance it j not that they fo much doubted 
the probability that fuch treafure might remain unpoflefs’d, or the knowledge and refolution 
of Ralegh to compafs it, fo much as his difpofition towards themfelves, if by a fuccefsful return 
Ire Ihould purchale the king’s favour. Therefore, to prevent fuch a rival as he might prove to 
Them, the advantage he propos’d to the State was neglctted ; nay, fo deeply had they rooted 
prejudices in the king’s breaft towards him in this particular, as well as in others before men¬ 
tion’d, that when his majefty was follicited by any perfon in Ralegh 's behalf (and Royal follici- 
tors he had) he, with that implicit reliance on other men’s reports, which thofe in fupreme 
Ration fo often bury their own judgments and their juftice in, would anfwer. That his council 
kne'M him letter than he did . But after CecylPs death, and now that Sir Ralph Winwood was 
fccretary of ftate, * Ralegh reviv'd his propofal to him, and, in a letter, told him with relation 
to thofe two or three earwigs who were ever crawling about the king, and at the mercy of whof e 
reprefentations he had fo long Iain, that it was his only infelicity the king did not know him as 
well as thofe courtiers pretended to do: “ For, had his majefty known me, fays he, I had 
“ never been here where I now am ; or, had I known his majefty, they had never been fo 
“ long there where they now are. His majefty not knowing me has been my ruin, and his 
“ mifknowing them has been the ruin of a goodly part of his eftate. But they are all of 
“ them now, feme living and lome dying, come to his majefty’s knowledge.” We learn 
further out of the faid letter, that both queen Anne, who had inform’d herfelf from the begin¬ 
ning of all that Ralegh had been accus’d with, and her brother the king of Denmark , at both 
times of his being in England , f were thoroughly fatisfy’d of his innocency, otherwife they 
would never have moved his majefty in his behalf. And prince Henry , who had been curious 
in fearching into the nature of his offences, had been frequently a mediator for him, as we have 
read before. Hereupon, lays Ralegh , ** The wife, the brother, and the fon of a king, do not 
“ ufc to fuc for men fufpedt \ but fince they all have done it, and with reference to me alone > 
“ you, ftrengthned by their example, may with the more hardinefs do the like.” Towards 
the end, Ralegh having acknowledg’d, that all he had remaining was owing to the king, and 
that he was ready to facrificc it all in his majefty’s fervice, concludes with this noble diftindfion^ 
To die for the king , and not by the king , is all the ambition I bavr in the world, s 

This and other like addrelfes to that new fccretary, advanced not Ralegh’s requeft lb much, 
but he found it necefiary to ufc ftronger intereft than what he was here making, and more fubftantial 
arguments than could flow from a pen. For whatever “ pity of his fufferings, his merit and 
“ fame of learning now begat in many, or by whatever means of the French ambaflador, with 
“ others of our own lords,” it is pretended, in our common accounts of him, that “ he got free. 
“ dom of repairing for his health to his houfe at St. ‘James’s, a year or two before he procur’d 
“ his commiilion for his voyage to Guiana ,” h we are more pofitivcly and particularly told, 
“ That Sir IVilliam St. John and Sir Edward Villiers , half-brother to the lady Villiers , after- 
“ wards dutchefs of Buckingham , procur’d Sir fValler Ralegh’s liberty, and had fifteen hundred 

* In Punlm't Pilgrims, vol. 4, and Dr. Heytin'i 
C./m.yap/.y, F-.l. fecor.d edit. 1657. p. 108;, C Sc. 

k See we ArticUi e> h bited .it the end of captain Ribtrt 
Har.'vurt's vo*.age to Ciuiants, in .\Jo. 1613. 
c S.r U'aUsr r.ategb '5 Afoluyj, 8vo. 1650, p. 52. 
d Idrm, p. JJ. 

* Sir Ralph U'irrxnJ was made fecretary of (late, 


March 29. 1614. 

1 In the lall of thofe journeys made by the faid Christian 
king of Dsnmarb into England, he anived the 21 Jt of 
Jutx, and departed Augujl 1. >614. 

* Sir Hatter RAcJ: to Mr. fcciciary lt'hr.'.xJ, in his 
R, mains (lad edit.' p. 164. 
k Aulnus CiqHinurisr, p. 91. 



Digitized by LiOOQle 








cxcil *fhe LIFE of 


«< pounds for their labour.” 1 It further appears, that thefe ufed their power with Sir George 
Vt fliers, the new rifing favourite at court, and fo obtained the king’s confent for Ralegh's 
enlargement: for there is a letter of Ralegh's acknowledgments to that favourite in thefe words, 
«* Sir, You have, by your mediation, put me again into the world ; I can but acknowledge 
“ it; for to pay any part of your favour by any fervice of mine as yet, it is not in my 
“ power. If it fucceed well, a good part of the honour {hall be yours j and if I do not 
“ alfo make it profitable unto you, I fhall fhew myfelf exceeding ungrateful. In the mean 
“ while, and, till God difcovcr the fuccefs, I befeech you to reckon me among the number 
“ of your faithful fervants, tho’ the lead: able. JV. Ralegh .” k This letter is dated only 
March 17, but probably written in this year laft mention’d, 1615^ becaufe three days after¬ 
wards, as Camden has precifely remember’d, Sir IValter Ralegh was releas’d out of the 
Releas'd out Vower. c So that he thus purchas’d his liberty in the thirteenth year of his confinement j that 
oi the Toner. j s t0 fay, after he had been (without intermiflion) twelve years, three months, and five days 
in the faid Tower of London, befides near three months more at his firft commitment thither, 
and during his arraignment at JVincheJler. 

At this time Carr , earl of Somerfet, had been about four or five months in the faid Tower 
with his countefs, for the barbarous impoifonment of Sir Thomas Overbury about two years 
before in the fame place, to which he had treacheroufly driven him, for only having obftru&ed 
the faid earl's vile and fcandalous commerce with that lewd woman, while (he was young 
Effcx's wife. “ Thefe two accidents (at this time drew great notice) happening (as ’tis ob- 
“ ferved in a trad aferib’d to the lord Brook ) fo much beyond all expectation ; that the one, 
“ being a fpecial favourite of the king, the other a condemned man j the one imprifon’d, 
“ the other fet at liberty •, gave great occafion of fpeech and rumour, and fo much the more 
“ wonder and admiration, becaufe of Ralegh's wit and policy.” d Ralegh is further faid by 
the fame author, to have given Somerfet many quips and taunts during his faid imprifonment 1 
and it may not be improbable, towards fuch an undeferving intruder upon his eftate. But, as this 
earl of Somerfet was convifted of felony for the faid murder, whereby the two hundred thoufand 
pounds he had heap’d up, and lands to the income of nineteen thouland pounds per Annum being 
again difpers’d •, * and as the king had laid that heavy curfe upon himfelf and his pofterity 
which he did, if ever he pardon’d any of the faid murderers, it might have been thought that 
Ralegh's comparifon of himfelf and that noble malefaClor, would not have been fpoil’d, when 
he faid, That the whole Hiftory of the World had not the like precedent, of a king's prifoner to 
purchafe freedom, and his bofom favourite to have the halter, but in feripture, in the cafe of 
Mordecai and Haman. Inftead of that, Ralegh is faid, by the relator of this pafiage, to 
have been told, the king fhould reply upon hearing this obfervation, That Ralegh might die 
in that deceit > f and fo he did, as this author truly fays: for the king now lav’d the life of 
the one, as much to the aftonilhment of the world, as he afterwards put the other to death. 
But he could do no lefs, if his favourite was really a mailer of fuch fecrets as are elfewhere 
fpoken of. b And this is enough to refolve why the misfortunes of that earl, if they may be 
called fuch, which at the word were more favourable than his merits in any wife deferved, 
were not equal to his crimes. h 

Ralegh being thus at liberty, foon appears bufy in making preparation for his voyage. To 
this purpofe he called in the eight thoufand pounds , which he had lent to the countefs of Bedford, i 
reckon’d in king James his declaration, a competent fatisfattion for Sherborne ; tho’ it was 
afterwards valued by the Hate at 5000 /. per annum. But feeing that not fufficient to fit 
out a fleet in the manner he found neceflary, his wife confented alfo to fell her houfe and 
lands at Mtcbam in Surrey, for which he received twenty-five hundred pounds \ k all which and 
more he expended in this expedition. And what frenzy could poflefs him, as he fays himfelf, 
thus to difpofe of his whole fubllance, and undertake fuch a toilfome and perilous voyage now 
that his conftitution was impair’d by fuch a long confinement, befides age itfelf, ficknefs and 
affliction, were he not afiiir’d thereby of doing his prince fervice, bettering his country by com¬ 
merce, and refloring his family to their eftates, all from the mines of Guiana ; and, fays he, 
if I myfelf had not feen them with my own eyes. 1 I have not yet heard who was the purchafcr 
of that eftate at Mtcbam j but there is a letter of Ralegh's to a nobleman extant, which poffibly 


a Obfervations on Sanderftn s hiftory of king James, 

4/0. p. 10. 

f> Sir Walter Ralegh to Sir George Vi liters, from the 
fjrig:nali in the library of James Weft, Efq; 

« Camden 'j Annals of King James. 

* The hive years of king James , &c. by Sir Foulk 
G rev ill, late lord Brook, 4/0. 1643. p. 67, 

* Idem, p. 66. 


f Sand^rfon's hiftory of king James , Sec. 

* Dr. Welwood’r Notes on Wilfon’j hiftory of king James, 
in the Compleat Hiftory of England, tom. 2. fol. 699. 

h Ofborne, *vol. 1. p. ic6. 

* Obfervations on Sanderftn s hiftory of king James , 
p. 11. 

* Idem , alfo Sir Walter Ralegh's Apology, page 47. 

! Idem, page 48. 

relates 


Digitized by L.ooQle 





Sir WALTER RALEGH. 

relates thereunto. It is to entreat him to make an impartial valuation of fomc lands to i 
fifing favourite who was to be the purchafer, and is penn’d in the following words. “ I 
“ humbly befeech your lordlhip to give me leave, and pardon too, if I need it, for the an- 
44 fwering of thofe things which you were lately pleas’d to objeft aguinft me; and that you 
44 will charitably alfo confider both of my demands, and of the realbns which embolden me 
“ to make them. Thofe anfwers go here, in a paper which is enclos’d, apart; and my letter 
“ lhall lay but thus much, that the gentleman, who is fo greatly in favour, hath many fair 
44 fortunes before him, and we, nothing to look for but milery j and that he is better able to 
“ give us above the worth of the land, than we in condition to abate any part thereof. And 
“ therefore we humbly befeech your lordlhip, that your cotnpajjion and care of honour , may 
“ be the judge between his profperous navigation, and our Ihipwreck : and that your charily 
“ for us, and your defire of fatisfatlion for him, may equal the ballance between us. I hope 
“ fo heartily to find all juft favour at your hands, as I will venture, upon this, to affure 
44 you, that I will do all my utmoft to make my wife and fon forget their mifery in them- 
“ felves, and to be ever mindful of their duty towards your lordlhip ; to whom I hope they 
“ will be, as I am fure myfelf have been, and am, a moft faithful, humble fervant.” » 
Besides the ten tboufand five hundred pounds which it coft Sir Wallet Ralegh to put himfelf 
in equipage for this long-propofed voyage, a much greater fum than would have paid for his 
liberty of receding from it, or for a formal pardon, had he thought he needed, and had gone 
about to purchale it i there were many co-adventurers, who, by contributions to the expence 
thereof, entided themfelves to a lhare in the returns. But moft of thefe are called by Ralegh* 
a company of voluntiers, who had never feen the fea nor wars ; and, except forne forty gentle¬ 
men, a very diffolute, diforderly, and ungovernable crew, “ whom their friends thought it an 
exceeding good gain to be difeharg'd of, at the hazard of fome thirty, forty or fifty pounds, 
“ knowing they could not have lived a whole year fo cheap at home.” b There were, more-' 
over, leveral merchants, not only in England but foreign parts, who contributed to this Afire- 
adventure; fo confident were they that it was no chimera , no fuppolititious or airy treafure that' 
was promifed or purfued. One of thefe merchants, afterwards knighted, and very eminent for 
kis dealings, was named Peter Vanlore, who fo approved of Sir Walter Ralegh's undertaking, 
that he not only lent a letter to his brother Sir Adrian Thibaut in Amjlcrdam , rcquefling him tc> 
engage another merchant there to communicate fomething he knew of the riches in Guiana to 
Sir Walter Ralegh but made that requeft in Ralegh’s own manner of expreilion, from a copy' 
which he drew up for him. This draught, as I have it from the faid original, is as follows: 
“ Brother Tibotes , There is a mercliant in Amjlcrdam , that for the love he bears ro my’ 
44 honourable friend Sir Walter Ralegh , is content to difeover fomewhat of importance unto 
“ him in Guiana , to which country Sir Walter Ralegh is now preparing to go j but he doth 
44 require affurance from Sir Walter Ralegh, that he himfelf may be allur'd to enjoy fuch part 
“ of the commodity difeover’d, as he fhall agree upon with Sir Walter Ralegh by his deputy 
44 Mr. Henry Hovenar. I do therefore pray you to fpeak with the party which Mr. llovenar 
44 will bring unto you, and to know what affurances he will require, which to pleafure Sir 
“ Waller, I fhall be willing to give ; that is to fay, to give him affurance that upon Sir 
“ Walter’s return into England , the charges being deduced, the difeoverer fhall receive from 
Sir Walter fuch part of the faid merchandize as Sir Waller and he fhall agree on \ altho’ 
** there needs no fuch affurance to be given, becaufe his majefty doth afflire all Sir Walter's 
“ partners by the Great Seal of England , That they Jhall truly and quietly enjoy all their parts 
44 and Jhares of what goods , merchandize or treafure foever Jhall be returned ■, out of which 

44 Great Seal of England , the difeoverer (hall have an aflignment for fo much as belongs unto 

%f‘ him, to be deliver’d here in London , to whomfoever he lhall appoint to receive it.” Then 
in anew line he concludes thus: 44 To Mr. Peter Vanlore. This is the letter which I defirc 
44 you to write to your brother in Amjlerdam ; and for any affurance you lhall give, I will 

44 again put you in fureties to fave you harmlefs. W. Raleghf This letter is dated July i. 


4 See a CelleRion of Ltttiri made by Sir Toby Mathews, 
8iv. i6,6o, p. 66. 

k Sir Walter Ralegh’/ Apology, p. 4. 

• This copy of a letter tor Sir Peter Vanlore to engage 
a Dutch merchant in Sir Walter Ralegh’s Guianian adven¬ 
ture, from the original draught of Sir Walter s own hand, 
is in the poffeflion of Broun Willis, of Whad Jon-Hail in 
Bucji, Efq; to whom we arc obliged for this communi¬ 
cation. And a tranfeript appears'to have been lent ac¬ 


cording to Sir Walter's requeft ; for, after his death, hi\ 
lady having commenced law-luits againll the laid Vaniots , 
this copy was produced in court, as appears by the lol 
lowing endorlement upon it: “ This letter was ihewn 
“ unto Mathias Pettenvart, at the time of his examination, 
“ on the part and behalf of Sir Peter Vanlore, knt J,. 
“ fendant, againll Dame Elizabeth Ralegh, wiJJovv, com - 
“ flainanl. 12° Juttii. 1623. Signed Martin Bajill. 

r r r 1616. 


exciii 


Digitized by LiOOQLe 


CXC1V 


*fhe LIFE of * 

1616. And if Ralegh had his com million for that voyage before this time, as it appears he 
had, by his citing it, then it muft be erroneoufly dated, being near two months after, in king 
James his Declaration. * Here again, that com mi (lion feems-to have been given under the 
Great Seal of England •, and alfo el le where: b In that Declaration , ’tis laid to be under tlie Privy 
Seal. But there are other things obfervable of this commiflion as it is there printed, and in 
other places, as we (hall fee prefendy. 

*■ In the mean while we may here obferve a little oppofition that was made to this voyage. 
And indeed fome perfons at court, who might remember what advances Ralegh had formerly made 
there, by the means of feveral exploits which he undertook at a diftance from it} and others, 
admonilh’d by confcience, that every friendly gale in his navigation would be fplitting them 
upon a rock, might well be expedted to obltrudl, as far as they could, his progrcls : but none 
do we hear of fo impatient and clamorous againft it as the Spaniard. For there had been now 
in England, about three years, an agent from Spain , named Diego Sarmiento de Acuna , better 
known, but not till about the time of Ralegh's death, or perhaps after it, by the title of count 
de Gondoman a man, who, if he gain’d that influence he did over king Janies purely by art, 
muft be allowed a good fhare of dexterity in the myfteries of negotiation ; but as he was adapt¬ 
ed by nature to footh and captivate him, no lefs than by the pretenfions of his agency, it dimi- 
nilhes the wonders of his fuccefs in making that king fuch a fubjedt to his enchantments, and keeping 
him fo many years a prifoner as it were in the Tower he had heap’d up of airy and glittering pro- 
mifes: yet what reward was referved, for all his fervices here, in his own country, and how 
this ardent Have to the will and pleafure of his mafter, was both executioner of his mvvl pride 
as well as other paflions, and facrifice alfo at laft to them, muft be left for thofe to difp.'.y “.ho 
have more leifure to dilate upon fuch retaliations of Providence. This was the man who (as 
he is reprefented in king James's Declaration) now “ took great alarm,” and is faid to have 
** made loud and vehement afiertions to his majefty in repeated audiences, that he knew, and 
“ had difeover’d the intention and enterprizc of Sir IValter Ralegh to be but hoftile and pi- 
“ ratical, tending to the breach between the two crowns, c and the danger and deftrutftion of 
“ the king his matter’s fubjedts in thofe parts •, protefting in a fort againft it.” To which that 
the king, Ihould anfwer, (as it is there faid alter Ralegh's death) “ He would fend Sir Walter 
Ralegh with a limited commiffion (but how limited it; was will foon appear) and that “ he 
« durft not, upon peril of his head, do any fuch matter j and if he did, he would furely 
do juftice upon him, or fend him bound hand and loot into Spain , with all the gold and 
« goods he Ihould obtain by robbery and bring home, were they never fo great.” d Then 
the king by Sir Ralph Winwood, got both a folemn proteftation from Ralegh , that he had ■ 
no other intention but only to go to thofe gold mines ; and alfo a clofe letter to his majejly (as 
it is here in his declaration juftly call’d) confirming the fame. This clofe letter was both written 
clofc to the purpoft , or in fuch expreflive terms as to have laid open the whole fcheme of 
Ralegh's voyage ; and alfo as a matter to be kept clofe , or with the utmoft privacy j for *tis 
faid, that upon fuch communication, his majefty promifed, on the word of a king f to keep it 
fecret : e and it would have prevented all fuppofition of difingenuity, if this clofe letter had been 
fairly exhibited in that declaration , had it been when this was pen’d, in the king’s pofleffion, as 
it ouglit according to his royal promife. On the contrary, this feems to have been the very 
letter, by which, through the Spanifh ambaflador’s means, his mafter the king of Spain was 
pre-admoniftied of Ralegh's whole enterprize, and had fent to Guiana , before he left the Britijh 
channel , to prepare a greater force than his, to oppofe him, as will hereafter appear. Nay, ’tis 
vifible by what immediately follows in the faid declaration , both that this clofe letter (how cloftly 
foever the contents of it are with-held) did reveal the particulars of Ralegh's naval ftrength, and 
that the king did divulge it to the Spanifh ambaflador $ becaufe it was fo far from making hiny 
recede from his former jealoufy, that he is difeover’d to have objected thereupon againft the 
number of Ihips Ralegh had prepared for the faid voyage, f to which Ralegh then doubtleft 
made as proper anfwer, as we (hall find he did hereafter. But in fhort fuch a propofal, by one 
c nrrying the reputation of fuch an active, witty and valiant gentleman, efpecially of fo great 
a commander at fea, as his enemies allow he had ; 8 one who muft be thought moft wary above 
all others of incurring king James’s difpleafure, under which he had fo long fufTer’d •, one who 


» Sec a 'Declaration of the Demeanour and Carriage of 
Sir Walter Ralegh, Knight ; as well in bis Voyage as 
f .hence his Return , &c. 4/0. 1618. p. 24. 

* Dr. lUyJin’j Cofmography , fol. 1086, &c. 
c But fee Ralph's Apology , p. 53 * 

4 King James his Declaration of Sir Waller Ralegh’/ 


Demeanour , &c. p. 5. 

• Howel’/ Letters , p. 369. Shirley’/ Life of the •valiant 
and learned Sir Walter Raiegh, Fol, 3d edit. 1687, p. 28. 
And alfo in the life of Sir Walter Ralegh in a colieftioa 
of Lives Englilh and foreign , vol. 1. 1704, p. 128, {iff. 
4 King James s Declaration , p. 6. I Idem, p. 27. 

had 


Digitized by 


GoogI 


c 








cxcv 


Sir WALTER RALEGH. . 


had given fuch publick atteftations of his finccrity in the profecution of this propof.il \ anil 
one who, as the greaceft proof he could give thereof, was actually embarking his whole fortune 
as well as credit, together with thofc of his friends and relations, all finding fecurity for their good 
behaviour, without any charge to the crown if they fail’d, and with profpuft of great advantage 
if they fucceeded, was fo far from being overthrown by any remonftrances of the ambaflador 
himfelf, or from being thought a moft noble and generous overture by all other men, that even 
the king's honour is acknowledg’d, in his own Declaration, to have been engag’d, not to deny 
bis people the adventure and hope of fo great riches. 1 And yet what character of that king's 
honour towards his people, is expofed in the fame leaf of that very Declaration , where it is 
pretended, that in his oven princely judgment he gave no belief to it, as being perfuaded that in 
nature there were no fuch mines entire, or that the Spaniards , fo induftrious in the chace of 
treafure, would have fo long negledted the fame is left to the reader’s diftindtion. But it may 
be bell dil'cover’d by the care taken to fecure his majefty’s dividend fo clearly, and to exprels 

* many other articles fo doubtfully, in the commiffion itl'elf, of which we fhall now give an im¬ 
partial abftradt, whether it was from a magnanimous principle or a mercenary one, from. 
upright policy or downright prevarication, that the fame was granted ; being as follows. 

“ JAMES , by the grace of God, (A V. To all to whom th^fe prefents (hall come, (Ac, His commtj/ion 

“ Whereas Sir Walter Ralegh, knight, intendeth to undertake a voyage by fea [° r t * e v ^| c 
« and /hipping, to the South parts of America or elfewhere within America , po/Tefs’d and or clfcwben 
“ inhabited by heathen and favage people j to difeover fomc commodities and merchandize ’ n / *" trua ' 

« profitable for the fubjeds of our kingdoms, whereof the inhabitants make little or no ufej 
“ whence may enfue, by commerce, fome propagation of the chritlian faith and reformed 
“ religion among thofc idolatrous people : and whereas there are divers merchants, (Ac. well 
“ difpofedto afiift Sir Walter Ralegh , had they afiurance to enjoy their due fiure of the pro- 
« fits returned. Sir Walter Ralegh being under die peril of the law, and whereas divers other 
“ gentlemen his kinfmen and friends, with feveral captains and commanders, are alfo desirous 
** to follow and venture their lives with him, if they might be commanded by none but 
“ himfelf: We, upon deliberate confideration, defiring the benefit of our fubjcSls, all'o to 
«* give our princely furtherance to the laid Sir Walter Ralegh and his friends, as well as to 
“ encourage others in the like laudable enterprifes , advance the converfion of favages, and 
•“ encreafe traffick by our fubjeds of this kingdom, have of our fpecial grace, (Ac. granted 
“ Sir Walter Ralegh full power to carry for the faid voyage, fo many of our fubjeds, or others 
“ who will become our fubjeds, as fhall willingly accompany him j with fuffkient /hipping, 

*• armour, weapons, ordnance, munition, powder, /hot, (Ac. and all other ti if gs as he /lull 

• “ think neceflary for the ufe and defence of him and his company j befides liberty 10 exchange 
** or otherwife difpofe of his goods or merchandize j alfo to return into this or other of our 
“ dominions with fuch gold, filvcr, bullion, or any other wares, and they to be converted to 
“ the proper ufe of the laid Sir Walter Ralegh and his company : paying to us, our heirs, 

“ (Ac. the full fifth part of all fuch gold and filver, bullion, and ore of gold or filver, 

“ pearl and precious Hones as /lull be fo imported , withal fuch cuftomsj (Ac. as (lull be due 
“ for any other goods whatever. Further to encourage Sir Walter Ralegh and the adven- 
“ turers, we promife in verbo regio, that no gold, filver or other wares by them imported 
“ from thofe parts fo pofiefs’d and inhabited, /hall be feiz’d by us, our heirs, or any of our 
“ officers, but that it /lull remain (the fifth part of the /aid gold, filver, bullion, (Ac. as be- 
“ fore, with all other cuftoms and dudes being truly paid) to the foie ufe of Sir Walter Ralegh 
“ and his company. Further of our moft fpecial grace, (Ac. we conftituce the faid Sir 
“ Walter Ralegh to be the foie governor and commander of all perfons who /hall travel or be 
“ with him in the faid voyage or in their return. And give him full power to co> red, 

“ puni/h, pardon, and rule them according to fuch orders and inftruflions as the faid Sir 
“ Walter Ralegh (hall eftabli/h, as well in cafes capital and criminal as civil, both marine 
“ a*d other; fo that the faid proceedings, as near as conveniently may be, are agreeable to 
“ the laws of this realm and to die chriftian faith now profels’d in the church of England. 

“ And becaufe in fuch enterprizes great inconveniences have grown by mutinies and diforders 
“ for want of fufficient authority, we give full power to Sir Waller Ralegh in cafe of rebel- 
“ lion or mutiny by fea or land, to exercife martial law upon juft and apparent nece/fity, in 
“ as ample a manner as our lieutenant-general by fea or land, or our lieutenants in the coun- 

ties of England. And we give Sir Walter Ralegh full power to appoint fuch captains and 


» King Jama his Dtdaratm, p. 4. 


“ other 


# 


Digitized by ^iOOQIC 


4 


cxcvi 


The LIFE of 

other commanders and minifters under him as fhall be requifite for the better ordering and 
“ governing his company. We further command the wardens of the cinque ports, cuflomers, 
“ and other officers, quietly to permit Sir Wither Ralegh, and all who fiiall adventure with 
“ him, to pafs to the faid South or other parts of America, pofTefs’d and inhabited as aforefaid, 
“ and to return with any goods whatever, and to fell or otherwife difpofe of the fame to the 
“ only ufc of him and his company •, paying the fifth part of all gold, filver, bullion, 

“ as before, imported, and other cuftoms and duties aforefaid. And thefe prefents, (Jc. fhall 
<l be to the faid wardens, &c, fufficient warrant. And we grant to the faid Sir Walter Ralegh, 
“ that thefe our letters patents or the inrollment thereof, with all the grants, claufes, &c. therein, 
“ fhall be fufficient and effeftual in law, any law, ftatute, &c. notwithftanding. Witnefs 
“ ourfelves, the 26th day of Augujl , in the 14th year of our reign of England, France and 
“ Ireland and of Scotland, the 50th. Per breve de private ftgillo .” 

This abftraft is made from the faid commiffion, as it is printed in king James's ’Declaration • > 
and may agree with that which feems alfo to have been given us from the records. b Whether 
there was, originally, any preamble to it we cannot fay. But there are authors who affirm, 
that in this commiffion king James called him his trujly and well-beloved Sir Walter Ralegh . e 
Tho’ thefe may be words of courfe in fuch like inflruments, yet if fornc words were thus taken 
out in that recital aforefaid, it might give reafon of inferring that by the fame liberty others 
have been fqueez’d in. Yet even as it is fuffer’d there to appear, *tis furcly far from being fo 
clearly penn'd in point of thofe limitations it is faid in his m.ijcfly’s Declaration he promis’d the 
Spanijh ambaffador: for here is no limitation to any part of America, not only the South parts 
but elfeavherc being authoriz'd, and all that are habitable, inhabited in fome degree or other 
by heathen and favage people: fo vague, fo equivocal, and difputablc is that diltinclion: not 
one word of Guiana , no owning of his own right, or the power he had lately given to pLnt 
there, no privilege for working any mine there, nor prohibition to meddle with the king of 
Spain’s fubjetts there or elfewhere, as another writer has W'ell obferv’d. a On the contrary, full 
liberty to carry what arms and ammunition they pleas’d for defence, if they fliould need it; and 
laftly, the royal affurance of enjoying unmoldled whatever they returned with. In fhort, this 
commiffion muft eafily be obferved to have been penn’d, how clearly foever pretended, as if 
king James did neither know of Sir Walter Ralegh’s intention for and at Guiana j tho’ a little 
before, he had the whole particulars thereof from Ralegh’s own hand, or that there were any 
Spaniards planted there ; tho’ he appears to have known that alfo from the Spanijh ambaffador 
himfelf, whofe own kinfman, as we fhall hear, was fent, during Ralegh's reftraint, from 
Spain, to build and colonize upon that very fpot to which Ralegh had now this unlimited com- 
million, as we may rather term it, to go. For ’tis fo much the reverfe of that clofe penn’d let¬ 
ter wherein Ralegh had, fo exprefiively, and fo unrefervedly, placed his whole truft of this voyage 
jn king James, that it feems contriv’d, both to hoodwink the Spaniard till the a&ion was over, 
tho’ the king betray’d it himfelf, and to fecure loop-holes fufficient for the royal authority 
againft his exceptions j e but they proved fo large, that it was thought expedient, in the end, 
as we fhall find, that the commiffion fhould not be infilled on to limit or reftrain any body. 

Whether this indiftindt power in that commiffion made Ralegh more or lefs importunate 
for his pardon, we cannot fay. . Some indeed write, that he laboured mainly to obtain it ; 
but they are led into that belief by the declaration aforefaid: whereas we find it exprefsly afferted 
in a letter of Carew Ralegh’s ; that his father had overtures made him of procuring his pardon 
for fifteen hundred pounds by Sir William St. John, one of the perfons of whom he purchas’d 
his freedom, therefore one whofe intcreft was the lefs to be doubted in this particular ; but 
that Sir Walter Ralegh conferring, a little before his departure from England, with Sir Francis 
Bacon (newly made lord keeper of the great feal, and not long after lord chancellor) upon 
this pecuniary pardon, he pofitively advifed Ralegh againft it in thefe words: Sir, the knee- 
timber of your voyage is money j fpare your pitrfe in this particular, for upon my life, you have 
a fufficient pardon for all that is pafs'd already, the king having, under Lis broad feal, made you 

admiral 

4 See the firft volume of State Trials, fol. 219, in the 
notes. 

e Roger Coke , in his State of England during the Four 
laft Reigns , obferves, page 84, “ That this commiffion but 
“ ill agreed with the treaty of peace made with the kiug 
€t of Spain in the fecond year of king James's reign.** 
And a little further, ** That in granting this commiffion, 

4t you fee (fays he) by what an undnlinguiih'd power 
“ covetoufnefs governs the aftions of princes as well as 
“ meaner men, againft (heir honour and intereft : for at 

" that 


a From page 9 to 24. 
b Vide Rymer\ Fad. vol. 16. fol. 789. 
c See Ralegh' 3 Remains, 12 mo. 1651, and in the laft 
edition, p. 200 5 where ’tis faid, Ralegh afterwards plead¬ 
ed thefe words in his commiffion, To his trujly and well- 
hrioved fuhjecl, &c. as what implyM a pardon: See alfo 
Coke'* Four laft Reigns, P- 85. Rapin's late Uijlory of 

England ; where he fays, this commiffion was directed 
a not re amt et feal Walter Ralegh . Alfo Mr. Twdal'i 

Putts on the fame place. 


Digitized by 



c 







cxcvu 


Sir IF A L TE R RALEGH. 


admiral of your fleet, and given you power of the martial law over your officers and folders , 1 
But we are elfcwhere told, that even for lefs than half that money beforemention’d, that is to 
fay, “ for feven hundred pounds , the faid Sir William St. John, and alfo Sir Edward Villiers 
“ (before fpoken of) offer’d Sir Waller Ralegh not only his full pardon, but liberty not to go 
“ his voyage if he pleas’d ; and that he rclus’d both ; the rather bccaufe he was told by Sir 
“ Francis Bacon (as above) that his faid commiflion was as good a pardon for all former 
«* offences, as the law of England could afford him.” b 
And now, near feven months alter the date of his commiflion, began his fleet to appear, or 
rather that part of it which lay in the Thames, and confided of feven fail. From the Survey 
which was taken thereof by the appointment of Charles earl of Nottingham the lord admiral, 
on the 15th of March in the year laft named, it appears, that the firfl of them, or admiral, a 
brave (hip, as deferibed by one who might probably have feen it, and built by Ralegh himfelf, c 
was named the Defliny , of 440 tons, and 36 pieces (or more) of ordnance i Sir Waller Raleg/j 
general, and his Ion Walter captain: befides two hundred men, whereof fourfeore were gentle- 
mcn-volunteers and adventurers, mod of them Sir Walter’s relations ; which number was af¬ 
terwards encreas’d. Second , the Jafon of London, 240 tons, and 2 5 pieces of ordnance •, captain 
John Pennington vice-admiral, fourfeore men, one gentleman and no more. Third , the En¬ 

counter, 160 tons, 17 pieces of ordnance; Edward Haft tugs captain : (no men more, except 
the mailer, mention’d) but he dying in the Indies , was fuccecded in the command by captain 
Whitney. Fourth , the Thunder , 150 tons, 20 pieces of ordnance; Sir Warham Sentleger c ap~ 
tain, fix gentlemen, fixty foldiers, ten land men. Fifth , the Flying Joan , 120 tons, 14 pieces 
of ordnance; John Ctidley captain, twenty-five men. Sixth , the Southampton , 80 tons, 6 
pieces of ordnance; John Baxley captain, twenty-five mariners, two gentlemen. Seventh , 
the Page , a pinnace, 25 tons, 3 rabnets of brals ; James Barker captain, eight fiilors. d But 
before Ralegh left the coad of England , he was join’d by as many diips more : fo that his 
whole fleet confided of thirteen fail, befides his own (hip. e And tho* we cannot be fo parti¬ 
cular in the remaining parr, we may yet learn thus much of it, that one lhip, named the 
Conner line, was commanded by captain Key mis ; 1 another, called the Confidence! under 
the charge of captain Woolafton ; there was a ffallop, named the Flying Hart, under Sir John 
Ferae ; two flyboats, under captain Samuel King, and captain Robert Smith ; and a carvel , 
with perhaps another named the Chudley , befides. 8 
With the former part of the fleet Ralegh let fail from the Thames on the 28th of March 
afortfaid,*> which was in the year 1617, and was foon after ready to proceed at the Jfle of 
Wight, when fevcral little accidents fell out to retard his progrefs; for he day’d there lome 
days for Sir Warham Sentleger , whofe fhip, the Thunder, by the negligence of her mader, 
was at Jce in the Thames: alfo after Ralegh was got to Plymouth , captain Pennington was not 
come to the Jfle of Wight , and when he did arrive, was forced to ride back to London to en¬ 
gage die lady Ralegh to pafs her word for the money which was to redeem the bread for his (hip, 
amounting to thirty pounds, without which he could not have gone forward j nor could Sir 
John Feme proceed till Ralegh had fupply’d him with a hundred pounds by his coufin Herbert, 
and procur’d him another hundred pounds of his friend Dr. Sutcliffe , dean of Exeter , having 
furnilh’d himfelf with a third hundred before he came from Wales. Ralegh tarried alfo for 
captain Whitney, who had a third part of his victuals to provide; and to aflift him, Ralegh 
generoufly fold his plate at Plymouth , notwithftanding which, and Ralegh's having given him 
more countenance than any other of his officers, Whitney ran away from him at the Granadoes, 
and drew captain Woolafton with his fhip after him: Ralegh had further the patience to wait ten or 
twelve days for captain Baylcy , which he afterwards ungratefully requited by deferting alfo the 
fleet at the Canaries , for no apparent reafon but Ralegh's refufing him a French lhallop he 
took in the bay of Portugal ; and yet after Ralegh had bought her for fifty crowns, that the 
French might have no caufe of complaint, Bayley might have had her if he had defir’d it. 1 


“ that time the king granted this commiflion he was, by 
“ JJiebr, treating a marriage between prince 

u L at Its and Infanta of Spain, uyon terms of tnvo 
millions of money with her.” Rut what put a ttop to 
that nia ch, may, in the lame author, and others, be I ten. 

a If owe I’i l anti liar Letters, cth edit. 1678, vol. 2. 
P^^i. 


b (Alienations on 
pngc 10. 

r UmvcT.r l.titcrs , 

* A / .’1 it ana 6a -1 
i * unit j read, to ^ 


SatuUrfon s hiftory of king James, 
voF. 1. page 

'1 cf fu:h Slips as -jutre in the River 
< to Sta t under the Command tf Sir 


Walter Ralegh ; and of their Names , Tonnage, and number 
of Mm. Taken by certain Gentlemen appantsd thereto by 
the Right Honourable Charles Earl of Nottingham, &c. 
At the end of a farce pamphlet entitled, Neivs f Sir 
Walter Ralegh, isfe. Sent from a Gentleman of his Elect 
to a FHcnd in London, t$e. j^to. 1618. 

e Howel'i Letters, as before. 
f Idem , p. 6. 

if See Sir Walter Ralegh's apology, 8vo. 1650, p. 22 , 
26, 7 4. 

h Camden* Annals of King James. 

4 Ra/e^h's Apologv. p . 7, 8. o. 

f ff ' Fo- 


Digitized by CiOOQie 


CXCVlll 


Sets out for 
C uiana. 


The LIFE of 

For thefe reafons he was forced to linger fome months at Plymouth, lofing thereby a fair 
wind, and indeed the feafon of the year. The mean while he publifh’d in May following, 
fuch orders throughout his fleet, as gained him great applaufe, for the regularity and inftruction 
they eftablilh’d therein. A gentleman of his company, in a tra< 5 t he wrote of this voyage, 
having exprefs’d “ how many ways Sir IValter Ralegh was moved to enterprizes of this nature 
“ more than any other Englijhman whatfoever j by his wifdom and learning, variety of con- 
“ ference, and experience of places he had formerly held ; alio how much greater his noble 
“ ends have been than any man’s whatfoever of our nation who had attempted the likecourfes 
he proceeds “ to the particular government of his fleet; which tho’ others (fays he) have in 
** fome meafure obferved, yet in all the great volumes which have been written, touching 
«« voyages, there is no precedent of fo godly, fevere and martial government; fit to be en- 
“ graved in every man’s foul that covets to do honour to his king and country in the like 
«* attempts then exhibits “ a copy of the faid laws, articles arsd commandments , which we 
“ at this prefent (fays he) obferve and of which, it may not therefore be unacceptable, 
hereunder to prefent the heads. * 

It was the end of June or the beginning of July, before all his company join’d him 
and he fail’d from Plymouth : then being encounter’d with a violent ftorm fome eight leagues to 
the weft of Scilly, in which captain Cbidle/s Pinnace was funk, and captain King driven into 
Brifiol, Ralegh held it, from experience as well as reafon, the office of a commander of many 
fhips, and thofe of different failings and conditions, rather to take a port, and keep his fleet 


« Bearing this title. Orders to be obfenved by the Com¬ 
manders of the Fleet , and Land Companies , under the Charge 
and Con/tucl of Sir Walter Ralegh, Knight , bound for the 
South Parts of America or elfr&bere. Given at Plymouth 
in Devon, 3 May 1617. They firft enjoin, That divine 
icrvice (hould be read morning and evening, or, if in¬ 
terrupted by foul weather, once a day. That all (wearing 
and blafphcmy (hall, after admonition, be fined. That 
no man refute obeying his oflicer in all things commanded 
for the benefit of the journey, or rciufe to wait his turn 
as directed, the failors by the mailer and boatfwain, the 
land men by their captains, lieutenants and others. Two 
captains of the. watch in every (hip to choofe two foldicrs 
every night to fearch between decks that no fire nor candle¬ 
light be carried about after the watch fet, nor burning in 
any cabbin without a lanthorn: Tobacco forbidden all men 
but upon the upper deck. Land men to learn the names 
and places of the ropes, to afiift the failors upon deck, 
bailors to be trained as they do land men, fo that all may 
be elleemcd failors or foldicrs, as there is occalion : not to 
chafe or board any (hip without order of the general. 
To take nothing from any in league with his majejly ; 
but, in extremity, to agree for the price. Every night 
to tall allem the general’s (hip and follow hk light, and 
receive inftruftions of the courfe to be held, every morn¬ 
ing. If leparuted by Aorms, to open their iealed billets, 
firtt on this fide the North Cape if needful; (econdly, at 
the South Cape; third, after 23 degrees; and fourth from 
the height of Cape de Vert. Upon difeovering any fail 
at fca, either to windward or leeward of the admiral 
which he cannot difeern, if (he be large and Angle, to 
ftrike main top-fail and keife it again fo often as they 
judge it to be 100 tons burden, as if 200, to ftrike and 
hmte twice, &e* Upon difeovering a fmall (hip, to do 
the like with fore-top fail; but if many great (hips appear, 
both to ftrike the main-top (ail often, and hang out the 
enfign in the main top. If they go large before wind, to 
Hand as they do, till it may be judg'd the admiral had 
ieen the faid ftgns and (landing. But if you went large 
at the difeovery, to hale the (beets after a while, then go 
large again : fo if they have their tacks aboard, and you 
yours aboard at the difeovery, bear up a little and hale 
your (heet off again, to (hew us what courfe they hold. 
If you difeover a fail by night to windward of you, and 
you windward of the admiral, bear up to acquaint us : if 
you think you might fpeak with her, keep aloof, and fire 
a piece to give us knowledge. None to fire any ordnance 
but in difeovering a fail by night, in danger of enemies, 
tire, or finking. If you Ere by day we (hall know ’tis to 
make a lhip ftrike, if by night we (hall know you fee 
more fail than your own ; if you think we hear not, in a 
quarter ef an hour fire again. If you are in prefent danger 
by a leak, (hoot two pieces foon after one another; if by 
fire, throe in like manner. In foul weather every (hip to 
fit her fails to keep company with the reft, and not to run 
fo far a head by day but it may fall aftem the admiral at 
night. If attack'd by fca, the captain to appoint fnfficient 
uiBllaucc to the gunner, and, if needful, the cabbins be¬ 


tween deck to betaken down ; all beds and facks employ'd 
for bulwarks. Mufoetcers of every lhip to be divided under 
captains lor the forccaftlc, the waft and the poop. Gun¬ 
ners not to (hoot great ordnance at other diilance than 
point blank: officers to fee no loofe powder be carried 
between decks near liuftock, or match in hand. Hogf- 
heads faued in two, filled with water ready on the decks, 
and wet blankets ngtinft fire. Carpenters to be divided, 
in the hold and between decks, with leaden plates, plugs, 
at hand. Proper numbers of (ailors to be appointed 
to every fail under proper commanders: fo that all know¬ 
ing their charge and places, may do their duty without 
confufion or noife, none being to fpeak but the officers. 
No man to board a (hip of the enemy without order. 
Every (hip under lee of the enemy, mull labour to recover 
the wind, if the admiral endeavour it; or if the enemy be 
to leeward, the whole fleet to follow the admiral or other 
leading (hip within mufket /hoc of the enemy, giving Co 
much liberty to the leading (hip after her broad-fidc de¬ 
liver'd and her fail trim’d ; then the fecond (hip to give her 
fide t fo the third and fourth all taking as the firlt, and 
giving the enemy the other fide, (hall keep him under a 
perpetuaf volley : And thus to the windermoft (hip of the 
enemy, till it be batter'd to pieces or forced up to mtangl* 
the reft. If the admiral chace and is headmoft, the next 
(hio to take up his boat, unlefs otherwHe ordered ; the like 
to be done by thofe that follow other chafing (hips. The 
divided Mulketeers not to deliver their (hot but at fuch 
dillances as their commander direfls. Ships to be kept 
clean between decks. Ordnance not cloy’d with trunks 
and chefts. Provifions to be delivered to the lleward. Ap¬ 
parel to be in cloak-bags, except fome few chcfts that 
will not pciler the (hips. Fire-arms to be kept clean; if 
out of order, the officer to order the armorer to amend 
die*. No feafting or drinking between meals; or drink¬ 
ing healths on the (hip's provifion. Every captain, by 
his purfer or other officer, to take weekly accounts ol the 
vi&uals. No candles co be delivered by the (leward to 
any private man or private ufe. Whoever Heals apparel, 
vittuals, fcfr. to be punifh'd as a thief and murderer. No 
man to ftrike any officer on pain of death: private men 
ftfiking one another to be punifh'd by court martial. 
Players at cards or dice for apparel, arms, fcfr. to be di arm'd 
and made fwabbers. Cowards upon any landing or 
otherwife, to be difarmed and made labourers te carry 
vi&uals for the reft. None to land in foreign parts without 
order from fome chief commander 5 and where they land, 
none to force either chriftian or heathen women on pain 
of death. When landed in the Indies , not to eat fruits 
unknown, and fuch not eaten by birds on the tree, or 
beads under it. Not to deep.on the ground, or eat new 
flcfh till falted two or three hours. To fwim in no rivers 
but where the Indians do, and to ufe them with courtefy. 
Other orders on the land to be eftablifh'd by general con- 
fent when they fhould arrive there. A flag on the miz/m 
(hrouds of the admiral, was to be the fignal for lummon- 
ing the officers to council. bee a traft call’d, AVwi 
Sir Waller Ralegh, 4 to. 1618 ; from page 19 to 28. 

together. 


I 


d 

r 

t 

E 

i, 

0 

Is 

i’ 

L 

K 

P 

4ilC 

it 

\i.\ 

t i 
jp 
hi 
Ic 
fe 

S> 

} 

ilL 

fc 

fc: 

fev 

ti 

r 

f?'; 

fel 

i* 

t, 

in 

fc 

y, 

(z: 


t<: 

1 

**!... ■ 

“‘tii: 

''■ii 
if» 







Digitized by 



1 





CXClX 


Sir WALTER RALEGH. 


tbgtther, than to endanger the lofs of his nriafts and rigging, or tire advantage which enemies 
might take, or the lofs of more time in attending another rendezvous, by the danger of a 
fcparation. Therefore he put into Ireland , and was oblig’d to ftay feven weeks there: fo that 
the winds only were to be accufed now (as he obferves) for their delay. And here, tho’ by 
bis credit he procur’d fifty oxen, which he distributed among his fleet, fome of the crew fpared 
Hot, at his return, to defame him with having taken care to re victual himfelf and none of the 
reft. On the 19th of Auguft he fet forward from Cork. “ 

Whbn he arriv’d at the tfle of Lancerota , on the 6th of September , Ralegh lent a requeft to ^ n ; ves at 
the governor, that he might be admitted to treat for fome provifions: the governor fent back Lance>ota. 
word, that he would confer with Ralegh foimfelf, if he would come attended but by «tne gentle¬ 
man, and armed only with their rapiers. Ralegh taking with him’lieutenant Bradjhaw met the 
governor, who agreed, that if he would fend up an Englijh fatftor, wliofe Ihrp then rode in 
tfie road, whatever the ifland afforded fhould be deliver'd at a reafonable rate. Ralegh fent 
the fattor, but die governor pracraftinated, and at laft fent word, that urrlefs he Would embark 
his men which lay on the fca (hare, the iflanders were fo jealous they durft not divide from 
one another to Supply him. Ralegh comply’d, but when half his men were got aboard, the 
ifianders began to offer violence -upon the reft. They flew one, and fent the faff or to tell 
Ralegh they would part with nothing to him, for that tliey believed his company to be the 
Tnrkijh fleet which had lately deftroy’d Puerto Sanclo. The Englifo hereupon would have gone 
and helped themfelves, but Ralegh confidering what difpleafure it might give at home, how 
die merchants might firffer, and the poor Englijh fatftor be ruin’d, complained to the governor 
of the Grand Canaries j of whom he alfo defired leave to take water undifturb’d j but inftead 
of anfwer, when he landed fome hundred men in the defart part of the ifland where they found 
lfefh water, there ambufh was laid, by which one of his men was wounded to death, and more 
had been flain had not captain Thtrnhurjt and lieutenant IIayman t two valiant gentlemen, 
feconded by Sir IVarham Sentlegcr and young captain Ralegh , with half a dozen more, made 
forty of them run away. From this unavoidable fray. Bay ley found pretence to turn tail and 
go home again. 

In want of water they fail’d to Gomera, one of the ftrongeft and beft defended of all thefe At Gomera . 
iflands, and the beft port. The Spaniards , being feated upon the very walk of tlie fra, roughly 
fainted the fleet at its firft entrance with their cannon, and the Englijh returned their falutation. 

But as loon as Ralegh recover’d the harbour, and commanded there fhould be no more firing, 
he fent a Spaniard he had with him, afhore, to afliire the governor he had no intention to 
make war with any of the Spanijh king’s fubjetfts > and if any harm had been done by his great 
ordnance to the town it was their fault, who, by fhooting firft, gave the occafion. The go¬ 
vernor anfwer*d, he thought they had been the Turkijh fleet aforefaid ; but having been certified 
they were chriftians and EngliJfjmen , and fought nothing but water, he was willing to let them 
take what they pleas’d, if he might be affur’d they would make no attempt upon the town- 
houfes, or their gardens and fruits. Ralegh reply’d, that he would give him Iris faith, and 
the word of the king of Great Britain , his foveraign, that if the people of the town or ifland 
fhould lofc fo much as an orange or a grape by any one of his men without paying for it, he 
would hang him up in the market-place. And Ralegh kept his men in fuch good difcipJine, 
that the governor in divers letters (for he wrote to him every day) acknowledg'd how punctually 
Ralegh kept his faith with him, in regard to the inoffenfive behaviour of his company •, and 
alfo how much himfelf was beholden to him for his particular civilities. For his countefs> 
who was of Englijh extract, being a Stafford by the mother’s fide, and of the houfc of Horn e 
by the father, having fent Ralegh fome prefents of fruit, fugar and rufk, he return’d others of 
greater value. h The earl moreover, gave him at his departure, on the 21ft of September, a 
letter to Bon Biego Sarmiento the Spanijh ambaflador in England , teftifying how honourably 
Ralegh had comported himfelf to the Morijco's in thefe Canary IJlands during the fourteen 
days that lie was among them. Before he fet fail, he difeharg’d a bark of the Grand Canaries , 
taken by one of his pinnaces, coming from Cape Blanc in Africa ; who complaining that his 
men had eaten of their fifli to the value of fix duckets, Ralegh gave them eight. 

After having weather’d through a violent hurricane and fome vaft ftiowers of rain, befides 
dangers no lefs fearful within •» ficknefe now beginning to vifit his fhip, c he arriv’d on the 2d 


» Sir Walter Ralegh’i Journal of his {laft) voyage to 
Guiana , the original manufcript, lol. i. 

k Tho* the pi denis P.alegb return’d to this governor’s 
lady are not mention'd in his Apology, whence his progrefs 
hitherto is chiefly extracted, I find, in his own Journal 
aforefaid of this ver;agr, that they conliftcd of an extract 


Of 

of amber, ambergrrefe, a fine cut-work ru if, a very excel¬ 
lent picture of Alary Magdalen, and a good quantity of 
ro/e-ivatcr, which was of great value and cllccm in thele 
parts. 

« Whereof there died, his provoft mnithnl If. Steed on 
the ztft of September ; his mailer luigeon AVu-.W/on the 

a>_)th; 


Digitized by v^ooQie 



cc 

At Bfwo. 


At U icfsco. 


The LIFE of 

of Oclober at the ifle of Bravo : and here alfo underwent great hazards and hard/hips j befides 
the ficknefs daily fpreading among his men. For whereas all thole who navigated even between 
Cape dc Vert and America, were wont to pafs between fifteen and twenty days at moll, he 
found the wind fo contrary to him, and indeed to nature, fo many florins anil Ihowcrs, that he 
fper.t near fix weeks in the paflage from hence ; by real'on whereof, and the burning heat of the 
climate, he was in great diftrefs for water. Here lofing anchors, cables and water-calk, be* 
fidcs two more of his company, 1 he was driven after two days, by a kind of turuado, from 
this ifiand *, which, as well as the others he touch’d at, before mention’d, he has well deicrib’d 
in his Journal of this unfortunate voyage. After his return home, detraction did not fpare 
to give out, that he went to Cape de Vert knowing it to be inlefted, and thereby loft many of 
his men j whereas he was a hundred and fixty leagues from that Cape, according to his own 
account, in his Apology ; and had threefcore men ill in his own fhip before he came to Bravo, 
as we find it in his Journal j tho’ if he had gone to that Cape now, after the rains which had 
fallen, there had been little danger of any fuch infection. All places that lie near great rivers, 
in low and moorilh grounds, do indeed, as he rightly obferves, fubjodt their inhabitants to fevers 
and agues •, as even along both fides of our own river Thames ; and other infection is not found 
cither in the Indies or in Africa , except when the cafterly wind or breezes are excluded and 
kept off by fome high mountains from the valleys, whereby the air wanting motion, ftagnates, 
and becomes exceedingly unhealthful, as at Nombre de Dios, and fome other places. But, fays 
he, as good fuccefs admits of no examination , fo the contrary allows of no exafe. b 

Hence they proceeded, on the 4th of Oclober, towards Guiana. But the ficknefs revifited 
and deftroy’d many of thofe whom the florins fpared, carrying off numbers of his ableft men 
both for lea and land, no Jcfs than forty-two of his own fhip ending their voyage with their 
lives,' moftly in this month, at leafl before they reach’d the coaft. u About the 12th of the 
fame month, when their ficknefs began to be at the height, and they at the greateft diftance 
from any fhore, they were many other ways alfo diftrefs’d ; for when they began to be in 
fcarcity of water, they were alfo becalm’d ; yet ever threatned with extremity of tempeftuous 
weather, from the ftrange and unufual alterations in the atmofphere. One while the horizon 
muffled as it were in fuch thick and fearful darknefs, that they were forced to fleer a day or 
two'by candle-light. At other times, arched and overfhot with gloomy di(colorations j fo that 
watery rainbows were continually invading their eyes, or heavy Ihowers their bodies, and dead 
calms retarding their fhips. Afterwards at Trinidad , Ralegh obferved, befides two water- 
galls, no lefs than fifteen rainbows in one day, and one of them bent as it were both ends 
together, making a perfect circle ; and thefe were ever followed with wet weather •, for as he 
alio noted, efpecially of the morning rainbow, it did not here produce a fair day, as in Eng¬ 
land. e But one good efl'efl enfu’d, that when their water was fo fcarce, near the latter end of 
this month, that the (hip's crew was reduced to half allowance, they laved fome hogfheads, 
which fell from the clouds, and all quenched their thirft with great cans of this bitter draught, 
as Ralegh deferibes that pin water to have been. On the lall day of this month, as he was 
raifed abruptly out of his bed in a fweat, by the noife which a fudden great guft had occafion’d 
in his fhip, he got a cold, which turned to a burning fever, and caft him down for twenty 
days together ; in which time he receiv’d no other fuftenance than a few ftew’d prunes, but 
drink, every hour, both day and night ; and fweated fo exceflivcly, that he was forced to 
lhift three times every day, and as often at night. 1 At laft the violence of his tlifeafe was 
abated, by the oranges and other fruits he had 'received at Gomcra of the governor’s lady ; 
which he had carefully preferved in find to his great refrcfhment; and without which, as he 
owns himfelf, he could not have lived : 6 But it was double the time before he could recover 
in any tolerable degree from this (harp vifitation. 

In this flow and fickly manner they arriv’d at laft, on the 1 ith of November , at the north 
cape of VAapoco. And here Ralegh fent for his old fervant Leonard, the Indian, who had 


29th ; and on the laft day of this month, died his foil’s 
ierjeant, Holer ft . Sir H alter Ralegh' % Journal of his laft 
ruynoi *0 Guiana. 

Lieutenant Allen , who died the 2d of Oflober, and 
tiie c.ipe merchant Key mis , who died the day following. 

Ralegh’/ Apology, p. 18, 19. 

« Sir Walter Ralegh’/ letter to his wifi from Caliana , 
the 14th of November* in his Remains (the laft edit) 
p. 166. 

<1 Mr. John Howard, enfign to captain North , died the 
fitli o i():lober. Alfo Mr. Fowler, Sir Halter'* principal 
refiner. 11 is fervant Crab, died the 8th; and all his other 
/crvar.ts were fo ill, he had not any hut hit pa^cs to 


3ttend on him. Captain John Piggot* Ralegh's lieutenant- 
general by land, died the 13th : alio •• Mr. John Talbot* 
who had lived (lavs Raltgh) with me eleven years in 
11 the Tower ; an excellent general fcbolar, and a faithful 
“ tiue man as liv’d.” Then alio died Mr. Gardiner* 
and Mr. Mordant ; befides his own cook, Francis . Cap¬ 
tain Jennings died the 16th, and hi. coufin, lieutenant 
Peyton, the 18th of the fame month ; beJides many others 
of lefs note. Ralegh's Journal, tse. 

e Sir Walter Ralegh’/ Journal* as before. 
f Idem. 

* Ralph's letter in his Remains, as afurefaid, p. 16*. 

been 


Digitized by boogie 






CC 1 


Sir WALTER RALEGH. 

been in England three or four years with him ; but he was removed fo far up in the country, 
there was no purfuing him. * Therefore he flood away for Caliana , which is in 5 degrees, 
on the coaft of Guinn *, at the firft difeovery call'd Port Howard , k where the caflique was 
alfo his fervant, and had lived with him in the Tower of London two years. There* he At 
arrived in a day or two, having palled the ifland noted for its multitude of birds and filk-bear- 
ing trees, and from thence fent for his fervant Harry , the Indian , who, with other ca/Iiques, 
came and brought him great ftore of Cajfavi bread and roafted mullets, with plantanes, pinas, 
piftacias, (Ac. But Ralegh ventured not to eat of the pinas, which tempted him exceedingly, 
till after a day or two’s airing on the lhore in a tent which was there pitch’d for him ; then he 
alfo eat fome armadillo and a little pork, and began to gather ftrength. Here alfo he landed 
his Cck men, and recovered many •, and here he buried captain Edward Haftings (the lord 
Huntington’s brother) who died ten days or more before, and with him his fetjeant major, Hart % 
and captain Henry Snedale i the charge of whofe Ihip Ralegh gave to his fervant Captain Robert 
Smith of Cornwall. e Here he alfo fet up his barges and lhallops which they brought from 
England , in quarters, cleanfed his Ihips, trim’d up his calk, and fupply’d them with water } 
fix’d up a forge, and made fuch iron works as they wanted. Thus on that lhore, and this 
river they employed and refrelh’d themfelves for about three weeks; during which time, Ralegh 
was very much carefs’d by the Indians of his old acquaintance aforefaid, and the other natives of 
this place, who cherilhed him daily with the bell provifions that the country yielded, and 
offer’d him all kind of obedience, even to the making him their foveraign prince and ruler, if Offer’d to be 
he would abide and fettle among them •, fo frelh continued his memory, and fuch unanimous™^® m 
impreffions of homage and refpedt had his former behaviour ftill left upon them ; which offer 
he mentions with the greateft modefty and indifference in the dilpatch he now lent to England. 

For in this interval, captain Peter Alley , one of his company, who was much troubled with a 
vertiginous diforder in his head, having got leave to return home, and the opportunity of a 
Dutch veflel which lay there, Ralegh among other letters, fent one by him to his lady, dated 
from Caliana the 14th of November. Herein, fays he, ** I cannot write to you but with a 
“ weak hand, for I have fuffer*d the moft violent calenture for fifteen days that ever man did, 

“ and lived 1 but God that gave me a ftrong heart in all my adverfities, has alfo now ftrength- 
“ ned me in the hell-fire of heat. We have had two moft grievous ficknefles in our Ihip, of * 

“ which forty-two have died, and there are yet many fick •, but having recover'd the land of 
“ Guiana this 12th of November , I hope we (hall recover them. We are yet two hundred 
“ men, and the reft of our fleet are reasonably ftrong, ftrong enough I hope to perform what 
“ we have undertaken, if the diligent care at London to make our ftrength known to the Spanijh 
“ king by his ambaflador, has not taught the Spani/b king to fortify all the entrances againft 
“ us. Howfoever, we mull make the adventure, and if we perilh, it lhall be no honour for 
“ England, nor gain for his majefty, to lofe, among many others, an hundred as valiant 
“ gentlemen as England hath in it.” Then having fpoken of Baylefs running away from 
him, the unnatural weather they had laboured through, and their tedious palfage, with the pre¬ 
fer of fruits which had fo much relieved him, as is before obferved, befides the death of fome 
principal officers, and recommendation of himfelf to fome friends in London , efpecially his fon 
Carew , he concludes thus: “ To tell you that I might be here king of the Indians were a 
“ vanity j but my name hath ftill lived among them > here they feed me with frefh meat, and 
“ all that the country yields: all offer to obey me.” d At this time alfo, a gentleman of his 
company having drawn up a difeourfc in praile of Guiana , and in honour of this adventure - y 
efpecially of the principal difeoverer Ralegh himfelf, it being dated from Caliana November the 
17th, fent it alfo into England by the fame bearer i * and it was printed the following year. ‘ 

On the 4th of December they left this river, and came next day to the Triangle jflands ■, g 
but were all in danger of leaving their bones upon the (holes before they got thither. For they 
were laid aground, efpecially Ralegh' s larger Ihip, for the fpace of twenty-four hours or more *, 


1 Ralegh's journal. 

* Ralegh's Apology for his Voyage to Guiana, p. 21. 

9 Sir Walter Ralegh'/ Journal, and his Apology, p. 22. 

- Ralegh’/ Remains, (1 aft edit) p. 166. 

e This captain Peter Alley arrived in England the latter 
^ of January following ; for Camden, in his Annals of 
James, fays, that on the 31ft of the faid month, he 
ngnihed (to the ftate) that Sir Walter Ralegh was very 
fickly, and that feveral volunteers died of their ficknefs. 

J Under the title of. News from Sir Walter Ralegh : 
Wth the true Deft r ip t ion of Guiana $ as alfo a Relation of 


the excellent Government , and much Hope of the Prof per ity 
of the Foyage. Sent from a Gentleman of his Fleet , to a 
mop fpedal Friend of his in London ; from the River Cali¬ 
ana, on the Coaft of Guiana, November 17, 1617. Bf 
R. M. 4 to. 1618. With a wooden cut of Sir Walter 
Ralegh in the title page, in band and collar, and black 
(velvet) doublet lac’d with filver, much like that graved on 
copper, before the old editions of his liiftory of the World. 
For this fcarce traft, among others, I have been much 
beholden to the courtefy o! Sir Han: Shane. 
t Ralegh’/ Journal, &c. 

t t t and 


Digitized by UjOoq le 



CC11 


divides his 
H^ct at the 
Triangle 
Ijlands . 


11 is hftrut* 
tions to 
A tjmis . 


The L I F E of 

and had it not been*fair weather, would never have got off the ccaft, having not aLove two 
fathom of water. Here, after a few days, when all the fleet was gather’d together, it being 
conlider’d in a general confultation, that Ralegh himfelf who had grappled with the ficknels for 
fix weeks, and was now rather fo much relaps’d than recover’d, that he could not move other- 
wile than as he was carried in a chair, * they refolved that there was no thoughts of his under¬ 
taking the paflage up the Orenoque in perfon. And further, tho* they could never underhand 
by Keymis , who was the firft of any nation that had enter’d die main month of that river, nor 
by any of their mariners, who had traded there many years for tobacco, what certainty the water 
was of ; yet having found by experience, that fhips at eleven foot water, lay aground three 
days in palling up j therefore there was no attempting it with Ralegh's fliip, which being 
heavier, and charged with near forty pieces of ordnance, drew leventcen foot. Nor would his 
fon with the reft have ventured, with the provifions they had, through any other perfon’s af- 
furance or refolution of flaying to relieve them at a place appointed, againft the forces expedted 
to approach, but that of his father and their general. b So it was refolved by all, that the five 
larger fliips (hould ride at Punta de Gallo in Trinidad under Ralegh , to fecure their retreat, and 
the five Idler (for this was now the whole number of his fleet) with five or fix foot companies 
of fifty men each, fhould enter the river. According to this determination, the fleet was here 
divided y that is to fay, captain Whitney in the Encounter \ Woolajlon in the Confidence ; King 
in the SupplySmith in a Pink, and Hall in a Carvel. The companies had for thrir leaders 
captain Charles Parker , and captain North (brothers to the lord Mounteagle and the lord North i) 
young Ralegh , captain Thornhurfi of Kent j captain Pennington's lieutenant, who feems to be 
another Hally and captain Chidley' s lieutenant, Prideux. Sir Warham St. Leger , Ralegh's 
lieutenant, who had the charge of thefe companies, fell fick at Caliana ; fo it was confcr’d on 
George Ralegh, Sir Walters nephew, who had ferved with great commendation in the Low 
Countries i and captain Key mis had the chief charge for their guidance and landing within the 
river. c But Keymis having laid down the plan of his intended attempt upon the mine, and 
undertaken to difeover it with fix or eight perfons in Sir John Feme's lhallop, Ralegh , upon 
confideration, difliking that method of proceedure, determined to alter it, and therefore gave 
him his inftru&ions in the following words. 

“ Keymis , Whereas you were refolv’d, after your arrival into the Cronoque , to pafs to the 
“ mine with my coufin Herbert and fix mufketiers, and to that end defired to have Sir John 
“ Feme's lhallop j I do not allow of that courfe ; becaufe you cannot land fo fecretly, but 
«* that fome Indians on the river fide may dilcover you, who giving knowledge thereof to the 
“ Spaniard , you may be cut off before you recover your boat. I therefore advife you to fuf- 
“ for the captains and companies of the Englijh to pafs up weftward of the mountain Aio, from 
“ whence you have no lefs than three miles to the mine, and to encamp between the Spanijh 
“ town and you, if there is any town near it j that being fo fecured, you may make trial what 
“ depth and breadth the mine holds, and whether or no it will anfwer our hopes. And if 
“ you find it royal, and the Spaniards begin to war upon you, then let the ferjeant-major re- 
*« pell them, if it is in his power, and drive them as far as he can: but if you find the mine is 
“ not fo rich as to perfuade the holding of it, and it requires a fecond fupply, then lhall you 
“ bring but a bafket or two to fatisfy his majefty that my defign was not imaginary but true, 
“ tho’ not anfwerable to his majefty’s expectation ; for the quantity of which I never gave 
*« affurance, nor could. On the other fide, if you lhall find any great number of foldiers are 
“ newly fent into the Orenoque , as the caflique of Caliana told us there were, and that the 
“ paffages are already enforc’d, fo as without manifeft peril of my fon, yourfelf and the other 
«* captains, you cannot pafs towards the mine ; then be well advifed how you land, for I know 
“ (that a few gentlemen excepted) what a feum of men you have, and I would not for all 
“ the world, receive a blow from the Spaniard to the dilhonour of the nation. I myfelf, for 
“ my weaknefs, cannot be prefent, neither will the company land except I abide by the fhips, 
“ the galleons of Spain being daily expected. Piggol the ferjeant-major is dead, Sir Warham 
“ St, Leger , my lieutenant, without hope of life, and my nephew, George Ralegh , your fer- 
“ jeant-major, now, but a young man : it is therefore on your judgment that I rely \ who, Itruft» 
** God will direct for the beft. Let me hear from you as foon as you can. You lhall find 
“ me at Punta de Gallo dead or alive ; and if you find not my fhips there, yet there you lhall 
“ find their allies •, for I will fire with the galleons if it come to extremity, but run away I 
“ will never.” d 

* lli> letter to Sir Ralph ///.wgW, in his Remains , & Srt Ralegh’/ Apology, p, 26. 

(Ult edit.* p. 1 "O. c Ralegh % j Journal, &c. -Ralegh’/ Apology, p. 26. 

With 


Digitized by 


Google 













Sir WALTER RALEGH. 


ccm 


With thefe inftruflions thofe five fhips fet forward, parting from Ralegh and the reft of 
the fleet at the iflands aforefuid, with a month’s provifion, on the ioth of December. * But 
when they found a new Spanijh town, call’d St. Thome, confiding of about 140 houfes 5 tho* 
lightly built, with a chapel, a convent of Francijcans, and a garril'on erected on the main channel 
of the Orenoqitc, b about twenty mile* diftant from the place where Antonio Berreo , the governor 
taken by Ralegh in his firft difeovery and conqucft here, attempted to plant i Keymis and the 
reft thought themfelves oblig’d, through fear of leaving the enemy’s garrifon between.them and 
their boats, to deviate from their inftrudions, which enjoin’d them, firft to carry a little party 
to make trial of the mine, under a flicker of their own camp ; and then to deal with the Spantjh 
town as it Ihould give caufe, by permitting or offering to prevent them. So they concluded to 
land in one body, and encamp between the mine and die town i c whereby, tho* themfelves 
were fomething ftronger, their boats were fubjett to the fame expofure, and the mine left untry’d 
contrary to Ralegh's order. For, about three weeks after dieir departure, landing, by night, 
it feems, nearer the town than they fufpeded, and meaning to reft themfelves on the river-fide 
till morning, they were, in the night-time, fet upon by the Spanijh troops, appriz’d of, and fore¬ 
arm’d for their coming, as we lhall fee. This charge was fo unexpected, and ftruck the com¬ 
mon foldiers with fuch amazement and confufion, that had not the captains and fome Other 
valiant gendemen made head, and animated the reft, they had %11 been cut to pieces. But the 
reft, by their example, foon rallying, made fuch a vigorous defence againft the Spaniards , 
that they drove them to a retreat, till in the warmth of their purfuit, the Englijb found them¬ 
felves at the Spanijh town before they knew where they were. Here the battle was renewed 
afrefti upon them, being afiaulted by the governor himfelf Don Diego Palameca, and four or 
five captains at the head of their companies i againft whom, captain IValter Ralegh , a brave 
and fprighdy young man, now twenty-three years of age, but fonder of glory than fafety, 
not tarrying for the mulketiers, rufli’d foremoft, at the head of a company of pikes, and 
having killed one of the Spanijh captains, was hfmfelf fliot by another ^ but prefling ftill 
forward, with his fword upon Erinetta, probably the captain who had (hot him, this Spaniard 
with the butt-end of his mufleet fell’d him to the ground, and after thefe words. Lord have 
mercy upon me, and projper your enter prize t young Ralegh fpoke no more. Hereupon John Y oun gjf a ;^v 
Plejfington, his ferjeant, thruft the laid Spanijh captain through the body with his halbert. Twaflain. 
commanders more of the Spaniards were at the fame time flain, one by John of Morocco, another 
of young Ralegh’s company: and laftly the governor himfelf alfo loft his life in the faid en¬ 
gagement j i which happen’d, as Camden reckons, the fecond of January. e The leaders 
being thus all difpatch’d, and many of their foldiers, the reft fled and were difper’d, fome to 
flicker about the market-place, from whence they kill’d and wounded the Englijh at pleafure j 
fo as they faw no way left to be fafe, but by firing the town about their ears, and driving them 
to the woods and mountains, whence they ftill keep the Englijb waking with perpetual alarms, f 
Others were more careful to defend the pafiages to their mines, of which they had three or 
four not far diftant, than they had been to defend the town itfelf. 8 But for the magazine of 
tobacco, which one writer, among other erroneous reprefentations of this voyage, thought mighc 
countervail the charge of it, could it with fome other things have been preferved, h it feems 
not to have been confumcd by the Englijh •, becaufe Ralegh had enough thereof foon after to 
have paid for the victualling of his fleet, if there had been occafion, as himfelf has related.» 

All obftru&ions feemingthus removed, captain Keymis had now a fair opportunity to make 
what trial he pleas’d at the mine ; and that he did attempt the difeovery will appear by the 
confequcnce, as his preparations do in the letter he wrote to Ralegh fix days after the atftion 
afordaid, tho’ it came not long after to his hands. Herein having open’d in as gradual and 
difcreet a manner as he could, how gallantly his fon fell in this exploit, and obferved, that if 


» Sir Walter Ralegh’/ ’Journal. 
b Heylin'r Cofmograpby, p. 1084. 

• Set Ralegh’* Apology, p. 29; and his Letter to the 
loid Carenu, touching the action at Guiana ; printed at 
the end of the faid Apology, p. 64. 

^ See Ralegh’* Apology, p. 30, 31 ; and his Letter to 
his wife, in his Remaim (the laft edition) page 178. 
(where there is an egregious error of the prefs, mix. I fame 
(for l fay) five of them flain at the entrance of the town ; 
as if Ra/egb had been prefent at the action) See alfo, for 
young Ralegh' s lall words captain Keymit his letter from 
the Oremque to Sir IValter Ralegh, in his Apology, p. 33. 
Tis laid in king Jamei’s Dec/araeion, p. 34, that young 
Rplegb, liekelieft to know his fathei’s fecrec, when he leu 
his foldiers upon this town us'd thefe or the like words. 


“ Come on my hearts, here i* the mine that we mull 
“ expeCt, they that look for any other mine are fools.”* 
As if Ralegh was at fo much toil, hazard and expence 
only to break the peace, and drive a pack of poor Spa¬ 
niard out of a warthlefs town. Nor doe> it fetm likely, 
that if young Ralegh knew this to be his father’s fccret, 
that he would thus difclofe it; but rather if he did utter 
fuch an expreflion, that he fuddenly invented it to give 
his men hopes of booty, knowing that would beft excite 
them to bravery. 

* Anuah of King James. 

* Ralegh’j Apology, p. 31. 

* Ralegh’/ Remaim, (laft edition) p 178. 

k Howel’* Letter *, 5th edition, p, 6. 

1 Ralegh’* Remeum, p. 176. 

** his 


Digitized by LiOOQie 


CC1V 


The LIFE of 

« his extraordinary valour and vigour of mind had not led them all on, it had never been at* 
** tempted, nor performed as it was, to his furviving honourhaving alfo obfcrved, that, 
«« foar of the beft houfes in the town belonged to refiners ; tho* he had feen no coin or bullion, 
*« but only a little plate " he adds, “ Now I propofe, God willing, to vifit the mine, not 
“ eight miles from the town ; fooncr I could not go by reafon of the murmurings, thedifeords, 
“ and vexations wherewith the ferjeant-major is perpetually tormented.” Concluding with thde 
words: tl I have fent your lordlhip a parcel of fcatter’d papers, and referve a cart-load \ one 
“ roul of tobacco, one tortoife, with fome oranges and lemons j praying God to give you 
*« ftrength and health of body, and a mind armed againft all extremities. I reft ever to be 
“ commanded, this 8 th of January, 1617, your lordfhip’s, Key mis." * 

Indeed Ralegh had need of thofe prayers, on his own part, at this time, not only in his 
ficknefs, but even in the intervals he had of recovery • for here to give fome account of him 
in this time of their feparation, we may obferve, that he lay with the five larger fhips under 
himfelf, captain John Pennington , his vice-admiral, one of the moft fufficient gentlemen for 
the fea, that England has, fays he •, Sir IVarham St. Leger, another valiant and worthy gcntle- 
At Vunta at man. Sir John Feme , and captain Chidley of Devon , b moftly at Punt a de Gallo , and other 
ports about Trinidad, no lefs than a hundred and fifty miles from the reft of his fleet, making 
the adventure up the Oronoqut, yet in daily apprehenfions of meeting with the Spanijh armada » 
fent purpofely to lay wait for and deftroy him ; which it would probably have done, after the 
great ficknefs which had fo much weakned his men, and under this difadvantageous divifion of 
his fhips, but that the enemy luckily waited foT him in a wrong place. Befides, it having 
been fall'ely rumour’d in his fleet, that he brought out of England twenty-two thoufand broad- 
pieces of gold with him, fome of his crew traiteroufly confpir’d to fail away, while he was gone 
aftiore in his barge, to take views and make difeoveries of the country, 1 which he was fome- 
times wont to do, as at Terra de Brea , or the Pitch-land , as he calls it, from the bitumenous fubftance 
which fo remarkably iflues there, as he has well deferib’d •, and when he travers’d fome woods 
to feck the trees that yield that precious baljhm whereof he got a fmall quantity, which fmek 
like angelica ; d fo to have left him a prey to famine, wild beafts, or the no lefs unmerciful 
Spaniards , by whom he might have been flea’d alive, as other Englijhmen , who came but to 
traffick, had formerly been. Add to this the many provocations he received from the Spaniards 
who were in any of the ports where his men landed, only to exchange a few commodities for 
tobacco or other products of the country, not only by the moft opprobrious language, but dif- 
charging fometimes a volley of twenty mufkets at a time upon them, whereby Sir John Fern t 
had fome of his men kill’d. e And laftly, the uneafinefs he was continually in, that he could 
hear no tidings of the reft of his fleet thus detach’d upon the adventure. And tho’ fome Indian 
fpies were brought to him in the beginning of February , by one of whom, who could fpeak 
the Spanijh tongue, he was firft inform’d, that the Englijh in Orenoque were reported, by fome 
Tivitivas he had fpoken with, to have taken St. Thome and flain Diego de Palameca the gover¬ 
nor, with captain Erinetta, and captain John Rues ; that the reft fled, and that two Englijh 
captains were likewife kill’d : Tho* the fame was foon after alfo aflerted, with other particulars* 
by another Indian \ yet Ralegh would not fet them down, till he knew the truth > which af¬ 
terwards endeavouring to conipafs of other Indians , faid to have been at the taking of that 
town, whom he fent in purfuit of, they efcaped, and he was not certified in the report, even 
near the middle of this month, for fo far his own Journal extends. 1 

In the mean while Keymis made an attempt for the mine, and had fet forward with captain 
Thornhurjl , Mr. W. Herbert , Sir John Hamden and others ', but at their firft approach, near 
the bank where they intended to land, he received, from an ambufeade of Spaniards in the 
woods (who had probably gather’d there with expe&ation of his coming that way to the 
mine) a volley of fhot, which flew two of his company, hurt fix others, and wounded captain 
* 'Thornhurjl fo dangeroufly in the head, that he langurlh’d thereof three months after. 8 This 
blow firft ftagger*d the refolution of Keymis , who then, as he reflected more upon the ftate of 
tlieir condition, was more over-power’d with doubts and difeouragements - t infomuch that tho’ 


a Ralegh’; Apology, p. 32. 

k Ralegh’; Letter to Usnavood, in his Remains, (laft 
edit.) p. 171. 

« Rulcgh’/ Apology, p. 5. 

* Ralegh’; Journal. 
e Idem. 

f Tim Journal oi Ralegh* i laft voyage to Guiana , written 
uith his own hand, confiding of (even fheett of paper, 


tho’ written moftly on one fide, only with intention per¬ 
haps of enlarging fome of the particulars af terwards, feems 
incompleat both at the beginning and the end : for it 
begins but at the the 19th of Augu/t, when he let fail from 
Cork, and ends at the 13th of February 1617, before the 
rdl of his fleet returned to him from the Orenoque It 1* 
preferved in the Cottonian library, under Titus, B. VIII. 
f Ralegh’/ Apology, p. 31, 32. 

the 


Digitized by LxOOQle 




ccv 


Sir WALTER RALEGH. 

the Englijh under him might have been informed of two or three mines more, befides this which 
Keymis had undertaken to lead them to, by a Mulatto, who had waited on the late governor in 
his chamber, and, as he has written in his letter beforemention’d, knew all things that concern’d 
his matter. * This ftrvant, afterwards, by no other means than courteous ufage, difcover*d 
the fame to Ralegh himfelf •, and not only the places where thofe mines lay, but more par¬ 
ticularly, that two of them, gold ones, were in the pofieffion of Don Pedro Rodrigo de Paramo, 
and Hermian Frontino j and a filver one, in the pofieffion of Francifco Fasardo j and that the 
caufe of their remaining unwrought was, that they wanted Negroes to work them : for, by a 
law of Charles the emperor, the Indians could not be conftrairv’d, and the Spaniards neither 
would nor could endure the labour. b Yet did the Englijh now decline all endeavour, either to 
be dire&ed to thefe, tho’ but few miles diftant from the town, or proceed to poflefs that which 
Keymis was to condu& them to, tho’ within a few hours march. Nay, when the fhips were 
upon their return, and they had failed down the river as far as the country of Carapana, one of 
the natural lords, who had referved that part of Guiana to the late queen •, and, having heard 
that the Englijh had abandon’d St. Thome, and left no forces, as he hop’d they would have 
done, had fent a great canoo, laden with ftore of fruits and provifions, to the captains j alfo 
by one of his men, who had learn’d the Spanijh tongue during his long flavery under the Spa - 
niards, had offer’d them a rich gold mine in his own country, to engage their flay ; further 
proffering to leave fufficient pledge for any Englijh perfon they fhould fend to examine it; and, 
when captain Leak with another of the company, named Molineux, offer’d themfelves to go* 
the greater pan neverthelels refus’d to fuffer them. This declenfion of his offer, fo heightned 
Carapana' s defire to make it acceptable, that he fent again, leaving one of his men ftill aboard, 
who entreated to detain them but two days, and Carapana would himfelf, aged as he was, 
bring them a fample of the ore a , who, tho’ ftill rejected, and the fhips under fail, yet fent once 
more a boat after them up to the mouth of the river, in hopes to the very laft of retrieving them, 
as the faid captain Leak, Parker , Molineux , and half a dozen officers more, are, by Ralegh , 
nominated to atteft. e But the adventurers, among other diffwafives from all temptation to continue 
there any longer, harbour’d a notion that the Spaniards had fecredy agreed with, and employ’d 
thofe Indians only to trepan the Englijh ; which appear’d but a weak and ill-grounded apprehenfion 
to Ralegh j for fuch treachery might have been eafity prevented, had they waited the arrival of 
the old Indian chief, who would have brought the ore to their very fhips. And what advantage 
in betraying them, fays he, could there be, when the Guianians offered to leave hoftages, fix 
for one ? Moreover, one of the Indians , whom the Englijh found in fetters when they took St. 

Thome, and brought with them aboard, could have told them, that the very caffique, who fent 
to fhew them the gold mine in his country, was unconquer’d and at enmity with the Spaniard j 
and could have affur’d them withal, that fuch mines were in that country poflefs’d by the faid 
caffique. d But no intreaty or invitation would retain them, and fo they return’d, about the 
middle of February, to Punt a de Gallo, after the fleet had been thus divided, and they abfenc 
above two months from Sir Walter Ralegh, as himfelf has informed us ; * whereby it appears, 
that the fleet united at, or very foon after, the time he difeontinued his Journal , and it ap The fleet 
pears no-where in that Journal , that any inhuman offer was made to remove from Punta de united - 
Gallo to the Cbaribes , many leagues off, where he knew famine muft over-take the land foldiers 
before they could over take him, as his enemies fuggefted: *' befides, he cleared himfelf in fuch 
a folemn manner of this afperfion at his death, as leaves not the leaft ftain of cruelty any where 
but upon their characters who flander'd him with it. g 
’Tis poffible that Keymis might, at his firft return, be favourably received, and as familiarly 
admitted to Ralegh’s table as before j h for a difappointment of this confequence was not to be 
too readily broach’d on one fide, nor reprehended on the other. Befides, as fome miti¬ 
gation of their ill fuccels, and inducement to further hopes, Keymis produced two ingots of 
gold which had been referved at St. Thome , as the king of Spain’s quinto , or proportion j together 
with fevcral other valuable fpoils of the governor. * Keymis alfo brought with him a large 

quantity 

h Kiffg James’/ Declaration , p. 37/ 

* Among the relt, one, that was more curious in its 
nature, than coilly in its materials j being only a bottle 
made of a ferpentine ftone; but it had a rare foveraign 
quality of giving any wine or water infus’d therein ter 
twenty four hours, the tafte and operation of the Spa 
water, and to make the fame of fingular efficacy in ex¬ 
pelling the gravel, and curing all diforders of the fpleen ; 
for which it was highly elleemed by Sir Walter Ralegh, 
and, feveral years after his death, alio by Richard of 
Corki who, having been made acquainted, by Sir Walter % 


# Keymis’/ Letter to Ralegh , in the faid Apology , p. 
33 * and the Apology, p. 42, 43. 

b Idem : and Ralegh's letter to Wimvood, in his Remains, 
(laft edit.) p. 174. 

* See hu Apology , p. 4$. 

® Idem , p. 46, &c. 

• Ibid. p. 41. 

f In king Jates's Declaration , p. 36. 

* Sir Walter Ralegh’/ Anfwtr to fome things at his 
death, at the end of his Apology, p. ult. alfo in ms Dj ng 
ffeetb. 


Digitized by v^.ooQie 



CCV1 


The LIFE of 

quantity of papers, letters, memorials, fchemes, plans and maps found in the faid governor’s 
ftudy} which gave fome fingular lights into the ftate and condition of Spain , with rcfpeft to 
many of the American plantations. Among thefe papers were found four letters, which plainly 
Hi< enterprife difcover’d, not only Ralegbti whole entcrprizc to have been betray’d, but his life thereby put into 
betray’d. £ he power of the Spaniards themfelves i a and by whom, even to the breaking of that peace, 

if any was broken, for which he was afterwards exclaim’d againft. Ralegb himfelf has 
related : b for he thought this fuch black and cruel ufage, that he forbore not, in a letter which he 
wrote, about a month after this time, from the ifle of St. Chrijlophcr' s, to Sir Ralph tVinwood , 
the feerctary of ftate, to fhew his fenfe of it in thefe words: “ It plea fed his majefty to value 
“ us at fo little, as to command me, upon my allegiance, to fet down under my hand, the 
“ country and the very river by which I was to enter it j to let down the number of my men, 
“ and burden of my Ihips, and what ordnance every (hip carried ; which being made known 
“ to the Spanijh ambaflador, and by him fent to the king of Spain , a diipatch was made 
“ and letters fent from Madrid before my departure out of the Thames." c By the contents 
of thofe Spanijh letters it further appears, that three hundred Spanijh foldiers, and ten pieces of 
ordnance, were commiflioned to be fent from their refptftive garrifons againft the adventurers 
up the Orenojue t that is, a hundred and fifty men from Nuevo Reyno de Granada , under the 
command of captain Antonio Mufica\ and another hundred and fifty from Puerto Rico, to be 
conduced under Francijco Zanchio. There was alfo prepared an armada by fea, to let upon 
Ralegh himfelf and the Ihips with him *, “ by which, fays he, we had not only been torn to pieces, 
“ but all thofe in the river had alfo perilhed, they being of no force for the fea fight; for we 
** had refolved to have burnt by their fides, and to have died there, had the armada arriv’d but, 
“ belike, they ftay’d for us at Margarita , by which they knew we mull pals towards the 
“ Indies .” In another letter, which he wrote the next day from the fame ifland to his wife, 
Ralegh fays, “ Never was poor man expofed to Daughter as I was.” Then having related the 
particulars of the forces beforemention’d, fent to deltroy him, through the communication of 
his fcherne to the court of Spain by the Spanijh ambaflador, he concludes this part with thefe 
words: “ It were too long to tell you how we were preferved j if I live, I lhall make it 
“ known.” d 

But the indignation which Ralegh mull have conceived at the fight of thefe letters, was not 
a little heightned, when he came to hear that Keymis had made no adtual trial at the mine, and 
the reafons he gave for having relinquilh’d it. He alledg’d indeed, that after the falley of the 
Spaniards upon them from the woody banks, which had dilabled feveral of his men at their 
firft attempt to land, he began to confider, they had not then able men enough left to work 
the mine •, tho’ indeed, it lay not lo deep, as to need all thofe.pioneers and implements, which, 
inking James’s Declaration, Ralegb is obje&ed againft for not carrying with him, as may appear 
by the firft difeovery of this mine, in the former part of thefe Iheets. Keymis alfo argued, they had 
not men enough to keep this mine, tho’ they Ihould efcape further danger in the difficult paflage 
to it, which he feared much they Ihould not \ the Spaniards befog more careful to preferve it, as 
was faid, than the town ; and the ways to it, Afperay Fragoja, as Ralegb has obfcrved ; agreeable 
to that infertility and unaptnefs for cultivation, which Acojla and other naturalifts, have ddcrib’d 
in thofe grounds which are impregnate with fuch treafures. Keymis urged further, that 
they wanted fufficient provifions for the number remaining, having been much longer up the 


pctge, with its virtues and value, performed feveral notable 
cures thereby, and at lalt made an acceptable prefent of 
it to Sir Henry Uotton, then provoft of Eton College, who 
was troubled with one, or both of thofe infirmities. See 
the earl of Cork" s Letter to Sir Henry Wot ton, in Kelt quiet 
Wottonianer, I into. 1651, p. 497* 

* The king of Spain's firft letter, fent to Guiana by a 
bark of Avijo , to arm the Indians againft Ralegh's co¬ 
ming, was dated 19 March 1616, at Madrid (which 
letter, fays Ralegh , in his to Sir Ralph Winwood, I have, 
here cncfofed, fent you, the reft I referve ; not knowing 
whether they may be intercepted or not ) The fecond of 
that king's was dated 2d of May 1617, fent alfo by a 
caravel to Diego de Palameca , governor of Guiana, El 
Dorado and Jr ini dad. The third of his majefty’s, was 
fent by the biihop of Puerto Rico , and delivered to that 
governor the 15th of July following : and the fourth was 
lent from the farmer and iecretary of his cuftoms in the 
Indies at the fame lime. Thus Ralegh's letter to Win- 
wood (bom St. Chrijiopher's) in his Remains (laft edition) 
p. 172. compared with fome manufeript copies of it in 
the Harleyan library, fjfc. Others tell us, thefe adver- 
tifements and preparations were the caufe of all the 
rciillancc tfat was made at St. Thome i that Ralegh's 


whole defign, under his own hand, was delivered by 
king James to Gcndomar ; and that his own letter (thereof 
to king James) was found in the governor of St. Thome's 
clofet; which letter he brought hack, and fhewed to the 
lords of the council. Sec Obfemtations on Sanderfon'r 
Hijlory , p. it. Thus alio in the State-Trials , vol. t. 
p. 219 ; and in Dr. Wcl e wood*s Memoirs , it is laid, Ra* 
legh's plan, which king James promifed to keep fecrct, 
was lent by Gondomar to Spasty, thence to the Indies, 

before Ralegh left the Thames 5 and the very original 
paper was found m the Spam/h governor’s ckyfet. 

b Tho' Ralegh has charged this matter of betraying 
him to the Spaniards in plain terms, both in his letter to 
the fccretary of ilate, which follows as above, and in- his 
Apr, logy ; one, or both of which king James had certainly 
read, it is yet obiervable, that this topic is not fo much 
as touch'd upon in his majefty’s Declaration, but entirely 
funk in filence. 

c Sir Walter Ralegh's Letter to Sir Ralph Winx'&d, 
from St. Chrijiopher's, dated 21ft of March 1617, printed 
in his Remains (the laft cdi.ioo) p. 1 72 * 

* See his Letter to his wife, in (the fame edition of) 
bis Remains, p. 179, 45 V. 

river 


Digitized by LnOOQle 






Sir WA LTE R RALEGH. 


river than they wepefted > and that they could not carry endugh from the town up the mountain, 
their company being divided, the greater part, in the town kfeU, and thole too weak to de¬ 
fend it. That he further found all regard to order and obedience broke through, as foon as 
captain Ralegb was dead j and feared the fatal news of his death, would either not find his fick 
father alive, or haften his end : that to attempt the difeovery, and fail through any of thefe 
difeouragements, he thought would be more detrimental than wholly at this time to decline it* 
that to difeover it for a pack of profligates and mutineers, was more than they deferv’d \ and 
to difeover it for Ralegh himfelf, not likely to live, and unpardon'd, was, as whifper‘d in the 
company, for a man nm tns in the law. Above all that, it would therefore be a greater error 
<o find it for the Spaniards, than to pretend it could no-where be found. Laftly, that thefe ar^ 
guments, approved of by the majority, were confirmed by the alarm they received at the 
difeovery of the letters (aforefaid) in the governor’s clofet-, whereby they were led, every 
moment, to expedt a frelh enforcement of the enemy againft them from each end of the river • 
therefore feparate as the fleet was, and not able to make refiftance, they all agreed to return. • 
However fpecious thefe arguments, or fome of them, might be, Ralegb was in no-wife 
pacified with them. He utterly difavowed the whole conduct of Key mis before feveral of his 
company, and the ignorance he had pretended to them -, told him, that a blind man might 
have found the place, by the marks and directions himfelf had fet down under his own hand j 
and that his care of lofing more men in palling the woods was but feigned $ for, after his fon’s 
death, it was known he had no care for any man furviving, and therefore, had he brought 
home but one hundred weight of ore, tho’ with the lofs of as many men, it would have given 
the king fatisfadtion, preferved his reputation, and encouraged a return the- next year, with 
greater force, to have held the country for his majefty, to whom it belong’d ; b for the riches and 
fruitfulnefs whereof, himfelf had formerly fo largely attefted. c But fince he had fuffered his 
wilfulnefs, in fpite of his knowledge, to defeat their whole undertaking, he Ihould indeed be 
glad if Keymis could make thofe reafons, for not opening the mine, paflable With the ftate, but 
that he himfelf could not juflify the negledt. Keymis grew deeply dlfcontehted hereat, and 
continued fo feveral days. “ Afterwards he came to me in my cabbin (fays Ralegb ) and 
** fhewed me a fetter he had written to the earl of Arundel, excufing himfejf for riot difeoyering 
“ of the mine, ufing the fame arguments, and many others, which he had done before ; and 
** prayed me to allow thereof.” But Ralegb , no way fatisfied, declared, that as Keymis could 
plead no ignorance, he could admit of no excufe, being wounded in his credit with the king 
paft all recovery, and that this could admit of no reparation. Keymis , feeing Ralegh refolved 
not to favour his folly, retir'd as one knowing rv«t what courfe to take, yet exprdling, perhaps, 
alfo fome defign of giving further fatisfadlion ; “ and went out of my cabbin into his own,” 
lays Ralegb, where having (hut himfelf in, Ralegh foon after heard a piftol go off, and fending 
up to know who difeharg’d it, Keymis made anfwer, he fir’d it himfelf, becaufe it had been 
long charg’d. About half an hour after, his boy going into his cabbin, found him dead, with 
much blood by him, having a long knife thruft through his left pap into his heart, and his 
piftol lying by him -, with which it appear’d, that he had (hot himfelf, but die bullet being 
fmall, and having only crack’d a rib, he difpatch’d effectually with the knife. d And this, 
as I compute, happen’d about the latter end of February aforefaid, or perhaps the former 
part of March, becaufe Ralegh mentions it in the letters he wrote this month intp England , be¬ 
fore refer’d toj therefore the death of Keymis could not happen in the following fummer, as 
one author mjftakes. * And whereas fome had given it out, that Keymis flew himfelf through 
reniorfe that he had feduced and deluded fo many gentlemen with an imaginary mine, Ralegb 
will not allow that to have been the caufe j but aferibes it entirely to his own pofitive and 
palfionate temper, and fays, that “ he would not have laid violent hands on himfelf for any 


* The poftfeript of Rakgh't letter to his lady, from 
St. Cbnfhpber's, 22 March, im his Remains (jail edition) 
P * 77 > *78- Alfo his letter to Sir Ralph VTinwood, 
idem, p. igj ; and his Apolcgy, p. 35, 36. 

Idem. 

. c Keymis*; Relation of the fecond voyage to Guiana, 
in Hakluyt , vol. 3. fbJ. 683. 

^ The Letters in the Retrains, aforefaid, p. 178, 181. 
And the Apology, p. 39. James Hczirl lays, that captain 
Krjmii, the main inllrument for the dilcovery ot the 
mine, piftol'd himfelf in a defperate mood of difeontent 
in his cabbin in the Ccmver/me ; which not being Ralegh's 
Ihip, would remove Keymis' s death (till further from all 
formilc that he had any fuch foul play done hixn to prevent 


telling of tales, as Sandnfort and other prejudiced writers 
Jiave malicioufly iniicuated* The 06 fa valor on hi$ 
Htpry of king James, calls it a bafe afpafion ; and San. 
derfon, in his /tnfaxer, inllcad of producing any authorirv 
in his own juililication, is for meddling no further with it; 
fo refers to his Hi/lory, as a matter too large to be infer ted 
again. But what entirely dears the affair,°is king James's 
Declaration ; for had there been the leaft fhndow of 
fulpicion that Ralegh had been any way concerned in 
Kijmrs'b untimely end, we may be well pertuaded, that 
Declaration would not have been filent thereof, which 
has nmaiVd and aggravated fo many frivolous circumllan- 
ces in this voyage againft him. * 

• Athtn. Ox on, vol. 1 col. 433. 

“ roan's 


Digitized by LiOOQle 


CCVill 




The L I F E of 

“ man’s opinion j not when he did, adds Ralegh , could he have faid unto me, that he was 
“ ignorant of the place, and knew of no fuch mine > for what caufe had I then to have re- 
“ jetted his excufes, or to have laid his obftinacy to his charge ?” Further urging, “ that 
“ feveral captains,” whom Ralegh names, “ might be put to their oaths, whether or no > 
“ Keymis did not confefs to them, coming down the river, at a place where they caft anchor, 
“ that he could, from thence, have gone to the mine in two hours.” 1 

After this accident it was determined, in a council of the officers, to make for New¬ 
foundland, to repair and refrelh their Ihips •, but before, as well as after, they arriv’d there* 
great diforders arofe: fome took to courfes of their own head, and ran away from him, as was 
before-mention’d ; and many others proved fo refrattory and ungovernable, that, when he 
At St Chrif. came to the ifle of St. Cbrijlopber's , he was forced, under the condutt of his coufin, Mr- 
icfoert Herbert , to fhip them home. Of whom, tho’ he had lhewed fome uncommon generofity to 
fome of them, he fays, in the letter he wrote from thence to his wife on the 22d of March, 
“ I know they will not fpare to wound me j” and further declares, “ There is never a bafc 
“ flavc in all the fleet that hath taken the pains and care that I have done that hath flept fo 
“ little, and travell’d fo much: my friends will not believe them, and for the reft I cars- 
“ not.” b In another letter he lent from hence at the lame time to Sir Ralph IVinwood , he 
writes to the fame fenfe, and further adds: “ But thefe being gone, I lhall, fays he, be able, 
“ if I live, to keep the fea till the end of Augujl , with fome four reafonable good Ihips j” c 
for to that number was his fleet now reduced. By the time here propos’d of continuing at 
fea, there might have now been thoughts of fome courfc to qualify the mifadventure of the 
mine, and enable them to re-attempt it; perhaps by fome little trading voyages: but how 
probable that he Ihould defign any thing fo far as the Eaft Indies , or that with fuch fmall Torce 
he intended to go for the weftern iflands, to attack the Mexico fleet, and furprife the carracks, 
as in the king’s Declaration is laid to Ralegh* s charge, d we lhall leave for others to decide. 
At Neuftvnd- ’Tis plain that nothing of this was put in prattice *, for when they came to Newfoundland , the 
land ' company in his own fhip fell to mutiny, and thofe who were for flaying abroad, whom IVilfon 

calls the major part, made Ralegh take an oath, fays he, not to go home but by their al¬ 
lowance. * But the Declaration fays, that the greater number were for returning to England • 
and that Ralegh getting on the fea bank, put it to the queftion ; whereupon the voices divided* 
Jlarboard and larboard ; and that when he perceived the greater number vote for their return* 
he went to that fide and voted fo too j f but manifeftly to the hazard of his life was his voting 
on either fide. 6 In the lame Declaration we are further led to believe, he afterwards “ offer’d 
“ his own fhip, which was of great value, to his company, if they would only fet him aboard 
“ a French bark, and that he made the lame offer to fome of his officers, when he was come 
“ back to Ireland , as not knowing how things would be conftrued, and being loth to put his 
head under the king's girdle j” h but he did, and we lhall fee the confequence of it. 

By the time that Ralegh arrived on the coaft of Ireland , the lacking of St. Thome, the 
firing of the town, and the flaughter of the Spaniards to the number of four or five hundred 
men, were largely defcanted on by his enemies, as by his friends were his own more particular 
misfortunes in the long and dangerous ficknefs he had endured i his difappointment in the 
mine •, the confumption of fo much treafure the lofs of his gallant fon * the violent end of 
his old fervant captain Keymis } and above all, the general diforder, defection, and difperfion 
of his whole fleet. All together, it became not fo much a national as a univerfal topic of 
difcourfe and attention j every one cenfuring or commiferating as their intereft or affettions 
mov’d. It is remember’d, by Camden , that captain John North, brother to the lord North, 
a valiant gentleman, and who was much efteemed by Ralegh for his faithful condutt under him 
throughout this voyage, was the firft who related the deplorable news of this unfortunate expe¬ 
dition to king James , on the 13th of May, 1618. * He feems to have done it in a very juft 
and pathetical manner j and it might have had a good effett, had that king’s pity been as eafily 
touch’d as his fear. Among authors, fome, who had been for regiftering this commiffion of 


* Ralegh’; Apology, p„ 40. 

fc The pollfcript of Ralegb'% letter to his lady, from 
St- Cbrijhpbers n 22 March, in his Remains (lalt edition) 
p. 180 

c See his letter to Sir Ralph Wiwwood in thofe Remains, 
p. 182, which is but a pollfcript to his letter to the fame 
perfon, printed page 169, and (hould have followed it 
fuch at the end of page 175, as I find in a good old 
MS. copy of it; where it bears date from St. Chrijlophtrs, 
one of the iflands of the Antilias, March 21, 1617. 
d Page 3S* 


« Wilfon’/ Hiflory of King James, in the CompUat Hi - 
Jlmry of England, vol. 2, p. 713. 

f The king's D< dotation, p. 39, 40. 

* 44 If 1 had a purpofe to have turned pirate, fays 
44 Ralegh, why did I oppole myfelf againft the greatell 
44 number of my company, and was thereby in danger 
44 to be flain or call into the fea, becaufe I refus'd it V ' 
His Apology, p. 47, 

h The Declaration, p. 38, 40. 

4 Camden'/ Annals of King James. 

king 


Digitized by 


e 




CC1X 


Sir WALTER RALEGH. 

king James with that granted by Alpbonfo king of Naples to Bertram his captive Moor, whom he 
entrufted both with his liberty, and a large linn of money to buy him fome line horfes in Barbary , 
for which his jefter gave him a prime place in his fool’s chronicle \ were now, upon the ex¬ 
pectation of a return, ready, with the lame jefter, to blot out the king, and enroll the cap. 
t ivc for a fool: but others look’d upon this attion of Ralegh's in a nobler and more elevated 
light, and as what, for the integrity of acquitting his fiduciary pledges, was rather to be 
compared with the generous act of that brave Roman conful, Attilius Rcgulus ; who, to keep 
his promife and his faith, returned to his enemies, the Carthaginians , under whom he had 
been a prifoncr} tho’ he knew that he went to inevitable death. 4 

And now the Spanijh amballador having, by fpecial advertifements, gain’d the earlieft 
intelligence of all that had parted at Guiana ; and how, among the reft, his own kinfman, 
the governor, had been (lain, broke into the king’s prefence in a turbulent manner, and bawling 
out for his majefty’s audience, only of one word, aflaulted him with the abrupt and repeated 
exclamation of Piratas! Piratas ! Piratas! At laft he found breath and words to enlarge 
upon the matter fo effedually, as what tended not only to the infringement of his majefty’s 
promife, but that happy union between the two crowns in their royal progeny, now the match 
between prince Charles and Dona Maria , with all the advantages it was pregnant with, was 
in fuch a hopeful degree of maturity, even to the involving of both nations in the moft durable 
and dreadful hoftilities, that the pacific king of Great Britain was ready to do any thing in 
the world to appeafe him, and hufh it up. To this purpole, his royal proclamation was forthwith 
publifhed on the nth of June j fetting forth, that “ Whereas we gave liberty to Sir Walter 
“ Ralegh and others, to undertake a voyage to Guiana , where they had pretended a probabi- 
“ lity of difeovering gold mines, Off. We did, by exprefs limitation and caution, reftrain 
“ and forbid them from attempting any act of hoftility upon any territories or fubjeCts of 
** foreign princes with whom we are in amity ; and more particularly, thofe of our dear 
** brother the king of Spain , in re/peCt of his dominions in that continent, which, notwith- 
** ftanding, they have, by hoftile invafion of the town of St. Thome , &c. broken and 
“ infring’d. We have therefore held fit to make publick declaration of our utter miflike and 
“ deteftation of the faid infolencies; and for the better detection and clearing up of the truth, 

** we charge all our fubjeds, that have any underftanding or notice thereof, to repair to any 
“ of our privy council, and make known their whole knowledge, that we may thereupon 
“ proceed to the exemplary punifhmcnt and coercion of all' fuch as are found guilty of l'o 
“ fcandalous and enormous outrages.” b / 

The next thing to be thought of was, a proper and plaufible inftrument for the apprehenfion 
of Sir Walter Ralegh when he fhould come alhore ; fuch a one was Sir Lewis Stucley foon 
found to be (and not Sir John , as one writer erroneoufly chriftens him c ) who was vice-admiral 
of Devon (not lieutenant of the Tower , as the fame negligent author miftakes again.) One 
who, tho’ Ralegh's countryman, and, as all others but Stucley fay, his kinfman too, yet moft 
officioufly undertook that charge, through the forded profped of profit •, “ lo unnatural, 

“ fays IVilfon, and fervile is the fpirit when it hath an allay of bafenefs i there being many 
“ others fitter for that employment.” d However, his orders were to bring up this greac 
malefador in a fair and courteous manner, according to his majefty’s gracious and mild courfe, 
as it is call’d in his Declaration. And tho’ we are told, by one, otherwife mifguided in hi s 
account of this expedition, by fome diftorted reprefentations of it in thofe times, “ That the 
“ world much wonder’d, fo great a wife man as Sir Walter Ralegh , would return to call 
“ himfclf upon fo inevitable a rock as it was fear’d he would e neverthelefs, as we are 
allured, by captain Samuel King , an old officer of Ralegh's , who bore him company all thi s 
while, and has left us a particular Narrative of whatfoever occur’d in their journey from their 
landing now at Plymouth , to their final arrival at London , that he no fooner put into the 
harbour, and heard of the proclamation aforefaid againft him, than he refolved to furrender 
himfelf voluntarily into his majefty’s hands and to that intent, both moor’d his lhip and 
fent his lails alhore the firft day he landed •, f which T take to have been in the beginning ofR fturn510 
July, and after he had been abfent upon this voyage a full twelve-month. Moreover, tho’ rtynousb. 
he foon met here with feveral difeouraging reports alfo, concerning the Spanijh ambaflador’s 
ftay at London only for his coming up, to profecute him, as my faid manufcript author has 

■ Howell Letters , vol. i, p. 6 ; and vol. 2 , p. 37 2, e HowcVi Letters t vol. 1, p. 7. 

* See Rymer’j Fardera, tom. 17, iol. 92. * Captain Samuel King 1 / Narrative of Sir Walter Ra- 

* Aulicut CoqumuriiCs p. yy. iWA Motives and Opportunities for conveying himfelf out 

* Reign ot king Jama, m the Ccm/leat Hifory of of tl* Kingdom. With the Manner hvuj he vccu £etray'd. 

tngUnd, vol. 2, p. 713. MS. two (hetts,/*/. 1618, p. 2. 

xxx it. 


Digitized by 


;Google 


The LIFE of 

it} Ralegh ftill continued firm in that refolution. The laid ambafilidor is, in fame common 
memoirs, laid to have been fent for over to Spain at this time > and in fome again, that his 
commiflion was expir’d \ but others think, that impatience to deliver the fuccefs of his nego¬ 
tiations fpur’d him away, according to inftrudtion, when he had got ftill aflfurance that Ralegh 
Ihould be difpatch’d at fome rate or other, whatever he could fay for himlelf: for he de¬ 
parted for Spain three weeks before Ralegh came to London , having left the remainder of his 
bufinefs in the hands of fome efpanioliz'd partifans at court, whom he had made fure. * 

However, 


1 Merc, fine? we are to take our leave of this Don 
Diego Sarmiento, the following remarks upon him may 
not be thought very digreffory, lince they mollly tend 
to the further illuilration of Sir Walter Ralegh's Aory. 
His f.rfl coming into England, rho' omitted by our im- 
erfect hiitorians or king James s reign, is remember'd, 
y Sir John Finer, in his Ohfervatum touching Foreign 
Ambaffadors, to have been in 1613 ; being aged then, as 
I compute, from a date upon one of his pictuies, 45 years. 
Therein he further appears with fhorr, thin, black hair, 
of a tall, meagre ftature, with a lor.gifh vitoge, and a 
cio.e, auiterc alpect ; which made hi* open and jocofe 
humour fo much more taking, that 'tis laid, he cculd 
perfectly ravijb the heart of our Caledonian Solomon, with 
the little jells, tales and fables he would fo readily apply 
upon all occaficns. In the author aforefhid, may be read 
this ainbalVador'j wearifom fcruplcs againlt the date's am- 
baflador, Sir Noe/l Car one, about right-hand and left, 
upper hand and lower, chairs and llools, with iuch like 
wciglity and indilpcnlable points of honour among thcic 
foveraign mini Her?. As to his carriage againft Sir Walter 
Ralegh, it appears fufficicntly above, in the body of this 
narrative. Lot if he was related to that Don Pedio 
Sarmiento , a famous fea commander, Ifcfore mention’d to 
have been Ralegh' s prioner, that accident might fomewhat 
lharjcn the faid ambaflador againlt him ; but much moie 
this new one of Diego de Pa/amaa's being ilain at St . 
*7 heme, who was his near relation, as captain King 
tells us. However his perlccution of Ralegh appears 
with fo much fury and intemperance throughout, as little 
agrees with that dexterity of management or circumvention 
which Ojbornc calls the bufinefs of an ambaffador ; and for 
which, among other things, he thought this fuch an in¬ 
comparable agent. But indeed, it may not argue great 
fttrength of abilities to carry a great fway in the orb of 
government, no more than great flrength of fmews to 
remove huge bodies in that of matter, lo much as the 
great weaknets or fcquacity of thole elements wherein 
they arc centred or lupported ; and, as an ingenious 
writer obferves, the power of the almighty is often evi¬ 
denc’d by the weakneis of the very inllrument. There 
needed not the mongers of Afric to correft the fins of the 
Egyptians, a fwarm of locuils could do it, and vermin 
formed out of the very dull; and tho’ a whole country 
were deflroy’d by fuch, will you argue, fays he, they 
mull needs have had the craft of foxes or the courage of 
lions ? Some have intimated, that the Span'jb ambailador 
could not, with all his worrying and baiting of king 
fames, prevail fo cftldlually for the dcllruihion of Sir 
Walter Ralegh (how eafy and tempting foever it might 
be to trample over the fence that is already broken down) 
but that he was forced to belabour the point with Spanijb 
gold, among thole creatures who had thegreatcll influence 
at court, l or, as one writes, 44 The bargain was made, 
44 and Ralegh was devoted for a facrifice before they knew 
•« whether he was fuccefsful or not; and, if we may 
44 believe the accounts that are left upon record of that 
“ part of hillory, the king of Spain gave a good lum of 
44 money for his head. Some have gone fo tar, as to 
44 tell us who had the money, at leait a good part of it. 
41 If this be true, the Engli/b court had in it, at that 
•• time, fome of the molt infamous people that were 
44 ever concern’d in any admimllration. As to thofe 
14 who reprove the king himlelf with it, I fhali fay no 
44 more than this, they ought to have been very fure of 
14 the truth of it, before they recorded a thing of a 
44 Britijb king fo much beneath the character of any 
41 monarch in the world, viz,, to take money from an 
44 enemy for the blood of their own fubjedts, and of fuch 
44 fubjeds too as were moll dangerous to the very enemy 
44 they were fold to ; w hich is neither lefs nor more, 
44 than felling their own fafety, as well as innocent 
“ blood." Sec An Hiflorteal Account of the Voyages and 
Adventures of Sir ‘Walter Ralegh, 8u<?. 1719, p. 38. 
However it was, the Spanijb n 111 baflador feems to have 
left the Engli/b court well fat i Tied on the 16th, and em¬ 
bark'd for Spain on the 20th of Juh 1618, having ftrll 
emptied all the prifons in England of Romijb pried*. 


many of whom he carried with him home, further to 
grace his triumphs. Yet all true Englijhmcr. conceived 
hopes that the Jate adion under Ralegh at Guiana, and 
a tumult lately happening at the Spanijb ambaiTador’s 
hou.e in Barbu an, upon the murder of a boy, would 
freflrate the match. But this ambaflador return’d to 
England in the beginning of March 1619, under pretence 
of purfuing that dclulive negotiation, and was lodg’d, 
not without murmurs, at the bilhop of El y’s houle in 
Holbome . He was alfo trick’d out with titular honours, 
the ulual reward of fuch fervices as his were ; being new¬ 
ly made Ccnde de Gondomar, as Sir John Finet oblcrvcs ; 
otherwife, in the whole, not fo fubdantially rewarded at 
home, as the flavifli pains he took abroad to pleafe his 
prince w r as thought todeferve. The train of his orher titles 
may be read in a pamphlet, not long after his return, 
dedicarcd to him here, call’d The Spanifh Englifh Rofei 
or Englifh Spanifli Pomegranate ; by a moll fuliom flatte¬ 
rer, named Michael Du Veil, who has further boJfler’d 
him out, as well as Sir John Digby , ne\yly cieated baron 
of Sherborne, (another precious promoter of the laid 
match) with fuch extravagant additions of falfe honours, 
as both dilparage and dilcredit thofe which were real. 
As for the pernicious practices of this Spanijb ambaflador 
in England, which might gain him thole airy gratuities, 
they are unfolded in another tra«fl, entitled Vox Populi, 
or AV*u 'S fom Spain; tranjlatedaccording to the Spanifh 
copy ; which may fee vs to forewarn both England and the 
United Provinces hew far to trufi to Spanilh Pretences . 
Printed 4/0. 1620, reprinted, thirty-nine years after, 
with the title of, A choice Narrative of Count Gondomar*/ 
Tranfaflions during bis Embafiy in England ; (in this edi¬ 
tion, faid to be) written by Sir Robert Cotton. The 
editor, John Rowland, had no other reafon for aferibing 
it to this renowned antiquary than his having treafur’d it 
up in manufeript, and that he died heart-broken : whereas 
he w'as not fo much as heart-grieved when the firfl edi¬ 
tion was publifli’d ; tho’ in the Second Part, hereafter 
mention’d, he is faid to have made heavy complaint a- 
gainil Qondomar. Neverthclefs, the faid editor, Revel And, 
may have obferved juilJy enough in his dedication of it 
to Sir W. Pajlons , 44 That Gondomar , with his facetious 
44 words and gellurcs, could pipe king James alleep ; 
44 that he did iometimes hold the helm himlelf, and was 
44 near running the fhip aground, or to have fplit her 
44 upon the rocks: 7’hat the influence of his ill afpeft, 
44 and cclipfir.g the fun beams, is hardly over unto this 
44 prelcnt age : That his fucceflor, Don Carlo Colonna , 
44 was thought, by many judicious men, to be more 
44 prudent; and tiiat Gondomar was but a buffoon com- 
44 par’d to him.” In the treatife itlelf, Gondomar is 
reprefented in a Spanijb council lately held at Aragm, 
and delivering his chief fervices to have been, \ft. His 
working a dillike between king James and his Houfe of 
Commons , perluading him to rule by his prerogative ; and 
as for money, to lurnilh himlelf by the marriage with 
Spain and by domeJlick projects, without any lubfidy: 
alio that he hereby kept England from ftirniflung its 
navy. 2 dly. His fhewing only a colourable refillance of 
our Eafi- India trade, as being rather hurtful than helpful 
to the llate, by carrying out our folid treafures, and bring¬ 
ing home fpice, filk, leathers and toys; befides wading 
our mariners. 3.^/7, Elis oppofing our Weft-Indian 
voyages moll llrenuoufly, as what would raife another 
England to with-Aand their New Spain in America ; there¬ 
fore that he croft’d all the undertakings for Virginia and 
the Bermudas, cauiing the rcculants, who were lharers, 
to withdraw their ventures and difeourage the work. 
4 thly. That by this means likewife, he kept the voluntary 
forces from Venice, till it was almoll too late to fticcour 
them. 3 thly. That he flickled hard for the Cautionary 
Towns , which the late king Philip called the keys of the 
Lone-Countries. And 6 thly. That the laft, and not the leail 
fervice he d.d wa% in overthrowing Sir Walter Ralegh's 
voyage, and purfuing him, 44 I need not fay almofi to death, 
44 fays he, if all thing* hit right and allfirings hold.** Fur¬ 
ther, that his commiflion would not let him tarry to be 
a fpewlator of his execution, 44 which I defired the rather 

44 (fays 


Digitized by UnOOQie 







Sir IF A L7E R RALEGH. 

However, before he left England, an excellent letter feerm to have been written by Ralegh in 
his own defence, and conveyed to the king ; which, as we have it in print, runs thus: “ May 
“ it pleafe your molt excellent majefty. If in my journey outward bound I had my men 
“ murder’d at the I funds, and yet fpared to take revenge ; if I did difeharge fome Spanijb 
“ barks taken, without fpoilj if I did forbear all parts of the Spanijh Indies , wherein I might 
“ have taken twenty of their towns on the fca-coalts, and did only follow the enterprize I 
« undertook for Guiana , where, without any directions from me, a Spanijh village was burnt, 
«« which was new fet up within three miles of the mine •, by your majefty’s favour, 1 find 
no reafon why the Spanijb ambafTador fhould complain of me. 

“ If it were lawful for the Spaniards to murder twenty-fix Englijhmen , tying them back to 
« back, and then cutting their throats, when they had traded with them a whole month, and 
«‘ came to them on the land without fo much as one fword j and it may not be lawful for 


•« (fays hel that ly conctjfiw, I might have wrung from 
<• lb iniwfidtrate Englilh an ackmnvLdgtmcnt of tny 
« majlers right in thojc places, punifhing him for attempt- 
«« ing there, tho’ they might prel’cribe for the full toot. 
«« And this 1 did to Hop their mouths hereafter, and 
« becaufe I would quench the heat and valour of’ that 
“ nation, that none fhould dare hereafter to undertake 
the like, or be fo hardy as to look out at fea, or 
44 breathe upon our coafl: ai d iailly, bccaufe I would 
44 bring to ignominious death that old pirate, who is one 
“ of the lall, now living, bred under tnat Englijb Virago, 
** and by her flcfh’d in our blood and ruin. To do tnis 
44 1 had many agents; full, divers courtiers, who were 
44 hungry and gaped wide for Spanijb gold: fecondlv, 
•« fome who bare him at heart for inveterate quan els: 
« thirdly, fome foreigners, who having in vam fought 
44 the elixir heretofore, hope to find it in his head: 
44 fourthly, all men of the Romfto faith, who are of the 
44 Spanijb fodion, and would have been my blood-hounds 
44 to hunt him or any fuch to death willingly. And 
44 hilly, I left behind me fuch sin in/lrumcnt, compos’d 
44 artificially, of a fecular underftandmg and a religious 
44 profdlion, as he is every way adapted to ferew hi in felt* 
44 into the clolet of the heart, and to work upon femi- 
44 nine levity, who in that country have mafeuline 
44 fpirits, to command and purfue their plots unto death.” 
How much foever this may be called a fictitious fpcech, 
it is founded on fuch matters of fact, that Rufbworth, 
and others of our molt ferious hiftorians, have admitted 
the fubthnee thereof as period hiilory. The fame year 
this pamphlet was firlt printed, there was written another, 
call’d Vox Spirit us, or Sir Walter Ralegh’j Ghofl ; being 
a Conference between Sir Gondomar, bis majcfly's ambajfa- 
dor of Spain; the Frier Confeffor, and Father Baldwin 
the JeJuite , at ElyHoule in Hoi borne, A ov. 20, 1620. 
For fo 1 noted the true title to be, in a good old MS. 
copy of this conference, communicated to me, fome time 
pall, by Dr. Thomas Short, an eminent phyfieian, at 
Sheffield in Yorljbire. It has lately been printed in Phernix 
Bntannicuf , from another good copy in the library of a 
very worthy gentleman, under the title of Profopopaeia : 
or Sir Walter Ralegh’/ Ghofl, Sec. but dated as tho’ 
written two years later, which is a millakc, as any one 
would foon find who is acquainted with the hiilory of 
thofe times. The purpofe of this trad is, further to 
difdofe Gondomar s mifenievous tranfadions in England; 
as how he lull’d and deceived king James, perverted 
fome noblemen to the Popjb religion, and corrupted the 
prelacy to a toleration of Catbolicks ; how the navy was 
negleded; what money was expended upon one J'umoey, 
to know in whofe poilefljon were the abbey lands ; how 
much a fearch cod of our harbours and havens; and how 
much to enumerate the well afteded to their religion : 
till the ghod of Ralegh riling, deteds their devifes under 
thefe five heads. 1. The propagation of the Catholick. 
religion. 2. The exaltation of the pope’s fupremacy. 
3. The glorification of the Spanijb monarchy. 4. The 
extenuation of the Lnv-Countn's glory. 5. The abufe 
of England's fimplicity ; and the wuole, finally, to decry 
the match with the Infanta . In 1622, about F.afler , 
Gondomar committed a grofs filecifm in politicks, by 
fullering his ungovernable paflion fo to expofe his Iciger 
honour, by ftriking William Utbgmv, the Scotch traveller, 
whom he had long deceived with promifes of reparation 
for the imprisonment, tortures, and robberies committed 
on him by the In an ft ion at Malaga, as may be read in 
the book of his Travels; that the laid ambaifadorgot his 
tan foundly box’d by him before a numerous crowd of 
noble witnefles. 44 His fiflula, fays Lithgow (meaning, 
“ 1 think, his cane, tho’ alluding to his difeafe) was 
u contrabanded by a fit! ; and for vidory, favour lent 
** me authority.” He was imprifouM for it niie weeks 


in the Marfloalfea ; 44 whence I returned (fays he) with 
44 more cretin, than he lef. England with honeity ’* In 
June following, as Camden tells us, Gtnd.niar was re¬ 
ported to be imprifon’J in Spain , for fo much promoting 
the match ; and that the Irfanta was to be marry'd to 
the grand duke of Tufiany . Two years after, came out 
The jccond Part of Vox Fopuli, cr Gondomar 1 / appearing 
in the Liktnefs of a Machi.ivcl in a Spanifh Parliament: 
wherein are di/cover'd bis treacherous and fubtle Practices 
to the Ruin as well of England as the hcthcilands. 
Tranilatcd out of the Spattip copy : Printed at Goricum, 
410. 1624. Dedicated to Frednick and Elizabeth, king 
and queen of Bohemia , and Maurne , piioce of Orange % 
count of Raffia u ; by T. S. of V. alias Thomas Scot, as 
the late Thomas Raw Hrfon, Efq; was rightly of opinion ; 
with pid arc* of Gondomar, hislitter,and lx>:tom)cf> chair, & 7 . 
44 1 lerein (lays the author to or.c of thofe princes) you 
44 thall perceive the curtain drawn from before the Spa- 
44 niard , that the world may, for certain, fee he is not 
44 fo beautiful as many of our Englijb , w ho fo long have 
44 doated on him,* would make him to be ; nor on the 
44 other fide, fo terrible that your Dutch need fear him, 
44 how grim foever he looks upon them.” It would be 
too tedious to recite the particulars of his deluding and 
defrauding the Englijb nation recorded in this pampnlct > 
how he wrclled prelents and penfions from the Catbolicks , 
no lefs than ten thoufand pounds from Sir Rcbert Cottons 
friend* and acquaintance ; and from feveral ladies great 
Turns of money, to be repaid when Dcna Maria arrived 
in England, or to prefer them at court under her; felling 
the place of groomefs of the Hole to fix fcveral ladies ; 
and many other fuch like profound ads of policy. But 
above all, that his comparing the iecrct of Sir Walter 
Ralegh's voyage and tranimittmg it to Spain, and pro¬ 
curing his death, drew the fpeciai notice and thanks of 
his royal iovcraign, as the crown and mailer-piece of his 
negotiations. Much paper might be ailo employ'd in 
repeating the jells, llories, and layings of this Condo ar 
wiiile among us, which have been treafur’d up by fome 
raie politicians of thole times; in moil of which he was 
more witty than wife, expofing in fome his narrow fpirit 
in matters of gratitude ; and in others, frequently ridicul¬ 
ing the very religion he profefs’d. Two years afterwards, 
the court was haunted with another pamphlet, call’d Sir 
Walter Ralegh’/ Gboji ; or England'/ Forewanter. Di /- 

covering a ftcret Ccnfultathn newly ho!den in the Court of 
Spain. Together with bis tormenting of Count de Gon¬ 
domar ; and bis flrange Affright meat, Confjfton, and 
publick Recantation : lasing open many Treacheries for the 
Subxcifion of England, isc. 410. Utrizht, 1626: which 
1 fhall here fay no more of having before quoted it in 
thefe Ihcets; nor of another book bcfiJes, call’d Sir 
Walter Ralegh’/ Gbofl; printed in %vo. leveral years 
after; becauic written on a fubjed which concerns not this 
ambafTador. We may refer Gondomar's diigrace in the 
Spanijh court, with the fending over of his Ion by the 
king of Spain, a beggar of reward in king Charles's 
coujt, for the fervices of his father, to the honour of 
Spanijb biflory ; and conclude the little, of much that 
might be here laid more of him, in the words of an 
observant contemporary ; who relating how the hy- 
ocritical archbilhop of Spalato was made away with 
y poilon, &c. adds, 44 That the llatefman Gondomar, 
44 was requited in like fort, notwithflanding all his icr- 
44 vice* for the church of Rome, his lolici.acions againft 
44 Sir Walter Ralegh , his catechizing of Spalato , Sec. 
44 For, by way of gratitude, he had, as is reported, 
44 given him a Spanijb fig, or elfe, tho’ ever a merry 
44 man, died at lalt for very grief.” See James Wadf- 
wortb's further Objcrvations of the EnglifhSpanilh Pilgrim, 
concerning Spain, 4 to. 1630, p. 28. 

4< your 


Digitized by Cioooie 


ccxii 


Jhe LIFEo/ 

“ your majefty’s fubjeds, being charged firft: by them, to repell force by force; we may 
“ juitly fay, O miferable EngliJlj! 

“ If Parker and Mecbam took Campeacby and other places in the Honduras , feated in the 
“ heart of the Spanijh Indies ; burnt towns, and killed the Spaniards , and had nothing faid 
“ unto them at their return ; and myfelf, who forbore to look into the Indies, becaufe I would 
“ not offend, mud be accus’d ; I may as juflly fay, O miferable Ralegh ! 

“ If I have fpent my poor eftate, loft my fon, fufFer’d by ficknefs, and otherwife a world 
“ of hardfhips •, if l have refifted with manifeft hazard of my life, the robberies and fpoils 
“ with which my companions would have made me rich: if when I was poor, I could have 
4 ‘ made myfelf rich: if when I had gotten my liberty, which all men and nature itfelf do 
“ much prize, I voluntarily loft it: if when I was lure of my life, I rendered it again: if I 
“ might elfewherc have fold my fhip and goods, and put five or fix thoufand pounds in my 
“ purfe, and yet brought her into England j I befeech your majefty to believe, that all this 
44 I have done, becaufe it Ihould not be faid, that your majefty had given liberty and truft to 
44 a man, whofe end was but the recovery of his liberty, and who had betrayed your majefty’s 
“ truft. 

“ My mutineers told me, that if I returned for England I fhould be undone ; but I be- 
“ lieved in your majefty's goodnefs, more than in all their arguments. Sure, I am the 
“ firft that being free and able to enrich myfelf, yet hath embraced poverty and peril; and 
“ as fure I am, that my example fhall make me the laft. But your majefty’s wifdom and 
“ goodnefs I have made my judges ; who have ever been, and fhall ever be, your majefty’s 
44 moft humble vaflal, Walter Ralegh 2 

When Ralegh had fettled his affairs in the weft of England he began his journey for Lon¬ 
don., purfuant to his firft refolution: but before he came to Afljburton , twenty miles from 
Plymouth , he was met by Sir Lewis Stucley ; who faid, “ he had orders for arrefting him and 
“ his fhip.” Ralegh anfwer’d, “ he had faved him the labour, and done it to his hands.” 
And tho* at that time Stucley had no warrant, as our MS. author aforefaid gees on, for fuch arreft, 
either from the king, or the lords of the council, “ for it feems that his hafte was fo great, 
4 ‘ and his heart fo fet upon fome fuppofed pur chafe , that he could not flay for a warrant b 
yet Raiegb , being told by him, that he had fuch a verbal commiflion from the fecretary, did 
in no wife refift even that authority. So they went back together to Plymouth , and lay at 
Sir Chrijlopher Harris his houfe ; where Sir Walter Ralegh was fo little watch’d, that he was 
fometimes two or three days without feeing Sir Lewis Stucley. And Ralegh himfelf fays, that 
Stucley left him nine or ten days to go where he lifted, while he rode about the country. c How¬ 
ever, as we learn from captain King , it did, at laft, come into Ralegh's mind (whether upon 
fome private advices, how infuperably the prejudice of-his enemies was working againft him j 
or any fuggeftions of his own, how he might work a reconciliation more fuccefsfully from 
abroad, it is not faid, but contrive he did) to convey himfelf out of the kingdom. There¬ 
fore, while they were at Plymouth , he employ’d our author, the faid captain King to provide 
him a bark that would carry him over into France. King James's Declaration fays, Raiegb dealt 
for a bark, as for a friend, and proffered twelve crowns for the paflage: d Stucley fays, he 
dealt with two captains of French barks: * the Declaration fays, Ralegh was then under no 
guard, and Stucley , that he was then under his keeping. But leaving thefe inconformities to 
others, I here follow captain King, who informs us, that himfelf procur’d the velfel, which is 
moft likely, and that he detain’d it nigh four days, riding at anchor beyond command of the 
fort. The firft night, about one of the clock, they fecretly took boat to have gone aboard, 
but before they reach’d the bark, Ralegh , whether through fome more prevailing thought 
that might arife of a generous reliance upon the king, or a more confident dependance upon 
the juftice of his caufe, or for any thing he left behind, or would have firft left either in 
writing or otherwife, docs not yet appear * but certain it is he changed his refolution, and 
returned to his lodging unfufpefted by any one. The next day, he fent money to the mafter 
of the bark, to retain him one night more ; and yet Ralegh never went nigh him 
afterwards. 

It has been objected, as captain King goes on, (who does not fay by whom, but I find it 
in the king’s Declaration <) that Raiegb was obliged to return, becaufe the night was lo dark 


* Sir Walter Rale%h to king James, after his return 
from Guiana ; printed in his Remains, and compared 
%vith fome manufenpt copies. 

b Captain King's ^Narrative, fjc. MS. as before. 


c Hem, and Sir Walter Re/tglj's Dying Speech. 
d The Declaration, p. 41, 42. 
e Stucley’j Petit inn ana Information, Sec. p. 5 , 6. 
f King Jama's Declaration, p. 42. 

that 


Digitized by 


Google 








a 

d 

9 

» J 

lid 

ic 

as 

ut 

*• 


on 

ni 

ira 

re- 

iuf 

at 

It 

10 

is 

t 

I, 

t 

m 

in 

i 

6 

m 

it 

i 


it 


Sir WALTER- RALEGH. 

dot be could not find the veffel: ** but I (fays the captain) who was with him, will take my 
** oath, that if he had been only willing to have towed a quarter of a mile further, he might 
«* have feen her. Befides* if that nigh? would not have ferved, one of the other three would, 
“ the wind being fair, and die tide felling out conveniently. 

Ait it. this, fays captain King, Stucley received a-warrant to bring up Sir Walter Ralegh, 
but with no more ijpeed than his health would permit i and he took to his affiftance, one 
Matmrie , a French quack, “ upon what occafion (fays King) 1 here willingly omit, as well 
“ becaufe I would not meddle with any inftrument of ftate f as becaufe I, little fufpc&ing what 
“ followed, was fomewhat carelefs in the obfervance of their carriage.” 

In their journey they baited and lodg’d at divers gentlemen’s houfes of Ralegh's acquain¬ 
tance upon the road, from fome of whom hearing, more diftin&ly the nearer he approach’d 
it, what a ftorm his enemies had brew’d at court, he began to regret his having ncgle&ed the 
opportunity he had at Plymouth of retiring j which he difeourfed of to his lady and to me, fays 
captain King, who told him, “ He could blame none but himfelf.” Bat after that peremptory 
warrant which a purfuivant brought down for thie fpeedy bringing up of his perfon, he begin 
again to mediate upon a retreat i tho’, as he grew more defirous, it grew more difficult. 
Therefore, when he had made fuch inland advancement on his journey as to have no means 
left that would favour him by water, “ He once more employed roe (lays captain King) who 
«* was always ready to do any thing that might procure hiS fefety ; being well ajfur*d in my 
** own ctmfcience , tho’ he fought to abfent himfelf till the Spamfh fury was over, yet, as he 
“ always feid, That no mifery Jhould make him dijloyal to his king or country. And altho’ 
“ Manourie, in his Declaration , lets down that Sir Walter Ralegh fhould, to him in private, 
“ Jjpeak ill of his majefty •, yet 1 muft proteft till toy Jaft hour, that in all the years I followed 
“ him, 1 never beard him name his majefty but •aoith reverence ;• I am forry the affertion of 
“ that man Ihould prevail fo much againft the dead.” 

The particulars of captain King's employment for this fecond efcape, we fhall refpite a while, 
to make way for thofe, which, according to the due qourfe of time, muft now be recur'd to 
out of that Frenchman's Declaration, as captain King calls it above* and fhall do it with fuch 
juftice as not to omit or difguife apy of the ill words, againft his majefty, sfferibed to Ralegh 
therein. But can only do it from that which was fuffer’d to appear after Ralegh's, death, an- 
hexed to king fames his Declaration \ and thereby chufe rather td hazard a trefpafs upon 
the patience of fome readers, who may think it a detail of improbable, at le&ft infignificant 
©tyeftions, than incur the eenliire of partiality from others in omitting it; fince king James, 
and conlequently his council* thought if would £afs for matter of fuch importance, by their 
making it fo great a part of what was hoped wbuld jilftify his proceedings againft Ralegh ; 
and of fuch authority, as to need no other evidence: not that it is there too expreffively or 
pofirively call’d Mtnourie’s Declaration , or his confeffien or examination upon oath, but by a 
pretty, light, pliable phrafe, ’tis feid, “ The ftory himfelf reporteth to have pafe’d in this manner.” 

Upon Saturday, the 25th of July, Sir Walter Ralegh, Sir Lewis Stucley, and the faid 
Manourie went to lie at Mr. Drake's , where the letters of commiffiort from the privy council 
were brought to Sir Lewis Stucley, and that Ralegh hereat changing countenance, exclaimed 
with an oath, Is it poffible my fortune Jhould return upon me thus again ? This haftening their 
departure, they advanc’d on Sunday morning nearer to London about four miles, and baited 
at Mr. Horfef s. That here Ralegh flrft caufed Manourie to be founded Wliat was in his 
heart (fufpe&ing, apparently, that he was defigned ds a fpy over him) by his old domeftick, 
captain King j who, difeourfing Manourie upon Ralegh's calamities, faid, I wijh we were all 
at Paris. Manourie anfwer’d, I would we were all at London * what fhould we do at Paris? 
Becaufe, feid King, as foon as we come to London, they will commit Sir Walter to the Tower, 
and cutoff bis head. Manourie faid, he hoped belter things, and that , according to his ability, 
he was ready to do him all honefl fervicc. After dinner they fet forward for Sherborne -, and 
here Ralegh is faid to tell Manourie , All that was bis, and the king had unjuftly taken it from 
him. Matmrie , and Ralegh's retinue lay in the town that night * but Ralegh himfelf and 
Stucley, at old Mr. Parham's. On Monday they got to Salisbury , where, as Ralegh was 
walking on foot down die hill, and had found, by enquiry, that Manourie had got fome 
phyfick about him, he defired him to prepare a vomit againft morning. “ For I know,” 
faid he, (as he is here reprefented, with a furprifing faith already in fuch a man) “ ’twill 
“ be good to evacuate bad humours * and by this means, I fhall gain time to work my friends, 
“ order my affairs, and perhaps pacify his majefty: otherwife, as foon as 1 come to London , 
“ they’ll have me to the Tower, and cut off my head, which I cannot efcape without coun. 

v y y “ terfeiting 


Digitized by 


Google 


ccxiii 


ccxiv 


*The LIFE of 

«* terfeiting ficknefs, which your vomits will effeCl without fufpicion." Accordingly that, 
at Salisbury , he complained of a dimnefs of fight, with a dizzinefs in his head j and, when 
he was conducted towards his chamber, that he ftagger’d, and ft ruck himfelf with fuch 
violence againft a pillar in the gallery, Is made Stucley think he was lick indeed ; and in 
that belief, Manourie left him for that time. On Tuefday morning, Ralegh fent his lady with 
the greateft number of his fervants forwards to London j and now it was he alfo fent captain 
King thither, on the expedition aforefaid (whom we (hall meet with there, prepared for the 
fame, as foon as Manourie is brought to an end of this fame ftory.) Then comes a fervant 
of Ralegh' s, into Stucley' s chamber, and declares his matter was out of his wits, that he left 
him in his fhirr, upon all four, fcratching and gnawing the ruflies on the planks. Stucley 
fent Manourie , who found him in bed ; and alking “ what he ail’d ?” he anfwer’d, ** Nothing ; 
“ but that he did it on purpofe.” That then Ralegh alked for the vomit, and took it without 
any hefitation. At Stucley' s entrance, that he fell a raving *, and, before his vomit operated, 
had fuch ftrong convulfions upon him, that Stucley , and all the help he could get, were not 
ftrong enough to prevent the contraction of his finews as faft as the company could draw them 
ftraight, infomuch that Stucley caufed him to be chaf’d and fomented, but that Ralegh , truly* 
afterwards laugh’d at it to Manourie , and faid (fuch a confident is he now grown!) be bad made 
Stucley a perfect phyftcian. 

I n the next place, Ralegh mull be obferved to take fotne repofe ; fo Manourie is fliut into 
the room with him, and having difluaded him from a more violent vomit, becaufe his firft 
did not yet work, Ralegh alk’d, if he knew not of fome preparation which would make him 
look ghaftly and irkfome outwardly, and not affeCt the vitals, or make him inwardly fick. 
After a paufe, Manourie allur’d him he could fumilh him with a harmlefs ointment, which 
would yet foon make him all over like a leper. “ Whereby, we are told, Ralegh laid, “ the 
“ lords would be afraid to approach him, and that it would move their pity befides.’* Soon 
after he had been thus anointed on the brows, arms and breall, the blifters role fo fuc- 
cefsfully, and fo foon ripen’d to their full difcolourations, that Stucley , at his next vifit, per¬ 
ceiving Ralegh's body all broke out in purple fpots with yellow heads, and the rell of his 
Ikin fo inflamed with heat, concluded he was ftruck over with the plague, and that it was 
highly contagious. But alking Manourii s opinion, he truly concealed all, for that, as yet, 
he knew nothing of Ralegh's intended flight i but thought it was only to gain time to fatisfy 
his majefty. However, away went Stucley to the grave bilhop Andrewes, then upon the point 
of his tranflation to Winchefter , and foon made known what a frightful figure Sir Walter Ralegh 
was become ; deferibed all the tokens upon him, and, in the end, return’d with two doCtors, 
and one batchelor of phyfick. All their Ikill could not enlighten them with one fpark of 
knowledge in the nature of his diftemper } but they gave thpir opinion in writing, that the 
patient could not be removed into the air without manifeft hazard of his life j and Manourie 
fet his hand to it. 

Here, Ralegh is deferib’d to have been much delighted that matters went on fo profperoufly, 
efpecially.that the vomit worked fo thoroughly in the prefence of thefe learned doCtors. But 
having apprehended they would infpeCt his water, he direClcd Manourie to rub the urinal 
with a certain drug, which turned all to fuch a difmal colour, and fuch a difagreeable feent, 
that if heaven did not preferibe, the patient mull perilh *, for nothing could the phyficians do 
but pronounce the difeafe mortal. Further, that he then made Manourie bind his arm about 
with the black filk ribband which he took from his poniard ; but that not diftempering his pulfe 
agreeable to expectation, he had more blifters raifed the next day. By this time his phyfick 
having opened his ftomach and made him hungry, he got Manourie fecretly to buy a leg ot 
mutton and three loaves, which he fed upon in private, and by this fubtilty, was thought to have 
fatted three days, that is to Friday the laft of July., ever feigning great indifpofition and uneafinefs 
in company j but when alone, tor to get the opportunity of being fo was the chief fource of all 
Writes his the artifice he did here really put in practice, he wrote his declaration or Apology , and is faid 
.^v/ey. t0 have got Manourie to make him a tranfeript of it •, which was, as the penman of this 
ftory further fays, fince prefented to his majefty. But' by an expreflion of that ambiguity and 
latitude, whether we are defigned to underftand it was before or after Ralegh's death •, that 
penman, intelligent enough in other parts of Manourieds faid ftory, and the reft of the king’s 
Declaration (for they were both of them vifibly call in one mould) might think it not ncceflary 
to be fo here. It was furcly a moft vexatious ftratagem, that Ralegh fhould unexpectedly 
make fuch a provoking vindication of his voyage, and thereby defeat the preparations that 

were 


Digitized by LxOOQle 








Sir WALTER RALEGH. 


were making to cut him off for it: but however it may, in the opinion of pofterity, have 
cleared his innocence ; among his contemporaries, it could not fecure his fefety. * 

The fame night, as the ftory goes on, apparently to raife inflammations beyond his own 
perfon, he infinuated to Stucley , that he thought he had taken poifon at Mr. Parham* s, for 
that he was a Papift, and kept a prieft in his houfe ; but defired, and particularly to Monfteur, 
that it might not be fpoken of. A while after, being in his bed-chamber undrcls’d, and no 
body prefent but his friend Manourie , he is faid to have taken a looking-glafs in his hand to 
admire his fpotted face, and to have merrily obferved to his faid confident, bow they Jbould. one 
day laugh for having thus cozen'd the king , council, p by ft dans, and Spaniards and all. 

On the firft of Augufi , being the day that the king arrived in his progrefs at Salisbury, 
Ralegh is faid to have taken Manourie in private, and having open’d a red leather trunk, put 
into his hand nine piec&' of Spanifh gold, faying, “ There is twenty crowns in piftolets, 
“ which I give you for your phyfical receipts, and the vi&uals you bought me: and I will 
“ give you fifty pounds a year if you will do what I tell you : and if Sir Lewis Stucley afks 
« what conference you have had with me, tell him that you comfort me in my adverfity, 
“ and that I make you no other anfwer than what is here written,” giving him a piece of 
paper containing thefe words, “ Ve la, M. Manourie , /’ acceptance de tout mes travaux ; ptrlt 
“ de mon ejlate, et de mon fils j mes maladies et douleurs : Ve la, cejfeft de ma confience au 
“ roy." b Which paper of Ralegh's own hand-writing, was afterwards produced by Manourie. 

And now Ralegh is pretended to pra&ife more unrcfcrvedly ftill about the efcape with 
Manourie , as being all in his power to aid him, and he the only perfon trufted by Stucley. 
Whereupon he propofes, that Ralegh , at his coming to London , fhould lie perdue at a friend 
of Manourids in Shire-Lane, which did not long engage his approbation, for Ralegh re- 
folved otherwife ■, telling this only perfon trufted by Stucley (through an incredible profufenefs 
of communication) “ that he had fent captain King to hire him a bark below Gravefend, which 
“ would go with all winds, and another little boat to carry him to it.” Adding, that *«to 
*• hide himfelf in London, he fhould be always apprehenfive of a difeovery by the general 

fearchers that are there; but that to efcape, he muft get leave to go to his own houfe, and 
«* being there, he would fo handle the matter as to flip from Stucley through a back-door into 
“ the boat with eafe; for no body would dream he could go on foot, feeing him fo feeble as 
“ he feemed to be.” Then that Manourie fhould fay, “ Why would you fly ? your Apology 
“ and your laft declaration , do they not fufficiently juftify you ?” and that Ralegh fhould 
filence him with, «* Tell me no more *, a man that fears, is never fecure.” 

In the next place, Ralegh is faid to have procur’d the king’s licence to be at his own houfe 
when he fhould come to London : and that when Manourie hereupon obferved, his majefty 
feemed not inclin’d to take away his life, fince he fuffer’d him to repair to his own habitation 
for the recovery of his health ; that Ralegh fhould reply, “ They ufed all thefe kinds of flatteries 
4 ‘ to the duke of Biron, to draw him fairly into prifon, and then they cut off his head.” Adding, 
« I know they have concluded among them, it is expedient that a man fhould die to re-aflure 
“ thctraffick which I have broken with Spain." Thereupon, fays our ftory, he broke forth 
into the moft hateful and traiterous words againft the king’s own perfon (but it furprifingly 


* Sir Walter Ralegh*/ Apology for bis Voyage to Guiana, 
was not publilh’d, that 1 can find, before 1650, and 
then commonly annexed to his Selefl EJfays , printed in 
8 *9. the fame year, where it contains 58 pages. But 
in Henry Hexam's Tongue-Comb at between two Soldiers in 
the Gravefend Tilt-boat, ^to. 1623, p. 75, Csfc* it is 
quored as a piece then well known, in manufeript at 
Jcift, if not in print Artd T. Cbalontr muft have had 
a knowledge of this Apology, or of Ralegh' s Journal, 
when among the verfes prefix'd to TGage's Survey of 
the Weft-indies, Fol. 1648, he faid, 

Renowned Ralegh twice did undertake 
With labour great, and dangers not a few, 

A true difeovery of thefe parts to make, 

And thereof wrote both what he faw and knew. 

This Apology was afterwards reprinted with the EJJays 
abovemention’d in 1667. And again with the Abridg¬ 
ment of Ralegh’s Hi fiery of the World, 8vo. 1700. But 
neither of the printed editions is fo correct, in names, 
places, numbers, as fome manuferipts, in being, 
might probably have rendered them ; particularly one 
copy prefented to the library of St. John's college. Cam- 
bruige, by the learned and reverend Mr. Thomas Baker ; 
containing 22 pages in a fmall hand, folio. This is 
dated two days after Ralegh's death, and fent by way of 


letter, from one who had long fcmcwhal inwardly known 
him, to a friend; which particular we have not in the 
printed copies; but it begins as thofe in print do, with 
thefe words, If ill fuccefs of this enterprixe of mine hud 
been without example, &c. There is alio a good old 
copy or two of this Apology among Sir Hans Sloane's MS. 
collections, mark’d, in his library, A. 271, and B. 521. 
Other manuferipts there are alfo of it in other libraries of 
the learned. As to the character of it, no more need be 
faid than in captain King's words, where he “ refers 
•* thofe who would be fatisfied about this voyage, to an 
“ Apology written by Ralegh himfelf, in which he hath 
“ fnithjully and truly fet down (fays he) all the pafages 
“ thereof." 

b As much as to fay, u Behold there, Af. Manourie f 
« the fruit of all my toils ; the lofs of my fortune and 
** of my fon, the ficknefs I have endured and the for- 
“ rows: behold there, the effeCt of that faith I repo- 

“ fed in his majefty.” But behold where ? -for that 

ve la or voila, repeated as it is, plainly points at fome 
more copious or convincing evidence which accompanied 
this expreflion, and more particularly demonftrated thofe 
lofles and afflictions to have been the fruit of Ralegh's 
trull or faith in ihe king; to which thefe words appear 
but a bare dire&ion i and which therefore feems here to 
have been fupprefs'd. 

omits 


Digitized by 







, The LIFE of 

omits them all to object only his) ending with this improbable rant, “ that if he could but 
“ lave himfelf for this time, 4ie would plot fuch Plots as Ihould make the king think himfelf 
“ happy to fend for him again, and reftore him to hiseftate with advantage*, yea, and would 
“ force the king of Spain to write into England in his favour.” , < 

Nay, when Manourie (as we are further perfuaded) (hewed fuch care and concern for 
Stucley as to a(k, what would become of him if Ralegh efcap’d ? Whether he would be put 
to death, or lofe his office and eftate i Ralegb is faid to anfwer, “ Not to death ; but he would 
“ be imprifon’d for a while, yet his lands were affured to his eldeft fon, and for the reft it was 
“ no part of his care.” Then Manourie alks, if it were not treafon in himfelf to be aiding to his 
efcape ? “ No *, anfwerp Ralegh , you are a foreigner. However, if you pretend to know 
“ any thing, they’ll put you in prifon” “ But what if I am difcover'd to have a hand in 
“ your cfcape ?” fays t’other. *« Why follow me into France , your own country, replies 
“ Ralegh \ quit all and I will make amends for all.” 

As they travel I’d, between Andover and Stains, Manourie , as this ftory that is afcrib’d to him 
acknowledges, difcovered Ralegh's intended efcape to Stucley , who thenceforth ufed extraordinary 
diligence in guards and watches upon him, which Ralegb perceiving , as it is alfo own’d, nerer- 
thelefs trufts Manourie with a new propofal at Stains in thefe words \ “ I fee it is not poflible to 
“ efcape by our two tneans alone, Stucley is fo watchful, and fets fuch ftridt guard upon me, 
** and will be too hard for us with all our cunning *, therefore there is no way but to make him 
“ of our council •, and if we can perfuade him to let me lave myfelf, I will give him in hand 
** the worth of two hundred pounds fterling.” Upon thefe words, he drew forth and Ihewed 
Manourie a jewel made in the falhion of hail, powder’d with diamonds, having a ruby in 
the middle, valued at a hundred and fifty pounds fterling > and putting it into his hands faid, 
“ Befides this jewel, he (hall have fifty pounds in money: pray tell him as much from me, 
** and perfuade him to k, I know he will truft you.” 

This overture being made by Manourie, Stucley, after fome parley, fent back 
word by him to Ralegh , “ that he would accept of his offer , and bad him tell Ralegb he was 
«* content to do as be had dfftred : but would chufe rather to go with him than tarry behind 
“ with fhame and reproachdirecting Manourie further to a(k, “ how this could be done 
«* without lofing his office of vice-admiral, which coft him fix hundred pounds ; alfo to 
« what place they fhould go, how they fhould live afterwards, and what means he would 
“ carry with him to furnifo this intended efcape ?” Ralegb obviates all this with praying him 
to tell Stucley , “ that if he would fwear unto him not to difcover him, he would tell him his 
« whole intent *, and that for the firft point, tho’ Stucley were to lofe his office, he fhould yet 
«« be no lofer > that as foon as he was got into France or Holland, his wife was to fend him 
«« a thoufand pounds •, and that he Ihould carry with him only a thoufand crowns in money 
«» and jewels to ferve at prefent.” After fupper, Ralegh is further reprefented fo open, fb 
contrary to all his former character, and beyond all manner of belief, as to fay, “ O if I 
“ could efcape without Stucley , I fhould do bravely j but its no matter, I’ll carry him along, 
«* and afterwards difpatch myfelf of him well enough.” Then Manourie having apprifcd 
Stucley of all that pafs’d, brought them together. Ralegh (hewed the jewel, and, probably, 
deliver’d it, for Stucley Ihewed himfelf content, and it was probably upon the acceptance of it, 
but defined a little refpite to difpofc of his office. Manourie, having thus feen the agreement 
made, took his leave of them for London (the part defign’d for him ending here) after having 
faid to Ralegh, “ he did not think of feeing him again, while he was in EnglandRalegb , at 
parting, gave him, by a letter to a perfon at Radford, an iron furnace, with a diftillatory of 
copper belonging to it j and charged him “ to tell every body he met, how fick he was, 
“ and that he left him in an extreme loofenefs that very night.” 

But as Ralegh had difpatch’d captain King to London with inftruitions to be in readinefs 
for him, he kept moving on * when there fell out an accident which gave him frefh hopes to 
facilitate his efcape. For when he came to his inn at Brentford, he was met by a Frenchman, 
named La Cbefnay, a follower of Le Clerc, agent from the French king j who told Ralegb, 
the faid French agent was very defirous to fpeak with him, as foon as he got to London, 
about fome affairs which highly concerned his fafety. Accordingly the next night after Ralegh 
was at London, the faid Le Clerc and La Cbefnay came to vifit him at his houle: and there 
Le Clerc offer’d him a French bark, which he had prepared for him to efcape in j and 
withal, his letters recommendatory for his fafe conduit and reception, to the governor of 
Calais and to fend a gentleman exprefty that Ih juld attend and meet him there. But Ralegh 
underftanding the French bark not to be fo ready nor fo fit as that he had already propofed for 

himfelf, 


Digitized by LnOOQle 






CCXVll 


ll 

*> 

d 

ili 

:d 

m i 
s 

to 
id 
ra 

his ' 

*; 
im . 

tey ! 

is 

I 

l & 

kii 

T 

i 

I 

it 

i 

* 

to 

*> 

1, 

«, 

> 

It 

ji 

4 

ff 

> 

if 

(> 


Sir WALTER RALEGH. 


himfelf, gave him thanks, and told him, that he would make ufe of his own bark, but for 
his letters, and the reft of his offer, that he ihould be beholden to him, becaufe his acquaintance 
in France was worn out. * With this paffage, and a word or two only of Ralegh's attempt to 
efcape, after he came to London , it not being thought proper here to expatiate upon the arts 
ufed in betraying it, ends the tedious fardel of objections accumulated to render him unwor¬ 
thy of mercy in the king’s Declaration , and the ftory aferibed to the obfeure Frenchman afore- 
faid in it, but unconfirmed by any affidavit or evidence upon oath, which, in other fuch cafes, 
have been thought neceffary vouchers: therefore how far to be call’d heinous offences, ads of 
hoftility, depredations, abufes of his charge, impoftures and declenfions of juftice, the reader 
may now firft give his own judgment, and then compare it with what has been before faid of 
thefe accufations by others. b 

And now comes on the remainder of captain King's Narrative $ wherein he tells us, that 
from Salisbury he was fent before to London to provide a boat, and to lay her as low as 
Tilbury j and that he was alfo advis’d to put one Cotterell in truft, who had been Ralegh's 
fervant, for the provifion of a wherry. As foon as King came to London , he dealt with 
Cotterell , who feemed as willing to do Sir Walter Ralegh fervice as himfelf* but telling him 
of one Hart, who had been boatfwain to the faid captain’s Ihip, and had a ketch of fiis own; 
with him the captain therefore agreed, and gave him money to get it in readinefs, having 
vowed fecrecy upon the reward which the captain further promifed him. But he had no 
fooner received the thirty pieces of fiber than he betray’d the defign to Mr. William Herbert , 
who as fuddenly made it known ; but King not fufpeding any difeovery, ftill fed Hart with 
money to keep the ketch at Tilbury. 


• Ralegh might fay this to get his recommendation the 
ftronger, bat indeed his fame was now in high requeft 
at the French court. For one of the noblell fcholars in 
France , Nicholas Claudius Fab/ictus, lord of Peirrjh, wri¬ 
ting, ibon a/ter, a letter over to Camden , concludes it 
with thefe words, J'ay eu un grand dcfpUifr d'entendre 
It mawnis fiuctz de la llavigation de my lord Ralle ; 
farce que cefl un perfonage, dont la a taleur ct le merite 
iont en grande recommendation : e'ilfe fait aucune relation 
de fon voyage, jt fray bun aife de la •voir. Camdeni 
EpiftAst, ig. 1691, p. 243. The original of this letter, 
writ:en by the faid Pur eft us to Camden, is preferv’d in 
the Cotton library. 

As for that negotiation of this French agent with Sir 
Walter Ralegh after he arrived at London , to remove hirn 
from thefe who thirtted after his blood, into the protection 
of a date which better knew how to value his great ac- 
complifhments, it was not fo cloleiy manag’d by them, 
but it took wind at court, infomuch that /l ionfuur de la 
Chefnaye was brought to an examination before the lords, 
and having confeh’d his being employ’d by Le Clerc in 
the defign of conveying Sir Walter Ralegh to France , he 
was, in September following, committed to a juilice of 
peace’s houfe in the nature of a clofc prifoner. Le Clerc 
was alfo cited to appear before the council. And here, 
through thole eternal peccadillos which are ever brambling 
the courfe of embattles, arofe a difpute, which however 
juftifiably it might be maintain’d by the faid French am- 
bafTador, feems yet to have added fome fuel to the fire of 
indignation alieady kindled againft Sir Walter Ralegh. 
For Le Clerc declar’d, he would continue dumb to all 
their interrogator.es till he (hould be ufed with that di- 
flinflion which others, qualified as he was, had before 
been. Inltancing, that Sir W. Becher , then agent for 
king James in France, had, at an audience before the 
council of ftatc, claimed the right, in honour of his re- 
prefentative quality, of not propounding his bufinefs till 
the lords of the council fliould fund up as he did, and 
be uncover'd as he was: for, being in that place am- 
bafliidor, he Ihould be allowed to let and be cover’d, as 
the counfellors were at the time of their audience. This, 
Le Clerc affirmed, had been yielded to by the king his 
matter’s counfellors, and therefore he challeng’d the like 
refpett from their Jordlhips. The lords anlvver'd, that 
different countries had their different forms of treaty; 
and that the manner of proceeding in Frame, was no 
nile for ours in England. But Le Clerc perliiled inflexi¬ 
bly in his right to this privilege. Then the lords, nei¬ 
ther to comply with his demand, nor conltrain his refo- 
lution, determin’d to lay afide all form or ceremony, by 
miring, promifeuoufly, into another room, no ways 
affected with the ob.ervances of the council-chamber, and 
there to dilcourfe over his tranfactions in favour of Sir 
Walter Ralegh, as a matter of private and indifferent 
convention. Here Le Clerc made many folcmn pro¬ 
bations that he knew nothing at all of the matter, till 
at length, after the con front me nt of Le Chefnay , and his 


rc confcffion of their employment for Sir Walter Ralegh'% 
efcape, Le Clerc could no longer face it out, but corifefs’d 
it likewile himfelf. King James being informed thereof, 
Le Clerc had notice given him by the lords, to forbear 
all further exerciie of his charge, and not to appear at 
court, till it Ihould be known, by the return of a znef- 
fenger they had lent exprefs to France , whether the king 
hvs mailer would herein avow his minifter’s actions. Thit 
was on, or not long after, the 17th of September; foon after 
Sir IV. Becher was confin’d to his houfe in Franca and about 
a month after, a difpatch came over to Le Clerc with 
particular charge to deliver it himfelf into king James's 
own hand, to try if he could by that means, recover 
himfelf again at court. Away potted Le Clerc to Roy fon, 
where the king then was, and ottering, himfelf to pre- 
fent the letters, could gain no admiflion; but being re- 
fer’d to the lords in waiting, he faid, he would either 
perfonally, according to his inilructions, or not at all, 
perform that fervice. So he returned to London , and 
from thence, in a few days, or about a week before Sir 
Walter Ralegh's death, to France , with his letters un¬ 
deliver’d ; and the revocation of the Englijh agent there¬ 
upon enlued. See Camden's Annals of King James ; 
but chiefly Finctti Philoxenis: or choice Obfer vat ions of 
Sir John Finct, Mafer of the Ceremonies to the two lafl 
Kings, touching the Reception , Precedence , Treatment , Au¬ 
dience, Punctilios and Con tells of foreign Ambaffadors sn 
England, 8™. 1656, p.jjo. Alfo V Ambaffadeur , et 
fes Fond ions, par blonfieur de Wiquefort, 4*. 1690* tom. 
I. p. 397. where, tho* he fays. La cour de France auroit 
him nxmlu maintenir fon minifre ; yet that after monfieur 
Le Clerc returned to France , il ne fut fas fort confideri 
dr puis ce temps la. Such the fate of unluccefsful fervice ! 

b Upon the great murmurs and difeontent among the 
people, which i'o generally arofe at the putting of Sir 
Walter Ralegh to death, infiomuch that, tho’ one of 
Effex's adversaries, he was pitied even by EJfex's friends; 
“ King James, after the mode of weak and ill-confulted 
44 princes (fays OJborne) fet forth a Declaration ; which, 
44 according to the ordinary fuccefs of fuch apologies, 
render'd the condition of that proceeding voorfe in the •world's 
44 opinion." Another author obferving, “ Such is the power 
44 of envy, and fo really criminal it is to be matter of 
44 more merit than fuch a prince knew how to value and 
44 to have done fcrviccs which they could not fuffidently 
44 reward, that this alone was Ralegh' s crime and hav¬ 
ing obferved that his very enemies had ackowledged the 
rcafonablenefs of his attempt at Guiana , with the juft 
meafures he took to put it in execution ; and, befides his 
perfonnl valour and publick conduct, the excellence of all 
the difpofitions he made for his expedition, concludes 
(with regard to the king’s Declaration ,) 44 That they had 
“ not any thing to lay to his charge on that part, but *what 
44 was fo evidently malicious, and fo fcolijh in the con - 
“ trivance alfo, as made all men ajhamed that heard it." 
See the Hiflorical Account of Sir Walter Ralegh/ Voyages 
and Adventures, 8vo. 1719, p. 37, 38. 

ZZZ 0* 


Digitized by 


Google 


ccxviii The LIFE of 

On Friday night, which was the 7 th of Augu/l, Sir Walter Ralegh came to London , * 
when captain King attended on him at his lodgings, but was told by Ralegh that he could in 
no wife get ready to go off that night. It feems to be the next day that Stucley got his war¬ 
rant to indemnify him for any contradl he fhould enter into with Sir Walter Ralegh , or to 
authorize his compliance with any offer he lhould make him for his efcapc, or in fhort, as 
others have not lpared to call it, a licence to betray him j for tho’ Ralegh might now have 
been fecured in a direct and undifguifed manner, yet the glory was to do it infidioufly, and 
under the vizor of friendlhip ; being not more fuitablc to the genius of predominant power, 
than necefiary on the prefent occafion, to give room for fo many more little circumfhnces of 
objection as might occur to fupply the place of one wanting, that fhould have been capital. And 
this night it was that the French ambaflador aforefaid, came to RalegV s houfe, and made the 
propofal before recited. But when captain King came to him again the fame night, Ralegh 
laid there was no going now without Stucley , whom he doubted not but he fhould engage to 
go along with him, and that the next night, without failure, he would meet the captain at 
the Tower Dock. As for Mr. Herbert , aforefaid, he was employ’d in garrowing Sir Wallet 
RalegPs houfe, as the captain phrafes it, while Ralegh , being thus drawn out of it by Stucley , under 
pretence of bearing him company, might be the more unexpectedly feiz’d with all fucb 
private papers as he fhould have about him *, in hopes, no doubt, that by one means or other, 
fomething might turn out to make a charge of fufficient weight againft him. But, in the 
condufion, fays our faid author, all the papers which were found, proved to be no other, 
than what might, without any diferedit, have been laid open to all the world. 

Captain King went, as he further tells us, on Sunday night to the place appointed with 
two wherries; and Sir Walter Ralegh alfo came thither ; having put on a falfe beard, and a 
hat with a green hatband. He was accompanied with Sir Lewis Stucley , young Stucley t and 
his own page. Then afking captain King, if all things were ready ? he anfwer*d, they were, 
and that the cloak-bag and the four piltols were in the boat. Stucley then faluted captain King y 
and afk’d, whether thus far he bad not dijlinguijhed himfelf an honejl man ? to which King 
anfwcr’d, that be hop'd be would continue fo. 

After they enter’d the boats and divided the piflols, they had not rowed above twenty 
ftrokes before the watermen told them, that Mr. Herbert had lately taken boat, and made as 
if he would have gone through-bridge, but returned down the river after them. This raifed 
fomc apprehenfxon in Ralegb t but, upon Stucley' s encouragement, they rowed on ; yet Ralegh , 
not well fatisfied, called captain King near to him, who was in the other boat with young 
Stucley and Hart t and intimated, that he could not go forward unlefs he was furc of the water¬ 
men, whom he then alfo fpake to, afking, whether, if any fhould come to arreft them in 
the king’s name, they would row forwards or return. At this, the great boobies were fo 
frightned that they cry’d, and anfwer*d, they knew no body there but captain King , who had 
hired them to Gravefend \ and that they neither dared, nor would go any further. Ralegh 
faid, that a brabbling matter with the Spanifh ambaflador, was the caufe that of neceflity he 
muft go to Tilbury to embark for the Low Countries - t and that he would give them ten pieces 
of gold for their pains. 

Then began Stucley' s part, curfing and damning himfelf that he lhould be fo unfortunate 
as to venture his life and fortune with a man fo full of doubts and fears. He fwore that if 
the watermen would not row on, he would kill them} and perfuaded Ralegh that there was no fuch 
danger as he fufpeCted * of which opinion captain King alfo ftill was. Thus the time paft till 
they drew near Greenwich , when a wherry crofs’d them, which Ralegh laid came to difeover 
them. King fought to difluade him from this fuppofition, and told him, that if they could 
but reach Gravefend, he would hazard his life to get to Tilbury. Thefc delays fpent the tide, 
and the watermen faid, it was impofllblc to get to Gravefend before morning. Hereupon 
Ralegh would have landed at Purfleety and Hart would have poflefs’d him, that tho’ it was 
night he could procure him horfes to Tilbury. Stucley appeared very zealous for this propofal, 
and faid, that upon that condition he could be content to carry the cloak-bag on his own 
fhoulders half a mile j but King told him, that if they could not go by water, it was impoffl- 
ble, at that time of night, to get horfes to go by land. 

By this time they had rowed as far as Woolwich , or rather about a mile beyond, which 
might be to a reach call’d the Gallions near Plumjlead. Here, approaching two or three 
ketches. Hart began to doubt whether any one of diem was his. Upon this, Ralegh con- 

■ Camden, in his Annals of King James, fays, Ralegh He alfo in the fame arricle, confirms Stucle/i acceptUW 
was brought to London on the 9th of Auguft 1618 ; but, ol the bribe to efcapc with Ra'egh. 

•s I compute from the king’s Declarations, it is a miitake. 

eluded 


Digitized by L^OOQle 







CCX1X 


Sir WALTER RALEGH, 

eluded they were all betray’d, and bid the watermen turn back, hoping to have got to his 
©wn houfe before morning \ and began to examine Hart very ftriCtly } who pretended he had 
given his men exprefs charge not to ftir from Tilbury till he came down ; but this would not 
induce Ralegh to proceed. Before they had rowed back a furlong, they efpied another wher¬ 
ry, and hailing her, they faid they were for the king. Ralegb perceiving they were fomc of 
Mr. Herbert's crew, propofed to Stucley , feeing they were difcover*d, and in refpeft to his 
fafety, that he might remain ftill in his cuftody} and that Stucley fljould openly declare 
to the watermen, he was his prifoncr, which he did. Here Stucley and he fell into private 
difcourfe, contriving how Ralegb might reach his houfe *, and how Stucley might lave himfelf 
harmlefs by faying, that he only pretended to go along with Ralegh in order to difeover his 
intentions, and feize upon his private papers. Then they whifperM fome time together, and 
Ralegb taking fome things out of his pockets (whether more rubies powder'd with diamonds, 
our author does not lay) and gave them to Stucley, who all this while, not only hugg*d and 
embrac’d him, as it feem’d with the greateft tendernels, but made the utmoft proteftations of 
love, friendlhip, and fidelity. When they were got back to Greenwich, Stucley faid, that he 
durft not carry Ralegb to his houle, but perfuaded him to land, which they did \ the other 
ftrangc boat landing at the lame time, in which the men, they perceived, belonged to Mr. 
W. Herbert and Sir William St. John , the fame who had made good profit of Ralegb before, 
as we have read. Upon Greenwich bridge, Stucley told captain King, it would be for Sir 
Walter's good, that he lhould pretend he was confenting with him to betray his mailer. King, 
not able to fathom the depth of this policy, as he tells us, refus’d it, thinking he lhould not 
only thereby belie his own confcience, but make himfelf odious to the world i therefore, tho’ 
Ralegh himfelf made fome motion of it to him, he could not, how ferviceable foever it might 
prove, be guilty of fo much infincerity towards him. Then Stucley arretted the captain in 
his majdty’s name, and committed him to the charge of two of Mr. Herbert's men. After 
this they all went to a tavern, and by the way, captain King heard Ralegh fay, Sir Lewis, 
tbefe allions will not turn out to your credit. Ralegh was kept apart from King till morning, 
when as they enter’d into the Tower, Ralegh faid to him, Stucley and CotterelJ have betray'd me . 
adding, for your part, you need be in fear of no danger , but as for me, it is I am the mark 
that is Jbot at. Then captain King, being forced to take his leave, left Ralegh, to Ins tuition > 
with whom / do not doubt (lays he) but his foul rejleth. And fo concludes his Narrative. 

Hut the curious reader would probably be willing to know what Stucley had to lay for 
himfelf upon this bufinefs} and this I have alfo fome opportunity of relating from the trail 
he publilh’d after Ralegh's death in his own defence ; which tho’, for its author’s behaviour 
aforefaid, it has been lo much difregarded, that of all the hillorians general and particular, , 
who have written of Sir Walter Ralegh , and fome few of them, whofe characters are pretty well 
known, to his difparagement; I never met with one who has Ihewn it lb much credit as to 
quote it: yet, as I have found fome few paffages not altogether ulelefs in explaining other 
parts of this life, fo thofe, which concern this part, I have thought proper more particularly 
here to infert, in obfervance to a good biographical maxim, which enjoyns us, as far as the 
parts they bear in our narrative will permit, to lhew a due refpeCb to the characters of all 
men, and confequently not, in favour of any, to proftitute our own. 

In this traCt, which is properly enough addrefs’d to the king, one of the earlieft motives to 
revenge, in that poor injirument of Jlate, as Stucley no lefs properly calls himfelf, againft 
Ralegb, appears to be a pretence, that Ralegb had abridg’d Stucley 1 s father of an incredible 
dividend in a prize many years before taken ac fea, • whereof a more particular account has been 
before given in its proper place \ as the laft motive will appear to be what Ralegh faid of this 
Stucley in his Dying Speech. But the arguments Stucley makes ufe of for having betray’d him, 
are drawn firft from Ralegh's having pretended to be poifon’d at Sir Edward Parham's houfe, 
who was Slucley's kinfman. For he reports Ralegh to have faid, ** Tho’ the gentleman would 
“ not hurt me, yet there might be priefts that did it: for I remember, after my morning’s 
“ draught of a cup of ale, which Sir Edward Parham offer’d me in the hall, I felt prefently 
“ a kind of excoriation in my bowels, as if fome jefuite had been the butler.” “ Now, fays 
“ Stucley , when I faw the puftles break out upon him at Salisbury , my compaffion, I confefs, 

4 ‘ was too credulous to report it.” But that being thus deceived himfelf, and thereby wrong¬ 
ing his kinfman, it moved hi$ indignation againft Ralegb for abufing both : fo that in fhort, he 

• To tbt ting'I excellent n ajefj, The bumble petition mitteJ to him for tht bringing up of Sir Walter Ralegh, 

information 0/Sir Lewii Stucxy, knight, •vice-admiral and the fcandahut efperfiont eaft upon b m for the fame. 

•f Devon, tncling bit oven behaviour in tbt charge ecta- 410. 1618, p. 8. 

drew 


Digitized by LiOOQlC 


ecxx 


The L I F E of 

drew Ralegh to his deftrudion by a lie, becaufe he had induced Studey to afperfe his kiniman 
with one. And tho’ divinity would not, as Stucley owns, yet reafon of ftate would hold it 
lawful to lie for the difcovery of treafon, in fervice to the commonwealth. Then he endea¬ 
vours to reconcile himfelf to the commonwealth, by anfwering the objection of hi* being fo 
inftrumental to the depriving it of fo fufficient a member as had not left his equal behind him, 
in thefe words : “ No man denies but he had many fufficiencies in him: but what were thefe 
“ but fo many weapons of practice and danger againft the ftate, if he efcaped ? being fo deeply 
“ tainted in fo many points of difeontent, dilhonefty, and diftoyalty. He knew, as he had 
“ written, that as in nature, fo in policy, a privatione ad habitum rot fit regrcjp.o. And 
«* therefore being defperate of any fortune here, agreeable to the height of his mind, who can 
“ doubt but he would have made up his fortune elfewhere, upon any terms againft his fove- 
“ raign and country ?** ‘ In another place, which relates to Ralegh's laft endeavours of 
efcaping, he tells the king, «« On the Saturday when I received your majefty’s commiflion by 
“ my coufin Herbert , I received alfo intelligence by him, that at that inftant Ralegh was 
“ flying from my cuftody without my privity, not having, as yet, made him any femblance 
“ of condefcent: b fo that I almoft came upon him unawares, even as he was putting on his 
•* falfe beard, and other difguifements ; which declares he did ftill diftruft your goodnefs, 
“ doubtlefs out of the confcience of his guiltinefs, whatever he writ or faid to the contrary, 
“ And is it any marvel then, that he was angry with me at his death for bringing him back ? 
“ Befides, being a man, as he was thought, of fo great a wit, it was no fmall grief that a man of 
" fo mean wit as I fhould be thought to go beyond hint Yea, but you fhould not have ufed 
“ fuch craft to go beyond him. No ? Sic ars deluditur arte. Neque enim lex jufiior ulla eft 
“ quam reels artifices arte perire fua. But why did you not execute your commiflion bravely 
** to his apprehenfion on him in his houfe ? why ? my commiflion was to the contrary, to 
“ difeover his pretenftons, and to feize his fecret papers, &c. And can any honeft fubje<5t 
“ queftion my honefty in the performance of fuch a commiflion, which tended to difeover the 
“ fecret intentions of an ill-afrcded heart to my foveraign ? How can any diflike this in me, 
41 anJ not bewray his own difhoneft heart unto the ftate? Yea, but tho’ another might have 
«« done this, yet how might you do it, being his kinfman and his friend? Surely if I had 
been fo ; yet in a publick employment and truft laid upon me, I was not to refufc it, much 
*« lefs to prefer private kindnefs and amity before my publick duty and loyalty: for what did 
I know the dangerous confequence of thefe matters which were to be-difeover’d ? or who 
“ knows them yet, of thofe that make themfelves my competent judges ? But if there were 
“ no kindred or amity between us, as I avow there never was, what bond then might tie me 
“ to him, but the tie of compafiion to his miferies ? which was in my foveraign’s heart to 
“ diftribute, when he faw time, that did command me, and not in the difpenfation of me* 
«* nor of any other inftrument’s power that is to be commanded.” c Thefe are his arguments; 
and he concludes his pamphlet with making two humble petitions to his moll excellent majefty ; 
«« Firft, feeing that I, your poor loyal fubjed, am burdened and opprefied with the teftimony 
“ of a bitter enemy, of a perjur’d and condemned man, againft all reafon, confcience and 
« law ; that I may have your majefty’s leave, to the confirmation of the truth, which I have 
«» avowed to be fufficient; to receive the facrament upon it in your majefty’s chapell.” But 
if he did receive the facrament, to confirm the truth of his aflertions, for this feems to be the 
meaning of his words, if they have, or were intended to have any ; how that would juftify 
the fallhood of his adions; and how, his taking of the facrament would be of any credit to 
him, who has own’d, that divinity would not hold his p rad ices lawful or how clear him for 
the violation of that truft and fidelity he had before taken the facrament, as we (hall hear pre- 
fently, to maintain, he was not thought cafuift, or even inftrument of ftate enough to refolve: 
the laft petition is, “ That his majefty would be fo gracious as to fuffer a declaration to come 
“ forth from the ftate, for the clearing of thefe matters, and further fatisfudion of the world 
which plainly difeovers, that this pamphlet , fent out under the name of this inftrument , was a 
mere concerted preparative to the faid declaration which fo obfervantly followed it j like a 
fomentation to fupple the minds of the uneafy people, that the foveraign unguent might enter 
more elfedu.illy. But how little fatisfadion the faid declaration gave, we have already noted; 
and for Stucley's performance, it made not fo much as himfelf eafy *, being, in his own opinion, 
fo infufficient to deface the black and odious ftainsof his condud, that he was forced to write 

, llid. p. 14, 15. London, to have made fome femltanct of condefcent when 

k Mamurii\ ltory as before, fomewhat dife-edits this the j :wel was offer’d him. 
of Siuile/s, who teems, before he came with Ralegh to • Stucley’/ Petition and Information, & c. p. 7, tSV. 

an 


Digitized by 


Google 







Sir WALTE R RALEGH. ccxxi 

an Apology befides ; and that was fo little regarded, as never to havfe been thought worthy oi 
the prefs. Whether his life was more fuccefsful than his writings, and hoW it Fared with him 
after this piece of court-fcrvice, may be gathered from feveral authbfs. Some hiftorital com¬ 
purgators of this reign, and confcquently no friends to Reslegb'i memoryj yet own, that Stucley *s * 
deftiny was fuitable to his dealings, being afterwards hang’d, fay they* for clipping of gold. i 
Sut thofe who had better intelligence, and knew the truth more particularly, have delivered it 
more perfectly; where they affirm, ** That Stucley having, for a bag of money, falfifted Hri 
“ faith, which be had confirm’d by the tie of the holy facrartient, he Was, before the year 
“ came about, caught clipping the fame coin, in the king’s own houfe ait Whitehall^ which 
41 he had received as the reward of his perfidioufnefs •, for which being condemned to ba 
“ hang’d, he was driven to fell himfelf to his Ihirt, to purehafo his pardon of two knights.’ 1 
“ Then (to avoid the fight and fcotn of mankind) withdrew himftlf to a little rfland in the 
“ Severn lea, called thcljleof Lundy , and there died a poor diftraffed beggar b which,- as we 
find it elfewhere fufficiently confirm’d, Was in lefs than two years aftet 1 Ralegh's death. 1 Thus 
horribly did the deceiver's reward prove his punilhment j and thus We leave this notable 
monument of improfperous treachery. 

RALEGH, as we before mention’d, was now prifoner again in the tower of London, into the 
being brought thither on Monday morning the 10th of Augujl. About two or three days T° rxer - 
after, a. committee was felefbed to examine into the aforefaid efcape, it being a mafter luckily 
apable, and highly ncceflary to be enlarg'd upon, in order to fill u£ the meafure of accufa- 
tion. Such a premeditated flight was therefore declaim’d againft as a crime fo heavy and fo 
heinous, fiich a difdain or defpair of his majefty’s mercy, as was greatly to be cxpeCTcd 
could never obtain his forgiveneft. Then again, for Sir IValter Ralegh to alienate himfelf 
thus from his native country by means of a foreign power, was ftretch’d- out to the idea of a 
fcparation as horrid as the breach of fbme huge rock or promontory frdift the main land, when' 
ks foundation was Tap’d and wafh’d- away by undermining waves. 

The arguments Ralegh now rcturned’to extenuate this mighty tranfgreflion, having been by 
no author tranfmitted to us, it is not ifrtpoffible but they Were witH the reft- of his juftification be¬ 
fore thofe coramiflioners, during thte time of this his hft : tnriprifottorferifj mduftriotrfly ft i fled; 

There is, notwithftanding, one of his own letters on this fofejeft ddceHded, By means of the' 
pels, tout. Itria directed, by the etYOr of the edito? k ferns,- tb'thfc-duke, tho* as yet; ho J 
more than marquis of Buckingham, and dated the' 14th of Ofloher. J Herein, fays Ralegh , 
with relation to his late attempted efcape, 44 That Which doth comfort my foul in this offtndr 
“ is, that even in the offence itfeif, I- had no other- intent than hlf majeftyY ftTvite, arid to 
** make his majefty know that my late enttrprize was grounded upon a truth, and which 
“ with one Ihip fpeedily fet out, I meant to have allured or to have died; being refolved, 

* as it is well ioiown, to have done it from Plymouth , had I not been reftram’d. Hereby 1 
“ I hoped, not only to 1 recover his majefty’s gracious opinion, but have deftroy’d all thofe 
“ malignani reports which had been fpread of me. That this is 1 true- that gentleman whom 
“ l fo much trufted, my keeper, and to whom I open’d my heart, cannOt but teftify ; and 
** wherein, if I cannot be believed living, my death folall witnefs. Yea-, that gentleman 
** anna: bbt avow it, that when we came back toWards London ; I defrred to fave no other' 

** treafurc than the exatt description of thofe places in the Indies. That I meant to go hence 
44 as a difeontented man, God, I truft, and my own actions will difluade his majefty ; whom 

* neither the lofs of my eftate, thirteen years imprifonment, and the denial of my pardon,' 

** could beat from his fervice: nor had the opinion of being counted a fool,- or rather diftradt, 

“ by returning as I did, ballanc’d with my love to his majefty’s ptrfon and eftate, any 1 
“ place at all in my heart. 

- “ It was that laft fevere letter from the lords for the fpeedy bringing of me up, and the 
u impatience of difhonour, that firft put me in fear of my life, or enjoying it in a perpetual 
" imprifonment, never to recover my reputation loft, which ftrengthned me in-my late, and : 

“ too late lamented refolucion, if his majefty’s mercy do not abound ; if his majefty do nbtf 
" pity roy age, and fcorn to take the extremeft and utmoft advantage of my errors; if his 1 
“ majefty, in his charity, do not make a difference between offences proceeding from a life-' 

“ faving natural impulfion, without all ill intent, and thofe of an ill heart; and that youri 

* M:at> Ccquinariz, 8vo. p. 94. And FranklaniT s that faithlefs knight, where he fays, “ That Sir Lnvi, 

Annals of King Jamti and King Charles I. Fol. 1681, “ Stuclty, who had betrayed Sir Walter Ralegh , died in 

P 3*. isle. *• a manner mad, on the 29th of Jigujl, 1620. Amalt 

k Hyv.it s Letters, vol. 2, p. 372. °f A ’i»g James. 

* Camden very well agrees in this mifcrable end of 

“ lordftiip, 


Digitized by 


Google 


a a a a 


ccxxu 


The LIFE of 


“ lordlhip, remarkable in the world for the noblenefs of your dilpofition, do not vouchfafe 
“ to become my interceffor *, whereby your lordfhip (hall bind an hundred gentlemen of my 
“ kindred to honour your memory, and bind me, for all the time of that life which your 
• ** lordfhip (hall beg for me, to pray to God that you may ever profper ; and over-bind me 
“ to remain your molt humble fervant, W I Ralegh.'* a 

Though all other events and motions in this expedition were now alfo rack’d and tenter’d 
by his adverfaries \ tho’ the commiflioners (who were perhaps the fame, mention’d in a 
kind of oblique manner, at the end of the king’s Declaration , as witnefles thereof) came now 
conftantly to the Tower , to pick out or catch hold of any thing that might contribute fome 
plaufible matter to condemn him -, yet after the examinations, re-examinations, and con- 
frontments of the moft difeontented perfons in the late voyage, none of all the depofitions upon 
oath, that are pretended to have been taken, or were really worm’d out of them, were ever 
thought fo material by the faid commiflioners, as to have been diftinCtly brought to light, 
either in that Declaration or elfewhere, againft Sir Walter Ralegh. Much lefs may we ex- 
peCt to meet with any of the arguments urged by himfelf in his own defence during this 
inquifition, or clofe and private manner of fifting him from fo many quarters. And yet, if 
they had been fairly prefented to the publick, it is not thought they could have given the world 
greater fatisfa&ion, or have cleared him better than what he had juft before written, both in 
his letter to the lord Carew and at the end of his Apology , to prove the authority he had for 
the late aCtion at Guiana , the integrity of his condutt in it, with the reafon and neceflity thereof. 
Wherein it appears, he abfolutely depended on the honour of king James to continue now, as 
he had begun, the maintenance of his right to that country which Ralegh had lawfully pof- 
fefled for the crown i at leaft, fo far, as not to renounce or circumvent his own commiflion; 
other wife, how well he knew that if he made the leaft oppofition to any refiftancc of his at¬ 
tempt, he was liable to be purfued as an invader ; or, if he returned with any gold, to be 
perfecuted as a plunderer by the Spaniards j and if he did neither, that he was ftill no left 
liable to be accus’d as an impoftor by his co-adventurers. But in this latter refpeCt, all fuf- 
picion was clearly removed, even from thole who by their lodes in this voyage would have 
been moft readily prompted to make fuch reproach, when they found Ralegh prove himfelf 
as in thefe writings, to the face of mankind, fuch a far greater lofer than any of the reft here¬ 
by. as was before obferved : and as for the other two objections, Ralegh has alfo made it no 
lefs amply evident in the fame pieces, how glaringly he muft appear to the world, a mere 
premeditated or defigned facrifice to one of them, if king James Ihould maim his foveraignty 
of its title to Guiana, or now difclaim’d the undertaking there which he had before authoriz’d. 
For therein he has lhewcd, that his majefty was well refolved of his right in thofe parts bor¬ 
dering the Orenoque co the fouth, as far as the Amazons , by having formerly given the Englijh 
leave to plant and inhabit there ; and that his own propofal to go thither, was not accounted 
of as what would endanger the peace, even by the Spanijh ambaffador, who pretended it to be 
needlefs that Ralegh Ihould carry fuch ftrength with him, if he intended no other enterprize, 
for that he Ihould work any mine there without difturbance ; but had a good reafon return’d 
by Ralegh for that ftrength, from the example of Sir John Hawkins. Further (hewing, that 
for the Spaniards to fet up a town upon the Orenoque, was fuch a ufurpation, and that tbeir 
king Ihould thereupon call himfelf king of Guiana, was as unreafonable as if he were to call 
himfelf king of Ireland , becaufe he took pofleflion a tSmerwick, and built a fort there. Ha¬ 
ving alfo lhcwn, that no peace could be broken there by him, where no peace was maintain’d 
by the Spaniards , both from their bloody ufage of the Englijh , who had lately been to trade 
there, and from the words in the king of Spain' s late letters to the governor} «« who firft 
“ call’d us enemies , when he hoped to cut us in pieces, fays Ralegh , and having fail’d, peace- 
** breakers : when to be an enemy and a peace-breaker in one and the fame aCtion, is impof- 
“ fible.” b Moreover, that here the Spaniards began the firft (laughter \ that their town was 
not burnt by any knowledge or permiflion of his, nor his directions to the mine followed. 
Laftly, having obferved how little the Spaniards can endure that the Englijh nation Ihould 
look upon any part of America , being above a fourth part of the whole known world, tho* 
the hundredth part was never poflefled by the Spaniards: and withal, the many ill confe- 
quences of acknowledging, that we have offended the king of Spain by landing in Guiana , 
even to the ruin of our navigation, trade, power, and dominion in this quarter of the globe, 

a See the Cabala ; or Myjteriet if State, in Letters if k Sir Walter Ra’egt 'y letter to the lord Coreiv, at the 
the great Minijlers to King James and King Charles, (etc, end of his sffology. p Cj. 

410. 1654, page 309. 


where 






• • • 


Sir WALTER RALEGH. 


ccxxm 


where there was as much room and reafon for advancing the honour and riches of England. 
as of any ftate in chriftendom ; he concludes his Apology with thefe words, I have faid it 
already , and J will fay it again, that if Guiana be not bis majejly’s, the working of a mine 
there, and the taking of a town there, had been equally perilous *, for , by doing the one , 1 had 
rob’d the king of Spain, and been a thief j and, by the other, a difturber or breaker of the peace.' 

Now it is plain, that king James fo much waved his right to Guiana , at leaft till Ralegh 3 
was put to death (for then he aftum’d it again, by the power he gave for another expedition to* 
thofe parts, * however, irrefolutely, according to cuftom, he revok’d it) that as we obferve in' 
his Declaration , not only the place which Ralegh went to is pretended to be out of his com- 
miffion, but the title he flood upon, to be no ways compatible with it. Yet fo inconteftably did 
Ralegh make it appear, no doubt in his examinations at prefent, no lefs than in the writings 
abovemention’d, that if any peace could be broken where no peace had been maintain’d , it mujl> 
either be by king James himfelf., in firjl granting a commiffion to plunder another prince (for he 
knew where Ralegh was going, and no where declines his knowledge that the Spaniards were 
fettled there) and then betraying if to procure a defeat of the very attempt be had empower’d 
or elfe by the Spaniards tbemfelvesy in refifting bis endeavours to put it in execution ; that after 
all this quefloning, canvafing, and heaping up of allegations againft him, the council could 
not think it juftifiable to take away Sir fValter Ralegh’s life for all that had pa fled at Guiana. 
Yet, as he muft be put to death, they fpund a way to appeafe the Spaniards with his blood, by 
making this laft aftion at St. Thome the efficient caufe, but the obfolete condemnation at 
Winchejler, fifteen years paft, the nominal caufe of his definition: as a courfe whereby both 
the law would be judicially fatisfied, and the title be left, for fear of difpleafure, undecided- 
So in the whole, it was refolved there fhould be room enough to revoke the king's former 
mercy, as it appears in his Declaration ; and that Ralegh might lofe his head upon his former 
attainder j b notwithftanding the repugnancies apparent in fuch a concJufion to men of 

penetration j 


• About a year after the death of Sir Walter Ralegh , 
king James granted captain Roger North, a commiflion to 
inhabit and fettle a colony near the river of Amazons in 
Guiana ; but was foon aw'd by Gondomar fo much, that, 
on the 15th of May 1620, he ifliied a proclamation to 
recall that gentleman from the faid undertaking, and 
committed hu brother* the lord North , to the Fleet prifon 
for halloing the faid voyage, as may be read in Camden's 
Annals of that king's reign. Some other little attempts 
were feveral years after nude there, which may be read 
of in a manuicript entitled. An txafl Narrative of the 
Slate of Guiana, and of the Engliftl Colony in Surynam, 
in the Beginning of the War vetth the Dutch, and of its 
Actions during the War ; with the taking thereof by the 
Fleet from Zeland: of which fome copies are prelerved 
in the Ajhmolean and other libraries. But how all this 
fpacious and fruitful country has been fmee fhamefully 
de erted, by the Engli/b cfpecially ; the quiet pofleflion 
there by the Spaniards, to this day, is fufticient witnefs. 
Whereupon we cannot forbear reciting here the reflection 
of a late writer, in an efiay, partly before quoted. On the 
needful Improvements in Trade : wherein, e* prefling how 
much he is for promoting merchants to rational and pro¬ 
fitable adventures, andfailors to new difcoveries, as things 
moil valuable in their nature, folid in their defign, and 
glorioufly advantageous in their fucccfs, he proceeds thus: 
* c By fuch adventures and difcoveries, all our encreafe in 
44 colonics and plantations has been produced. *Twa$ 
41 bv fuch happy attempts, that the famous Sir Walter 
44 Rairgk and his afliflants, fettled the Britijh nation upon 
44 the Northern comment of America ; and, had he been 
44 encouraged, or rather had he not been bafely betray'd, 
44 he had fettled us alfo upon the Southern continent; 
“ and the power of Great Britain in her colonies and 
“ iflands, m that part of the world, had been fuperior 
44 as well in wealth as in extent of land, and in ftrength 
44 of people, to all the nations of the world that ever 
** fettled there. And perhaps, by this time, we had 
44 wanted no Ajfento to carry Negroes to America ; no 

44 Licence to trade to the Guiph of Mexico , but the South- 

44 Sea had been our own, and all the wealth and glory 
44 of America paid homage to king Georce. But 
u fate, and the ill policies of thofe times hinder’d; and 
44 the golden mountains of Chili, and the filver mines of 
44 Potcfi, the wealth of the richeft part of the world, is 

44 facnficed to the lull and Both of the poorefl, and 

44 proudeft nation under the fun." See the Humour if, 
vof. 2. 2vo. 1725, p. 39. Another modern author, in 
his Addrefs to the SouthSea Company, obferving this at- 
tempt of Sir Walter Ralegh's to have been the greateft 


enterprize that ever was undertaken by any private per- 
fon; how much it would be to the glory of the faid 
Company to bring it to perfection; how much it was to 
the infamy of that age in which this great man fufler’d, 
that iuch an enterprize was not only diicourag'd, but even 
betray'd to the Spaniard , and this gallant gentleman ex- 
pofed to ruin ; alfo how juft a reproach to this nation 
ever fince, that fuch a part of the world, fo timely and 
fo effectually difeover’a to us, has not been made our 
own, and all thofe nations, who would fubmit to us, and 
be afliftant to the great work, be taken ii.to protection, 
confederated and made ufe of in fubjecting that inex- 
hauftible treafure to be found there, to the government 
and crown of Great Britain ; he concludes the laid 
Addrefs in thefe words; 44 7 'he country is within the pa- 
44 tent or charter of the South Sea Company ; the under- 
44 taking feems to be their due: their charter begins at 
44 the river Orenoque, and none can attempt it without 
44 them. If they pleafe to take fuch a propofal into 
44 confideration, the author of thefe flieets is leady to 
44 lay before them a plan or chart of the rivers and 
44 (hores, the depths of water, and all neccflary inftruc- 
44 tions for the navigation, with a fcheme of the under- 
44 taking, which he had the honour, about thirty years 
44 ago, to lay before king William, and to de- 
44 monftratc how eafy it would be to bring this attempt 
44 to perfection. If the Company decline it, 'tis then 
44 humbly propos’d, that they will give leave to a fociety 
44 of merchants to undertake it under the Company's li- 
44 cence, and on fuch conditions as may be thought 
44 reafonable 1 of which more fhall be faid when fuch a 
44 propofal fhall be entertain’d by the Company." See an 
Historical Account of the Voyages and Adventures of Sir 
Walter Ralegh, Svo. 1719 s from p. 42 to 5J. 

k “ A head (fays OJhorne) of more weight to our 
44 court (cfpecially in that dearth of wifdom then raging), 
44 than the Injanta could be, notwithftanding that the 
44 mod general, no lefs than the leaft fufpeCtcd repons, 
44 made her alone owner of the greateft beauty, virtue, 
44 gallantry and prudence that were at that day extant 
44 in womankind ! But, as the fbolifti idolaters were 
44 wont to facriflce the clioiceft of their children to the 
44 devil, the common enemy of humanity ; fo our king 
44 gave up this incomparable jewel to the will of this 
44 monfter in ambition {the Spaniard) under the pretence 
44 of a fuperannuated tranfgreflion, contrary to the opi- 
44 nion of the mod honeft fort of gownmen ; who main- 
44 tain’d, that his majefty's pardon lay induftvdy in the 
44 commiflion he gave him upon his fetring out to fea; 
44 it being incongruous that he, remain’d under the 

notion 


Digitized by k-xOOQle 


CCXXJV 


fbe LIFE of 

pcnctratipit; among whom, Carey) Ralegh has yery well obfcrv’d thereupon, that his fatlx r 
was condemn'd for being a friend to the Spaniards, and lofl bis life by the fame fentence, for being 
their enemy. * 

V A method, however, of difpatching him being thus piec’d out, the king, or thofe with 
whom he left the management of this affair when he went upon his progrefs, appear’d very 
eager for bringing it to a period. Therefore, as the fhorteft way, a privy feal was fent to 
the judges, forthwith to order execution. But they confidering there ought to be fome face of 
regularity in the matter, and a little finger in the court of jullice to Aide it off with as much 
decency and fmoothnefs as the bufinefs would allow of, demur’d upon that extrajudicial man¬ 
ner of proceeding. Therefore, on Friday the 23d of October, there was a conference held 
upon the form or manner how prifoners, who have been attainted of treafon and fet at liberty, 
Ihould bp brought to execution, between all the juftices of England •, as one of them, judge 
Hutton tells us: wherein the queftion being put, “ Whether a privy feal was fuflicient, it 
“ being dire&ed to the juftices of the King's Bench , to command them to award execution 
“ againft Sir Walter Ralegb | or how they (hould proceed before execution be awarded ?" It 
was refolved by all, “ That he ought to be brought to bar, by Habeas Corpus to the lieu- 
** tenant of the 7 * ower, and then demanded, if he could lay any thing why execution fliould 
«* not be awarded ? For the proceedings againft him being before commiffioners , they are deliver’d 
“ only into the court of King's Bench, or they might have remain’d in a bag or a cheft, and 
“ no roll made thereof; and fo long time palling, it is not a legal courfe that he Ihould be 
*< commanded by a privy feal or great feal to be executed, without being demanded, what 
*« he hath to fay ? For he might have a pardon, or he might lay that he was not the fame 
“ perfon: as if one be outlawed of felony, and taken, he lhall not be prefently bang’d, but 
♦« he lhall be brought to bar, and fo demanded, ( 3 c. Upon tlus refolution, a privy feal 
«* came to the juftices of the King's Bench, commanding them to proceed againft him accor 
“ ding to law.” b In what fenfe he was fo proceeded againft may be better underftood by 
that notice which on the 24th of October, being the next day, Ralegh received from the com- 
tniffioners to prepare for death; c and by his not being fuffer’d, when he foon after appear’d, 
in court, before the judges, according to law, to make any defence of himfelf for what had been 
the occafion of his coming thither *, as may be feen by the following abftraft of the laid 
proceedings, which I have been favour’d with from authentick copies. 

On Wednefday , the 28th of October, Sir Walter Ralegh, at eight o’clock in the morning, 
was awaked out of a fit of a fever, with fummons prefently to appear at the King's Bench bar 
Brought to at Wejlmin/ler j and, loon after nine o'clock, he was, by writ of Habeas Corpus, brought 
Uejhmnjicr- The writ being deliver'd to die judges by Sir Walter Apjley , and. Sir Walter RalegRt 

convittion at Winchefler read, the attorney, Mr. Henry Telverton, fet forth, “ That the 
«« prifoner having been fifteen years fince convided of high treafon, and then received the 
“ judgment of death, his majefty, of his abundant grace, had been pleafed to Qicw mercy 
«♦ unto him, till now, that jullice calls to him for execution. Sir Walter Ralegb (continued 
*« he) hath been a Jlatefman, and a man, who, in regard to his parts and quality, is to be 
“ pitied: he hath been as a Jlar at which the world have gazed i but liars may fall, nay 
«* they mull fall when they trouble the fphere wherein they abide. d It is therefore his ma¬ 
tt jelly’s pleafure now to call for execution of the former judgment, and I now require order 
«» for the fame.” Then the clerk of the crown, Mr. Fanjhaw, having read the record of 
the convidion and judgment, the prifoner, holding up his hand, was alked, “ what he could 


*« notion of one dead in the law, (hould, as a genera], 
** difpofe of the lives of others, not being himfelt mailer 
«« of his own. But fhc Spanijb faction, then ablolute at 
44 court, and foie managers of the king’s power no leis 
4 ‘ than his juflice , did fo far tender his catholick ma- 
44 jelly’s full (atisfettion in the procuring of his death, 
44 the only man of note left alive who had helped to 
44 beat them in the year 1588 ; that no abfurdity lying in 
44 the way of his profecution, could deter them from 
44 making ufe of hi? former condemnation; remembring, 
«« withal, how far his wit had puzzled them at Winebefter, 
«< and how much the jury, who condemn’d him there, 
•« were touch’d in their confciences; which made it the 
44 lefs probable they (hould be able to impannel one fo 
•< wicked as would do it then. Befides, No peace be- 
M y 0 nd the Lint, was a belief fo rivet ed in the opinion 
of all, as he could not have been indited anew, with- 
«* out the king’s producing the original articles, by which 
« his accufers would have been convinced of malice, or 
44 his prince of folly. Memoirs of King James, p. 108. 

• Sec Hrw*r 3 Letters, vol. z, p. 371 ; and the tract 


entitled, A brief Relation of Sir Walter Ralegh’/ Troubles, 
isle, where Carnv Ralegh's words are, p. 9, as follows. 
44 Here juflice was indeed blind! blindly executing one 
44 and the lame perlon, upon one and the fame con- 
44 demnation, for things contradictory ; for Sir Walter 
44 Ralegb was condemn’d for being a friend to the Spa- 
44 niard , and loft his life for being their utter enemy/ 
44 T hus kings when they will do what they pleafc, 
44 pleafe not him they (hould, God ; and having made 
44 their power fubfervient to their will, deprive themfclves 
44 of that juft power whereby others are iiibfervicnt to them.” 

Sir Richard Hutton’/ Reports, fob 1656, p 21. 
Alio judge Crook's Reports 2, fob 49$; ferjeant Rolle' s 
Reports, 50, p. 7. a id IV. Kelfin* Abridgment, Wr. 
vol. 3. 1726, fol. 365. 

« Camden’/ Am.ah of King J :mes. 
d So in the copy here chiefly followed, but in one 
more ancient, this companion is thus turn’d into a metaphor; 
Sir Walter Ralegb , in his time, n vara liar ; yea , and of fucb 
nature as (hined fair, but cut ef tie nnffity of flute, like 
liars, when they trouble the (pherc, mult indeed fall. 

41 fay 


Digitized by bjOOQle 







ccxxv 


Sir WALTER RALEGH. 

“ fay, why execution Ihould not be awarded againft him ?” Ralegh told the lords, “ his 
“ voice was grown weak by his late ficknefs, and an ague he had at that inftant upon him, in 
“ which he was brought thither} therefore (as it appears in another copy of thefe proceedings 
“ before refer’d to) deftred the relief of a pen and ink.” But the lord chief juftice, Sir Henry 
Montague , telling him “ he fpake audibly enough,” he went on to this effedt : “ That he 
“ hoped the judgment he received to die fo long fince, could not now be {trained to take 
** away his life \ fince by his majefty’s commiflion for his late voyage, it was imply’d to be 
“ reftor’d, in giving him power as marfhal on the life and death of others ; and fince he 
“ undertook the fame to honour his foveraign, and enrich his kingdom with gold, of the ore 
“ whereof this band , faid he, hath found and taken in Guiana.” Then beginning to mention 
by what unavoidable and unblameable means the faid enterprize mifearried, the lord chief 
juftice interrupted, and told him, “ whatever he fpoke touching his voyage was not to the 
«* purpofe *, alio that his commilHon could be of no fervice to him ; that treafon was not 
“ pardon’d by implication, and that he mud fay fomething elfe to the purpofe, otherwife they 
“ muft proceed to give execution.” • Ralegh , then finding whatever he {hould offer in his 
own juftification would be no way to the purpofe, put himfelf upon the king’s mercy j yet 
g^ve fomc reafons, “ why he hoped the king would take companion upon him concerning 
“ that judgment which was fo long paft, in which both his majefty was of opinion, and 
there were fome prefent who could witnefs, that he had hard ufage.” b The lord chief 
juftice advis’d him to the wifdom of fubmiflion, and told him, “ he was called to grant exe- 
“ cution upon the judgment given fifteen years fince j all which time he had been as a man 
« dead in the law, but the king, in mercy, fpared him } that he might think it heavy if 
“ this were done in cold blood j but it was not fo, for new offences had ftir’d up his majefty’s 
** juftice to revive what the law had formerly caft upon him. I know , continued he, that you. 
** have been valiant and wife , and I doubt not but you retain both thefe virtues , for now you 
** Jball have occafion to ufe them. Tour faith hath heretofore been quefttoned, but I am refolved, 
«* you are a good ebriftian •, for your book, which is an admirable work, doth teftify as much . 
“ I would give you counfel , but I know you can apply unto yourfelf far better than I am able to 
“ gtne you." Yet, with the good neighbour in the gofpcl, he was for pouring fome oil into 
his wounds; tho’ far was it from yielding the refrcfhmcnt he promis’d, by reafon of the feverL 
ty wherewith he fo fharpened the infufion. “ I give you the oil of comfort, laid he, tho’ in. 
“ refpedt that I am a minifter of the law, mixed with vinegar .” Nay, the judge further 
gave him, how unneceflary foever he juft before own’d it to be, one lefture upon farrow\ 
“ Sorrow, faid he, will not avail you in fome kind) for were you pained, forrow would 
“ not cafe you; were you afflufted, forrow would not relieve you \ were you tormented, 
“ forrow would not content you j and yet the forrow for your fins would be an everlafting 
«' comfort to you.” Then another alfo upon death. “ You muft do as that valiant captain 
“ did, laid he, who, perceiving himfelf in danger, faid, in defiance of death, Death , thou 
expciHeft me *, but , maugre thy fpite, J expe£l tbee. Fear not death too much, nor fear 
** death too little ; not too much, left you fail in your hope •, nor too little, left you die 
“ prefumptuoufly : and here I muft conclude my prayers to God for it, and that he would 
“ have mercy on your foul.” So he ended with faying, “ Execution is granted .” 

RALEGH then defir’d, that he might not be cut off fo fuddenly •, for that he had fome¬ 
thing to do in difeharge of his confcience, fomething to fatisfy his majefty, and fomething the 
world in: he defir’d further, that he might be heard at the day of his death •, and concluded* 
with calling on “ God to be his judge, before whom he (hould ftiortly appear, that he was 
“ never diftoyal to his majefty j which I will juftify , faid he, where I fhall not fear the face of 
“ any king on earth" Thus the manuferipts here chiefly followed, conclude \ c but in the more 
ancient copy of thefe proceedings, Ralegh's conclufion, to the fame fenfe, is thus more copioufly 
exprefs’d: “ 1 moft humbly beleech your lordlhips, that you will grant me lome time before 


* Another Account relates this paflage thus : 44 When 
44 Ralegh began to juftify himfelf for the late ‘voyage, the 
44 lord chief juftice filenced him therein, faying, There 
44 was no other matter there in queftion, but concerning 
44 the judgment of death formerly given againft him, 
44 which, the hurt's pleafun <was, upon fome occafion! befi 
“ tt himfelf, to have executed, unlefs he could 
4 ‘ fbew good caute to the contrary.” See the Proceedings 
againft Sir Walter Ralegh at Weftminfter, annexed to Sir 
f. Overbury's Account of his Arraignment at Winch eft er, 
4 t0 - *648, p. 16. 

* In another copy of this proceeding againft him at 


Weftminfter , which is the old MS. I have before me, as 
bovemention'd, this paflage is thus exprefled : 44 Concerning 
44 my judgment at Winchefter, I prefume, moft of you, 
44 that now hear me, are refolved h<nu that *was obtain'd ; 
44 and I know that his majefty was fo refolved touching 
44 that trial, that if he had not been anew exafperatea 
44 againft me, certain I am, I might (if I could by na- 
44 ture) have lived a thoufand and a thoufand years, 
44 before he would have taken the advantage thereof.” 

• In a volume of the Harleyan manuferipts, 90, C. 7. 
fol. 439; and another manufeript amorg the collections 
of the late Mr. Granger. 

b b b b “ my 


Digitized by CiOOQie 


CCXXV1 


The LIFE of 


“ my execution, thatl may fettle my affairs and my mind more than they yet are •, for I hav e 
“ much to do, both for my reputation, confcience and loyalty \ and I would befeech the 
“ favour of pen, ink and paper, to exprefs myfelf fomething thereby, and to difeharge my- 
felf of fome truft of worldly matters that were put in me -, which leifure, I befeech you 
** think, that I crave not for to gain one minute of life ; for now being old, fickly, in dif- 
“ grace, and certain to go to it, life is wearifome to me. And I do laftly befeech your 
** lordlhips, that, when I come to die, I may have leave to fpeak freely at my farewell, to 
** fatisfy the world only, that I was ever loyal to the king, and a true lover of this com- 
“ monwealth ; for this I will feal with my blood.'* So craving their prayers, he was led 
away to the Gate-houfe , near the Palace-yard. 

The king was all this while retir’d as it were, or at fome remotenefs from this tragical 
feene, and, as I have receiv’d it from particular tradition, in Hertford/hire •, as if he would have 
diverted himfelf not only from the fight or report, but even the thoughts of it:» yet yhat an 
effectual and expeditious hand he had in it, may further appear by his fpecial warrant for the 
execution ; which was produced, ready fign’d, as if it at Wejlminfler , in a manner, asfoonas 
the fentence was over, being dated the fame day, and directed to his chancellor, Vcrulam, Herein, 
his gracious majefly, «« difpenfing with the manner of execution according to his former judgment, 
“ and releafing him of the fame to be drawn, hang’d and quarter’d, fays, our pleafure is, inftead 
“ thereof, to have the head only of the faid Sir Walter Ralegh cutoff, at or within our palaceof 
“ Wejlminjler: commanding the faid chancellor hereupon to direft two feveral writs under the 
“ great feal •, one to the lieutenant of the ‘Tower, or his deputy, for the delivery of Sir [Valter 
“ Ralegh to the fheriffs of Middlefex at the faid palace *, and the other, to the faid fheriffs for 
“ the receiving the faid Sir Walter Ralegh from the faid lieutenant, and for executing him there 
* { for which this to be his warrant and difeharge, againft us, our heirs and fucceffors forever.” b 
We find, about the fame time, fome petitions prefented to the king in behalf of Sir Walter 
Ralegh, which were flrengthncd with the felicitations of fome perfons in great power and efteem 
with his majefty •, but lhall not wonder at their having no effedl with him, to mitigate this 
peremptory and rigorous doom, if it be true as an author, who had opportunity enough of 
obferving his difpofition, and abilities fufficient to give a clear judgment of it, has faid there¬ 
of, with relation to Sir Walter Ralegh , that “ King ’fames fo far participated of the humour 
** of a pufillanimous prince, as to pardon any fooner than thofe injur’d by himfelf.” * As for 
Ralegh, we find not that he harbour’d the leaft expectation or defire of a reprieve ■, for that all 
the oppreffions of age, fickneis, obloquy, fpoil and lofs of all his means, befides the other 
indignities he now lay under, banife’d every wife of redrefs in this world, but by that diffo- 
Jution which puts an end to all worldly miferies, appears pretty evident in the letter he feems to 
have written but a feort time before his death to the king ; in which, he rather acknowledges 
fome former tendencies to favour and compafiion, than defires any repetition of them, and 
gives a very good reafon for his having no further profpeCt of any thing fubftantial therein, 
where he fays, “ I have not fpared my labour, my poor eftate, and the hourly hazard of 
« my life ; but God hath otherwife difpofed of all, and now end the days of my hope.” But 
if the days of his hope had ended when he landed at Plymouth, the days of his life had proba¬ 
bly been augmented to a much greater number. Not, if it had been prolonged into many 
other a£ts, that they might have adorn’d it with fuch unfading renown, as that one whereby 
with fuch univerfal admiration he finife’d it. That letter aforefaid, he concludes with the 
generous profeflion of “ being in nothing fo miferable, as in that I could never meet with an 
occafion, fays he, wherein to be torn in pieces for your majefly's fervice. d But his ma¬ 
jefty chofe rather to let his own name and memory be torn in pieces for Ralegh's honour, and 
not only by all indifferent or impartial judges, but by his own countrymen ; e and even by 

antagonifts 


» In Camden , alfo it may appear, that the king came 
rot to London to give audience to foreign ambaffadors now 
(as in all other parts of his reign) flocking over, till a day 
or two after Ralegh' s death, then he came privately to 
Whitehall in the evening ; but feems very reltlefs about 
this time ; very often in his boots, and hunting to and fro; 
fometimes at Oat lands, fometimes at Theobalds, fometimes 
at Hampton-Court ; not but he found time to dedicate his 
Meditations on the Lord's Prayer to his favourite Buckingham , 
in February following; but how he reconcil’d a certain ar¬ 
ticle in that prayer with the intention of his Declaration a- 
forefaid againft Sir Walter Ralegh , about the fame time 
publiftfd, I leave for others to compare. The queen, all 
this while, lay on her death-bed; nay, even when fhe lay 
dead, in March following, and before the folcmnity of her 


funerals, the king was fo bufy in that important affair of 
his life, the horfe-races at A J rw-Market, that he got a vio¬ 
lent fit of ficknefs thereby 5 fo that it was fear’d his fa¬ 
vourite diverfion would prove as fatal to him as it was 
thought a few years after the medicinal applications ot 
that favourite peer aforefaid did. 

*> Rymer’i Fardera, tom. 17, fol. 115. 
c Ofborne’i Me moirs of King James, p. 107* 
d See Sir Toby Mathews's Colit SI ion of Letters, p 65. 
c Bilhop Burnet , ipcaking of fome great errors in king 
James's reign, goes on thus: “ Befides the:e publick 
“ actings, king James fufler’d much in the opinion of 
11 all people, by his ilrange way of ufmg one of the great- 
eft men of that age, Sir Walter Ralegh ; againft whom, 
u the proceedings at firfi were much center'd, but the 

“ lafi 


Digitized by kiOOQle 







CCXXV11 


Sir W ALTE k RAL&GH. 

antagonifts to one another in other ports of hiftory, than fuffer any mercy to interfere with that 
fordid but deceitful, and foon after derided purfuit of a profitable alliance with the crown of 
Spain. 

Whither any fuch conditions were offer’d him at this time to lengthen the fhort line 
of an uncomfortable exiftence, which were either fo extortionate as Ralegh could not comply 
with them, or fo bafe and deteftable as to be worfe than death, the particulars are not 
come to light t unlefc fome glimpfes thereof may be difeerned in that Epigram he wrote a 
little while before his end, in allufion to the light of a candle: which is as follows. 

Cowards may fear to die, but courage ftout. 

Rather than live in fnuff, will be put out. 

Moreover, how fublimcly his thoughts were now fequefter*d or elevated from all worldly 
confiderations, and with what ferenity, what fteadinefs, he did in a manner poffefs the 
joys of a better ftate before he could be driven to it, is vifible in that poem he wrote about the 
lame time, on the pilgrimage his foul was fuddenly to make to the regions of eternity, which 
concludes with this diftich: 

Of death and judgment , heaven and hell , 

Who often thinks , muft needs die well. 

And that his faith was no Ids ftedfaft in the hopes of a refurre&ion, we are as convincingly 
aflur’d by thofe verfes which, this laft night of his life, he probably wrote alfo here, in the 
Gate-boufe they being found there in his bible j and, according to the moft ancient copies 
I can meet with, pen’d in thefe words : 

Even fuch is Time l who takes in truft 
Our youth, our joys, and all we have j 
And pays us but with earth and dujl: 

Who, in the dark and filent grave , 

When we have wander'd all our ways. 

Shuts up the ftory of our days. 

But from that earth, that grave and duff. 

The Lord Hull raife me up, I truft. 

The next morning, being Tburfday the 29th of Oflober , and the lord mayor's day. Sir 
Walter Ralegh was conduced, by the Iheriffs of Middlefex, to the old Palace-yard in Wefl- 
minfter , where there was a large fcaffold ereded before the parliament-boufe for his execution. 
He had on, a wrought night-cap under his hat} a ruff band; a black, wrought velvet night¬ 
gown over a hair-colour’d fettin doublet, and a black, wrought waift-coat } a pair of black, 
cut, taffety breeches, and a(h-colour*d filk ftockings. He mounted the fcaffold with a chear- 
fol countenance, and laluted the lords, knights, and gentlemen of his acquaintance there 
prefent. Then proclamation being made by an officer for filence, he introduced his fpeech 
with informing them, that as he was yefterday taken out of his bed in a ftrong fit of a fever, 
which much weaken’d him, and whofe untimelinefs forbearing no occafion or place, he ex¬ 
pected it again to day: therefore did firft implore God, that he would preferve him from the 
interruptions thereof at this time, and next, defir’d the audience, if any difability of voice or 
dejeftion of countenance fhould appear in him, that they would impute it rather to the difordcr 
of his body than any difmaiedned of mind. Then paufing a little, he fat down, and directed 
himfelf towards a window, where the lords Arundel , Northampton , Doncajler , with other 
nobles were fitting, and begun his fpeech. But they being at fome diftance from the fcaffold, 
he apprehended they did not plainly diftinguilh his words, therefore laid, he would ftrain his 
voice, for that he would willingly have them hear him. To which the lord Arundel anfwcr’d, 

“ i*P part of them was thought both barbarous and ///*- otherwife a great oppofer of bifhop Burnet , yet agrees 
€< A little further, fpeaking of the fame king, he with him in this particular ; where fpeaking of the artifices 
fays, “ His reign, in England , was a continual couyfe of by which king James was prevail’d on to put the gallant 
“ mean practices: the firft condemnation of Sir Walter Ralegh to death, he fays, however, he thinks, it might 
“ Ralegh was very black ; but the executing him after fo refult more from want of courage than from cruelty, that 
u many years, and after an employment that had been “ The action <was inexcufablt ; being not more unjuft than 
M given him, was counted a barbarous facrificing him to ** mean-fpirited, and one of the greateft blemifhes in this 
** the Spaniards /* Hiftory of bit vwn Times, vol. X. “ reign/* See A Jhort Virw of the Hiftory of England, 
1724, fol. 16 and 17. And a late hiftorian, who was &c. By Bcvil Higgons, Efqi 8vo. 1734, p. 234. 

they 


Digitized by boogie 


ccxxvm 


His I all 
Sjxrcb. 


*The LIFE of 

they would rather come down to the fcaffold ; which he, and Ibme others did. Then Sir 
Walter Ralegh, having faluted them feverally, began again, as follows. 

« I thank God, that he has fent me to die in the light and not in darknefs. I likewife 
** thank God, that he has fuffer’d me to die before fuch an aflembly of honourable witnefies, 
“ and not obfcurcly in the Tower ; where, for the fpace of thirteen years together, I have 
*« been opprefs’d with many miferies. And I return him thanks, that my fever hath not taken 
«* me at this time, as I prayed to him it might not, that I might clear myfelf of fome ac- 
*« cufations unjuftly laid to my charge, and leave behind me the teftimony of a true heart 
“ both to my king and country. 

“ There are two main points of fufpicion that his majefty hath conceived againft me, 
“ and which, I conceive, have fpecially haftned my coming hither ', therefore I defire to 
“ clear them to your lordlhips, and refolve you in the truth thereof. The firft is, that his 
“ majefty hath been inform’d, I have had fome plot or confederacy with France , for which 
“ he had fome reafons, tho* grounded upon a weak foundation. One was, that when I re-* 
“ turn’d to Plymouth , I endeavoured to go to Rocbel , which was becaufe I would fain have 
“ made my peace before I came to England. Another reafon was, that again I would have 
** bent my courfe to France , upon my laft intended efcape from London , being the place 
“ where I might have the beft means of making fuch peace, and the beft fafeguard during 
** that terror from above. Thele, join’d with the coming of the French agent to my houfe 
“ here in London , only to confer about my faid voyage, together with the report of my 
“ having a commiflion from the king of France , might occafion my being fo fufpedted in 
“ this particular, and his majefty to be fo difpleafed with me. But this I fay; for a man 
“ to call God to witnefs at any time to a falfhood, is a grievous fin. To call himaswitnefs 
“ to a falfhood at the point of death, when there is no time for repentance, is a crime far 
“ more impious and defperate j therefore, for me to call that Majefty to witnels an untruth, 
“ before whofe tribunal I am inftantly to appear, were beyond meafure finful, and without 
“ hope of pardon. I do yet call that great God to witnefs, that, as I hope to fee him, to 
“ be faved by him, and live in the world to come, I never had any plot or intelligence 
«« with the French king *, never had any commiflion from him, nor faw his hand or feal; 
« that I never had any practice or combination with the French agent, nor ever knew or 
*« faw fuch a perfon, dll I met him in my gallery unlook’d for. If I fpeak not true, O 
“ Lord, let me never enter into thy kingdom. 

“ The fecond fufpicion or imputation was, that his majefty hath been inform’d, I had 
« fpoken difloyally of him. The only witnels of this was, a bafe Frenchman , a runnagade, 
«* a chymical fellow, whom I foon knew to be perfidious ; for being drawn by him into the 
«« a&ion of freeing myfelf at Winchejler , in which I confefs my hand was touch’d, he, being 
** fwom to fecrecy over-night, reveal’d it the next morning. ’Tis ftrange, that fo mean a 
«« fellow could fo far encroach himfelf into the favour of the lords ; and, gaping after fome 
«« great reward, could fo falfly accufe me of feditious fpeeches againft his majefty, and be 
«* fo credited. But this I here fpeak, it is no ume for me to flatter or to fear princes, I, who 
** am fubjedk only unto death: and for me, who have now to do with God alone, to tell a 
«« lye to get the favour of the king were in vain : and yet, if ever I fpake difloyally or 
«« dilhoneftly of the king, either to this Frenchman or any other ; ever intimated the Jeaft 
“ thought hurtful or prejudicial of him, the Lord blot me out of the book of life. 

“ I confess, I did attempt to efcape, and it was only to fave my life. I likewife confefs, 
“ that I feigned myfelf to be indifpofed at Salisbury * but I hope it was no fin j for the 
«* prophet David did make himfelf a fool, and fuffer’d fpitde to fall upon his beard to efcape 
“ from the hands of his enemies, and it was not imputed unto him as a fin : what I did, 
«« was only to prolong time, till his majefty came, in hopes of fome commiferation from 
** him. 

“ But I forgive that Frenchman •, and likewife Sir Lewis Stucley , the wrongs he hath done 
«« me with all my heart; for I have received the facrament this morning of Mr. Dean, and 
«* I have forgiven all men •, but, in charity to others, am bound to caution them againft him, 
«« and fuch as he is. For Sir Lewis Stucley , my keeper and kinfman, hath affirmed, that I 
“ fhould tell him, my lord Carew and my lord of Doncajler here, did advife me to efcape * 
but I proteft before God, I never told him any fuch thing •, neither did thefe lords advife 
** me to any fuch matter. It is not likely that I fhould acquaint two privy-counfellors of 
•* my efcape nor that I fhould tell him, my keeper, it was their advice j neither was there 

any 


Digitized by 


Google 






CCXX1X 


Sir WALTER RALEGH. . 

“ any rcafon to tell it him, or he to report it ; for it is well known, he left me fix, eight, 
“ or ten days together alone, to go whither I lifted, while he rode about the country. He 
“ further accus’d me, that I fhould (hew him a letter, whereby I did fignify, that I would 
“ give him ten thoufand pounds to efcape ; but God caft my foul into cverlafting fire if ever 
“ I made fuch proffer of ten thoufand pounds, or one thoufand pounds \ but indeed, I fhewed 
« him a letter, that if he would go with me, there fhould be order taken for the difeharge 
“ of his debts when he was gofie ; neither had I one thoufand pounds, for, if I had, I could 
«» have made my peace better with it otherwife than by giving it Stucley. Further, he gave 
“ out, when I came to Sir Edward Parham's houfe, who had been a follower of mine, and 
“ gave me good entertainment, I had there received fome dram of poifon. When I anfwer’d 
“ that I feared no fuch thing, for I was well affur’d of thofe in the houfe i and therefore wifhed 
“ him to have no fuch thought. Now I will not only fay, that God is the God of revenge, 
“ but alfo of mercy; and I defire God to forgive him, as I hope to be forgiven.” Then 
calling his eye upon his note of remembrance, he went on thus : 

“It was told the king, that I was brought perforce into England ; and that I did not 
“ intend to return again. Whereas captain Charles Parker, Mr. Trejham , Mr. Leak , and 
“ divers others that knew how I was dealt withal by the common foldiers, will witnefs to 
“ the contrary. They were an hundred and fifty of them who mutiny’d againll me, 
“ and fent for me to come to them t for unto me they would not come. They kept me 
“ clofe prifoncr in my cabbin, and forced me to take an oath, that I would not go into 
“ England without their confent, otherwife they would have caft me into the fix Alter I 
“ had taken this oath, I did, by wine, gifts, and fair words, fo work upon the maftcr- 
“ gunner, and ten or twelve of the faction, that I won them to dcfill from their pui[K>fes, 
“ and intended, when I returned home, to procure their pardon •, in the mean while pro- 
“ poled, that I would difpofc of fome of them in Ireland ; to which they agreed, and would 
“ have gone into the north parts, from which I diffuaded them, and told them, they were 
“ Red-fhanks who inhabited there, fo drew them to the fouth •, and the better to clear mylelf 
“ of them, was forced to get them a hundred and fifty pounds at kingj'ale , otherwile I had 
“ never got from them. 

“ There was a report alfo, that I meant not to go to Guiana at all; and that I knew not 
“ of any mine, nor intended any fuch matter, but only to get my liberty, which I had not 
“ the wit to keep. But it was my full intent to go for gold, for the benefit of his majefty, 
“ myfelf, and thofe who went with me, with the reft of my countrymen : tho’ he that knew 
“ the head of the mine, would not difeover it when he faw my fon was fiain, but made him- 
“ felf away.” Then turning to the earl of Arundel , he faid, “ My lord, you being in the 
“ gallery of my fhip at my departure, I remember you took me by the hand, and faid, you 
“ would requeft one thing of me ; which was, whether I made a good voyage or a bad, that 
“ I would return again into England •, which I then promis’d, and gave you my faith I 
“ would.” So you did, faid his lordfhip, *tis true, and they were the laft words I faid to 
“ you.” Another flander was raifed of me, that I fhould have gone away from them, and 
“ have left them at Guiana *, but there were a great many worthy men, who accompanied me 
“ always, as my ferjeant-major, and divers others (whom he nam’d) that knew it was none 
“ of my intention. Alfo it hath been faid, that I ftinted them of frefh water ; to which I 
“ anfwer, every one was, as they mull be in a fhip, furnifh’d by meafure, and not according 
“ to their appetites. This courfe all feamcn know muft be ufed among them, and to this 
“ flraight were we driven,. Another opinion was held, that I carried with me fixteen thouldnd 
“ pieces of gold ; and that all the voyage I intended, was but to gain my liberty, and this 
“ money into my hands : but, as I fhall anfwer it before God, I had no more in all the 
“ world, diredlly or indiredlly, than one hundred pounds ; whereof I gave about forty-five 
“ pounds to my wife. But the ground of this falfe report was, that twenty thoufand pounds 
“ b ing adventured, and but four thoufand appearing in the furveyor’s books, the reft had 
“ my hand to the bills for divers adventures ; but, as I hope to be faved, I had not a 
“ penny more than one hundred pounds. Thefe are the material points I thought good to 
“ fpeak of; I am at this inftant to render my account to God, and I proteft, as I fhall 
“ appear before him, this that I have f'poken is true. 

“ I will borrow but a little time more of Mr. Sheriff, that I may not detain him too 
“ ' on g j and herein I fhall fpeak of the imputation laid upon me through the jealoufy of 
“ the people, that I had been a perfecutor of my lord of Effex ; that I rejoiced in his death, 
“ and flood in a window over-againft him when he fuffer’d, and puff’d out tobacco in de- 

c c c c “ fiance 


Digitized by L.00Q le 



ecxxx 


Beheaded. 




*the LIFE#/ 

“ fiance of him \ when as, God is my witnefs, that I flied tears for him when he died j, 
“ and, as I hope to look God in the face hereafter, my lord of EJfex did not fee my face at 
‘‘ the time of his death j for 1 was far off, in the armoiy, where I faw him, but he law not 
“ me. 'Tis true, I was of a contrary fa£tion v but I take the fame God to witnefs, that 1 
“ had no hand in his death, nor bare him any ill affedlion, but always believed it would be 
“ better for me that his life had been preferved \ for after his fall, I got the hatred of thofe 
“ who wilhed me well before : and thofe who fet me againft him, fet thcmfclves afterwards 
“ againft me, and were my greateft enemies: and my foul hath many times been grieved, 
“ that I was not nearer to him when he died; becaufe, as I underftood afterwards, he afked 
“ for me at his death, and defired to have been reconciled to me. 

And now 1 entreat, that you all will join with me in prayer to that great God ofhea- 
** ven, whom I have grievoufly offended, being a man full of all vanity, who has lived a 
“ finful life in fuch callings as have been moft inducing to it; for I have been a foldier, a 
“ failor, and a courtier, which are courfes of wickednefs and vice ; that his Almighty Good- 
“ nefs will forgive me j that he will caft away my fins from me ^ and that he will receive me 
“ into everlafting life: fo I take my leave of you all, making my peace with God.” * 
Then proclamation being made, that all men fhould depart the fcaffold, he prepared 
himfelf for death, giving away his hat and cap and money to fome attendants who flood near him. 
When he took leave of the lords and other gentlemen, he intreated the lord Arundel to defire the 
king, that no fcandalous writings to defame him might be publilh’d after his death. Con¬ 
cluding, I have a long journey to go, therefore muft take my leave. Then having put off his 
gown and doublet, he call’d to the headfman to fhew him the ax, which not being fuddenly 
done, he faid, I pr'ythee let me fee it. Doft thou think that I am afraid of it ? Having 
finger’d the edge of it a little he return’d it, and faid, frniling, to the fheriff, This is a Jkarp 
medicine, but it is a found cure for all difeafes ; and having intreated the company to pray to 
God to affift and ftrengthen him, the executioner kneeled down and afked him forgivenefs; 
which Ralegh , laying his hand upon his fhoulder, granted. Then being afked, which way 
he would lay himfelf on the block, he anfwer’d. So the heart be right, it is no matter which 
•way the head lies. As he (loop’d to lay himfelf along, and reclined his head, his face 
being towards the eaft, the headfman fpread his own cloak under him. After a little paufe, 
he gave the fign that he was ready for the ftroke by lifting up his hand, and his head was 
ftruck off at two blows, his body never fhrinking or moving. His head was (hewed on each 
fide of the fcaffold, and then put into a red leather bag, and, with his velvet night-gown 
thrown over it, was afterwards conveyed away in a mourning coach of his lady’s. 
His body, as we are told, was buried hard by, in the chancel of St. Margaret s church, near 
the altar •, but his head was long preferved in a cafe by his widow, for fhe furvived him 
twenty-nine years, as I have found by fome anecdotes remaining in the family j and after her 
death, it was kept alfo by her fon Carew, with whom it is faid to have been buried. b 

Thu* 

“ leave my companies to come after to the favage ifland, 
“ as Hatty Feam hath falfcly reported. I did not carry 
“ with me a hundred pieces. I had with me about ftxty , and 
“ brought back near the fame number. 1 never Ipake 
“ to the Frouh Manourie any one difloyal word or dilho- 
“ nourable fpeech of the king ; nay, if 1 had not loved 
“ the king truly, and trufled in his goodnifs, fomewhat 
“ too much, I know that f had not now fuller’d Jcath. 

“ Thele things are moft true, as there is a God, and 
“ as I am now to appear before his tribunal feat; where 
“ I renounce all mercy and falvation if this be not truth. 
“ At my death, W. R A L E c H.” 

*> However it was thought by An’.'vny Wood, as was 
obferved in a former note, that the (aid Cetrtw Ralegh 
was buried at Wejlminjler in the fame grave with his 
father; it is aliened, at Wcfl-Htrfely, in Surrey, which 
was his feat, that the faid fon was buried there. And 
they have a tradition, that when he was inter'd, the head 
of Sir Walter Ralegh, which had been kept by him, was 
then put into the grave with his corpfe. And I have fee a 
a letter concerning fuch of the Ralegks as were baptized 
or buried at Hor/ek aforefaid, written by William A tche- 
las, Elq; who relides upon that eflate, to a friend; 
wherein that ingenious gentleman “ dees verily believe, 
“ the head he faw dug up there in 1703, from the fide 
“ of a grave where a Carenv Ralegh had been buried, 
“ was that of Sir Walter Ralegh ; there being no bones 
“ of a body to it, nor room for any, the rcifc of that fid* 
“ of the grave being firm chalk." All we {hall mention 
more of Sir Walter Rahgh's head, is, the iiory remem¬ 
ber’d 


■ This la(l fpcech of Ralgeb' s is taken partly from an old 
MS. copy in the Harleyan library, and another in MS. 
alfo before me, but, principally, from three of the molt 
ancient copies \vc have of it in print, at the end of Om. 
bury s Narrative of his Arraignment, and in his Remains ; 
each fupplying fomething the others are wanting in, yet 
none varying confiderably from the relf, either in form of 
expreflion, or matter of faff. From thcncc alfo, the 
fuccceding particulars above of his behaviour at his death 
are drawn. Sir Walter Ralegh was not content with pro¬ 
nouncing of this fpcech, but left a fummary of it, figned at 
this time by his own hand. This we have but one copy of 
in print, and it is, at the end of his Apology, as follows. Sir 
Walter Ralegh’* Anfiver to Jome Things at his Death . “ I did 
41 never receive any dire&ion from my lord Carer.u to make 
44 my efcape, nor did 1 ever tell StucUy any fuch thing. I did 
•* never name my lord Hay and my lord Care<iu to Stu:l*y 
44 in other words or fenfe than as my honourable friends, 
44 among other lords. I did never fhew unto Stueley any 
44 letter wherein there was iooco/. named, or any one 
44 pound ; only I told him, that I hoped to procure the 
44 payment of his debts in his abfence. I never had 

44 commillion from the French king. I never faw the 
«< French king's hand or fea! in my life. I never had 
44 any plot or pra&ice with the French, dircdlly or in- 
44 direftly, nor with an y ot ^ cr P rinc * or Hate unknown 
«« to the king.* My true intent was, to go to a mine of 
44 gold in Guiana ; it was not feign'd ; but it is true, that 
44 tuch a mine there is, within three miles of St. Thome. 
44 1 never had in my thought to go from Trinidado and 


Digitized by 


Google 









CCXXX 1 


Sir WALTER RALEGH. 

I'hus have we feen how Sir Walter Ralegh, after a Ihining and confpicuous feries of adtions 
againft the enemies of his country, and for the improvement of navigation as well as the en¬ 
largement and enrichment of the Brilijb empire, under one foveraign, was deprived of bis 
liberty, his ejlate, and his life under another ; how Sir Walter Ralegh , who had been one 
of the greateft fcourges of Spain, was made a facrifice to it i how the fervices of Sir Walter 
Ralegh , I fay, in camp , in court , by land, by fea, with /word and pen, were an honour to 
queen Elizabeth's reign * and how his fufferings at Wincbejler , at Wejlminjler , by imprifonmcnt , 
by law, with /lander and the ax, were the difgrace of king James's. Wricers vary in their 
accounts of his age j but the moft credible hiftorians inform us, that he was futy fix years 
old at his execution. * Yet was it conjectured, by the extraordinary effufion of blood from 
his veins, that he had flock and ftrength enough left of nature to have furvived many years. 
“ His death was managed by him, as one author has obferved, with fo high and religious 
«« a rcfolution, as if a Roman had adted a Cbriflian, or rather a Chrijlian a Roman b and 
this is confirm’d by Sir Richard Hutton's evidence, who fays, “ He died in a good and 
“ religious manner •, fpake much, and without any fear of death fubmitted himfelf to the 
«« block ; by his death he gained great reputation in this life, and, by the grace and mercy 
« of God, remiflion of his fins and eternal life hereafter.” e 

And now, fince it is time to clofe the feene, “ let this glorious and gallant cavalier, whole 
“ enemies have confefs’d he was one of the weightieft and wifefl men that this ifland ever 
“ bred, reft in his grave, and may his virtues live in pofterity d whom to infpire there¬ 
with, the felicities of commemoration, however here difpofed of, feem to have # fignally 
Combin'd •, having tranfmitted many ample teftimonies, how emulous the harmony of record 
and the fpiritof communication have been to reftore thofe honours to his memory which were torn 
from his perfon •, and make hiftorical compenfation for fuch honourable calamities : and 
that fo early, that from this fpeedy growth of his fame, through his extraordinary merits and 
misfortunes, the learned and judicious Mr. Nathanael Carpenter, who wrote but few years 
after his death, drew that comprehenfive character which has fo much engaged the concur¬ 
rence of all fucceeding writers; where he fays. Who bath not known or read of that prodigy 
of wit and fortune, Sir W altir Ralegh? A man unfortunate in nothing elfe but in 


ber'd by OJbornt and Fuller; who tell us, that Mr. Ed- 
•uarj Wumark , a wealthy citizen, great news-monger, 
and conftam Paul's. walker, hearing there, the news of 
Sir Walter Ralph's death the day he was beheaded, and 
frying, among other things, His head would do <vety well 
upon the (houlders of Sir Robert Naunton, then lecretary 
offtate, was complain’d of, and fummon’d to the privy 
council; where he pleaded, that he intended no difrefpett 
to Mr. Secretary, only fpake in reference to the old pro - 
verb, that Two beads were better than one; (o for the 
prefent was difmifs’d. Not long alter, when rich men 
were call’d upon for a contribution to St. Paul's cathedral, 
Wiemork, at the council-table, fubferibed a hundred 
pounds. But Mr. Secretary faid, Two hundred art better 
than one, you know , Mr. Wiemark ; which, between fear 
and charity, he was fain to fubicribe. 

1 Camden’/ Annals of King James. Wood'/ A then. 
Oxon. and Prince's Worthies. 

* 0 {borne’/ Memoirs. 

« See Hutton’/ Reports , as before. Nor only in profe, 
but in verf« we have feveral teftimonies of Sit Walter 
Ralegh's heroick comportment at his death. I have feen 
three or four epitaphs on him highly extolling the fame, 
u print; whereof one ends thus: 


Heaven hath his foul, the world his fame. 

The grave his corpfe, Stucley his ftiame. 

But there is an Elegy, written upon Sir Walter Ralegh , 
afterwards bilhop of Chtchefer , which, 
~ P™**! among the faid prelate’s poems in 8a so. 1657, 
1^/ d i k nown to any who have written of Sir 
alter Ralegh , that I chufe rather to repeat that than any 
otber m this place; and it is as follows. 


I will not weep, for ’twere as great a fin 
To lhed a tear for thee as to have been 
An aftor in thy death: thy life and age 
Was but a various feene on fortune’s lhgc, 

With whom thou tugg’ft and ftrov’ft e'en out of br 
“ ^J°ng toil; ne’er matter'd till thy death; 

l "*n» defpight of trains and cruel wit, 
llioa did ft at once fubdue malice and it. 

I dare not then fo blaft thy memory, 

A* fry* I do lament, or pity thee. 


Were I to chufe a fubjeft to bellow 
My pity on, he fhould be one as low 
Jn fpirit as defert: that durft not die. 

But rather were content by (lavery 
To purchafe life. Or I would pity thofe 
Thy moll induttrious and friendly foes. 

Who, when they thought to make thee Randal's ttory 
Lent thee a fwifter flight to heav’n and glory: 

Who thought, by cutting off fome wither’d days, 
Which thou couldft fpare them, to eclipfe thy praife; 
Yet gave it brighter foil, made thy ag’d fame 
Appear more white and fair, than foul their lhame. 
And did promote an execution, 

Which, bur for them, nature and age had done. 

Soch worthlefs things as thefe were only born 
To live on pity’s alms, too mean for fcorn. 

Thou dieft an envied wonder, whofe high fate 
The world mutt ttill admire , fcarce imitate ! 


Among the later poems which have been written upon 
him, fince here is not room for Dr. S. Bowden's ingenious 
verfes inferib’d to Mifs Ralegh, who is a direct 
defendant, and now living at Salisbury, I /hall here 
recite only the concluiion of major Riehardfon Pack's 
Prologue to Dr. Sewelts Tragedy of Sir Walter Ralegh as 
containing a moft notable admonition to fuccccding times. 

Jealous of virtue that was fo fubJime , 

His country damn’d his merit as a crime. 

The tray tor's doom did on the patriot wait * 

He fav'd— and then he perijh'd by the fate . 

A patient monarch, too fecurely wife, 

Unhappy kings, they fee with others eyes! 

Weakly contented to the guilty deed, 

An « in thcir » A M p, 0 N bleed. 

HRlTObiS, by this example tautjht umi ,• 

^ ound not the publick out of private Ipue ’ 

To great achievements, jull re-wards allow', 

Nor tear the laurel from the victor's brow. 

Exert your vigor in the nation's caufe 
But grudge no rival his defirv'd appLfe. 

Safely wb may defy MADRID or ROME, 

If no fly GONDOMAR preva.ls at hom i. 

* HowelV Letters, rol. 2, p. 372, 

the 


Digitized 


by 


Googl 







ccxxxii 73 be LI F E of 

the greatnefs of his wit and advancement! whofe eminent worth was fucb, both in domeftick 
policy, foreign expeditions and difeoveries ; in arts and literature, both praftic and con¬ 
templative, that it might feem at once to conquer both example and imitation. * But left a 
private judgment Ihould be fufpefted, more liable to the ignorance of a ftranger, or the affec¬ 
tion of a friend •, and that there may be no room left to doubt either of fuch manifold worth in 
Sir Walter Ralegh, or that it was all made a facrifice of fate to the enemies and deceivers of 
the ft ate, we have refcrved, as moft convincing, the acknowledgments of an enemy, who 
made him that facrifice, here to conclude with. For king James , foon after Ralegh's execu¬ 
tion, beginning to fee how he was, and would be deluded by the Spaniard, made one of his 
minifters write to his agent in Spain , to let that ftate know, they fhould be look’d upon as 
the moft unworthy people in the world, if they did not now aft with fincerity, fince his 
majefty had given fo many teftimonies of his j and now of late, by caufing Sir Walter Ralegh 
to be put to death, chiefly for the giving them JatisfaRion. Further to let them fee how, in 
many actions of late , his majefty had ftrained upon the affections of bis people, and efpecially 
in this lafl concerning Sir Walter Ralegh, who died with a great deal of courage and conftancy. 
Laftly, that he fhould let them know, how able a man Sir Walter Ralegh was, to have done 
his majefty fervice. Yet, to give them content, be hath not fpared him ; when by preferving him, 
he might have given great fatisfattion to bis fubjeCls, and had at command , upon all occafions, 
as ufeful a man as ferved any prince in Chriftendom. b 

t Cirpentefj Geography Delineated. In Tim Books, writers on Sir W. Ralegh have copied this character. 
Containing the fp her teal and topical Parts thereof 4to. h See A Letter from a great Minifter of State to Mr . 
Oxon. 1625 and 163c ; lib. 2. cap. 11, p. 261. From Couington, Agent in Spain, in RuJ/mortb 's Hiiloricai Col- 
whence Howel, Anthony Wood, J . Prince, and other lection*, vol. 1, fol. 9, 10. 


FINIS. 



ERRATA. /■ 

F IL. 17, the two Uft letter* of reference in the t«tt fhould be d. and e. fol. 21. lin. 28. lead mmerg'd . idem, in the Note*, lin. 10. read 
Oftavo. fol. 22. laft lin. of N. for captain read fane relation of. fol. 23. lin. 7. from the oottom, dele Sir. foj. 28. N. col. 2. lin. 9. retd 

jet tbt for captain P. Ralegh* a. fol. 31. lin. 9. read who rewarded, fol. 34. lin. 21. for fent it over read deliver'd n. fol. 35. N. col. 1. lift 

lin. read tax fox take. fol. 48. N. lin. 3. read Ofiavo. fol. 50. N. lin. 2c. read young, by the earl. fol. 59. N. lin. 8. dele but. fol. 60. Uft 

lin. N. read report of. fol. 71. N. lin. 20. read geographical*, fol. 82. N. col. 2. lin. 6. read when by. lin. 7. dele by fol. 90. i. 4. from the 

bottom, r. mated, fol. 120 lin. 21. for as it feemt read as he novo thought, fol. 127. N. lin. 2. for Sir Henry fVottomt Parallel read The Earl of 
Clarendon’* Difparity. fol. 130. lin. 16. dele a. fol. 131. laft N. Jin. 6. read fat. fol. 132. lin. 7. read to have. fol. 134. N. col. 2. lin. T. 
for es lunes read let unes. lin. 3. read cbrcmlgte . fol. 139. N. lin. 14. for Suffex read Surrey , to a friend, fol. 144. N. lin. 2. read great grand, 

icc. fol. 154. lin. 2. read under the wardens, fol. 164. N. lin. e* read corrupt judges. fol. 166. Jin. 14. from below, read dejftnys were. fol. 
279. N. lin. 17. fiom the bottom, read fifty for forty. fol. 180. lin. 7. for jdjhmolcan read the hb/j>y of Caiui-Cu Jcgc, CauiUidgc. idem, N. 
tai. 4. read Mitre for Morc% 206. lin. 6. dele the ptnod and put a comma. 


Digitized by v^.ooQle 


















THE 

TRIAL 

O F 

Sir WALTER RALEGH, K" 

For H I G H TREASON, 

yftWinton the i yth of November, 1603, 1 Jac. I. 


The COMMISSIONERS were. 


The Right Honourable Henry Howard, Earl 
of Suffolk, Lord Chamberlain. 

Charles Blunt, Earl of Devon. 

Lord Henry Howard, afterward Earl of 
Northampton. 

Robert Cecil, Earl of Salisbury. 

Edward Lord Wotton of Morley. 

IRST, The Commiffion of Oyer 
and Terminer , was read by the Clerk 
of the Crown-Office ; and the Prx- 
foner bid hold up his Hand: 

And then prefently the Indiftment, 
which was in effect as followeth t 

cf H A T he did confpire , and go about to deprive 
1 the King »f bis Government , to raife up Sedition 
•within the Realm , to alter Religion , to bring tn t oe 
Roman Superjlition, and to procure foreign Enemies 
to invade the Kingdom. That the Lord C°bham, 
the gtb of June laji, did meet with the [aid Sir Wal¬ 
ter Ralegh in Durham Houfe, in the Parifh of _ot. 
Martin’s in the Fields, and then and there had Con ■ 
fere nee with him how to advance Arabella Stuart to 
the Crown and royal Throne of this Kingdom i and 
that then and then it was agreed , That Cobham 
Jkould treat with Aremberg, Ambaffador from the 
Arch duke of Auftria, to obtain of him 600,000 
Crowns , to bring to paf their intended Treajons. It 
was agreed, That Cobham fmld go to Albert the 
Arch-duke , to procure bun to advance the preler.oc 
Title of Arabella : Prom thence , knowing that M- 


Sir John Stanhope, Vice-Chambirtain. 

Lord Chief Juftice of England, Popham; 

Lord Chief JuJlice of the Common-Pleas, 

Anderfbn. 

Mr. Juftice Gawdie. 

Mr. Juftice Warburton, and 
Sir William Wade. 

bert had not fujficient Means to maintain his own 
Army in the Low-Countries, Cobham fhould go to 
Spain to procure the King to ajfijl, and further her 
pretended Title. 

Jt was agreed , the better to effeEl all this Confpi- 
racy , That Arabella fhould write three Letters, one 
to the Arch-duke, another to the King of Spain, and 
a third to the Duke of Savoy ; and promife there 
Things: Firft, To ejlablijha firm Peace between Eng¬ 
land and Spain. Secondly, To tolerate the Popifh 
and Roman Superjlition. Thirdly, To be ruled by 
them in contracting of her Marriage . 

Andy for the effecting tbefe traiterous Purpofes, 
Cobham fhould return by the Ifie of Jerfey, and 
ftjould there find Sir Walter Ralegh, Captain of the 
faid lfie y and take Counjel of Ralegh for the dif- 
tribuling of the aforefiiid Crowns , as the Occafion 
or Difcontentment ef the Subjects ftjculd give Caufe 
and IVay . 

And furlheVy That Cobham and his Brother 
Brook met on the ytb of June lajl, and Cobham 
told Brook all tbefe Treajons: To the which Trea- 
fons Brook gave his Ajjenly and did join bimfelf to 
all tbefe-y and after , on the Thurlday following , 
c c e c Cobham 



Digitized by VjOOQ 1C 







CCXXXV111 


Tie T R I A L of 


Cobham and Brook did fpeak thefe Words \ That 
there would never be a good World in England, 
till the King (meaning our Soveraign Lord ) and 
his Cubs (meaning bis Royal IJfue ) were taken 
away. 

And, the more to difable and deprive the King of 
his Crown, and to confirm the /aid Cobham in bis 
Intents , Ralegh did publijb a Book , falfiy written 
againjl the mofi jufi and royal Title of the King, 
knowing the faid Book to be written againjl the jnjl 
Title of the King ; which Book Cobham after that 
received of him. Farther, for the better effecting 
thefe traitorous Purpofes, and to efiabli/h the faid 
Brook in bis Intent, the faid Cobham did deliver the 
faid Book unto him, ttoe 14th of June. And fur¬ 
ther, the faid Cobham, on the 16 th of June; for 
Acccmplijkment of the faid Conference , and, by the 
traitorous Injligdtion of Ralegh, did move Brook to 
incite Arabella to write to the three forettamed 
Princes to procure them to advance her Title ; and 
that fiie, after fix had obtained the Crown , fijould 
promife to perform three Things, viz. 1. Peace between 
England and Spain. 2. To tolerate with Impunity, 
the Popifh and Roman Superftilions. 3. To be 
ruled by them three , in the contrailing of her Mar¬ 
riage. 

To thefe Motions , the faid Brook gave his Afient \ 
and for the better effecting of the faid Treafcns, Cob¬ 
ham, on the ljtb of June, by the Infligaiion of Ra¬ 
legh, did write Letters to Count Aremberg, and 
did deliver the faid Letters to one Matthew de Law- 
rency, to be delivered to the faid Count, which he 
did deliver, for the obtaining of 600,000 Crowns ; 
which Money, by other Letters, Count Aremberg did 
promife to perform the payment of ; and this Letter 
Cobham received the 18 th of June. And then did 
Cobham promife to Ralegh, that when he had re¬ 
ceived the faid Money, he would deliver 8 coo Crowns 
to him ; to which Motion he did confent j and after¬ 
wards Cobham offered Brook, that after he Jhould 
receive the faid Crowns, he would give to him 10000 
thereof ; to which Motion Brook did affent. 

To the Indi&ment, Sir IValter Ralegh pleaded 
Not Guilty. 

The J U R Y. 


Sir Ralph Conisby, Knt. 
Sir Thomas Fowler, Knt. 
Sir Edward Peacock , Knt. 
Sir William Rowe, Knt. 
Henry Coodyer, Efq-, 
Roger Wood, Efq$ 


Thomas Walker, Efq; 
Thomas Whitby, Efqv 
ThomasHighgate, Gent. 
Robert Kempt hen, Gent. 
John Chawkey, Gent. 
Robert Brumley } Gent. 


Sir Walter Ralegh was asked, whether he would 
take Exceptions to any of the Jury. 

Ralegh. I know none of them } they are all 
Chriftians and honeft Gentlemen -, I except againft 
none. 

E . Sujf. You Gentlemen of the King’s learned 
Council, follow the fame Courfe as you did the 
other Day. 

Ralegh. My Lord, I pray you, I may anfwer 
the Points particularly, as they are delivered, by 
realonof the Weaknefsof my Memory and Sick- 
nefs. 

Popham, Chief Juflice. After the King’s learned 
Council have delivered all the Evidence, Sir Wal¬ 
ter, you may anlwer particularly to what you 
will. 

Healc, the King's Serjeant at Law. You have 
heard of Ralegh's bloody Attempts, to kill the 
King and his royal Progeny, and, in place thereof* 


to advance one Arabella Stuart. The Particulars of 
the Indittment are thefe: Firft, That Ralegh met 
with Cobham the 9th of June, and had Conference 
of an Invafion, of a Rebellion, and an Infur- 
rettion, to be made by the King’s Subjects, to 
depofe the King, and to kill his Children, poor 
Babes, that never gave Offence : Here is Blood, 
here is a new King and Governor. In our Kino 
confifts all our Happinefs, and the true Ufe of the 
Gofpcl; a Thing, which we all wilhed to be fet- 
led after the Death of the Queen. Here muff be. 
Money to do this, for Money is the Sinew of War 
Where fhould that be had ? Count Aremberg muff 
procure it of Philip King of Spain , 5 or 600,000 
Crowns, and out of this Sum, Ralegh muff have 
„ 8000 i then there mult be Friends to .effedt this. 

» Cobham muff go to Albert , ArcH-duke Of Aujlria, 
from whom Aremberg was Ambaflador at that time 
in England. And what then ? He mull perfuade 
the Duke to affift the pretended Title of Arabella. 
From thence Cobham mult go to the King of Spain, 
and perfuade him to affift the faid Title. Since the 
Conqueft, there was never the like Treafon. But 
out of whofe Head came it ? Out of Ralegh's, who 
mull: alfo advife Cobham to ufe his Brother Brook to 
incite the Lady Arabella to write three fevcral Let¬ 
ters, as aforefaid in the Indictment ; all this was on 
the 9th of June. Then three Days after. Brook was 
acquainted with it: After this, Cobham faid to Brook, 
’Twill never be well in England, till the King and 
his Cubs are taken away. Afterwards Ralegh de¬ 
livered a Book to Cobham, treachcrouffy written 
againft the Title of the King. It appears, that 
Cobham took Ralegh , to be either a God , or an Idol. 
Cobham endeavours to fet up a new King, or Go¬ 
vernor. God forbid, mine Eyes fhould ever fee fo 
unhappy a Change. As for the Lady Arabella, 
./he, upon my Confcience, hath no more Title to 
the Crown than I have a , which, before God, I ut¬ 
terly renounce. Cobham, a Man bred in England, 
hath no Experience abroad. But Ralegh, a Man of 
great Wit, Military, and a Sword-man. Now 
whether thefe Things were bred in a hollow Tree, 
I leave to them to fpeak of, who can fpeak far better 
than myfelf. 

Sir Edward Coke, the King's Attorney. I muff: 
firft, My Lords, before I come to the Caufe, give 
one Caution j becaufe we fhall often mention Per- 
fons of eminent Places, fome of them great Mo-, 
narchs: Whatever we fay of them, we fhall but re¬ 
peat what others have faid cjf them; I mean the 
capital Offenders in their Confeflions: We, profeffing 
Law, muft fpeak reverently of Kings and Poten¬ 
tates. I perceive thefe honourable Lords, and the 
reft of this great Affembly, are come to hear what 
hath been fcattered upon the Wreck of Report. 
We carry a juft Mind, to condemn no Man, but 
upon plain Evidence. Here is Mifchicf, Mifchief' 
in fummogradtty exorbitant Mifchief. My Speech 
fhall chiefly touch thefe three Points ; Imitation, 
Supportation , and Defence. 

The Imitation of Evil ever exceeds the Prece¬ 
dent j as on the contrary. Imitation of Good ever 
comes fhort. Mifchief cannot be fupported, but by 
Mifchief: Yea, it will fo multiply, that it will 
bring all to Confufion. Mifchief is ever under- 
prop’d byFalfhood of foul Practices. And becaufe all 
thefe things did concur in thefe Treafons, you fhall 
underftand the Main, as before you did the Bye. 

The Treafon of the Bye, confifteth in thefe Points: 
Firft, That the Lord Grey, Brook, Markham, and 
the reft, intended by Force in the Night, to fur- 
prize the King’s Court; which was a Rebellion in 
the Heart of the Realm, yea, in the Heart of the 
Heart, in the Court. They intended to make him, 

that 


Digitized by 


Goog[< 







CCXXXIX 


Sir WALTER RALEGH. 


that is a Sovereign, fubjeCt to their Power, purpo- 
(ingto open the Doors with Mufquetsand Calivers, 
and to take alfo the Prince and Council. Then, 
under th? King’s Authority, to carry the King to 
the Toner, and to make a Stale of the Admiral : 
When they had the King there, to extort three 
Things from him.. Firft, A Pardon for all their 
Trealons. Secondly, A Toleration of the Roman 
Supaftition: Which, their Eyes lhall fooner fall 
ojjt, than they lhall ever fee •, for the King hath 
fpokenthefe Words in the hearing of many, I will 
Ife the Crown and my Life, before ever I will alter 
jccligion. And Thirdly, To remove CounfeJlors : 
In the room of the Lord Chancellor, they would 
have placed one fFatfon a Prieft, abfurd in Huma¬ 
nity, and ignorant in Divinity. Brook , of whom 
I will fpeak nothing. Lord Treafurer ; the great Se¬ 
cretary muft be Markham, Oculus Patria. A Hole 
muft be found in my Lord Chief Jultice's Coat. Grey 
mull be Earl Marjhal, and Majler of the llorfe , be 
caule he would have a Table in the Court: Marry, 
he would advance the Earl of IVorcefler to a higher 
Place. All this cannot be done without a Multitude. 
Therefore H'atfon the Pried telleth a refolute Man, 
That the King was in Danger of Puritans and 
Jefuits •, fo to bring him in blindfold into the A< 5 li- 
on ; faying, That the King is no King till he be 
crowned, therefore every Man might right his own 
Wrongs: But he is Rex Natus, his Dignity def- 
cends as well as yours, my Lords. Then IVatfon 
impofeth a blafphemous Oath, That they Ihould 
fwcar to defend the King’s Perfon, to keep fecrct 
what was given them in Charge, and feek all Ways 
and Means to advance the Catholick Religion. 
Then they intend to fend for the Lord Mayor and 
the Aldermen, in the King’s Name, to the Tower t 
led they Ihould make any Refidance, and then to 
take Hodagcs of them ; and to enjoin them to 
provide for them Viftuals and Munition.. Grey, 
becaufe the King removed before Midfummer, had 
a further Reach, to get a Company of S\vord : men 
to aflift the-AClion: Therefore he would day, till he 
had obtain’d a Regiment from Op.er.d or Auflria. 
So you fee, thefeTreafons were like Sampfoti's Foxes, 
which were joined in their Tails, tho’ their Heads 
were fevered. 

Ralegh. You Gentlemen of the Jury, I pray 
remember, I am not charged with the Bye, being 
the Treafon of the Prieft. 

Attorney. You are not: My Lords, you (hall 
obferve three Things in the Treafons. 1'irjl, They 
had a Watch-word (the King's Safety) ; their Pre¬ 
tence was Bonum in fe, their Intent was Malum in 
fe. Secondly, They avouched Scripture ; both the 
Frieds had, Scriptum ejl ; perverting and ignorant¬ 
ly midaking the Scriptures. Thirdly, They avouch¬ 
ed the Common Law to prove. That he was no 
King till he was crowned, alledging a Statute of 
j 3 Eliz. This, by way of Imitation, hath been 
theCourfe of all Traytors. 

In the 20th of Edward II, Ifabella the Queen, 
and the Lord Mortimer, gave out. That the King’s 
Pet ion was not fafe, for the Good of the Church and 
Commonwealth. 

The Bifhop o (Carlijle did preach on this Text, 
My Head is grieved ; meaning by the Head, the 
King; that when the Head began to be negligent, 
the People might reform what is amifs. 

In the 3 d of Henry IV, Sir Roger Claringdon, 
accompanied with two Prieds, gave out, that Ri¬ 
chard II. was alive, when he was dead. 

Edward III. caufed Mortimer's Head to be cut 
ofl, for giving Counfel to murther the King. 

The 3d of Henry VII. Sir Henry Stanley found 
the Crown in the Dull, and fet it on the King’s 


Head. When Fitzwater and Garret told him, that 
Edward V. was alive, he faid. If be be alive, I 
will ajfijt him : But this cod him his Head. 

Edmund de la Pole , Duke of Suffolk , killed a 
Man in the Reign of King Henry VII, for which the 
King wouhj have him hold up his Hand at the Bar, 
and then pardoned him. Yet he took fuch Offence 
thereat, that he lent to the Noblemen, to help to 
reform the Commonwealth ; and then faid, he 
would go to France and get Power there. Sir Ro¬ 
ger Compton knew all the Treafon, and difeovered 
fFindon and others, that were attainted. 

He faid, there was another Thing that would be 
dood upon, namely, that they hadbutoneWitncfs; 
then he vouched one Appleyard' s Cafe (Temp. Eliz.) 
a Traytor in Norfolk , who laid a Man mud have 
two Accuicrs. Helmes was the Man that accufed 
him ; but Mr. JuJlice Catlin faid, that that Statute 
was not in force at that Day ; his Words were, 
Thrujl her into the Ditch. 

Then he went on fpeak in g of Accufers, and made 
this Difference : An Acculer is a Speaker by Re¬ 
port j when a Witnels is he, that upon his (Lth 
lhall fpeak his Knowledge of any Man. 

A third fort of Evidence there is likewife, and 
this is held more forcible than either of the other 
two i and that is, when a^ Man, by his Accufation 
of another, lhall, by the fame Accufation, alfo 
condemn himfelf, and make himfelf liable to the 
fame Fault and Punilhment: This is more forcible 
than many Witnefles. So then, fo much by way 
of Imitation. Then he defined Treafon : There is 
Treafon in the Heart, in the Hand, in the Mouth, in 
Confummation ; comparing that in Corde to the 
Root of a Tree; in Ore, to the Bud; in Manu, 
to the Bloffom; and that which is in Confumma- 
tione, to the Fruit. 

Now I come to your Charge, you of the Jury : 
The Greatnefs of Treafon is to be confidered in 
thefe two Things, Determinalionc finis, and Ele- 
flione mediorum. This Treafon cxcdleth in both, 
for that it was to dedroy the King and his Proge¬ 
ny. Thefe Treafons are faid to be Crimen lee fa 
Majefialis ; this goeth farther, and may be termed 
Crimen extirpanda Regia Majefialis id toiius Pro- 
geniei fua. I dull not need, my Lords, to fpeak 
any thing concerning the King, nor of the Bounty 
and Sweetnefs of his Nature, whofe Thoughts arc 
innocent, whofe Words are full of Wifdom and 
Learning, and whofe Works are full of Honour ; 
altho’ it be a true Saying, Nunquam nimis, quod 
nunquamfatis. But to whom do you bear Ma¬ 
lice? To the Children ? 

Ralegh. To whom fpeak you this? You tell 
me News I never heard of. 

Attorney. Oh Sir, do I ; I will prove you the 
notorioufed Traytor, that ever came to the Bar. 
Afteryou have taken away the King, you would 
alter Religion : As you Sir IF alter Ralegh have 
followed them of the Bye in Imitation; lor I will 
charge you with the Words. 

Ralegh. Your Words cannot condemn me, my 
Innoccncy is my Defence: Prove one of tilde 
Things wherewith you have charged me, and I 
will confds the whole Indictment; and that I am 
the horribleft Traytor that ever lived, and worthy 
to be crucified with a thoufand thou land Torments. 

Attorney. Nay, I will prove all : Thou art a 
Monlter ; thou had an Englijh Face, but a Spanijh 
Heart. Now you muft have Money : Aremberg 
was no fooner in England (I charge thee Ralegh) 
but thou incitedft Cobham to go unto him, and to 
deal with him for Money, to bellow on difeontent- 
cd Perfons, to raife Rebellion in the Kingdom. 

' Ralegh, Let me anfwcr for myfdf 

Digitized byGod^tC 


ccxl The TRIAL of 


Attorney. Thou lhalt not. 

Ralegh. It conccrneth my Life. 

Lord Chief JuJlice Popham. Sir JValter Ralegh, 
Mr. Attorney is but yet in the General *, but when 
the King’s Council have given the Evidence wholly, 
you Ihall anfwer every Particular. 

Attorney. Oh! do I touch you ? 

Lord Cecil. Mr. Attorney, when you have done 
■with this general Charge, do you not mean to let 
him anfwer to every Particular ? 

Attorney. Yes, when we deliver the Proofs to 
be read. Ralegh procured Cobham to go to Arem¬ 
berg, which he did by his Initiation ; Ralegh fup- 
ped with Cobham before he went to Aremberg \ af¬ 
ter Supper, Ralegh conducted him to Durham 
Houfe v from whence Cobham went with Lawrency, 
a Servant of Aremberg' s, unto him, and went in 
by a Back-way. Cobham could never be quiet un¬ 
til he had entertain’d this Motion, for he had four 
Letters from Ralegh. Aremberg anfwered, the Mo¬ 
ney lhould be performed, but knew not to whom 
it lhould be dillributed. Then Cobham and Law¬ 
rency came back to Durham Houfe, where they 
found Ralegh. Cobham and Ralegh went up, and 
left Lawrency below, where they had fecret Confe¬ 
rence in a Gallery, and after Cobham and Lawrency 
departed from Ralegh. Your Jargon was Peace! 
What is that ? Spanijb Invafion, Scotijh Subverfion. 
And again, you are not a fit Man to take fo much 
Money for procuring of a lawful Peace, for Peace 
procured by Money is dilhonourable. Then Cob¬ 
ham mull go to Spain, and return by Jerfey , where 
you were Captain : And then, becaufe Cobham had 
not fo much Policy, or at lead Wickednefs, as 
you, he mull have your Advice for the dillribu- 
tion the Money. Would you have defpofed fo 
good a King, lineally defeended of Elizabeth, el- 
dell Daughter of Edward IV: Why then mull 
you fet up another ? 1 think you meant to make 
Arabella a titular Queen, of whofe Title I will 
fpeak nothing •, but fure you meant to make her a 
Stale: Ah good Lady! you could mean her no 
good. 

Ralegh. You tell me News, Mr. Attorney. 

Attorney. Oil Sir ! I am the more large, be¬ 
caufe I know with whom I deal: For we have to 
deal to-day with a Man of Wit. 

Ralegh. Did I ever fpeak with this Lady P 

Attorney. I will track you out before I have 
done ; Engli/Lmen will not be led by Perfuafion 
of Words, but they mull have Books to perfuade. 

Ralegh. The Book * was written by a Man of 
your Prolclfion, Mr. Attorney. 

Attorney. I would not have you impatient. 

Ralegh. Methinks you fall out with yourfelfj I 
fay nothing. 

Attorney. By this Book, you would perfuade Men, 
that he is not the lawful King. Now let us conlider 
lome Circumllances: MyLords, you know my Lord 
Cobham {for whom we all lament, and rejoice *, 
lament in that his Houfe, which hath Hood fo long 
unfpotted, is now ruinated : Rejoice, in that his 
Trcafons are revealed ) is neither Politician no 
Sword-man; Ralegh was both, united in the Caufe 
with him, and therefore Caufe of his DellruClion. 
Another Circumllance is, the fccret contriving of it. 
Humphry Stafford claimed Sanctuary for Treafon, 
Ralegh in his Machiavilian Policy hath made aSan- 
(fluary for Treafon. He mull talk with none but 
Cobham, becaufe (faith he) one W itnefs can never 
condemn me. For Brook laid unto Sir Griffith 
Markham , take heed how you do make my Lord 


Cobham acquainted •, for whatfoever he knoweth, 
Ralegh the Witch will get it out of him. As 
foon as Ralegh was examined on one Point of Trea¬ 
fon concerning my Lord Cobham , he ftrote to 
him thus > I have been examined of you , and 
confeffed nothing. Furtlier, you fent to him by 
your trufty Francis Kemifh, that one Wknef- 
could not condemn •, and therefore bad his Lords 
Ihip be of good Courage. Came this out of Cob- 
bam's Quiver ? No : But out of Ralegh's Machia- 
velian and Devililh Policy. Yea, but Cobham did 
retraCl it: Why then did you urge it ? Now then 
fee the moll horrible Practices that ever came out 
of the bottomlefs Pit of the lowell Hell. After that 
Ralegh had Intelligence that Cobham had accufed 
him, he endeavoured to have Intelligence fromCoi- 
ham, which he had gotten by young Sir John Pay- 
ton : But I think it was the Error of his Youth. 

Ralegh. The Lords told it me, or elfe I had 
not been fent to the Tower. 

Attorney. Thus Cobham , by the Inlligation of 
Ralegh, entred into thefe A&ions: So that the Que- 
ftion will be. Whether you are not the principal 
Traytor, and he would neverthelefs have entred in¬ 
to it ? Why did Cobham retraCt all that fame ? Fir ft, 
Becaufe Ralegh was fo odious, he thought he lhould 
fare the worfe tor his fake, idly. He thought thus with 
himfelf, if he be free, I lhall clear myfelf the better. 
Alter this, Cobham asked for a Preacher to confer 
with, pretending to have Dr. Andrews ; but indeed, 
he meant not to have him, but Mr. Galloway , a 
worthy and reverend Preacher, who can do more 
with the King (as he faid) than any other; that he, 
feeing his conftant Denial, might inform the King 
thereof. Here he plays with the Preacher. If Ra¬ 
legh could perfuade the Lords, that Cobham had no 
Intent to travel, then he thought all lhould be well. 
Here is Forgery. In the Tower, Cobham mull write 
to Sir Thomas Vane , a worthy Man, That he meant 
not to go into Spain •, which Letter Ralegh deviled 
in Cobham 's Name. 

Ralegh. I will walh my Hands of the Indict¬ 
ment, and die a true Man to the King. t 

Attorney. You arc the abfoluteft Traytor tha 
ever was. 

Ralegh. Your Phrafes will not prove it, Mr.' 
Attorney. 

Attorney. Cobham writeth a Letter to my Lord 
Cecil , and doth will Mellis, his Man, to lay it in a 
Spanijh Bible, and to make as tho’ he found it by 
chance. This was after he had Intelligence with 
this Viper •, then he was falfe. 

Lord Cecil. You mean a Letter intended to me; 
I never had it. 

Attorney. No, my Lord, you had it not. You, 
my Mailers of the Jury, refpect not the Wickednefs 
and Hatred of the Man, refpedl his Caufe > if he 
be guilty, I know you will have Care of it, for 
the Prelervation ot the King, the Continuance of 
the Golpel authorifed, and the Good of us all. 

Ralegh. I do not hear yet, that you have fpoken 
one Word againll me •, here is no Treafon of mine 
done. It my Lord Cobham be a Traytor, what is 
that to me ? 

Attorney. All that he did, was by thy Inlligati • 
on, thou Viper •, for I Thou thee, thou Traytor. 

Ralegh. It becometh not a Man of Quality and 
Virtue, to call me fo : But I take Comfort in it, 
it is all you can do. 

Attorney. Have I anger’d you? 

Ralegh. 1 am in no Cafe to be angry ? 


* This Book ivas infixed, A Defence of the Queen's Proceedings, againft Mary Queen of Scotland. Written by one Robert Snag. 
See the Arraignment of Sir Walter Ra'egh. Bj 67 rTliomas Ovcrour/, 4x0. 164S. 

C» *jf • 


Digitized by 


Googl 


e 






Sir IV A LTE R RALEGH. ccxli 


C. J. Popbam. Sir Walter Ralegh , Mr. Attorney 
fpeaketh out of the Zeal of his Duty, for the Ser¬ 
vice of the King, and you for your Life j be va¬ 
liant on both fides. 

Now they proceed to the reading the Proofs. 

The Lord Cobham’j Examination read. 

“ He confefieth he had a Pafport to go into Spain, 
u intending to go to the Arch-duke, to confer 
“ with him about thefe Practices; and becaufe 
“ he knew the Arch-duke had not Money to 
“ pay his own Army, from thence he meant to go 
“ to Spain, to deal with the King for the 600,000 
“ Crowns, and to return by Jerfey ; and that no- 
“ thing fhould be done, until he had fpoken with 
** Sir Walter Ralegh , for diftribution of the Money 
4t to them which were difeontented in England. 
“ At the firft beginning, he breathed out Oaths 
u and Exclamation* againft Ralegh, calling him 
4t Villain and Traylor; faying, he had never en- 
“ tcred into thefe Courfes, but by his Inftigation, 
** and that he would never let him alone. 

Here Mr. Attorney willed the Clerk of the 
Crown-Office, to read over thefe laft Words 
again (he would never let him alone.) 

The Lord Cobham’j Examination. 

44 Befides, he fpake of Plots and Invafions: Of 
“ the Particulars wnereof he could give no Ac- 
«* count, tho’ Ralegh and he had conferred of them, 
“ becaufe he was (as he faid) confounded with 
“ them. Further, he faid, he was afraid of Ra- 
“ legb, that when he fhould return by Jerfey, that 
** he would have him and the Money to the King. 
“ Being examined of Sir Arthur Gorge , he freed 
“ him, faying. They never durft truft him j but 
** Sir Arthur Savage they intended to ufe, becaufe 
41 they thought him a fit Man. 

Ralegh. Let me fee the Examination: This is 
abfolutely all the Evidence can be brought againft 
me j poor Shifts! You Genrlemen of the Jury, I 
pray you underftand this : This is that which mult 
either condemn, or give me Life; which mull free 
me, or fend my Wife and Children to beg their 
Bread about the Streets. This is what muft prove 
me a notorious Tray tor, or true Subject to the 
King. Let me fee my Accufation, that I may 
make my Anfwer. 

Clerk of the Council. I did read it, and fhew 
you all the Examinations. 

Ralegh. At my firft Examination at fKtndjor , my 
Lords alked me, what I knew of Cobham’s Practice 
with Aremberg ; I anfwered negatively: And as con¬ 
cerning Arabella, I proteft before God, I never heard 
one Word of it. If that be proved, let me be 
guilty of a thoufand Treafons. It is a ftrange 
thing you will impute that to me, when I never 
heard fo much as the Name of Arabella Stuart , but 
only the Name of Arabella. 

After being examined, 1 told my Lords, that I 
thought my Lord Cobham had Conference with 
Aremberg , 1 fufpelted his vifiting of him : For after 
he departed from me at Durham Houfe, I faw him 
pafs by his own Stairs, and pafied over to St. Mary- 
Saviours, where I knew Lawrcney a Merchant, and 
a Follower of Aremberg, and therefore likely to go 
unto him. My Lord CVcj/asked my Opinion concer- 
t i'-'g Lawrency ; I faid, That if you do not appre¬ 
hend Lawreney, it is dangerous, he will fly ; if you 
do apprehend him, you Hull give my Lord Cobham 
Notice thereof. I was asked likewile, Who was 
the greateft Man with my Lord Qobbam ? I an¬ 


fwered, I knew no Man fo great with him, as 
young Wyat of Kent. 

As foon as Cobham faw my Letter to have difeo- 
vered his Dealing with Aremberg, in his Fury he 
accufed me ; but before he came to the Stair-foot 
he repented him, and faid, he had done me wrong. 
When he came to the End of his Accufation, he added. 
That it he had brought this Money to Jerfey, that I 
would have delivered him and the Money to the King. 
Mr. Attorney , You laid this never came out of Cob- 
ham's Quiver, he is a Ample Man : Is he fo Ample ? 
No : He hath Difpofitions of his own, he will not 
eafily be guided by others, but when he has once 
taken Head in a Matter, he is not eafily drawn 
from it; he is no Babe. But it is ftrange for me to 
devife with Cobham, that he fhould go to Spain , to 
perfuade the King to disburfe fo much Money, he 
being a Man of no Love in England , and I ha¬ 
ving refigned my Room of chirteft Command, the 
Wardenlhip of the Stannaries: Is it not ftrange for 
me, tc make myfelf Robin Hood, or a Kelt, or a Cade ; 

1 knowing England to be in better Eftate to detend it- 
fclf than ever it was. I knew Scotland united, Ireland 
quieted, Denmark allured, which before was fufpedted. 

1 knew, that having loft a Lady whom Time had fur- 
prifed, we had now an active King, a lawful Succeflor. 
The State of Spain was not unknown to me. I had 
written a Difcourfe, which I had intended to prefent 
unto the King, againft Peace with Spain. I knew 
the Spaniards had fix Repulfcs, three in Ireland , 
and three at Sea, and once in 1588 at Cales, by 
my Lord Admiral. I knew he was difcouraged 
and difhonoured, I knew the King of Spain to be 
the proudeft Prince living ; but now he cometh 
creeping to the King my Matter, for Peace, I knew, 
whereas before he had in his Ports fix or feven fcore 
Sail of Ships, he hath now but fix or feven. I 
knew of twenty-five Millions he had from his Indies , 
he hath fcarce one left. I knew him fo poor, that 
the Jefuits in Spain , who were wont to have fuch 
large Allowance, were fain to beg at the Church- 
door. Was It ever read or heard, that any Prince 
fhould difburfe fo much Money, without a Juffi- 
cient Pawn ? I knew her own Subjects, the Citizens 
of London , would not lend her Majelly Money, 
without Lands in Mortgage. I knew the Queen 
did not lend the States Money, without Il./fhing, 
Brill , and other Towns for a Pawn. And can it be 
thought, he would let Cobham have lo great a Sum? 

I never came to the Lord Cobham’s, but about 
Matters of his Profit, as the ordering of his Houfe, 
paying of his Servants Board-wages, (Ac. I had of 
his when I was examined, four thoufand Pounds 
worth of Jewels for a Purchafe ; a Pearl of three 
thoufand Pounds, and a Ring worth five hundred 
Pounds: If he had had a Fancy to run away, he 
would not have left fo much to have purchased a 
Lcafe in Fee-farm. I faw him buy three hundred 
Pounds worth of Books, to fend to his Library 
at Canterbury, and a Cabinet of thirty Pounds to 
give to Mr. Attorney , for drawing the Convey¬ 
ances ; and God in Heaven knowetli, not I, whe¬ 
ther he intended to travel. But for that Practice 
with Arabella , or Letters to Aremberg, or any Dif¬ 
courfe with him, or in what Language he fpake 
unto him; if I knew any of thele things, I would 
abfolutely confefs the Indidment, and acknowledge 
myfelf worthy a thoufand Deaths. 


Cobham’j fecond Examination read. 


U 

«< 

(i 


4< The Lord Cobham being required to liibfcribe to 
an Examination, there was flic wed a Note under 
RaUgb's Hand* the which when he had peruled, 
he paufed, and after brake forth into thefe 
Speeches : Oh Villain ! Oh Tra 

f f f f 

Digitized by 


ytor ! I will now 

Gooof" 






cexlii 


The TRIAL of 


** tell you all the Truth: And then faid, HisPur- 
“ pofe was to go into Flanders and into Spain, for 
“ the obtaining theaforefaid Money, and that Ralegh 
u had appointed to meet him in Jerfey as he return- 
“ ed home, to be advifed of him about the Diftri- 
“ bution of the Money. 

Popbam, Lord Chief JuJlice. When Cohham an- 
fwered to the Interrogatories, he made fcruple to 
fubferibe ; and being urged to it, he faid, if he might 
hear me affirm, that a Perfon of his Degree ought 
to fet his Hand, he would ; I lying then at Rich¬ 
mond, for fear of the Plague, was fent for, and I told 
he ought to fubferibe j otherwife it were a Contempt 
ofa high Nature: Then he fubferibed. * The Lords 
queftioned with him further, and he fhewed them a 
Letter, as I thought written to me, but it was indeed 
written to my Lord Cecil: He defired to fee the 
Letter again, and then faid, Oh Wretch! Oh 
Tray tor! Whereby I perceived you had not per¬ 
formed that Truft he had repoled in you. 

Ralegh. He is as pafhonatea Man as lives, for he 
hath not fpared the beft Friends he hath in England in 
his Paflion. My Lords, I take it, he that hath been 
examined, hath ever been asked at the Time of his 
Examination, if it be according to his meaning, 
and then to fubferibe. Methinks, my Lords, when 
he accufes a Man, he fhould give foine Account 
and Reai'on of it •, it is not fufficient to fay, we 
talked of it. If I had been the Plotter, would not 
1 have given Cobbam fome Arguments, whereby 
to perfuade the King of Spain , and anfwer his Ob¬ 
jections. I knew Wefimorland and Botbwell , Men 
of other Underllandings than Cobbam , were ready 
to beg their Bread. 

Sir Thomas Fowler , one of the Jury. Did Sir 
Waller Ralegh write a Letter to my Lord before he 
was examined concerning him, or not ? 

Attorney. Yes. 

Lord Cecil. I am in great Difputc with myfelf, 
to fpeak in the Cafe of this Gentleman: A former 
Deamefs between me and him tied fci firm a Knot 
of my Conceit of his Virtues, now broken by a 
Difcovery of his Imperfe&ions. I proteft, did I 
ferve a King that I knew would be difplcafed with 
me for fpeaking, in this Cafe I would fpeak, what¬ 
ever came of it: But feeing he is compared of 
Piety and Jullice, and one that will not miflike 
any Man for fpeaking a Truth, I will anfwer 
your Queftion. 

Sir !Falter Ralegh was (laid by me at Windfor, 
upon the firft News of Copley , that the King’s Per¬ 
fon fhould be furprifed by my Lord Grey, and Mr. 
George Brook ; when I found Brook was in, I fuf- 
peCled Cobbam, then I doubted Ralegh to be a Par¬ 
taker. I fpeak not this, that it fhould be thought, 
I had greater Judgment than the reft of my Lords, 
in making this haflc to have him examined ; Ra¬ 
legh following to JVmdfor, I met with him upon 
the Terrace, and willed him, as from the King, to 
flay, faying, The Lords had fomething to fry to 
him : Then he w-as examined, but not concerning 
my Lord Cobbam, but of the furprifing Treafon ; 
my Lord Grey was apprehended, and likewife Brook i 
by Brock we found, that he had given Notice to 
Cobbam of the furprifing Treafon as he delivered itto 
ns, buc with as much Sparingnefs of a Brother as he 
might: We lent for my Lord Cobbam to Richmond , 
where he flood upon his Jollification, and his Qua¬ 
lity i fometimes being froward, he faid he was 
not bound to fubferibe, wherewith we made the 
King acquainted. Cobbam faid, if my Lord 
Chief Juflice would fay it were a Contempt, he 


would fubferibe v whereof being refolved, he fub- 
feribed. There was a Light given to Aremberg, 
that Lawrency was examined *, but that Ralegh 
knew that Cobbam was examined, is more than I 
know. 

Ralegh. If my Lord Cobbam had trufted me in 
the Main, was not I as fit a Man to be trufted in 
the Bye ? 

Lord Cecil. Ralegh did by Letters acquaint us, 
that my Lord Cobbam had fent Lawrency to Arem¬ 
berg, when he knew not he had any Dealings with 
him. 

Lord H. Howard. It made for you, if Lawrency 
had been only acquainted with Cobbam, and not 
with you. But you knew his whole Eftate, and 
were acquainted with Cobbam's Pra&ice with Law¬ 
rency ; and it was known to you before, that Law¬ 
rency depended on Aremberg. 

Attorney, i. Ralegh protefteth againft the fur¬ 
prifing Treafon. 2. That he knew not of the 
Matter touching Arabella. I would not charge 
you. Sir Walter , with a Matter of Falfhood: You 
fiy, you fufpeCted the Intelligence that Cobbam had 
with Aremberg, by Lawrency . 

Ralegh. I thought it had been no other Intelli¬ 
gence, but fuch as might be warranted. 

Attorney. Then it was but lawful Sufpicion. 
But to that whereas you faid, That Cobbam had 
accufcd you on Paflion, I anfwer three Ways. 1. I 
obferved when Cobbam faid, Let me fee the Letter 
again, he paufed, and when he did lee that Count 
Aremberg was touched, he cried out, 0 Traytor ! 
O Villain ! now will 1 confefs the whole Truth. 
2. The Accufation of a Man on Hear-fay, is no¬ 
thing: Would he accufe himfelf on Paflion, and 
ruinate his Caufe and Pofterity, out of Malice to 
accufe you ? 3. Could this be out of Paflion ? 

Mark the manner of it: Cobbam had told this 
at leaft two Months before to his Brother Brook , 
You are Fools, you are on the Bye , Ralegh and I 
are on the Main , we mean to take away the King and 
his Cubs •, this he delivered two Months before. So 
mark the Manner and the Matter; he would not turn 
the Weapon againft his own Bofom, and accufe 
himfelf to accule you. 

Ralegh. Hath Cohham confefled that ? 

Lord CbieJ Jufice. This is lpoken by Mr. At¬ 
torney, to prove that Cobbam' s Speech came not 
out of Paflion. 

Ralegh. Let it be proved that Cobbam faid fo. 

Attorney. Cohham faith, he was a long time doubt¬ 
ful of Ralegh , that he would fend him and the Money 
to the King. Did Cobbam fear left you would betray 
him in Jerfey ? Then of neceflity there mull be 
Truft between you. No Man can betray a Man, 
but he that is trufted, in my underftanding. This 
is the greateft Argument to prove, that he was ac¬ 
quainted with Cobham's Proceedings. Ralegh hath 
a deeper Reach than to make himfelf, as he faid, 
Robin Hood, a Ket, or Cade ; yet I never heard 
that Robin Hood was a Traytor ; they fay he was 
an-Out-law. And whereas he faith, that our King 
is not only more wealthy and potent than his Pre- 
deceflors, but alfo more politick and wife, fo that 
he could have no Hope to prevail: I anfwer. 
There is no King fo potent, wile, and aftive, but 
he may be overtaken through Treafon. Whereas 
you fay, Spain is fo poor •, dilcourfing fo largely 
thereof, it had been better for you to have kept in 
Guiana , than to have been fo well acquainted with 
the State of Spain. Btfides, if you could have 
brought Spain and Scotland to have joined, you 


• This Affistka Htntng off erf, in 
it i /> !« alt th A rtnivrt' tin t 
i.xttntdjrem him ly At L:> 


ho tcoJt anapuc 

tjxbic h had 


this A count of tht Ti ial, feezes the grof) Partiality eird Fr.l/hsod f the Pet fa, 

/, it eifputn, that CoI>ham would v.evcr fit ft iha tht Accufation if S r W-ilcer Ralegh, 
ds, thevgb hu fear and ether Pajjkus. s ■ 

by vi O Og 






Sir IF ALTER 

might have had hope to prevail. For his fix Over¬ 
throws, I anfwer * he hath the more Malice, be- 
caufe Repulles breed deftre of Revenge. Then 
you lay, you never talked with Cobbam but about 
Lodes, and letting Lands, and ordering his Houle} 

I never knew you Clerk of the Kitchen, (Ac. If 
you had fallen on your Knees at firft, and confef- 
led the Trcafon, it had been better for you. You 
lay, he meant to have given me a Cabinet of 
thirty Pounds ; perhaps he thought by thofe 
means, to have anticipated me therewith. But you 
fay, all thefe are Cincumftances. I anfwer, all 
this Acculation :in Circumftance is true: Here 
now I might appeal to my Lords, that you take 
hold of this, that he fubforibed not to the Accufa- 
eion. 

Lord H. Howard. Cobbam was not then prefied 
to fubferibe. 

Attorney. His Acculation being teftified by the 
Lords, is of as great Force, as if he had fubferi- 
bed. Ralegh laith again, if the Accufer be alive, 
he mud be brought Face to Face to fpeak, and 
alledges 25 Edw. III,That there mud be two fuffi- 
cient Witnefles that mull be brought Face to Face 
before the accufed, and alledgeth 10, and 13 
Eliz. 

Ralegb. You try me by the Spani/b Inquifition, 
if you proceed only by the Circumftances, without 
two Witnefles. 

Attorney. This is a treafonable Speech. 

Ralegb. Evertere bominem jujlum in caufa fua , 
injuftum ejl : Good my Lords, let it be proved, 
either by the Laws of the Land, or by the Laws of 
God, that there ought not to be two Witnefles ap¬ 
pointed i yet I will not ftand to defend this Point 
in Law, if the King will have it fo ; it is no rare 
thing to be falfly accufed. A Judge condemned a 
Woman in Sarum , for killing her Husband, on 
theTeftimony of one Witnefs; afterwards his Man 
confefled the Murder, when fhe was executed. Who 
after, being touch’d in Confcience for the Judg¬ 
ment, was ufed to fay, Quod nunquam de hoc fatlo 
animam in vita fua purgaret. It is alfo command¬ 
ed by the Scripture, Deut. xvii. In ore duorum aut 
trium tejlium , (ftc. and xix. Non fiabit uttus tejlis 
contra aliquem , (Ac. 

If Chrift requireth it, as it appeareth. Mat. 
xviii. If by the Statute, Civil Law, and God’s 
Word, it be required that there mult be two Wit- 
nefies at the leaflj bear with me if I defire one. 

1 would not defire to live, if I were privy to 
Cobbam's Proceedings: I had been a Slave, a Vil¬ 
lain, a Fool, if I had endeavoured to fet up Ara- 
bella , and refufed fo gracious a Lord and Soveraign. 
But urge your Proofs. 

Lord Chief Juft ice. You have offered Queftions 
on divers Statutes, all which mention two Accufers 
in Cafe of Indictments ; you have deceived yourl'elf, 
for the Laws of 25 Ed. III. and 5 Ed. VI. are re¬ 
peal’d. It fufficeth now, if there be Proofs made 
either under Hand, or by Tcllimony of Witnefles, 
or by Oaths j it needs not the Sublcription of the 
Party, fo there be Hands of credible Men, to tefti- 
fy the Examination. 

Ralegh. It may be an F.rror in me, and if thofe 
Laws be repeal’d, yet I hope the Equity of thofe 
Laws remains ftill j but if you affirm it, it mult be 
a Law to Pollerity ; the Proof of the Common 
Law is by Witnefs and Jury j let Cobbam be here, 
let him fpeak it: Call my Acculer before my Face, 
and I have done. 

Attorney. Scientia fulcris eft mera Jgnorantia ; 
You have read the Letter of the Law, but under- 
ftand it not. Here was your Anchor-hold, and 
your Rendezvous - } you trull to Cobbam > either Cob- 


RALEGH. ccxliii 

bam mud accufe you, or not accufe you *, if he did, 
then it would not hurt you, becaufe he is but one 
Witnefs; if he did not, then you are fafe. 

Ralegb. If ever I read a Word of the Law, or 
Statute before I was Prifoner in the Tower, God 
confound me. 

Attorney. Now I come to prove the Circum¬ 
ftances of the Acculation to be true. Cobbam 
confefled he had a Pafport to travel, hereby in¬ 
tending to prefent Overtures to the Atch-duke, and 
from thence to go to Spain, and there to have Con¬ 
ference with the King for Money : You fay, h« 
promifed to come Home by Jcrfey, to make merry 
with you and your Wife. 

Ralevh. I faid, in his Return from France , not 
Spain. 

Attorney. Further, in his Examination, he laith. 
Nothing could be fet down for the Diftribution of 
the Money to the Difcontented, without Conference 
with Ralegh. You faid. It Ihould have been for 
Procurement of Peace, but it was for raifing Re¬ 
bellion. Further, Cobbam faith, He would never 
have entred into thefe Courfes, but by your Infti- 
gation, and that you would never let him alone. 
Your Scholar was not apt enough to tell us all the 
Plots; tliat is enough for you to do, that are hia 
Mailer: You intended to trull Sir Arthur Savage, 
whom I take to be an honeft and true Gentleman, 
but not Sir Arthur Gorge. 

Ralegb. All this is but one Accufation of Cobbam’s, 
I hear no other thing ; to which Accufation he 
never fubferibed, nor avouched it. I beleech you, 
my Lords, let Cobbam be fent for, charge him on 
his Soul, on his Allegiance to the King ; if he 
affirm ir, I am guilty. 

Lord Cecil. It is the Acculation of my Lord 
Cobbam, it is the Evidence againft you ; mull ic 
not be of Force without his Sublcription ? I defire 
to be relblved by the Judges, Whether by the Law 
it is not a forcible Argument of Evidence. 

Lbe Judges. My Lord, it is. 

Ralegh. The King, at his Coronation, is fworn 
In omnibus Judiciis fuis Asquitatem , non Rigorem 
Legis obfervare : By the Rigour and Cruelty of the 
Law, it may be a forcible Evidence. 

Lord Chief Juftice. That is not the Rigour of 
the Law, but the Juftice ot the Law ; elle when 
a Man hath made a plain Accufation, by Practice, 
he might be brought to rctra< 5 l it again. 

Ralegb. Oh my Lord ! you may ul'e Equity. 

Lord Chief Juftice. That is Irom the King ; 
you arc to have Juftice from us. 

Anderfon. The Law is, if the Matter be proved 
to the Jury, they mull find you guilty •, tor Cob¬ 
bam’s Accufation is not only againlt you, there arc 
other things fufficient. 

Lord Cecil. Now that Sir Walter Ralegh is 
finished, that Cobbam’s Subfeription is not neccf- 
fiary •, I pray you Mr. Attorney go on. 

Ralegb. Good Mr. Attorney be patient, and 
give me Leave. 

Lord Cecil. An unnecefiary Patience is a Hin¬ 
drance; let him go on with his Proofs, and then 
refel them. 

Ralegb. I would anfwer particularly. 

Lord Cecil. If you would have a Table, and 
Pen and Ink, you lhall. 

Then Paper and Ink was given him. 

Here the Clerk of the Gown read the Letter 
which the Lord Cobbam did write in July, which 
was to the El Lift of his former Examination, fur¬ 
ther laying, I have difclofed all ; to accufe any 
falfely , were to burthen my o-v. v. Confcience. 


Digitized by 


Googl< 






ccxliv 


The TRIAL of 


Attorney. Read Copleys Confeflion the 8th of 
June, he faith. He was offered 1000 Crowns to 
be in this Action. 

Here Watfon's Additions were read. 

The great Mafs of Money from the Count was 
impoffible, &c. 

Brook's Confeflion read. 

7 here have Letters paffed, faith he, between Cob- 
ham and Aremberg, for a great Sum of Money, to 
affift a fecond Action, for the fur prizing of his Majejly. 

Attorney. Ic is not poflible it was of Paflion ; 
for it was in Talk before three Men being feverally 
examined, who agreed in the Sum to be beftowed 
on difiaffeded Perfons. That Grey fhould have 
12000 Crowns, and Ralegh fhould have 8ooo, or 
ioooo Crowns. 

Cobham's Examination, July 18. 

If the Money might be procured (faith he) then a 
Man may give Penftons. Being afked, if a Penfion 
fhould not be given to his Brother Brook , he denied 
it not. 

Lawrency's Examination. 

Within five Days after Aremberg arrived, Cobbam 
relbrted unto him. That Night that Cobbam went 
to Aremberg with Lawrency , Ralegh fupped with 
him. 

Attorney. Ralegh muft have his Part of the 
Money, therefore now he is a Traytor. The 
Crown fhall never Hand one Year on the Head of 
the King (my Matter) if a Traytor may not be 
condemned by Circumftances. For if A tells B , 
and B tells C, and C D, (Ac. you fhall never prove 
Treafon by two Witnefles. 

Ralegh's Examination was read. 

“ He confefleth Cobbam offered him 8ooo 
“ Crowns, which he was to have for the Further- 
“ ance of the Peace, between England and Spain $ 
“ and that he fhould have it within three Days. 
“ To which, he faid, he gave this Anfwcr, When 
*« I fee the Money, I will tell you more ; for I 
“ had thought it had been one of his ordinary idle 
“ Conceits, and therefore made no Account thereof. 

Ralegh. The Attorney hath made a long Nar¬ 
ration of Copley , and the Priefts, which concerns 
me nothing •, neither know 1 how Cobbam was alter¬ 
ed. For he told me, If I would agree to further the 
Peace, he would get me 8ooo Crowns. I afked 
him. Who fhall have the reft of the Money ? He 
• faid, I will offer fuch a Nobleman (who was not 
named) fome of the Money. I faid. He will not 
be perluaded by you, and will extremely hate you 
for fuch a Motion. Let me be pinched to Death 
with hot Irons, if ever I knew there w r as any In¬ 
tention to bellow the Money on dilcontented Per¬ 
fons. I had made a Difcourfe againll the Peace, 
and would have printed it: if Cobbam changed his 
mind, if the Priefts, il Brook had any fuch Intent, 
what is that to me ? They mull anfwer for it. 
He offered me the Money betbre Aremberg came, 
that is difference of Time. 

Serj. Philips. Ralegh confefleth the Matter, 
but avoideth it, by diftinguilhing of Times. You 
faid, it was offered you before the coming of Arem¬ 
berg •, which is falfe. For you being examined 
whether you Ihould have fuch Money of Cobbam , 
or not: You faid, Yea *, and that you Ihould have 


it within two or three Days. Ntno mcriturus pree- 
fumitur mentiri. 

Lord Henry Howard. Alledge me any Ground 
or Caufe, wherefore you gave ar to my Lord 
Cobbam for receiving Penfions, in Matters you had 
not to deal with ? 

Ralegb. Could I ftopmy Lord obbam' s Mouth? 

Lord Cecil. Sir Walter Ralegh prelfeth, that my 
Lord Cobbam fhould be brought Face to Face. If 
he asks things of Favour and Grace, they mull 
come only from him that can give them. If we fit 
here as Commiflioners, how lhall we be fatisfied, 
whether he ought to be brought, unlcfs we hear the 
Judges fpeak ? 

Lord Chief JuJlice. This thing cannot be grant¬ 
ed *, for then a Number of Treafons Ihould flourilh: 
The Accufer may be drawn by Practice, whilft he 
is in Perfon. 

Judge Gaudy. The Statute you fpeak of, con¬ 
cerning two Witnefles, in Cafe of Treafon, is found 
to be inconvenient; therefore by another Law it 
was taken away. 

Ralegh. The common Trial of England is by 
Jury and Witnefles. 

Lord Chief Juftice. No, by Examination: If 
three confpire a Treafon, and they all confefs it; 
here is never a Witnels, yet they are condemned. 

Judge IVarburton. I marvel. Sit Walter, that 
you being of fuch Experience and Wit, fhould 
Hand on this Point •, for fo, many Horfe-ftealers 
may efcape, if they may not be condemned with¬ 
out Witnefles. If one fhould rulh into the King’s 
Privy-Chamber, whilft he is alone, and kill the 
King (which God forbid) and this Man be met 
coming with his Sword drawn all bloody ; fhall 
not he be condemned to Death ? My Lord Cobbam 
hath, perhaps, been laboured withal j and to fave 
you, his old Friend, it may be that he will deny all 
that which he hath faid. 

Ralegh. I know not how you conceive the Law. 

Lord Chief JuJlice. Nay, we do not conceive 
the Law, but we know the Law. 

Ralegh. The Wifdom of the Law of God, is 
abfolutc and perfed, Hac fac , (A vives , (Ac. But 
now by the Wifdom of the State, the Wifdom of 
the Law is uncertain. Indeed where the Accufer 
is not to be had conveniently, I agree with you 5 
but here my Accufer may, he is alive, and in the 
Houfe. Sufanna had been condemned, if Daniel 
had not cried out: Will you condemn an innocent 
Jfraelite , without Examination or Knowledge of the 
Truth? Remember it is abfolutely the Command¬ 
ment of God •, if a falfe Witnels rife up, you fhall 
caufe him to be brought before the Judges ; if- he 
be found falfe, he fhall have the Punifhment which 
the Accufed fhould have had. It is very fure, for 
my Lord to accufe me is my certain Danger, and 
may be a means to excufe himfelf. 

Lord Chief JuJlice. There mult not fuch a Gap 
be opened for the Deftrudion of the King, as would 
be, if we fhould grant this. You plead hard for 
yourfelf, but the Laws plead as hard for the King. 
I did never hear that Courfe to be taken in a Cafe 
of Treafon, as to write to one another, or fpeak to 
one another, during the Time of their Imprifon- 
ment. There h: th been Intelligence between you, 
and what underhand Przdices there may be, I 
know not. If the Circumftances agree not with 
the Evidence, we will not condemn you. 

Ralegb. The King defires nothing but the 
Knowledge of the Truth, and would have no Ad¬ 
vantage taken by Severity of the Law. If ever 
we had a gracious King, now we have! I hope, 
as he is, fuch are his Minifters. If there be 
but a Trial of five Marks at the Common Law, 


Digitized by 


a Wit- 

Google 






Sir WALTER RALEGH. ccxlv 


a Witnefs muft be depofed. Good my Lords, 
Jet my Accufer come Face to Face, and be depo¬ 
fed. 

Lord Chief JuJlice. You have no Law for it: 
God forbid any Man Ihould accufe himfelf, upon 
his Oath. 

Attorney. The Law prefumes, a Man will not 
accufe himfelf to accufe another. You are an odious 
Man: For Cobham thinks his Caufe the worfe, that 
you are in it. Now you Jhall hear of fome Stirs to 
be raifed in Scotland. 

Part of Copley’s Examination. 

“ Alfo Watfon told me, that a fpecial Perfon 
“ told him that Aremberg offered to him a thou- 

fand Crowns to be in that Adion ^ and that 
“ Brook faid, the Stirs in Scotland came out of Ra- 
“ legb's Head. 

Ralegh. Brook hath been taught his LefTon. 

Lord H. Howard. This Examination was taken 
before me ; Did I teach him his Leflon ? 

Ralegh. I proteft before God, I meant it not 
by any Privy-Counfellor; but, becaufe Money is 
fcant, he will juggle on both Sides. 

Ralegh*; Examination. 

** The way to invade England, were to begin 
«* with Stirs in Scotland. 

Ralegh. I think fo ftill: I have fpoken it to 
divers of the Lords of the Council, by way of 
Difcourfe and Opinion. 

Attorney. Now let us come to thofe Words of 
Deftroying the King and his Cubs. 

Ralegh. O barbarous! if they, like unnatural 
Villains, Ihould ule thofe Words, lhall I be char¬ 
ged with them ? 1 will not hear it; I was never 
lalfe to the Crown of England. I have fpent 40000 
Crowns of mine own, againft the Spanijh Fadion, 
for the Good of my Country. Do you bring the 
Words of thefe hellifh Spiders, Clark, fVatfon , and 
others, againft me? 

Attorney. Thou haft a Spanijh Heart, and thy 
fclf art a Spider of Hell; for thou confefieft the 
King to be a moft fweet and gracious Prince, and 
yet haft confpired againft him. 

Watfon’; Examination read. 

“ He faid, that George Brook told him twice, 
“ that his Brother, the Lord Cobham, faid to him, 
“ That you are but on the Bye, but Ralegh and I 
u arc on the Main. 

Brook’; Examination read. 

“ Being ask’d what was meant by this Jargon 
“ the Bye and the Main, he faid, That the Lord 
“ Cobham told him, that Grey and others, were in 
“ the Bye, he and Ralegh were on the Main. Be- 
** ing ask’d what Expofition his Brother made of 
“ thefe Words, he faid, he is loth to repeat it. 
“ And after faith, by the Main, was meant, the 
‘‘ taking away of the King and his Ifliic. And 
** thinks on his Confcience, it was infufed into his 
*‘ Brother's Head by Ralegh. 

Cobham’; Examination read. 

Being ask’d, if ever he had faid. It will never 
be well in England, till the King and his Cubs were 
taken away. He faid. He bad anfwered before , 
and that be would anfwer no more to that Point. 


Ralegh. I am not named in all this : There is 
a Law of two Sorts of Accufers, one of his own 
Knowledge, another by Hear-fay. 

Earl of Suffolk. See the Cafe of Arnold. 

Lord Chief JuJlice. It is the Cafe of Sir William 
Thomas, and Sir Nicholas Arnold. 

Ralegh. If this may be, you will have any 
Man’s Life in a Week. 

Attorney. Ralegh faith, That Cobham was in a 
Paflion when he faid fo. Would he tell his Brother 
any thing of Malice againft Ralegh, whom he lo¬ 
ved as his Life ? 

Ralegh. Brook never loved me} until his Bro¬ 
ther had accufed me, he faid nothing. 

Lord Cecil. We have heard nothing that might 
lead us to think, that Brook accufed you, he was 
only in the Surprifmg Treafon j for by accufing you, 
he fhould accufe his Brother. 

Ralegh. He doth not care much for that. 

Lord Cecil. I muft judge the beft. The Ac- 
cufation of his Brother was not voluntary ; he pa¬ 
red every thing, as much as he could, to favc his 
Brother. 

Cobham*; Examination read. 

u He faith, he had a Book written againft the 
“ Title of the King, which he had of Ralegh, and 
** that he gave it to his Brother: Ralegh faid, it 
“ was foolifhly written. 

Attorney. After the King came within twelve 
Miles of London , Cobham never came to fee him, 
and intended to travel without feeing the Queen, and 
the Prince. Now in this Difcontentment, you gave 
him the Book, and he gave it to his Brother. 

Ralegh. I never gave it him, he took it off my 
Table. For I well remember, a little before that 
time, I received a Challenge from Sir Amias Pref- 
ton, and for that I did intend to anfwer it, I refol- 
ved to leave my Eftate fettled, therefore laid out 
all my loofe Papers, amongft which wasthisBook. 

Lord Howard. Where had you this Book ? 

Ralegh. In the old Lord-Treafurer’s Study, af¬ 
ter his Death. 

Lord Cecil. Did you ever fhew or make known 
the Book to me? 

Ralegh. No, my Lord. 

Lord Cecil. Was it one of the Books which was 
left to me or my Brother ? 

Ralegh. I took it out of the Study in my 
Lord Treafurer’s Houfe in the Strand. 

Lord Cecil. After my Father’s deceafe, Sir Wal¬ 
ter Ralegh defired to fcarch for fome Cofmographi- 
cal Defcriptions of the Indies, which he thought 
were in his Study, and were not to be had in print •, 
which I granted, and would have trufted Sir Wal¬ 
ter Ralegh as foon as any Man •, tho’ fince, for fome 
Infirmities, the Bands of my A Red ion to him have 
been broken j and yet, referving my Duty to the 
King my Mafter, which I can by no means difpenfe 
with, by God, I love him, and have a great Con- 
flid within myfelf: But I muft needs fay, Sir Wal¬ 
ter ufed me a little unkindly, to take the Book 
away without my Knowledge ; neverthelefs I need 
make no Apology in Behalf of my Father, confi- 
dering how ufetul and neceflary it is for Privy- 
Counfellors, and thofe in his Place, to intercept and 
keep fuch kind of Writings ; for whofoever fhould 
then fearch his Study, may in all likelihood find 
all the notorious Libels that were writ againft the 
late Queen j and whofoever fhould rumage my Stu¬ 
dy, or at leaf! my Cabinet, may find feveral againft 
the King, our foveraign Lord, fince his AcceJlion 
to the Throne. 

g g g g p r 

Digitized by viUUV LL 


coxlvi 7%e T R I A L of 


Ralegh. This Book was in Manuscript, and the 
late Lord Treafurer had wrote in the Beginning of 
it with his own Hands thefe Words, This is the Book 
of Robert Snagg. And t do own, as my Lord 
Cecil has faid, that I beliere they may alfo find in 
my Houle, almoft all the Libels, that have been 
writ acainft the late Queen. 

Attorney. You Were no Privy-Counsellor, and 
I hope never Shall be* 

Lord Cecil, He was not a fworn Counfellor of 
State, but he has been called to Confultations. 

Ralegh. 1 think it a very feverc Interpretation 
of the Law, to bring me within Compafs ofTrea- 
lon for this Book, writ fo long ago, of which no¬ 
body had read any more than the Heads of the 
Chapters, and which was burnt by Brook without 
my Privity j admitting I had delivered the fame 
to my Lord Cobham, without allowing or approv¬ 
ing, but difeommending it, according to Cobham' s 
firll Acculation. And put the Cafe J fhould come 
to my Lord Cecil, as I have often done, and find 
a Stranger with him, with a Packet of Libels, and 
my Lord fhbuld let me have one or two of them 
to perufe. This I hope is no Treafon. 

Attorney. I obferve there was Intelligence be¬ 
tween you and Cobham in the Toncer ; for after 
he faid, It was againjl tlx King's Title , he denied it 
again. 

Sir William Wade. Firll my Lord Cobham con- 
fefieth it, and after he had fubferibed it, he revo. 
ked it again: To me he always faid, That the Drift 
of it was againjl the King's Title. 

Ralegh. I protefi before God, and all his 
Works, I gave him not the Book. 

Nota. Sir Robert Wroth fpeaketb, vr whifpereth 
fomelhing fecrelly. 

Attorney. My Lords, 1 mud complain of Sir 
Robert Wroth ; he fays, this Evidence is not mate¬ 
rial. 

Sir Robert Wroth. I never fpake the Words. 
Attorney. Let Mr. Serjeant Philips teflify, whe¬ 
ther he heard them. 

Lord Cecil. 1 will give my Word for Sir Ro¬ 
bert Wroth. 

Sir Robert Wroth. I will fpeak as truly as you, 
Mr. Attorney , for, by God, I never fpake it. 

Lord Chief JuJlice. Wherefore fhould this Book 
be burnt? 

Ralegh. I burned it not. 

Serj, Philips. You prefented your Friend with 
it, when he was difeontented. If it had been be¬ 
fore the Queen’s Death, it had been a lefs matter ; 
but you gave it him prefently when he came from 
the King, which was the time of his Difcontent- 
ment. 

Ralegh. Here is a Book fuppofed to be Trea- 
fonable ; I never read it, commended it, or de¬ 
liver’d it, nor urged it. 

Attorney. This is cunning. 

Ralegh. Every thing that doth make for me is 
cunning, and every thing that maketh againfl me 
is probable. 

Attorney. Lord Cobham faith, that Kemi/h came 
to him with a Letter torn, and did wifh him not 
to be difmay’d, for one Witnefs could not hurt 
him. 

Ralegh. This poor Man hath been clofe Prifo- 
ner thefe eighteen Weeks; he was offered the Rack 
to make him confefs. I never fent any fuch Mef- 
fage by him ; I only writ to him, to tell him what 
I had done with Mr. Attorney •, having of his, at 
that time, a great Pearl, and a Diamond. 


Lord H. Howard. No Circumftance moteth 
me more, than this. Kemifh was never on the Rack ; 
the King gave Charge, that no Rigour fhould be 
ufed. 

Conmijjioners. We protefi before God, there 
was no fuch Matter intended, to our Knowledges. 

- Raleph . Was not the Keeper of the Rack fent 
for, and he threatned with it ? 

Sir William Wade. When Mr. Sollicitor and my 
felf examined Kemifh , we told him he deferved the 
Rack, but did not threaten him with it. 

Commijftoners. It was more than we knew. 

CobhamV Examination read. 

u He faid, Kemifh brought him a Letter from 
“ Ralegh, and that Part which was concerning the 
“ Lords of the Council, was rent out ; that he was 

examined, and cleared him of all $ and that the 
“ Lord II, Howard faid, becaufe he was difeon- 
“ tent, he was fit to be in the Adtion. And tur- 
“ ther, that KemifJj faid to him from Ralegh, that 
** he fhould be of good Comfort, for one Witnefs 
“ could not condemn a Man for Treafon. 

Lord Cecil. Cobham was asked whether and when 
he heard from you; he faid, every Day. 

Ralegh. Kemifh added more, I never bad him 
fpeak thefe Words. 

Nota. Mr. Attorney here offered to interrupt him. 

Lord Cecil. It is his lafl Difcourfe. Give him 
leave Mr. Attorney. 

Ralegh. I am accufed concerning Arabella , 
concerning Money out of Spain. My Lord Chief 
juflice faith, a Man may be condemned with one 
Witnefs, yea without any Witnefs. Cobham is 
guilty of many things, Confcientia mille Tejles. He 
hath accufed himfelf, what can he hope for but 
Mercy ? My Lords, vouclifafe me this Grace. Let 
him be brought, being alive, and in the Houfe; 
let him avouch any of thefe things, I will confefs 
the whole Indidlment, and renounce the King’s 
Mercy. 

Lord Cecil. Here hath been a touch of the Lady 
Arabella Stuart , a near Kinfwoman of the King’s. 
Let us not fcandal the Innocent by Confufion of 
Speech : She is as innocent of all thefe Things as I, 
or any Man here j only fhe received a Letter from 
Cobham, to prepare her ; which fhe laugh’d at, and 
immediately fent it to the King. So far was fhe 
from Difcontentment, that fhe laugh’d him to fcorn. 
But you fee how far the Count of Aremberg did 
confent. 

The Lord Admiral (Nottingham) being by in a 
Standing , with the Lady Arabella, fpake to the 
Court. 

The Lady doth here protefi upon her Salvation, 
that fhe never dealt in any of thefe things, and fo 
fhe willed me to tell the Court. 

Lord Cecil. The Lord Cobham wrote to my 
Lady Arabella, to know if he might come to fpeak 
with her, and gave her to underfland, that there 
were fome about the King, that laboured to dis¬ 
grace her ; fhe doubted it was but a Trick. But 
Brook faith, his Brother moved him to procure 
Arabella to Write Letters to the King of Spain : 
But he faith, he never did. 

Ralegh. The Lord Cobham hath accufed me, 
you fee in what manner he hath forfworn it. Were 
it not for his Accufation, all this were nothing. 
Let him be asked, if 1 knew of the Letter which 

Lawren - 


Digitized by 


Google 





Sir TV A LTER RALEGH. ccxl vii 


Ixtwrency brought to him from Aremberg. Let 
me fpcak for my Life, it ctn be no hurl for him 
to be brought i he dares not accufe me. If you 
grant me not this Favour, I am ftrangely uled. 
Campion was not denied to have his Accufcrs Face 
to Face. 

Lord Chief Juftice. Since he fnuft needs have 
Juftice, the acquitting of his old Friend may moVe 
him to fpcak otherwise than the Truth. 

Ralegh. If I had been the Infufer of all thefe 
Treafons into him. You Gentlemen of the Jury, 
mark this: He faid, I have been the Caufe of all 
his Miferies, and the Deftrudion of his Houfe; 
and that all Evil hath happened unto him, by my 
wicked Counfel ; if this be trut, whom hath he 
Caufe to accufe, and be revenged on, but on me ? 
And I know him to be as revengeful, as any Man 
on Earth. 

Attorney. He is a Party, and may not come, 
the Law is againft it. 

Ralegh. It is a Toy to tell me of Law. I de¬ 
fy fuch Law, I ftand on the Fail. 

Lord Cecil. I am afraid my often fpeaking (who 
am inferior to my Lords here prefent) will make 
the World think, I delight to hear myfclf talk. 
My Afledion to you, Sir Walter Ralegh, was not 
extinguiflied, but flaked, in regard of your Deferts. 
You know the Law of the Realm (to the which 
your M ind doth not conteft) that my Lord Cobham 
cannot be brought. 

Ralegh. He tray be, my Lord. 

Lord Cecil. But dart you challenge it ? 

Ralegh. No. 

Lord Cecil. You lay, that my Lord Cobban, 
your main Accufer, muft come to accufe you. You 
fay, he hath retraded: I fay many Particulars are 
not retraced. What the Validity of all this is, is 
merely left to the Jury. Let me ask you this: If 
my Lord Cobham will fay, you were the only In- 
ftigator of him to proceed in the Trcafons, dare 
you put yourfelf on this ? 

Ralegh. If he will fpeak it before God and the 
King, that ever I knew of Arabella's Matter, or the 
Money out of Spain, or of the Surprifmg Treafon ; 
1 put myfelf on it, God’s Will and the King’s be 
done with me. 

Lord H. Howard How if he fpcak things equi¬ 
valent to what you have faid ? 

Ralegh. Yes, in a main Point. 

Lord Cecil. If he fay, you have been the In- 
ftigator of him to deal with the Spanijh King, had 
not the Council caufe to draw you hither ? 

Ralegh. I put myfelf on it. 

Lord Cecil. Then, Sir Walter Ralegh, call up¬ 
on God, and prepare yourfelf i for I do verily be¬ 
lieve, my Lords will prove this. Excepting your 
Faults (I call them noworfe) by God, I am your 
Friend. The Heat and Paflion in you, and the 
Attorney’s Zeal in the King’s Service, makes rtie 
fpeak this. 

Ralegh. Wbofoever is the Workman , it is reafon 
be Jhould give Account of his Work to the Work-ma- 
fier. But let it be proved, that he acquainted me 
with any of his Conferences with Aremberg : He 
would furely have given me l'ome Account. 

Lord Cecil. That follows not. If I let you on 
Work, and you give me no Account, am I there¬ 
fore innocent ? 

Attorney. For the Lady Arabella I faid, flie was 
never acquainted with the Matter. Now that Ra¬ 
legh had Conference in all thefe Treafons, it is ma- 
nifeft •, the Jury hath heard the Matter. There is 
one Dyer, a Pilot, that being in Lisbon , met with 
a Portugal Gentleman, who asked him if the King 


of England was crowned yet ? To whom he an- 
fwered, I think not yet, but be /hall bfjhortly. Nay, 
faith.the Portugal Gentleman, that (hah he never 
be, for hisThroat will be cut by Don Ralegh and 
Don Cobham, before he be crowned. • 

Dyer was called and fworn, and delivered this 
Evidence. 


Dyer. I came to a Merchant’s Houfe in Lisbon, 
to fee a Boy that I had there t there came in a 
Gentleman into the Houfe, atid enquiring what 
Countryman I was, I laid an Englijhman : Where¬ 
upon he asked me, if the King was crowned ? 
And I anfwered, that I hoped lie fhould be fo Ihort- 
ly. Nay, faith he, he (hall never be crowned, for 
Don Ralegh and Don Cobham will cut his Throat 
ere that Day come. 

Ralegh. W r hat infer you upon this ? 

Attorney. That your Treafon hath Wings. 

Ralegh. If Cobham did pradile with Aremberg, 
how could it not but be known in Spain ? Why 
did they name the Duke of Buckingham with Jack 
Straw's Treafon, and the Duke of 2 ork with Jack 
Cade , but that it was to countenance his Treafon ? 

Confider, you Gentlemen of the Jury, there is 
no Caufe fo doubtful, which the King’s Council 
cannot make good againft the Law. Confider my 
Difability, and their Abiliry: They prove nothing 
againft me, only they bring the Acculiuion of my 
Lord Cobham , which he hath lamented and repented 
as heartily, as if it had been for a horrible Murther. 
For he knew, that all this Sorrow which Ihould 
come to me, is by his means. Prefumptions muft 
proceed frorrt precedent or fubfequent Fads. I 
have fpent 40000 Crowns againft the Spaniard. I 
had not purchafed forty Pounds a Year. If I had 
died in Guiana, I had not left 300 Marks a Year 
to my Wife and Son. I that have always condem¬ 
ned the Spanijh Fadion, methinks it is a ftrange 
Thing, that now I Ihould .afreet it. Remember 
what St. Auftin fays, Sic judicale tanquam ab alio 
tnox judicandi •, unus judex, mum tribunal. Ifycu 
would be contented, on Prefumptions, to be deli¬ 
vered up to be flaughtered, to have your Wives 
and Children turned into the Streets to beg their 
Bread *, if you would be contented to be fo juJged, 
judge fo of me. 

Serj. Philips. I hope to make this fo clear, as 
that the Wit of Man ftiall have no Colour to an- 
fwer it. The Matter is Trcalbn in the higheft 
Degree, the End to deprive the King of his Crown. 
The particular Treafons are thefe : tuft. To raife 
up Rebellion j and, to efied that, to procure Mo¬ 
ney ; to raife up Tumults in Scotland, by divul¬ 
ging a treafonable Book againft the King’s Right 
to the Crown; the Purpofe, - to take the Life of his 
Majefty and his IfTue. My Lord Cobham confeflcth 
Sir Waller Ralegh to be guilty of all thefe Treafons. 
The Qu^ftion is. Whether he be guilty as joining 
with him, or inftigatingof him ? The Courfe to prove 
this, was by my Lord Cobham' s Accufation. If that 
be true, he is guilty ; if not, lie is clear. So, whether 
Cobham fay true, or Ralegh ? That is the Qucttion. 
Ralegh hath no Anfwer, but the Shadow of as much 
Wit, as the Wit of Man can devife. He ufeth 
his bare Denial ; the Denial of a Defendant muft 
not move the Jury. In the Star-chamber , or in the 
Chancery , tor matter of Title, if the Defendant be 
called in Queftion, his Denial on his Oath is no Evi¬ 
dence to the Court to clear him, he doth it in / ro- 
pria Caufa. Therefore much Ids in Matters of 
Trealon. Cobham's Teflific.ition againft him Ljc- 
fore then, and fince, hath been largely diiconrfed. 


Digitized by 






ccxlviii The TRIAL of 


Ralegb. If Truth be conftant, and Conftancy 
be in Truth, Why hath he forfworn that, that he 
hath laid ? You have not proved any one Thing 
by direft Proofs, but all by Circumstances. 

Attorney. Have you done ? The King mull have 
the laft. 

Ralegh. Nay, Mr. Attorney , he which fpeaketh 
for his Life, muft fpeak laft. Falfe Repetitions and 
Miftakings muft not mar my Caufe. You fhould 
fpeak fecundutn allegata fc? probata. I appeal to 
God and the King, in this Point, Whether Cob- 
ham’s Accufation be fufficient to condemn me. 

Attorney. The King’s Safety, and your Clear¬ 
ing, cannot agree. I proteft, before God, I never 
knew a clearer Treafon. 

Ralegh. J never had Intelligence with Cobham 
fincc I came to the Tower. 

Attorney. Go too, I will Jay thee upon] thy 
Back, for the confidenteft Traytor that ever came 
at a Bar. Why ftiould you take 8000.Crowns for 
a Peace ? 

BJ Lord Cecil. Be not fo impatient, good Mr. At¬ 
torney, give him leave to fpeak. 

Attorney. If I may not be patiently heard, you 
will encourage Traytors, and difeourage us. I am 
the King’s fworn Servant, and muft fpeak •, if he 
be guilty, he is a Traytor j if not, deliver him. 

Nota. Here Mr. Attorney fat down and would 
fpeak no more, until the Commiffionen urged 
and intreated him : After much ado he went on, 
and made a long Repetition of all the Evidence, 
for the Direct ton of the Jury ; and at the re¬ 
peating of fome things. Sir Walter Ralegh in¬ 
terrupted him, andfaid , He did him Wrong. 

Attorney. Thou art the mod vile and execrable 
Traytor that ever lived. 

Ralegh. You fpeak indifcreetly, barbaroufly and 
uncivilly. 

Attorney. I want Words fufficient to exprefs thy 
viperous Treafons. 

Ralegh. I think you want Words indeed, for 
you have fpoken one Thing half a dozen times. 

Attorney. Thou art an odious Fellow, thy Name 
is hateful to all the Realm of England for thy Pride. 

Ralegb. It will go near to prove a meafuring 
Caft between you and me, Mr. Attorney. 

Attorney. Well, I will now make it appear to 
the World, that there never lived a viler Viper up¬ 
on the Face of the Earth than thou •, and therewith¬ 
al drew a Letter out of his Pocket , faying further, 
My Lords, you fhall fee, this is an Agent, that 
hath writ a Treatife againft the Spaniard, and hath 
ever fo detefted him •, this is he, that hath fpent fo 
much Money againft him in Service j and yet you 
fhall all fee, whether his Heart be not wholly Spa¬ 
nijh. The Lord Cobham, who, of his own Nature 
was a good and honourable Gentleman, till over¬ 
taken by this Wretch, now finding his Confcience 
heavily burthened with fome Courfes, which the 
Subtilty of this Traytor had drawn him into, my 
Lords, he could not be at reft with himfelf, nor 
quiet in his Thoughts, until he. was eafed of that 
heavy Weight •, out of which Paffion of his Mind, 
and Difcharge of his Duty to his Prince, and his 
Confcience to God, taking it upon his Salvation, 
that he wrote nothing but the Truth, with his own 
Hands he wrote this Letter. Now, Sir, you fhall 
fee whether you had Intelligence with Cobham, 
within four Days before he came to the Tower. If 
he lie wholly Spanijh, that defired a Penfion of 1500 
Pounds a Year from Spain, that Spain by him might 
have Intelligence, then Ralegh is a Traytor. He 


hath taken an Apple, and pinned a Letter unto it, 
and threw it into my Lord Cobham' s Window j 
the Contents whereof were this j It is doubtful whe¬ 
ther we fhall be proceeded with or no, perhaps you 
fhall not be tried. This was to get a Retradation. 
Oh! it was Adams Apple, whereby the Devil did 
deceive him. Further he wrote thus, Do not as my 
Lord of EfTex did •, take heed of a Preacher ; for 
by his Perfuafion he confeffed, and made bimfelf guil¬ 
ty. I doubt not, but this Day, God fhall have as 
great a Conqueft by this Traytor, and the Son of 
God fhall be as much glorified, as when it was faid, 
Vicifii Galilee 5 you know my meaning. What 
tho’ Cobham retraced, yet he could not reft nor 
fleep, until he had confirmed it again. If this 
be not enough to prove him a Traytor, the King 
my Maftcr fhall not live three Years to an end. 

Nota. Here Mr. Attorney produced the Lora 
Cobham’; Letter (writ to the Commiffioners the 
Night before Ralegh’s Trial, viz. Nov. 16.) 
and as he read it, infer ted fome Speeches. 

I have thought it fit , to fet down this to my Lords, 
wherein I profefs on my Soul, to write nothing but 
the Truth. I am come now near to the Period of 
my Time, therefore I confefs the Truth before God, 
and his Angels. Ralegh, four Days before 1 came 
to the Tower, caufed an Apple (Eve’; Apple) to 
be thrown in at my Chamber-window ; the Effedt of 
it was to intreat me to right the Wrong that I bad 
done him, in faying , That I fhould have come borne 
by Jerfey j which under my Hand to him , I have 
retraced. His firft Letter I anfwertd not, which 
was thrown in the fame manner, wherein he prayed 
me to write him a Letter, which I did. He fent me 
Word , that the Judges were at Mr. Attorney’s 
Houfe, and that there was good Hope the Proceedings 
againjl us fhould be Jlaid \ be fent me another Time 
a little Tobacco. At Aremberg*; coming , Ralegh 
dealt with me, to procure him a Penfion of 1500 
Pounds a Tear, for which he promifed that no Adi ion 
fhould be againjl Spain, but be would give Knowledge 
before-hand. He told me the States bad Audience with 
the King. (Ah, is not this a Spanijh Heart in an 
Englijh Body ?) He hath been the original Caufe of 
my Ruin j for I bad no dealing with Aremberg, but 
by his Injligation. He hath been alfo the Caufe of 
my Difcontentment ; be advifed me, not to be over¬ 
taken with Preachers, as EfTex was, and that the 
King would better allow of a conjlant Denial, than to 
accufe any. 

Attorney. O damnable Atheift ! he hath learned 
fome Text of Scripture, to ferve his own Purpofe, 
but falfly alledged. He counfels him, not to be 
counfelled by Preachers, as EJfex was: He died the 
Child of God, God honoured him at his Death ; 
Thou waft by when he died, Et Lupus fc? turfes 
inflant morientibus Urfce. He died indeed for his 
Offence. The King himfelf fpake thefe Words > 
He that fhall fay EfTex died not for Treafon, is pi - 
nijhable. 

Ralegh. You have heard a ftrange Tale of a 
ftrange Man •, now he thinks he hath Matter enough 
to deftroy me •, but the King, and all of you fhall 
witnefs by our Deaths, which of us was the Ruin 
of the otler. I bid a poor Fellow throw in the 
Letter at his Window, written to this Purpofe, 
Tou know you have undone me, now write three 
Lines to jujlify me. In this I will [die, that he 
hath done me Wrong: Why did not he acquaint 
me with his Treafons, if I acquainted him with my 
Difpofitions ? 

Attorney. 


Digitized by 


Google 









Sir WA LTE R RALEGH. ccxlix 


Attorney. But what fav yod now of the Letter, 
and the Penfion of 1500 /. per Annum ? 

Ralegh. I lay, that Cobham is a bafe difhonour- 
able poor Soul. 

Attorney. Is he bafe ? I return it into thy 
Throat, on his behalf: But for thee, he had been 
a good Subjeft. 

Lord Chief Juftice; I perceive thou art not fo 
clear a Man, as you have preceded all this while ; 
for you Ihould have difeovered thefe Matters to 
the King. 

Nora. Here Ralegh pulled d Letter out of bit 
Pockety which the Lord Cobham bad written 
to him {but a few Days before be wrote that 
above to the Lords) and defired my Lord Cecil 
to read it, beeaufe be only knew bis Hand -, the 
Effefl of it was as follovsetb. 

Cobbdm's Letter of Juflification to Ralegh. 

u Seeing my felf fo near my End, for the Dif- 
« charge of my own Conference, and freeing my 
felf from your Blood, which elfe will cry Ven- 
*« geance againft me : I proteft upon my Salvation, 
«* I never praftifed with Spain by your Procure- 
** ment -, God fo comfort me in this niy Afflic- 
“ tion, ai you are a true Subjedt for any thing that 
1 know. I will fay, as Daniel , Purus fum d 
“ fanpuine hujus. So God have Mercy on niy 
«« Soul, as I know no Treafon by you. 

Ralegh. Now I wonder how many Souls this 
Man hath ! He damns one in this Letter, and ano¬ 
ther in that. 

Here was much ado-, Mr. Attorney alledged , that 
bis laft Letter was polilickly and cunningly ur¬ 
ged from the Lord Cobham, and that the firft 
was ftmply the Truth ; and that lef it fhould 
feern doubtful , that the firft Letter was drawn 
from my Lord Cobham by Promife of Mercy , 
or Hope of Favour , the Lord Chief Juftice 
willed, that the Jury might herein be fatisfied. 
Whereupon the Earl of Devonfhire delivered, 
that the fame was merely voluntary, and not ex- 
trailed from the Lord Cobham, upon any 
Hopes or Promife of Pardon. 

Nota. Tlsis was the laft Evidence ; whereupon a 
Marjhal was fworn , to keep the Jury private. 
The Jury departed, and ftaid not a quarter of 
an Hour , but returned , and gave their Ver- 
diil Guilty. 

Serj. Hele demanded Judgment againft the Pri- 
foner. 

Clerk of the Crown. Sir Walter Ralegh , Thou 
haft been indifted, arraigned, and pleaded not guil¬ 
ty, for all thefe ieveral Treafonsi and for Trial 
thereof, haft put thy felf upon thy Country ; which 
Country are thefe, who have found thee Guilty. 
Whatcanft thou fay for thyfelf, why Judgment and 
Execution of Death, fhould not pafs againft thee ? 

Ralegh. My Lords, The Jury have found me 
Guilty. They mud do as they are directed. I can 
day nothing, why Judgment Ihould not proceed. You 
fee whereof Cobham hath accufcd me. You remem¬ 
ber his Proteftations, that I was never Guilty. I 
defire the King Ihould know of the Wrongs done 
unto me, fince 1 came hither. 

Lord Chief Juftice. You have had no Wrong, 
Sir Walter. 

Ralegh. Yes, of Mr. Attorney. I defire, my 
Lords, to remember three things to the King. 


1 .1 was accufed to be a Praftifer ior Spain: I never 
knew, that my Lord Cobham meant to go thither, I 
will ask no Mercy at the King’s Hands, if he will 
affirm it. 2. I never knew of the Practice with 
Arabella. 3. I never knew of my Lord Cobham’ s 
Practice with Aremberg, nor of thefurprifing Treafon. 

Lord Chief Juftice. In my Confidence I am 
perfuaded, that Cobham hath accufed you truly. 
You cannot deny, but that you were dealt With, to 
have a Penfion to be a Spy for Spain ; therefore 
you are not fo true to the King, as you have pro¬ 
tefted yourfelf to be. 

Ralegh. I fubmit myfelfto the King’s Mercy ; I 
know his Mercy is greater than my Offence. I re¬ 
commend my Wife, and Son, of tender Years, un¬ 
brought up, to his Companion. 

Lord Chief Juftice. I had thought I fhould never 
have feen this Day, to have flood in this Place, to 
give Sentence of Death againft you becaufe I 
thought it impoffible, that one of fo great Parts 
fhould have fallen fo grievoufly. God hath bellow¬ 
ed on you many Benefits. You bad been a Man fit, 
and able, to have lerved the King in good Place. 
You had brought yourfelf into a good State of Li¬ 
ving: If you had entered into a good Confideration 
of your Eftate, and not luftered your own Wit to 
have entrapped yourfelf, you might have lived in 
good Comfort. It is beft for Man not to feek to 
climb too high, left he fall; nor yet to creep too 
low, left he be trodden on. It was the Pofie of the 
wifeft and greateft Counfellor of his Time, in Eng¬ 
land, In medio fpatio mcdiocria firma locantur. You 
might have lived well with 3000 1 . a Year, for fo I 
have heard your Revenues to be. I know nothing 
might move you to be difeontented ; but, if you had 
been down, you know Fortune’s Wheel, when it is 
turned about, rifeth again. I never heard, that the 
King took away any thing from you, but the Cap- 
tainfhip of the Guard, which he did with good Rea- 
fons, to have one of his own Knowledge, whom he 
might truft in that Place. You have been taken 
for a wife Man, and fo have fhewed Wit enough 
this Day. Again, for Monopolies for Wine, kstc. 
If the King had faid. It is a Matter that offends mv 
People , fhould / burthen them for your particular 
good ? I think, you could not well take it hardly, 
that his Subjects were eafed, tho’ by your private 
Hindrance. Two Vices have lodged chiefly in 
you j one is an eager Ambition ; the other corrupt 
Covetoufnefs. Ambition, in defiring to be advan¬ 
ced to equal Grace and Favour, as you have been 
before-time j that Grace you had then, you got 
not in a Day or Year. For your Covetoufnefs, I 
am forry to hear that a Gentleman of your Wealth 
fhould become a bafe Spy for the Enemy, which is 
the vileft of all other ; wherein, on my Confcience, 
Cobham hath faid true: By it you would have in- 
creafed your Living 1500 /. a Year. This Co¬ 
vetoufnefs is like a Canker, that eats the Iron-place 
where it lives. Your Cafe being thus, let it not 
grieve you, if I fpeak a little out of Zeal, and 
Love, to your Good. You have been taxed by 
the World, with the Defence of mod heithenifh, 
and blafphemous Opinions, which I lift not to re¬ 
peat, becaufe Chriftian Ears canr.ot endure to hear 
them, nor the Authors and Maintainers of them 
be fullered to live in any Chriftian Common-wealth. 
You know what Men faid of Hnrpool. You fhall 
do well before you go out of the World, to give Sa- 
tisf-dlion therein, and not to die with thefe Impu¬ 
tations on you. Let not any Devil perfuade you 
to think, there is no Eternity in Heaven ; if you 
think thus, you fhall find Eternity in Hell-fire. In 
the firft Accufation of my I.ord Cobham , I obler- 
ved his manner of fpeaking: I protcfl before the 
h h h h 

Digitized by 





erf V, •The ’T RIAL, &c. 


Living God, I am perfoaded he (poke nothing 
but the Truth. You wrote, that he Jhould not in 
any cafe confefs any thing to a Preacher, telling 
him an Example of my Lord of that noble 
Earl that is gone» who, if he had not been carried 
away with others, had lived in Honour to.this Day 
among us. He confeffed his Offences, and obtain¬ 
ed Mercy of the Lord j for I am verily perfuaded 
in my Heart, he died, a worthy Servant of God. 
Your Conceit of not iconfdling any thing, is very 
inhuman and wicked. In this World is the Tima 
of confefiing, that we may be ablolved at the Day 
°f Judgment. You have fhewed a fearful Sign of 
denying God, in advifing a Man not to confefs. 
It now cqmes in my mind, why you may not have 
your Accufer Face to Face j for fuch a one is eafily 
brought to retradf, when he feeth there is no Hope 
of his own Life. It is dangerous that any Trayton 
fhould have any Accefs one to another, or Confe¬ 
rence i when they fee themfelves muft die, they 
will think it belt to fee their Fellow live, that he 
may commit the like Treafon again, and fo in 
fome fort feek Revenge. 


Now it refteth to pronounce the Judgment 
which I wifh you had not been this Day to have 
received of me : For, if the Fear of God in you 
had been anfwerable to your other great Parts 
you might have lived to have been a Angular 
good Subieft. I never faw the like Trial, and I 
nope, I fhali never fee the like again. 

The JUDGMENT. 

But fince you have been found Guilty of thefe 
horrible Treafons, the Judgment of the Court is that 
you fhali be had from hence to the Place whence 
you came, there to remain until the Day of Execu¬ 
tion j and from thence you fhali be drawn upon a 
Hurdle through the open Streets, to the Place of Ex¬ 
ecution, there to be hanged and cut down alive, and 
your Body lhall be opened, your Heart and Bowels 
plucked out, and your Privy-Members cut off and 
thrown into the Fire, before your Eyes; then your 
Head to be ftrucken off from your Body, which (hall 
be divided into four Quarters, to be difpofed of at 
the King’s Plcafure: And God have Mercy upon 
your Soul, 



authors 


t 



Digitized by 


Google 








AUTHORScited in this HI STORY. 


R. Abr. bar f A 
Mcir l XaBen-Ezra 

Abulensis. v. Tojiaius 
Abydenvs 
Lucius Accius 
R. Achiba 

Acosta, v. Cojla ' 
Acusilaus, Argivus, hiftoricus 
Adimantus, Manichaeus 
Adrastus, Cyzicenus 
Chriftianus Adrichomius, Delphicus 
Algyptius. y. Hieronymus 
Claud Alli anus, hiftoricus 
Paulus Amilius, Veronenfis 

jEjchylus, Athenienfis, tragi- 
cus 

Atr/cus, cofmographus 
Julius Africa bus, fcripcor Ecclcfia- 
fticus 

Aimoinus, monachus Floria- 
_ cenfis 

Fra Leandro Alberti, Bononienfis 

Albert us Lavingenfis, Suevus, 
cognomine Magnus , epife. 
Ratisbonenfia 

Albert us. v. do Saxonid 
Ao.CyE.us, Mitylenaeus, poeta ly- 
ricus 

AlbinusFlaccus Alcuiuus, feu Alcbwinus, cog- 
noraeruo Diaeonus y abbas 
Turon. 

Alexamder, Aphrodifienfis e 
Caria. 

Coro. Alexander., cognomento Po- 
. lyhiftor, Cotieus 

Mohammed es Alfracanus, redtiu s Alferga- 
nius y Arabs, aftrologus 

Alpheus 

Gul. Alve rnus, feu Arvernus, epife. 

Parifienfie, al. Gul. Divus 
Pet.de Alyacq, five AUiacus, vel Ail- 
liacuSy epife. & card. Came- 
raceuds 

Llvus Ambrqiius, epiJc. Mediolanen- 
fis 

Ammianus. v. Mtircellinus 
Aaabs, propheta 
Ajhphiaravs 

AjHPHiLOcn.cs, Amphiarai fil. 
Am fh iow, Thebanus 
Anaxagoras, Clazomcnhis 
Dan. Ancelocrator, live Engel* 
lart, Corbacbienfis 


' Joh. 
Valerius 

S. 


Get. 


Pet. 

Lucius 

Divus Thomas 


Benedidlus 


TElius 


S. 


Joh. 


Ann ius, Viterbienfis 
Antias 

Antiochenus. v . Joannes 
Antiochus, ex monacho Lau. 

renfi abbas Sabenfis 
Antisthenes, pcripateticus 
philofophus 
Antoninus, J. C‘ us 
Antoninus Pius Auguftus 
Anton jus, eremita 
Apion, /Egyptius, Pliftonices 
Apocalypsis 

Apollinaris, Laodicese in 
Syria epife. Sc martyr 
Apollodoruj, Athenienfis, 
grammaticus 

Apollonius, Alcxandrmus, 
grammaticus, cognomento 

Dyifcolus 

Apollonius Rhodius 
Apollonius Tyancus, major 
Apostolorum afta 
Appianus, Alexandrinus 
A p pon vs, feu Aponetifis 
Apuleius, Madaurenfis 
Aouila, Ponticus 
AQjr in as, vel de Aquino 
Aratus, Cilix 
Archilochus, Parius 
Archimedes, Syracufanus 
Arias Montanus, Andalufianus 
A r ist a r c h us, chronographus 
ARisteas, five Arijleusy Pro- 
connefius 

Aristides, Adrianenfis, rhetor 
Aristobulus, CafTandreus, hi¬ 
ftoricus 

Aristoteles, Stagyrita 
Arnobius Afer, fenior, rhetor 
Arrianus, Nicomedienfis 
Artapanbs, hiftoricus 
Artemidorus, Afcalonica, 
Brabant us 

Asclepius, Athenienfis 
Athanasius, archiep. A’etan- 
drinus 

Athena us, Naucrarita 
Athenodorui Tarfenfis ftoi- 

cus philofophus 

Aventinus, Bavarus, hifto- 
ricus 

Aver roes Cordubenfis, fiu A- 
verrbous, five Alien Rujlj d, 
reftius Abu’l Walid Mo¬ 
hammed 

D. Au- 


Digitized by v_xOOQlC 









AUTHORS cited 


D. Aurelius 


Albohahi 


Rabbi 
Matthseus 
Dcdus Magn. 


Sir Francis 


Augustinus, cpifc. Hipponen- 
fis 

Augustinus, Chryfamenfis 
Av i c e n n a princeps, redius A- 
buAli AlShcich AJRai's Ibn 
Sina 

Avornathan 

Au ROOALLUS 

Ausonius, Burdigalenfis, Gallus 
Azor i us 


B 


Archangelus dc Burgo-Novo, five Burgonoven- 
fn 

Jon. Buteo, Dclphinas, mathemati- 
cus 


Lud. 
C. Julius 
Thomas de Vio 


Hermolaus 

Mof. 

Caefar 

Sebaft. 

S. Giovanni de 
du 


Bacon, Baron of Verulam , Vifc. 
St. Albans 

Roger Bacon, a Francifcan 
Jodocus Badius, Afcenfius vel Afcanius, 
Brabantus 

Barba Rus,Venetus, philofophus 
Bar-Ce phas. v. Mofes 
Barius 

Baroni us, SoranUs, card. & 
bibliothecarius 

Barbadas, feu Barradius t O- 
lyfliponenfis 
Barros 

Bart as. v. Sallujle 
Baruch, liber apocryphus 
Bas-ilius Magnus, Caefarea; Cap 
padociae epifcopus 
Joh. Goropius Becanus 

Bed a, venerabilis, Anglo-Saxo 
Belemus 

Bellarminus Politianus, car¬ 
dinal is 

Bella y, feign, de Langey 
Belleforest 
Bellonius, feu Belon 
Benedictus Theologus 
Benjamin, fil. Jonae Tudelenfis 
Benzonus, Mediolanenfis 
B e R n a r d u s, feu Bernhardus , 
abbas Clarevallenfis 
Bernensis Theologus 
Matthaeus Beroaldus 

Berosus, Babylonius, Beli fa 
cerdos 
Beutero 
Beza, Vezelius 
Bilson, bifhop of IVincbeJler 
Bocatius, vel Boccaccio , vel 
Bocbas , de Certaldo 


Rob. 

Mart, du 
Franc, dc 
Pet. 

R. 

Henr. 

Sandus 


Pero Anton. 
Theodorus 
Tho. 
Joh. 


CiiciLius, Caladianus Siculus 
C/E.L i us, Rhodiginus 
Caesar, primus imp. Rom. mon. 
Ca jet anus, cardinalis 
Callimachus, Cyrenaeus 
Callisthenes, Sybarita 
Calvin us, Noviodunenfis, Ve- 
romanduus, theologus Ge¬ 
neve nfis 
Calvisius 

Camden, Clarencicux king of 
arms 

Ca r d a n us, al. H. Cajldlioncus 
Cardanus, Mediolanenfis 
Carthusianus 
Casaubonus 
Cassam 

Cassianus eremita, feu Joh. 
Monachus cognomente Caf- 
fianus 

Cassiodorus, fenator 
Cast aldus 

C ast a l i o,redius Cajlcllio , Allob. 
Castor, Rhodius,chronographus 
Marc.Portius Cato, Cenforius 

C.feu Q, Vale-7 Catullus, Veronenfis 

rius J 

•Georg. Cedrenus 
Censorinus 
ChjEremon, AEgyptius 
Chalcidius, philofophus Pla- 
tonicus 
Charron 
Chronicorum libri 
uviu CHVTRiEUS 

Joh. Chrysostomus, archiep. Con- 
ftantinop. 

Ciccus Afculanus 
Cicero 
Cicocna 

Claudianus, Alexandrinus, 


Joh. 


Sethus 

William 

Hier. 


Ifaacus 

Joh. 

Joh. 


Magnus Aur. 
Sebaft. 


Pierre le 
David 


Marc. Tullius 
Strozzio 
Claudius 


Avititius feu A- 
nitius Manl.( 
Torq. Seve-( 
rinus 

Sandus 


Thomas 
Henr. de 
Bernhardus 

Bonavcntura 


Hugh 

Guil. 

Abr. 

Guil. 

Henr. 

Paulus 


Boethius 

BonaventurA 
BorR/Eus, p. 249- forfan Mar¬ 
tin. Borrhaus , alias Cellarius 
didus 

Bozius, Eugubinus 
Bracton, J.C‘ u ‘ 

Bredenbachius, 
denbach 

Brocardus, leu __ 

five Burcbardus , monachus 
de Monte-Sion 
Broughton 

Bucanus, theologusXalvinilta 
Bucholce R us 
Bud^eus, Parificnfis 
Bunt incus, Hannoveranus 
Burgensis, de S. Maria 


feu de Bre- 
BYocbardus , 


T. Flavius 

Laurentius 

Pandulphus 

Chriftoph. 
Natalis 
Pet. 
Laur. 
Jofephus a 

Pet. 

Quintus 
Nic. de 
D. Caecilius 


poeta 

Claudius Julius, five Iolaus 
Cleanthes, Stoicus 
Clearchus, Solenfis, PcnpaM- 
ticus 

Clemens, Alexandrinus 
Clitarchus, hiftoricus 
Codomannus 
Coe lest in us, v. Laziordus 
Collenutius, feu Colltnult , 
Pifamenfis 


Columbus 

Comes, feu Comitum, Venetu 
Comestor, Trecento 
Corvinus, Novoforenns 
Costa, Methymnenfis 
Cranzeus. v. Ar4»/«w 
Crates, Mallotes, grammaticus 
C r i n i t us,- Florentinus 
Ctesias, Cnidius 
Curtius Rufus 
Cusa, feu Cufanus, cardinalis 

Cyptunus, cpifc. O-S-g. 
Cyrillus, archiep. feu P» trwr 

Alexandrinus p 


Digitized by 











A U T H O R S cited. 


D 

Joh. Damascenus, Theflalonieenfis, 
qai etiam Joh. Mandurus, 
fca Manzurus nominatur 
Nic. Damascenus, philofophus 
Lambertus Dan^us, Aurelianenfis 
Daniel, prophcta 
Samuel Daniel, Efq; 

David, rex Sc prophcta 
Democritus, Abderita, five 
Milefius 

Demosthenes, Athenienfis ora- 
**•' ‘ tor 

Dercyllus 

Di a con us. v. Alcuinus 

Dinon 

Didymus, hiftoricus 
Diocles, Rhodius 
Diodorus Siculus, hiftoricus 
Diogenes, Laertius 
Dion Caflius, Coccejanus, Ni- 
caeus 

Dion Neapolites 

« Dionysius Afer, Periegetes, A- 

lexandrinus 

Dionysius, Areopagita 
Dionysius Halicarnafieus, hi¬ 
ftoricus 

S. Dorotheus, martyr, & epife. 
Tyri 

Draco, Corcyneus 

Durandus i 

1 

E j 

Sir Clement Edmonds, knight j 

Ecclesiasti cus. v. Siraeides 
Ecesippus, feu Hegefippus t ju¬ 
nior '• .... 

Elianus 

Ellanicus. v. Hellameus 
Empedocles, Agrigentinus, 
philofophus 

Quintus Ennius, antiq. poeta 

Ephorus, Cumanus, orator & 
hiftoricus 

S. E p h r it m , Syrus, diaconus Edef- 
fenus 

Epicharmus 

Epicurus 

Epioenes, aftrologus & hifto¬ 
ricus 

• Epimenides, Cretenfis 
S. Epiphanius, prills Salaminis, 
dein Conftantiae Cypriorum 
epife. 

Erasistratus 
Defid. Erasmus Roterodamus 

EratPsthenes, Cyrenaeus phi¬ 
lofophus 
Ericthonius 
Esdras, ptopheta . •• 

Esther, liber 
Gul. Estius 

Evacrivs, Ponticus 
Eva r ist us 

Andreas Eud.smon-Johannes, Cydo- 
nius . 

Eucubinus. v.Stevcbus 
Euphorion, Chalcidenfis 
Eupolemvs, hiftoricus 


Euripides, Athen. tragicusan- 
tiquior 

Eusebius, Pamphili HI. Caefa- 
rienfis Paleftinae epife. 
Eusebius, Emiflenus 
Eustachius 

Eustathius, Epiphanienfis 
Eustathius, Theflalonieenfis 
epifeopus 

Euthymenes, Maftilienfis 
Eutropius, Sophifta 
Ezekiel, propheta 
Ezra, liber 


Jac. Faber, Stapulenfis 
Fab ius. v. Piiior 
Barth. Faccius, feu Facius 
Paulus Facius 
Claude Fauchet, 

Tho< Fazellus, Siculus 
M. Minutius Felix 

Marfilius Ficinus, Florentinus 
Orontius Fine us, feu Fwceus, Delphi- 
nas 

Giles Fletcher LL. D. 

Sir John Fortescue, kn‘ Lord Chanc. 
to king Hen. VI. 

Sext. Julius Fron tin us' 

Ant. - Fume 
Mart. Fumee 

" Joh. 'Funccius, • Werda Norimberg. 

G 

•* . ; * 

Claud. ' Galenus, Pergamenus 
Galilaeus • Galilei, Lynceus, feu Gali- 
leus Galileus 

Cn. Cornel. Gallus, Forqjulienfis, poeta 
Lucas Gauricus, epife. Geophonen- 
‘ fis 

^neas Gaz^eus, ex Platonico philofo- 
pho Chrtftianus 

, • : GelasiusI. papa 

( Ger. Ge l denhauri us, Novioma- 
gus 

Aulus Gellius 

Gemistus. V. Pletbo 
Gilb. . Genebrardus, Arvernus 
Francifc. Georgius, Venetus 
Juftus Gestelius 
Nic. Gibbons, D. D. 

Gistilanus 
Mich. Glycas, Siculus 

; Go r op i us. v. Bee anus 
•Joan. Bapt Grammaye 

Franc. Gratianus de Garzatoribus 
Grecorius I. papa, diftus 
Magnus 

Gregorius XIII. papa, antea 
. d ictus Hugo Boncompagnus 
Gregorius, Nazianzenus,The- 
ologus 

Gr E GORI us, Neocaefarienfis epif. 
cognomine Tbaumatureus 
• Francefco Guicciardini 
. Melchior Guilandinus, Boruflhs 

Gu illermus, Tyrius, feu ar- 
. ; chiep. Tyrenfis 

Gulielmus, Neubrigenfis, feu 
Neuburgenfis 

; Gulielmus, Parifienfis 
i i i i 


H. 





























A .U T H O R S* cited ’ 


Rich. 


D. 


H 

Haithovus, Armenia 
Hakluyt, M. A. Preb. of 
iTeJlmnfter, & c . 
Halicarnasseus. v. Diotiyfius 
Hecat^us, Abderita 
Hecat^eus, Milefius 
Hegesippus. v. Egeftppus 
HELLANicus^Lesbius, hiftoricus 
Henricus, Mechlinienfis 
H eh a cl ides, Crctenfis 
Heraclitus, Lesbius 
Hermes Trifmegiftus 
Hermippus, Smyrnaeus 
Hermodorus 

Batt Joh. 

Herrault 

Hesiodus, Afcneus, poeta 
Hieronymus, Phoenix, vel 
Aigyptius 

Hieronymus, Stridonenfis, pref- 
byter r 

Hierosolymitanus. v. An - 

; dreas • 

Hilarius, epifc. Pidavienfis 
Hipparchus, Bithynus 
Hippocrates, Cdus; y • 
Hippolytus, Thebanus’ 
Homerus 

Hooker, M. A.' Matter of the 
Temple , & c . 

Hopkinson 

Horatius flaccus, poeta 
HqsEA, propheta/ 
Hospinianus, Tigurinus 
Hvqo. v. de SanElo-Einorc 
Hy«inus . ;> » , 


Jacobus, apoftolus 
Iamblichvs* Porphyrii difcipu- 

• , lus ,> 

James I. king of England , &c. 
Jansenius,. epifc; Jprenfis & 
Gandavenfis 
Jeremias, propheta 
Job, Huflita y.. , i 

Joannes, Antiochenus, didtus 
i i Scbolajlicus ., 

Johannes,, evangelifta & apo- 

ftolus ,) 

Jonas, propheta 
Josephus, facerdos Hicrofot. 
Josua 

Irsn^eus, epife. Lugdunenfis, & 
martyr 

Isa i as, propheta 
Isidorus, epifc. Hifpalenfis 
Isocrates, Athenienfis, rhetor 
Juda, apoftolus 
Judicum liber, 

Judith, liber 

Ju li anus, imperator, apoftata 
Junius, Biturix, feu Francoisdu 
Jon 

I vo, prior Belluacenfis, dein epifc. 
Carnotenfis 

Justinianus, imperator i 

Justin vs, hiftoricus j 


Rich. 

John 

Q. 

Rudolph. 
, C.Jul. 


Corn. 


S. 

Flavius 

D. 

B. 


Franc. 

D. 

Flavius 
M. J unianus 


Justinus, Samaritanus, phil 0 f 0 . 

r. - . . Pnus & martyr 

Dec. Junius Juvenalis 


R. David 
R. Mofes 
Alb. 
Leonh. 


L. Cselius 
Pet. 
A;lius 
Monfieur de 


Pet. 
F. Joh. 

John 

Joh. 

<• • R - 

c ; Joh, 

Joh. Hugo 

Titus 

Pet. 


..... • Ed. 

Francois 
Charles 
M, Annaeus 

,i b.Vi.SL 

Joh. 

C. 

Titus 

* t 

. . ' if 1 * r 1 ! » . 

Raimundus 

Martinus 

• - Tho. 
Nic. 


■ i j- 

Nic. 

Ambrofms 

Raph, 

Conftantinus 
Sir John 

■. , ) . i- '■••• 

Amxnianus 


Kim chi. . , 

Kimchi 

Krantzius 

Krentzheim, Iphofius Fran- 
, cus 


Lactantius Firmianus 
Laicstan 
Lampridius 
Lancey 

Laonicus, Chalcondylas Atlie- 
. nienfis 
Lavinius 

Laziardus, *brd. Coeleft. mo> 
nachus 
Lean 

Leander. v. Alberti 
Leo, Granatenfis vulgo Africa - 
. . nus didtus) 

Leucippus, philofophus 
Levi ben Gerlhom 
Levita , 

Leunclavjus, feu Leunclajus y 
five 4 . Lewenclajus , Amelbur. 
. . nus 

Linschote 

Linus, vetus poeta Grscus . 
iLivius, Patavinus, hiftoricus 
Lombardus, feu LongobarduSy 
^ magill. fentent.. &.. epiX. Pa- 
...... rifienlls . 

Lopez 

Lo'pEaj, ^ Gomara 
Loyseap , 

Lucanus 
Lucas, evangelifta 
Luci a nus > Samofatenfis 
Lucid u.s,. Samocheus , 

Lu ci lius, Suellanus 
Lucrbtius Cams 
Ludovjcvs, Romanus Patritius 
Lullius, Majoricenfis 
Lutherus, Wittembergenfis 
Lycophron, Chalcidienfis 
Lydiat, M. A. 

Lyranus, five de Lyra 
.Lysjmachus^ Alexandrinus 

: m 

Maccab^orum libri 
Machia.vbi.lus, Florentines 
Macrobius Theodofius, alias 
, Autd. Macrobius Ambr. 
.Theod. 

Maif^uj, Volaterranus 

Ma;imon, ius 

Malachias, propheta 
Mahassss . 

Manoeviae, knight 
ManethO|S, Sebcnnyu Diol 
politanus 

lyl A N ICH/®I . 

MaRicellinus, hiftoricus 


Digitized by 


Google 













AUTHOR^ cifed\ 


s. 

Pet. 

M. Valer. 

Andr. 

Chriftianus 

S. 

IdRabanus 

Mich. 

Pomp. 

Phil. 


Gerhardus 

Joh.' 


Matthias a 
Jac. 


Hcrennius ' 

Joh. de 
, Blaife de.. 
- • John 
Phil. 


Wolfg, . 


Marcus, evangelifta 
Marsylus 

Martyr, Vermilius, feu Ver 
melinus, FI prentinus 
Martialis 
Martianus 
Masius, Damafcenui 
Mass^eus, Cameracenus 
Matthaus, evangelifta , 
Mauris, ah didus Ma^nenti- 
us , ah Rabanus Theutoni- 
cus 

Medina 
Mecasthenes ’ 

Mela, Hifp, 

NJelanchthon, Bretta Pala- 
tinus 

Melito, epifc. Sardenfis 

MeNJETUS, 

Menander, comicus 
Menander, Ephefius 
Menander, rhetor 
Mercator,, Flander 
M^RpERus, Udcenfis / 
Mercurius, i. Hermes Trif- 

mcgijlus 

Methrodipi, epifc. Tyrenfis, 
.;. & martyr 

Metrodorus, Chius > 
Micbou, canonicus Cracovien- 

’ •-> 

MiDDENDp^pivsi Tranfifela- 

v|?, 

Mirandula. v. Pkus 
Mithridates, cex Pond &c 
' , , Bithyni* 

Mochus, phepnixi. ., v 

Mo D ESTLN US, J. C u « 

Mont A ML'S. v. Artanus 
Monte-Villa 
Montluc v 
Moor 

Mornaus, fca Mtr ’/ uiyus , feign. 

• (duPlcffis. 

Mqses har-Cephas, epifc. Cyri 
Mos£s r Juda»rum legiflator 
Mji?aus, Athenienfis, Orpheo 
. cqxvus > . ■ ; 

|MujQyiy$, piufanus, Lotharin- 


Bus. 

*; r 


i i r 


.! A l 

It.... 


N 


• *« • . 

. propheta.'; r 

j° • Naux-li Rus, alias Vergenbans 
1 di&us, theolognsA: J* O u * 

Naxjazen us. v. Gregorius 
Ne WM j AS> fiber-? 

Com. N.epos^ hiftorkus 
Joh. NepOs, Silvaous, epifc. Hicrofo- 
lymitanus 44 ,u » 
Nicander, Colophonius 
Nicephoros, Callifti fij. Xan- 
n ,, . thopulus 

Uom - Manus Nicer, Venqtus ...... , ) 

Nonius Marieellus, grammad- 
• cus St ptripateticus Tiburi- 
•} • : enfli .• .... 

Seignuerdela Noil* " ' 

i ■ ^oviomagit. v, Geldenbaurius 
Nuxnenius, Apameenfis, philofo- 
■ - phus Pyrhagoricus 


IV A, 


O 




S. 

t*aul. 


Onuphrius 
TEmilius 
Ertienne 
C.(al. P.)Vellej. 

Franc. 
Eutrop. Merop. 


Hier. ab Ole astro, Lufitanus 
Onesicritus 
Onuphrius. v. Panvinius 
Oricenes, Adamandus 
Qr'ontius. v. Ftneus 
Orosius, presbyter Hifpanus 
. • . Orpheus, TTirax, poetarum ve- 

fuftiffimus 

* ' i A} 3r ‘ Ortelius, Antverpianus 
‘Hier. OsOrius, Lufitanus, epifc. AN 
. garbienfis 

Publius Ovjdius Nafo, poeta 


Santes Pacn.inus, Lucenfis 
Mich, de Palacio, feu Palatio, five Pa- 
: lacioSy theologus Granatenfis 

Palaphatus, Parius vel Prie- 
nenfis 

Palladius, ^ Galata, Evagrii 
difcipulus^ epifc. Helenopo- 
litanus, dein Afponitanus 
Pan Vini us, Veronenfis 
Papinianus, J. C tu * 
Pasqj/ier 
Pa terculus 
PatritIus, feu Patricii 
t Paul in us, Aquitanus, epifc. 
Nolanus 

.PAHftUSj^apuftolus _ • • 

Pa ulus, Venetus, eremita ord 
a S. Auguftini * 

'Pausanias, Cappadox 
Psrerius, .Valentinus 
Perondinus, Pratenfis j , 
Pktrarcba 
Pet rus„ ^poftolus 

pEUy E RUS. • . <| 

Phac ius. v. Fagius i 
PH EMtjus, fthacenfis 
Phe recydes, Syrius 
Phil ammon, Delphicus 
Ph t l t.N us, Agrigentinus. 
pHiyisTys, Naucradta 
Philo,, fcnior 

, Philo Byblias, gran^maticus 
Philo^ Judatus 
Fhilochorus, Athenienfis 
Phiiajstratus, Lemnius 
Ph iLOXENusj Maburgenfis 
Ph leoon, Trallianus* Adriani 
iuiperat. libertus 

Phurnu t us, leu PbornutuSy aJ. 
Cornutus 

vPjccolhomineus, feu Piccolo- 
mineuSy Senenfis 

PlCTOR, . , , 4 

PicuSj d us Mirandulae &c Con¬ 
cordias, comes .j . f . | 
Pierius yalerianus, Rofctanius, 

. Bdluneafo , .*i; 

Pin'darus, Thebanus » j 
Pi N5DA,. Hilpan. 
i Pin e^us.. ,, * 

\.Pi nj usi,., Lufitanus 
Piso, Sqaciusi J. CV 
■ Planca RPia 

'. Pl a to, Achenienfis, philofophus 
Plautus, S.irciius * ; 

du Pl ESSM 


Bened.- 

Pet. 

Franc. 

Oafp. 


.1 

Herennius 
Fhivips 

; y.ji »!. 

ir ’. 

.: ... IV 

Alex. 

Q, Fabius 

• • JdL 

Joh. 

. *. 'T u'» 

Juan de 

^ ' lleflor 
Guerinus 

• J 0 ! 1 * 

M. Accfus 




Digitized by 


Googh 















AuT-hOrs 


du 

Geor. Gemiftqs 
C. 


Jul. 


Guilh. 

AEmilius 

Mich. 1 

Claud. 


Plfssis. v. Morneui 
Pletho 

Plimius fccundus Vcroncnfis, fe- 

nior . 

Plotinus, philofophus Platoni- 

cus 

Plutarch us, Chaeronenfis 
Pole mon, Euergeti filius 
Poly itNus, Macedo 
Pollux, f eu Poly duces, Nau- 
cratita 

Polybius, Lycortx f. Magalo- 
polita 

Pol ych Ron i us epifc. Apa- 
mcenfis 

Porphyrius, Malchus, Tyrius 
Postellus, Barcmonius Nor- 
mannus 

Pr isct anus, grammaticus Cx- 
lareenfis 

Pro bus, hiftoricus 
Proclus, Diadochus, Lycius 
Procopius, Caefareenfis 
Procopius Gaz*us, fophifta 
Chnftianus 

Psellus, philofophus Chriftia- 
nus 

Ptolem^us, Alexandrinus 
^ YT phus° RAS> ^ am ‘ us *pl'iloPo- 


cited. 


M. Fab. Quintilianus, fcnior. 


xj-» ru -n. Rabanus. v. Mnurus 
ich. Chriftop. Radzevilus 1 

Raimundus. v. Lullius 
Ra-Mbam, five Maimonides 
Ranzanus, Siculus 
Rectus, feu It Roy, Conftanti- 
enfis 

Recum libri 
Reineccius, Steinhemius 
Re inhold us, Salfeldicnfis 
Reuch LINUS, diftus Capnio, 
Phorcenfis 

Reusnerus, Leotinus Silcfius 
J. q u » 

R he nanus, Seleftadienfis 
Rhodicinus. v. Callus 
Rhodius Alexandrides 
Ribera, Villacaftinenfis 
Rupertus, abbas Tuiticnfis 
Ruth, liber - 


Pet. 

Lud. 


Reinerus 

Erafmus 

Joh. 

Elias 

Beatus 

Franc. 


R. Saadias Haggaon, i. e. excel- 
' lens , di&us " - 

Pomponius Sabi nus 
Nicolaus Salcuni' •' l 
Guillaume Sal lust e, fieur du Bartas 
C. Crifpus Sallustius ...... • 

Alphonf. Salmeron, Toletanus 

Salomo-n rex Hebraorum fa- 
pientiflimus 
Rabbi Salomon 

Samuel, propheta - 
- Sanchoniathon, Phcenix 
Hugode Sancto-Victore, Saxo 


Albertus feu 7 , 
Albertucius \ de 
Jof. Juft. 
Ulricus 

Chriftianus 

Clem. 

Barthol. 


Cael. 


L. Anna?us 

M. Annaeus 


Joh. 
Marius 
Simeon 
Marc. Aurel. 
Corn. 

Joh. 

Sir Philip 
C. Sollius 

Carolus 

C. 

Jefus 


Sir Thomas 


C. Jul. 


Herm. 

Tilemannus 

Henr. 

Auguft. 


Walafridus 
Joh. Guilh. 
C. 


Saxo grammaticus, Rofchilden- 

[X, in Dan “ p«- 

Saxonia 

Scalicer, Aginnenfis, J u ]jj f 
Schmidel j 

Scholiastes Apollonii 
Schrot 

Schubertus, Lafatius 

Sc ULTETUS 

Sede * P lam Rabba. i. c. 

Ordo tnundi magnus 
Sedulius, presbyter 
Seleucus, Alexandrinus 
Sempronius Afellio 
Seneca, Cordubenfis 
Seneca, rhetor 
Septuacinta Interpretes 
Serknus abbas 
Se R R A n us, feu de Serres 
Servius Honoratus 
Sethus magifter Antiochenus 
Severinus, Tarfcnfis 
Severus 51 
Sibyllarum libri 
Sicha R DUS 
Sid ney, knight 
Si don 1 us Apollinaris, Arverno- 
rum epifc. 

Sigonius, Mutinenfis 
Si li us Italicus, poeta 
Simonides 

Sir a c 1 d e s, feu Ecclefiafticus, 
liber apocryph. 

Sixtus Sencnfis 
Smith, knight, L L. D. ; prin- 
cipal fecretary of ftaie to 
king Edw. VI. and queen 
Elizabeth 

Socrates, Athenienfis, philo¬ 
fophus 
Soli n us 

Sophocles, tragicus 
Sosibius, Lacon 
Sosthenes 

Sozomenus, Salaminius 
Stella, Bipontinus 
STipHANus,Byzantinus 
StephanUs 

Steuchus, Eugubinus, epifc. 
Kifami 

Strabo, Amafenus 
St r a b vs, feu Strabo , abbas Au- 
gienfis 

Stuckius, feu Stukius , Tiguri- 
nus, theologus 
Suetonius Tranquillus 
Suidas, junior, grammaticus 
Sulpitius Severus 
Svmmachus, Samaritanus 


C. Corn. Tacitus, hiftoricus 
Talmud 

. Tat 1 anus, Aflyrius 

Q. Sep. Florens TertulLianus, presbyter Car- 
thaginenfis 

Joh. Ravifius Textor, Noviodunenfis 

THADD/BUS 

Thales,: Milefius 
Thallus, hiftoricus 

Thamyras, 



Digitized by 










AUTHORS cited. 


Thamyras, vel Tba myris, 
Thrax, antiquus poeta 
Theodor etus, leu Theodor it us , 
cpifc. Cyri 

Theophilus, patriarcha Antio- 
chenus 

Theophrastus, Erefius 
Theopompus, Chius 
Theopompus, Colophonius 
Andre The vet 

Thomas, v. Aquinas 
Thucydides, Athenienfis, hi- 
ftoricus 

Albius Tibullus, poeta 

Tim/eus, Locrus, Pythagori- 
cus 

Aug. Torniellus, Novnrienfis 
Andr. Torquemada, Hilp. 

Alphonlus Tostatus, epilc. AbuJenfis, feu 
de Avila 

Immanuel Tremellius, Ferrarienfis 
T rezenius 

Trismecistus. v. Hermes 
Joh. Trithemius, feu Trite miits, 
five Trittenbemius , abbas 
Trogus Pompeius 
Trophonius 
Tudelensis. v. Benjamin 
- > Joh. Tzetzes, grammatkus 

Ifaeius Tzetzes 

V 

Joachimus Vadianus, Sangallenfis 
Gregorius de Valentia, Hiipanus 
M. Ter. Varro 
Franc. Vatablus, Ambianenfis 
Flavius Vegetius Renatus 
Franc. Vergara, Hifp. 

Ric. Verst eg an, Batavus 
Americus Vesputius, Florentinus 
Victor, epife. Uticenfis 
Claud. Marius Victorinus, leu ViBor , orator 
Mafiilienfis 

Nicol. Vicnier, feu Vi? menus* Bar- 
renfis 


Jofa. Bapt. V I’LL ALP A N DUS 
Arn. Catalanus, \ Villa nova n us, five de Viiti- 
feu Cathelanus f nova, Gallus, medicus 

Vincentius Burgundus, prsc- 
ful Belluacenlis 

Mercurius dc Viper a, Beneventanus 
Publ. Vircilius Maro 
Jac.tie V itriaco epife. Acconenfis 
Joh. Lud. Vives, Valentinus Hiipanus 
Domitius Ulpianus, J. C us 

Volaterranus. v. Maffezus 


W 

Wolfg. Weissenburgius, J. C us 
J oh. Wi erus, cognomine Pifcina - 
rius 

Andr. Willet, D. D. preb. of Ely 
Joh. Wolfj us, Tcii tVolphiuSy Ta- 
bernremontanus 


■ . X 

Xanthus, Sardianus, hiftori- 
cus 

Xenacoras, hiftoricus 
Xenophanes, Colophonius 
Xenophon, Athenienfis 
Wilh. Xylander, Auguflanus 


Z 

Zacharias, pfopheta 
Hieron. Zanchius, Alzanenfis Italus 
Zeno', Kleates, philofophus 
Zeno, Sidonfus, pbifoibphus 
S. Zeno, epife. Verooenfis & 
martyr 

Jac. Zieclerus, Lindavus 
Joh. Zonaras, monachus 

Zo roast res, Baclrianorum 
rex. 



Digitized by 


Google 







Lately publilh’d in Six Parts, 

Now collected into One V olume, with a Table of Contents and a compleat Index to 

the whole. 

P HCENIX BRITANNICUS. Being a Collection of fcarce and curious TraCts 
Hiftorical, Political, Biographical , Satirical, Critical , &c. which are no where to be 
found but in the Clofets of the Curious •, intcrfperfed with choice Pieces from original Manu- 
fcripts: 

Among other valuable TraCts in this Collection are, 

i. The Copie of a Letter from Mafter T. M. neere Salisbury to Matter H. A. at London , coni 
ceming the Proceeding at IVmcheJler •, where the late Lord Cobham , Lord Gray, and Sir 
Griffin Markham , all attainted of High Treafon, were ready to be executed, on Friday the 
9th of Dec. 1603. At which time his Majeftie’s Warrant, all written with his owne hand 
(whereof the true Copie is here annexed) was delivered to Sir Benjamin Ticbbourne , high Sheriffc 
of Hampjhire , commanding him to fufpend their Execution till further Order 

2. The Character of King James. By Sir A. IF. 

3. Proteft of the Houfe of Commons (1604) againft certain Infringement of the Court, &c. 
From a MS. Copy. 

4. A choice Narrative of Count Gondomar’s TranfaCtions during his Embady in England. 
1620. 

5. Voxpopuli: Or, Count GondomaPs TranfaCtions, Part II. 1622. 

6. Profopopaia : Or, Sir Walter Ralegh'i Ghoft. 1622. 

7. Robert Earl of EJfesd s Ghoft. 2 Parts. 1624. 

8. A Record of fome worthy Proceedings in the Honourable, Wife and Faithful Houle 
of Commons, in the Parliament holden in the Year 1611. 

9. King James's Letter to the Speaker of the Houfe of Commons. 

Printed and Sold by J. Walt hoe, over againft the Royal Exchange in Cornbill. 


Digitized by xOOQle 





THE 

HISTORY 


OF THE 

WO R L d: 

Intreating of the 

Beginning and Fir ft Ages of the fame, from 
the Creation unto Abraham* 


The FIRST BOOK. 

Chap. I. 

Of the Creation, and Prejervation of the World. 


Sect. I. 

That the Invisible God is fcen in his Creatures. 


0 D, whom the wifeft men ac¬ 
knowledge to be a Power un- 
effable, and Virtue infinite; a 
Light by abundant clarity 
invifible i an tJnderftanding 
which itfelf can only compre¬ 
hend, an Eflence eternal and 
fpiritual, of abfolute purenefs 
and fimplicity ; was, and is pleafed to make himfelf 
known by the work of the world : In the wonder¬ 
ful magnitude whereof (all which he embraceth, 
nlleth, and fuftaineth) we behold the Image of that 
Glory which cannot be meafured, and withal, that 
one, and yet univerfal Nature, which cannot be dc- 
«ned. In the glorious lights of heaven, we per¬ 
ceive a Shadow of his Divine Countenance ; in his 
merciful provifion for all that live, his manifold 
Goodnels; and laftly, in creating and making exi- 
Itcnt the world univerfal, by the abfolute art of his 


own word, his Power and Almightinels ; which 
Power, Light, Virtue, Wifdom, and Goodnefs, be¬ 
ing all but attributes of one fimple Eflence, and 
one God, we in all admire, and in part difeern per 
fpeculum creaturarum , that is, in the difpofition, or¬ 
der, and variety of celeftial and terreftrial bodies : 
terreflrial, in their ftrange and manifold diverfities *, 
celeftial, in their beauty and magnitude ; which in 
their continual and contrary motions, are neither re¬ 
pugnant, intermix’d, nor confounded. By thefe 
potent eflfe&s, we approach to the knowledge of 
the omnipotent Caufe, and by thefe motions, their 
almighty Mover. 

In thefe more than wonderful works, God (faith 
* Hugo) fpeaketh unto man : And it is true, that 
thefe be thofe difcourfes of God, whofe effedts, 
all that live, witnefs in themfelves -, the fenfible, 
in their fenfible natures ; the reafonable, in their 
reafonable fouls: For, according to b St. Gregory, 



■ * Hugfl fuper Ecclef. Homil. 8. *> Greg, in Mar. Henn. ad fil. Tat. I. 5. Unus vero ingenitus, fc non apparens, & immani- 

' us, omnia autem manifeibns, per omnia appuet, 4c in omnibus. Apparemia iolum gcneratocum eft , nihil appanuo quam ge. 

O Wilis 


Digitized by 


Google 

























7 ’he History of the World. Book I. 


O sums homo to ipfo quod rationalis conditus eft, ex 
ipfa ratione, ilium qui fe condidit, Deum ejfe collide re 
debet: Every man, in that he is reafonable, out of 
the fame reafon may know, that he, which made 
him, is God. This God all men behold (faith 
Job) which is, according to the fathers, Dominalionem 
tUiiis confpicere in creaturis , To difeern him in his 
providence by his creature. That God hath been 
otherwife feen, to wit, with corporal eyes, exceedeth 
the fmall proportion of my underftanding, ground¬ 
ed on thefe places of * St. John and “ St. Paul, Te have 
rot beard bis voice at any time , neither have ye feen his 
Jkape. And again, Whom never man fnw, nor can fee. 

And this I am fure agrees with the nature of God’s 
fimplicity, of which St. Auguftine, Ipfa enim natura , 
vel fubftantia, vel quelibet alio nomine appellandum eft, 
id ipfum quod Deus eft, corporaliter vidcri non poteft ; 
That nature, or that fubftance, or by whatfoever 
name that is to be called which is God, whatfoever 
that be, the fame cannot be corporally perceived. 
And of this opinion were b Origen, Cyril, Chryfoftom, 
Gregory Nazianzene, Hierome, Auguftine, Gregory 
the great, Evariftus, Alcuinus , Dionyjius Areopagita , 
Aquinas , and all others of authority. But by his own 
word, and by this vifible world, is God perceived 
of men which is alfo the underftood language of 
the Almighty, vouchfafed to all his creatures, whofe 
hieroglyphical chara&ers are the unnumbred ftars, 
the fun and moon •, written on thefe large volumes of 
the firmament j written alio on the earth afid the 
feas, by the letters of all thofe living creatures, and 
plants, which inhabit and Tefide tlierein. Therefore 
laid that learned c Cufanus, Munilus univerfus nihil 
aliud eft, qudn: Deus explicatus ; The world univerfal 
is nothing elfe but God exprefs’d. As the invifiblc 
things of God (faith d St. Paul) are feen by the crea¬ 
tion of die world, being confidered in his creatures. 
Of all which, there was no other caufe preceding 
than his own will, no other matter than his own 
power, no odier workman than his own word, no 
other conlideration than his own infinite goodnefe. 
The example and pattern of thefe his creatures, as 
he beheld the fame in all eternity in die abundance 
of his own love, fo wits it at length in the mod wife 
order, by his unchanged will moved, by his high 
wifdom difpofed, and by his almighty power per¬ 
fected, and made vifible. And therefore (faith Mi¬ 
ra ndula) we ought to love God, ex fide, id ex effeEli- 
bus (that is) both perfuaded by his word, and by 
the effect of the world’s creation : Neque enim qui 
caufa caret, ex caufa id origine feiri, cognofcique poteft, 
fed vel ex rerum, qua fail# funt, queeque ftunt id gu - 
bernantur, obfervationc id collatione vel ex ipftns Dei' 
verbo: For he, of whom there is nd higher caufe, 
cannot be known by any knowledge of caufe or be¬ 
ginning (faith t Monlanus) but either by the obferving 
and conferring of things, which he hath, or doth 
create and govern •, or elfe by die word of God 
himfelf. 

Stef. n. 

TJsat tlje xvifeft of the Heathen, whofe authority is not 
to be defpifed, have acknowledged the world to have 
been created by God. 

T HIS work and creation of the world, did 
mod of the ancient and learned phitofophers 
acknowledge, diough by divers terms, and in a dif¬ 
ferent manner exprefs’d •, I mean all thofe who are 
intided by St. Auguftine, fummi philofophi, philofo- 


phers of higheft judgment and underftanding. l Mer- 
curius T rifmegiftus calleth God, principium unroerfo¬ 
rum, the original of the univerfal j to whom he 
giveth alfo the attributes of Mens, Natura, Actus, 
Necefftas, Finis, id Renovatio. And wherein he truly 
with St. Paul cafteth upon God all power; confef- 
fing alfo, that the world was made by God’s al¬ 
mighty word, and not by hands : Verbo, non mam- 
bus, fabricalus eft mundus. Zoroafter (whom Hera¬ 
clitus followed in opinion) took the word Fire to 
exprefs God by (as in S Deuteronomy and in P St. Paul 
it is ufed) Omnia ex uno igne genita funt. All things 
(faith he) are caufed or produced out of one fire. 

So did Orpheus plainly teach, that the world had 
beginning in time, from the will of the mod high 
God : whofe remarkable words are thus converted ; 
h Curn abfeondiffet omnia Jupiter fummus, deinde in lu¬ 
men gralum emifit, ex facro corde operans cogiiata id 
mirabilia: Of which I conceive this lenie: When 
great Jupiter had bidden all things in himfelf, working 
out of the love of his facred heart, be fent thence, or 
brought forth, into grateful light, the admirable wor ks 
which he had fore-thought. 

Pindarus the poet, and one of the wifeft, acknow¬ 
ledged alfo one God, the mod high, to be the Fa¬ 
ther and Creator of all things ; Unus Deus, Pater, 
Creator fummus . Plato calleth God the caufe and ori¬ 
ginal, the nature and reafon of the univerfal •, ‘ Totius 
rerum natura, caufa, id origo Deus. But hereof more 
at large hereafter. 

Now, although the curiofity of feme men have 
found it fuperfluous to remember the opinions of 
philofophers in matters of divinity (it being true, 
that the feripture hath not want of any foreign tefti- 
rnony) yet as the fathers , with others excel lendy 
learned, are my examples herein •, fo St .Paul him¬ 
felf did notdefpife, but thought it lawful and pro¬ 
fitable, to remember whatfoever he found agreeable 
to the word of God among the heathen, that he 
might thereby take from them all efcape, by way 
of ignorance, God rendring vengeance to them that 
know him not, as in the epiftle to ’Titus he citeth 
Epimenidcs againft the Cretans, and to the Corinthi¬ 
ans, Menander and in the fevenreenth of the Ads, 
Aralus, idc. For, truth (faith St .Ambrofe) by whom- 
foever uttered, is of the Holy Ghoft •, Veritas, a quo- 
cunque dicatur, a Spiritu Sanflo eft : And laftly, let 
thofe kind of men learn this rule j Qua facris fervi- 
tint, prophana non funt ; Nothing is prophane, that 
ferveth to the ufc of holy things. 

Sect. ID. 

Of the meaning of In Principid, Genef. I. i. 

T HIS vifible world, of which Mofes writeth, 
God created in the beginning, or firft of all-, 
in which (faith Tertullian ) things began to be. Thi* 
word Beginning (in which the Hebrews feek feme 
hidden myftery, and which m the Jews Tar gum is 
converted by the word Sapientia ) cannot be referred 
to fucceftion of time, nor to order, as feme men 
have conceived, both which are fubfequenc; but on¬ 
ly to creation then. For before that beginning, there 
was neither primary matter to be informed, nor 
form to inform, nor any being, but the eternal. 
Nature was not, nor the next parent or time begot¬ 
ten, time properly and naturally taken : for if God 
had but difpofed of matter already in being •, theft 
as the Word Beginning could not be referred to all 
tilings, fo muft it follow, that the inflitution of 


» John J. j. 1 Tim. 6. 16. *• OHgert 1 .1 mfi ifxftv c. 21. Cyril. Sc Chryf. in Joh. hom. 14. Greg. Nam. 1. *> Theolng. 

Hicr. in Efaiam Aug. 1 . 2. de Trin. c. 12 Sc 13. Greg. Mag. 1 . 18. Mor. Evar. cp. 1. Dccret. Alcuin. 1.2. de Trin. c. 16. D. Areop. 
c 4. Cal. Hierar. Thom. p. 2. «|. if. art. VI. St alibi Dees qili natura umfrbim eft, t* iviftbilibus pefftt fciri, opus feck quui 
Opificcm foi vi&biliter manifHhuts, m per cenxub imatam fciretui. Sc ills Dtus —r™""* rtfs credere cur, Aob. in cpttL ad Rom. 
c. 1. ' « Cufan. de gen. dialog. * Rom. 1. 20. « A. Mont. Nat. Hift. fol. 7. * Herm. in Pacmandro, Sc in lermone faexo. 

2 Dcut. 4. 24. Heb. 12. 19. h Orph. dc fum. Jove. * Vid. c. 6. 

matter 


Digitized by 








Chap. I. The History of the World. 


i 


matter proceeded from a greater power, than that 
of God. And by what name lhall we then call fuch 
an one (faith Laftantius) as excccdeth God in poten¬ 
cy; for it is an aft of more excellency to make, 
than to difpofeof things made ? Whereupon it may 
be concluded, that matter could not be before this 
beginning; except we feign a double creation, or al¬ 
low of two powers, and both infinite ; the impolfi- 
bility whereof fcometh defence. 1 Nam impqffibtle efi 
plnrti ejfe infinita : qimlam alterum efiet in ultero fi- 
nitum ; There cannot be more infinites than one: 
for one of them would limit the other. 

Sect. IV. 


God (faith f Baruch) bow large is the place of his pof- 
feffion! it is great, and hath no end', it is highland 
unmeafurable. . 1 

Bui: leaving multiplicity of opinions, it is more 
probable and allowed, that by the words * Heaven 
and Earthy was meant the folid matter and fubftance, 
as well of all the heavens, and orbs fupernal, as of 
the globe of the earth and waters, which covered it 
over (to wit) that very matter of all things, Mate¬ 
ria, chaos, po/Jibilitas , five pn/fe fieri. W hich mat¬ 
ter (faith h Calvin) was fo called, Quod totius mundi 
femen fuerit ; Betaufe it was the fceci of die univer- 
i'al: an opinion of ancient philofophers long before. 


Of the meaning of the words Heaven and Earth, 
Genef. ii. i. 

T H E univerfal matter of the world (which Mo- 
fes comprehendeth under the names of Hea¬ 
ven and Earth) is by divers diverfly underftood ; 
for there are that conceive, that by thofe words was 
meant the firft matter, as the Peripateticks underftand 
it; to which St. Augufiine and Ifidore feem to ad¬ 
here, Tccifii mundum (faith St. Augufiine ) de mate¬ 
ria in for mi ; quant fecifli de nulla re, pene nullam 
rem: that is, Thou haft made the world ot a mat¬ 
ter without form; which matter thou madeft of no¬ 
thing, and being made, it was little other than no¬ 
thing. 

But this potential and imaginary materia prima, 
cannot exift without form. Peter Lombard, the 
Schoolmen , Beda, Lyranus, Ctmefior , Tofiatus , and 
others affirm, that it pleafed God firft of all to cre¬ 
ate the Empyrean Heaven: which at the fucceeding 
inftant (faith b Beda and Strabo) he filled with Angels . 
This Empyrean Heaven Steuchius Eugubinus calleth 
Divine clarity and uncreated: an error, for which he 
is ffiarply charged by Pererius , though (as I con¬ 
ceive) he rather failed in the fubfcquent, when he 
made it to be a place, and the feat of Angels, and 
juft Souls, than in the former affirmation *, for of 
the firft, That God liveth in eternal light, it is writ¬ 
ten, c My foul, praife thou the Lord, that coveretb 
bimfelf with light: and in the Revelation, d And 
the city hath no need of the fun, nett lot r of the moon 
to Jbine in it: for the glory of God did light it. And 
herein alfo e John Mercer upon Genofis differeth not 
in opinion from Eugubinus: for as by Heaven cre¬ 
ated in the beginning, was not meant the invifible 
or fuperceleftial; fo in his judgment, becaufe it was 
in all eternity the glorious feat of God himfclf, it 
was not neceflary to be created; Quern mundum fu- 
per-cwleftem meo judicio creari (laith Mercer) non 
erat necefi'e. 

But as Mo fes forbare to fpeak of Angels, -and of 
things invifible and incorporate, for the weaknefs 
of their capacities, whom he then cared to inform 
of thofe things which were mod manifeft (to wit) 
That God did not only by a ftrong hand deliver 
them from the bondage of Egypt , according to his 
promifc niade to their lore-fathers; but alfo that he 
created, and was the foie caufe of this afpeftable, 
and perceivable univerfal: fo on the other fide I 
dare not think, that any fuperceleftial heaven, or 
whatfoever elfe (not himfelf) was increate and e- 
ternal; and as for the place of God before the world 
created, the finite wildom of mortal men hath no 
perception of it, neither can it limit the feat of infinite 
»wer, no more than infinite power itfelf can be 
imited: for his place is in himfelf, whom no mag¬ 
nitude elfe can contain: How great is the boufe of 


Sect. V. 

That the fubfiance of the waters, as mix'd in the bo¬ 
dy of the earth, is by Mofes underfiood in the 
word earth: and that the earth, by the attributes 
of unformed and void, is deferibed as the chaos of 
the ancient heathen. 

M OSES firft nameth heaven and earth (put¬ 
ting waters but in the third place) as com¬ 
prehending waters in the word earth; but afterwards 
he nameth them apart, when God by his fpirit be¬ 
gan to diftinguilh the confrifed mafs, and (as Bajil 
faith) Pr<eparare naturam aqu.e ad foecunditatem vi¬ 
ta lem ; To prepare the nature of water to a vital 
Iruitfulnels. 

For under the word Heaven , was the matter oi 
all heavenly bodies, and natures exprels’d: and by 
the name oiEartb and IVatcrs, all was meant, what¬ 
foever is under the moon, and fubjeft to alteration. 
Corrupt feeds bring forth corrupt plants ; to which 
the pure heavens are not fubjeft, though fubjeft to 
perilhing. They fisall pertfh (faith ‘ David) and the 
heavens Jhall vanifh away like fmoak, faith k E/ay. 
Neither were the waters the matter of earth; for it, :, 
is written, 1 Let the waters under the heavens be ga¬ 
thered into one place, and let the df/Utnd appear: 
which proveth, that the dry land 'Was mix’d and co¬ 
vered with the waters, and not yet diftinguifhed ; 
but no way, that the waters were the matter or feed 
of die earth, much lefs of the univerfal. Initio tu, 
Dom'tne, terram funclafii\ Thou, O lx>rd, in the 
beginning haft founded the earth: and again, n > The 
earth was covered with the deep (meaning with wa¬ 
ters) as with a garment , faith David. And if by 
natural arguments it may be proved, that water by 
condenfation may become earth, the fame reafon 
teacheth us alfo, that earth rarified may become wa¬ 
ter: water, air: air, fire: and fo on the contrary. 
"Deus ignis fubfiantiam per aerem in aquam convert it ; 
God turnetn the fubftance of fire by air into water. 
For the heavens and the earth remained in the fame 
ftate in which they were created, as touching their 
fubftance, though there was afterwards added mul¬ 
tiplicity of perfeftion, in relpeft of beauty and or¬ 
nament. ° Caelum vero if terra infiatu creatiohis re- 
manferunt quantum ad fubfiantiam , licet multiplex 
perfeflio decor is & ornatus eis pofimodum fuperaddita 
efl. And the word which the Hebrews call Maim, 
is not to be underftood according to the Latin tranf- 
lation fimply, and as fpecifical water; but the lame 
more properly fignifieth liquor. For (according to 
vMontanus) Efi autem Maim liquor gemtntts, hoc 
nomen propter verborum pentiriam , Latina lingua plu¬ 
ral’s numero aquas fecit ; For Maim (faith he) is a 
double liquor (that is, of divers natures) and this 
name or word the Latins, wanting a voice to ex- 
prels it, call it in the plural, aquas, waters. 


V , 4 

• Cufan. dc mente, lib. 3. Beda Hex. Strabo fuper Gen. Hug. Cof. Sc de nat. in corp. • IV. 104. 1 2. d Claritas diviia 
non eft lux fafta, fed fapientia Dei, non creata, led nata, Apoc. 21. 23. c Mercer, in Cell. 7. 7. f Bar. 3. 2 4, 23. 
1 Cufan. in Compend fo l. 224. Operis. t» Cal. in Gen * Pf. 102. 26.^ k Llay 31. 1 Gen. 1.9. ™ Pi. 104. 6. 

a Zeno 0 Gul. p ar fc 00 , Mont, de nat 


1 Zeno. 

N°. 


Digitized by 


This 

Googl 


B 







6 


The H i s f o R y tf the World. Bode l. 


This mafs, or indigefted matter, or chaos, crea¬ 
ted in the beginning, was without form, that is, 
without the proper form, which it afterwards acqui¬ 
red, when the fpirit of God had feparated the earth, 
and digefted it from the waters. * And the earth was 
void , that is, not producing any creatures, or ad¬ 
orned with any plants, fruits, or flowers. But af¬ 
ter the fpirit of God had moved upon the waters , and 
wrought this indigefted matter into that form, 
which it now retakieth •, then did the earth bud forth 
the herb, which feedetb feed, and the fruitful tree ac¬ 
cording to bis kind, and God faw that it was good 
which attribute was not given to the earth, while 
it was confus’d •, nor to the heavens, before they 
had motion, and adornment. God faw that it was 
good, that is, made perfeCt: for perfection is that 
to which nothing is wanting. Et perfeEli Dei per- 
feEla funt opera •, The works of the perfect God 
are perfect. 

From this lump of imperfect matter had the an¬ 
cient poets their invention of Demogorgon\ Hefiodus 
and nnaxagoras the knowledge of that chaos : of 
which b Ovid •, 

Ante Mare, if Terras, if (quod tegit omnia) caelum, 
Unus erat toto nature vultus in or be , 

Quern dixere chaos, rudis indigefaque moles. 

Before the feaand land was made, and heaven, that 
all doth hide, 

In all the world one only face of nature did abide: 
Which chaos hight, a huge rude heap. 

Sect. VI. 

How it is to be underfood, that the fpirit of God 
moved upon the waters j and that this is not to be 
fearched curioufy. 

A Fter the creation of heaven and earth, then 
void and without form, the fpirit of God 
moved upon the waters. The feventy interpreters 
ufe the word fuperferebatur , moved upon or over: 
incubabat or fovebat, v faith Hieromt) out of ^ Baftl •, 
and Eafil out of a Syrian doCtor; Equidem non me¬ 
ant tibi , fed vtri cujufdam Syri fententiam recenfebo 
(faith Baft) : which words incubare or fovere , im¬ 
porting warmth, hatching, orquickning, have a fpe- 
cial likenefs. d Verbum tranfatum ef ab avibus pulliti- 
ei fua incubantibus, quamvis fpirituali, if plane ine- 
narrabili, non autem corporali modo \ The word is 
taken of birds hatching their young, not corporally, 
but in a fpiritual and unexpreflible manner. 

Some of the Hebrews convert it to this effeCb, 
fpirit us Deivolitabat-y The fpirit of God did flut¬ 
ter : the Chaldean paraphraft in this fenfe, Ventus a 
confpeftu Dei fuffiabat : or, as others underftand the 
Chaldean, Flabat, pellebat , removebat : The wind 
from the face of God did blow under, drive, or re¬ 
move, or did blow upon •, according to the e 147 th 
Pfalm, He caufed bis wind to blow, and the waters 
increafe : but there was yet no wind nor exhalation. 
{ Arias Montanus in thefe words, Et fpiritus Elthim 
Merachefet, id ef, ejfcaciter motitans, confovens, ac 
agitans fuper facies gemini liquoris , The fpirit of 
God effectually and often moving, keeping warm, 
and cherifhing, quickning and ltirring upon the 
face of this double liquor. For he maketh four ori¬ 
ginals, whereof three are agents, and the laft paf- 
five and material, to wit, Caufa , which is the divine 
goodnefs: s Jehi, which is, fiat, five erit , let it be, 
or, it fhall be. Qua vox verbo Dei prima prvlata fa¬ 
it : Which voice (faith he) was the firfbthat was ut¬ 
tered by the word of Goa The third, fpirit us elo- 

• Gen- 1, 1, 12. b Ovid. Met. lib. 1. « Bafil. Hexam. 

Cof. fol. 13. I Ar. Mont, dc nature, png. 149. * Eta. 55. 


him, the fpirit of God, id ef. Vis quadam divina, 
arilis ac prafens, per omnia pert ingens, omnia complens■, 
that is, a certain divine power, or ftrength, every 
where aCtive and extending, and ftretching through 
all, filling and flnifhing all things. The fourth he 
calleth Maim, id ef, Materies ad omnem rem confi- 
ciendam babilis ", Matter apt to become every thing. 
For my felf, I am refolved (Cum Deus fit fupetra- 
tionale omnirations. Seeing God is in all reafon above 
reafon) that although the effeCts which follow his 
wonderful ways of working, may in a meafure be 
perceived by man’s underftunding, yet the manner 
and firft operation of his divine power, cannot be 
conceived by any mind, or fpirit, compaffed with a 
mortal body. Animalis homo qua Dei funt non per- 
ctpit : For my thoughts (faith the Lord in h Efay) 
are not your thoughts, neither are your ways my 
ways. And as the world hath not known God him- 
felf-, fo are his ways (according to St. Paul) pafl 
finding out. O righteous father-, the world hath net 
known thee, faith Chrift. And therefore, whether 
that motion, vitality, and operation, were by incu¬ 
bation or how elfe, the manner is only known to 
God. 'Quomodo in omnibus fit rebus, vel per ef'entiam, 
vel per potentiam, intclleflus nofler non capit *, For 
how God (faith St . Augu/linc, fpeaking of his ubi¬ 
quity) is in all things, either by eflence, prefence, 
or power, our underftanding cannot comprehend. 
k Nihil inter Deum bominemque difaret, fi confilia, 
(f difpofitiones illius Majefatis atema, cogitatio af- 
fequeretur humana •, Tliere would be no difference 
between God and man, if man’s underftanding could 
conceive the counfels and difpofing of that eternal 
majefty j and therefore ro be over-curious in fearch- 
ing how the all-powerful word of God wrought in 
the creation of the world, or his all-piercing and 
operative Spirit diftinguifhing, gave form to the 
matter of the univerfal, is a labour and fearch like 
unto his, who, not contented with a known and fafe 
ford, will prefume to pafs over the greateft river in 
all parts, where he is ignorant of their depths: for 
fo doth the one lofe his life, and the other his under¬ 
ftanding. We behold the ftfn, and enjoy his light, 
as long as we look towards it, but tenderly, and 
circumfpeCUy : we warm ourfctves fatlly, while we 
ftand near the fire-, but if we leek to out-face the 
one, or enter into the other, we forthwith become 
blind or burnt. 

But to efehew curidflry -, this is true, that the 
Engl 'tfj word (moved) is moft proper and fignificarit : 
for of motion, proceedeth all production, and all 
whatfoever is effected. And dvis omnipotent Spirit 
of God, which may indeed be truly called, Piim- 
pium motus, and with Mirandula, Vis caufa effici¬ 
ent is, The force of the efficient caufe, St. Augufline 
fometimes taketh for the Holy Ghoft 4 fometimes 
for a wind or breath, Sub nomine fpiritus , Under 
the name of a fpirit, which is fometimes fo taken i 
or for Virtualis Croat Mr a, for a created vircoaihty : 
Tertullian and Theodoret call it alfo a breaA or 
wind: Mercurius nafneth k, SpiritHm tenuem inteb 
ligibilem , A pure'or thin intelligible fpirit: Anaxa¬ 
goras, Mensem : Toftatus, Voluntattm fjf fninirm 
Dei, The will and 'mind of God ; which Mens, 
Plato in Titnao maketh Animam VnuUdi, The foul 
of the world : and ih his fiKth book, Dt Republt- 
ca, he calleth it. The law of heaven •, 'in his epiftles, 
The Leader ef things to emtte, and the prefence of 
things pafl. But as Cyprian wrote 'ot rhe incarna¬ 
tion of Chrift our Saviour, Mens deficit, vox fix, 
& non mea tan turn., fed etiatn -Angehrum j hty 
mind faileth, my voice is filent, and not mine only, 

<1 Junius. * Pfal. 147. 18. f Ar. Mont, ut fup. Eugub. in 
I. • Aug. TTaft. 20. in Johan. 17. 2;. * I.a£t. in Prafstt. 

but 









Chap. I. The History of the World. 


7 


but even the voice of ahgels: fo may all men elfe 
fay in the underftanding and utterance of the ways 
arid works of the creation •, for to him (faith * Nazi- 
anzenus) there is not one fubftance by which he is, 
and another by which he can, Std confubflantiale 
iiliefi, quicqtiid ejus eft , (ft quicquid eft \ Whatso¬ 
ever attribute of him there is, and whatsoever he is, 
it is the very fame fubftance that himfelf is. 

But the Spirit of God which moved upon the 
waters, cannot be taken for a breath or wind, nor 
for any other creature, Separate from the infinite 
a dive power of God, which then formed and dif- 
tinguifhed, and which now fuftaineth and giveth 
continuance to the univerfal. For the Spirit of the 
Lord filleth all the world \ and the fame is it which 
namtainetb all things, faith b Solomon. If thou fend 
forth thy fpirit (faith David) they are created : 
and Gregory, Deus fuo prafentiali effe, dat omnibus 
rebus effe, ita quod ft fe rebus fubtraheret , ficut de 
nibilo facia funt omnia, fic in nibilum defluerent 
unherfa: God giveth being to all things, by being 
prefent with all things, fo as if he ftiould withdraw 
himfelf from them, then as of nothing the world 
was made, it would again fell away and vanifh in¬ 
to nothing. And this working of God's fpirit in 
all things, c Virgil hath exprefs’d excellently : 

Principio caelum at terras, campofque liquentes , 
Lucentemque globum lutue, Titaniaque aftra , 

Spiritus intus alit : totamque infufa per artus , . 
Mens agitat molem , (ft magno fe corpore mifeet. 

The heaven, the earth, and all the liquid main, 
The moon’s bright globe, and ftars Titanian, 

A fpirit within maintains: and their whole mafs, 
A mind,which through each part infus’d doth pafs. 
Fafhions, and works, and wholly doth tranfpierce 
All this great body Of the univerfe. 

And this was the fame fpirit, which moved in the 
univerfal, and thereby both diftinguiftied and adorn¬ 
ed it. d His fpirit hath garnifhed the heavens , faith 
Job. So then the Spirit of God moved upon the 
waters, and created in them their Spirituality, and 
natural motion •, motion brought forth heat *, and 
heat rarifa&ion, and fubtilty of parts. By this fpi¬ 
rit (which gave heat and motion, and thereby ope¬ 
ration to every nature, while it moved upon the wa¬ 
ters, which were in one indigefted lump, and e cha¬ 
os, difpofed to all forms alike) was begotten air : 
an element fuperior, as lighter than the waters ; 
thro 1 whofe vaft, open, Subtile, diaphanick or trnnfe 
parent body, the light, afterwards created, might 
eafily tranfpierce : light for the excellency thereof 
being the firft creature which God called good, 
whole creation immediately followed. This Spirit 
Cbryfoftom calleth a vital operation, Aqttis a Deo 
infitam , ex qua aqueenon folum motionem, fed (ft vim 
procreandi animaha habuerint. He calleth it, A vi¬ 
tal operation given by God unto the waters , whereby 
the waters had not only motion, but alfo power to 
procreate or bring forth living creatures. 

Sect. VII. 

Of the light created, as the material fubftance of the 
fun, and of the nature of it, and difficulty of know¬ 
ledge of it: and of the excellency and ufe of it : 
and of motion, and heat annexed unto it. 

T Hefe waters were afterwards congregated , 
and called the fea : and this light afterwards 
(in the fourth day) gathered and united, and called 
the fun, the organ and inftrument of created light. 


For this firft and difperfed light did not (as I con¬ 
ceive) diftinguifh the night from the day, but with 
a reference to the fun’s creation, and the uniting of 
the difperled light therein. This is proved by tliefe 
words, 1 Let there be lights in the firmament, to fe- 
parate the day from the night : which lights in the 
firmament of heaven, were alfo made for figns, and 
for feafons, and for days, and for years, implying a 
motion inftantly to follow, by which, days and 
years are diftinguifhed-, after which Succeeded time, 
or together with which, that time (which was die 
meafure of motion ) began. For that fpace of the 
firft three days which preceded the fun’s creation, or 
formal perfection, when as yet there was not any 
motion to be meafured, and the day named in the 
fifth verle •, was but fuch a fpace, as afterwards by 
the fun’s motion made a civil or natural day. And 
as waters were the matter of air, of the firmament, 
and of the lower and upper waters, and of the feas, 
and creatures therein earth, the matter of beafts, 
plants, minerals, and man’s body : fo may light 
(for expreffion fake) be called the chaos, or materi¬ 
al fubftance of the fun, and other lights of heaven : 
howbeit, neither the fun, nor any thing fenfible, is 
that light it felf, 8 £>u<c caufa eft lucidorum. Which 
is the caufe that things are lightfome (tho’ it make 
it felf and all things elfe vilible:) but a body moft 
illightncd, which illuminateth the moon, by whom 
the neighbouring region ( which the Greeks call te¬ 
ther, the place of the fuppofed dement of fire ) is 
effected and qualified, and by it all bodies living in 
this our air. For this light Avicenna calleth vehi- 
culum (ft fomentum omnium coeleftium virtutum, (ft 
mprefjionum \ The condu&er, and preferver, or nou- 
rifher of all celeftial virtues and impreflions, nothing 
defeending of heavenly influences, but by the medi¬ 
um, or means of light. Ariftotle calleth light a qua¬ 
lity, inherent or cleaving to a diaphanous body, Lu¬ 
men eft qualitas inherent diapbano : but this may be 
better avouched of the heat, which it tranfporteth, 
and bringeth with it, or condu&eth : which heat 
(fey the Platonicks) h Abeunte lumine rtfidet in fub- 
jefto The light being departed, doth refide in the 
fubjedl, as warmth in the air, tho’ the feme be de¬ 
prived of light. This light Plotinus and all the 
Academics make incorporal, and fo doth Montanus, 
Cui nec duritia reftftit, nec Jpatium \ Which neither 
hardnefs refifteth, nor fpace leaveth. 

N Arijlotic findeth corporality in the beams of light j 
but it is but by way of repetition of other mens o- 
pinions, faith * Picolomincus, Democritus, Leu ippus, 
and Epicurus , give materiality to light itfelf, but 
improperly : for it pafllth at an inftant, from the 
heaven to the earth •, nor is it refilled by any hard¬ 
nefs, becaufe it pierceth thro’ the folid body of 
glafs, or other crillalline matter •, and whereas it is 
withftood by unclean, and unpure earthy fubllanccs, 
lefs hard, and more eafy to invade than the former, 
the feme is, k Quod obftaculum natura terreum atquc 
fordidum, non capit candidam luminis puritatem i 
Becaufe an obftacle, by nature earthy and foul, doth 
not receive the pure clcarnefs of light; alluding to 
that moft divine light, which only fhineth on thofe 
minds, which are purged from all worldly drofs 
and human uncleannefs. 

But of this created light there is no agreement in 
opinion neither do 1 marvel at it, tor it can¬ 
not be found either, in the fathers, philofophers, 
fchool-men, or other ancient or latter writers, that 
any of them underflood either it or themfelves there¬ 
in : all men (to call off ignorance) have dilputed 
thereof, but there is no man that hath been taught 


4 Xuianz. lib. z. Tlieol. *> Wife), t. j. c Virg. Ancid. lib. 8. 724. i Job 26. 13. 
* Lux dicitur, quae fc, & omnia vifibilia fecit. Cufen. in Compend. cap. 7. & cxcicit. lib. 5. 
Picol. de k p] ot i n 


e Gen. 1. z f Gen. i 14. 
Fie in. lib. ac Lumine, cap. u. 







8 The History of the World. Book I. 


thereby. Thomas Aquinas (not inferior to any in 
wit) as he hath fhewed little ftrength of argument 
in refuting the opinions of Beda y Hugo , Lombardy 
Lyranus , and others : fo is his own judgment here¬ 
in, as weak as any man’s j and moft of the fchool- 
men were rather curious in the nature of terms, and 
more fubtile in diftinguifhing upon the parts of 
dcxftrine already laid down, than difcoverers of any 
thing hidden, either in philofophy or divinity : of 
whom it may be truly faid. Nihil fapientia odiofius 
acumine nimio \ Nothing is more odious to true 
wifdotn, than too acute fharpnefs. Neither hath 
the length of time, and the fearch of many 
learned men (which the fame time hath brought 
forth and devoured) refolved us, whether this light 
be fubftantial, corporal, or incorporal: corporal they 
fay it cannot be, becaufe then it could neither pierce 
the air, nor thofe hard, folid, and diaphanous bo¬ 
dies, which it doth y and yet every day we fee the 
air illightned : Incorporal it cannot be, becaufe it 
fometime affedleth the fight of the eye with offence, 
and therefore by moft of the fathers fo efteemed. 
Others fiiy (as Patricius) that it cannot be matter, 
becaufe no form fo excellent as it felf to inform it: 
neither can it be any accident, which is not fepa- 
rable without the deftrudion of the fubjedt: for 
light being taken from the fun, the fun is no more 
the fun in exiftence. 2dly, If light were pro¬ 
ceeding from matter and form, then either, or both, 
mull be one of thefe, lucid or bright, dark or 
opake, diaphanous or tranfparent \ but darknefs 
cannot be parent of light, and things diaphanous 
(being neither light nor darknefs, but capable of 
either) cannot be the caufe of either, and there¬ 
fore muft the matter, or form, or both, be lucid 
and fhining. a Lucid and Ihining obtain their fo be¬ 
ing of the light \ and therefore if we derive this 
being of light from a former, then would the pro- 
grefs go on infinitely and againft nature y and 
therefore he concludeth, that light in the fun hath 
his being primarily, and immediately of it felf, and 
is therefore the fun’s form, and the form of all lucid 
and fhining bodies: but what is taught hereby, 
let others judge. 

But in my underftanding, Lumen (which may be 
englifhed by the word jbine') is an intentional fpecies 
of that which may be englifhed by light \ and fo, 
this fhining, which proceedeth from the fun, or 
other lights of heaven, or from any other light, is 
an image, or intentional fpecies thereof * and an in¬ 
tentional fpecies may be underftood by the example 
of a red or green colour, occafioned by the fhining 
of the fun through red or green glafs : for then we 
perceive the fame colour caft upon any thing op- 
pofite y which rednefs or other colour we call the 
intentional fpecies of the colour in that glafs. And 
again, as this light, touching his fimple nature, is 
no way yet underftood, fo it is difputed, whether 
this light firft created, be the fame which the fun 
inholdeth and cafteth forth, or Whether it had con¬ 
tinuance any longer than till the fun’s creation. 

But by the moft wife and unchanged order, 
which God obferved in the works of the world, I 
gather, that the light, in the firft day created, was 
the fubftance of the fun : for h Mofes repeateth twice 
the main parts of the univerfal : firft, as they were 
created in matter •, idly, As they were adorned with 
form : firft, naming the heavens, the earth, the wa¬ 
ters, all confiifed •, and afterward, the waters con¬ 
gregated, the earth made dry land y and the hea¬ 
vens diftinguifhed from both, and beautified. And 
therefore the earth, as it was earth, before it was un¬ 


covered, and before it was called Arida y or dry land • 
and the waters were waters, before they were con¬ 
gregated and called the fea, though neither of them 
pertedt, or enriched with their virtual forms : fo the 
fun, although it had not its formal perfeftion, his 
circle, beauty, and bounded magnitude, till the 
fourth day, yet was the fubftance thereof in the firft 
day (under the name of light) created y and this 
light formerly difperfed, was in the fame fourth day 
united, and let in the firmament of heaven: for, to 
light created in the firft day God gave no proper 
place or fixation *, and therefore the effects named 
by Anticipation (which was to feparate day from 
night) were precifely performed, after this light 
was congregated and had obtained life and motion. 
Neither did the wifdom of God find caufe why it 
Ihould move (by which motion, days and nights 
are diftinguilhed) till then : becaufe there was not 
yet any creature produced, to which, by moving, 
the fun might give light, heat, and operation. 

But after the earth (diftinguifhed from waters) 
began to bud forth the bud of the herb, &c. God 
caufed the fun to move, and (by interchange of 
time) to vifit every part of the inferior world } by 
his heat to ftir up the fire of generation, and to give 
activity to the feeds of all natures : £ For, as a king^ 
which commandeth fome goodly building to be 
eredted, doth accommodate the fame to that ufe 
and end, to which it was ordained ; fo it pleafed 
God (faith Procopius) to command the light to be y 
which by his all-powerful word he approved, and 
approving it, difpofed thereof to the ufe and com¬ 
fort of his future creatures. 

But in that it pleafed God to ask of d Job y By 
what way is the light parted , and where is the 
way where light dwelletb ? we thereby know, that 
the nature thereof falleth not under man’s un¬ 
derftanding •, and therefore let it fuffice, that by 
God’s grace we enjoy the effects thereof. For this 
light is of the treafure of God (faith * Efdras) and 
thofe which inhabit the heavens , do only know the 
Ejfcnce thereof. Nihil ignotum in coelo , nihil notum 
in terra: Nothing unknown in heaven, nothing 
perfectly known on earth. * Res ver<e funt in mutt - 
do invifibili y in mundo vifibili umbr<e rerum : 
Things themlelves are in the invifible world \ in 
the world vifible, but their fhadows. Surely, if this 
light be not fpiritual, yet it approacheth neareft 
unto fpirituality y and if it have any corporality, 
then of all other the moft fubtile and pure •, for 
howfoever it is of all things feen, the moft beau¬ 
tiful, and of the fwifteft motion, .of all other the 
moft neceflary and beneficial. For it miniftreth 
unto men, and other creatures, all cclcftial influ¬ 
ences j it diflipateth thofe fad thoughts and forrows, 
which the darknefs both begetteth and maintain- 
eth - y it difeovereth unto us the glorious works of 
God, and carrieth up with an angelical fwiftnefs, 
our eyes unto heaven, that by the fight thereof, our 
minds being informed of his vifible marvels, may 
continually travel to furmount thefe perceived hea¬ 
vens, and to find out their omnipotent caufe and 
Creator. 6 Cognitio non quiefeit in rebus creatis y 
Our knowledge doth not quiet it felf in things 
created. Et ipfa lux facit , ut cat era mundi mem¬ 
bra digna fint laudibus , cum fuam bonitatem 6? de- 
corem omnibus communicet j It is the light (faith St. 
Ambrofe) that maketh the other parts of the world 
fo worthy of praife, feeing that it felf communi- 
cateth its gooanefs and beauty unto all. Of which 
Ovid out of Orpheus: 


* Lucida corpora funt plena fua luce, alienis tenebris impervia. Opaca funt plena fuis tenebris alicuo lumine. Tranfparentia feu 
Diaphana carent fuis Sc lumine Sc tenebris: alienis Sc lumine Sc tenebris permcantur. Seal. fubt. ex. 71. Gen. 1.9 
* Quemadmodum rex aliquis, See. Procop. in Gen. 1. d Job 38. 24, 9. * Eld. 1 . 2. c. 6. 40. f Herm. * Ficin. 

IHe 


Digit 


,yG00g[ 


c 





Chap. I. "The History 

* Me ego fum, qui longum metior annum. 

Omnia qui video, per quern videt omnia mundus, 
Mundi oculus. 

The -world dilcerns it felf, while I the world be¬ 
hold, 

By me the longeft years, and other times are told, 

I die world’s eye. 

Laftly, if we may behold in any creature, any 
one fpark of that eternal fire, or any far-off dawn¬ 
ing of God’s glorious brightnefs, the fame in the 
beauty, motion, and virtue of this light, may be 
perceived. Therefore was God called Lux ipfa , and 
the light, by Hermes named lux fanEla, and Chrijl 
our Saviour faid to be b that light, which lightnetb 
every man that cometh into the world. Yet in re- 
fpeft of God’s incomprehenfiblefublimity, and puri¬ 
ty, this is alfo true, that God is neither a mind, nor 
a fpirit of the nature of other fpirits •, nor a light, 
fuch as can be difcerned. Deus prof eft o non mens eft, 
at zero ut fit mens caufa eft \ nec fpiritus, fed caufa 
qua fpiritus extat \ nec lumen , fed caufa qua lumen 
exiftit. God (faith Hermes in Poemandro) certainly 
is not a mind, but the caufe that die mind hath his 
being $ nor fpirit, but the caufe by which every fpi¬ 
rit is} nor light, but the caufe by which the light 
exifteth. 

So then the mafs and chaos being firft created, 
void, dark, and informed, was by the operative 
fpirit of God, pierced and quickned, and the waters 
having now received fpirit and motion, refolved their 
thinner parts into air, which God illightned : the 
earth alfo by being contiguate, and mixt with waters 
(participating the lame divine virtue) c brought forth 
the bud of the herb that feedeth feed, (ftc. and tor a 
mean and organ, by which this operative virtue 
might be continued, God appointed the light to be 
united, and gave it alfo motion and heat, which 
heatcaufed t continuance of thofe feveral fpecies, 
which the earth (being made fruitful by the fpirit) 
produced, and with motion begat the time and times 
lucceeding. 

Sect. VIII. 

Of the firmament, and of the waters above the firma¬ 
ment : and whether there be any cryftalline heaven , 
or any primum mobile. 

A Fter thit the fpirit of God had moved upon 
the waters, and light was created, God faid, 
J.et there be a firmament in the midft of the waters, 
and let it feparate the waters from the waters: that 
is, thofe waters which by rarifa&ion and evapora¬ 
tion were afcended, and thofe of the earth and fea. 

But tliefe waters, feparate above this extenlion, 
which the Latin tranflation calleth firmament um, or 
expanfum (for fo ffatablus, Pagninus , and Junius 
turn it) are not the cryftalline heavens created 
in the imaginations of men •, which opinion Bafilius 
Magnus calleth a childifh fuppofition, making in 
the fame place many learned arguments againft this 
fancy. For the waters above the firmament, are the 
waters in the air above us, where the fame is more 
folid and condenfe, which God feparated from the 
neathcr waters by a firmament, that is, by an extend¬ 
ed diltance and vaft fpace: the words Raquia (which 
Montanus writeth Rakiagb) and Shamajim, being 
indifferently taken for the heaven and for air, and 
more properly for the air and tether, than for the 
heavens, as the belt Hebricians underftand them, 
d Quo J'uprema ac tenuia ab infirmis crajjis didu cl a, 
interfeclaque diftarent •, For that whereby the fupreme 
and thinlxxiies were placed in diflance, being leve¬ 
red and cut off from low and grofs matters: and 

1 Chid. Met. 1 . i. k Jch. i. 9. Sc 14. 46. * Gen. 1. 1 

1C4 12. *Gcn. 19. 24. 27.23. hDcut.11.11. 1 

N*. 1. 


of the World. 9 

the waters above the firmament, exprefs'd in the 
word Majim , are in that tongue taken properly for 
the waters above the air, or in the uppermoft region 
of the fame. 

And that the word heaven is ufed for the air, the 
feriptures every where witnefs *, as in the e bleffings 
of Jofepb , and in the 104th Pfalm , * By thefe fprings 
/ball the fowl of the heaven dwell \ and upon Sodom 
and Gomorrah it rained brimflone and fire out of the 
heaven •, and in Ifaac's blefling to Jacob , 8 God give 
thee therefore of the dew of heaven : and in h Deu¬ 
teronomy the nth, But the land whither you goto 
poffefs it, is a land that drinketb water of the 
rain of heaven : and in * Job, Who bath ingendered 
the frofts of heaven ? and in St. k Matthew , Behold 
the fowls of heaven, for they fow not. So as in all 
the feriptures of the Old Teilament throughout, is 
the word heaven very oft ufed for air, and taken 
alfo hyperbolically for any great height, as, 1 Let 
us build us a tower, whofe top may reach to heaven, 
&c. And in this very place Bafel avoucheth, that 
this appellation of heaven for the firmament, is but 
by way of fimilitude: his own words be thefe •, Et 
vocavit Deus firmamentum ccelum. H<tc appellatio alii 
quidem proprie accommodatur, huic autem nunc adfi- 
rnilitudinem \ And God called the firmament heaven: 
this appellation (faith Baftl) is properly applied to 
another (that is, to the ilarry heaven) but to this 
(that is, to the firmament dividing the waters) it is 
impofed by fimilitude. And if there were no other 
proof, that by the firmament was meant the air, and 
not the heaven -, the words of Mofes in the 8 th verfe, 
conferred with the fame word firmament in the 20th 
verfe, make it manifeft: for in the 8 th verfe it is 
written, that God called the firmament, which di¬ 
vided waters from waters, heaven; and in the 20th 
verfe he calleth the firmament of heaven, air •, in 
thefe words. And let the fowl fly upon earth in the 
open firmament of heaven. And what ufe there fhould 
be of this icey, or cryftalline, or watery heaven, I 
conceive not, except it be to moderate and temper 
the heat, which the primum mobile w-ould otherwife 
gather and increafe: though in very truth, inftead 
of this help, it would add an unmeafurable greatnefs 
of circle, whereby the fwiftnefs of that firft move- 
able would exceed all poflibility of belief. Sed nemo 
tenctur ad impojfibilia \ But no man ought to be held 
to impoftibilitics; and faith it felf (which furmount- 
eth the height of all human reafon) hath for a forci¬ 
ble conductor the word of truth, which alfo may be 
called Lumen omnis rationis ift mt elk 51 us ; The light 
of all reafon and underftanding. Now that this fup- 
pofed firft moveable, turneth it felf fo many hundred 
thoufand miles in an inftant (feeing the feriptures 
teach it not) let thofe that can believe mens imagina¬ 
tions, apprehend it, for I cannot. But of thefe ma¬ 
ny heavens, let the reader that defircth fatisfa&ion, 
fearch Orontius \ and of this watery heaven, Bafilius 
Magnus, in his Hexam.fol. 40, 41 ,tftc. and Mattb. 
Beroaldus , in his 2d book and 6th chapter. For 
my felf, I am perfuaded, that the waters called. 
The waters above the heavens, are but the clouds 
and waters engendred in the uppermoft air. 

Sect. IX. 

A conclufion, repeating the fum of the works in the 
creation, which are reduced to three heads: the 
creation of matter, the forming of it, the finifbing 
of it. 

T O conclude, it may be gathered out of the firft 
chapter of Genefis, that this was the order of 
the mod wife God in the beginning, and when there 

i. d Mont. Nat. hill. fol. 152. « Gen. 49. 2$. f Pfa!. 

Job 38. 29. k Matth. 6. 26. J Gen 11 4 

C was 

Digitized b.y Google 





7 he History of the World. Book I, 


was no other nature, or being, belt God’s incompre- 
henfible eternity. Firft, he created the matter of all 
things: and in die firft three days he diftinguifhed, 
and gave to every nature his proper form \ the form 
of levity to that which afeended \ to that which de¬ 
fended, the form of gravity: for he feparated light 
from darknefs, divided waters from waters, and ga¬ 
thered the waters under the firmament into one 
place. In the laft three days, God adorned, beau¬ 
tified, and replenilhcd the world: he fet in die fir¬ 
mament of heaven, the fun, moon, and ftars-, 
filled the earth with beafts, the air with fowl, 
and the fea widi filh, giving to all that have life a 
power generative, thereby to continue their fpecies, 
and kinds \ to creatures vegetative and growing, 
dieir feeds in themfclves } for * be created all things , 
that they might have their being : and the generations 
of the world are preferved. 

Sect. X. 

That nature is no principium per fe-, nor form , the 
giver of being : and of our ignorance how fecond 
caufes Jhould have any proportion with their effeds. 

A N D for this working-power, which we call 
nature, the beginning of motion and reft, ac¬ 
cording to Ariflotle \ the fame is nothing eli'e, but 
the ftrength and faculty, which God hath infilled 
into every creature, having no other ielf-ability, than 
a clock, after it is wound up by a man’s hand, liadu 
Thofe therefore that attribute unto this faculty, any 
firft or foie power, have therein no other underftand- 
ing, than fuch a one hath, who looking into die 
ftern of a fliip, and finding it guided by the helm 
and rudder, doth aferibe lome abfolute virtue to die 
piece of wood, without all confideration of the liand 
that guides, or of die judgment, which alfo direft- 
eth and commandctli that hand : forgetting in this 
and in all elfe, that by the virtue of the firft aft, all 
agents work whatfoever they work: Virtute primi 
alius y agunt agentia omnia quicquid agunt: For as 
the mind of man feeth by the organ of the eye, hear- 
cth by the ears, and maketh choice by the will: and 
therefore we attribute fight to the eye, and hearing 
to the ears, Ific. and yet it is the mind only, that 
giveth ability, life, and motion to all thefe his inftru- 
ments and organs fo God worketh by angels, by the 
fun, by the ftars, by nature or infufed properdes, and 
by men as by feveral organs, fevcral eftefts j all fe¬ 
cond caufes whatfoever, being but inftruments, 
conduits, and pipes, which carry and diipcrfe what 
they have received from the head and fountain of 
die univerfaL For as it is God’s infinite power, and 
evcry-wherc-prefence (compafiing, embracing, and 
piercing all things) that giveth to die fiui power to 
draw up vapours, to vapours to be made clouds • 
clouds to contain rain, and rain to fall: fo all fecond 
and inftrumental caufes togedier with nature it fell, 
without that operative faculty which God gave them, 
would become altogether filent, virtuelels, and dead: 
of all which excellently b Orpheus \ Per te virefeunt 
omnia All things by thee fpring forth in youthful 
green. I enforce not thefe things, thereby to anni¬ 
hilate thofe variable virtues which God hath given 
to his creatures, animate and inanimate, to heaven¬ 
ly and earthly bodies, Ific. for all his works in their 
virtues prail'e him: but of the manner how God 
worketh in them, or they in or widi each other, 
which the heathen philofophers, and thofe that fol¬ 
low them, have taken on them to teach : I fay, 
there is not any one among them, nor any one 
among us, diat could ever yet conceive it, or cx- 


prefs it, ever enrich his own underftanding with any 
certain truth, or ever edify others (not foolifh by 
felf-flattery) therein. F'or (faith Ladantius t fpcak- 
ing of the wifelom of the philofophers) Si facultas 
invenieniee veritatis hide Jludio fubjacerct, aliquando 
ej/'et inventa \ cum vero tot temporibus , tot ingeniis 
in ejus inquifitione contritis , non jit compreben/a, ap~ 
paret nullum ibi eJJ'e fapientiam •, If in this ftudy 
(faith he) were means to find out the truth, it had 
ere this been found out: but feeing it is not yet com¬ 
prehended, after that fo much time, and lb many 
wits have been worn out in the enquiry of it, it ap- 
peareth, that there is no wifelom there to be had. 
'■Nam fi de una re pr<ecifa feietuh habcretur y omnium 
return feientia neccffdtio habere:ur \ If the prccife 
knowledge of any one thing were to be hail, it fliould 
necefiarily follow, that the knowledge of all things 
were to be had. And as the philofophers were ig¬ 
norant in nature, and the ways of her working j 
fo were they more curious, than knowing, in their 
firft matter and phyfical form. For it their firft 
matter had any being, it were not then the firft mat¬ 
ter: for, as it is the firft matter, it hath only a 
power of being, which it altogether leaveth, when 
it doth fubfift. And feeing it is neither a fubftance 
perfeft, nor a fubftance inchoate, or in the way of 
perfection, how any other fubftance Ihould thence 
take concrefence, it hath not been taught, neither 
are thefe forms (faith a learned author) any diing, 
fi ex ea exprimatur potentia , qiue nihil eft. Again, 
how this firft matter fhould be fubjedum for mar urn y 
and paftive, which is underftood to precede the form, 
it is hard to conceive : tor to make form, which is 
the caule, to be fubfequent to the thing caufed (to 
wit, to the firft matter) is contrary to all reafon, 
divine and human : only it may lx_- feud, that ori¬ 
ginally there is no other difference between heat and 
fire, of which the one cannot fubfift without the o* 
ther, but in a kind of rational confide;Stion. Leav¬ 
ing thereto:e thefe riddles to their love s, who by 
ceitain fcholaftical diftinctions wreft and pervert 
the truth of all things, and by which Ariflotle hath 
laboured to prove a ialfe eternity of the world, I 
think it far later to affirm with St. AuguflinCy That 
all fpccies and kinds are from God, from whom, 
whatfoever is natural proceedeth, of what kinJ or 
eftimation foever •, from whence are the feeds of all 
forms, and the forms of all feeds and their moti¬ 
ons \ A quo eft omnis fpecics, a quo eft quicquid natu- 
raliter efl y cujufcunque generis ejl y cujufcunque tejli- 
mationis efi\ a quo funt femina formarum, foi mr 
feminum y motus feminum atque formarum. And 
thus much Averrois is forced to contcfs. For all 
forms (faith he) are, in primo mot ore, which is alio 
the opinion of i Arijlotle in the i ;th of his Metapb. 
and of Albertus upon Dionyfius. 

Sect. XL 

Of fate y and that the fiars have great influence : 
and that their operations may diverjly be prevented 
or furthered. 

A N D,as of nature, l'uch is the dilpute and con¬ 
tention concerning fiite or deftiny, ot which 
the opinions of thofe lear ned men that have written 
thereof, may be lately received, had they not there¬ 
unto annexed and fallened an inevitable needhry, 
and made it more general, and univerlaJly power¬ 
ful than it is, by giving it dominion over die mind 
of man, and over his will, ot which Ovidy and fu~ 
venal: 


a Wil'd. Sol. i. 14. *> Natura cnim remota politic rail puteftate divina, prorfj, nihil eft. 

r. « Cypr. Ue mente, 1. 3. A 12. Metaph. 


Lait. de t'alia Sap.ciaia, 1. j- 


» fa::' 


Digitized by 


Google 






n 


Chap. I. The History of the World. 


i 

$ » 


1 Rati* fatum vimere nulla valet. 

Servis rtgna dabunt, captivis fata triumpbos. 

’Gainft fate no counfel can prevail. 

Kingdoms to (laves by deftiny. 

To captives triumphs given be. 

An error of the Chaldeans , and after them of the 
Stricks, the Pharifies, Prifcilliantfis, the Bardij'aniflsy 
and others, as b Bifil, Augufline, and Thomas have 
obferved : but that fate js an obedience of fecond 
caufcs to the firft, was well conceived of Hermes, 
and Apuleius the Platonifl. c Plotinus out of the 
aftronomers calleth it a difpofition from the afts of 
celeftial orbs, unchangeably working in inferiour 
bodies, die fame being alio true enough, in refpeift 
of all thofe things which a rational mind doth not 
order nor direft. Ptolemy, Seneca, Democritus , 
Epicurus, Cbryflppus, Empedocles, and the Stoicks, 
fome of them more largely, others more ftridlly, 
aferibe to d fate a binding and inevitable neccffity j 
and that it is the fame which is fpoken and deter¬ 
mined by God {quod de unoquoque nojlrum fatus ejl 
Dtus) and the definite lot of all living. And cer¬ 
tainly it cannot be doubted, but the ftars are tnftru- 
ments of far greater ufe, than to give an obfeure 
light, and for men to gaze on after fun-fet: it being 
manifeft, that the diverfity of fealbns, die winters, 
and fummers, more hot ajul cold, are not fo uncer- 
tained by the fun and moon alone, who always keep 
one and the fame courfe •, but diat the ftars have 
alio their working thereiiv 

And if we cannot deny, but that God hath given 
virtues to fprings and fountains, to cold eardi, to 
plants and ftones, minerals, and to the excremental 
parts of the bafeft living creatures, why fliould we 
rob the beautiful ftars of their working powers ? for 
feeing they are many in number, and of eminent 
beauty and magnitude, we may not think, that in 
the treafury of his wil'dom, who is infinite, there 
can be wanting (even for every liar) a peculiar vir¬ 
tue and operation •, as every herb, plant, fruit, and 
flower adorning the (ace of the eardi, hath the like. 
For as thefe were not created to beautify the earth 
alone, and to cover and lludow her duily face, but 
otherwile tor the ufe of man and bcaft, to feed them 
and cure them •, fo were not thofe uncountable glo¬ 
rious bodies fet in die firmament, to no other end, 
than to adorn it •, but lor inftruments and organs oi 
his divine providence, lb tar as it hath pleated his 
juft will to determine. Origen upon diis place of 
* Genefis , Let there be light in the firmament, See. 
affirmeth, that the ftars are not caufcs (meaning 
perchance binding caufcs-,) but are as open books, 
wherein are contained and fet down all things wliat- 
foever to come but not to be read by the eyes of 
human wifdom: which latter part I believe well, 
and diis laying of Syracules withal: 1 That there are 
h'd yet greater things than thefe be , and we have 
Jeen but a few of bis works. And though, tor the 
capacity of men, we know fomewhat, yet in die 
tme and uttermoft virtues of herbs and plants, which 
our lclves low and let, and which grow under our 
feet, we are in effect ignorant \ much more in die 
powers and working of celeftial bodies. For hard¬ 
ly (laith t Solomon) can we dijeern the things that aie 
upon the earth , and with great labour find we out 
thofe things that art before us: who can then invcjii- 
gate the things that arc in heaven ? l * Alultum ejl de 
rebus cwlcflibus aliquid cog no (cere: It is much to 
know a little ot heavenly tilings. But in this tjucl- 
tion ot fate, the middle courle is to be followed, 


dial as with the heathen wc do not bind God to his 
creatures, in this fuppofed neceiTity of deftiny > J*> 
on the contrary, we do not.rob thofe beautiful crea¬ 
tures of their powers and offices, Kor had any of 
thefe fecond caufcs defpoilcd God of his prerogative, 
or had God himfelf conftraincd the mind and will 
of man to impious .lifts by any celeftial inforcements, 
then fure die impious exeufe of fome were juftifi- 
able \ of whom St. * Augnflinc, Jmpia perverfitate in 
malls faclis rcclifllwe reprehendendis ingerunt accufan- 
dum pot ins auilorem jy derum, quam commifforemJ'ce- 
lerurn j Where we reprehend them ot evjl deeds, 
diey again with wicked perverfenels urge, that ra¬ 
ther the audior and creator of the ftars, than the doer 
of the evil, is to be accufcd. 

But that die ftars and other celeftial bodies incline 
the will by mediation of the fenfitive appetite, which 
is alfo ftirred by die conftitution and complexion, 
it cannot be doubted. Corpora coeleflia (laith Da- 
mafeene ) conflituunt in nobis habitus, complexions, 
(fi difpofitiones *, The heavenly bodies (faith he) make 
in us habits, complexions, and difpofidons \ for the 
body (diough k Galen intbree it iurdier) hath un¬ 
doubtedly a kind of drawing after it the affections 
of die mind, efpecially bodies ftrong in humour, 
and weak in virtues \ tor thofe of cholcrick com¬ 
plexions are fubjeCt to anger, and the furious e lie efts 
thereof j by which they fuller tliemfclvcs to be trans¬ 
ported, wliere the mind luth not rcafbn to remem¬ 
ber, that paffions ought to be her vallals, not her 
mailers. And diat they wholly direCi the reafon- 
lefs mind, lain refolved: for all thofe which were 
created mortal, as birds, bcafts, and the like, are 
left to their natural appetites \ over all which, ce- 
lcftial bodies (as inltruments and executioners of 
God's providence) have ablblute dominion. What 
we fliould judge of men, who little differ lfom beads, 
J cannot tell} for as he that contendctli againft thofe 
inforcements, may cafily mafter or rclilt them •, fo 
wholbever lhall negleCl the remedies by virtue and 
piety prepared, putteth himfelf altogether under the 
power of his fenfual apatite j 1 Vmcctur fatum fi 
reflflas,vincit ficontcmpjcris Kate will be overcome, 
it thou refill it *, if thou ncgledt, it conquereth. 

But that either die ftars or the fun have any power 
over the minds of men immediately, it is abfurd to 
think, odier than as aforelaid, as the fame by die 
body’s temper may be affefted. Lumen Jolts adge - 
nerationem JenJibilium corpotum confert, Iff ad vi/am 
ipfam movet , (fi nntrit, {fi auget, (fi pcrficit : The 
light of the l'un (faith St. m Augnflinc) liclpcdi the 
generation of ftnfible bodies, moveth them to life, 
and nouriftiedi, augmented), and peiiefteth diem ; 
yet ltill as a minillcr, not as a mailer: Bonus qui - 
dein cfl Jol, in nuniflerio, non imperio \ The fun is 
good to iervc,not tol'way (frith St ."Ambrofe.) And 
St. Augufliue, Dcus regit injeriora corpora per fupe- 
riora God rulcth the bodies below by thole above: 
but he avoucheth not, that luperiour bodies have 
rule over mens minds, which are incorporal. 

But howibever we are by the ftars inclined at our 
birth, yet there are many tilings both in nature and 
art, that encounter the fame, and weaken their ope¬ 
ration*, and Ariflotle himlelf confeffeth, dut the 
heavens do not always work their effedts in inferiour 
bodies, no more than the figns of rain and wind do 
always come to pal's. And it is divers times i'ccn, 
that paternal virtue and vice hath his counter-work¬ 
ing to thefe inclinations. ° Ejl in juveueis pat rum 
vitius •, In the young off-l'pring the fathers virtue 
is *, and foon the contrary, pat mm vitia: and herc- 


* Juvcn. &t. -oi. r Bali!. Kffa. 4. Aug. dc hctvf. 70. c. 3;. Tho. cont. (jent. 3. c. S3. 

® Cic. dclat. <• (jcii. 1. rj. ( ted. 4:. c. 32. s Wifd. 0 16. •> Arillo:lc. ‘ Aug. :o. t»en. a*l lit. 

mor. an.kq. temp ' Quint. ai Aug. dc Civ. Dei, 1 . >■ 11 lies. !. 4. dc term. 3. " Hot. ). 4. Oil. 30. 


l-'iiin in 12 d.*!ig. 

"(ial r 


Digitized by 


Google 


12 


7& History of the World. Book \. 


in alio there is often found an interchange *, the fons 
of virtuous men, by an ill conftellation, become in¬ 
clinable to vice •, and of* vicious men to virtue. 

Egregia ejl foboles fcelerato nata parente : 

A worthy fon is born of a wicked fadier. 

But there is nothing (after God’s referved power) 
that fo much fetteth this art of influence out of fquare 
and rule, as education doth: for there are none in 
the world fo wickedly inclined, but that a religious 
inftruttion and bringing up, may faihion anew and 
reform them *, nor any fo well difpofed, whom (the 
reins being let loofe) the continual fcllowihip and 
familiarity, and the examples of diflolute men, may 
not corrupt and deform. Veflels will ever retain a 
favour of their firft liquor: it being equally difficult 
either to cleanfe the mind once corrupted, or to ex- 
tinguifh the fweet favour of virtue firft received, 
when the mind was yet tender, open, and eafily iea- 
foned *, but where a favourable conftellation (allow¬ 
ing that the ftars incline the will) and a virtuous 
education do happily arrive, or the contrary in both, 
thereby it is that men are found fo exceeding virtu¬ 
ous Or vicious, heaven and earth (as it were) run¬ 
ning together and agreeing in one: for as the feeds 
of virtue may, by the art and husbandry of chriftian 
counfel, produce better and more beautiful fruit, than 
the ftrength of felf-nature and kind could have 
yielded diem *, fo the plants, apt to grow wild, and 
to change themfelves into weeds, by being fet in a 
foil fuitable, and like themfelves, are made more 
unfavoury and filled with poifon. It was diereforc 
truly affirmed, Sapiens adjuvabit opus a fir or urn , qiicm- 
admodum agricola terra naturam \ A wife man af- 
fifteth the work of the ftars, as the husbandman 
helpedi the nature of the foil. And Ptolemy himfclf 
confefTeth thus much, Sapiens , {j? omina fapientis 
medici dominabuntnr ajlris \ A wife man, and the 
ominous art of a wife phyfician, fhall prevail againft 
the ftars. Laftly, we ought all to know that God 
created the ftars, as lie did the reft of the univerf.il •, 
whole influences may be called his referved and un¬ 
written laws. But let us confider how they bind: 
even as the laws of men do •, for although the kings 
and princes of the world have by their laws decreed, 
that a thief and a murderer fhall fuffer deadi $ and 
though their ordinances are daily by judges and ma- 
giftrates (the ftars of kings) executed accordingly •, 
yet thefe laws do not deprive kings of their natural 
or religious companion, or bind them without 
prerogative, to fuch a feverc execution, as that there 
fhould be nothing left of liberty to judgment, power, 
or confcience: the law in his own nature, being no 
other than a deaf tyrant. But feeing that it is other- 
wife, and that princes (who ought to imitate God 
in all they can) do fometimes for caufes to themfelves 
known, and by mediation, pardon offences both 
againft others and themfelves \ it were then impious 
to take that power and liberty from God himfelf, 
which his fubftitutesenjoy , God being mercy, good- 
nels, and charity it felt'. Otherwile that example of 
prayer by our Saviour taught ; 1 And let us not be 
led into temptation, but deliver us from evil , had been 
no other but an expence of words and time , but 
that God (which only knoweth the operation of his 
own creatures truly) hath affined us, that there is no 
inclination or temptation fo forcible, which our hum¬ 
ble prayers and defires may not make fruftrate and 
break afunder: for were it (as the Stoicks conceive) 
that fate or deftiny, though depending upon eternal 
power, yet being once ordered and difpofed, had fuch 
a connexion and immutable dependency, that God 


himfelf fhould in a kind have fhutup himfelf there¬ 
in •, Hovj miferable then were the condition of men 
(faith Augujltruj left altogether without hope. 

And if this ftrength of the ftars were fo transfer¬ 
red, as tint God had quitted unto them all dominion 
over his creatures * be he Pagan or Cbrijlian that fo 
believeth, the only true God of the one, and the 
imaginary Gods of the other, would thereby be de- 
fpoiled of all worfhip, reverence, or refpedh 

And certainly, God which hadi promifed us the 
reward of well-doing, which Chrift himfelf claimed 
at the hands of the father ( b / have finifhed the work 
which thou gavefl me to do and the fame God, 
who hath threatened unto us the forrow and rormenr 
of offences, could not, contrary to his merciful na¬ 
ture, be fo unjuft, as to bind us inevitably to the 
deftinics or influences of the ftars, or l'ubjetft our fouls 
to any impofed neceflity. But it was well faid of 
Plotinus , that the ftars were fignificant, but not ef¬ 
ficient, giving them yet fomething Id's than their 
due : and therefore as I do not confent with them, 
who would make thofe glorious creatures of God 
virtuelefs : fo I think that we derogate from his eter¬ 
nal and abfolute power and providence, to aferibe 
to them the fame dominion over our immortal fouls, 
which they have over all bodily fubftances, and 
perifhable natures: for the fouls of men loving and 
fearing God, receive influence from that divine 
light it felf, whereof the fun’s clarity, and that of 
the ftars, is by Plato called but a fhadow, c Lumen 
ejl umbra Dei, IfDeus ejl lumen luminis Light is the 
fhadow of God’s brightnds, who is the light of light: 
But to end this queftion, becaufe this deftiny, toge¬ 
ther with providence, prefcience, and predeftination^ 
arc often confounded, I think it not impertinent to 
touch the difference in a word or two; for every 
man hath not obferved it, though all learned men 
have. 

Sect. XII. 

Of PRESCIENCE. 

Rcfcience, or foreknowledge (which the Greeks 
call Prognofis, the Latins Proecognitio, or Pr<r- 
feientid) confidercd in order and nature (if wc may 
fpeak of God after the manner of men) goeth before 
rovidence: for God foreknew all things, before he 
ad created them, or before they had being to be 
cared for \ and prefcience is no other than an infal¬ 
lible foreknowledge. For whatfoever our felves 
foreknow, except the fame be to fucceed according¬ 
ly, it cannot be true that we foreknow it. But this 
prefcience of God (as it is prefcience only) is not the 
caufe of any thing futurely fucceeding: neither doth 
God’s foreknowledge impofe any neceflity, or bind. 
For in that we foreknow that the fun will rife, 
and fet; that all men born in the world fhall 
die again 3 that after the winter the fpring fhall 
come •, after the fpring, fummer, and harveft j 
and that according to the fevcral feeds that we fow, 
we fhall reap foveral forts of grain, yet is not our 
foreknowledge the caufe of this, or any of thefe: 
neither doth the knowledge in us bind or conltrain 
the fun to rife and fet, or men to dye •, for the cau¬ 
fes (as men perfuade themfelves) are otherwife ma- 
nifeft and known to all. The eye of man ( faith 
d Boetius) beboldetb thofe things Jubjecl to fenfe, as 
they are j the eye J'eelh that fuch a beajl is an horfe, 
it feeth men, trees , and houfes , &c. but our feeing 
of them (as they are) is not the caufe of their fo be- 
ing, for fuch they be in their own natures. And 
again out of the fame author j Divina provident ta 
rebus generandis non imponit neceffitatem , quta fi 
omnia evenirent ex neceffitate , prxmia bonorum, 6? 



4 Alatth. 6. 13. t> Jo!in 18. 4. 


« Plat. pol. 6. Ficin.in 1 . - pol. 


d Boetius d» Coufol. 

Digitized by 


Google 


tana 







Chap. I: The History of the World. 


*3 


poena nalorum ptriret } Divine providence (faith 
he) impofeth no neceffity upon things that are to 
exift} For if all come to pafs of neceffity, there fhould 
neither be reward of good, nor punifhment of evil. 


N 


beginning, and is the bond of the univerfaJ: Amor 
divinus rerum omnium ejl principium, (ft •vinculum 
univerfi (faith Plato :) Amor Dei eft nobis perpetuus, 
mundi copula, parti unique ejus immobile fuftentaculum, 
ac univerfie maebirue fundamentum \ The love oi 
God is the perpetual knot, and link or chain of 
the world, and the immovable pillar of every part 
thereof, and the bafis and foundation of the univer- 
fal. God therefore, who could only be the cauie of 
all, can only provide for all, and fuftain all j fo as 
to abfolute power, to every where prefence, to 
perfect goodnels, to pure and divine k love - t this at¬ 
tribute tranfeendent liability of providence is only 
proper and belonging. 

Sect. XIV. 

Of PREDESTINATION. 

N O W for predeftination, we can difference it 
no otherwife from providence and prefcience, 
than in this •, that prefcience only forefeeth -, provi¬ 
dence forefeeth and careth for, and hath refpeCt to all 
'creatures, even from the brighteft angels of heaven, 
to the unwordiieft worms of the earth : and prede- 
ftination (as it isufed, efpecially by divines) is only 
of men, and yet not of all to men belonging, but 
of their falvation properly, in the common ufe of di¬ 
vines ^ or perdition, as fome have ufed it. Yet m Pe¬ 
ter Lombard, Thomas, Bernenfis Theologus , and others, • 
take the word predeftination more fir idly, and for 
a preparation to felicity. Divers of the fathers take 
it more largely fomedmes: among whom St. Au- 
guftine fpeaking of two cities, and two focieties, 
uleth thefe words; "Quarum eft una , quapradeftina - 
ta eft in aternum regnare cum Deo, altera aternum 
fupplicium fubire cum diabolo, whereof one is it, 
which is predeftinated to reign for ever with God, 
but the other is to undergo everlafting torment widi 
the devil * for according to Nonius Marcellus , De¬ 
ft mare, eft praparare•, and of the fame opinion are 
many proteftant writers, as 0 Calvin, Beza, Buca- 
nus, Danaus, and fuch like: and as for the mani¬ 
fold queftions hereof arifing, I leave them to die 
divines ^ and why it hath pleafed God to create 
fome veflels of honour, and fome of difhonour, I 
will anfwerwith Gregory , who laith, P G)ui in fatlis 
Dei rationem non videt, infinnitatem fuarn confide - 
rans, cur non videat, rationem videt \ He that feeth 
no reafon in the adions of God, by confideration 
of his own infirmity, perceiveth the reafon of his 
blindnefs. And again with St. 4 Auguftinc , Occulta 
ejfe caufa pot eft, injuft a eft'e non pot eft -, Hidden the 
caufe of his predeftination may be, unjuft it cannot be. 

Sect. XV. 

Of fortune: and of the reafon of fome things that feem 
to be by fortune, and againft reafon and providence. 

L Aftly, feeing deftiny or neceffity is fubfequent 
to God’s providence, and feeing that the ftars 
have no other dominion, than is before fpoken, and 
that nature is nothing, but, as Plato calleth it, Dei 
artem , vel artificiofum Dei organum ; The art, or 
artificial organ of God: And Cufanus , divini pree- 
cepti inftrumentum, The inftrument of the divine 
precept: we may then with better reafon reject that 
kind of idolatry, or God of fools, called, fortune 
or chance > a goddefs, the mod reverenced, and 
the molt reviled of all other, but not ancient: for 
Homer maketh her the daughter of Oceanus , as Pau- 
fanias witnefieth in his MeJ/cniaeks. The Greeks 

*Pf i47. 8, 9. b Pf. 104. 27. & 145. 15. « 1 Reg. 17. 4. d Matth. 6. 26. * Luke 12. 6, 7. f 1 Pet. ?. 7. t pf 

36. 6. h j cr 24. i Elay 42. 8. k 1 John 4. 1. God is iwt. 1 Rom. 8. & 9. m Lomb. 1 . 1. iljil. 39. Thom. part. 1. 
dill. 2 3. Bern, de Probl. de p. d. n Aug. 1 . 15 c. 1. dc Civ. Dei. 0 Cal. in c. 9. ad Rom. v. 1 1. Bcz. in magn amior. in c. 

9 ad Rom. Danarus 1 . 3. dc-Salut. p Greg. Mag. Job 9. * Aug. ad Polin, ep 59. 

• N J . 1. D call 

Google 


Sect. XIII. 

Of PROVIDENCE. 

T 0 VV providence (which the Greeks call Pro- 
_ noia) is an intellectual knowledge, both fore- 
feeing, caring for, and ordering all things, and doth 
not only behold all paft, all prefent, and all to come, 
but is the caufe of their fo being, which prefcience 
(fimply taken) is not: and therefore providence by 
the philofophers (faith St. Auguftine') is divided into 
memory, knowledge, and care: memory of the 
paft, knowledge of the prefent, and care of the fu¬ 
ture : and we our felves account fuch a man for pro¬ 
vident, as, remembering things paft, and obferving 
things prefent, can by judgment, and comparing 
the one with the other, provide for the future, and 
times fucceeding. That fuch a thing there is as pro¬ 
vidence, the feriptures every where teach us , Mofes 
in many places, the prophets in their predictions, 
Chrift himfelf and his apoftles aflure us hereof j and 
befides the feriptures, Hermes , Orpheus , Euripides , 
Pythagoras, Plato, Plotinus , and (in eftedt) all learn¬ 
ed men acknowledge the providence of God-, yea 
die Turks themfelves are fo confident therein, as 
they refufe not to accompany and vifit each odier in 
the moft peftilent dilcafes, nor fhun any peril what- 
foever, though death therein do manifeftly prefent 
it fclf. 

The places of feripture proving providence, are 
fo many, both in general and particular, as I fhall 
need to repeat but a few of them in this place: Sing 
unto God (laith a David) which covereth the heavens 
with clouds, and prepareth rain for the earth, and 
maketh the graft to grow upon the mountains, which 
giveth the beafts their food, and feedetb the young 
raven that cries: b All thefe wait upon thee, that 
thou may ft give them food in due feafon: c and thou 
fialt drink of the river Chercth (faith God to Elijah) 
and I have commanded the ravens to feed thee there. 
d Behold, the fowls of the air, they fow not, nor 
reap, and yet your heavenly lather feedeth them: 
Again, c Are not two fparrows fold for a farthing ? 
and one of them Jhallnot fall on the ground without 
your Father: yea, all the hairs of your bead are num- 
bred: And St. 1 Peter, Caft all your care on him, for 
he careth for you: And bis judgments are written, 
faith s David. 

God therefore, who is every where prefent, h fVho 
filletb the heavens and the earth, wbofe eyes are upon 
the righteous, and his countenance againft them that 
do evil, was therefore by Orpheus called oculus infi¬ 
nity, an infinite eye, beholding all things -, and 
cannot therefore be efteemed as an idle looker on, 
as if he had transferred his power to any odier for 
it is contrary to his own word, * Gloriam me am alte¬ 
rs non dabo ■, I will not give my glory to another. 
No man commandcth in the king’s prefence, but 
by the king’s direction •, but God is every where 
prefent, and king of kings. The example of God’s 
univerfal providence is feen in his creatures The 
father provideth for his children: bealls and birds 
and all living, for their young ones. If providence 
be found in fecond fathers, much more in the firft 
and univerfal: and if there be a natural loving care 
in men, and bealls, much more in God, who hath 
formed this nature, and whofe divine love was die 


Digitized by 


14 The History of the World* Rook I. 


call her tu^hv, fignifying a relative being, or beti¬ 
ding, lb as before Homer s time this great lady was 
fcarce heard of \ and HefioduSy who hath taught 
the birth and beginning of allthefe counterfeit gods, 
hath not a word of Fortune *, yet afterwards fhe 
grew fo great and omnipotent, as from kings and 
kingdoms, to beggars and cottages, (he ordered all 
things, refitting the wifdom of the wifeft, by ma¬ 
king the pofliefifor thereof miferable \ valuing the 
folly of the moft foolifh, by making their fuccefs pro- 
fperous: infomuch as the actions of men were Grid 
to be but the fports of fortune, and the variable ac¬ 
cidents happening in mens lives, but her paftimes: 
of which 2 PalladtuSy Vita hominum ludus for tun* eft \ 
The life of man is the play of fortune: and becaufe 
it often fiftieth out, mat enterprifes guided by ill 
counfels, have equal fuccefs to thofe by the beft 
judgment conducted, therefore had fortune the fame 
external figure with fapience j whereof Atbenaus : 

Longtime a fapientia fors diffidety 

Sed mult a perftcit tamen ftmillima: 

From wifdom fortune differs far, 

And yet in works moft like they are. 

But I will forbear to be curious in that, which 
(as it is commonly underftood) is nothing elfe but 
a power imaginary, to which the fuccefs of hu¬ 
man actions and endeavours were for their variety 
aferibed •, for when a manifeft caufe could not be 
given, then was it attributed to fortune, as if there 
were no caufe of thofe things, of which moft men 
are ignorant i contrary to this true ground of Plato , 
Nihil eft ortum fub fole t cujus caufa legitima nonpra- 
cefferit \ Nothing ever came to pafs under the fun, 
of which there was not a juft preceding caufe. But 
Aquinas hath herein anfwered in one diftimftion, 
wnatfoever may be obje&ed •, for many things there 
are (faith he) which happen, befides the intention 
of the inferior, but not befides the intention of the 
fuperior \ Prater intentionem inferiority fed non pra¬ 
ter intentionem fuperioris (to wit, the ordinance of 
God}) and therefore (faith b Melancbton) Quod 
poeta fortunam t not Deum appellamus y whom the 
poets call fortune, we know to be God. And that 
this is true, the leripture in many places teacheth 
us -y as in the Law of murther, c He that fmiteth a 
many and he die t Jhall die the death i and if a man 
hath not laid wait, but God hath offered him into 
his handty then 1 will appoint thee a place whither 
be flmll flee. Now, where the feripturc hath thefe 
words, God bath offered him into his hands , we fay, 
if he hurt him by chance: and in d Deuteronomyy 
where the flipping the ax from the helve, 
whereby another is (lain, was the work of God 
himlelf , we in our phrafe attribute this accident, 
to chance or fortune: and in e Proverbs , The 
lot is caft into the lap y but the whole difpofition 
thereof is of the Lord: fo as that which feemeth 
moft cafual and fubjedl to fortune, is yet difpofed 
by the ordnance of God, as all things elfe ^ and 
hereof the wifer fort, and the beft learned of the 
philofophers were not ignorant, as Cicero witnefleth 
for them, gathering the opinion of Ariftotle and his 
fedlators, with thofe of Plato y and the Academickty 
to this effedt, that the fame power which they 
called Animam munch y the foul of the world, was 
no other than that incomprehenfible wifdom, which 
we exprefs by the name of God, governing every 
being as well in heaven as in earth \ to which wif¬ 
dom and power they fometime gave the title of ne- 
ccfliry or 1 fate, becaufe it bindeth by inevitable or¬ 


dinance : fometime, the ftyJe of fortune, becaufe of 
many effedts there appear unto us no certain caufes. 
To this effedt fpeaketh St. Auguftine in his quefti- 
ons upon Genefts the firft book: the lame hath Se¬ 
neca in his 4 th of Benefits *, which was alfo the 
dodtrine of the Stoickty of which feft he was e For 
whatfoever (faith he) thou calltft God, t be it Nature t 
Fatey or Fortune y all are but one and the famty dif¬ 
ferenced by divers termSy according as he ufethy and 
exercifeth his power diver fly. 

But it may be objected, that if fortune and chance 
were not lometimes the caufes of good and evil in 
men, but an idle voice, whereby we exprefs fuc¬ 
cefs i how comes it then, that fo many worthy and 
wile men depend upon lb many unworthy and emp¬ 
ty-headed fools ? That riches and honour are given ' 
to external men, and without kernel y and fo many 
learned, virtuous, and valiant men wear out their lives 
in poor and dejedfed eftates ? In a word, there is no 
other inferiour, or apparent caufe, befide the partiality 
of mao’s aftedtion, but the fafhioning and not falhion- 
ing of our {elves according to the nature of the ume 
wherein we live : for whofoever is moft able, and 
beft fufficient to difeern, and hath withal an honell 
and open heart and loving truth : if princes, or 
thofe that govern, endure no other difeourfe than 
their own flatteries: then, I fay, fuch an one, whole 
virtue and courage forbiddeth him to be bafe and 
a diflembler, lhall evermore hang under the wheel j 
which kind of deferving well and receiving ill, we 
always falfly charge fortune withal. For whofoever 
fhall tell any great man or magiftrate, that he is not 
juft*, the general of an army, that he is not vali¬ 
ant y and great ladies, that they are not fair , fhall 
never be a counfeller, a captain, or a courtier. 
Neither is it fufficient to be wile with a wile prince, 
valiant with a valiant, and juft with him that is 
juft, for fuch a one hath no eftate in his profperi- 
ty j but he muft alfo change with the fucceflor, if 
he be of contrary qualities } fail with the tide of the 
time, and alter form and condition, as the eftate 
or the eftate’s mailer changeth: otherwife how 
were it poffible, that the moft bafe men, and le- 
parate from all imitable qualities, could fo often at¬ 
tain to honour and riches, but by fuch an obfervant 
flavilh courfc ? Thefe men having nothing elfe to 
value themlelves by, but a counterfeit kind of won¬ 
dering at other men, and by making them believe 
that all their vices are virtues, and all their dully 
actions cryllalline, have yet in all ages profpered 
equally with the moft virtuous, if not exceeded them. 
For, according to Menander , Omnis infipiens ar- 
rogantia & plauftbus capitur j Every fool is won with 
his own pride, and others flattering applaufe: So 
as whofoever will live altogether out of himlelf^ 
and ftudy other mens humours, and obferve them, 
fhall never be unfortunate j and on the contrary, 
that man which prizeth truth and virtue (except the 
feafon wherein he liveth be of all thefe, and of all 
forts of goodnefs, fruitful) fhall never profper by 
the pofleffion or profeflion thereof. It is alfo a token 
of a worldly wife man, not to war or contend in 
vain againft the nature of times wherein he liveth: 
for fuch a one is often the author of his own mifery j 
but beft it were to follow the advice, which the pope 
gave the bifhops of that age, our of Ovid t while the 
Arian herefy raged: 

b Dum furor in citrfu eft y currents cede furori. 

While fury gallops on the way, 

Let no man fury’s gallop flay. 


» Sen. ep. 91 . Aur. vift. de Pertinace, Sen. ep. 74 . Demetrius Poliorcetes, in the great and often changes of hit fortune, is fuiJ to 
bavt ufed to cr\ out upon Fortune , applying to her a <vcrftof itichylus : Tu me extuliili, eadem me is (fentio) perditum.^ * Te fa*> 
mus fortuna I)eam, cceloque locamus. Sat. 10. 366. « Lxod. 21. 12, <3. d Deut. 19. 5. * Prov. 16. 33. 1 Ci«. «. I** 1 ®? 

l.i. * Senec.l. 4. c. 7. k Ovid. ilet. 1 . 1. 


Digi 


by Google 







* • » r 

Chap. I. "The History of the World. 


And if Ciem (thin whom thit world begat not 
a man of more reputed judgment) h*d followed the 
counfel of his brother Quintus, Potuijfet (faith Pe¬ 
trarch) in kSiulo fuo mori, potuijfet integro cadavere 
fepeliri \ He might then have died the death of na¬ 
ture, and been with an untom and undiflevered body 
buried ; for, as, Petrarch in the fame place noteth, 
Quid fiultius quam defperantem (prxferttm de effetlu) 
la thus perpetuis implicari ? What more foolilh than 
for him that defpairs (efpecially of the effect) to be 
entangled with endlefs contentions? Whofoever 
therefore will fet before him Macbiavef s two marks 
to )hoot at (to wit, riches, and glory, mult fet on 
and take off a back of iron to a weak wooden bow, 
that it may fit both the ftrong and the feeble > for 
as he, that firft deviled to add fails to rowing veflels, 
did either fo proportion them as being fattened aloft. 


19 

and towards the head of his malt, he might abide 
all winds and ftorms, or elfe he fometime or other 
periihed by his own invention; fo that man which 
prizeth virtue for itlelf, and cannot endure to hoil'e 
and ffrike his fails, as the divers natures ot calms 
and ftorms require, muft cut his fails and his cloth 
of mean length and breadth, and content himlclf 
with a flow and fure navigation (to wit) a mean and 
free eftate. But of this difpute of fortune, and the 
reft, or of whatfoever Lords or Gods, imaginary 
powers, or cauies, the wit (or rather loolilhnefs) of 
man hath found out: let us refolve with St. Pauly 
who hath taught us, that there is a but one God, the 
Fathery of whom are all things , and we in him , and 
one Lord JeJits CbriJ} t by whom are all things, and 
we by him j there are diverfities of operations, but 
God is the fame, which worketh all in all. 


1 i Cor. 8. 6. 12. 6. 


Chap. II. 

Of Mans eftatc in his firfl Creation, and of God’s reft. 


Sect. I. 

Of the image of God, according to which man was 
firft created. 

T HE creation of all other creatures being 
finifhed, the heavens adorned, and the 
earth replenilhed, God faid, • Let us make 
man in our own image, according to our likenefs. 

Man is the laft and moil admirable of God’s 
works to us known : b Ingens miraculum homo \ Man 
is the greateft wonder (faith Plato out of Mercurius:) 
Nature ardentifpm* artificium ; The artificial work 
of the mod ardent or flre-like nature (as faith Zo- 
roafter,) though the fame be meant, not for any ex¬ 
cellency external, but in refpe£t of his internal form, 
both in the nature, qualities, and other attributes 
thereof: in nature, becaufe h hath an eflence, im¬ 
mortal and fpiritual in qualities, becaufe the fame 
was by God created holy and righteous in truth •, 
in other attribute^ becaufe man was made lord of 
the world, and of the creatures therein. 

‘ Sanftius his animal, mentifque capacius alt a. 
Deer at adbuc , & quod dommari in cetera poffet: 
Natus homo eft. 

More holy than the reft, and underftanding more, 
A living creature wants, to rule all made before, 
So man began to be. 

Of this image and fimilitude of God, there is 
much difpute among the fathers, fchoolmen, and 
late writers: fome of the fathers conceive, that man 
was made after the image of God, in refpedl chief¬ 
ly of empire and dominion, as St. Chryfoflom , Am- 
brofe, and fome others : which St. Ambrofe denieth 
to the woman in thefe words, Ut ficut Deus units , 
ab e 0 fitret homo unus \ 13 quomodo ex Deo uno om¬ 
nia, ita ex uno bomine omne genus ejfet fuper faciem 
totius ten*: unus igitur unum fecit , qui unitatis 
ejus haberet imagintm, That as God is one, one 
man might be made by him, and that in what man¬ 
ner all things are of one God, likewife of one man 
the whole kind fhould be upon the face of the whole 
earth: therefore he being one, made one, that fhould 
have the image of his unity. But whereas it is ga¬ 


thered out of the following words of the fame verfe, 
that man was after the image of God in refpeft of 
rule and power; it is written Dominamini in the 
plural number •, and let them rule over the fifb in the 
fea, c. and therefore cannot the woman be exclu¬ 
ded. Others conceive, that man is faid to be after 
the image of God in refpedf of his immortal foul 
only: becaufe as God is invifible, fo the foul of 
man is invifible ; as God is immortal and incorpo¬ 
ral, fo is the foul of man immortal and incorporal • 
and as there is but one God which governeth the 
world, fo but one foul which governeth the body of 
man; and as God is wholly in every part of the 
world, fo is the foul of man wholly in every part of 
the body: Anima eft tota in toto, & tot a in qualibet 
parte \ The foul is wholly in the whole body, and 
wholly in every part thereof, according to Arijlotle, 
though Cbalcidins, and other learned men, deny that 
do&rine j which that it is otherwife than potentially 
true, all the Ariftotelians in the world lhall never 
prove. Thefe and the like arguments do the Jews 
make (faith T'ofl at us) and thefe refemblances, between 
the infinite God, and the finite man. 

The lchool-men refemble the mind or foul of man 
to God, in this refpeft efpecially ; becaufe that as 
in the mind there are three diftintft powers, or fa¬ 
culties'(to wit) memory, underftanding, and will; 
and yet all thefe being of real differences, are but 
one mind: fo in God there are three diftindt per- 
fons, the Father, Son, and Holy Ghoft, and yet 
but one God. They alfo make die image and fimi¬ 
litude divers; and again, they diftinguifh between 
imagintm Dei, and ad imaginem Dei\ and fpin in¬ 
to fmall tlireds with fubtile diftindtions many times 
the plainnefs and fincerity of the feripturcs : their 
wits being like that ftrong water, that eateth thro’ 
and diffolveth the pureft gold. ViHorinus alfo ma- 
keth the image of God to be fubftanrial, but not the 
fimilitude : Sed in fubftantia nomen qualitatis decla - 
rativum, A word declaring quality in the fubftance. 
Out of which words, and that which followeth, it 
is inferred, that as die image and fimilitude do 
gready differ, fo the finful foul doth not therefore 
leave to be die image of God; but it hath not his 
fimilitude, except it be holy and righteous. St. Au- 
gufiine alfo againft Adimantus thcManicbee affirmeth. 


•Gen. j. 26. b Trif. Afel. 2. Sc de volant. Dei. Plat. leg. 1 . t. 
Wonah In locum Ovid. Met. 1 . t. 76. 


« Sanftum, quia pars potior immortalii; animal, qu a in 


Digitized by 


Goojft 




1 6 The History 

that by fin, the perfection of this image is loft in 
man •, and in his retractions maintaineth the fame 
opinion, and alfo affirmeth that the fimilitude is 
more largely taken, than the image. 

But howl'oever the fchool-men and others diftin- 
guifh, or whatfoever the fathers conceive * fure I 
am, that St. Paul maketh the fame fenfe of the 
image, which Vidorinus doth of the fimilitude, 
who faith, *Aswe have home the image of the earth - 
ly, fo Jhall we bear the image of the heavenly j and 
it cannot be gathered out of the feriptures, that the 
words image and fimilitude were uied but in one 
fenfe, and in this place the better to exprefs each 
other ; whatfoever Lombard hath faid to the con¬ 
trary. For God knows, what a multitude of mea¬ 
nings the wit of man imagineth to himfelf in the 
feriptures, which neither Mofes , the Prophets, or 
Apoftles, ever conceived. Now as St. Paul ufeth 
the word (image) for both : fo St. James ufeth the 
word (fimilitude) for both, in thefe words: b "there¬ 
with blefs we God even the Father , and therewith 
curfe we men, which are made after the fimilitude 
of God. Howfoever therefore St. Augufiine feem- 
eth, out of a kind of elegancy in writing, to make 
l'ome difference : as where he writeth, ‘ Confitemur 
imagincm in ceternitate, fimilitudinem in moribus in- 
veniri ; We confefs that this image is found in e- 
temity, but his fimilitude in manners, that is, in the 
fpiritual difpofnions and qualities of the mind j yet 
thus he elfewere lpeaketh plainly: d fihtafi veropof- 
fit ejfc imago ahqua, in qua Jimilttudo non fit : 
ft enim omnino fimilis non eft, proculdubio nec imago 
eft t As if (lays he) there could be any image, where 
the fimilitude is not: no, out of doubt, where there 
is no likenefs, there is no image. The very words 
of the text make this moft manifeft, as, Let us 
make man in our image, according to our likenefs j 
which is, Let us make man in our image, that he 
may be like us: and in the next verl'e following, 
God himfelf maketh it plain •, for there he ufeth 
the word (image) only as thus: God created the 
man in his image, in the image of God created be 
him. And to take away all difpute or ambiguity, 
in the firft verfe of the fifth chapter, the word (fi¬ 
militude) is ufed again by it felf, as. In the day 
that God created Adam, in the likenefs of God 
made he him. And this fimilitude e St. Paul, 
calleth the image Put on (faith he) the new 
man which is renewed in knowledge after the 
image of him that created him. And in Syraci- 
des it is written, He made them according to his i- 
mage. Now if we may believe St. Paul before Pe¬ 
ter Lombard and other fchool-men, then it is as 
manifeft as words can make it, that the image 
and fimilitude is but the fame; for St. Paul ufeth 
both the words direCtly in one fenfe. 1 For they 
turned the glory of the incorruptible God, to the fimi¬ 
litude of the image of a corruptible man. 

Zanchius laboureth to prove, that man was 
formed alter the image of God, both in body and 
mind: * Nulla pars in bomine, qua non fuerit hujufee 
imagihis particeps, No part in a man (faith he) 
which was not participating Gods image-, for God 
laid, Let us make man according to our own image. 
Jhit the foul alone is not man, but the Hypoftafis 
or whole man compounded of body and foul, ‘the 
body of man (faith he) is the image of the world, 
and called therefore Microcofmus \ but the Idea and 
exemplar of the world was firft in God, fo that 
man, according to his body, muft needs be the 
image of God. Againft which opinion of this 
learned man, his own objection feemeth to me fuf- 


of the W oJi l d. Book I. 

ficient, where he alledgeth that h may be faid, that 
Mofes fpake by the figure Synecdoche, as when a 
man is called a mortal man, yet is not the whole 
man mortal, but the body only: fo when God. 
faid, Let us make man after our image, he meant 
the foul of man, and not the body of earth and 
dull: h Male did us qui deitatem ad heminis Imea- 
menta refert (fairh St. Augufiine 'f) Curfed is he 
that referreth the Deity of God to the lineaments 
of man’s body: Dens enim non ejl human it forma 
particeps, neque corpus humar.um divime (faith Phi¬ 
lo if) God is not partaker of human form, nor hu¬ 
man body of the form divine. The Hebrew word 
for image, is Tfclern, which lignifieth a lliadow or 
obfeure rcfemblance : In imagine pertrunfit homo \ 
Man paficth away in fhadow: L.et us then know 
and confider, that God, who is eternal anil infinite,- 
hath not any bodily fhape or compolition, lor it is 
both againft his nature and his word ; an error of 
the Antbropomorphitte, againft the very cl fence and 
majefty of God. 

Surely Cicero, who was but a Heathen , had yet 
a more divine underftanding than thefe grofs Here- 
ticks: Ad fimilitudinem Dei propius ai cede bat bu- 
mana virtus, qtiam figura $ .The virtue which is in 
man (faith he) came nearer the fimilitude of God 
than the figure. For God is a lpiritual liibllance, 
invifible, and moft fimple j God is a juft God, 
God is merciful, God is charity it felf, and (in a 
wefrd) goodnefs it felf, and none elfe fimply good. 
And thus much it hath pleafed God himlelf to 
teach us, and to make us known of himfelf What 
then can be die fhadow of fuch a lubftance, the 
Image of fuch a nature, or wherein can man be 
laid to refemble his unexcogitable power and per- 
feCfnels? Certainly, not in > dominion alone i for 
the devil is faid to be the prince of this world, and 
the k kingdom of Chrift was not thereof, who was 
the true and perfeCt image of his Father: neither be- 
caufe man hath an immortal foul, and therein the 
faculties of memory, underftanding, and will • for 
the devils are alfo immortal, and participate thofe 
faculties, being called 1 damones , becaufe Jcientes of 
knowledge and l'ubtilty : neither becaufe we are rea- 
fonable creatures, by which we are diftinguifhed 
from beafts: for who have rebelled againft God ? 
who have made gods of the vileft beafts, of ferpents, 
of cats, of owls, yea, even of fhameful parts, of lufts 
and pleafures, but reafonable men? Yet do I not 
condemn the opinion of St. n Cbryfoflom and Ambrofe, 
as touching dominion, but that, in refpeCt thereof, 
man was in fome fort after the image of God, if 
we take dominion, fuch as it ought to be, that is, 
accompanied with juftice and piety for God did 
not only make man a ruler and governor over the 
fifties of the fea, the fowls of heaven (or of the air) 
and over the beafts of the field but God gave unto 
man a dominion over men, he appointed kings to 
govern them, and judges to judge them in equity. 
Neither do 1 exclude reafon, as it is the ability of 
underftanding. For I do not conceive, that Iren<eus 
did therefore call man, the image of God, becaufe 
he was animal rationale only ; but that he underftood 
it better, with Sybilla \ Imago mea eft homo, redam 
rationem habens \ Man that is endued with right 
reafon is faid to refemble God (that is) by right 
reafon to know and confefs God his Creator, and 
the fame God to ferve, Jove, and obey j and therefore 
faid St. Augufline (who herein came nearer the truth) 
Fecit Deus hominem ad imaginem £ 5 ? fimilitudinem 
fiuam in mente j God made man in refpeft of the 
intellect after his own image and fimilitude and 


a i Cor. 15 49. t> Jam. 3. 9. « Ut fupra. d Aug. ut fupra. e CoIofT. 3. 

T>ci, 1 3. t\ 1. Mn Cell. • Eph. 6. 12. k John 18. 36. 1 Elat. in. Cratol 


10. f Rom. 1. 23. * Zunch. de >pcr. 

m Oforiui dc Juft. 1 . 5. 


Digitized by 


Rtynerius ? 

Google 



Chap. II. The History »/ & World. 17 


* Reynerius, Homo, quod habet mentem, faft Us eft ad 
tmaginem Dei\ Man was made after the image of 
God, in mind, or, in that he hath a mind. 

Sect. II. 

Of the intellefludl mind of man , in which there is 
much of the image of God and that this image is 
much deformed by fin. 

B U T mens is not taken here for anima phyfica, 
according to Ariftotle , which is, forma vel na- 
tura hominis The form or nature of man \ but 
this faculty or gift of God, called mens, is taken 
for prima vis animi, the principal ftrength of the 
mind, for foul] cujus a SI us eft perepetua veritatis 
comemplatio \ whofe aft [exercife, or office] is the 
perpetual contemplation of truth and therefore it 
is alio called b inttUeUus divinus, inlelleflus contem¬ 
plative, {ft anima contemplativa \ A divine under- 
Ihnding, and an intelleft or mind contemplative. 
c Eft autem mens noftra (faith Cufanus') vis compre - 
hendtndi-, {ft totum virtuale ex omnibus comprehen- 
dendi virtutibus compofetum j Our intellectual mind 
(faith he) is a power of comprehending •, even the 
whole, that is in this kind powerful, compounded of 
all the powers of comprehenfion: unto which Mer¬ 
curius attributeth fo much (it his meaning accom¬ 
pany his words) that he efteemeth it to be the very 
eflence of God (which was alfo the error of the Ma- 
nicbees, and others) and no otherwife feparate from 
God (faith he) than the light from the fun: for this 
mens, or undemanding (faith Mercurius) J eft Deus 
in hominibur, Is God in men , or rather (and which 
I take to be his meaning) is the image of God in 
man. For, as the fun is not of the fame eflence or 
nature with the divine light, but a body illightned, 
and an illumination created , fo is this mens or un- 
derftanding in men, not of the eflence of God’s in¬ 
finite underftanding, but a power and faculty of our 
fouls the pureft j or, the lumen anima rationality by 
the true and eternal light illightned. And this mens 
others call animam anima, the foul of the foul \ or, 
with St. Auguftinc, the eye of the foul, or receptacle 
of lapience and divine knowledge, jjW amorem fapi- 
entia tanquam ducem fequitur j Which followeth af¬ 
ter the love of fapience as her guide (faith Philo-,) 
between which and reafon -, between which and the 
mind, called anima ; between which and that power 
which die Latins call animus, there is this difference: 
reafon, is that faculty by which we judge and dif¬ 
eourfe-, anima , by which we live. Hereof it is faid, 
Anima corpus animat, id eft, vivificat -, [or] The 
foul is that which doth animate the body, that 
is, giveth it life for death is the foparation of body 
and foul: and the fame ftrength (laidi Philo's which 
God the great direftor hath in the world, the fame 
hath this anima , or mind, or, foul in man. Ani¬ 
mus, is that, by which we will and make election , 
and to this Bajil agreeth, which callcth this mens , 
or divine underftanding, Perfpicacem anima partem \ 
The perceiving part of the mind, or, the light by 
which die foul difeerneth : Dormicntium mens , non 
anima , fopitur $ {ft infuriofts mens extinguitur , ani¬ 
ma manet: In men that fleep it is this (mens, or) 
underftanding, and not the mind or foul, which 
refteth, during which time it is but habitual in wife 
men, and in mad men this (mens) is extinguifbed, 
and not the foul i for mad men do live, though 
diftraft. 

Therefore this word being often ufed for the foul 
giving life, is attributed abufively to mad men, 
when we fay that they are of a diftraft mind, in- 


ftead of a broken underftanding: which word (mind; 
we ufe alfo for opinion, as, 1 am of this mind, or, 
that mind: and fomcrimes for mens conditions or 
virtues, as, he is of an honeft mind, or, a man of a 
juft mind: fometitnes for aft'eftion, as, I do this for 
my mind's hike : and Ariftotle fometimes ufeth this 
word (mens) for the phantafy, which is the ftrength 
of the imagination: fometimes for the knowledge 
of principles, which we have without difeourfe : of¬ 
tentimes for fpirits, angels, and intelligences: but as 
it is ufed in the proper fignificarion, including both 
the underftanding agent and poflible, it is delcribcd 
to be a pure. Ample, fubftantia] a iff, not depending 
upon matter, but having relation to that which is 
intelligible, as to his firrt objeft: or more at large 
thus i a part or particle of the foul, whereby it 
doth underftand, not depending upon matter, nor 
needing any organ, free from paffion coming from 
without, and apt to be diffevered, as, eternal from 
that which is mortal. Hereof excellently Mercurius ; 
Anima eft imago mentis , mens imago Dei. Dens 
menti prcecft, mens anim<e, anima cotpori The foul 
(meaning that which giveth life) is the image of 
this underftanding, or mens \ and this ( mens ) or 
underftanding is the image of God. God is prdi- 
dent or ruler over this underftanding, this under¬ 
ftanding over the foul, and this foul over the body. 
This divifion and diftinftion our of the Platonics , 
and Peripatetickty I leave to the reader to judge oh 
That Mens bumana hath no need of any organ, 
t Marftlius Ficinus in his 9 th book of the foul’s immor¬ 
ality, laboureth to prove. Zanchius doth not dif¬ 
fer from Ficinus in words -, for (faith he) ' Ad fa - 
cultatem intelligentem exercendam , non eget mens orga- 
no\ tanquam medio, per quod intelligent: quanquam 
eget objefio in quod intueatur , f ft ex quo intelleclionem 
concipiat. Hoc autem objeflumfunt phantafmata , feu 
return a fenfbus perceptarum fmulachra ad phantafi- 
am prolata: To exercife the faculty of underftand, 
the mind of man (faith he) needeth no inftrument, 
as a mean, by which it may underftand : but it 
needeth an object, whereon to look, and whence 
to conceive the aft of underftanding. This objeft 
are the phantafms, or the refemblunces of things 
received from the fenfe, and carried to the phanaiy. 
But in efteft, thisconclufion feemeth to carry a con¬ 
trary fenfe, when he maketh the phantafy, in repre- 
fenting the objeft to the underftanding, to be a cor¬ 
poral Organum neither can it be underftood to be 
an Organum of any thing, but of the underftanding. 
And he addeth, that the relemblance of things in 
man’s imagination, are, to his underftanding and 
mind, as colours are to the fight j whence it fo fol- 
loweth, that the imagination or phantafy it felf is 
to the faculty of underftanding, as the eye is to the 
faculty of feeing: and as this is an Organum, fo that. 
Of this queftion, how the mind in all her aftions 
maketh ufe of the body, and hath communion with 
the body, I refer the reader to a mod grave and 
learned difeourfe in the laft reply of M. D. s Bilfon , 
late bifhop of fVinchefter, unto lien. Jacob. How- 
foever the truth be determined, we muft conclude, 
that it is neither in refpeft of reafon alone, by which 
we difeourfe, nor in refpeft of the mind it felf, by 
which we live, nor in refpeft of our fouls fimply, by 
which we are immortal, that we are made after the 
image of God. But moll fafely may we refcmble 
our lelves to God in mente, and in refpeft of that 
pure faculty, which is never feparate from the con¬ 
templation and love of God. Yet this is not all ^ 
for St. Bernard maketh a true difference between 
the nature and faculties of the mind or foul, and be- 


* Rcyn.de ment. b Pcrmand. « De mente. Idiot. 1 . 3. Sen. ep. 65. f. & 31. f. * Lib. 9. c. f Zanch. deeper. Dei, 
P 4 . r ; 3 -}• *• c. 2. 1 Page 185. Sc fequent. Ad imaginem Dei creavit ilium, id eli, iHpientix, virtues, ac bomcatis compotem, qui 

icie mtaitiis crcatorcm agnofccrct fuum; atquc imitaii, proque ingenii, proque auftoritaiis, libi conceflie rations, ltudeiet. Kxam. 

No. II. E f - tween 

Digitized by VjOOV It 


18 "The History pf the World. Book I. 

. . y ^ v 


tween the infufion ojf qualities, endowments and 
gifts of grace, wherewith it is adornptf and enriched, 
which, being added tp the nature, effince, and fa¬ 
culties, maketh it altogether to be after die image 
of God: whofe words are thefe. Non propterea ima - 
go Dei ejl, quia fui meminit mens, feque intelligit (J 
diligit (which alfo was the opinion of St. Augufline 
fed quia potefl meminiffe, intelligere, ac diligere cum 
a quo fa El a efl, (that is) The mind (or mens) was 
not therefore the image of God, becaufe it remem- 
breth, underftandeth, and loveth it felf but becaufe 
it can remember, underftand, and love God, who 
created it. And diat this image may be deformed 
and made unprofitable, hear Bafil\ Homo ad ima¬ 
gines/ & ftmilitudinem DeifaElus ejl, peccatum vero 
imaginis bujus pulchritudinem deformavit , & inuti- 
lem reddidit , dum animam corruptis concupifcenti<e 
affcElibus immerfit: Man was made after the image 
and fimilitude of God, but fin hath deformed the 
beauty of this image, and made it unprofitable, by 
drawing our minds into corrupt concupifcence. 

It is not therefore (as aforefaid) by reafon of im¬ 
mortality, nor in reafon, nor in dominion, nor in 
any one of thefe by it felf, nor in all thefe joyned, 
by any of which, or by all which we refemble, or 
may be called the fhadow of God, diough by rea¬ 
fon and underftanding, with the other faculties of the 
foul, we arc made capable of this print j but chiefly, 
in relpcft of the habit of original righteoufnefs, 
mod pcrfcClly intuled by God into the mind and 
foul of man in his firft creation, for it is not by 
nature, nor by her liberality, that we were printed 
with the feal of God’s image (though reafon may 
be laid to be of her gift, which, joined to the foul, 
is a part of the eflential conftitution of our proper 
[peeks') but from the bountiful grace of the Lord of 
all goodnefs, who breathed life into earth, and 
contrived within the trunk of duft and clay, the in¬ 
imitable hability of his own piety and righteoufnefs. 

So long therefore (for that rel'emblance which do¬ 
minion hath) do thofe that are powerful retain die 
image of God, as according to his commandments 
they exercife the office or liiagiflracy to which they 
arc called, and fincerely walk in the ways of God, 
which in die fcriprures is called, * walking with 
God i and all other men fo long retain this image, 
as they fear, love, and ferve God truly, that is, tor 
the love of God alone, and do not bruife and deface 
his feal by die weight of manifold and voluntary 
offences, and obflinate fins. For the unjuft mind 
cannot be after the image of God, feeing God is 
jufticc it felf , the blood-thirfty hath it not, for God 
is charity and mercy it felf ■, falfhood, cunning prac¬ 
tice, and ambition, are properties of fatanj and 
therefore cannot dwell in one foul, together with 
God: and to be fhort, there is no likelihood be¬ 
tween pure b light and black darknefs, between beau¬ 
ty and deformity, or between righteoufnefs and re¬ 
probation. And though nature, according to com¬ 
mon underftanding, have made us capable by the 
power of reafon, and apt enough to receive this 
image of God s goodnefs, wliich the fenfual fouls 
of beafts cannot perceive •, yet were that aptitude 
naturally more inclinable to follow and embrace the 
lalle and durelefs pleafurcs of this ftage-play world, 
than to become the fhadow of God by walking after 
him, had not the exceeding workmanfhip of God’s 
wifdom, and the liberality of his mercy, formed 
eyes to our fouls, as to our bodies, which, piercing 
through the impurity of our flefh, behold the high- 
eft heavens, and thence bring knowledge and objeCt 
to the mind and foul, to contemplate the ever-during 


glory, and termlefs joy, prepared for thofe which 
retain the image and fimilitude of their Creator, pre- 
ferving undefiled and unrent the garment of the new 
man, which, after the image of God, is created in 
righteoufnefs, and holinefs, as faith c St. Paul. Now 
whereas it is thought by fonte of the fathers, as by 
St. Augufline, with whom 6 St. Ambrofe joyneth, that 
by fin, the perfection of the image is loft, and not 
the image it felf: both opinions by this diftinClion 
may be reconciled (to wit) that die image of God, 
in man, may be taken two ways \ tor, either it is 
confidered according to natural gilts, and confifteth 
therein namely, to have a reafonable and under¬ 
ftanding nature, iyc. and in this fenfe, the image 
of God is more (oft by fin than the very reafonable 
or underftanding nature, tsfe. is loft (or fin doth not 
abolifh and take away thefe natural gifts:) or, the 
image of God is confidered, according to fuperna- 
tural gifts, namely, of divine grace and heavenly 
glory, which is indeed the perfection and accom- 
plifhment of the natural image* and this manner of 
fimilitude and image of God is wholly blotted out, 
and deftroyed by fin. 

Sect. III. 

Of our bafe and frail bodies : and that the care there¬ 
of Jhould yield to the immortal foul. 

T H E external man God formed out of the duft 
of the earth, or (according to the fignificati- 
on of the word, Adam) of Adamath , of red earth, 
or ex limo terree, out of the flime of die earth, or a 
mixed matter of earth and water. c Non ex quali- 
bet humo, fed ex gbaphar adamath (id ef) ex pinguif- 
fima (9* molliffima: Not that God made an image 
or ftatue of clay, but out of clay, earth, or duft, 
God formed and made flefh, blood, and bone, with 
all parts of man. 

That man was formed of earth and duft did 
Abraham acknowledge, when in humble fear he cal¬ 
led unto God, to five Sodom : f Let not my Lori 
now be angry , if I fpeak, I that am but ditjl and 
ajbes : And, In thefe houfes of clay, whofe founda¬ 
tion is in the dufl, do our fouls inhabit , according 
to Job. And though our own eyes do every where 
behold the fudden and refiftlcfs a (faults of death, 
and nature afliireth us by never-failing experience, 
and reafon by infallible demonftration, that our 
times upon the earth have neither certainty nor du¬ 
rability *, that our bodies are but the anvils of pain 
and difeafes, and our minds the hives of unnumbred 
cares, forrows, and paflions: and that (when we 
are mod glorified) we are but thofe painted ports, 
againft which envy and fortune direCt their darts , 
yet fuch is the true unhappinefs of our condition, 
and the dark ignorance which covereth the eyes of 
our underftanding, that we only prize, pamper, 
and exalt this vaflal and flave of death, and forget 
altogether (or only remember at our caft away lei- 
fure) the imprifoned immortal foul, which can nei¬ 
ther die with the reprobate, nor perilh with the mor¬ 
tal parts of virtuous men : feeing God’s juftice in 
the one, and his goodnefs in the other, is exercifed 
for evermore, as the ever-living fubjeCts of his re¬ 
ward and punifhment. But when is it that wc exa¬ 
mine this great account ? never while we have one 
vanity left us to fpend: we plead for titles, till our 
breath fail us-, dig for riches, while our ftrength en- 
ableth us ■, exercife malice, while we can revenge *, 
and then when time hath beaten from us both youth, 
pleafure, and health, and that nature it felf hateth 
the houfe of old age, we remember with * Job, that 


a Gen. e- 22. k 2 Cor. 6. 14. *2 Cor 3.9. d St. Ambrofe. 

4. 19. h Job 10. 21. & 17. 13. 


e Arias Mont, denat f. jj 6. f Gen 18,27. * J°b 


Digitized by 


Googl 




e 








Chap. II. "The History of the World. 


ur mufi g o the way from whence we flail not return , 
and tlmt our bed is made ready for us in the datk j 
and then, I fay, looking over-late into the bottom 
ofourconfcience (which pleaiure and ambition had 
locked up from us all our lives) we behdld therein 
the tearful images of our adtions part, and withal 
this terrible inlcriprion: * That God will bring every 
work into judgment^ that men hath done under the fun. 

But what examples have ever moved us ? what 
perliiafions reformed us ? or what threatnings made 
us afraid ? we behold other mens tragedies play’d 
before us, we hear what is promifed and threaten¬ 
ed : but the world’s bright glory hath put out the 
eyes of our minds*, and theft: betraying lights (with 
which we only fee) do neither look up towards 
termlcfs joys, nor down towards endlcls forrows, 
rill we neither know, nor can look for any thing 
elfe, at the world’s hands. Of which excellently 
Marius Fiftor : 

Nil btjles , nil dira fames , nil ienique mtrrbi 
Egerunt t faimuty qui nunc fumuSy iifque periclis 
Tentati ; nihilo meliores reddimur unquanr. 

Sub vitiis nullo culparum fine manentes. 

Difeafes, famine, enemies, in us no change have 
wrought, ^caught: 

What erft we were, we are ; ftill in the fame fnarc 
No time can our corrupted manners mend. 

In vice we dwell, in fin that hath no end. 

But let us not flatter our immortal fouls herein -y 
for to negled God all our lives, and know that we 
ncglett him, to offend God voluntarily, and know 
that we offend him, calling our hojies on rhe peace, 
which we truft to make at parting, is no other than 
a rebellious prefumption, and (that which is the 
worft of all) even a contemptuous laughing to fcorn, 
and deriding of God, his laws and precepts. b Fru- 
Jlra fptranty qui fic de mifericordia Dei fibi blandi - 
untur , They hope in vain, faith Bernard , which 
in this fort flatter theinfelves with God’s mercy. 

Sect. IV. 

Of the fpirit of life, which God breathed into man in 
bis creation. 

I N this frame and carcafs God breathed the breath 
of life •, and the man was a living foul : (that 
is) God gave a body of earth and of corruptible mat¬ 
ter, a foul fpiritual and incorruptible j not that God 
had any llich bodily mftruments as men ufe, but 
God breathed the fpirit of life and immortality in¬ 
to man, as he breatheth his grace daily into luch 
as love and fear him. c The fpirit of God (faith 
Elihu in Job) hath made me t and the breath of the 
Almighty bath given me life : In qua fententia (faith 
Rabanus ) vitanda eft paupertas fenfus carnaliSy ne 
forte putemus Deum t vel manibus corporeis de limo 
formajfe corpus hommiSy vel faucibus out labiis fuis 
infpiraffe in faciemformatiy ut vivere pofiit & fpira- 
cu/um vit<e habere : nam & propheta cum ait y ma - 
nus tu<e fecerunt me, &c. tropica bac locutione magis 
quam propria (id efi y juxta confuetutlinem, qua fo- 
lent homines operari ) locutus eft : In which fentence 
(faith he) the beggarlinefs of carnal fenfe is to be 
avoided, left perhaps we Ihould think, either that 
God with bodily hands made mans body of flime, 
or breathed with jaws or lips upon his face (being 
formed) that he might live, and have the fpirit of 
life: for the prophet alfo when he faith, thy hands 
have made me, fpakc this tropically, rather than 
properly (that is) according to the cuftom which 


h Gen. 2. 7. i Eccl. 12. 7 -, 

wum S: terra. m Aug. 1 . qu. 83. 4. 67. retr. 1 . 1. c. 2 . 


'9 

men ufe in working. Quantum eft periculi his t am 
feripturas fenfu corporeo legunt ? In what danger 
are they that read the feriptures in a carnal fenfe ? 
By this breath was infufed into man, both life and 
foul, and therefore this (foul) the philofophers call 
Animamy qu.e vivificat corpus , (ft animat •, \\ liich 
doth animate and give life to tiie body. The inspi¬ 
ration of the Almighty gheth underftanding, faith 
Job , and this fpiric, which God breathed intoman, 
which is the reafonable foul of man, rt-turneth again 
to God that gave it, as the body returneth unto 
the earth, out of which it was taken j according to 
Ecclefiafl.es : d And dujl flail return to the earthy out 
of which it was taken y and the fpirit fi;all return to 
God that gave it. Neither is this word (fpirit) 
ufually otherwife taken in the feriptures, than for 
the foul j as when Stephen cried unto God: c Do- 
mine t fit feipe fpirit urn nieum, Lord Jefus receive my 
fpirit: and in St. Johu y t And Jefus bowed his beady 
and gave up the gbofty or fpirit \ (which was) that his 
life and foul left his body dead. And that the im¬ 
mortal foul of man differcth from the fouls of bcafts, 
the manner of creation niaketh it nunifeft : for it 
is written, * l.ct the waters bring forth in abundance 
every creeping tbmgy and let the earth bring forth the 
living thing according to his kind y the beafi of the 
qarthy &c. But of man it is written. Let us make 
man in our own image , &c. and further, that h the 
Lord breathed in bis face the breath of life. Where¬ 
fore, as from the water and earth were thofe crea¬ 
tures brought forth, and thence received life j fo 
fhall they again bediflfolved into the fame firft mat¬ 
ter, whence they were taken: but the life of breath 
everlafting, which God breathed into man, fhall, 
according to EcclefiafieSy * return again to God that 
gave it. 

Sect. V. 

Tltat man is (as it were) a little world: with a di- 
grejjion touching our mortality. 

M A N, thus compounded and formed by God, 
was an abftnnff or model, or brief ftory of 
the univerfal : in whom God concluded the creati¬ 
on, and work of the world, and whom he made 
the laft and moft excellent of his creatures, being 
internally endued with a divine underftanding, by 
which he might contemplate and ftrve his Creator, 
after whofe image he was formed, and endued with 
the powers and faculties of reafon and other abili¬ 
ties, that thereby alfo he might govern and rule the 
world, and all other God’s creatures therein. And 
whereas God created three forts of living natures 
(to wit) angelical, rational, and brutal •, giving to 
angels an intelleiftual, and to bcafts a fenfual na¬ 
ture, he vouchfafed unto man, both the k intellectual 
of angels, the fenfitive of bcafts, and the proper ra¬ 
tional belonging unto man, and therefore (faith 
Gregory Nazianzene) 1 Homo eft utriufque nature 
vinculum y Man is the bond and chain which tyeth 
together both natures : and becaufe in the little 
frame of man’s body there is a reprefentation of 
the univerfal, and (by allufion) a kind of partici¬ 
pation of all the parts there, therefore was man 
called Microcofittos, or the little world. m Deus i- 
gitur hominem fattunty velut altertim qnendam mun- 
dumy in brevi magnumy atque exiguo totum t in ter - 
ris flatuit \ God therefore placed in the earth die 
man whom he had made, as it were another world, 
the great and large world in the fmall and little 
world \ for out of the earth and dull was formed 
the flefh of man, and therefore heavy and lumpifti; 
the bones of his body we may compare to rhe hard 

« Afts 7. 59. f John 9. 30. 1 Gen. 1. 20, 


1 Eccl. 12. 14. b Bern, in Pf. qui habitat. e Job 33. 4. d Eccl. 12. 7. — , -. —, 

24*26. &G«n. 2. 7. 1 Eccl. 12. 7. * Ar. Phyf. 1 . 8. c. 2. 1. 17. f. 1 Greg. ISaz. Epill. Omnis in hoinine creatura, St 

recks 

Digitized by VjUUVlt 


20 


7 ‘he HisfokY of the WokLts. Book L 


rocks and (tones, and therefore ftrong and durable j 
of which Ovid: 

1 Inde genus durum fumus , experieufque labor um, 

Et documenta dantus qua ftmus origine nati : 

From thence our kind hard-hearted is. 

Enduring pain and care, 

Approving that our bodies of 
A (tony nature are. 

His blood, which difperfeth it felfby the bran¬ 
ches of veins through al 
bled to thofe waters 


w 


the body, may be refenrv 
licit are carried by brooks 
and rivers over all the earth •, his breath to the air, 
his natural heat to the inclofed warmth which the 
earth hath in it felf, which, (lirred up by the heat 
ot the fun, aflifteth nature in the fpeedier procrea¬ 
tion of thofe varieties, which the earth bringeth 
forth •, Our radical moifture, oyl, or balfamum 
(whereon the natural heat feedeth and is maintai¬ 
ned) is relembled to the fat and fertility of the 
earth j the hairs of man’s body, which adorns, or 
overfhadows it, to the grafs, which covercth the 
upper tace and (kin of the earth our generative 
power, to nature, which produceth all diings •, our 
determinations, to the light wandring, and unitable 
clouds, carried every where with uncertain winds 


our eyes, to the light of the fun and moon } and 
the beauty of our youth, to the flowers of the 
lpring, which, either in a very fhort time, or with 
the fun’s heat, dry up and wither away, or the 
fierce puffs of wind blow them from the (talks j 
the thoughts of our mind, to the motion of An¬ 
gels-, and our pure underftanding (formerly called 
mens , and that which always looked* upwards) to 
thole intellectual natures, which are always prefent 
with God j and laftly, our immortal fouls (while 
they are righteous) are by God himfelf beautified 
with the title of his own image and fimilitude. And 
although, in refpeCl of God, there is no man juft, 
or good, or righteous (for, b In angelis deprehenfa 
eft ftultitia, Behold, He found lolly in his An¬ 
gels, faith Job-,) yet, with fuch a kind of diffe¬ 
rence, as there is between the fubltance and the (ha- 
dow, there may be found a goodnefs in man : 
which God being pleafed to accept, hath there¬ 
fore called man, the image and fimilitude of his 
own rightcoufnefs. In this alfo is the little world 
of man compared, and made more like die uni- 
verlal (man being the mealure of all things j 
c Homo ejl menfura omnium rerum , faith Anfiotk 
and Pythagoras) that the four complexions refcm- 
ble the four elements, and the feven ages of man 
die feven planets -, whereof, our infancy is compa¬ 
red to the Moon, in which we feem only to live 
and grow, as plants} the fecond age to Mercury , 
wherein we are taught and i lift ruffed j our third 
age to Venus, the days of love, defire, and vani- 
ty; the fourth to the Sun, the ftrong, flourilhing, 
and beautiful age of man’s life } die fifth to Mars , 
in which we feek honour and victory, and in 
which our dioughts travel to ambitious ends } the 
fixth age is afenbed to Jupiter , in which we begin 
to take account of our times, judge of our felves, 
and grow to the perfection of our underftanding j 
the Lift and feventh to Saturn , wherein our days 
are fad, and over-call, and in which we find by 
dear and lamentable experience, and by the lols 
which can never be repaired, that of all our vain 
paffioas and affeCtions pall, the forrow only abi- 
deth : Our attendants are ficknefles, and variable 
infirmities, and by how much the more we are ac¬ 
companied with plenty, by lo much the more 


greedily is our end defired, whom when time hath 
made un foci able to others, we become a burthen 
to our felves : being of no other ufe, than to hold 
the riches we have from our fucceflors. In this 
time it i?,f when (as aforefaid) we, for the moft 
part, and never before, prepare for our eternal ha¬ 
bitation, which we pafs on unto with many fighs, 
groans, and fad thoughts, and in die end, by the 
workmanffiip of death, finifti the forrowtul bufi- 
nefs of a wretched life ^ towards which we always 
travel both deeping and waking: neither have 
thofe beloved companions of honour and richts 
any power at all to hold us any one day, by the 
glorious promife of entertainments -, but by what 
crooked path foever we walk, the fame leadctli 
on direClly to the houfe of death, whole doors lie 
open at all hours} and to all perfons. For this 
tide of man’s life, after it once turneth and decli- 
neth, ever runneth with a perpetual ebb and fal¬ 
ling dream, but never flowedi again: our leaf once 
fallen, fpringeth no more * neither doth the fun or 
the fummer adorn us again, with the garments of 
new leaves and flowers. 

Redditur arboribus florens revirentibus <etas \ 

Ergo non homini , quod fuit ante , redit. 

To which I give this fenfe. 

The plants and trees made poor and old 
By winter envious. 

The fpring-time bounteous 
Covers again from fhame and cold; 

But never man repair’d again 
His youth and beauty loft, 

Though art, and care, and coft. 

Do promife nature’s help in vain. 

And of which , 

Catullus, Epigram. 53; 

Soles occidcre £s? re dire poffunt: 

Nobis cum femel occidit brevis lux, 

Nox eft perpetua una dormienda. 

The fun may fet and rife: 

But we contrariwife 
Sleep after our fhort light 
One everlafting night. 

For if there were any baiting place, oj reft, in 
the courfe or race of man’s life, then, according 
to the doCtrine of the Academics , the fame might 
alfo perpetually be maintained} but as there is a 
continuance of motion in natural living things, 
and as the fap and juice, wherein the life of plants 
is preferved, both evermore afeend or defeend} fo 
is it with the life of man, which is always either 
increafing toward ripenefs and perfection, or de¬ 
clining and decreafing towards rottennefs and dif- 
folution. 

Sect. VI. 

Of the free power, which man had in bis firft crea¬ 
tion , to difpofe of himfelf. 

T Hefe be the miferies which our firft parents 
brought on all mankind, unto whom God 
in his creation gave a free and unconftrained will, 
and on whom he beftowed the liberal choice of 
all things, with one only prohibition, to try his 
gratitude and obedience. God fet before him, a 
mortal and immortal life, a nature celeftial and 
terrene, and (indeed) God gave man to himfelf, 
to be his own guide, his own workman, and his 
own painter, that he might frame or deferibe unto 


aOiiJ. Met. 1 . 1. b Job 4. t8 c Arilt 10. Mernph. c. i. f 


himfelf 


Digitized by 


Googl< 








Chap. II. The History 

himfelf what he pleafed, and make election of his 
own form. * God made man in the beginnings 
(faith Siracides) and left him in the hands of bis 
own counfel. Such was the liberality of God, and 
man’s felicity: whereas beads, and all other crea¬ 
tures reafonlefs, brought with them into the world 
(faith Lucilius) and that even when they firft fell 
from the bodies of their dams, the nature, which 
they could not change •, and the fupernal fpirits or 
angels were from the beginning, or foon after, of 
that condition, in which they remain in perpetual 
eternity. But (as aforefuid) God gave unto man 
all kind of feeds anti grafts of life (to wit) the ve¬ 
getative life of plants, the fenfual of beads, die 
rational of man, and the intellectual of angels ; 
whereof which foever he took pleafure to plant and 
cultive, the fame fhould futurely grow in hitn, 
and bring forth fruit, agreeable to his own choice 
and plantation. This freedom of the firft man 
Adam, and our fird father, was enigmatically 
deferibed by Afclepius Athenienfis (faith Mirandu- 
h) in the perfon and fable of Proteus , who was 
faid, as often as he pleafed, to change his fhape. 
To the fame end were all thofe celebrated Meta- 
morpbofts among the Pythagoreans , and ancient 
poets, wherein it was feigned, that men were trans¬ 
formed into divers fliapes of beads, diereby to 
(hew the change of mens conditions, from reafon 
to brutality, from virtue to vice, from meeknefs to 
cruelty, and from judice to oppreflion. For by 
die lively image of other creatures did thofe Anci¬ 
ents reprefent the variable pafiioas, and affeCtions 
of mortal men ; as by lerpents were fignified de¬ 
ceivers •, by lyons, oppreflors and cruel men ; by 
fwine, men given over to lud and fenfuality; 
by wolves, ravening and greedy men • which alfo 
St. Matthew refembleth to falfe prophets, d which 
come to you in fhseps clothings but inwardly they are 
ravening wolves: by the images of dones and 
docks, foolifh and ignorant men ; by vipers, un¬ 
grateful men ; of which c St. John Baptiji, O ye 
generation of vipers , &e. 

Sect. VII. 

Of God's ceaftng to create any more : and of the 
caufe thereof , becanfe the univerfdl created was 
exceeding good. 

I N tiiis work of man, God finifhed the creati¬ 
on ; not that God laboured as a man, and 
therefore reded: for God commanded, and it was 
finilhed, Cut voltuffe efl fecijfe\ With whom to 
will is to make, faith Bcda. Neither did God fo 
red, diat he left the world made, and the creatures 
therein to themfelves: for d My father worketh to 
this day (faith Chrifl) and I work ; but God red¬ 
ed (that is) he created no new fpecies or kinds of 
creatures, but (as aforefaid) gave unto man a 
power generative, and fo to the red of living crea¬ 
tures, to plants and flowers, their feeds in them- 
fclvesj and commanded man to 'multiply and fill 
tlie earth, and the earth and fea to bring forth 
creatures according to their fcveral kinds: all which 
being finifhed, God law that his works were good, 
not that he foreknew not, and comprehended not, 
die beginning and end before they were ; for God 
made every plant of the field before it was in the 
earth ; but he gave to all things which he had 
created the name of good, thereby to teach men, 
that from fo good a God there was nothing made, 
but that which was perfect good, and from whofe 
finiple purity and from fo excellent a caule there 
could proceed no impure or imperfeCt effect. For 


of the World. 21 

man having a free will and liberal choice, purcha- 
fed.by difobedience his own death and mortality; 
and for the cruelty of man’s heart, was the earth ai- 
terward curfed, and all creatures of the firft age dc- 
ftroyed, but the righteous man Noah and his family, 
with thofe creatures which the ark contained, relef- 
ved by God to replenifh the earth. 


CHAP. III. 

Of the place o/Paradisf., 

Sect. I. 

That the feat of Paradife is greatly miflaken : and 
that it is no marvel that men fhould err. 

C oncerning the firft habitation of man, wc read, 
that the Lord God planted a garden eaft-wardln 
Eden, and there he put the man whom he made, 
Gen. ii. 6 . Of this feat and place of Paradife , all 
ages have held difpute; and the opinions and judg¬ 
ments have been in effeCt, as divers, among thole, 
that have written upon this part of Genefts, as upon 
any one place therein, feeming molt obfeure: Some 
there are, that have conceived the being of the ter- 
reftrial Paradife , without all regard of die world’s 
geography, and without any refpedt of ealt and 
weft, or any confederation of the place where Mofes 
wrote,* and from whence he direded (by die quarters 
of the heavens) the way how to find out and judge, 
in what region of the world this garden was by God 
planted, wherein he was exceeding refpedive and 
precife. Others, by being themfelvcs ignorant in 
the Hebrew y followed die firft interpretation; or 
rrufting to their own judgments, underftood one 
place lor another; and one error is fo fruitful, as 
it begetteth a thouiand children, if the licendoufnefs 
thereof be not timely reftrained. And thirdly, 
thofe writers which gave themfelves to follow and 
imitate others, were in all things fo obfervant fec- 
tators of thole mailers, whom they admired and be¬ 
lieved in, as they thought it fafer to condemn their 
own underftanding, than to examine theirs. For 
(faith Vadianus in his epiftle of Paradife ) magnos 
errors, magnorum virorum aucloritate perjuafi, 
tranfmittimus ; We pafs over many grofs errors, 
by the authority of great men led and perfwaded. 
And it is true, that many of the fathers were far 
wide from the underftanding of this place. I fpeak 
it not, that 1 my felf dare prefume to cenfure them, 
for I reverence both their learning and their piety, 
and yet not bound to follow them any further, 
than they are guided by truth: for they were men ; 
& humanum efl errare. And to the end that no 
man Ihould be proud of himlelf, God hath diftri- 
buted unto men fuch a proportion of knowledge, 
as the wifeft may behold in themfelves their own 
weaknefs: Nulli unquam dedtt omnia Deus ; God 
never gave the knowledge of all things to any one. 
* St. Paul confefs’d that he knew not, whether he 
were taken up into the third heaven in the flelh, 
or out of the flelh; and Chrift himfelf acknowledges 
thus much, 8 that neither men, nor angels knew of 
the latter day ; and therefore, feeing knowledge is 
infinite, it is God (according to h St. Jude) who is 
only wife. Sapientia ubi invenitur ? (faith Job ) 
But where is wildom found ? * and where is the place 
of underftanding ? Man knoweth not the price there - 
°f t for it is not found in the land of the living. And 
therefore feeing God found folly in his angels, mens 
judgments (which inhabit in the houfes of clay) can¬ 
not be without their miftakings: and fo the lathers. 


* beefcf. iy. t> \fattli. 7. 15. < Matth. 3. 7. d John 5. 17. 

kr'* 1 ' h J u( k ! T ver - *7* 4 J°b 2 &- ' 2 > *3* 4* 1 **■ 

^0. 2 . F 


« Gen. 1. 23 . Sc vcr. 22. 24. { 2 Cor. 12. 2. 


Digitized by 


Goodft 

o 





22 


The H i s t o r y of the World. Book L 


and other learned men, eiccu fable in particulars, efpe- 
cially in thofe whereupon our falvation dependeth 
not. 

Sect. II. 

A recital of Jlrange opinions touching Paradife. 

N O W touching paradife , firft it is to be en¬ 
quired, Whether there were a paradife, or 
no ? or whether Mofes' s defeription were altogether 
myftical and allegorical ? as Origen, Philo, Fran, 
Georgius , with others, have affirmed 3 and that un¬ 
der the names of thofe four rivers, Pifon, Gtbon , 
Hiddekel and Perath, the tree of life , and the tree 
of knowledge , there were delivered unto us other 
myfteries and fignifications 3 as, that by the * four 
rivers, were meant the four cardinal virtues, Juf- 
tice, femperance , Fortitude and Prudence ; or (by 
others) 0 / 7 , Wine , Milk and Honey. This allego¬ 
rical underftanding of Paradife by Origen divulged, 
was again by Fran. Georgius received (faith Sixtus 
Senenfts',) whofe frivolous imaginations Sixtus him- 
lelf doth fully and learnedly anfwer, in the 34th an¬ 
notation of his 5 th book, fol. 338. the laft edition. 

b St. Ambrofe alfo leaned wholly to the allegori¬ 
cal conftru&ion, and fet Paradife in the third hea¬ 
ven, and in the virtues of the mind, in nofiro 
principali, which is, as I conceive it, in mente, or in 
our fouls: to the particulars whereof he alludeth in 
this fort. By the place or garden of Paradife, was 
meant the foul or mind 3 by Adam, mens or under¬ 
ftanding 3 by Eve, the fenfe 3 by the ferpenty delec¬ 
tation 3 by the tree of good and evil, fapience 3 and 
by the reft of the trees, the virtues of the mind, or 
in tire mind planted, or from thence fpringing. 
Notwithftanding all which, upon 1 Corinth, cap. t>. 
he in direft words alloweth bodi of a ccleftial and 
terreftrial Paradife 3 the one, into which St. Paul 
was wrap’d 3 the other, into which Adam was put 
by God. Aug. Chryfamenfts was of opinion, that a 
Paradife had been j but that there was not now any 
mark thereof on the earth : the fame being not on¬ 
ly defaced, but withal the places now not lb much 
as exifting. To which Luther feemeth to adhere. 

The Manichees £llfo underftood, that by Paradife 
was meant the whole earth 3 to which opinion Va- 
dianus inclineth, as I conceive his words, in two 
feveral places. Firft, upon this 3 Fill the earthy 
Gen. 10. of which he gives this judgment: Hoc ip- 
fo etiam quod dixit t Replete terramy dominamini uni - 
verfts ammantibuSy fubjicite terramy clarifftme docet t 
totam terram extant cm y & omnigenis (ut turn erat) 
frudibus confttamy fedem (5? hortum ilium Ads, iff 
pofteritatis future fuiffe 3 Thefe words (faith he) 
in which God laid, Bring forth fruit and multiply, 
and fill the earth, and fubdue it, and rule over eve¬ 
ry creature, do clearly fhew, that the univerfal earth, 
fet or filled with all forts of fruits (as then it was) 
was the garden and feat of Adam, and of his future 
pofterity. And afterward he acknowledgeth the 
place, out of the c Ails, Apofolus ex uno fanguine 
omne genus humanum ideo faclum docet t ut babita- 
rxnt fuper univerfam faciem terra : lota igitur terra 
paradtfus ille erat 3 The apoftle (faith ne) teach- 
eth, that God hath made of one blood all man¬ 
kind, to dwell over all the face of the earth : and 
therefore all the earth (faith he) was that Paradife. 
Which conjectures I will anfwer in order. Goropi- 
us Becanus differeth not much from this opinion, 
but yet he acknowledgeth that Adam was firft 
planted by God in one certain place, and peculiar 
garden j which place Goropius findeth near the ri¬ 
ver of Acefmes, in the confines of India. 


d Tertulliany Bonaventurc, and Durandus y make 
Paradife under the equinoctial 3 and Poftellusy quite 
contrary, under the north pole : the Chaldeans alio 
for the molt part, and all their leCtators, followed 
the opinion of Origen, or rather Origen theirs 3 who 
would either make Paradife a figure, or facrament 
only, or elfe would have it feated out of this fenfi- 
ble world, or raifed into fome high and remote re¬ 
gion of the air. Strabus and Rabanus were both 
fick of this vanity, with Origen and Philo : So was 
our venerable e Bede and e Peter Come for, and 1 Mo¬ 
fes Barcephas the Syrian, tranflatcd by Majius. But 
as Hopkins fays of Philo Judaeus, that he wonder’d, 
f>uo malo genio afflatus. By what evil angel he was 
blown up into this error 3 fo can I but greatly mar¬ 
vel at the learned men, who fo grofly and blindly 
wander’d 3 feeing Mofes, and after him the pro¬ 
phets, do fo plainly deferibe this place by the regi¬ 
on in which it was planted, by the kingdoms and 
provinces bordering it, by the rivers which water’d 
it, and by the points of the compafs upon which 
it lay, in refpedt of Judea , or Canaan. 

Noviomagus alfo upon Be da, De natura return, 
believerh that all the earth was taken for Paradife , 
and not any one place. For the whole earth (faith 
he) hath the fame beauty aferibed to Paradife. He 
addeth, that the ocean was that fountain from whence 
the four rivers, Pifon , Gehon, Tigris, and Euphrates, 
had their beginning 3 for he could not drink it pof- 
fible, that theft rivers of Ganges, Nilus, Tigris , and 
Euphrates (whereof the one ran through India , the 
other through Egypt, and the other through Mefo- 
potamia and Armenia') could rift out of one fountain, 
were it not out of the fountain of the ocean. 

Sect. HI. 

That there was a true local Paradife caf.ward in the 
country of Eden. 

T O the firft therefore, that fuch a place there 
was upon the earth, the words of Mofes make 
it manifeft, where it is written, 1 And the Lord God 
planted a garden eaflward in Eden, and there be put 
the man whom he had made: and howloever the 
vulgar tranflation, called Jeronis tranflation, hath 
converted this place thus, Plantaverit Domiuus 
Deus Paradifum voluptatis a principle: The Lord 
God planted a Paradife of plcafure from the begin¬ 
ning} putting the word (pleafurc) for Eden, and 
(from the beginning) for caftward: it is manifeft, 
that in this place Eden is the proper name of a re¬ 
gion. For, what fcnfe hath this tranflation (faith 
our Hopkins , in his treatife of Paradife) that he 
planted a garden of pleafure, or, that a river went 
out of pleafure to water the garden ? but the feven- 
ty interpreters call it Paradifum Edenis , The Para¬ 
dife of Eden 3 and fo doth the Chaldean paraphraft 
truly take it for the proper name of a place, and 
for a noun appellative •, which region, in refpeft of 
the fertility of the foil, of the many beautiful ri¬ 
vers and goodly woods, and that the trees (as in the 
Indies) do always keep their leaves, was called 
Eden, which fignifieth in the Hebrew , pleafantnefs, 
or delicacy 3 as the Spaniards call the country, op- 
pofite to the ifle of Cuba, Florida : and this is the 
miftaking, which may end the difpute, as touching 
the double fenfe of the word, that as Florida was a 
country, fo called for the flourifhing beauty thereof-, 
fo was Eden a region, called plealure or delicacy 
for its pleafure or delicacy: and as Florida lignifi- 
eth flourifhing 3 fo Eden fignifieth plcafure: and yet 
both are the proper names of countries 3 for Eden be- 


• Bartnf. fern 2 . 1 . 1. 143. 
cap Mole's Baic. de Par. 


*» Amb. de Parad. 
£ Gen. cap. 2 


c A£b 17. 26. d Bart. 16. 126. « Bed in Gen. Pet. Cwneih J. 1. 


Digitized by 



3 ng 

e 




Chap. III. The History 0/ ^ World, 23 


ing the proper name of a region (called pleafure in 
the Hebrew) and Paradife being the choice feat of all 
that region, Paradife was truly the garden of Eden, 
and truly the garden of pleafure. 

Now, for eaftward , to tranflate it, from the be¬ 
ginning., it is alfo contrary to the tranflation of the 
feventy j to the antient Greek fathers, as Bafil, Cbry- 
fofttm, Tbeodoret, Gregory •, and to the Rabines, as 
Ramban, Rabbi Solomon, R. Abraham , and Cbim- 
tbi *, and of the Latins, Severinus, Damafcenus, &c. 
who plainly take Eden for the proper name of a 
region, and fet the word (eaftward) for ab initio 
for Damafcene' s own words are thefe, Paradifus eji 
locus Dei manibus in Eden ad orientem mirabiliter 
conftius ; Paradife is a place marvelloufly planted 
by the hands of God in Eden , towards the eaft. 

And after all thefe fathers, Guilhelmtis Pariftenfis, 
a great learned man, and Sixtus Senenfts, of latter 
time?, do both underftand thefe words of Eden and 
of the eaft, contrary to the vulgar tranflation Pa- 
riftenfis , as indifferent to both, and Sixtus Senenfts, 
directly againft the vulgar: of which thefe are their 
own words; After this I will begin to ipeak of Pa¬ 
radife terreftrial, which God planted from the be¬ 
ginning, or eaftward, &c. Poft h<ec incipiam loyal 
de Paradifo terreftri, quern plantafte Deum ab ini¬ 
tio vel ad orientem, &c. And then Senenfis j Mo- 
fes enim clarijfme prodit, Paradifum a Deo confitum 
in regtone terra orient alts, qua dicitur Eden : Eden 
autem eft proprium nomen, apparet ex quarto capite 
Gen. ubi legimus, Cham babitajfe ad orientalcm pla- 
gam Eden 5 For Mofes (faith he) doth fhew moft 
clearly, that Paradife was planted of God in a re¬ 
gion of the eaft country, which is called Eden: but 
that Eden is a proper name, it appeareth in a Gene/is, 
where we read, that Cham dwelt on the eaft border 
of Eden. Pererius endeavoureth to qualify this tranf¬ 
lation } for this particle (faith he) ab initio, is re¬ 
ferred to all the time of the creation, and not to the 
very firft day, alledging this place of Chrift, that 
although the devil was faid to be a b Man-flayer 
from tbe beginning, yet that was meant but after the 
fixth day. But furely, as I think (referring my 
felf to better judgment) the devil was from tire in- 
ftant of his fall a man-flayer in difpofition, though 
he had not whereon to pradlife till man’s creation. 
And for conclufion, St. Hierome (if that be his tranf¬ 
lation) advifeth himfelf better in the end of the ;d 
chapter of 'Genefls, converting the word (Eden) by 
(ante) and not (a principio) as, God did fet a che- 
robin before the garden of Eden > Collocavit Deus 
ante paradifum veluptatis, cheruhin \ and Pererius 
himfelf acknowledged, that this is the true fenfe 
of this place, precifcly taken, according to the He¬ 
brew, Pofuit a parte orientals borti Eden, cberubin ; 
He fet on the enft fide of the garden of Eden, a 
cherubin. Becanus affirmed, that the Hebrew word 
(Be) fignifieth (with) as well as (in) and fo the text 
bcareth this fenfe • That God planted a garden 
with pleafure (that is to fay) full of pleafure. But 
Becanus followed this conftrudfion, only to de end 
to find Paradife upon the river of Acefines •, for 
there he hath heard of the Indian fig-tree in great 
abundance, which he fuppofeth to be the tree of 
knowledge of good and evil, and would derefore 
draw Paradife to de fig-tree: which conceit of his 
I will anfwer hereafter. 

Now, becaufe Paradife Was feated by Mofes to¬ 
wards the eaft, thence c.ime the cuftom of praying 
towards de eaft, and not by imitation of the Chal¬ 
deans : and therefore all our churches are built eaft 
and weft, as to the point where de fun rifeth in 
Marsh, which is dircftly over Paradife (faid Da¬ 


mafcenus :) affirming, that we always pray towards 
de eaft, as looking towards Paradife, whence we 
were eaft out and yet the temple of Solomon had 
their priefts and facrifices, which turned themfelves 
in their fervice and divine ceremonies, always to¬ 
wards de weft, thereby to avoid die luperftition of 
de Egyptians and Chaldeans. 

But becaufe eaft and weft are but in refpeft of 
places (for although Paradife were eaft from Judea, 
yet it was weft from Perfla) and the ferving of 
God is every where in the world \ the matter is not 
great, which way we turn our laces, fo our hearts 
lfand right j other than dis, that we who dwell 
weft from Paradife, and pray turning our lelves to 
the eaft, may remember dereby to befeech God, 
dat as by Adam's fall we have loft de Paradife on 
earth •, fo by Chrift’s death and paffion we may be 
made partakers of the Paradife celeftial, and de 
kingdom of heaven. To conclude, I conceive, 
that there was no oder myftery in adding de word 
(eaft) to Eden by Mofes, than to fhew, that the re¬ 
gion of Eden, in which Paradife was, lay eaftward 
from Judea and Canaan : for the feriptures always 
called the people of thofe nations, the fons of the 
eaft which inhabited Arabia , Mefopotamia, Chal¬ 
dea, and Perfla : of which Ovid, 

Eurtis ad auroram , Nabath<eaque regna recejjit , 

Perjidaqtte , (3 radiis juga fubdita matutinis. 

The eaft wind wid aurora hath abiding 

Among tiCArabian and the Pcrfian Hills, 

Whom Phoebus firft dilutes at his up-rifing. 

And if it be - objected, that Jeremy the prophet, 
threatning the deftru&ion of Jerufalem , dod often 
make mention of northern nations, it is to be noted, 
dat the north is dere named, in refpe»ft of dofe 
nations dat followed Nabucbodonofor, and of whom 
the greateft part of his army was compounded ■, 
not that Babylon it felf ftood north from Jerufalem , 
though inclining from de eaft towards the north. 

Now to the difference of this tranflation, Peter 
Comeftor giveth beft fatisfaffion : for he ufeth de 
word, front the beginning, dat is, from the firft part 
of tbe world (a principio) id eft (faith he) a prima 
orbis parte •, and afterward he affirmed, that a prin¬ 
ciple, and ad orientem, have the fame fignification : 
from the beginning, and eaft-ward, is all one j a 
principio idem eft quod ad orientem. 

But to return to the proof of dis place, and dat 
this ftory of mankind was not allegorical, it follow¬ 
ed in the text of the ad chapter and 9th verfe, in 
thefe words; for out of the ground made the Lord 
God to grow every tree pleafant to the fight, and 
good for meat, &c. fo as firft it appeared that God 
created Adam eliewhere as in the world at large, 
and then put him into the garden : and de end why, 
is exprefs’d, verfe 18, that he might drefs it and 
keep it: Paradife being a garden or orchard filled 
with plants, and trees, of the moft excellent kinds, 
pleafant to behold, and (withal) good for meat: 
which proveth that Paradife was a terreftrial gar¬ 
den, garniftied with fruits, delighting both the eye 
and talte. And to make it more plain, and to 
take away all opinion of allegorical conftru&ion, he 
affirmed, verfe 1 o, that it was watered and beau¬ 
tified with a river expreffing alfo the region, out 
of which dis river fprang, which he called Eden \ 
and dat Eden is alfo a country near unto Charon in 
Mefopotamia, i Ezechiel witneilcd. 

But to all thefe cabalifts, which draw de truth 
and ftory of de feriptures into allegories, Epipha- 
nius anfwered in thele words Si Paradifus non eft 
fenftbilis , non eft etiam fons, ft non eft fons, non eft 


d Ezecli ;7 ox. 


jUimen 




* Gen. 4. 16. k John 8. 44. c Gen. 3 24. 


D 




24 "The History^ /& World: . Book I. 


flumtn, ft non ejl /lumen, non funt quatuor principia, 
non Pi/on, non Gehon, non Tigris, nec Euphrates ; 
non ejl ficus , folia , comedit Eva de arbore, 

non ejl Adam, now funt homines, veritas jam fa- 

bttla eft, (ft omnia ad allegorias revocantur\ It Fa- 
rarfr/e be not fenfible, then there was no fountain, 
and then no river •, if no river, then no fuch four 
heads or branches, dnd then not any fuch river as 
Pifon , or Gehon , Tigris , or Euphrates \ no fuch fig- 
tree, or fruit, or leaves ; Eve then did not eat of 
the fruit, neither was there any Adam , or any man, 
the truth was but a fable, and all things efteemcd 
are called back into allegories. Words to the fame 
effeft hath St. Flierome upon Daniel \ Conticcfcant 
eorutn delir amenta, qui umbras (ft imagines in veri- 
tate fcquentes, ipfam conantur evert ere veritatem, ut 
Paradifum (ft flumina , (ft arbores patent allcgorice 
legibus fe debere fubruere : Let the dotage of them 
be filent, who following fhadows and images in the 
truth, endeavour to fubvert the truth it lelf, and 
think that they ought to bring Paradife, and the 
rivers, and the trees, under the rules of allegory. 

Furthermore, by the continuation and order of 
the ftory, is the place made more manifeft. For, 
God gave Adam free liberty to eat of every tree of 
the garden (the tree of knowledge excepted) which 
trees Mofes in the 9th verfe faith that they were good 
to eat ; meaning the fruit which they bare. Bcfides, 
God left all beafts to Adam to be named, which he 
had formerly made \ and thefe beafts were neither 
in the third heaven, nor near the circle of the moon, 
nor beafts in imagination : for if all thefe things 
were enigmatical or myftical, the fame might all'o 
be faid of the creation of all things. And Ezechiel, 
fpeaking of the glory of the Affyrian kings, ufeth 
this fpetch } 1 All the trees of Eden, which were in 
the garden of God, envied him which proveth both 
Eden, and Paradife, therein feated, to be terreftrial: 
for the prophets made no imaginary comparifons. 
But Mofes wrote plainly, and in a fimple ftyle, fit 
for the capacities of ignorant men, and he was more 
large and precife in the defeription of Paradife, 
than in any other place of feripture; of purpofe to 
takeaway all fcruple from the incredulity of future 
ages, whom he knew (out of the gift of prophecy) 
to be apt to fabulous inventions ; and that if he had 
not deferibed both the region and the rivers, and 
how it flood from Canaan, many of the unbelieving 
Ifraelites, and others after them, would have mil- 
conftrucd this ftory of mankind. And, is it likely, 
there would have been fo often mention made of 
Paradife in the feriptures, if the fame had been an 
Utopia? For we find that the valley, wherein b So¬ 
dom and Gomorrah flood (fometimes called Pentapo- 
lis, of the five principal cities therein) was before 
the deftruftion (which their unnatural ftn purchafed) 
compared to the Paradife of the Lord, and like to 
the land of Egypt toward Zoar: in like manner was 
Ifrael refembled to the Paradife of God, before the 
Babylonians wafted it: which proveth plainly, that 
Paradife it fdf, exceeded in beauty and fertility, 
and that thefe places had but a refemblance thereof: 
being compared to a feat and foil of far exceeding 
excellency. 

Befidcs, whence had Homer his invention of Al- 
cinous's gardens, as Jufltn Martyr noteth, but out 
of Mofes' s defeription of Paradife ? Gen. ii. And 
whence are their praifes of the Elyfian fields, but 
out of the ftory of Paradife ? To which alfo ap¬ 
pertain thofe verfes of the golden age in Ovid: 

c Per ct at eeternum placidique tepentibus auris, 

■ Mulcebant Zephyri natosfine fem 'tne /lores. 


The joyful fpring did ever laft. 

And Zepbyrus did breed 

Sweet flowers by his gentle blaft, 

Without the help of feed. 

And it is manifeft, that Orpheus, Linus , Pinda- 
rus, Hefiodus, and Homer, and, after him, Ovid, 
one out of another, and all thefe together with Py¬ 
thagoras and Plato, and their fc&ators, did greatly 
enrich their inventions, by venting the ftoln treafures 
of divine letters, altered by prophane additions, and 
difguifed by poetical converlions, as if they had 
been conceived out of their own (peculations and 
contemplations. 

But befides all thefe teftimonies, if we find what 
region Heden, or Eden was ; if we prove the river 
that ran out of it, and that the fame afterwards was 
divided into four branches •, together with the king¬ 
doms of Havila, and Cu(h •, and that all thefe are 
eaftward from Canaan, or the defarts of the Amo- 
rites, where Mofes wrote; I then conceive, that 
there is no man that will doubt, but that fuch a 
place there was. And yet I do not exclude the alle¬ 
gorical fenfe of the feripture ■, tor as well in this there 
were many figures of Chrift, as in all the Old Tefla- 
ment throughout: the ftory being direcftly true not- 
withftanding. And to this purpofe (faith St. Au- 
guflinej Tres funt de Paradifo generates fententia: 
una eft eorum, qui tantummodo corporaliter Paradi- 
fum intelligi volunt: alia eorum, qui /pintualiter tantum 
(id eft) ecclefiam : tertia eorum, qttiutroque modo Pa¬ 
radifum accipiunt ; (that is) There are three opini¬ 
ons of Paradife : the one of thofe men, which will 
have it altogether corporal: a fecond of thofe, which 
conceive it altogether fpiritual, and to be a figure of 
the church: the third of thofe, which take it in 
both fenles j which third opinion d St. Augii/line ap- 
proveth, and of which Suidas giveth this allowable 
judgment: e Quemadmodum homo fenfibilis, (ft intel- 
ligibilis fimul condituserat: fie (ft bum fancliffimum 
nemus fenfibile fimul (ft intelligibile, (ft duplici fpecit 
eft praditurn > (that is) As man was created at one 
time, both fenfible, and intelligible, fo was his holy 
grove, or garden, to be taken both ways, and en¬ 
dued with a double form. 

Sect. IV. 

Why it ftjould be needful to intreat diligently of the 
place of Paradife. 

B U T it may be objected, that it is needkfs, 
and a kind of curioiity,to enquire fo diligently 
after this place of Paradife, and that the knowledge 
thereof is of little or no ufe. To which I anfwer, 
that there is nothing written in the feripture, but 
for our inftru&ion •, and if the truth of the ftory be 
neceflary, then by the place proved, the fame is alfo 
made more apparent. For if wc Ihould conceive 
that Paradife were not on the earth, but lifted up 
as high as the moon \ or that it were beyond all 
the Ocean, and in no part of the known world; 
from whence, Adam was faid to wade through the 
fea, and thence to have come into Judea (outol 
doubt) there would be few men in the world, that 
would give any credit unto it. For what could 
feem more ridiculous than the report ol fuch a 
place ? and befides, what maketh this feat ot Para¬ 
dife fo much difputed and doubted of, but the con¬ 
ceit that Pifhon Ihould be Ganges, which watereth 
the eaft India j and Gehon, Nilus , which enrichcth 
Egypt: and thefe two rivers fo far diftant, as (ex¬ 
cept all the world were Paradife) thefe ftreams can 
no way be comprifed therein ? 


» Freeh. 31.9. * Gen. 13.10. « Ovid. Met. 1. * Aug de Civit Dei. 1 . 13. c . 21. 


■ Suida« in vei bo Pandifus. 


Secondly, 


Digitized by 


oeco.'ju 

(google 








Chip. lit. The History of the W o n l d. 25 


Secondly, If the birth and works, and death of 
our Saviour, were faid to have been in lbme fuch 
country, of which no man ever heard tell, and that 
his miracles had been performed in the air, or no 
place certainly known: I allure my felf, that the 
Chriflian religion would have taken but a (lender 
root in the minds of men: for times and places are 
approved witnefles of worldly a&ions. 

T hirdly, If we Ihould rely, or give place to the 
judgment of fome writers upon this place of Gene fa 
(though otherwife for their do&rine in general they 
are worthy of honour and reverence) 1 lay that there 
is no fable among the Grecians or Egyptians more 
ridiculous: for who would believe that there were a 
piece of the world fo fet by it felf, and feparated, 
as to hang in the air under die circle of the moon ? 
or who fodoltifh to conceive, that from thence the 
four rivers of Ganges , Nilus y Euphrates , and Tigris. 
Jhould fall down, and run under all the ocean, and 
rile up again in this our habitable world, and in 
thofe places where they are now found ? which left 
any man think that I enforce, or ftrain to the 
worft, diefe are Peter Come fur’s, own words. Eft 
autem locus amoenijjimus , longo terrx & marts traClu 
a nojlra habitabili Zona fecretuSy adeo clevatuSy ut 
ufque ad lunarem globum attingaty tfle. (that is) It 
is a moll pleafant place, fevered from our habitable 
Zone y by a long tradl of land and lea, elevated fo, 
that it reacheth to the globe of the moon. 

And Mofes Ear Cephas upon this place writeth in 
this manner: 4 Deinde hoc quoque refponfum volu- 
mus y Paradifum multofublimiorepofitum effe regione t 
atque h<ec nojlra extet terra , eoque fieri tit ilhnc per 
pracipitium delabantur fltevii tanto cum impetu y quan¬ 
tum verbis exprimere non pojfis ; eoque impetu impul- 
fi prejfique fub oceani vado rapiuntur y unde rurfus 
profliant ebulliantque in hoc a nobis culto orbe : 
which have this fenfc : Furthermore (faith he) we 
give this for an anfwer, that Paradife is fet in a 
region far raifed above tiiis part which we inhabit * 
whereby it comes to pafs, that from thence thefe 
rivers fall down with fuch a headlong violence, as 
words cannot exprefs ; and with that force fo im- 
pulfed and prefs’d, they are carried under the deep 
ocean fea, and do again rife and boil up in this our 
habitable world: and to this he addeth the opinion of 
Epbram, which is this: Ephram dicity Paradifum 
arnbire terramy atque ultra oceanum ita pofitum ejje } 
ut totum terrarum orbem ab omni circumdet regione t 
non aliter atque lun<e orbis lunam cingit ; (which is) 
That Paradife doth compafs or embrace the whole 
earth, and is fo fet beyond the ocean, as it envi- 
roneth the whole orb of the earth on every fide, as 
the orb of the moon doth embrace the moon. To 
the end therefore that thefe ridiculous expofitions and 
opinions do not bring queftion unto truth it felf, or 
make the fame fubjedt to doubts or difputes, it is 
neceflary to dilcover the true place of Paradife , 
which Godin bis wifdom appointed in the very na¬ 
vel of this our world, and (as Melanchton lays) in 
parte terra meliore , in the beft part thereof, that 
from thence, as from a center, the univerfal might 
be filled with people and planted ; and by know¬ 
ing this place, we lhall the better judge of the be¬ 
ginning of nations, and of the world’s inhabitation: 
for near unto this did the fons of Noah alfo difperfe 
themfelves after the flood, into all other remote re¬ 
gions and countries. And if it be a generous defire 
in men, to know from whence their own fore-fa¬ 
thers have come, and out of what regions and na¬ 
tions ; it cannot be difpleaflng to underftand the 
place of our firft anceftor, from whence all the 
ftreams and branches of mankind have followed 


and been deduced. If then it do appear by the fop 
mer, that fuch a place there was as Paradife, and 
that die know ledge of this place cannot be unpro¬ 
fitable, it followedi in order to examine leveral opi¬ 
nions before remembred, by the truth it felf; and to 
fee how they agree with the fcnle of the feripture, 
and with common reafon; and afterward to prove 
directly, and to delineate the region in which God 
firft planted this delightful garden. 

Sect. V. 

That the flood hath not utterly defaced the marks of 
Paradifey nor caufed hills in the earth. 

A N D firft, whereas it is fuppofed by Aug. Chy- 
famen fit y that die flood hath altered, deform¬ 
ed, or rather annihilated this place, in fuch fort, as 
no man can find any mark or memory diereof (of 
which opinion there were others alfo, aferibing to 
the flood the caule of thofe high mountains, which 
are found on all the earth over, with many other 
ftrange effhfts :) for mine own opinion, I think 
neither the one, nor the other to be true. For al- 
diough 1 cannot deny, but that the face of Paradife 
was after the flood withered, and grown old, in 
refpcdl of the firft beauty (for both the ages of men, 
and the nature of all things time hath changed:) yet 
if there had been no fign of any fuch place, or if the 
foil anil feat had not remained, then would not \lo- 
fety who wrote of Paradife about Sso years after 
die flood, have deferibed it fo particularly, and 
die prophets long after MofcSy would not have made 
fo often mention thereof. And though the very gar¬ 
den it felf were not then to be found, but that the 
flood, and other accidents of time, made it one com¬ 
mon field and pafture with the land of Eden, yet 
the place is ftill the fame, and the rivers ftill remain 
the lame rivers. By two of which (never doubted 
of) to wit, Tigris, and Euphrates , we are fure to 
find in what longitude Paradife lay; and learning 
out one of diefe rivers, which afterward doth di¬ 
vide it felf into.four branches, we are fure that the 
partition is at the very border of the garden it felf. 

For it is b written, that out of Eden went a river 
to water the garden, and from thence it was divi¬ 
ded, and became into four heads; now, whether 
the word in the Latin tranflation (tnde) from thence, 
be referred to Eden it felf, or to Paradife ; yet the 
divifion, and branching of thofe rivers, muft be in 
die north, or fouth fide of the very garden (if the 
rivers run as they do, north and fouth;) and dierefore 
thefe rivers yet remaining, and Eden manifcftly 
known, there could be no liich defacing by the flood, 
as is fuppofed. Furthermore, as diere is no likeli¬ 
hood, that the place could be fo altered, as future 
ages knew it not; lo is there no probability diat ei¬ 
ther thefe rivers were turned out of their courfes, or 
new rivers created by the flood which were not, or 
that the flood (as atbrel'aid) by a violent motion, 
when it began to decreale, was the caufe of high 
hills, or deep valleys. For what defeent of wa¬ 
ters could there be in a fpherical and round body, 
wherein there is nor high nor low ? feeing that all* 
violent force of waters is either by the ftrength of 
wind, by defeent trom a higher to a lower, or by 
the ebb or flood of the fea. But that there was any 
wind (whereby die feas are mod enraged) it ap- 
pcaredi not, rather the contrary is probable: for it is 
written, c Therefore God made a wind to pafs upon 
the eat thy and the waters cea fed. So as it appeareth 
not, that, until the waters fank, there was any wind 
at all, but that God afterward, out of his goodnels, 
cauled die wind to blow, to dry up the abundant 


a 


c Gen. 8. i. 

Digitized by Google 


flime 


No. a. 


Barcephas convened fy Mafiu.'. 


Gen. 2 . io. 

G 








2 6 r the History of the World. Book I. 

flime and mud of the earth,and make the land more were afterw ards, and ever fince, known by the fame 
firm, and to cleanfe the air of thick vapours, and names, and on which mountains it is generally re- 
unwholfome mills: and this we know by experi- ceived that the ark relied ^ but untruly, as 1 /hall 
ence, that all downright rains do evermore difTever prove hereafter. And again it appeareth, that the 
the violence of outragious winds, and beat down, mount Sion (tho’ by another name) was known 
and level the fwelling and mountainous billows of before the flood \ on which the Tbalmudifls report 
the fea : for any ebbs and floods there could be that many giants faved themfelves alfo ; but (as 
none, when the waters were equal, and of one Annius faith) without all authority, cither divine 
height, over all the face of the earth, and when there or human. 

were no indraughts, bays, or gulfs to receive a flood, Lallly, it appeareth that the flood did not fa 

or any defeent, or violent falling of waters in the turn upfide down the face of the earth, as thereby 
round form of the earth and waters, as aforefaid : it was made pad knowledge, after the waters were 
and therefore it feemeth moll agreeable to reafon, decreafed, by this, that b when Noab fent out the 
that the waters rather Hood in a quiet calm, than clove the fecond time, jbe returned with an olive-leaf 
that they moved with any raging or over-bearing in her mouthy which flic had pluck’d, and which 
violence. And for a more diredl proof that the (until the trees were dil'covercd) Ihe found not: lor 
flood made no fuch dellroying alteration, Jofepbus otherwife Ihe might have found them floating on 
avoweth that one of thofe pillars eredled by Seth, the water ; a manifefl proof, that the trees were not 
the third from Adam, was to be fecn in his days j torn up by the roots, nor fwam upon the waters, 
which pillars were fet up above \yz 6 years before for it is written, foliumoliv.e rupturn, or decerptum, 
the flood, counting Seth to be an hundred years a leaf pluck’d , which is, to take from a tree, or to 
old at the erection of them \ and Jofcph himfelf to tear off. By this it is apparent (there being no- 
have lived fome forty or fifty years after Chrift: of thing written to the contrary) that the flood made 
whom, altho’ there be no caule to believe all that no fuch alteration, as was fuppofed, but that die 
he wrote, yet that which he avouched of his own place of Paradife might be l'een to fucceeding ages, 
time, cannot (without great derogation) be called efpecially unto Mofes, by whom it plcafed God to 
in queftion. And therefore it may be poflible, that teach the truth of the world’s creation, and unto the 
fome foundation or ruin thereof might then be feen. prophets which fucceeded him : both which I take 
Now, that fuch pillars were raifed by Seth, all an- for my warrant, and to guide me in this difeovery. 
tiquity hath avowed. It is alfo written that Berofus 

(to whom, altho’ I give little credit, yet I cannot SECT. VI. 

condemn him in all) that the city of Enoch, built That p aradi r g mt the M * fvme 

by Cam about the mountains of Ltbanus was not de- have . maki tbe occan t0 bt tbe Jcumtn 

facedby length of time : yea, die ruins thereof; An- 0 f thofe four rivers. 

mm (who commented upon that invented trag- 

ment) laith, were to be feen in his days, who liv’d r I ’HI 9 conceit of Aug. Chryfamcnfis being an* 
in the reign of Ferdinand and Ifabclla of Cajlile. A fwered, who only giveth bis opinion for rca- 
And if thefe his words be not true, then was he ex- fon, I will in a few words examine that of the Ma- 
ceeding impudent: for, fpeaking of this city of E- niebces , of Noviomagus , Vadianus , Goropius , Beca- 
noch, he concludeth in this fort: Cujus maxima & nus , ami all thofe that underlfood, that by Paradife 
ingentis molts fundamenta vifuntur , & vocatur ab in- was meant the whole earth. But in this I fhall not 
colts regionis, Civitas Cain , ut noflri mcrcatores , 6? trouble the reader with many words, becaufe by 
peregrini referunt •, The foundation of which huge thofe places of fcripturc formerly remember’d, this 
mals is now to be feen, and the place is called by universality will appear altogether improper. The 
the people of that region, the City of Cam, as places which Fadianus alledgeth, c Bring forth fruit 
both our flrangers and merchants report. It is alfo and multiply, fill the earth and fubdue it, rule over 
avowed by Pomponius Mela (to whom I give more every creature, &c. with this of the Alls, * And hath 
credit in thefe things) that the city of Joppa was made of one blood all mankind, to dwell on all tbe 
built before the flood, over which Cepha was king: face of tbe earth, do no way prove fuch a genera- 
whofe name, with his brother Phineus , together lity: for the world was made for man, of which 
with the grounds and principles of their religion, he was lord and governour, and all things then-in 
was found graven upon certain altars offlone. And were ordained of God for hisufe. Now, altho’all 
it is not impoflible, that the ruins of this other city, men were of one and the fame fountain of blood 
called Enoch by Annins, might be feen, tho’ found- originally •, and Adams pofleriry inhabited in pro- 
ed in the firfl age: but it could not be of the firfl cefs of time over all the face of the earth: yet it 
city of the world, a built by Cain j the place rather dilproveth in nothing the particular garden, aflign- 
than the time denying it. ed to e Adam to drefs and cultive, in which he li- 

And to prove diredtly that the flood was not the ved in fo blefled an eflate before his tranfgreflion. 
caufc of mountains, but that there were mountains For if there had been no other choice, but that A- 
from the creation, it is written, that tbe waters of dam had been left to the univerlal, Mofes would 
tbe flood overflowed by fifteen cubits the higheft moun - not then have faid * eaflward in Eden, feeing the 
tains. And Mafias Damafcenus, fpeaking of the world hath not eafl nor weft but refpeftively. And 
flood, writeth in this manner : Eft fupra Minyadam to what end had the angel of God been fet to keep 
excclfus mans in Armenia (qui Baris appellatur) in the eaft fide, and entrance into Paradife after A- 
quo confugientes multos, fermo eft, diluvii tempore dam's expullion, if the univerfal had been Para- 
liberator And upon Minyada there is an high difis ? for then muft Adam have been chafed alfo 
mountain in Armenia (called Baris) unto which, it out of the world. For if all the earth were Para- 
is /aid, that many fled in the time of the deluge, difie, that place can receive no better conflruiftion 
and that they faved themfelves thereon. Now, than this, That Adam was driven out of the world 
tho’ it is contrary to God’s word, that any more into the world, and our of Paradife into Paradife, 
were faved than eight perfons (which Mafius doth except we fhould believe with Melrodcrtts, that there 
not avouch, but by report) yet it is a teftimony, were infinite worlds. Which to deny, he thinks 
that fuch mountains were before the flood, which all one as to affirm, ‘That in fo large a field as the 


* Gen 2. 8. { Gen 3. 24. 

/ ' tntiverftl, 

Digitized by V^xOOQLC 


■ Gen. 4. 17. 


Gen. S. 11. 


* Gen. 1. 28. 


Adis 17. 26. 








. •» « . f 

Chap. III. The History 0/ ^ World. 17 


univerfal, there fhould grow but one tbiftle. Novio- 
ikagus upon Beda, feemcth to be led by this, that 
it was impoflible for thofe three rivers, Ganges, Ni¬ 
ks and Euphrates (which water three portions of 
the world lo far diftant) to rife out of one fountain, 
except the ocean be taken for the well, and the 
world for the garden. 

And it is true, that thofe four rivers, being fo 
Underftood, there could be no conjecture more pro¬ 
bable } but it (hall plainly appear, that Pifon was 
falfly taken for Ganges, and G ebon falfly for Nilus, 
altho’ Ganges be a river by Havila in India, and 
Nilus runs thro’ Ethiopia. The Seventy write Chus 
for Ethiopia , and thereby the errors of the Mani- 
cbees, and the miftakings of Noviomagus, Goropius 
and Vadianus, with others, are made manifeft. Yet 
was their conjeClure far more probable than that of 
Epbrcm, Cyrillus and Athanafius, That Paradife 
was feated far beyond the Ocean fea, and that A- 
dam waded through it, and at laft came toward the 
country in which he was created, and was buried 
at mount Calvary in Jerufalem. And certainly, 
tho’ all thofe of the firft age were of great ftature, 
and fo continued many years after the flood, yet 
Adam's (hin-bones muft have contained a thoufand 
fathom, and much more, if he had forded the oce¬ 
an •, but this opinion is fo ridiculous, as it needs no 
argument to difprove it. 

Sect. VII. 

Gf their opinion which make Paradife as high as 
the moon: and of others which make it higher 
than the middle region of the air . 

T Hirdly whereas Beda faith, and as the fchool- 
men affirm, Paradife to be a place altogether 
removed from the knowledge of men ( locus a cog - 
nitione hominum remotiffimus) and Barcephas concei¬ 
ved, that Paradife was far in the eaft, but mounted 
above the ocean, and all the earth, and near the 
orb of the moon (which opinion, tho’ the fchool- 
men charge Beda withal, yet Pererius lays it off 
from Beda, upon Strabus, and his matter Rabanus') 
and whereas Rupertus, in his geography of Para¬ 
dife, doth not much differ from the reft, but finds 
it feated next or neareft heaven •, it may feem, that 
all thefe borrowed this doctrine out of Plato, and 
Plato out of Socrates: but neither of them (as I 
conceive) well underftood •, who (undoubtedly) took 
this place for heaven it felf, into which the fouls of 
the Sleffed were carried after death. 

* True it is, that thefe philofophers durft not for 
fear of the Areopagites (in this, and many other di¬ 
vine apprehenfions) fet down what they believed in 
plain terms, efpecially Plato : though Socrates in 
the end fuffered death for acknowledging one only 
powerful God \ and therefore did the devil himlclf 
do him that right, as by an oracle, to pronounce 
him the wifeft man. u Juflin Martyr affirmeth, 
that Plato had read the feriptures \ and St. Augufl 
tir,e gave this judgment of him, as his opinion, that 
(few things changed) he might be counted a Chrifti- 
»n. And it feemeth to me, that both Tertullian 
and Eufebius conceive, that Socrates, by that place 
alorefaid, meant the celeftial Paradife, and not this 
of Eden. Solinus, I grant, reporteth, that there is 
a place exceeding delightful, and healthful, upon 
tlie top of mount Atho (called Acrithonos) which 
being above all clouds of rain, or other inconveni¬ 
ence, the people (by reafon of their fo many years) 
are called Macrobici (that is) long-liv’d. A further 
argument is ufed for proof of the height of this 
place, bccaufe therein was Enoch preferved from 


the violence of die flood : approved by Ifidore and 
Peter Lombard: in which place ailb Tertullian 
conceived, that the blefled fouls were preferved till 
the laft judgment: which Irensus and Juflin Mar¬ 
tyr alfo believed. But this opinion was of all catbo- 
lick divines reproved, and in die Florentine council 
damned-, of which St. Augufline more modeftly 
gave this judgment: Sicut certum ejl Enoch & 
ham, nunc vivere : it a ubi nunc funt, an in paradi - 
fo an alibi, incertum eft \ (that is) As it is certain 
that Enoch and Elias do now live-, fo where they 
now live, in paradife, or ellewhere, it is uncertain. 
But Barcephas gives a third caufe, though of all o- 
ther the wcakeft. For (faith he) it was neceflary 
that Paradife fhould be fet at flich a diftance and 
height, becaufe the four rivers (had they not fallen 
fo precipitate) could not have had fufficient force to 
have thruft themfeives under the great ocean, and 
afterward have forced their paffage thro’ the earth, 
and have rifen again in the far diftant regions of 
India, Egypt, and Armenia. 

Thefe ilrange fancies and dreams have been an- 
fwered by divers learned men long fmee, and late¬ 
ly by Hopkins, and Pererius, writing upon this fub- 
jett} of whole arguments I will repeat thefe few: 
(for to ufe long difeourfe againft thofe things, which 
are both againft fcripture and reafon, might right¬ 
ly be judged a vanity in the anfwerer, not much 
inferiour to that of the inventer.) 

It is firft therefore alledged, that fuch a place 
cannot be commodious to live in: for being let fo 
near the moon, it had been too near the fun, and 
other heavenly bodies. Secondly, becaufe it muft 
have been too joyndt a neighbour to the element of 
fire. Thirdly, becaufe the air in that region is fo 
violently removed, and carried about with fuch 
fwiftnefs, as nothing in that place can confift or 
have abiding. Fourthly, becaule the fpace between 
the earth and the moon (according to Ptolemy and 
Alfraganus') is feventeen times the diameter of the 
earth, which makes in a grofs account about one 
hundred and twenty thoufand miles. Hereupon it 
muft follow, that Paradife, being raifed to this 
height, muft have the compafs of the whole earth 
for a bafts and foundation. But had it been fo rai¬ 
fed, it could hardly be hidden from the know-ledge, 
or eyes of men, feeing it would deprive us of the 
fun’s light all the fore-part of the day, being feated 
in the eaft, as they fuppofe. Now, to fortify the 
former opinions, Toftatus addeth this, that thofe 
people which dwell near thofe falls of waters, are 
deaf from their infancy, like thofe that dwell near 
die c Catadup* , or over-falls of Nilus. But this I 
hold as feigned. For I have feen in the Indies, far 
greater water-falls, than thofe of Nilus, and yet the 
people dwelling near them are not deaf at all. Tof¬ 
tatus (better to ftrengthen himfelf) citeth Baftl and 
Ambrofe together: to which Pererius, Sed ego h<ee 
apud Bafiliutn & Ambrofium in eorum feriptis, qudt 
nunc extant, nufquam me legere tnemini \ But I do 
not remember (faith he) that I ever read thofe tilings 
either in Baftl or Ambrofe. 

But for the bodies of Enoch and Elias, God hath 
difpofed of them according to his wifdom. Their 
taking up might be into the celeftial Paradife, for 
ought we know. For altho’ flcfli and blood, fub- 
jedt to corruption, cannot inherit the kingdom of 
heaven, and die feed mutt rot in the ground before 
it grow, yet we fhu.ll not all die ( faith St. Paul) 
d but all Jhall be changed: which change in Enoch 
and Elias, was eafy to him that is almighty. But 
for the reft, the feriptures are manifeft, that by the 
flood all perifhed on the eardi faving e eight per- 


1 bin- Lam in $co. l> Jufl. Mart, adm.ad Gent. Aug. * Cicero Somn Scip 


4 1 Cor. 15. 36, jt. 

Digitized by 


* 1 Pet. 3. to. 










28 Tfe HisTokY of the WokLD.' Book t. 


fons > and therefore in the terreftrial Paradife they 
could not be. 

For Toflatus'* own opinion, who foared not 
altogether lb high as the reft, but believed that Pa - 
radife was raifed above the middle region of the air, 
and twenty cubits above all mountains, that the 
flood did not therefore reach it (which Scot us and 
other latter fchool-men alfo believed-, for, fay they, 
there were no finners in Paradife, and therefore no 
caufe to overwhelm it:) this is alfo contrary to 
the exprefs letter of the feripture, which diredtly, 
and without admitting of any diftinftion, teacheth 
us, that 1 the waters over-flowed all the mountains 
under heaven. And were it otherwife, then might 
we as well give credit to Maftus Damafcenus , and 
the Tbalmudifls , who affirm, that there were of the 
giants that faved themfelves on the mountain Baris, 
and on Sion. But to help this, Scotus being ( as 
die reft of the fchool-men are) full of diftindtions, 
faith that the waters ftood at Paradife, as they did 
in the b red fca, and at Jordan > and as the flood 
was not natural, fo was Paradife faved by miracle. 
And Thomas Aquinas qualifieth his high conceit with 
this fuppofition, that it was not believed, that Para¬ 
dife was fo feated, as Bede and others feem to affirm 
in words, but by hyperbole and comparatively, for 
the delicacy and beauty fo refembled. But this I 
dare avow of all thole fchool-men, that though they 
were exceeding witty, yet they better teach all their 
followers to fhift, than to refolve, by their diftin- 
dtions. Wherefore not to ftay long in anfwering 
this opinion of Toflatus, I confefs that it is written, 
that the mountains of Olympus, Atho, and Atlas, 
over-reach and furmount all winds and clouds, and 
that (notwithftanding) there is found on the heads 
of the hills both fprings and fruits •, and the Pagan 
priefts, facrificing on thefe mountain-tops, do not 
find the allies (remaining of their facrificcs) blown 
thence, nor thence wafh’d off by rains, when they 
return: yet experience hath refolved us, that thefe 
reports are fabulous-, and Pliny himfelf (who was 
not fparing in the report of wonders) avoweth the 
contrary. But were it granted, yet the height of 
thefe mountains is far under the fuppofed place of 
Paradife and on thefe felf hills the air is fo thin 
(faith St. Augujline, whom herein I miftruft) that 
it is not fufficient to bear up the body of a bird, 
having therein no feeling of her wings, or any fen- 
fible refiftance of air to mount her felf by. 

Sect. VIII. 

Of their opinion that feat Paradife under the Eqtti- 
notlial: and of the pleafant habitation under 
thofe climates. 

HOSE which come nearer unto reafon find 
| Patadife under the Equinoctial line, as Tertulli - 
an, Bonaventure, and Durandus \ judging, that there¬ 
under might be found moft plealure, and the grea- 
teft fertility of foil: but againft it Thomas Aquinas 
objefteth the diftemperate heat, which he fuppo- 
feth to be in all places fo direftly under the fun -, 
but this is non caufa pro caufa •, for although Para¬ 
dife could not be under the line, becaufe Eden is 
fir from it, in which Paradife was •, and bccaufe 
there is no part of Euphrates, Tigris, or Ganges un¬ 
der it ( Ganges being one of the four rivers, as 
they luppofe) yet this conceit of diftemper (be¬ 
ing but an old opinion) is found to be very untrue, 
though for the conjecture not to be condemned, 
confidering the age, when thofe fathers wrote, 
grounded chiefly on this: that whereas it appeared, 
that every country, as it lay by degrees nearer the 
tropick, and fo toward the Equinoctial, did fo 


much the rtiore exceed in heat; it was therefore a 
reafonable conjecture, that thofe countries which 
were fituated diredtly under it, were of a diftemper 
uninhabitable: but it feenieth that Tertullian con¬ 
ceived better and fo did Avicenne, for they both 
thought them habitable enough: and though (per¬ 
chance) in thofe days it might be thought a fanta- 
ftical opinion (as all are wiiich go againft the vul¬ 
gar -,) yet we now find, that if there be any place 
upon the earth of that nature, beauty, and de light 
that Paradife had, the fame muft be luund within 
that fuppofed uninhabitable burnt zone, or within 
the tropicks, and neareft to the line it felf. For 
hereof experience hath informed reafon, and time 
hath made thofe things apparent, which were hid¬ 
den, and could not by any contemplation be difeo- 
vered. Indeed it hath fo pleafed God to provide 
for all living creatures, wherewith he hath filled the 
world, that luch inconveniences which we contem¬ 
plate afar off, are found by trial and the witnefs of 
mens travels, to be fo qualified, as there is no por¬ 
tion of die earth made in vain, or as a fruitlcl's 
lump to fafhion out the reft. For c God himfelf (faith 
Ifaiab) that formed the earth and made it, he that pre¬ 
pared it, he created it not in vain , he fa med it to be 
inhabited. Now we find that theft* hotteft regions of 
the world feated under the Equinoctial line, or near 
it, are fo retrelhed with a daily gale of eafterly 
wind (which the Spaniards call the Brize') that doth 
evermore blow ftrongeft in the heat of the day, as 
the downright beams of the fun cannot fo much 
mafter it, that there is any inconvenience or diftem¬ 
perate heat found thereby. Secondly, the nights 
are fo cold, frefh and equal, by reafon of the entire 
interpofttion of die earth, as (tor thole places which 
my felf have fecn, near the line and under it) I 
know no other part of the world of better, or equal 
temper, only there are Ionic tracts, which by acci¬ 
dent of high mountains are barrd from this air and 
frefh wind, and fome tew fandy parts without trees, 
which are not therefore fo well inhabited as the reft j 
and fuch difference of foils wc find alfo in all other 
parts of the world. But (tor the greateft part) thofe 
regions have fo many goodly rivers, fountains and 
little brooks, abundance of high cedars, and other 
ftately trees calling fhade, fo many forts of deli¬ 
cate fruits, ever bearing, and at all times beautified 
with bloffom and fruit, both green and ripe, as it 
may of all other parts be beft compared to die Pa¬ 
radife of Eden : the boughs and branches are never 
unclothed and left naked, their fap creepeth not un¬ 
der ground into the root, fearing the injury of the 
froft : neither doth Pomona at any times defpife her 
withered hufband Fertumnus, in his winter quarters 
and old age. Therefore are thefe countries called 
Terra vitiofe, vicious countries: for nature being 
liberal to all without labour, neceflity impofing no 
indurtry or travel, idlenefs bringeth forth no other 
fruits than vain thoughts, and licentious pleafures. 
So that to conclude this part, Tertullian and thole 
of his opinion were not deceived in the nature of 
the place : but Aquinas, who mifliked this opini¬ 
on, and followed a worfe. And (to lay the truth) 
all the fchool-men were grofs in this particular. 

Sect. IX. 

Of the change of the names of places .- and that be- 
fulcs that Eden in Caelefyria, there is a country 
in Babylon, once of this name, as is proved out of 
Ifaiah xxxvii, and Ezek. xxvii. 

r I 1 H E S E opinions anfwered, and the region 
1 of Eden not found in any of thofe imaginary 
worlds, nor under Torrida Zona , it followeth that 


» Gen. 7. 19. b F.xod 14. 21. 


c Jfai;ih 45. 


18. 

Digitized by 


Google™* 






Chap. III. The History of the W o r l d. 


29 


now we difcover and find out the feat thereof, for 
in it was Paradife by God planted. The difficulty 
of which fearch refteth chiefly in this, that as all 
nations have often changed names with their ma¬ 
ilers j fo are moll of thefe places, by Mofes re-. 
membred, forgotten by thofc names ot all hiftori- 
ans and geographers as well ancient as modern. 

Befides, we find that the Affjrians, Babylonians, 
Males and Per fans (Cyrus only and few others ex¬ 
cepted) fought to extinguifii the Hebrews. The 
Giccians hated both their nation and their religi¬ 
on ^ and the Romans defpiied once to remember, 
them in any of their Rories. And as thole three 
monarchies fucceeded each other •, fo did they trans¬ 
form the names of all thofe principal places and ci¬ 
ties in die eaft: and alter them, the Turk hath, 
fought (what he could) to extinguifii in all things 
the ancient memory of thofc people, which he hath 
fubjreted and inthrallcd. 

Now befides thofe notable marks, Euphrates and 
Tints, the better to find the way which leadeth to 
the country ot Eden , we are to take for guides thefe 
two confiderations (to wit) that it lay caftward from 
Cana in and Judea •, and that it was of all others 
the mod beautiful and fertile. Firft in refped of 
fmiation, the next country to Judea eaftward was 
Arabia Petr*a\ but in this region was Mofes him- 
fell when he wrote: and the next unto it eaftward 
alio was Arabia die Defat 7 , both which in refpedl 
of the infertility could not be Eden, neither have a- 
ny of the Arabians any fuch rivers, as arecxprefsM 
to run out of it: fo as it followcth of necefiity, 
that Eden mull be caftward, and beyond both At a- 
bia Pctrjea, and Dcferta . But bccaule Eden is by 
Mofes named by it felf, and by the fertility and 
the rivers only deferibed, we muft feck it in other 
feriptures, and where it is by the additions'of the 
neighbour nations better deferibed. Ip the pro¬ 
phet Ifaiah I find it coupled and accompanied 
with other adjacent countries, in thele words Ipokcrr 
in the perfon of Senacbcrib by Rabfikch . a IMve 
the Gods of the nations delivered them, which my 
fathers have defroyed, as Gofan and liar an and 
Rtfepb, and the children of Eden , which were at 
Tela [far ? and in Ezekiel, where he prophefieth a- 
gainlt the Tyrians: 1 They of liar an and Canneh, 
ami Eden, the merchants of Sheba, Ajhttr, and 
Chilmad, were thy merchants, &c. 

But to avoid confufion, we muft underftand that 
there were two Edens, one of which the prophet 
c Amos remembreth, where he divideth Syria into 
three provinces, whereof the firft he maketh Syria 
Damafccne , or Decapolitan : the lecond part is that 
valley called Avenir, otherwife Conva/lis , or the 
tract olCbamatb, where AJfjria is joyned to Arabia 
the Defart and where d Ptolemy placcdi the city ol* 
Averia: and the tliird is known by the name of 
Domus Edenis , or Coclcfyria , otherwife vallis cava, 
or the hollow valley, bccaule the mountains of Li - 
banus and Antiltbanus , take all the length of it on 
both fidcs, and border it: for Code in Greek is ca¬ 
va in Latin . But this is not that Eden , which we 
feck: neither doth this province lie eaft from Ca¬ 
naan, but north, and fo joyncth unto it as it could 
not be unknown to the Hebrews . Yet, bccaule 
there is a little city therein called Paradije, the 
Jews believed this Codefjria to be the fame which 
Mofes deferibeth. For the fame caufe doth Hop¬ 
kins in his treatife of Paradife reprehend Beroaldus, 
in that he confoundeth this Eden with the other 
Eden of Paradife: tho’to give Beroaldus his right, 

I conceive that he led the way to Hopkins, and to 
all other later writers, faving that he failed in dif- 


tinguifiiing thele two regions, both called Eden: 
an<| that he altogether miliinderllood two ol die 
four rivers, to wit, Pi fin and Gihon, as Hull ap¬ 
pear hereafter. Now, to find out Eden, which (as 
Mofes teacheth us) lay eaftward from the Defarts, 
where he wrote after he had palled the red fea \ 
wc niuft confider where thofe other countries are 
found, w hich the prophet Ifaiah and Ezekiel join- 
eth with it. For (faith Ij'iialf) Gofan, liar an, and 
Rcfeph, and the children of Eden, which were at 
Telajfar . Alfo K Ezekiel joineth liar an with Eden, 
whp, together with thofe of Sheba, Aflour and Chit- 
mad, were the merchants that traded with the city 
of Tyre, wffiich was then (faith Ezekiel ) the mart 
of the people for many ifes. And it hath ever been 
the cuftom, that the Perfians conveyed their mcr- 
chandile to Babylon, and to thofe cities upon Eu¬ 
phrates 'and Tigris, and from thence tranfported 
them into'Syria, now Soria, and to the port of the 
Mediterranean fea : as in ancient times to the city 
of Tyre, afterwards to Tripoly, and now to Aleppo, 
from whence they imbark them at the port of A- 
lexamlretta, in the bay of I{ficus, now Laiazzo . 
Ezekiel, in the description of the magnificence of 
Tyre, and ot tfie exceeding trade that it had with 
all the nations of the call, as the only mart-town 
of that part .of the world, reciteth both the people, 
with whom they had commerce, and alfo what 
commodities every country yielded: and having 
counted the levcral people and countries, he addeth 
the particular trade, which each of them exercifed. 
< They were thy merchants (faith the prophet) in all 
forts of things, in raj men/s of blue filk, and of broi- 
dcred works) fine linen , coral and pearl; and after¬ 
wards (peaking of the merchants of Sheba and Ra- 
amah, and in what kinds they traded, he hath thefe 
words. The merchants of Sheba and Raamah were 
thy merchants, they occupied in thy fairs, with the 
chief of all fplces, and with all precious flones and 
gold. Now thefe be indeed the riches which Perfia 
and Arabia foelix yield: and bccaufe Sheba and 
Raamah are thofe parts of Arabia, which border 
tlie fea, called the Perfan gulf, therefore did thofe 
nations both vent fuch fpice, fwcet gums, and 
pearls, as their own countries yielded, and withal 
having trade w ith their neighbours of India, had 
from them alfo all lbrts ot ipices, and plenty of 
gold. The better to convey thele commodities to 
that great mart of Tyre, the Shebans or Arabians 
entered by the mouth of Tigris , and from the city of 
Tcrrcdon (built or enlarged by Nabuchodonozor, now 
called Balfara) thence lent up all thele rich merchan- 
dilcs by boat to Babylon, from w'hence by the body 
of Euphrates, as far as it bended weftward, and af¬ 
terwards by a branch thereof, which reacheth within 
three days journey of Aleppo, and then over land 
they pals’d to Tjre, as they did afterwards to Tri¬ 
poly (formerly Ilieropolis ) and thence to Alexan- 
dretta, as aforefaid. Now the merchants of Can¬ 
cels, which Ezekiel joineth with Eden, inhabit¬ 
ed far up the river, and received this trade from 
Arabia and India, befides thofe proper commo¬ 
dities which themfclvcs had, alfo which they re¬ 
ceived out of Pcrfia , which bordered them. St. 
Jerome undcrftandctli by Canneh, Seleucia, which 
is fcated upon Euphrates, where it breaketh into 
Jour heads, and which took that name from Selcu- 
ctis, wlip made thereof a magnificent city. ITtero - 
fclymitanus thinks it to be Ctcftpbon, but Ctefiphon 
is fcated down low upon Tigris, and Cannc can¬ 
not be on that fide, I mean on the eaft fide of Ti¬ 
gris, for then w'ere it out of the valley of Skinar . 

Pliny placcth the Scbcnite upon Euphrates, where 


* Fft. 3;. i2. fc Ezck. 27. 23. c Amos 1. 1. d Strabo. e Ezek. 27. 23. f Fzek. 27. 24. * P!in. I. 6. c 26. 

No. 2. H 


Digitized by 


Google 






The History of the World. Book I. 


the fame beginneth tb be fordable, which is to¬ 
ward die border of Syria , after it IeaVeth to be the 
bound of Arabia the Defart , and whete the fiver 
of Euphrates rcfletteth from the Defart of Palmi- 
rtna : for thefe people of Canneh (afterwards Sche- 
nitre') inhabited both borders of Euphrates , ftretch- 
ing diemfelves from their own city of Canneh in 
Shinar weftward along the banks of Euphrates , as 
far as the city of Thapfacus , where Ptolemy ap¬ 
pointed the fords of Euphrates: which alfb agreeth 
with the defcription of the Schenita by Strabo , 
whofe words are thefe \ 1 Mercatoribus ex Syria Se- 
Jeuciam (A Babyloniam euntibus iter ejl per Schceni- 
tas \ The merchants which travel from Syria to 
Seleucia and Babylon y take their way by the Sche- 
nites. Therefore thofe which take Canneh for Char- 
ran do much miftake it. For Charran , to which 
Abraham came from b Ur in Chaldea (called by 
God) ftandeth alfo in Mefopotamia y not upon Eu¬ 
phrates itfelfJbut upon die river of Chaboras , which 
fiftieth into Euphrates: and the merchants of Char¬ 
ran are diftimftly named with thofe of Canneh itl 
Ezekiel , as they of Haran, and Canneh, and Eden, 
the merchants of Sheba, Afhur, and Chilmad were 
thy merchants. Wherefore Charran , which is fome- 
times called Charre y and Haran t and Aran y is but 
the lame Charran of Mefopotamia - y and whert it is 
written Aran y then it is taken for the region of 
Mefopotamia : or Aran fluviorum , the Greek word 
Mefopotamia importing a country between rivers : 
for Mefos in Greek is medius in Latin y and Pota- 
mos fluvius. And when it is written Haran or A- 
ran y it is then taken for the city itfelf, to which 
Abraham came from Ur (as aforelaid.) For Stra- 
bo y in the defcription of Arabia y giveth that tradl 
of land from the borders of Caelejyria to the edge 
of Mefopotamia y to the Sckenit<e y who alfo inhabit- 
e8 on both fides of Eupbrates y and were in after- 
ages accounted of thefe Arabians which inhabit Ba- 
tanea and the north part of the Defarts y dretching 
themfelves towards die unhabited folitude of Pal- 
mirena y which lyeth between Syria and Arabia the 
Defart. So as thefe of Canneh lay In the very 
high-way from Babylon to Tyre y and were neigh¬ 
bours (indifferent) to Charran and to Eden : and 
therefore they are by the prophet Ezekiel coupled 
together. They of Haran y and Cannetb y and Eden y 
(Ac. But St. Jerome made a good interpretation 
of Cannetby or Chalne y by Seleucia y for Seleucia 
was anciently called Chalanne (witnefs Appian f) 
and fo Rabanus Maurus calleth it in his com¬ 
mentaries upon Genefts y the name by time and 
mixture of languages beirig changed from Cbalne 
or Canne , to Chalanne : of which name there afe 
two other cities, (landing in triangle with Seleucia , 
and almoft the next unto it, as Thelbe-canne and 
Mann-canne y the one a little to the weft of Seieucia y 
and the other oppofite unto it, where thefe rivers 
of Tigris and Euphrates are ready to join. There¬ 
fore which of tnefe the ancient Canne Was (being 
all three within the bound of the valley Shinar) 
it is uncertain : but it is a note as well of the im¬ 
portance of the place, as of the certain feat thereof, 
that fo many other cities did retain a part of the 
name in fo many ages after. Neither is it unlikely, 
that thele additions of Tbetbe and Mann to the word 
Canne y were but to make difference between the 
caft and the weft, or the greater and the lefs Cdnhe y 
or between Canne the old and the new: which ad¬ 
ditions to diftinguifh cities by, are ordinary in all 
the regions of the world. 

Now of the other city joyned with Eden y a t Ha- 


rdn y or Cbdrran y St. Jerome on the Judges (peak- 
ing thereof in thefe words: c LUftiqui feverteiehtur y 
pirvenerunt ad Charran , qua eft in medio itinert con¬ 
tra Ninevem y undecimo die y When they returned, 
they came to Charrari (which is the midway agiinft 
Nineveh) the eleventh day. 

This city is by the martyr Stephen , named Char¬ 
ran (fpeaking to the high-prieft:) d 7 e mtn y brethren y 
and fathers y hearken: the God of glory appeared to 
our father Abraham , while he was in McJ'opotamia y 
before he dwelt in Charran. But the feat of this ci¬ 
ty is not doubted of: for it is not only refnembred 
in many feriptures, blit withal exceeding famous 
for the death and overthrow of Crdft'us the Rfc. 
man y who, for his unfttiable greedintfs, was called 
Gurges avaritia y the guif of avarice. Whereof 
Lucan: 

e Ajfyrias Latio maculavit fanguine cartas. 

With Roman blood tWAJfyrian car he defil’d. 

But this city CaMie y or Chain r, is made manifeft 
by Mofis himfelf, where it is written of Nimrod : 
1 And the beginning of his kingdoms was Babel., and 
Erecby and Acad y and Cbalne , in the land of Sinaar y 
Or Shinar: where Mofes fheWeth the firtt compofi- 
tion of the Babylonian empire, and what cities and 
people were fubjeft unto Nimrod > all which lay in 
the faid valley Of Shinar , or near it j and this val- 
ley of Shinar is that traft afterwards called Babylo¬ 
nia and Chaldea , into which alfo Eden ftretcheth it 
felf, Chaldata y Babylonia , Sihar y idem fuht (ftith 
Comeftot.) Three names of one country: which re¬ 
gion of Babylonia y took name of the toWer Babels 
and the tower, 6f rhe confofion of tongues. And 
that Shinar Was Baby Ionia y it is proved in thefe words* 
8 And as they Went from the eaft y they found a plain 
in the land 6 f Shinar , and there they abode : in which 
plain Babylon was built (as aforeftid.) 

Now Shinar being Babylonia y and Canneh , in the 
firft beginning of Nikcrod' s greatnefs, and before he 
had fubdued any ftrange, or far-off nations, being 
one pan of his dominion, ami alfo named by Mofes 
to be in Shinar . it proVeth that Canneh joyneth to 
Babylonia \ which alfo iszeibWcoupleth with Edert y 
and (further) aftirtheth that thofe of Eden were al¬ 
fo the merchants which traded with the Tyrians: 
and lfaiah in the threats of Senacherib againft Jtra- 
falem (with other nations that Senacherib vaunted 
that his fathers had deftroyed) nameth the childreh 
of Eden which were at Telaffar. But before I con¬ 
clude where Eden it felf lyeth, it is neceflary to de- 
fcribe thofe other countries which Ezekiel joyneth 
therewith, in the places before retnembred, as thofe 
of Sheba and Rdamab. It is Written in Genefts: 
h Moreover the fons of Ham Were Cujh y &c. And 
the fans ofCuJb were Seba y and Havi la , and Sabtah y 
and Raamab y See. And the fins of Raamab Wire 
Sheba y &c. And anon after? Cufh begat Nimrod: 
fo as Sheba was the grandchild of Cujh y and Nim¬ 
rod the fon of Cujh y whofe elder brother was Sebab : 
though fome there are that conceive to the cbfitrary, 
that Nimrod was the elder in valour ami underftand- 
ing, though not In time and precedence of birth; 
wno inhabited thar part Of Shinar , Where Babel was 
built, afterwards Babylonia, fiis brother Raamab or 
Regma took that part adjOyningto Shinar , toward 
the fea fide and Perf an gulf (called afterwards Rai¬ 
ma and Sheba y by the father, and his fons, which 
pofieffed it.) For (faith Ezekiel) the merchants of 
Raamab and Sheba Wert thy merchants y they occu¬ 
pied in thy fairs With the chief of all [pices and all 


* Strabo, 1 . 16. h Gen. n. 31. « Jud. 1. * Afts 7. i. 

h Gen. 10. 7. 


* Lucan. 1 . 1. 105. f Gen. 10. 10. t Gen. 11. *. 


precious 


Digitized by 


Googl 


c 






dhap. flt. 7 'he History of the World; 31 


prttiids Jlokft-, ahd gold. So as Shebd was that tra6l 
(j{ country, Which pfifteth Arabia Deferta from 
Arabia F#lix, tirtd Which joyneth to the Yea, where 
Tigrls Wrti Fwpbhitts fall out, and rendcrthemfelves 
to tttt depart. This part and the confining country, 
* ftWJ&^CBfllelh Catabria, where the belt myrrh and 
frattfclMeHfe is gathered : Which people have an in¬ 
terchange (ft trade With Eldho, lying on the ealt 
fide of the Perfean gulf. By this it appears who 
were the Sbibean i, fpoken of by Ezekiel, and faid 
to haVfc been the merchants of Tyre, for gold, fpi- 
<#s, aftd precious Hones: of which they had not 
Only plenty of their bwtv, but were alfo ftirnifhed 
ftorh that part of Mia {called Ekna, according to 
Strabo) foe fefcchangfc of their aromatics, and other 
proper commodities. For, as Strabo reporterh out 
Of Eraiofl'b&tes, In Perfica tfrx iniflo infula eft, in 
qua multi 13 fre’tioft kniPUs gignahtur : in aliis vero, 
ckri f 3 'perlttcidi laptllu Erntoft bents (faith Strabo) 
affkrMeh, that, In the beginning of the Perfiun 
gulf, dhtre is an ifland, in which there are many 
prfeddus pelrls bred : and in other, Very clear and 
fhlning ftdnes. Now, the difference between 
Sheba the foh of Radtoah, and Stba the fon of 
Ctejb, is in this, that Sebk is written with the Hebrew 
(Samech •) ahd Shebd with (Scbtti.) but whatfoever 
the difference may be in the Hebrew orthography, 
theit cOurttries and habitations tire diverfe. For 
Sheba is thnft which bordereth the Perfittn fea-, and 
Sa'ba (whence the queen of Saba) neighboured the 
fed fea*, and fo that place Of the )2<i Pjalm expound- 
ed Reges Arab urn (3 Sab*, hath in the Hebrew this 
fcnfe, Reges Shebte (3 -Saba. 

Ifie Shebans-, Etekiel nameth together with the 
Edehites, becatile they inhabited upon rite out-let of 
the faWc HVer, Upton Which the Edeniffs were felt¬ 
ed : and lo'thofe ot Shebd, towards the fea-coaft and 
Upton it, pafs’d up the country, by Tigris and 'Eu¬ 
phrates, being joynfed in tone main (bream, and fo 
through the region of Eden, which Tigris bound- 
<th, thereby the butter to convey their merchandife 
toward Tftr. And as the cities of Cbarran , and 
Cartneh, border Eden on the well and north-Weft : 
fc doth Sheba on the fouth, and Cbilmad on the 
north-entt: Cbilrhad being a region Ot" the higher 
Media, as appeareth in the Chaldean paraphrafl: 
which country, by the geographers is called Coro- 
Mitena (/.) placed by exchange for (/?) which change 
the Hebrews alfo often ufe. 

Thus much of thofe countries which border Eden, 
and Who altogether traded With the Tyrians: of 
Which, the chief were the Edenitis, inhabiting fe- 
laffar : for thefe Semcherlb Vatinted, that his fathers 
had defttoyed •, ahd this place of Telaffttr lay moll 
convenient, both to receive the trade from Shebd 
and Arabia, and alfo to convey it over into Syria 
and to Tyrns. Now, tb make thefe things the 
more plain, we mull remember, that before the 
death of Scnacher'tb, many parts 6f the Babylonian 
empire fell from his obedience, ind after his death 
thefe monarchies were utterly disjoyned. 

For it appeareth both in Efay the 37th, and in 
the id of Kings, by the threats of Rdbfdcbe, the 
while the army of Affyria lay before JtrufdleM, that 
the cities of Gofan, Hardn, Refepb, and die Edemtes 
at Tckftar, had refilled the Affyrians: tho’ by them 
(in a fort) mattered and recovered. b Have the Gods 
of the nations delivered them Vihtsm My fathers have 
•dejiroyed, as Gofdn, and Hardn, Refepb, and the 
children of Eden, ivhicb were at Teiaffar ? But it ap¬ 
peared manifeftly after Stmcherib's death, that thefe 
nations formerly contending, Were then freed from 
the othefs fubjettion: for Efar-Haddon held Affyria \ 

* Strabo, 1 . 16. b Efay 37. 12. « 2 Kings 19. 35. 20.1 

Tab. 4, h Cufmog. Aft®. 


and Merodacb Bala dan, Babylonia. c And after 
that the army of Senacbertb, commanded by Rab- 
ftache which lay before Jcrufalem ( Hezektab then 
reigning) while Senacbertb was in Egypt, was by 
the angel of God deltroyed; the king of Babel fenc 
to i Hezekiah, both to congratulate the recovery ot 
his health, and his victory obtained over the Afjfy- 
rians. After which overthrow, e Senacberib lum* 
felf was flain by his own Ions in die temple of his 
idols, Efar-Haddon fucceeding him in Affyria. To 
the Bab) Ionian ambafficlors fent by Merodacb, { Heze¬ 
ktab fhewed all his treafures as well proper as conle- 
crate, which invited the k ings of Babylon afterward 
to undertake their conqudt and fubverfion. So 
as, the fufpicion ‘of war encreafing between Babylon 
and Affyria , the ■ Edemtes Which inhabited the bor¬ 
ders of Sbinar towards the north, and towards Af¬ 
fyria, Were employ’d tO bear off the incurfwns of 
the Affyrians •, and their garrifon-piace was at Te¬ 
la (far : and the very word ( Teiaffar ) faith Junius, 
fignifyirig as much as & bulwark againft the Affy- 
rians. This place Hverefolymilanus takes for Re- 
fern, others for Selcwia: but this Telaffar is the 
lame, which Am. MarceRtnus in the hiftory of Ju¬ 
lian (whom he followed tn the entenprife of Perfts) 
calleth ThHutba irtftead of Telaffar, who ddcribeth 
the exceeding ftrength thereof" in his '24th book : 
ft is feated in an ifland of Euphrates upon a fteep 
and unaffiultable Tock, infomuch as the emperor 
Julian durft not attempt it; and therefore it was k 
convenient place for a garrifon againft the Affyri¬ 
ans, being alfo a paffage out of Mcfopotamia into 
Babylonia, and in which the Edenites of the country 
adjoyning were lodged to defend the fame. This 
place s Ptolemy calleth Ttridata, having Refepb 
(which he calleth Refepba ) on the left hand \ and 
Canrteh (which he calleth Tbelbe-Canne) on the 
right hand 3 not far from whence, is alfo found die 
city of Mann-Cajtnc, upon Tigns *, and all thefe 
feated together, ns Efay ahd Ezekiel have forted 
them. But the underftanding of thefe places ft the 
more difficult, becaufe Affyria (which the Cbalde - 
tns call Atturia ) and Mejitpotamia , wert fo often 
confounded *, the one taken for the otherby inter¬ 
change of dominion. b Affyria (3 Mefbpotamia 
in Babylonia no men tranfierunt (laith Niger fy Afty- 
ria and Mcfopotamia took, the name ot Babylonia. 
'Lallly, It appeareth, by thdfe adjacent regions by 
the prophets named, in what part of the world 
Eden is feated, as, by Charran or Haran in Mefopo- 
tamia: alfo by Canneh ahd Refepb, according to the 
opinion Of Vatablus, who in thefe words tranflateth 
this place: Plant aver at anrem Jehovah Ileus bortum 
tn Eden, ab oriente ; The Lord God planted a gar¬ 
den in Eden eattward : that is (faith he ih his anno¬ 
tations) Jufjerat nafei arbores in Eden, regime orien- 
tali, in ftnibus Arabia 13 Mefopotamix • He com¬ 
manded trees to grow in Eden, an eaftern region in 
the borders of Arabia and Mcfopotamia . 

Sect. X. 

Of divers other ttftimonits of the land of Eden • and 
that this is the Eden of Paradife. 

A N D for a more particular pointing out of this 
Eden , it feems by rhe two epiftlcs of the Ne- 
Jlorian Chriftians, that inhabit Mejopotamia : which 
epiftles in the year 1352, they fent to the pope 
about the confirming of their patriarch, and Andrte¬ 
as Mafius hath publifhed them, tranfiated out of 
Syriac into Latin. By thefe fepittlcs (I fay) it feems 
we may have fome farther light for the proof of 
that, which we have faid about the region of Eden 

. * Efay $9. 1. c Efay 37-. 38. f Efay 39. 2. *Afia; 

Digitized by LiOOQlt 


31 The H i s t o R Y of the W o r L b. Book I. 


In thofe parts. For in them both, there is mention 
of the ifland of Eden in the river Tigris, or at leaft, 
Tigris in both thefe epiftles is called the river ot 
Eden. This ifland, as Majius in his preface to thefe 
epiftles faith, is commonly called Gozoria (as it 
were, the ifland, by an eminency.) It hath (faith 
he) ten miles in circuit, and was fometimes walled 
round about, which name of the ifland Eden may 
(doubtlefs) remain to this day ; tho’ in the reft of 
the region fo called, this name be fwallowed up with 
the fame of thofe flourifhing kingdoms of Mefopo¬ 
tamia, /Iffyria, Babylonia, and Chaldea. This ifland 
of Eden hath up the river, and not far beyond it, 
the city of Hafan-Cepha, otherwilc Fortis Petra : 
below it, it hath Mojal or Mofel , from which (as in 
that which followeth it fhall appear out ot Majius') 
it is not above twelve miles diftant. Neither is it to 
trouble us, that Mofal or Mofel by Marius Niger is 
remembred among the cities higher up Tigris , in 
thefe words, * ‘Juxta autem Tigrim, civitatcs pint 
Dorbeta prope Taurum montem, qua nunc Mofel di* 
citur y magna fane, (ftc. (that is) By Tigris are thefe 
cities, Dorbeta near unto mount Taurus (which is 
now called Mofel) which is a great one, (ftc. This 
opinion of Niger, difplacing Mofel, and making it 
to be Dorbeta (I fay) needs not here to trouble us : 
feeing for this matter, the teftimony of Majius, in¬ 
formed by the Chriftians that dwelt there (the feat 
ofwhofe patriarch it is) ought to be of credit, avow¬ 
ing that this Mofal (or Mozal) is in the coniines of 
Mefopotamia and /Iffyria, feated upon Tigris , and in 
the neighbourhood of Nineve \ and that it is the fa¬ 
mous Seleucia Parthorum. The Ncftoriati Chriftians 
in their former epillle, call it Attur in diele words: 
Ex omnibus civitatibus (ft pagis qtue pint circum 
civitatem Mofal (hoc eft) Attur, in vicinia Nincves ; 
Of all the cities and towns which are about the city 
of Mofal (that is) Attur in the neighbourhood of 
Nineve. As alfo Niger acknowledged Cteftpbon a 
city thereabout to be called Afjiir (which is the feme 
as Attur, after the dialed of thole nations, which 
change Sb into T.) Neither is it much that he 
fhoulil miftake Cteftpbon (which is not tar off Scleu- 
cia) for Seleucia , to be AJfur. By this dien we may 
come fomewhat near the end of our purpofe. For 
the ifle of Eden, which lieth in the breaft of Tigris, 
is but twelve miles from Mofal and that ancient ci¬ 
ty, which Ptolemy and Tacitus call Ninas , and the 
l’criptures Nineve j Philoftratus, and Simeon Sethi, 
Mofula , and John Lean, Mofal , others Moffe (tho’ 
it be not the lame with Mofal) is fet but a little 
higher upon the fame river of Tigris , near Mofal: 
fo that we are like to find this ifle of Eden here¬ 
about. For the feme An dr teas Majius, which placeth 
it above Mofal, makes it to be below Hafan-Cepha, 
which is upon the feme river ot Tigris. 

The only difficulty is this, that fome perhaps 
may think, that the words of the Neftorians in both 
their epiftles, fpeak not of any ifle in Tigris, called 
the ifle of Eden, but of an ifle in Tigris, a river of 
Eden. But this fenfc of their words in my opinion 
feemeth the more improbable. And yet, it this were 
the meaning here, we have a teftimony from the 
learned of thofe parts, that not only Euphrates, but 
alfo Tigris, was a river of Eden, and that the name 
o i Eden in thofe parts is not yet quite worn out, tho’ 
the region hath been fubjeft to the feme change 
that all other kingdoms of the world have been, and 
hath by conqutft and corruption of other languages, 
received new and differing names. For the fouth 
part of Eden, which ftretchcth over Euphrates , was 
after the Hood called Shinar, and then, of the tower 
of Babel, Babylonia, and the nordi part of Eden is 


tliat trad of Mefopotamia, AJfyria, and Armenia, 
which embraced* both the banks of Tigris between 
mount Taurus and Seleucia . And of this region 
of Eden that ancient JEthicus maketh mention (not 
that latter yEtbtcus, difciple of Gallinicus, odierwife 
by Plutarch and Athene us called Iftri, who lived 
in Egypt in the reign of Philadelphjis •, but anodier 
of a tar higher and remote time) the feme being 
made Latin out of the Greek by St. Jerome. And 
tho’ by corruption of the ancient copy it be written 
in AElbicus, Adonis for Edenis: yet Adonis, being a 
river of Phoenicia, cannot be underftood to be the 
region named by Aitkirus. For yEthicus makes 
it a country, and not a river, and joyneth it with 
Mefopotamia and ALthiopia, calling the land of Chus 
AEthiopia, after the vulgar, and lcptuagim. And 
laftly, the river which watcreth the regions (faith 
Ail incus) falleth into the gulf of Perfta : which ri¬ 
ver lie callcth Armodius for Tigris \ Tigris being but 
a name impofed for the fwiftnefe thereof And out 
ot Armenia bodi Tigris and Euphrates have their 
original: for out of Eden came a river, or rivers, 
to water the garden, both which rivers (to wit) Ti¬ 
gris and Euphrates, come out of Armenia, and both 
of them traverfe Mefopotamia, regions lirft of all 
known by the name of Eden, for their beauty and 
fertility. And it is very probable, that Eden con¬ 
tained alfo fome part of Armenia i and the excel¬ 
lent fertility thereof in divers places is not unworthy 
the name of Eden. For in fome part diereof (faith 
Strabo) the leaves are always green, and therefore 
therein a perpetual fpring. Alfo Stephanas, de Ur - 
bibus, mentioned! the city of Adana upon Euphrates : 
and the name of Eden was in ufc in Amos’ s time, 
dio’ he fpake not of Eden in the eart, but of Eden 
in Cccle/yna. But to the end I may not burthen 
the readers patience with too long a diicourfe, it 
may fuffice to know, that Euphrates and Tigris 
(once joined together, and afterwards feparate) are 
two ot thofe four heads, .into which thefe rivers 
which are feid to water the garden of Paradife , were 
divided: whole courfes being known, Eden (out of 
which they are feid to come) cannot be unknown. 
Now that Hiddekel and Perath were Tigris and 
Euphrates, it is agreed by all: tor the Seventy and 
all others convert Perath by Euphrates: (ft Hidde¬ 
kel, Tigrim omnes exponunt and all men underltand 
Hiddekel by Tigris (faith Vatablus.) And becaufe 
that which I have feid of die ifle of Eden fhall not 
be fubjeft to the cenfure of felt-invention, I have 
hereunder fet down die words out of the two gene¬ 
ral epiftles of the Neftorians, as Mafias (ad verbum) 
hath converted them into Latin. The occaflon of 
thofe letters and fupplications to the pope, were, 
diat the Neftorian Chriftians, which inhabit Mefo¬ 
potamia, AJfyria , Perfta, Babylonia, and have to 
this day (at leaft in queen Mary’s time they liad) 
fifteen churches in one city called Seleucia Partho¬ 
rum, or Mofel upon the river Tigris having no 
fufficient authority to choofe themftlves a patriarch 
(which cannot be done without four or three me¬ 
tropolitan bifhops at the leaft) fent to the bifhopof 
Rome, in the year of Chrift 1552 (as aforefeid) a 
petition to obtain allowance unto fuch an election, 
as themfelves had made : having three hundred 
years before that, upon the like deleft, fent one 
Marius thither to be confirmed \ and in this nego¬ 
tiation they made known to the bifhop of Rome 
the ftate of the Chriftian church in thofe parts: tor, 
upon the death of their patriarch (who of a cove¬ 
tous defire to enrich hinilelt, had forbom to inftitute 
metropolitan bifliops, when die places iell void) 
they all affembled themfelves together to confult 


of 


Digitized by 


Google 


a Ut fupra. 





Chap. III. Hhe HistoIiy of the World. 33 


of the church-government. And becaufe all the 
patriarchs for an hundred years had been of one 
houfe and family to the prejudice of the church, 
and that there yet remained one bifhop of the fame 
(lock and kindred, who afpired to the fame dignity 
which his predeceffors had held, the reft of the pro- 
feflors refilled to allow him. Upon which occafion, 
and for the choice of a governour more fufficient, 
rlre teachers in all the churches all'embled themfelves. 
The words of the general epiftlc to the pope were 
thefe, about the middle of the faid epiftle •, Fertrn 
nos non acceptavimus, nque proclamavimus ipfum ; 
fed fubito convenmus ex omnibus loess or lenlahbus, (ft 
ex omnibus civitatibus (ft pagis qua funt circum cs vi- 
tatem Mofel (hoc eft, Attur) in vicinia Ninevcs, ex 
Babylonia, ex Charra, ex Arbclla, ex Infula qua cjl 
in medio Tigris, fluminis Eden, 13 c. i. e. But we did 
neither accept of this man, neither pronounced him: 
but luddenly we aflemblcd our felves out of all parts 
of the eaft, and out of all the cities and villages 
which are about Mofel (or Attur) neighbouring up¬ 
on Nineve •, and out of Babylon, Charra, Arbclla •, 
and out of the ifland which lieth in the middle of 
Tigris , a river, of Eden, or rather out of the ifle of 
Eden, which lieth in the river Tigris. And in a 
fecond epiftle at the fame time fent, they ufed thefe 
words: Neque fuperfunt apud nos metropolisa, quo¬ 
rum eft ordinare catholicum j fed foli pauci cpifcopi , 
epifeopus Arbela, epifeopus Salmafti, epifeopus Adur- 
beigan \ en e vejiigio convenimus in infulam, qua eft 
infra Ttgrim ftumtn, Eden \ fecitnufque compact tint 
inter nos, (ftc. (which is) Neither arc there remain¬ 
ing among us any metropolitan bilhops, to whom 
it belongs to ordain a patriarch, but only a few bi- 
ftiops, as the bifhop of Arbela, the biftvop of Sal- 
maftus, and the bifhop of Adurbeigan : but lo, wc 
aflembled fpeedily in the ifland of Eden, which is 
in Tigris, and agreed between our felves, 13 c. 

Now this ifland of Eden, Maftus deferibeth with 
other places •, which being well conceived, die Ke- 
Ijorian epiftlcs, and the ftate of die church may be 
in thofe parts (faith he) die better underftood. And 
alter he hath diftinguifhed the four forts of Chriftiuns 
in thofe parts of die world, and in the fouth part of 
Africa, which he calleth Neftorians, 'Jacobites, Ma- 
romta, and Cuphti, he gocth on in thefe words: 
Mox, audita iltius rnorte, ccncurrijfc aiebant tumul- 
tnario in illam quam modo dixi Tigris infulam, qua 
duodecim circiter pnffuum millibus Jupra Mofal poft- 
ta, decern fere millia paffuum fuo ambitu contmet, 
Mur is undique cinda, (ft a pauci s aliis quam Ckrifti- 
anis bominibus habitat a : which is. Now hearing of 
the death of die patriarch (as thofe diat came to 
Rome reported) they ran tumukuoudy together in¬ 
to that ifland of Tigris or Eden before fpoken of, 
which ifland is fituated about twelve miles above 
Mofal, containing very near ten miles in compafs, 
and every where invironed with a wall, inhabited 
by few other men than Chriftians. And afterward, 
he maketh a recapitulation of the Chriftian churches > 
among the reft he addeth the ifle of Eden by the 
name of Geferta, infula Tigris, five Gefcrta. Fur¬ 
thermore, aeferibing the city of I/oJan-Cepba, or 
Fort is Petra, he placeth it fupra pradiftam Tigris 
infulam, rupi afpera impofttam \ Above the afore- 
faid ifland of Tigris, being leated on a deep rock. 
Of this ifland of Geferta, Andrew Theuet maketh 
mention in his jothbook of his general cofinogra- 
phy, in thefe words: Geferta ou Geftre eft au milieu 
dcla riviere du Tigre,(ft penfe que e'eft une terre des 
plusfertiles de toute 1 'A fie -, Geferta or Geftre is in 
the middle of Tigris, the foil the mod fertile of all 
Afta. 

By this we may fee that the ancient name of Eden 
Jiveth \ and of that Eden which lieth eaftward from 

No. UI. 


Arabia Petr an, and the defiirt where Mofes wrote, 
and that Eden which borderetli Char ran according to 
Ezekiel, and that Eden which is feated according 
to the aflmion of the faid proplier, and joined witli 
thofe nations of Rcfeph, Cannetb, and Cbarran, and 
the reft which traded with the Tyrians, and is found 
at this day in the parting of the two regions of Af- 
fyria, and Babylonia, where the Edenites in Telaf- 
far were garrifoned to refill the Affyrians, whole 
difplantation Senachcrtb vaunted of (as above-writ¬ 
ten^) and laftly, the fame Eden, which cmbraceth 
Tygris, and looketh on Euphrates, two of the known 
rivers of thofe four, which are by all men aferibedto 
Paradife. 

Sect. XI. 

Of the difficulty in the text, •which feemetb to make 
the four rivers to rife from one flreant. 


B U T it may be objected, that it is written in 
the text, That a river went out of Eden, and 
not rivers in the plural: which fcruple Matthew 
Bcroaldus hath thus anfwered in his chronology: 
The Latin tranflation, faith he, hath thefe words : 
Et flavins egredicbatur de loco voluptatis ad irrigan- 
dttm Paradifum, qui hide dividebatur in quatuor ca¬ 
pita : qtt.e verba melius confcntiunt cum rei narration, 
(ft ejufdem explication, ft ita reddantur j (ft fluvius 
erat egrediens ex Edene (Jjoc eft) fluvii procedebant ex 
Edene regionc ad rigandum pomarium (ft hide divi¬ 
debatur, (ft erat in quatuor capita: which is, And 
a river went out of die place of pleafure to water 
Paradife, and thence was divided into four heads j 
which words (faith Bcroaldus) do better agree with 
the narration and explication of the place, if they be 
thus tranflited And a river was going forth of 
Eden (that is) rivers went forth, and ran out of the 
region of Eden to water the orchard and from 
thence it was divided, and dicy became four heads. 
The Tigurine differs from the vulgar ox Latin •, for 
it converts it thus, Et fluvius egredicbatur de deliciis \ 
And a river went out of pleafure, infteadof Eden $ 
and the Latin addeth the word locus, or place, Et 
fluvius egredicbatur de loco voluptatis \ And a river 
went out of the place of pleafure ; and fo the word 
(place) may rightly be referred to Eden, which was 
(of all other) a region moll delighful and fertile ; 
and fb al lb the word (Jude) and thence, was divided, 
hath reference to the country of Eden, and not to 
the garden it fclf. 

And for the word (river) for rivers, it is ufual 
among the Hebrews : for it is written: Gen. i. 
ii. Let the earth bud forth the bud of the herb 
that feedeth feed, the fruitful tree, &c. Here the 
Hebrew ufeth the fingular tor the plural, herb and 
tree, tor herbs and trees •, and again, Gen. iii. ?. 
JVe eat of the fruit of the tree, inftead of (trees :) 
And thirdly, Gen. iii. 8. The man and his wife 
hid themfelves from the prefence of God j In medio 
lignt Paradife In the middle of the tree of the 
garden, for (trees.) And of this opinion is David 
Kimchi and Vatablus, who upon this place of Gene- 
fts fay, that the Hebrews do often put the fingular 
for the plural, as illud, for unumquodque illorum \ 
and he giveth an inllance in this queftion it felt, as, 
A river (for rivers) went out of Eden. 

And this anfwer out of divers of the learned, 
may, not without good reafon, be given to the 
objection, that Mofes fpeaketh but of one river, 
from which the heads thould divide themfelves. 
Howbeit I deny not, but with as good (and per¬ 
haps better) reafon, we may expound the four heads, 
to be four notable pail ages into famous countries. 
And fo we may take the word (river) verfe the ioth 
for one river (to wit) Euphrates, as this name com- 
prehendeth all the branches thereof. For this river 
1 , (after 


Digitized by 


boo gl 


e 






The History of the World. Book I, 


(after he is paft the place, where we fuppofe Para- 
ilife to have been) divides it felf, and ere long 
yielded Tour notable pillages into feveral countries, 
tho’ not all the way down ftream (for this is no 
where in the text) where it is noted, that following 
die river downward, there is conveyance into the 
countries named in the text, tho’ part of the way to 
one of the countries (t® wit, to Affyrid) were up 
Tigris. 

To this end the text fpcaking of Hiddekel » as it 
rifeth from the river of Eden , doth not fay, it com- 
paffeth or walheth the whole region of AJfyria (as 
it had ufed this phrafe of Pifon and Gebori) but that 
it runneth towards AJfyria. The firft branch Pi¬ 
fon, is Nahar-malcha (by interpretation) Bafilius, 
or flumen regium , which runneth into Tigris under 
Apamia-, whence arifeth the name of Pafi-Tigris, as 
it were Pifo-Tigris. This leadeth to the land of Ha- 
vila or Su/iana. The fecond branch Gebon , is that 
which in niftorians is Nabarfares or Narragas, for 
Nabar-ragas: both which names fignify flumen de- 
rivatum (a river derived) alfo Acracanus, qtiaft Ra - 
nofits, by reafon ot the froggy fens which it maketh : 
this Gebon leadeth to the firft feat of Chus, about 
the borders of Chaldea and Arabia , and it is loft at 
length in the lakes of Chaldea. The third branch 
Hiddekel, may be expounded the upper ftream of 
Pifon, or Bafilius , which runneth into Hiddekel, 
properly fo called (that is, into Tigris ) above Seleu- 
(ia , where it fheweth a pafiage up Tigris into AJfy¬ 
ria : where, becaufe at length it is called Hiddekel 
or Tigris , having before no known proper name, 
tlie text in this place callcth it Hiddekel from the be¬ 
ginning. The fourth Peratb , or Euphrates , fo cal¬ 
led per excellentiam, being the body of die river 
Euphrates , which runneth thro’ Babylon and Otris. 
But be it a river or rivers, that come out of Eden , 
feeing that Tigris and Euphrates arc noted in the 
text, there can be no doubt, but that Paradife was 
not far from thefe rivers: for that Perath in Mofes 
is Euphrates, there can be no queftion •, and (in¬ 
deed) as plain it is that Hiddekel is Tigris. For 
Hiddekel goeth (faith Mofes eaftward towards Affur , 
as we find, that Tigris is the river of AJfyria proprie 
dibla, whofe chief city was Nineveh , as in Genefis 
the loth it is written: That out of that land (to 
wit) Babylonia , Nimrod went into Affur^ and budd¬ 
ed Nineveh, which was the chief city ot AJfyria. 

And as for the kind of fpeech here ufed in the 
text, fpeaking of four heads j tho* the heads of ri¬ 
vers be (properly) their fountains, yet here are they 
to be underftood, to be fpoken of the beginning of 
their divifion from the firft ftream. Caput aqua 
(faith Ulpianus) illud eft, unde aqua nafeitur •, ft ex 
fonte nafeatur Ions', ft ex flumine, vel ex lacu,prima 
initia , (ftc. If the beginning of the water be out of 
a fountain, then is die fountain taken for the head: 
if out of a lake, then the lake \ and if from a main 
river any branch be feparate and divided, then where 
that branch doth firft bound it felf widi new banks, 
there is that part of the river, where the branch for- 
faketh the main ftream, called the head of the river. 

Sect. XII. 

Of the flrange fertility and bappinefs of the Babylo¬ 
nian foil, as it is certain that Eden was Jucb. 

I T may alfo be demanded, whether this region 
of Eclen, by us deferibed, be of fuch fertility and 
beauty, as Eden the feat of Paradife was : which if 
it be denied, then muft we alfo confider, that there 
was no part of the eardi, that retained that fertility 
and pleafure, that it had before the curfe: neither 
can we aferibe the fame fruitfulncfs to any part of 
die earth, nor the fame virtue to any plant thereon 


growing, that they had before the food \ and there¬ 
fore this region of Eden may be now no fuch flourifh- 
ing country, as it was when it was firft created in 
his perfedhon. Yet this I find written of it: Firft 
in Herodotus , Clia. lib. who was an fcye-Witnefs, 
and fpeaketh of the very place k lelf, for the ifle of 
Eden is but twelve miles or thereabout from Nine¬ 
veh, and fo from Mofal. Ex Euphrate extern in 
Tigrim, alteram flumen, juxta quod urbs Ninas fita 
erat, h.ec regio, omnium quas nos vidimus, optima 
eft, (ftc. Where Euphrates runneth out into Tigris, 
not far from the place where Ninas is feated; this 
region, 'of all that wc have feen, is moft excellent. 
And he addeth afterward, Ceteris aufctn fruftu pro- 
cre an do adco ferax eft, nt nunqnam non fete ducenta 
reddat, (ftc. (tliat is) It is fo fruitful in bringing 
forth com, that it yicldeth two hundred fold: the 
leaves of wheat and barley being almoft four fingers 
broad : as for the height of millet and iefani, they 
are even in length like unto trees, which altho’ I 
know to be true, yet I forbear to fpeak hereof, well 
knowing, that thofe things which are reported of 
this fruitfulnefs, will feem very incredible to thofe, 
which ncveT were in the country of Babylon. They 
have commonly in all the country palm-trees grow¬ 
ing of their own accord, the moft of them bearing 
fruit j out of which they make both meats, and wine, 
and honey, ordering them as the fig-trees. Thus 
far Herodotus. 

To this palm-tree, fomuch admired in the Eaft- 
India, Strabo and Niger add a fourth excellency, 
which is, that it yieldeth bread-. Ex quibuspanem , 
(ft mel , (ft vinttm, (ft acetum confidant, of which 
thcl&peopk make bread, wine, honey, and vinegar. 
But Antonias the eremite findeth a fifth commodity, 
not inferiour to any of thofe four, which is, that 
from this folf-fame tree there is drawn a kind of fine 
flax, of which people make their garments, and 
with which in Eaft-India they prepare the cordage 
for their (hips •, and that this is true, Athanaftns in 
the life of Antonias the eremite confefleth, faying. 
That he received a garment made thereof from the 
eremite himfelf, which he brought with him out of 
this region. So therefore thofe trees, which the 
Eaft-lndies fo highly efteem and fo much admire 
(as indeed the earth yieldeth no plant comparable 
to this) thofe trees (I fay) are in this upper Bab)ton , 
or region of Eden, as common as any trees ot rhe 
field. Sunt etiam (faith Strabo) paflim per omnem re- 
gionempalmce fua fponte nafeentes •, there are of palms 
over all the whole region, growing of their own ac¬ 
cord. Of dais place Quintus Curtins maketh this report, 
Euntibus a parte Leva Arabia odorum fertilitate nobi- 
lis, regio campeflris intereft inter Tigrim (ft Euphratem, 
jacens tam ubere (ft pingui folo, ut a paftu repe/lipe- 
cora dicantur, ne fatietas perimat (that is) As you 
travel on the left hand of Arabia (famous for plen¬ 
ty of fweet odours) there lieth a champain country 
placed between Tigris and Euphrates , and fo fruitful 
and fat a foil, that they are faidto drive their cattle 
from pafture, left they fhould perilh by fatiety. 
Bis in anno fegetes Babylonii fecant •, The Babylo¬ 
nians cut their corn twice a year (faith Niger.) And 
as countries generally are more fruitful to the fouth- 
ward, than in the northern parts: fo we may judge 
the excellency of this by that report which Strabo 
maketh of the fouth part of Armenia, which is the 
north border of Eden, or a part thereof •, his words 
be thefe in the Latin, Tot a enim hcee regio frugi- 
bus (ft arboribus abundat manfuetis, itemque temper 
virentibus j This region aboundeth with pleafutt 
fruits, and trees always green: which wirnefleth 
a perpetual fjpring, not found elfewhere but in 
the Indies only, by reafon of the fun’s neigh¬ 
bourhood, dae life and ftirter up ot nature in 

a prr- 


Digitized by 


Googl 


e 







Chap. til. The History of the World. 35 


a perpetual a&ivhy. In brief, fo great is the fer¬ 
tility of the ground, that the people are conftmin- 
ed twice to mow down their corn-fields, and a 
third time to eat them op with fheep : which hus¬ 
bandry the Spaniard's wanting in the valley of Me¬ 
xico, for the firft forty years, could not make our 
kind of wheat bear feed, but it grew up as high as 
the trees, and was fruitlel's. Befides, thofe fields are 
altogether without weeds (faith 1 Pliny) who addeth 
this Angularity to that foil, That the fecond year 
the very Hubble (or rather falling down of the 
feeds again) yieldeth them a harveft of com with¬ 
out any further labour: his words are thefe: Ubrr- 
talii tanta funt , ut fequenti anno fponte refiibilis fiat 

h (( - 

Sect. XIII. 

Of the river Pifon, and the land of Havilah. 

A FTER the difeovery of Eden, and the te- 
ftimonies of the fertility thereof, it refteth to 
prove that Pifon and Gebon are branches of Tigris 
and Euphrates. For that the knowledge and cer¬ 
tainty of thefe two rivers fhould trouble fo many 
wife men, it is ftrange to me, feeing necefliry it felf 
(Tigris and Euphrates being known) findeth them 
out: for Euphrates or Tigris , or both, be that river 
or rivers of Eden , which water Paradife , which ri¬ 
ver or rivers Mofes witnefieth afterward • divided 
into four heads, whereof the one is called Pifon, the 
other Gebon, ffic. Could there be a ftranger fancy 
•in the world, than when we find both thefe, name¬ 
ly, Tigris and Euphrates in Affyria and Mcfopota- 
mia, to feek the other two in India and Egypt, ma¬ 
king the one Ganges , and the other Ntlus ? Two 
rivers -as far diftant, as any of fame known or dif- 
covered in the world : the feriptures making it fo 
iplain, that thefe rivers were divided into four bran¬ 
ches ^ and with the feriptures, nature, reafon and 
txperience bearing witnefs. There is no error, 
which hath not fbme flippery and bad foundation, 
or fome appearance of probability relembling truth, 
which when men (who ftudy to be Angular) find 
out (draining reafon according to their fancies) 
they then publifh to the world matter of contenti¬ 
on and jangling: not doubting but in the variable 
deformity of mens minds to find fome partakers or 
iechtors, the better by their help to nurfe and 
cherifh 1'uch weak babes, as their own inventions 
have begotten. 

But this tnidaking (and firft for the river of Pi- 
fin) feemeth to have grown out of the not diftin- 
guifhing of that region in India , called Havilah, 
from Havilah } which adjoineth to Babylonia, after¬ 
wards known by the name of Sufiana. For Havi- 
lah upon Tigris took name from Havilah the fon of 
Cufh and Havilah in India from Havilah the fon 
of Joftan j the one reinembred by Mofes in the 
defeription of Paradife, the other where b Mofes 
fecteth down the generations of Noah and his Tons 
after the flood. For the fons of Cufh were Seba, 
Havtta , Sabtah, ami Raamah \ and the fons of 
Jotlan were Ophir and Havilah, free. of which lat¬ 
ter, to wit, of Ophir and Havilah , the fons of Joe- 
tan, that" ifland of Ophir (whence Solomon had gold) 
and Havilah adjoining had their names. Now be- 
caufe Ganges is a great and a famous river of the 
Eaft-India, and Havilah a country of the fame, and 
is limared upon Ganges, hence it came, that Gan¬ 
ges is taken tor c Pifon, which river is faid by Mo¬ 
fes to water the land of Havilah. Or perhaps it 
was fiippofed that thofe four rivers, named by Mo¬ 
fes, muft of neceflity be four of the greateft in the 
world •, whence (fuppofing that Ganges was the next 


great and famous* river after Tigris and Euphrates, 
they chofe out this river to make one of the four. 
And yet certainly there is another river, whom in 
thefe refpe&s they fhould rather have chofen than 
Ganges *, tor the river Indus on this fide India , for 
beauty, for nearnefs, and for ability, giveth no way 
place to Ganges \ but excccdeth it in all. Ami 
how can any reasonable man conceive, that Ganges 
can be one of the four heads: feeing Indus cometh 
between it and Tigris •, and between Tigris and In¬ 
dus is all that large empire of Pcrfia, confiding of 
many kingdoms. And again, farther towards the 
eaft, and beyond Indus , arc all thofe ample domini¬ 
ons of India infra Gangem, which lie between thofe 
two proud rivers of Indus and Ganges , now called 
the kingdom of Moger. So as if Indus be not ac¬ 
counted for any of the four, becaufc it is removed 
from Tigris by all the breadth of Pcrfia , then how 
much lei's Ganges , which falleth into die ocean, lit¬ 
tle lefs than forty degrees to the ea ft ward of Indus ? 
Surely whol'oever readeth the ftory of Alexander 
/hall find, that there is no river in Afia , that can 
exceed Indus. For Hydafpis was of that breadth 
and depth, as Alexander thereon in great Gallies 
tranlported himfelf and the greateft part of his ar¬ 
my, and in failing down that branch of Indus, found 
it fo large and deep, and by reafon thereof fo great 
a billow, as it endangered his whole fleet, which 
was ready to be fwallowed up therein : Hydafpis 
(as aforefaid) being but one of many branches of 
Indus, comparable to it, and as great as it, having 
befides this, the rivers of Coas, of Suaflus , Acefines , 
■Adris (otherwife Hirotis) Hifpalis and Zaradus , 
all which make but one Indus, and by it are fwal- 
Jowed up with all their children and companions, 
■which being all incorporated and made one ftream, 
it crofleth athwart Afia , and then at Cambaia vifit- 
cth the ocean fea. 

But becaufe Pifon , which compafltth Havilah, 
as alfo d Gebon, which watercth Cufh, muft fome- 
where be joined with the reft in one body, or at 
leaft be found to proceed out of the fame country 
of Eden, out of which the other two heads do pro¬ 
ceed, out of doubt they cannot, either die one or the 
other, be Ganges, or Ntlus : tor Nilus rifeth in the 
uttermoft of the fbuth, and runneth northward into 
the Mediterranean feaand the river Ganges rifeth 
out of the mountain Imaus, or (as others will have 
it) Caucafus, which divides the northern Scythia 
from India, and runneth from north to fouth into 
the -Indian ocean. And as for Per at h and Hidde¬ 
kel (that is, Euphrates and Tigris) the one of them 
•is begotten in Armenia, near Georgiana or Iberia, 
the other not far off in die fame Armenia , by the 
Gordicean mountains, fo as Ganges who only tra- 
velleth in her own India, and Ntlus thro’ Ethiopia 
and Egypt , never faw the land of Eden, or joined 
thcml'elvcs in one channel, either with themfelves, 
or with either of the other } and therefore could not 
at any rime from thence be feparated or divided 
into four heads or branches, according to Mofes. 

Therefore the river Pifon, which inricheth Ha- 
vila, is the fame which by joining itfclf with Ti¬ 
gris, was therefore called Pi/j-tigris , or Pifo-tigris, 
of Pifon and Tigris , which river watereth that Ha¬ 
vilah, which Havilah the fon of Cujh gave name 
unto, and not Havilah of India , fo called of Havt- 
lah the fon of Jo cl an, who inhabited with his bro¬ 
ther Ophir in the call. And this Havilah of the 
Cufhites hath alfo e gold, bdellium, and the onyx- 
ftonc. This bdellium is a tree, of the bignefs of 
an olive, whereof Arabia hath great plenty, which 
yieldeth a certain gum, fweet to fmell to, but bitter 


« Plin. Nat. Hift. 1 . 18. c. 17. 

9 • 


d Gen. 2. 13. « Gen. 2. 12. 


Digitized by 


Google 


Gen. 10. 7. 10. 29. r Gen. 2. 11. 








3 <S 


The HistORY «/ & World. • .Book I. 


in tafte, called alfo bdellium. The Hebrews take examination thereof. For Epiphanius, Augujline, 
the loadftone for bdellium. Beroaldus affirmeth, and ’Jerome, take this for current \ whereof it fol- 
that Bdela in Hebrew fignifieth pearl: fo doth Eu- lowed, that as Pifon was tranfported into the Eajl 
gtubittus \ and Jerome calls it O leafier: be it what India y to find out Havilah: lo was Gebon drawn 
it will, a tree bearing gum or pearl: Havilah or into Africa, to compafs Ethiopia. But if Havi- 
Stifiana hath plenty of both. Now this country of lab, whereof Mofes fpeakcth in the defcription of 
Suftana or Havilah ftretcheth itfelf towards the Paradife, be found to be a region, adjoyning to 
north, as far as the altars of Hercules , and from Babylon on the one fide, and Cujb (which is falfly 
thence embraceth all the tradl of land fouthward, interpreted Ethiopia ) faftned to it on the other 
as far as the Perfian gulf, on the caff fide thereof: fide, we fhall not need then to work wonders (that 
from which eaft-fide had the Shebans (which tra- is) to impofe upon men the tranfportation of rivers, 
ded with the city of Tyre according to Ezekiel) from one end of the world to the other, which (a- 
their great plenty of gold, which Strabo alfo wit- mong other ules) were made to tranfport men. 
nefleth, as was fhewed before. Now it was in the valley of Shinar, where Cujb the 

The * Greeks had a conceit, that Pifon was Da- fon of Ham firft fat down with his Tons, Sheba, 
nubius : the Rabbins take it for Nilus. Aben-czra Havilah, Sabtah, Raamah, Nimrod , &c. and of 
(faith b Hopkins ) out of Rabbi Saadia y tranflateth Havilah, the fon of Cujh y did that region take 
Pifon into Nilus : but Nilus findeth the fame im- name, which Pifon compafleth \ and the land (cal- 
poffibility that Ganges doth: and Danubius hath led Cujb) which Gehon watereth, tdok name of 
the fea of Hellefpont and all Aft a the lefs, between Cup himfelf. For as the fons of Jotlan, Ophir y 
it and Tigris. Now Pifon y which runneth through and Havi/ab y feated themfelves as near together as 
Havilah or Suftana , doth to this day retain fome they could in India y lb did the fons of Cup in Shi- 
fign of this name y for where it and Tigris embra- nar or Babylonia y where Nimrod built Babel: for 
ceth each other under the city of Apamia, there do Havilah or Chavilab was firft Chuj'ea of Cup • 
they agree of a joynt and compounded name, and then Cbufa y Sufa y and Suftana. 
are called Pifo-tigris. And it is firange unto me, From this Havilah unto the defarts of Sur, did 
that from fo great antiquity there ftiould be found the Ij'raelites and Amalekites poflefs all the interja- 
rcmaining any refembling found of the firft name : cent countries: for £ Saul fmote the Amalekites from 
for Babylon itfelf, which dwelleth fo near thcfe ri- Havilah to Sur: which Sur the Chaldean para- 
vers, is by fome writers known by the name of phraft converteth Hagra y and Hagra bordereth the 
Bandas y as, by c Pofellus, by Cafaldus y of Baldach: red fea *, but this was not meant from Sur upon the 
by Barius y of Bagdad, and of Boughcdor y by d An- red fea, to Havilah in the Eajl India j for Saul 
drew Theuet’ y and yet all thole that have lately feen was no fuch traveller or conqueror, and therefore 
it, call it Bagdet. To this river of Pifon y c Pto- Havilah muft be found nearer home, where the fons 
letny indeed, with many others, give the name of of lfmael inhabited, and which country Saul waft- 
Baftlius or Regius, and Gehon they term Mabar- ed: for Amalek and the Amalekites pofleft that neck 
fares and Marfas, and Baarfares. So is Euphra- of country, between the Perfian fea, and the red 
tes y near the fpring and fountain, by Strabo and fea j Havilah being the extreme of the one towards 
• Pliny called Pixirates : by Junius, Puckperah y out the eaft, and Sur of the other, towards Egypt and 
of the Hebrew , that is, the profufion or coming the weft, leaving that great body of Arabia Foelix 
forth of Euphrates : where it breaketh thro’ die towards the fouth \ and they fpread themfelves with 
mountain Taurus, it takes the name of Ornyra. the Midianites and Edumeans y from the eaft part, 
Plutarch calls it Medus and Zaranda : the He- or back-fide of the holy land, to the banks of £/,- 
brews Parath (faith Ar. Mont anus :) Pagninus y pbrates y comprifing the beft parts of Arabia Petrie a 
Pcrath : Jofepbus y Phorab : Eufebius y Zozimus : and Deferta. 

Ammianus, Chalymicus: Giflilanus and Colinutius 

term it Cobar: which Ezekiel calleth Chebar \ but Sec T. XIV. 

this is but a branch of Euphrates. The Ajfyrians Q c the river Ge hon and the land of Culh : and of 
know it by the name of Armalcbar or Nahor jbt m tran jlatlng of the Ethiopia for Cufli, * 
Malcha : but now commonly it is called Frat. Chron. xxi. 16. 

The fame confufion of names hath Tigris , as, 

Diglito y and Diglath y Seilax y and Sollax : of the \T O W, as Havilah in the Eajl India drew Pi- 
Hebrcws it was called Hiddekel: now of the inha- JLNI f on far out of his way thither, fo I fay 
bitants Trgil. did Cup (being by the Seventy tranflated Ethiopia ) 

But Mercer upon Genefis conceiveth rightly of force Gehon into Africa. For CuP being taken for 
thefe rivers : for Euphrates and Tigris (faith he) Ethopia by the Greeks , whom the Latins followed, 
ftream into four branches, two of which keep their Gehon consequently was efteemed for Nilus. But 
ancient names, and the other two are called Pifon h Ethiopians are, as much, as black or burnt faces y 
and Gehon. The reafon why thefe two rivers joy- whofe proper country is called Thebaides y lying to 
ned in one (below Apamia) lofe their names, and the fouthward of all Egypt. And aldio 1 there be 
are called Pifi-tigris y and the memory of Euphrates many other regions of Ethiopians y and far fouth in 
extinguilhed, is, becaufe die beft part of Euphrates Africa y yet thofe of Thebaides are thofe fo often re¬ 
running through the channel of Gehon y finketh into membered in the Egyptian ftories, and out of which 
the lakes of Chaldea, not far from Ur, die city of nation they had many times their kings of Egypt: 
Abraham , and lull not intirely into the Perfian fea, all which Ethiopians are very near, or clfe diredly 
as Tigris accompanied with Pifon doth. under the Equinoctial line, which is very far from 

This error, that Pifon was Ganges, was firft that land inhabited by the Chufites \ who are nei- 
broached by Jofephus (whofe fields, tho’ they be ther black of colour, nor in any fort neighbouring 
fertile, yet are they exceeding full of weeds) and o- Torrida Zona. But this tranfiation of the Septua- 
tlicr men (who take his authority to be fufficient in gint, Pererius doth qualify in this manner. There 
matter of defcription, whereupon depended no o- are (faidi he) two Ethiopia's, die eaft, and the weft: 
flier important confequence) were not carious in the and this divifion he findeth in Strabo, out of Ho- 

* Steuch. •> Hopk. de Par. c Port. Cofmog. J Theuct. C'ofmog. * Afuc tab. 4. f PI in. l:b. 5. c. 24. * 1 Sam. 

i j.y, h Set more of this point, c. 7. 10. 








• I * ' f ' . V, 

Chap. III. 7 *he History of the Worl b. 37 


Now becatife there is no colour to make 
Cbus Ethiopia in Aftica, Pererius will make Cujh 
and the land of the Cbujites (which is Arabia Petr.ea, 
and a part of Arabia the happy, with the region of 
Midian) to be the eaft Ethiopia. 

Now if it be granted, that Cujh and the land of 
the Cbufites, be that trad from Sur to Havilah, ac¬ 
cording to the fcriptures: * Habitavit lfmael ab 
Havilah ufque Sur, qu<t rejpicit /Egyptum introcun- 
tibus Affyrios \ lfmael dwelt from Havilah unto 
Sur, that is, towards Egypt, as thou goeft towards 
AJfjria : The fame fuffketh to prove that Gebon 
cannot be Nilus , but a river which watereth Cujh, 
and not Ethiopia. But this place of fcripture Habi¬ 
tavit lfmael, &c. hath this fenle : lfmael dwek 
from Havilah, which is the way of Affyria, or the 
country bordering Affyria-, and Sur , which lyeth 
cowards Egypt, which is as much to fay, as, the 
b iflues of lfmael (whereof there were twelve princes) 
whom God had promifed to make a great people, 
inhabited all thofe regions between the border of E- 
gypt and Affyria. And that they were (according 
to the word God) fo mcreafed and multiplied, it 
well appeared, when c Zerah the Chufite, which o- 
thers call Tharantba, brought an army of ten hun¬ 
dred thoufiind againft Afa king of Juda. Which 
army came not out of Ethiopia beyond Egypt 3 for 
that had been a ftrange progrefs tor fuch a multi¬ 
tude, as ten hundred thoufand, having fo mighty a 
king as the king of Egypt, between Paltflina and 
Ethiopia. But thefe were the Cbufites, Amalekites, 
Midianites, Ijmaelites, and Arabians. For it is 
written, that after Afa (ftrengthned by God) had 
defeated this world of an army, he in following his 
riftory took fome of the cities of king Zerab round 
about, as Gerar. Now that Gerar is a city of the 
Ethiopians, it cannot be fufpe< 5 ted: for thefe be the 
words of the fcripture difproving it: 6 And Abraham 
departed thence towards the fotitb country, and dwelt 
between Cadefh and Sur, and fojourned in Gerar ; 
Now Sur is that part, upon which Mofes and the 
Ifraeiites firft fet their feet after they palled the red 
fca, where the e Amalekites in Repbidim fet on them, 
fuppofing that they had been weary, and unable to 
. refill. Again, in the ftory of Ifaac it is written, 
1 (therefore Ifaac went to Abimelecb , and the Phi - 
lijUnes unto Gerar: and I am fure Abimelech and the 
Philiflines were no Ethiopians. And laftly, Mofes 
himfclf, where he defcribeth the bounds of Canaan, 
hath thefe words: * ‘then the border of the Canaa- 
nites was from Sydon, as thou come ft to Gerar: for 
Sydon was the frontier of Canaan towards die north, 
and Gerar by Gazah towards the fouth. But in¬ 
deed, howfoever Pererius doth with an honeft ex- 
cufe lalve his tranflation of Cbus for Ethiopia, yet 
it appeareth plainly, that the Septuagint, and Jofc- 
phus did altogether mifunderftand this place. And 
firft, for Homer’s eaft and weft Ethiopia, they are 
both found elfewhcre. For Pliny in his fifth book 
and eighth chapter, citeth Homer for an author, of 
thcle two Ethiopia’s. But the eaft Ethiopia is that 
which compafleth Nilus to the fouth of Egypt , and 
is the fouth border thereof-, now a part ot the em¬ 
pire of the Abyfines, under Prefer John 3 and the 
weft Ethiopia is that, which joynedi it lelf widi the 
river Niger, which we call Senega and Gambra : 
for thereabouts are thefe Ethiopians, called Perorfi, 
Oaratites, with divers other names, which 11 Pliny 
numbereth. But all thefe are in Africa, and be¬ 
yond the defarts thereof, faith Pliny out of Homer, 
Ayippa, and Juba, which regions indeed ( I mean 
that of Niger, and that of Prejler John, and the 


troglodites) lie due eaft and weft. But as for CuJlj, 
and the region of the Ifmaelites, (ftc. they are ex¬ 
tended diredly north from that Ethiopia, which is 
beyond Egypt. Now, that Jofephus was exceeding 
grois herein, it appeareth by that fidion, which he 
hadi of Mofes when he ferved Pharaoh, in the wars 
againft the Ethiopians : for in that (to make Cbus, 
Ethiopia) he tranfporteth Midian by miracle over 
the red fea, and beyond all Egypt, and fetteth it 
in Ethiopia, as fhall be (hewed more at large in the 
chapter of the world’s plantation. Again, that Ge¬ 
bon was improperly tranflated Nilus, Pererius con- 
fefleth, and layeth it rather to the corruption of the 
Greek copy, than otherwile. And whereas the Sep¬ 
tuagint have converted this place of the prophet 
Jeremy. * And what hajl thou now to do in the 
way of Egypt, to drink the water of Nilus ? Quid 
tibi vis in via /Egypti, ut bibas aquam Gehon ? To 
this faith Pererius, profeElo liebraice ibi non eft vox 
Gehon fed Sichor, qua Jignificat nigrum (ft turbi- 
dum 3 Truly (faidi Pererius ) the word Gehon in 
this place, is not found in the Hebrew , but Sichor , 
which fignifieth black and troubled water. 

Furthermore, this is a manifeft and unanfwerable 
argument, that Cbus was ill taken for. Ethiopia. 
* Mofes married the daughter of Jethro, prince and 
prieft of Midian, whom both the Greek and Latin 
call a Midianite, and not 1 Ethiopiffam, as (with 
Jofephus) the Geneva converts it, though it helps it 
a little with a marginal note. Now it is without 
difpute, that Zipporah was of the country of Midian , 
which is that part of Arabia Petr a a, bordering 
the red fea • for it is written in Exodus, that Mofes 
m fled from Pharaoh into the land of Midian, and 
fat down by a well, (ftc. and again, 0 When Mofes 
kept the fbeep of Jethro his father-in-law , prieft of 
Midian, (ftc . Indeed, thefe four nations are every 
where mixt in the fcriptures, becaufe they dwell 
confofedly with one another (to wit) the Madia- 
nit es, the Ifmaelites , the Amalekites, and the Cbufites, 
which were all in one general word, Arabians, and 
in the fcriptures fometimes called by one of thole 
names, and fometimes by another, as in Gen. xxxvii. 
2?, 27, 28, that Jofeph was fold to the Ifmaelites 3 
and again, v. 1,6. it is written, diat the Midianites 
lold Jofeph to Potipbar, Pharaoh's fteward. The 
Gctievians, in a marginal note (to avoid this con¬ 
founding of the nations) fay, that Mofes wrote ac¬ 
cording to their opinion, who took the Midianites 
and Ijmaelites to be all one. But Mofes wrote not 
after any man’s opinion, he wrote the truth, and 
thefe were all Arabians, and fo in this very place 
it appeareth by their merchandife, which they 
brought with them, when they bought Jofeph: for 
their 0 camels were laden with fpicery, and balm, 
and myrrh, which are the trades of Arabia Foclix , 
from whence chiefly, and from the Eaft India, all 
the world is ferved with myrrh and frankincenfe ; 
and their fpices they received from the eaft fide of 
the Arabian Gulf, as aforefaid. And in chap. 39. 
ver. 1. it is faid: That Potiphar bought Jofeph 
of the Ifmaelites, which the Chaldean paraphraft in 
the fame place calleth Arabians. Now, to make 
this the more manifeft, it is written, in Judges 
vi. 3. That when Ifrael had fown, then came 
up the Midianites , and the Amalekites, and they 
of the eaft, and came upon them : they of the eaft, 
were Arabians of the Defart fo as where before, 
in die buying of Jofeph, the Midianites and the If¬ 
maelites were confufed, here the Midianites and 
Amalekites, are made one nation. For in the pro- 
fecucion of the ftory of Gideon , the p Midianites 


. * ? v 18. k Gen. 25. 16. c 2 Chron. 14. 9. 

, !*• • '■ 8. » Jcr. 2. 18. * Exod. 2. 21. 3. 1. 

• dap. 6. • 

No. 3. 


<* Gen. 10. it. 
1 Numb 12 . 1. 

K 


« Exod. 17. 8. 
01 F.xod. 2. 15. 


f Grn. 26. 1. I Gen. 10. 19. 
n Exod. 3. 1. 0 Gen. 37. 25. 


Digitized by 


only 

o lc 








3 8 


^ ' ’’’ v ' i 

The History of the World; Book I. 


only arc named, as comprehending both nations j 
and thefe nations are all called a Ifmaehtes, and 
neither Midianites nor Amalekites. As when Gi¬ 
deon defired, that every man would give him die 
golden ear-rings, which they had taken, after the 
victory againft Zebah and Zalmunna, kings of 
Arabia, amounting to feventeen hundred (heckles 
of gold, it is written: * For they had gold ear¬ 
rings, becaufe they were Ifmaehtes. And thefe If- 
maelites were a great and valiant nation, and ever 
in adtion of war. b Manus ejus contra omnes, & 
nanus omnium contra cum ■, His hand (faith God 
of Ifmael) Jball be againft all men, and every mans 
band agajnft him. Of thefe Ifmaehtes came the 
Mahometan Arabians , though fome writers think 
Mahomet to be of the Schenit<e. And thefe Ifmae- 
litts , which inhabit chiefly in Cedar, and the De¬ 
farts of Sur and Pbaran (faidi Jofephus ) ufe poi- 
fon upon their arrows, as the Indians do. Towards 
the fouth-eaft are the Midianites, and Chufites : 
and beyond them, towards the Defarts of Arabia , 
the Amalekites \ and all are one nation, and all 
Arabians. 

■ Laftly, the ill tranflation of Ethiopia for Chus, 
is, among!! other places, made mod apparent, in 
Chronicles , in thefe words: c So the Lord Jlirred up 
againft Jehoram , the fpirit of the Philiftines and the 
Arabians , which confine the Ethiopians \ fo Jerome 
reads it the Geneva tranflation hath it, which were 
beftdes the Ethiopians. Now, how far it is off, be¬ 
tween the PhUijltnes, and the Negroes , or Ethiopi¬ 
ans , every man that looketh in a map may judge. 
For the Philiftines and Arabians do mix and join 
with the land of the Chufites , and arc diftant from 
Ethiopia about 31 or 3 3 degrees, and therefore not 
their next neighbours \ but all Egypt , and the De- 
Jar ts of Sur , and Pbaran , are between them. So 
as this place of the fecond of Chronicles , fhould 
have been tranflated in thefe words: So the Lord 
Jlirred up againft Jehoram, the fpirits of the Philif- 
tines , and Arabians, which confine and border upon 
the Chufites, who indeed are their next neighbours. 
d Nulla fupereft dubitatio , quin ^Ethiopia in facris 
Uteris fit Arabia propinqua \ There remaineth no 
doubt (faith Steuchius) but Ethiopia in the ferip- 
tures is taken for that country, which joineth to 
Arabia. 

Now may we think it is probable, or poflible, 
that Mofes could be ignorant of Nilus ? No^ he 
knew it, no living man fo well, and therefore 
would never have named Gebon for Nilus , or Ni¬ 
lus for Gebon. Surely if Mofes had meant Nilus, 
when he named Gebon , he would have called the 
river (into which he was caft upon reeds, and pre- 
ferved by God, working companion in the e daugh¬ 
ter of Pharaoh a river of Egypt, wherein he was 
born and bred, and wrought fo many miracles. 
Befides, the river of Nilus is often named in the 
feriptures, but never by the name of Gebon. And 
if Mofes had told the Israelites, that Nilus had been 
a river of Paradife, they might juftly have thought 
that he had derided them : tor they had lived there 
all the days of their lives, and found no fuch Para¬ 
dife at all, nor any memory, or fpeech thereof $ 
except we fliall believe the Paradife of Hefperides, 
where (faith ‘ Pliny) there was nothing found in 
his time, but wild olives inftead of golden apples. 
But Nilus is twice called Sicbor , once in 8 fjaiah, 
and once in die prophet h Jeremy \ and yet in thofe 
places it is not faid to be a river of Ethiopia, but of 
Egypt. For in a word, the Ifraelites had never 
any communion or affairs with the Ethiopians, nor 


any intelligence, or trade, beyond Egypt, to die 
fouth j but die enemies^ which they had on the 
fouth, and eaft parts, were diefe nations of the Chu¬ 
fites, Philiftines, Ifmaehtes, Amalekites, and Midia¬ 
nites ; who being often governed by many little 
kings, or rtguli, were diftinguilhed In names, ac¬ 
cording to the fathers and heads of thofe nations $ 
but in one general name were all Arabians. On the 
north-fide of Canaan, they were afflicted with the 
Calefyrians, with die Magogians, Tubalines, and ci¬ 
thers their adherents \ and thirdly within themfelvcs, 
the nations, which remained of the ancient Castaa- 
nites, held the ftrongeft cities upon the fea-coaft, as 
Tyre, Sedan , Aeon, Gaza, and many others: yea, 
Jerufalem itjfelf was with-held from Ifrael (from the 
days of Mofes even unto the time of David) by the 
Jebufites. . ■ . \ 

Tliat which,now remaineth ofmoft difficulty is, 
that it doth nut appear, that any part of Gebon wa- 
teretli that part of Arabia the ftony, which the Chu¬ 
fites inhabited in the times of the kings of Ifrael: 
and in this Defart it was, that Matt. Beroaldus loft 
himfelf in feeking out Paradife : for he was driven 
(to my underftanding) to create two rivers, and call 
them Gehon , and Ptfon\ to the end that the one 
might water Chus, and the other Havilab, for I 
find none fuch in rerum nature, as he hath deferi- 
bed : by wliich rivers he alfo includeth within Pa¬ 
radife, even Arabia the Defart. 

And as he well proved that Pifon was not Gan¬ 
ges, nor Gebon Nilus: fo where to find them elfe- 
wliere, it feenieth he knew not. Certainly this ri¬ 
ver of Gehon, which he maketh to full into the 
Mediterranean at Gaza, and whole fprings he find- 
eth far eaft in Arabia, is but imaginary: for the 
current by Gaza is but a finall ftream, rifing be¬ 
tween it and the red fea, whofe head from Gaza 
itlclf is little more than twenty Englijb miles, at 
Ihall appear hereafter. But queftionlefs hence it 
comes that many were miftaken. They all confi- 
dered of the habitations of the Chufites, as they 
were planted when the ftate of Ifrael flood, and 
when it flourifhed, being dien their near neigh¬ 
bours, and never looked back to the firft feats and 
plantation of Chus. For after the flood, Chus and 
his children never refted, till they found the valley 
of Shinar, in which, and near which himfelf with 
his fons firft inhabited. Havilab took the river- 
fide of Tigris chiefly on the eaft, which after his 
own name he called Havilab (now Sufiana: ) Ra- 
amah and Sheba farther down the river, in the en¬ 
trance of Arabia Fotlix. Nimrod feated himfelf in 
the beft of the valley, where he built Babel, where¬ 
of that region had afterwards the name of Babylo¬ 
nia. Chus himfelf and his brother Mizraitu iirft 
kept upon Gehon, which falleth into the lakes of 
Chaldea, and in procefs of time, and as their peo¬ 
ple increafed, they drew themfelves more wefterly 
towards the red or Arabian fea : from whence Mizo¬ 
ram pafs’d over into Egypt, in which tract the 
Chufites remained for many years after. Now be¬ 
caufe there could be no fuch river found in Arabia 
the ftony, which they might entitle Gehon, they 
tranflated Chus Ethiopia, and Gebon Nilus. And 
if we do examine this miftaking by example, we 
fhall the better perceive it as it was. For let us fup- 
pofethat Brute, or whofoever elfe that firft peopled 
this ifland, had arrived upon the river Thames, and 
calling the ifland after his name Britannia, it might 
be faid that Thames or Terns was a river that water¬ 
ed Britannia : and when afterwards, in procefs of 
time, the fame Brute had alfo dilcovcrej and con- 


e 2 Chron. 21. 16. * Steuch. Eugub. in Gen. 2. « Exod. z. 1 Plin. lib. 5. c. 1. 


Digit! 


:ed by G00g[C“ 


qncr Zk 


• Judges 8. 24. * Gen. 16. if. 

* Ifaiah 23. 3. h Jer. 2, 18. 





c ' / 


Chap. III. the History of the Worl d. 



tiered,Scotland^ which healfo entituled by the fame 
nafne of Bruajutia, aftes-ages might conclude that 
Scotland was no pan thereof,_becaufe tlte river Term 
is not found therein. Or let us foppofc that Europa, 
the daughter of die king, of tyre in Phoenicia, gave 
the name to Europe, according to Herodotus, lib ; r. 
(J 4. and that the firft difeoverers thereof arrived 
in the mouth of fome river in Thrace, which then 
watereth as much of Europe, as he firft difeovered, 
dull we in like fort rcfolve, that France , Spain, and 
Italy, See. are no part of Europe, becaufe that river 
is not found in them* or any of them \ In like man¬ 
lier was it foid by tfofcs, in his defeription of Gehon, 
that it watered the whole land ot Chur, but not the 
whole land which the Cbufitet Ihoulti or might in 
future time conquer, people, and inhabit, feeing in 
after-ages they became lords of many nations, and 
they might (perchance) have been, mailers in time 
(as the Saracens which, came of them were) of a 
great part of the world. For tho’ the Babylonian 
empire, which took beginning in Nimrod the fon of 
Chut, confided, at the firfl but of lour cities (to wit) 
Babel, Erecb , Acad, and Chains, yet we find, that 
his foeceflors within a lew years after commanded all 
the whole world in effed: and the lame of Babel 
confumed the memory of Cbufea. For of this tower 
of confufion did all that land take the name of Ba¬ 
bylonia : and the greatneis of that empire, founded 
by Nimrod a younger fon, obfcured the name and 
nation of his father Cujb in thofe parts, until they 
Crept farther off, and in places not yet entituled, and 
farther from the Babylonian empire, where the Chu- 
fites retained their names, which aj lo they fa¬ 
ttened to the foil and territory by themfelves after¬ 
wards inhabited and held. And we may not think 
that Chut or any of his could in hafle creep thro’ 
thole defeft regions, which the length of 150 years 
after the flood had (as it were) fortified with thickets, 
and permitted every bulk and briar, reed and tree, 
to join themfelves (as it were) into one main body 
and forreft. For if we look with judgment and 
tealon into the world’s plantation, we lhall find, that 
every family feated themfelves as near together as 
poflibly they could \ and tho’ ncceflity enforced them, 
alter they grew foil of people, to fpread themfelves, 
and creep out of Shinar or Babylonia, yet did they 
it with this advice, as that they might at all times 
refort, and foccour one another by river, tire fields 
being then (without all doubt) impafiable. So Ntm- 
rob, who out of wit and llrength ufurped dominion 
over the reft, lat down in the very confluence of 
all thofe rivers, which watered Paradife: for thi¬ 
ther it was to which the greateft troops of Noah's 
children repaired j and from the fame place whence 
mankind had his beginning, from thence had they 
again their incrcaie. The firft father of men Adam, 
had therein his former habitation. The fecond fa¬ 
ther of mankind Noah- began from thence his dif- 
perfion. 

Now as Nimrod the youngeft, yet ftrongeft, made 
his choice of Babel (as aforeiaid) which both Tigris 
and Euphrates cleanfed and enriched lb did Havi- 
lah place himfdf upon Pifo-Tgns : Raamah and 
his Ion Sheba farther down upon the fame river, on 
flic fca coaft of Arabia: Chus himlelf upon Gehon , 
the faireft branch of Euphrates. And when they 
began to Ipread themfelves farther off, yet they al¬ 
ways faftentd themfelves to the rivers fides: for Ni¬ 
neveh, Charran , Refepb, Canneh , Ur in Chaldea, 
and the other firft peopled cities, were all founded 
upon thefe navigable rivers, or their branches, by 
which the one might give foccour and aflillancc to 
tiie other, as is already often remembred. 


Sect. XV. 

A conclufion by way of repetition of fome things fpoktn 
of before. 

B U T now to conclude this difpute, it appear- 
eth to me by the teftimonies of the feriprures, 
that Pai adife was a place created by God, and a 
part of this our earth and habitable world, feated iti 
the lower part of the region of Eden, afterwards 
called Aram fluviorum, or Mefopotamia, which ta- 
keth into it alfo a portion of Shinar and Armenia : 
this region (banding in the moft excellent temper of 
all others (to wit) 3 y degrees from the Equinoctial, 
and 5 5 from the north pole: in which climate the 
moft excellent wines, fruits, oil, grain of all forts, 
are to this day found in abundance. And there is 
nothing that better proveth the excellency of this 
faid foil and temper, than the abundant growing of 
the palm-trees, without the care and labour of man. 
For wherein loever. the earth, nature, and the fun 
can moft vaunt, that they have excelled, yet (hall 
this plant be the greateft wonder of all their works: 
rhis tree alone giveth unto man whatfoever his life 
beggeth at nature’s hand. And tho’ it may be faid, 
that thefe trees are found.both in. the Eafi ■ind.JFefl- 
Indies, which countries are alfo bleffed with a perpe¬ 
tual fpring and fummer, yer lay down by thofe plea- 
fores and benefits the fearful and dangerous thun¬ 
ders and lightnings, the horrible and frequent earth¬ 
quakes, the dangerous difeafes, the multitude of ve¬ 
nomous beafts and worms, with other inconvenien¬ 
ces, and then there will be found no comparifon be¬ 
tween the one and the other. 

What other excellences this garden of Paradife 
had, before God (for mans ingratitude and cruel¬ 
ty) curfed the earth, we cannot judge \ but I may 
fafely think that by how much Adam exceeded all 
living men in perfedion, by being the immediate 
workmanfhip of God, by fo much did that chofen 
and particular garden exceed all parts of the univer- 
ful world, in which God had planted (that is) made 
to grow the trees of life, of knowledge j plants on¬ 
ly proper, and becoming the Paradife and garden 
of fo great a lord. 

The fum of all this is, that whereas the eyes of 
men in this feripture have been dim-fighted (fome 
of them finding Paradife beyond our known world: 
fome, above the middle region of the air: fome, 
elevated near the moon : others, as far fouth as the 
line, or as far north, as the pole, &c.) I hope that 
the reader will be fufliciently fatisfied, that thefe 
were but like caftles in the air, and in mens fancies 
vainly imagined. For it wascaftward in Eden (faith 
Mofes \) calbward, in reipefl of Judea, that God 
planted this garden, which Eden we. find in the pro¬ 
phets where it was, and whereof the name (in fome 
part) remaincth to this day. A river went out of 
Eden to water this garden, and from thence divi¬ 
ded it fclf into four branches •, and we find that 
both Tigris and Euphrates fwimming thro’ Eden do 
join in one, and afterward taking ways apart, do wa¬ 
ter Chus and Havilab, according to Mofes: the true 
feats of Chus and his Ions then being in the valley 
of Shinar, in which Nimrod built Babel. That Pi- 
fon was Ganges, the feripture, reafon, and experi¬ 
ence teach the contrary: for that which was never 
joined cannot be divided. Ganges, which inhabiteth 
India, cannot be a branch of the rivers of Eden •, 
that Gehon was Nilus, the fame diftance maketh the 
fame impoflibility, and this river is a greater ftranger 
to Tigris and Euphrates, than Ganges is: for altho’ 
there are between Tigris and Ganges above four thou- 
fand miles, yet they both rife in the fame quarter 
of the world -, but Nilus is begotten in the mountains 
of the moon, a 1 moft as far off as the Cape of Good 

Diaitized bv CxOG^l< 


O 











40 The History <?/ A World. Book I. 


Hope, and falleth into the Mediterranean fea: and 
Euphrates diftilleth out of the mountains of Armenia, 
and falleth into the gulf of Per fea : the one rifeth in 
the fouth, and travelleth north: the other rifeth in 
the north, and runneth fouth, threefcore and three 
degrees the one from the odier. In this leaf follow¬ 
ing, I have added a chorographical defcription of 
this terreftrial Paradife , that the reader may there¬ 
by the better conceive the preceding difeourfe and 
this is the reward I look for, that my labours may 
but receive an allowance fufpended, until fuch time 
as this defcription of mine be reproved by a better. 


CHAP. IV. 

Of the two chief trees in the garden of 
PARADISE. 

Sect. I. 

That the tree of life was a material tree: and in 
what fenfe it is to be taken, that man by his eat¬ 
ing the forbidden fruit, is made fubjcll to death. 

F O R eating the forbidden fruit of the tree of 
knowledge was Adam driven out of Paradife, 
in exilium vit<e temporalis, into the banish¬ 
ment of temporal life, faith Beda. That thefe trees 
of life and knowledge were material trees (tho’ fi¬ 
gures of the law and of the gol'pcl) it is not doubt¬ 
ed by the mod religious and learned writers: altho’ 
the the wits of men, which are fo volatile, as no¬ 
thing can fix them, and fo flippery as nothing can 
fallen them, have in this alfo delivered to the world 
an imaginary doctrine. • . 

The tree of life (fay the Hebrews ) hath a plural 
conflrudion, and is to be underflood, Lignum vita- 
rum, the tree of lives, becaufe the fruit thereof had 
a property, to preferve bodi the growing, fenfitive, 
and rational life of man-, and not only (but for 
A Adam's tranfgrefiion) had prolonged his own days, 
but alfo given a dureful continuance to all pofterity •, 
and that, fo long as a body compounded of ele¬ 
ments could laft. 

And altho’ it is hard to think, that flefli and blood 
could be immortal, but that it mull once perifli and 
rot, by the unchanged law of God impoled on his 
creatures, man (notwithllanding) fhould have en¬ 
joyed thereby a long, healthful, and ungrieved life : 
after which (according to the opinion of moll di¬ 
vines) he fhould have been mandated, as Enoch 
was. And as before the flood, the days of men had 
the long meafure of eight hundred or nine hundred 
years j and foon after the flood, of two hundred 
ears and upwards even to five hundred: fo if Adam 
ad not difobey’d God’s firfl and eafy command¬ 
ment, the lives of men on earth might have conti¬ 
nued double, treble, or quadruple to any of the 
longefl times of the firfl age, as many learned men 
have conceived. Cbryfojtom, Rupertus, Tofiatus, 
and others were of belief, that (but for Adam's fall 
and tranfgrefiion) Adam and his pofterity had been 
immortal. But fuch is the infinite wifdom of God, 
as he forefaw that the earth could not have contained 
mankind or elfe, that millions of fouls mull have 
been ungenerated, and have had no being, if the firfl 
number, wherewith the earth was replenilhed, had 
abode thereon for ever : and therefore that of Chry- 
fofiom mull be underflood of immortality of bodies, 
which fhould have been tranflated and glorified. 

But of what kind or fpecies this tree of life was, 
po man hath taken on him to teach: in which re- 


fpedl many have conceived, that the fame was not 
material, but a mere allegory , taking their ftrength 
out of Solomon, whete wifdom is compared to the 
tree of life, and from other places, where alfo Chrift 
is called the tree of life, and out of the Apocalypfes, 
b I will give to him that overcometh , to eat oj the 
tree of life, which is in the Paradife of God. But 
to this place St. Augufiine s anfwer may fuffice (which 
is) that the one doth not exclude the other, but that, 
as there was a terreftrial Paradife, fo there was a ce- 
leftial. For altho’ Agar and Sara were figures of the 
Old and New Teftament, yet to think that they were 
not women, and the maid and wife of Abraham, 
were mere foolifhnefs. And fo in this place the fenfe 
of the feripture is manifefl. For God brought out of 
the earth every tree fair to fight, and fiveet to tajle \ 
the tree alfo of life in the midjl of the garden: 
which fheweth, that among the trees, which the 
earth by God’s commandment produced, the tree 
of life was one, and that the fruit thereof was alfo to 
be eaten. The report of this tree was alfo brought 
to the ancient poets: for as from the indigefted 
matter or chaos , Hefiodus , Homer , Ovid , and others, 
fteal the invention of the created world -, fo from the 
garden of Paradife , they took the platform of the 
orchard of Alcinous , and another of the Hefperides : 
and from the tree of life, their Neftar , and Am- 
brofta for NeSlar , according to Suidas , fignifieth 
making young , and Ambrofta , immortality ; and there¬ 
fore faid to be the meat and drink of the Gods. 

Sect- II. 

Of Becanus’r opinion , that the tree of knowledge 
was Ficus Indica. 

N O W for the tree of knowledge of good and 
evil, feme men have prefumed farther, efpe- 
cially Goropius Becanus , who giveth himfelf die ho¬ 
nour to have found out the kind of this tree, which 
none of the writers of former times could ever guefs 
at, whereat Goropius much marvelleth. But as he 
had an inventive brain, fo there never lived any 
man, that believed better thereof, and of himfelf. 
Surely howfoever his opinion may be valued, yet 
he ufurpeth the praife due to others, at leaft if the 
invention be at that price at which he fetteth it. For 
Mofes Bar-Cephas fattened on this conjefture above 
fix hundred years before Becanus was bom: and 
Bar-Cephas himfelf referreth the invention toanan- 
dquity more remote, dung for his author Philoxe- 
nus Maburgenfis, and others, whofe very words 
Goropius ufeth, both concerning the tree, and the 
reafons wherewith he would induce other men to 
that belief. For Mofes Bar-Cephas in his treatife of 
Paradife (the firfl part, and fol. 48.) faith, that the 
tree of knowledge was ficus Indica , the Indian fig- 
tree, of which the greatefl plenty (faith Becanus ) 
are found upon the banks of Ace fines, one of the ri¬ 
vers which falleth into Indus, where Alexander built 
his fleet of gallies in, or near the kingdom of Porus. 

This tree beareth a fruit of the bignefs of a great 
pea, or (as c Pliny reporteth) fomewhat bigger, and 
that it is a tree fe Jemper Jerens, always planting it 
felf} that it fpreadeth it felf fo far abroad, as that 
a troop of horlemen may hide themfelves under it. 
6 Strabo faith, that it hath branches bending down¬ 
wards, and leaves no lefs than a fhield. Anftobtilus 
affirmeth that fifty horfemen may fhadow rhemielves 
under one of thefe trees. Oneficritus raifeth this 
number to four hundred. This tree (faith T/:eo- 
phrafius) exceedeth all other in bignefs, which alfo 
Pliny and Oneficritus confirm: to the trunk of 
which thefe authors give fuch a magnitude, as I 


* Fart. fcpt. 2. 1 . 1. 174. Apocal. 2. 7. 


* Plin. 1 . 11. c. 5. * Lib. 1. c. 2. 

fhamr 

Digitized by k.iOOQ 1C 










1 % ft 4 * ' V , 

Chap. IV. The History of the World. 


4 1 


fhame to repeat. But it may be, they all fpeak by 
an ill-underftood report. For this Indian fig-tree is 
not fo rare a plant, as Becanus conccivcth, who, be- 
caufe he found it no where elfe, would needs draw 
the garden of Paradift to the tree, and fet it by the 
river Act fines. But many parts of the world have 
them, and I my fell have feen twenty thoufand of 
them in one valley, not far from Paria in America. 
They grow in moift grounds, and in this, manner. 
After they are firft Ihot up fome twenty'or thirty 
foot in length (fome more, fome lefs, according to 
the foil) they fpread a very large top, having no 
bough nor twig in the trunk or Item: for from the 
utmoft end of the head-branches there iffueth out a 
gummy juice, which hangeth downward like a cord 
or finew, and within a tew months reacheth the 
ground j which it no fooner toucheth but it taketh 
root, and then being filled both from the top-boughs, 
and from his own proper root, this cord maketh 
it felf a tree exceeding haftily. From the utmoft 
boughs of thefe young trees there fall again the like 
cords, which in one year and lefs (in that world of 
a perpetual fpring) become alio trees of the bignefs 
of the nether part of a launce, and as ftrait as art 
or nature can make any thing, cafting fuch a fhade, 
and making fuch a kind of grove, as no other tree 
in the world can do. Now one of thefe trees con- 
lidered, with all his young ones, may (indeed) 
fhroud four houndred or four thoufand horfemen, if 
they pleafej for they cover whole vallies of ground 
where thefe trees grow near the fea-bank, as diey do 
by thoufands in the inner part of Trinidado. The 
cords which fall down over the banks into the lea, 
ihooting always downward to find root under wa¬ 
ter, are in thofe feas of the Indies , where oyfters 
brad, intangled in their beds, fo as by pulling up 
one of thefe cords out of the fca, I have feen five 
hundred oyfters hanging in a heap thereon j where¬ 
of the report came, that oyfters grew on trees in In¬ 
dia. But that they bear any fuch huge leaves, or 
any fuch delicate fruit, I could never find, and yet 
I have travelled a dozen miles together under them. 
But to return to Goropius Becanus. This tree (faith 
he) was good for meat and pleafing to the fight, as 
the tree of knowledge of good and evil is deferibed 
to be. 

Secondly, This tree having fo huge a trunk (as 
the former authors report, and Becanus believeth) it 
was in this tree tint Adam and Eve hid themfelves 
from the prefence of God, for no other tree (faith 
he) could contain diem. But firft it is certain, that 
this tree hath no extraordinary magnitude, as touch¬ 
ing the trunk or Item, for among ten thoufand of 
them it is hard to find any one bigger than the reft, 
and thefe are all of a mean fize. Secondly, the words 
of Mofes trallatcd in medio ligni , are by all the inter¬ 
preters undcrllood in the plural number (that is) 
in the midfi of the trees. But his -third argument 
(or rather the argument of Mofes Bar-Cephas t word 
for word) is,that when 1 Adam and Eve found them¬ 
felves naked, diey made them breeches of fig-leaves; 
which proveth (indeed) that either the tree it felf 
was a fig-tree, or that a fig-tree grew near it: be- 
caufe Adam being poflcfs’d with lhame, did not 
run up and down the garden to feek out leaves to 
cover him, but found them in the place it felf , and 
thefe leaves of all others were moft commodious, by 
reafon of their largenefs, which Pliny avoweth in 
thefe words j 1 Latitudo foliorum pelt re effigiem Ama¬ 
zonia babety the breadth of the leaves hath the fhape 
of an Amazonian fhield: which alfo Theophrafi con¬ 
firmed! • the form of which target P'irgH touches: 


c Due it Amazonidum lunatis agtnina pelt is 
Pentbeftlaa furens. 

The Amazon with crefcent-formed fhield 
Pentbcfilca leads into the field. 

Here Becanus ddireth to be believed, or rather 
threatneth us all that read him, to give credit to 
this his borrowed difeovery, ufing this confident (or 
rather cholcrick) fpcech. fihtis erit tam impudenter 
obfiiuatuSy ft b<cc a nobis de ficu bac ex antiquis ferip- 
toribus cum Mofis mrratione comparet , ut audeat di- 
cere aliam arborem inveniri pojfe, qua cum ilia magis 
auadret \ Who will be fo impudently obftinate, if 
he compare thefe things, which we have reported of 
this fig-tree, and out of ancient writers delivered, 
with the narration of Mofes t as to dare to avow, 
that any other tree can be found, which doth more 
properly anfwer, or agree therewith. But for my 
iclf, becaufe I neither find this tree, forting in body, 
in largenefs of leaves, nor in fruit to this report, I 
rather incline to the opinion of Philo: that the earth 
never brought forth any of thele trees neither be¬ 
fore nor after \ but I leave every man to his own 
belief, for the matter is of no great weight as touch¬ 
ing his kind: only thereby, and by the eafy com¬ 
mandment by God given to Adam , to forbear to 
feed thereon, it pleafed God to make trial of his 
obedience : ^Prohibita, non propter aliudy quam ad 
commendandum puree ac fimplicis obedient tx bonum j 
Being forbidden, not for any other refipeft, than there¬ 
by to commend the goodnefs of pure and fimple 
obedience. 

Sect. III. 

Of BecanusV not unwitty allegorizing of the fiory of 
bis Ficus Indica. 

B U T in this I muft do Becanus right, that he 
hath very wittily allegorized this tree, allow¬ 
ing. his fuppontion of the tree it felf to be true. The 
effects whereof, becaufe his difeourfes are exceeding 
ample, I have gathered in thefe few words. As 
this tree (faith he) fo did man grow ftraight and 
upright towards God, until fuch time as he had 
tranfgrefled and broken the commandment of his 
Creator ^ and then like unto the boughs of this tree, 
he began to bend downward, and itooped toward 
the earth, which all the reft of Adam's pofterity af¬ 
ter him have done, rooting themfelves therein, and 
fattening themfelves to this corrupt world. The 
exceeding umbragioufnefs of this tree he compareth 
to the dark and fhadowed life of man, thro’ which 
the fun of juftice being not able to pierce, we have 
all remained in the lhadow of death, till it pleafed 
Cbrift to climb the tree of the crofr tor our enlight- 
ningand redemption. The little fruit which itbear- 
eth, and which is hard to find among fo many large 
leaves, may be compared (faith he) to the little 
virtue, and unperceived knowledge among fo large 
vanities, which oblcure and fhadow it over. And 
as this fruit is exceeding fweet, and delicate to the 
tafte and palate •, fo are the delights and pleafures 
of the world moft pleafing while they dure. But 
as all thofe things which are moft mellifluous, are 
fooneft changed into choler and bitternefs: fo are 
our vanities and pleafures converted into the bitter- 
eft forrows and repentances. That the leaves are fo 
exceeding large, the fruit (for fuch leaves) exceeding 
little, in this, by comparifon we behold (faith he) the 
many cares and great labours of worldly men, their 
follicitude, their outward lhews and publick often- 
tation, their apparent pride and large vanities \ and 
if we feek for the f ruit, which ought to be their vir- 


* Gen. 3.7. t PI.-1. j*. c. 5. « Virg. An. 1 .1 . 494. < Augult. deCivit. Dei, 1 .13 «. 20. 

No. f. L tuous 


Digitized by 


Googl 


c 










The History of the World. Book I. 


tuous and pious actions, we find it of the bignefs 
of the finalleft pea-, glory, to all the world appa¬ 
rent ; goodneis, to all the world invifible. And 
furthermore, as the leaves, body, and boughs of 
this tree, by fo much exceed all other plants, as die 
greateft men of power and worldly ability furpafs 
the meaneft: fo is the litde fruit of fuch men, and 
fuch trees, rather fitting and becoming the unwor- 
thieft fhrub, and humbleft briar, orthepooreft and 
bafeft man, than fuch a flouriihing ftatdincls and 
magnitude. Laflly, whereas y Idam, after he had 
difobey’d God, and beheld his own nakednefs and 
fhame, fought for leaves to cover himfelf withal, 
this may ferve to put us in mind of his and our fins, 
as often as we put on our garments, to cover and 
adorn our rotten and mortal bodies: to pamper and 
maintain which we ufe fo many uncharitable and 
cruel practices in diis world. 

Sect. IV. 

Of the name of the tree of knowledge of good and 
evil: with fomc other notes touching the fiory of 
Adam’r Jin. 

N OW, as touching the fenfe of this tree of 
knowledge of good and evil, and what ope¬ 
ration the fruit thereof had, and as touching the 
property of the tree itfclf, Mofes Bar- Cephas , an an¬ 
cient Syrian doCtor (tranflated by Maftus) giveth 
this judgment, that the fruit of this tree had no 
fuch virtue or quality, as that by the tafting thereof, 
there was any fuch knowledge created in Adam, as 
if he had been ignorant before; but as Junius alfo 
noteth. Arbor fcientice boni (ft mali (id eft) experien- 
ti<e boni (ft mali ab eventu ; The tree of knowledge 
of good and evil (that is) the experience of good 
and evil by the event. For thus much we may con¬ 
ceive, that Adam being made (according to the He¬ 
brew phrale) by the workmanfhip of God’s own 
hand, in greater perfection than ever any man was 
produced by generation, being (as it were) the cre¬ 
ated plant, out of whofe feed all men living have 
grown up; and having received immortality from 
the breath or fpirit of God, he could not (for thefe 
refpeCts) be ignorant, that the difobeying of God’s 
commandment was the fearfulleft evil, and the ob- 
fervation of his precepts the happieft good. But as 
men in perfect health do (notwithftanding) conceive, 
that ficknefs is grievous, and yet in no fuch degree of 
torment, as by the flittering and experience in them- 
felves they afterwards witnefs: fo was it with Adam , 
who could not be ignorant of the punifhments due 
to negleCt and dilobedience j and yet felt by the 
the proof thereof in himfelf another terror than he 
had forethought, or could image. For looking in¬ 
to the glafs of his own guilty foul, he beheld there¬ 
in the horror of God’s judgments, fo as he then 
knew, he feelingly knew, and had trial of the late 
good, which could not be prized, and of the new 
purchafed evil, which could not be exprefs’d. He 
then law himfelf naked both in body and mind; 
that is, deprived of God’s grace and former felici¬ 
ty : and therefore was this tree called the tree of 
knowledge, and not becaufe the fruit thereof had 
any fuch operation, by any felf quality or effeCt: 
for the fame phrafe is ufed in many places of the 
feriptures, and names are given to figns and facra- 
ments, as to aCts performed, and things done. In 
fuch fort as this tree was called the tree of know¬ 
ledge, becaufe of the event (as is aforefaid) fo was 
the well of a contention therefore called b Efek, and 
the well of hatred e Sitnath , becaufe the herdfmen 
of Ifaac and Gerar contended for them; and the 

a Numb 20. 13. b Gen. 26. 20. c Gen. 26. 21. d 
2. 1 . 2. h Gen. 3. 17. 


heap of ftoncs, called the d heap of witnefs , between 
Jacob and Laban , not that the ftones bare witncls, 
but for a memory of the covenant. So Jacob cal¬ 
led the houfe of God e Bethel and f Hagar, the 
well in the defart , viventis (ft videntis . 

But Adam being both betray'd and mattered by 
his affections, ambitious of a farther knowledge than 
he had perceived in himfelf, and looking but flight- 
ly (as all his iflues do) into the miferies and forrows 
incident, and greatly affeCting the fuppofed glory 
which he might obtain by tafting the fruit forbid¬ 
den, he was tranfported and hlown forward by the 
gentle wind of pleating perfuafions unawares; his 
progreflion being ftrengthened by the fubtile argu¬ 
ments of Satan , who laboured to poifon mankind 
in the very root, which he moiftened with the liquor 
of the fame ambition, by which himfelf perifhed 
for ever. 

s But what means did the devil find out, or what 
inftruments did his own fubtilty prefent him, as fit¬ 
ted and apteft to work this mifehief by ? even the 
unquiet vanity of die woman ; fo as by Adam's 
hearkening to the voice of his wife, contrary to the 
exprefs commandment of the living God, mankind 
by that her incantation became the fubjeCt of labour, 
forrow, and death: the woman being given to man 
for a comforter and companion, but not for a coun- 
fellor. h But becaufe thou baft obeyed the voice of 
thy wife , &c. (faith God himfelf) Curfed is the 
earth for thy fake , in forrow ft: alt thou eat of it all 
thy life. It is alfo to be noted, by whom the wo¬ 
man was tempted ; even by the moft ugly and un¬ 
worthy of all beafts, into whom the devil enrred and 
perfoaded. » 

Secondly, What was the motive of her difobedi- 
ence: even a defire to know what was moft unfitting 
her knowledge, an affeCtion which hath ever fince. 
remained in all die pofterity of her fex. Thirdly, 
What was it that moved die man to yield to her 
perfuafions ? even the fame caufe which hath moved 
all men fince to the like confcnt, namely, an unwil- 
lingnefs to grieve her and make her fad, left fhe 
fhould pine and be overcome with forrow. But if 
Adam in theftate of perfection, and Solomon the fon 
of David , God’s chofen fervant, and himfelf a man 
endued with the greateft wifdom, did both of them 
difobey their Creator, by the perfuafion and for the 
love they bare to a woman, it is not fo wonderful 
as lamentable, that other men in fiiccecding ages 
have been allured to fo many inconvenient and 
wicked practices by the perfuafions of their wives, 
or other beloved darlings, who cover over and 
fhadow many malicious purpofes with a counterfeit 
paftion of diflimulate forrow and unquietnefs. 


CHAP. V. 

Of divers memorable things between the fall 
of Adam, and the flood of Noah. 

S E C T. I. 

Of the caufe and the revenge of CainV fine and of 
his going out from God. 

T H E fame pride and ambition which began 
in angels, and afterwards poftefs’d Adam , 
Cain alfo inherited: • for Cain (envious of 
the acceptation of his brother’s prayer and facrificc) 
flew him, making himfelf the firft man-flayer, and 
his brother the firft martyr: the revenge of which 

len. 31.48. « Gen. 28.19. f Cifn 16. 14. * Bart, fern- 

unnatural 


Digitized by 


Google 









t • % T V 

Chap. V. The History 

unnatural murder, although it pleafed (jod to miti¬ 
gate, when Cain cried out that his punifhment was 
greater than he could bear. For the fame offence 
chiefly (wherewith the Tons of Adam, as it were, 
urged and provoked God) he deftroyed all man¬ 
kind, but Ntab and his family: for it is written, 
* the earth aJfo was corrupt before God : of which 
in the faroe place Mofes giveth a reafon ■, for, faith 
he, The earth was filled with cruelty : and anon, 
after God himfelf made the caufe known unto No¬ 
ah, faying, An end of all fiejh is come before me, 
for the earth is filled with cruelty through them, and 
behold , I will defiroy them with the earth, or from 
the earth: Neither was this cruelty meant to have 
been in taking away the lives of men only, but in 
all forts of injuftice and opprefiion. After this 
murder of Abet, b Cain went out from the prefence 
of the Lord, and dwelt in the land of Nod, towards 
the eafi-fide of Eden : in which words, the going 
out of Cain from the prefence of tlie Lord, is not 
to be underftood after the literal fenfe , God being 
wholly in all parts of the world. c Tot its in coelo ejl t 
totus m terra, non altcrsis temporibus, fed utrumque 
fimul \ God (faith S. Augufiine) is wholly in heaven, 
and wholly in earth, and not by interchanged times, 
but all at once: and that this is true, David wit- 
iiefleth. * If I be in heaven (faith David) tbou 
art there if it* bell , then art there alfo: but what 
is meant thereby? 4 Exist a facie Dei (faith Cbry- 
fofiom) Cain went out from the prefence of the 
Lord, that is, he was left of God, disfavoured and 
bereaved of his prated!ton. 

Sect. II. 

Of Cain’r dwelling in the land of Nod : and of 
his city Enoch. 

T HIS word Nod, or Naid, 1 St. Jerome and 
many others urrderftand to fignify wandering, 
or uncertain habitation: vexation or agitation, faith 
Junius: but the Seventy convert it other wife, and 
take Nod foe the proper name of a country, and fo 
doth s Jofephus. But it feemeth to me, that Cain 
was rather a vagabond or wanderer in his cogitati¬ 
ons, than any thing elfe, and that his thoughts and 
conference had no quiet or reft, in regard of the 
murder committed, juftly fearing (by his own 
words) the like violence : h And whofoever findetb 
me (faith Cam ) /ball flay me. Now that Nod, or 
Naid, was a region wherein Cain inhabited, appea¬ 
red by the word [dwelt! for dwelling fignificth 
an abiding: and wo call thofe people wanderers 
and vagabonds that have no dwelling-place. And 
to make this dwelling and abiding more manifeft, 
* Mofes teacheth in what part of the earth this his 
habitation was, which he affirmeth towards the eafl- 
fide of Eden. Secondly, It is fait! by Mofes, that 
after Cain departed from the prefence or favour of 
God, he built a city, and called it by the name of 
his filrft-born, Enoch > which fheweth that he feared 
to wander, and rather fought to fortify himfelf a- 
pinft revenge. Cyrillus faith, that Cain and Abel 
were figures of Cbrijl and of the Jews and that 
** Cain, after that he had flain Abel unjuftly, had 
thenceforth no certain abiding in the world: fo the 
Jews, after they had crucified the Son of God, be- 
came runnegates: and it is true, that the Jews had 
never fince any certain eftate, commonweal, or prince 
their own upon the earth. Now this land of 
J u »ius taketh to be in Arabia Deferta , a re- 
Rion of Nomades j but Arabia the Defart is not 


Of the W o R l D. 43 

eaftward, or oii the eaft part of Eden, neither are 
thefe Nomades any particular people or nation. For 
all thefe, in what part of the world foever, which 
in old time lived by paftorage, and fed (as wccall 
it in Ireland ) upon white-meat without tilling of 
the ground, are called by the Greeks Nomades , and 
by the Latins Pafiores vagi, as the northern Tarta- 
rians, the Getulians, and Numidians in Africa, the 
ancient Britons, and the northern Irifh : yea, fuch 
were the inhabitants of Italy itfelf, till fuch time as 
Italus ( who gave them that name ) taught them 
the hufbandry of tillage ufed at this day. But the 
region eaftward from Eden is that part of Ajfyria , 
called by Ptolemy, Catena, which alfo might be 
derived of Carena, the county of Cain. And that 
Cain inhabited in thofe parts it may be gathered by 
the firft poffeffion of his father Adam \ for thus it 
is written, k Therefore the Lord God fent him forth 
from the garden of Eden to till the earth whence he 
was taken: and in the verfc following. Tints be cajl 
out man, &c. and at the eafi-fide of the garden of 
Eden he fet the Cberubtns: which fheweth that the 
entry into Paradife was from the eaft, by which en¬ 
trance Adam was eaft out, and therefore inhabiting 
on that fide of Paradife which was eaftward, ac¬ 
cording to the text: Cain alfo in the fame region 
fought his dwelling-place. Now, if the word Nod, 
or Naid, do fignify prefugus, that is, a fugitive, 
we can give no longer time to this uncertain habi¬ 
tation of Cain, than till he built the city of Enoch, 
the firft of the world, which he inclofcd either for 
his own defence, or (as Jofephus writeth) to opprefs 
others thereby. So as for my own opinion, I am 
refolved with the Septuagint, that Nod was the 
proper name of a region and for the word {va¬ 
gabond J which Cain ufeth of himfelf, it feemeth 
by the perclofe of the fame verfe, that {vagabond 1 
is therein underftood for fuch an one as travelletn 
in fear of revengement: for whofoever findetb me 
(faith Cain) Jball flay me \ or elfe {vagabond 3 is 
taken for a man without protection, and call out 
from the favour of God. 

And becaufe thefe Henochians, fo called of the 
city Henoch , were the firft fociety and civil aflem- 
bly of all other, it is likely that the fame of thefe 
people (either for cruelty, flrength, or other acti¬ 
ons) lived in tire memory of Noah and his ions ■, fo 
that after the flood (as there were of all forts of na¬ 
tures, lbme virtuoufly, fome impioufly, difpofed, 
and every aCtive mind fetting before it whom to 
follow or imitate) thofe people, which delighted in 
cruelty and opprefiion, took on them their names 
whofe natures they mofl liked and allowed *, of 
whom thefe Enochians were not the leaft. Per¬ 
chance the place it felf where Enoch flood before 
the flood, and whereof the monuments might re¬ 
main (as the pillars or tire foundation of Joppe did) 
gave occafion to the planters of that place to call 
themfelves by the fame names: for of thofe Eno¬ 
chians there were many nations in the borders of 
Pontus, and Colchis in Iberia, Segdiana, and Bac- 
tria, and of the fame name many mountains, as 
thofe which are otherwife called Coraxici. And 
feeing that it is hard to find out die truth of thefe 
things, which the mofl aged time hath covered over 
or defaced, we may (according to the counfel of 
1 Plato ) exceedingly rejoyce, and therewith fatisfy 
our felves, if of fo great and almofl worn-out anti¬ 
quity, if of the eldeft people’s names and nations, 
there remain any print or footfteps to pofteri- 

ty- 


6 . ii, i j. 

rad. Heb. 
orhe mutaiur. 


b Gen. 4. 16. « Aug de civitate Dei, 1 . 12. c. 19. d Pfol. 139. 8. « Chrvfoft. in G<*n. Homil. 2 . 

* Jo/tph. 1 . f. c. 3. ' h Gen. 4. 14. ■ Gen. 4. 16, 17. k Gen. 3. 23, 24. 1 Quotidie aliquid inhoc 

nova urbium fundament* jadimtur, aora gentium nemwa (extificHs nommibu-* prion bus) onuntur Seneca 

Goo^te 


D 





Book I. 



*The History of the World. 


In 1 Pliny, P. Mela, Strabo , Valerius Flaccus, 
Lucan, Stephanus , we find thofe Henochei defcri- 
bed, though diverfly written, as in Pliny l'ometimes 
Heniochi, in A/e/a Eniochi, in Flaccus, Heniochi, 
in Enocbii, all which inhabit upon the fea 

Euxinus, but yet none of thefe are on the eaft fide 
of Eden, or (according to Mofes* 5 words) eaftward 
from Eden. For Mofes, in all places where he de- 
feribeth any region, was fo exceeding precife, as 
fometimes he uleth the word eaft or lbuth without 
borrowing, or addition, at odier times with a bor¬ 
rowing, as eaftward or fouthward, or towards die 
eaft or fouth. In the place of Genefis xi. ver. 2. 
he writeth the word [[eaft] fimply and dire&ly. 
And as they went from the eafl, they found a plain 
in the land of Shinar, but this of Cain he addeth 
the word [[towards] as, in the land of Nod towards 
the eaft fide of Eden•, which may be taken, as in¬ 
clining fome one point or two either to the north or 
to the fouth of die eaft. 

But as we may conje&ure that thefe nations took 
name of Henoch, the city of Cain , or of the region 
wherein it flood, when the fame was rcpeopled af¬ 
ter the flood: fo it is probable that thefe Henocbii 
of Colchis, and other parts adjoyning, were not the 
firft of that name, after the fons of Noah began to 
fill the world again: becaufe, had this Henoch the 
city of Cain flood in any of thefe parts, it had then 
been feated north, and not eaft or eaftward from 
Eden. But as b Pliny findeth their habitation towards 
Pont us, fo afterwards he goeth on eaftward, till he 
track them or trace them out to their original. For 
he calleth thefe of Colchis (now Mengrelid) Sanni 
Heniochi > c Ptolemy Zani\ beyond which, an hun¬ 
dred and fifty miles eaftward, he findeth another na¬ 
tion of them about Iberia and Albania \ and beyond 
thefe again he difeovereth a third nation, from 
whence all the reft took beginning, which inhabited 
on the weft fide of the mountains of Paro-panifus , 
between them and the great river of Oxus , which 
bordereth Batlria on the north fide j and thefe He¬ 
nocbii are due eaft from the region of Eden , and 
eaftward from the very garden it felf. 

And altho’ we cannot be afiured, that thefe He>- 
nochii took name from the memory of the city of 
Henoch direflly, yet becaufe they inhabited due eaft 
from Para life, and afterwards fpred themfelves 
weftward (as all Noah's fons did that came into Shi- 
nar ) the conje<5ture is far more probable, than that 
of Annius the frier, who fets Henoch in Phenicia, 
quite contrary to Mofes's word: Phenicia from all 
parts of Eden being dire< 5 Uy weft. 

And befides thefe feveral nations of the Henocbii, 
d Stephanus findeth a region called Henochia , and 
the fame alfo in the eaft, with divers mountains a- 
bout Bafltia and Sogdiana of the fame name. On¬ 
ly the Grecians (according to their fabulous inven¬ 
tions of all tilings elfe) out of the word [Heniocbi ] 
which fignifieth carts or coach-men, make thefe na¬ 
tions to have fprung from the waggoners of Caftor 
and Pollux (to wit) e Amphipes and Telcbius, who 
attended them in the enterprife of Jafon into Col¬ 
chis. And tho’ I do not deny, but that Jafon 
with other Greeks ranged the coafts of Afta the lefs, 
in an open boat or kind of fmall galley, * of whom 
I fliall fpeak in his own time: yet no man doubt- 
eth but that the tale of the golden fleece was for the 
moft part poetical •, and withal that in fuch an open 
boat, which could hardly carry their own rowers, 
being fifty-four, there was no place, and lefs ufe 
of coach-horfes or waggoners. 


Sect. HI. 

Of Mofes’r omitting fundry things concerning CainV 
generation. 

B UT of the remembrance and teftimonies of the 
name of the city of Henoch in prophane flory, 
thus much may fuffice \ now it followeth to anfwer 
fome few objections againft certain particulars in the 
fourth and fifth chapter of Genefis: againft which 
for the firft it is demanded, how it was poflible for 
Cain (having no other afiiftance than his fon Henoch ) 
to perform fuch a work as the building of a city, 
feeing there is thereto required fo many hands, and 
fogreatamafs of all forts of materials? To which 
it is anfwered, that we are firft to confider, that of 
Cain (becaufe he was the parent of an impious race) 
Mofes ufeth no ample declaration •, and fo it bell a- 
greeth with his divine reafon, feeing that he con- 
taineth the whole flory of the firft race, which waft¬ 
ed by the leafl account 1656 years, in five fhort 
chapters. Yet thus much may every man borrow 
of his own weakeft reafon, that feeing it pleafed 
God to beftow on the firft generations of mens 
lives, fo long a meafure, as 800 and 9c® years, 
that in fuch a fpace Cain had not want of leifure 
and means to build many fuch cities as Henoch , be 
the capacity anfwering to what other of the world 
foever: for in what age of Cain's life he built it, the 
feriptures are filent: as of thofe times, and the times 
of his iflues Mofes had the leafl care. And as it was 
faid of Cain, that he built a city: fo was it faid of 
Noah, that his three fons peopled all the world : but 
in both, the procefs of time required to be under- 
flood : which advice feeing Mofes ufeth where the 
fpace lefs requireth it, as knowing that he writ the 
feriptures to reafonable men, we may eafily under- 
fland, that fuch was his meaning alfo in all reports 
of like nature. For in making but a difference be¬ 
tween the birth of Abel, and oblation of Cain, he 
fpake it in this fort, Fuit autem poft dies multos , or 
a fine dierum (that is) in procefs of time it came to 
pafs that Cain brought an oblation. And therefore 
it is in like fort to be underftood of Cain, that many 
years fore-gone, and when his people were increa¬ 
sed he built the city of Enoch or Henoch. 

And where it is written, as of Cain, that he built 
Enoch , fo of * Solomon, that he built the temple of 
Jerufalem j yet it is well known of Solomon, that 
he employed in that work 150000 labourers: for 
this phrafe or fpeech is common with our felves to 
fay, the king invaded •, when he caufed an invafi- 
on to be made: and he built, when he commanded 
fuch a building. And therefore feeing we find, 
that Mofes had no regard to the ages, to the birth, 
or to the death of any of Cain's iflues, it is not to 
be marvelled at, why he alfo pafleth over in a word 
the building of Enoch, without addition of any cir- 
cumftance: for of Cain, Mofes writeth in this man¬ 
ner : * Cain alfo knew his wife, who conceived and 
bare Enoch, and be built a city, and called the 
name of the city after the name of his fon Enoch. 
And to Enoch was born Irad, and had begat Me- 
hujael, and Mehujael begat Metbufael, and Mttbu- 
fuel Lamech. 

Now of Seth, Mofes writeth far otherwife, and 
in this manner. v And Seth lived 105 years, and be¬ 
gat Enoch, and Seth lived after he begat Enoch 807 
years, and begat fons and daughters: fo as all the 
days of Seth were 912 years, and he died, as for die 
years and times of the wicked they were not num¬ 
bered in libro viventium, faith Cyril. But in Seth 


* Plin. 1 . 6. c. 9, 11, & 16. Mel. 1 . i. c. ult. Strabo, lib. n. Val. Flac. 1 . 6. Lucan 1 . 3. v. 37. Plm. !. 6. c. 4. C 
c Ptol. tab. Aliac 3. d Steph. de urb. t Nat. Comes <alletb them Rhecas. Nat. Com. 1 . 8. c o. Strabo, 1 . 11 f fa thefe- 
hook of this fart, cap. 13. $. 5. *2 King; 6. h Gen. 4. 17, 18. * Gen. 5. 6. 


Digitized by 


Google 









Chap. V. The History of the World. 



was the church of God eilabliflied,frofn whom Chrift 
defcended, as touching his manhood: and therefore 
this way and work Mofes walked in, and finifhed 
it with care, palling over the reprobate generation 
(as aforefaid.) Of the line of Adam by Cain, Mofes 
remembreth but eight generations, reckoning Adam 
for one, and of the line of Adam by Setb ten, count¬ 
ing Adam alfo therein, as followcth: 

I. A D A M. 


j. Cain. 

3. Henoch. 

4. had. 

j. Mabttjael. 

6 . Matbufael. 

7. Ijtmecb , who by Ada had 

8. Jubal and Tubal, and by Silla 

T'ubalcain and Nocma. 


1 2. Seth. 

3. ' Enos. • " * 

4. Cainan. 

f. Mabaleel. •» 

6 . ‘ farad. •' • 

7. Henoch. 

8 . Metbufalem. 

9. Lamech^nd 
to- Noab. 


Thefe be the generations of Adam by Cain , 
which the fcriptures mention: but Jofepbus giveth 
unto Lamecb threefcorc and feventeen fons and 
daughters, by his two wives Ada , and Silla: and 
to thefe three fons of Lamecb, Mofes afcribeth the 
invention of paftorage, of mufick, and the work¬ 
ing in metal 3 for it feemeth that 1 Jubal firft gather¬ 
ed together, and made familiar thofe beafts which 
formerly were untamed, and brought them into 
herds and droves: * Tubal invented mufick, and 
• T'ubalcain the working in brafs and iron: the one 
being addidted to hulbandry, the od\er was mecha¬ 
nical, the third given to idlenefs and plcafure. In 
whom began thefe three meaner degrees of Ihepherds, 
handy-crafts men, and muficians. And in the if- 
fues of Seth began the fervices of God, divinity, 
prophecy, and aftronomy: the children of the one 
beheld the heavens, the other the , earth. 


Sect. IV. 

Of the diverfities in the ages of the patriarchs “when 
they begat their children. 

A Second fcruple hath been made, how it came 
to pafs that the patriarchs begat their chil¬ 
dren at fo divers ages as Cainan or Kenan at feven- 
ty years, Mabaleel and Enoch at threescore and five 
years, whereas Jar ad begat not any of his until he 
was 162 years old: Metbufalem begat at 187 *, La¬ 
mecb at 182, and Noab at 500 years. Now this 
difference hath been the more enforced, becaufe it 
cannot be conjcdlured, that either Jar ad, Methufa- 
lent, or Lamecb abftained from marriage out of die 
religion of abftinence, feeing that Enoch , wlio was 
tranflated by God for his fingular fan&ities, begat 
children before he was chreefcore and ten years 
old. 

The apparent difference hereof arifeth in this, 
that Mofes did not number the generations before 
the flood precifely, according to the firftbegotten 
and eldeft fons of the patriarchs ; but he drew down 
the line of Noah from Seth, and afterwards from 
Noab to Abraham, by their true anceftors, were they 
elder or younger, as he found them: for it is likely 
that Enoch was not the eldeft of Jar ad, nor La¬ 
mecb the firft-born of Metbufalem, nor Noab of 
Lamecb •, neither is there any thing known to the 
contrary, but that Noab might have had many fons 
before Shem, Ham , and Japbet , though thefe three 
were only named, and furviving, and which by 
God were referved to be the fathers ot mankind af¬ 
ter the flood j and therefore when we find Maha- 
leel to be begotten by Kenan at threefcore and ten 


years who Was the firft fon of Kenan , and then rec¬ 
kon that Metbufalem begat Lamecb in the 187th year 
of his life, the difference feemeth ftrange, where 
Lamecb is taken for the eldeft. But Mofes rejedleth 
all the other fons of Metbufalem but Lamecb only, 
becaufe he was the father of Noab as aforefidd. Of 
this St. Augafline hath fomewhat elfe in his 20th 
and 2 til chapters de civitate Dei. 

But as Mofes counted the generations of the firft 
age, and fo to Abraham, and the children of the 
promife after him*, fo doth St. Matthew recite the 
genealogy of Cbrifi, not by the eldeft fons, but 
from thole whom God had chofen and bleffed, with¬ 
out refpeft of the firft-born, who have hereby the 
prerogative in eftares, worldly and tranfitory only; 
and therefore the b Evaigelift nameth Ifaac and not 
Ifmael, tho’ JJivael were hrft in time: fo doth he 
take Jacob the younger, and not Efau the elder; 
neither is Cbri/l derived from any of the three eldeft 
patriarchs , Reuben, Simeon, or Levi, but from 
Juda a fourth brodier, and fo from David a youn¬ 
ger fon of Jeffai •, and laftly we find, that the king¬ 
dom it felt' of Juda was not given to the heir in 
nature, but to die heir of grace, namely c Solomon., 

S E C T. V. 

Of the long lives of the patriarchs : and fome of 
late memory. 

T H E third objection is, that the great diffe- ; 

rence of years between thofe of the firft age, 
whereof fome of diem had well near feen a thou- 
fand years, makes it difputed, whether the account 
of times were of the fame meafure is in after-ages, 
feeing that foon after die flood men lived not a 
third part of that time, and in fucceeding ages and f 

to this day not the tenth. . ... 

d They that have hereon refolved that thofe 
years were but Lunary years (to wit) of a month 
or thereabouts, or Egyptian years, are eafily confu¬ 
ted. For whereas Seth begat Enos in the year of 
his life one hundred and five, if thofe years be ta¬ 
ken but for months, then had Seth lived but eight 
years and one month when he begat Enos: and if 
the time of Enos have the fame allowance, when 
he beg.it Cainan , then could Enos at that time have 
been but fix years and forty-eight weeks old ; and 
fo it may be gathered of the reft excepting only 
Adam, who was created perfect in his kind, as 
were the trees in their kind, bearing fruit and feed. 

But this were too ridiculous to imagine. For to 
give an ability of generation at fix, leven or eight 
years, agreeth with the Ihort lives of the pigmies, 
and not with the conftitutions of our firft fathers, 
who being defcended from Adam, the workman- 
fhip of God’s hands, and begotten and born in the 
ftrong youth of the world, had length of days and 
ability of body agreeable. Again, if we allow 
this idle conceit of the Lunary years, then there 
would follow this extremity, that thofe which li¬ 
ved longcft, and upwards of nine hundred years, 
had by that account but the time of fourfeore and 
ten and odd years ; which were not only lefs by far 
than the patriarchs lived after the flood, but fhort 
of many mens lives in this decrepit age of the 
world, wherein many exceed fourfeore, and fome 
an hundred years. Further (if need be) to difprove 
this reckoning, whereas it is written, Gen. xxv. 
that Abraham died in a good age, an old man, 
and of great years: all which (if the former ac¬ 
count were of Lunary years) makes but feventeen 
and an half of our years. 


4. 2o, 2i, 22. k Mat. 1. 2. « 1 King? 2. 4 Solin. Pol. hift. c. 3. Macrob. Saturn. 1 . t. c. 8. Plin. 1. 7. c. 48. 

*0. :. M 


And 


Digitized by 


Googl 


e 







4 6 The History of the Wo;RLb. Book I. 


And if we fcek for a caufe of this long life in na¬ 
ture, then is it reafonable, that the firft man, created 
in higheft perfection, Ihould alfo beget children of 
equal ftrength or little differing: for of the firft and 
pureft feed there muft of neceflity fpring up the fair- 
eft and fniitfulleft plants. Secondly, the earth it 
felf was then much lefs corrupt, which yielded her 
increafe, and brought forth fruit and food for man, 
without any fuch mixture of harmful quality, as 
fince that time the curfe of God for the cruelty of 
nun’s heart brought on it and mankind: neither had 
the waters of the flood infufed fuch an impurity, as 
thereby the natural and powerful operation of all 
plants, herbs, and fruits upon the earth received a 
qualification and harmful change. And as all things 
under the fun have one time of ftrength, and ano¬ 
ther of weaknefs, a youth and beauty, and then age 
and deformity: fo time it felf (under the deathful 
fhade of whole wings all things decay and wither) 
hath wafted and worn out that lively virtue of na¬ 
ture in man, and bcafts, and plants, yea the hea¬ 
vens themfelves being of a moft pure and cleanfed 
matter (hall ‘wax old as a garment; and then much 
more the power generative in inferiour creatures, 
who by the ordinance of God receive operative vir¬ 
tue from the fuperiour. 

But befides the old age of the world, how far 
doth our education and fimplicity of living differ 
from that old time ? the tender bringing up of chil¬ 
dren, firft fed and nourilhed with the milk of a 
ftrange dug ; an unnatural curiofity having taught 
all women (but the begger) to find out nurfes, which 
neceflity only ought to commend unto them : the 
hafty marriages in tender years, wherein, nature 
being but yet green and growing, we rent from her, 
and replant her branches, while her felf hath not 

S my root fufficient to maintain her own top and 
half-ripe feeds (for the moft part) in their 
growing tip wither in the bud, and wax old even 
in their infancy. But above all things the exceeding 
hixurioufhefs of this gluttonous age, wherein we 
prefs nature with overweighty burdens, and find¬ 
ing her ftrength defeCHve, we take the work out of 
her hands, and commit it to the artificial help of 
flrong waters, hot fpices, and provoking fauces ; 
Of which Lucan hath thefe elegant verfes : 

t> . —. O prodiga rcrum 

Luxuries nunqnam parvo content a parat u : 

Et qutefiterum tor a pelagoqne ciborum 
Ambitiofa fames , & lauta gloria menfr, 

Difcite quam parvo liceat producere vitam : 

Et quantum nsUura petat. 

Non auro myrrbaque bibunt: fed gurgite puro 
Vita redit: fatis tjl populis jluvtufque cerefque. 

O waftful riot, never well content 
With low-priz’d fare; hunger ambitious 
Of cates by land and fea far fctcht and lent: 
Vain glory of a table fumptuous. 

Learn with how little life may be preferved. 

In gold and myrrh they need not to caroufe. 

But with the brook the people's thirft is ferved: 
Who fed with bread and water are not ftarved. 

i 

The c y Egyptians affirm, that the longeft time of 
man’s life is an hundred years, bccaufe the heart in a 
period body waxeth and groweth to ftrength fifty 
years, and afterwards by the fame degree decaycth 
and withereth. Epigenes findeth in his philofophy, 
that the life of man may reach to the period of an 
hundred and twenty years, and Hero fas to a hun¬ 
dred and feventeen years. Thefe opinions Pliny re¬ 
peated! and reproveth, producing many examples 


to the contrary. • In die laft taxation, number and, 
review of the eighth region of Italy, there were 
found in the roll (faith 0 Pliny ) fifty-four perfom 
of an hundred years of age : fifty-feven of an hun¬ 
dred and ten: two, of an hundred twenty-five: four 
of an hundred and thirty : as many that were an 
hundred and thirty-five, or an hundred and thirty, 
feven years old.: and laft of all, three men of an 
hundred and forty: and this fcarch was made in the 
times of Vefpafian the father and the Ion. 

The limple diet and temperate life of the 'Etfaan: 
gave them Jong account of many years: fodid it to 
the fecreuries of Egypian ceremonies, to the 'Perfi- 
an Magicians and Indian Bracbmans. The Greeks 
affirm out of Homer , that Nejlor lived three ages, 
and firefias fix, 'Sybilla three hundred years, Endy- 
mion of the lefs Afia, little lefs: alfo Majinijfa of 
Numidia lived very long, and Dando of Illyria. 
Among the kings of Arcadia many lived three hun¬ 
dred years (faith Ephorus) Hellanicus affirmeth of 
the Epeians , that fomc of diem live full two hundred 
years : and fo doth Diodorus Siculus of the Egyp¬ 
tians : and that thefe reports are not fabulous, 
Jofepbus bringeth many witnefles with himfelf, as 
Martthon, Btrofus , Mochas, EJlius , Hieronymus 
yEgyptius, Hecat<eus, Ephorus , and others. And 
Anthony Burnt , an hiftorian of good reputation re- 
porteth, that in the year 1570. there was an Indi¬ 
an prefented to So/yman , general of the Turks army, 
who had out-lived three hundred years. I my felf 
knew the old countefs of Dtfmond of Inchiqum in 
Munjler , who lived in the year 1589, and many 
years fince, who was married in Edward the fourth s 
time, and held her jointure from all the earls of 
Defmond fince then » and that this is true, all die 
noblemen and gentlemen of Munjler can witnefs. 
Strozzius Cicogna , out of Torqurmada Mafftus , and 
the like authors, telleth of fome that have not only 
far exceeded the term preferibed by Epigenes ; but 
been repaired from the withered eftate of decrepit 
age to frefh youth. But for length of life, if we 
note but the difference between the ability of men in 
thofe days wherein Galen the phyfician lived, it 
mayeafily prove unto us what reeds we are in re- 
fped of thole cedars of the firft age. For Galen did 
ordinarily let blood fix pound weight, whereas we 
(for the moft part) ft op at fix ounces. But to con¬ 
clude this part, there are three things (not counting 
conftellations) which are the natural caufes of a 
long and healthful life (to wit) ftrong parents, a 
pure and thin air, and temperate ufe of diet, plea- 
fure, and reft: for thofe which are built of rotten 
timber, or mouldering ftone, cannot ftand long up¬ 
right; on air we feed always and in every inllant; 
and on meats but at times: and yet the heavy load 
of abundance, wherewith weopprefeand overcharge 
nature, maketh her to fink unawares in the mid¬ 
way ; and therefore with a good conftitution, a 
pure air, and a temperate ufe of thofe things which 
nature wanteth, are the only friends and compani¬ 
ons of a Jong life. 

Sect. VI. 

Of the patriarchs delevering their knowledge by tra¬ 
dition : and that Enoch writ before the flood. 

A Fourth fcruple hath been made, how the cer¬ 
tain knowledge of the creation came to Mo- 
fes, feeing there was no ftory thereof written, and 
if any fuch had been, yet it is conceived, that all 
memory of antiquity perifhed in the univerfal flood. 

But if we confider the curiofity and policy of el¬ 
der ages, we fhall find that knowledge was the grear- 


• Pf. 10 2. 26. h Pharfal. 1 . 4. c Pier. Hicrog. 1 . 2. <* Plin. 1 . 7. c 29. 


« Joftph. antiq. 1 . 13. c. 8. 1 Plin. I. 7. c. 48. 

eft 


Digitized by 


Googl 


e 






Chap. V. 7’he History of the W o r l d. 


eft treaiure that men fought for, and which they ai- 
ft> covered and hid from £he vulgar fort, as jewels 
©f ineftimable price, fearing the irreverent conllruc- 
tion of the ignorant and irreligious: fcaswhatloever 
was attained unto concerning God, and his work¬ 
ing in nature, the fame was not left to publick dil- 
pute, but delivered over by heart and tradition 
pom wife men to pofterity equally zealous, 1 Ex 
ammo in omnium fine Uteris , medio intercedentt ver- 
bo \ from mind to mind without letters, by way of 
tradition of word of mouth. And it was thought 
by E[dr as ■, Origen, and Ildar tus (as b Mirandula 
concciveth) that Mofes did not only upon the mount 
receive the law Iron# God, but withal fecretiorem 
(j? veram legis enarrationaK, a more fecrot and true 
explanation of the Jaw, which (laidi he out of tlie 
fame authors) he delivered by mouth to J of jus, 
and Jofima to die elders: lor to teach diefe myftc- 
rk*s, which he called fecretiora , to the rude multi¬ 
tude, were uo other quarn dare fanti urn cardbus , (5? 
inter forces [pargete wargaritas, than to give holy 
things to dqg§, and to c.ift pearls before l'wine. In 
iucceedirig times this underftanding and wifdom 
began to be written in cipliers, and characters, and 
letters bearing the form ol beads, birds, and other 
creatures ^ and to be taught only to fuch, as ferved 
in their temples, and to their kings and prielts. 
Ofthefirft the Cabala of the Jews was an imitati¬ 
on : the invention of the other is inferibed to Zoro- 
ojier, Mercunus, Cadmus , and others^ butfulfly. 

This e Cabala importeth a law received by tradi¬ 
tion and unwritten. Cabala in Hebrew is receplio 
in Larin , and a receiving in Englijb. And this cuf- 
tom was alfo held by the Druids and Bards of our 
ancient Britons, and of later times by the irijb 
chroniclers called rymers. If dien fuch as would 
Jam wifeft ia the ufe of realon, will not acknow¬ 
ledge, that the (lory of the creation or beginning 
of all things was written by inipiration, the Holy 
Ghoft guiding die hand of Mofes •, yet it is manifeft, 
that the knowledge thereof might by tradition (then 
tifed) be delivered unto him by a more certain pre¬ 
emption, than any or all the tellimonies which 
prophane antiquity had preferved and left to their 
l'ucceflors*. which their wile men (as diey term diem) 
diil lay up and defend from the injury of die time 
and other hazards. For, leaving to remember that 
Adam intruded Seth, and Seth his children and fuc- 
ceifors, which cannot be doubted of, it is manifeft, 
that Me thu/a lent lived together with Adam himfclf 
two hundred forty and diree years, and A r oab with 
Mctbxjalevi no lefs than five hundred years : and 
before Noah died Abraham was fifty and eight years 
old \ from whence diis knowledge, by an eafy and 
•ordinary way, might come to l[rael t and fo to Mofes. 

But befides this tradition, it is queflionlcfs, that 
the ufe of letters was found out in die very infancy 
of the world, proved by thole prophecies written 
on pillars of ftonc and brick by Enoch : of which 
a Jofepbus affirmeth, that one of diem remained even 
in his time (meaning belike fomc ruin or foundation 
thereof) which pillars by others are aferibed to Seth. 
But ot thefe prophecies of Enoch c St. Jude teftifieth \ 
and lome part of his books (which contained the 
courfe of the ftars, their names and motions) were 
afterward found in Arabia feelix in the dominion of 
the queen Saba (faith' Origen) of which Tertuilian 
affirmeth that he had fecn and read lomc whole pa¬ 
ges. It is not therefore ftrange, that Mofes came 
to the knowledge of the creation and ftory of the 
tirft age, feeing he might receive it both by tradi¬ 
tion and letters, had not the fpirit of God inftruCt- 

1 Dion. Arecp. b Fol. 18. < Cabala eft feiemia Thcologi.r 

fp vcr. 14. f Origen. Homil. 1. in Num. S Orig. Homil 
k 1 «:ul. dc habit mulimim. 


ed anil infpired him as he did : winch alfo his ma¬ 
ny and ftrange miracles (performed before he wrote 
the feriptures) make more manifeft. 

Now tor the books of Enoch, howfoever lb roe 
men make qucflion of tiiem, fure I am that Ttrtul- 
lian, * Origen, Augujlint, Bedn, Procopius, Gazeus, 
(witli others) cite them in their writings: although 
.Medina, for an argument to prove them unwritten 
traditions, alledgcth that pope Getajius among other 
tthc Apocryphal feriptures (which he rejeCteth) named 
not did.* of Enoch j but that whatloever was jre- 
membred out of them, the fame was delivered by 
tradition from the Jews. But I rather think with 
Pererms that fuch a book die re was, and that die 
lame was corrupted alter the death of the apoftles, 
and many things added thereunto by hereticks, who 
took occafion upon the antiquity thereof, and out 
ot that place ot Michael contending with the devil 
about the body ot MoJes, to frame and add there¬ 
unto many inventions ot their own. . Ofte of the 
greateft arguments againft thefe books, is that nei¬ 
ther Pbslu, nor Jofepbus (the moll diligent fearehers 
of antiquity) make mention thereof. But againft it 
I will fet this opinion of St. Augujline, Scripftjfe 
quidem nonnulla drama Enoch ilium feptimsem ttb 
Adam negat e nonpoftanas *, That Enoch the fevenrh 
from Adam did write, divers divine things we cannot 
deny. Now his writings, which came afterwards to 
light, were fulpcCftd becaufe of the antiquity, and 
of tables of giants fuppoled to be begotten of an¬ 
gels, and others*, and by fo much the more, be¬ 
caufe no fuch book was found among thofe canoni¬ 
cal feriptures, kept by tlte diligence of the Hebrew 
priefts in Armario Judaico (faith h TertsAliari) who 
yet affirmeth dut this might be preferved by Noah. 
Surely that Enoch wrote the prophecies reme unbred 
by Jude, no man can deny j how they were deli¬ 
vered to pofterity ! know not, whether by the Jews 
Cabala, or by what other means, the fame is but 
man’s conjecture. And (certainly) by the know¬ 
ledge aferibed to JVoab of the motions of the hea¬ 
vens, and of the natures and conjunctions of the 
ftars j and afterwards to feme of his ions, to Zoro- 
after, and then to Abraham, it is very probable that 
Noah had fecn and might preferve this book. For 
it is not likely, that fo exquiiite knowledge therein 
(as thefe men had) was fuddenly invented and found 
out, but left by Seth to Enoch, and by Enoch to 
Noah, as hath been faid before. And therefore if 
letters and arcs were known from the time of Seth 
to Enoch, and that Noah lived with Metbufalem, 
who lived with Adam, and Abraham lived with 
Noah: it is not ftrange (I lay) to conceive how Mo¬ 
fes came to the knowledge of the firft age, be it by 
letters, or by Cabala and tradition, had the undoubt¬ 
ed word of God need of any other proof than fell- 
authority. 

Sect. VII. 

Of the men of renown before the flood. 

N O W let us confider the relation of Mofes, 
who named feven defcents ot Cains. children, 
and of Adam by Seth ten: Seth being given by God 
inftcad of Abel j and of Seth was Enoch begotten, 
in whofe time men began to profefs religion, and to 
offer facritice in publick. For altho’ Adam inftruCt- 
ed his children in the knowledge of God their 
Creator, as appeared by the facrifice offered by 
Cain and Abel ; yet it feemeth that after the birth of 
Enoch, men began publickly to call on the name of 
the Lord, that is, they ferved and praifed God by 
communion and in publick manner, or calling up- 

non revetota. P. M. S2. Mirnnd. 110 fol. <* Jof. I. 1. «■ Jud 

sS. in Num & Comment in Kvnng Johan Gclaf dill, j5. 

on 


Digitized by 


Google 




48 'T’he History 

on the name of the Lord, and thereby were the Tons 
of God or the godly diftinguifhed from the wicked. 
From the birth of Enos the fon of Seth, to the 
time of Enoch the fon of Jar ad, there is nothing re¬ 
membered by Mofes, but their own births, the births 
of their Tons, the length of their lives, and deaths. 
But of Enoch it is written, * that he walked with 
God, and he was no more feen : for Good took him 
away. By that, that he walked with God, was 
meant, that he was a juft and upright man, and 
that he feared, loved, and obey’d God. For the 
famephrafe Mofes ufeth of Noah. b Noah was a jujl 
and upright man in his time , and Noah walked with 
God. The Seventy convert it, Enoch placuit Deo \ 
Enoch pleafed God. And altho’ Abcn-Ezra and 
others underftand this place [tulit eum Deus~)fcili- 
cet, mortuus efi, God took him away (that is) he 
died, which (indeed) agreeth both with the phrafe 
of the feripture, and with our manner of fpeech 
to this day, to fay, God took him away, when he 
died; yet the difference which Mofes maketh be¬ 
tween the piety of Enoch and the reft of the patri¬ 
archs, and by omitting the word fdeath] which he 
ufeth to all elfe, makes it manifeft, that Enoch was 
not diffolved as the reft. For to all the reft of the 
patriarchs, Mofes ufeth thefe words, and he died ■, 
but of Enoch he fpake otherwife, faying only, he 
was miffing , or he was not feen. Et non invenieba- 
tur (faith the apoflle to the Hebrews) quia Deus eum 
tranftulit j And he was not found, for the Lord 
took him away. In the fame place it is exprefly 
added, that he faw not death. 

But whether this taking away of Enoch were not 
with the fame kind of changing, which St. Paul 
promifeth when he faith, that c when the end fhall 
come, we ffiall not all die, but all full be changed, 
I leave it to the learned divines. 

After Enoch, Mofes paffeth over to Methufalem 
and Lamech, remembring (as of the reft) the times 
of their birth and death: faving that Lamech pro- 
phefied of his fon Noah , faying, d This fame fhall 
comfort us concerning our work, and forrow of our 
hands, as touching the earth which the Lord bath 
cur fed. Of Noah, Mofes writeth more amply, than 
of any of the reft of Adam’s children by c Seth, be¬ 
ing the laft of the ten generations of the firft age, 
whom God (with his family) preferved, becaufe he 
was an upright man in his time, and feared God. 

But of the war, peace, government, and policy 
of thefe ftrong and mighty men, fo able both in 
body and wit, there is no memory remaining, whofe 
llories if they had been preferved, and what elfe 
was then performed in tnat newnefs of the world, 
there could nothing of more delight have been left 
to pofterity. For the exceeding long lives of men 
(who to their ftrength of body and natural wits had 
the experience added of eight hundred and nine hun¬ 
dred years) how much of neceflity muft the fame 
add of wifdom and undertakings ? Likely it is, that 
their works excelled all whatfoever can be told of 
after-times, efpecially in refpett of this old age of 
the world, when we no fooner begin to know, but 
we begin to die according to Hippocrates, * Vita 
brevis, ars longa, tempus praceps (which is) life is 
fhort, art is long, and time is headlong. And that 
thofe people of the firft age performed many things 
worthy admiration, it may be gathered out of thefe 
words of Mofes, ® Thefe were mighty men, which in 
old time were men of renown. But thefe men of re¬ 
nown (whom the feripture afterwards calleth giants, 
.both for ftrength of body and cruelty of mind) 
trufted fo much to their own abilities, as they for- 

* Gen. 5. 24. k Gen. 6.9. * t Cor. 15.51. d Gen. 5. 

• Gen. 6 4. 


of the World. • Book I. 

got altogether the piety 'of Seth, and the ways 
wherein Enoch walked : b for all the imaginations of 
their hearts were evil, only evil, and continually evil. 
And this wickednefs was not only found in the if- 
fues of Cain, but it was then unjverfal, when the 
children and fons of God (or of the godly) were 
corrupted and milled by their idolatrous wives, the 
daughters of Cain, or of thofe other men loving 
themfelves and the world only. 

That thefe ‘ fons of God were angels, which being 
taken with the beauty of women accompanied them 
and begat giants, fome of the fathers fuppofed, 
namely, Laflantius and Eufebius milled by Jofephus: 
of whom I cannot doubt, but that they afterwards 
changed their former opinions. And of this mis¬ 
taking many writers have taken great advantage, 
and have troubled themfelves with large anlwers 
and very needlefs: the queftion being uncapable of 
difpute, efpecially fince St Cbryfofom and St Au- 
gujtine have anfwered it largely long ago. For, 
that good and godly men were honoured with the 
title of God’s children, it doth every where appear 
in the feripture j and on the contrary, to think that 
angels, who (as Cbrifl witnefleth) behold thefaceof 
God (that is) always attend his commandments, 
fhould, after a feparation from the reft which fell 
with Lucifer, forfake the glorious prefence of their 
Creator, and become Incubi, or Succubi, contrary 
both to nature and grace, were more than madnefs 
to imagine. 

Sect. VIII. 

That the giants, by Mofes fo called, were indeed men 
of huge bodies: as alfo divers in latter times. 

S~\ F thefe giants which Mofes calleth mighty men, 
V^/ Goropins Becanus an Antwerpian (who thought 
his own wit more gigantical than the bodies of Nim¬ 
rod and Hercules) hath written a large difeourfe, in¬ 
tituled Gigantomachia, and drained his brains to 
prove, that there were never any fuch men: hisrea- 
fons (whofoever defires to lofe time) he may 'find 
them in the treatifes before named. It is true, that 
Cyrillus reproves the Grecian poets for their mon- 
ftrous fidlions: who affirm fhamelefiy, that the gi¬ 
ants have in elder times not only call up mountains 
upon mountains, but removed illands out of the 
fea, with like fooleries. And for that invention of 
calling up hills, and making war with the gods, 
no doubt but that the fame was borrowed out of 
the ftory of Nimrod, as before remembred •, and 
even out of this feripture, that the fons of God 
faw the daughters of men, of whom the firft gi¬ 
ants were begotten, was that conceit taken of Or- 
pheus and Hefiodus, that giants were the fons of the 
heaven and the earth j meaning by the heavens the 
fons of God, and by the earth the daughters of men: 
which verfes of Orpheus are by John Caffam (who 
hath written a witty difeourfe of this fubjefl) thus 
changed into Latin: 

Nomine coelefies illos dixere gigantes, 

Orti quod terra fuerint if Janguine call. 

From the earth, and from thy blood, O heaven 
they came, 

Whom thereupon the gods did giants name. 

But what will not opiniators and fclf-believing 
men difpute of, and make doubt of, if they cannot 
conceive that there were in the firft age fuch kind ot 
men \ and of which there have been in all times 
fince ? feeing the feriptures avow the one manifeft- 
ly, and common experience the other ? 

9. ' Gen. 6. 9. f Aphor. 1. * Gen. 64 h Gen. 6 J- 

And 


Digitized by 


Googl 


e 









Chap. VI. "The History <?/ World. 49 


And for that fuperlative (training of words, and 
the meaning of them, that the name of giants was 
given to oppreffors and tyrants, and not to ftrength 
of body and eminent ftature : fuch men might with 
better reafon call them oppreffors becaufe they were 
giants, and therefore had ability to opprels, than 
lay, that they were called giants only becaufe op- 
pivffors. Forfirft Mofes himtelf calleththem mighty 
men j which fheweth a (Irength furpaffing others : 
and afterwards, men of renown (that is) of great 
undertaking and adventurous action. And if the 
fame ftature of body, and ability had not been found 
among divers nations after die general flood, then 
might this place of Mofes have more willingly 
hearkened to a difpute, and yielded to interpretation. 

But betides all thefe famous giants found in pro- 
phane hiftories (which 1 will referve to accompany 
the giants of Albion in the ftory of Brit any) the 
fcripturcs do clearly and without all allegorical con- 
ftruction avow, that, befides Nimrod , there were 
found of thefe giants in the time of Abraham, of 
Mofes, of JoJhua, and of David-, namely, the 1 Re- 
phaims in Afierolh •, the Zuzsei or Zanzummims in 
Ham, and the Emims , which dwelt anciently in the 
land of Moab : whom Mofes (for ftature) compa¬ 
red! with the Anakims, which dwelt in Hebron , 
for they alfo were taken for giants as the Anakims: 
likewife where Mofes fpeaketh of the land of Am¬ 
mon, he ufeth thefe words, b That alfo was taken for 
a land of giants, for giants dwelt therein aforetimes : 
and whom the Ammonites call Zanzummims: a peo¬ 
ple that was great , and many, and tall as the Ana¬ 
kims. And thefe giants called Rephaims in Afle- 
roth and Kernaim, and the Zuz<ei or Zanzummims , 
Chedorlaomer King of Elam overthrew, afiifted by 
other kings his affociatcs. Alfo the prophet c Amos 
found among the Ammonites men of giant-like fta¬ 
ture, whom he compareth to the cedar, and whole 
ftrength to the oaks \ and the prophet d Baruch , 
Thefe were the giants famous from the beginning , 
that were of fo great future, andfo expert in war. 
Particularly it is written of* Og, king of Bafan, 
that his bed of iron was nine cubits long, and four 
cubits broad: for only Og king of Bafan remained 
of the remnant of the giants, who commanded die 
kingdom of Bafan, four hundred years after the ex¬ 
pedition of Chedorlaomer. Moreover thofe difeover- 
ers and fearchers of the land of promife (fent by 
Mofes from Cadesbarne in Paran ) made report at 
their return of the great ftature of diofe people in 
general, and efpecially of the ions of Artak, in thefe 
words. f All the people which we faw in it are men 
of great future: for there we faw giants , the fons 
of Anak which come of the giants, fo that we feemed 
in our fights like grafs-hoppers, and fo we were in 
their fight (that is) the fearchers found in their own 
judgments a marvellous difference between the Ana¬ 
kims and themfelves: infomuch that the Ifraclites 
were fo ftricken with fear, as they rather fought 
and defired to return again into 6 Egypt , and were 
more willing to endure their former flavery, than 
to fall by the flrokes of thofe fearful nations. Fur¬ 
thermore the fcripturcs put us out of doubt, that 
h Goliab the Philifiine of Hath was a giant of fix cubits 
and a fpan long: the armour wuich he wore weigh¬ 
ed five thoufand (heckles of Ivais : the lhaft of his 
fpear was like a weavers beam, and his fpear-head 
weighed Gx hundred (heckles cl con. Alfo in 'Sa¬ 
muel there is mention of anon.cr Goliab firnamed 
Getheus, becaufe he was of Gath: and of three other 
giants •, of which the firft was (lain by k Jehonathan , 


David's nephew', who had twelve fingers, and as 
many toes: a man of great ftature, and his fingers 
were by fixes, even lour and twenty. 

Alfo that 1 Sampfon was of furpafling ftrength no 
man doubteth, who tore a lion as it had been a kid, 
and after m flew thirty of the Phili(lines, and (after 
that) a thoufand more of them with a jaw-bone of 
an al's and laftly he took the " gates of Azzah, 
and the two pofts, and lifted them away with the 
bars, and put them upon his fhoulders, and carried 
them to the top of the mountain before Elton. If 
then it be approved by every judgment, that both 
nature and the heavens wax old, and that the great 
age of time hath (with it felf) infeebJed and almoft 
worn out die virtue of all things; then I fay, that as 
in all other kinds die earth (before diat fin had in¬ 
creas'd the curfe and corruption) brought forth her 
young ones more ftrong and beautiful than it did in 
after-ages: fo alfo thole giants, thofe mighty men, 
and men of renown, as far exceeded the proportion, 
nature and ftrength of thofe giants remembred by 
Mofes of his own time, and after him their fuccef- 
lors, as the ordinary proportion of all men in ge¬ 
neral, foon after the flood and in times far off", ex¬ 
ceeded the bulks and bodies of men which are now 
born in the withered quarter and winter of the 
world: If therefore giants were common in the 
third and fourth age, much more in the firft flou- 
rifliing youth and newnels of the world. 

But the wickednefs (efpecially in cruelty and op- 
preflion) of thefe men was fuch, as God therefore 
by the flood gave end to all flefh, but to the juft 
Noah and his family. ° And God repented him that 
he had made man ; which St. Augufline thus expound- 
eth : P Neque enim ficut bominem, ita Deum fabli 
fui poenitet , cujus efi de omnibus omnino rebus tarn 
Jixa fententia, quam certa preefeientia. Sed ft non 
utatur feriptura talibus verbis, non fe quodammodo 
familiarius infenuabit omni generi hominum, quibus 
vult ejfe confultum: ut & perterreat fuperbientes, & 
excitet negligentes, 6? exerceat queerentes, if alat in - 
telligentes. God (faith he) doth not repent him of 
any thing which he hath done (as men ufe to do:) 
but if the feripture did not ufe thofe words, or the 
like, it fhoukl not (in a fort) infinuate it lelf famili¬ 
arly to all forts of men, for whom it would pro¬ 
vide : that it might terrify the proud, ftir up the 
negligent, exercife the fearchers of truth, and nou- 
rifli thofe that underfland. 


CHAP. VI. 

Of idolatrous corruptions, quickly riftng, and 
hardly at length •vanifl/ing in the world: 
and of the reliques of truth touching thefe 
ancient times , obfeurely appearing in fa¬ 
bles and old legends. 

S E C T. I. 

That in old corruptions we may find fome figns of more 
ancient truth. 

H ERE before we proceed any further, the 
occafion offereth it felf for us to confider, 
how the Greeks and other more ancient nati¬ 
ons, by fabulous inventions, and by breaking into 
parts the ftory of the creation, and by delivering ic 
over in a myftical fenfe, wrapping it up mixed with 


Gen. 14. 5. b Deut. 2. 20, si. 
1 Sam. 17. . *2Sam. 21. 
DeCiviate Dei, 1. 15 .C. ij 


No. IV. 


c Amos c. 1. d Bar. 26. « Deuf. 3. 11. f Nurab. 13.34. * Numb. 14. a. 

* 1 Chron. 20. 7. ijudg.14.6. m Judg. 14.19. ®Judgi6.3. ® Gen. 6. 6. 


Digitized by 


•thep 

(google 


N 







*The History of the World. Book I. 


other their own trumpery, have fought to obfeure 
the truth thereof ^ and have hoped, that after-ages, 
being thereby brought into many doubts, might 
receive thofe intermix’d difeourfes of God and na¬ 
ture for the inventions of poets and philofophers, 
and not as any thing borrowed or ftolen out of the 
books of God. But as a skilful and learned Cbymifi 
can as well by reparation of vifible elements draw 
helpful medicines out of poilon, as poifon of the 
molt healthful herbs and plants (all things having 
in themfelves both life and death) fo, contrary to 
the purpofes and hopes of the heathen, may thofe 
which feek after God and truth find out every where, 
and in all the ancient poets and philofophers, the 
ftory ol the firft age, with all the works and mar¬ 
vels thereof, amply and lively exprefs’d. 

Sect. II. 

That the corruptions themfelves -were very ancient: 
as in the family of Noah, and in the old Egyp¬ 
tians. 

B U T this detection and falling away from God, 
which was firft found in angels, and afterwards 
in men (the one having erred but once, the other 
ever) as concerning mankind it took fuch eflfett, that 
thereby (the liberal grace of God being withdrawn) 
all the poftcrity of our firft parents were afterwards 
born and bred in the world, fuffering a perpetual 
cclipfe of fpiritual light. Hence it was that it pro¬ 
duced plants of fuch imperfection and harmful qua¬ 
lity, as the waters of the general flood could not fo 
wafh out or depure, but that the fame defe&ion 
hath had continuance in the very generation and 
nature of mankind. Yea, even among the few fons 
of Noah there were found ftrong eftc&s of the for¬ 
mer poifon. For as the children of Sbem did inhe¬ 
rit the virtues of Seth, Enoch , and Noah , fo the 
fons of Cham did poflefs die vices of the fons of 
Cain, and of thofe wicked giants of the firft age. 
Whence the Chaldeans began foon after the flood to 
aferibe divine power and honour to the creature, 
which was only due to the Creator. Firft, they wor- 
Ihipped the fun, and then the fire. So the Egypt »- 
a ns and Phenicians did not only learn to leave the 
true God, but created twelve l'everal gods, and di¬ 
vine powers, whom they worfhipped ; and unto 
whom they built altars and temples. For Herodo¬ 
tus faith, 1 Duodccim Deorum nomina frimos Egyp- 
tios in uju habuijje, atque Gracos ab illis cepiffe mu - 
tuatos, eofque ptius aras, (ft imagines (ft templa Diis 
fibi erexijfe. The Egyptians (faith he) firft devifed 
the names of the twelve gods, which the Greeks re¬ 
ceived from them, who firft erefted unto themfelves 
altars, images, and temples for the gods. 

Sect. III. 

That in procefs of time tbefe leffer errors drew on 
greater : as appearcth in the grofs fupcrjlitions of 
the Egyptians. 

B U T as men once fallen away from undoubted 
truth, do then after wander for evermore in 
vices unknown, and daily travel towards their eter¬ 
nal perdition: fo did thefe grofs and blind idolaters 
every age after other defeend lower and lower, and 
/brink and Aide downwards from the knowledge of 
one true and very God j and did not thereby err 
in wor/hipping mortal men only, but they gave 
divine reverence, and had the fame refpetft to beafts, 
birds, fifties, fowls, winds, earth, water, air, fire, 
to the morning, to the evening, to die plants, trees 


and roots, to paftions and affedtions of die mind, 
to paleneis, licknd's, lorrows, yea to the moft un¬ 
worthy and baled of ail thele. Winch barbarous 
blafphemy Rbodius Anaxandrides derideth in this 
manner. 

h Bovcrn colts, ego Deis mallo lovem. 

Tu maximum anguillam Dcum putas : ego 
ObJoniorum credtdi fuavijjimum, 

Carnes fuillas tu caves, at gaudeo 
Hijs maxitne: canem colis, quern verbero 
Edcntcm ubi deprebendo forte obfoniunt. 

I facrifice to God the beef, which you adore: 

I broil the Egyptian eels, which you (as God) 
implore: 

You fear to eat theflefti offwine, I find itfweet. 
You worlhip dogs, to beat them I think meet, 
When they my llore devour. 

And in this manner Juvenal. 

e Porrum aut c<epe nefas violate aut frangere morfu: 
O fanPlas gentes, quibus hue nafeuntur in bortis 
Numina ! 

The Egyptians think it fin to root up, or to bite 
Their leeks or onions, which they ferve with 
holy rite: 

O happy nations, which of their own fow ing 
Have ltoreof gods in every garden growing. 

Sect. IV. 

That from the reliques of ancient records among the 
Egyptians and others, the firft idols and fables were 
invented: and that the firfi Jupiter was Cain, 
Vulcan, Tubalcain, (ftc. 

B U T in fo great a confufion of vanities, where 
among the headiens themfelves there is no a- 
greement or certainty, it were hard to find out from 
what example die beginnings of thefe inventions 
were borrowed, or after what ancient pattern they 
eredled their building, were it not certain, that die 
Egyptians had knowledge of the firft age, and of 
whatfoever was done therein * partly from fome in- 
feriptions upon ftone or metal remaining after the 
flood •, and partly from Mizraim die fon of Cham, 
who had learnt the fame of Cham , and Cham of his 
father Noah. For all that the Egyptians write of 
their ancient kings and date of times cannot be feign¬ 
ed. And tho’ other nations after them had by imi¬ 
tation their Jupiters alfo, their Saturns t Vulcans % 
and Mercuries , with the reft which 6 St Auguftine 
out of Narro j Euftbius out of many prophane hirto- 
ries •, Cicero , Diodorus Siculus , Anwbius , and ma¬ 
ny more have obferved, to wit, the Phenicians t 
Phrygians , Cretans , Greeks , and other nations \ yet 
was Cain the fon of Adam (as fome very learned 
men conceive) called and reputed for the firft and 
ancient Jupiter \ and Adam for the firft Saturn : 
for Jupiter was faid to have invented the founding 
of cities ^ and the firft city of the world was built by 
Cain , which he called Enoch , of whom were the 
Enochii before remembred. And fo much may be 
gathered out of Plato in Protagoras , which alfo Hi - 
ginus in his 275th chapter confirmeth. For befides 
that many cities were founded by divers men, Ta- 
men primam latififimam a pritno (ft antiquiffmo Jove 
aedificatam \ yet the firft and Urgeft was built by 
the firft and moft ancient Jupiter, leated in the eaft 
parts, or in India , according to that of Mofes : c And 
Cain dwelt towards the eaft fide of Eden, &c. where 
alfo the Enochii were found after the flood. And 


* Herod, in Euterpe. * Nat. Com. !. i. c. 7. * Sat. 15. 2.9. 

Evang. c. 7. & 1 . 2. c. 23. Cic. 1 . 3. do Nat. Deorum. Arnob. 4. cont 


* Aug 1 . 19 c. 22. Dc Civit. Dei. Eufcb. 1 . 1. Pr<q\ 
Gent. « Gen. 4. 16. 


Digitized by 


therefore 

Google 




Chap. VI. The History of the W o r l d. 5 1 


therefore was Jupiter by the Athenians called Poli- 
eus, a founder of cities, and Ilerceios, an inclof'cr 
or ftrengthner of cities; (lay *Pbornutus and Pau- 
fanias and diat to Jupiter ilerceios there were in ve¬ 
ry many places altars and temples erected. And 
that there were cities built before the flood, Plato 
alfo witnefieth, as may be gathered in this his af¬ 
firming, that foon after mankind began to increale, 
they built many cities; which as his meaning he de- 
livereth in plain terms, in his third book of laws : 
for he faith, that cities were built an exceeding fpace 
of time before the deftruCtion by the great flood. 

This Jupiter of the Etbnicks was then die fame 
Cam, the fon of Adam, who marrying his own Af¬ 
ter (as alfo Jupiter is faid to have done) inhabited 
the eaft, where Stepbanus d: urbibus placeth the city 
Henocbia. And btfides this city of Henoch, Philo 
Judaus conceiveth that Cain built fix others, as 
Match, Jared, Tehe, Jefca, Selct and Gebat: but 
where Philo had this I know not. Now as Cain 
was the firft Jupiter , and from whom alfo the Eth- 
nicks had the invention of facrificc: fo were b Ju¬ 
ba/, Tubal and Tubalcain (inventors of paftorage, 
finiths craft, and mufick) the fame, which were 
called by die ancient prophane writers c Mercurias, 
Vulcan and Apollo: and as there is a likelihood of 
name between Tubalcain and Vulcan ; fo doth Au- 
gufline expound the name of Noema or Naamab, 
the After of Tubalcain, to fignify Venuda, or beau¬ 
tiful, voluptas, or plea lure: as the wife of Vulcan 
is laid to be Venus, the lady of pleafure and beauty. 
And as Adam was the ancient and firft Saturn, Cain 
the eldeft Jupiter, Eva, Rhea, and Noema or Naa¬ 
mab the firft Venus: fo did the fable of the divi¬ 
ding of the world between the three brethren the 
Ions of Saturn arife, from the true ftory of the di¬ 
viding of the earth between die three brethren the 
fons of Noah: fo alfo was the fiflion of thofe gol¬ 
den apples kept by a dragon taken from the ferpent, 
which tempted Evah: fo was Paradife it felf tranf- 
ported out of Afia into Africa, and made die gar¬ 
den of the Hefperidcs: the prophecies, that Cbrtjl 
fhould break the ferpent’s head, and conquer the 
power of helJ, occafioned the fables of Hercules kil¬ 
ling the ferpent of Hefper ides, and defeending into 
hell, and captivating Cerberus', foout of the taking 
up of Enoch by God was borrowed the converfion 
of dieir Heroes (the inventors of religion and fuch 
arts as the life of man had profit by) into ftars and 
heavenly figns, and (withal) that leaving of the 
world,, and afeenfion of Aftrca-, of which Ovid. 

15 Ultima cockflurn terras Aftraa rcliquit. 

Aflrea- laft of heavenly wights the earth did' 
leave. 


gotten by the fons of good men upon the daughters 
of the wicked (whom Mofcs calleth mighty men, 
and men of renown) did they fteal thole wondrous 
great ads of their ancient kings, and powerful giants 
and again their war undertaken ag.unll the Gods, 
from the building of the tower of Babel by the giant 
Nimrod, as h St. Augnflint termeth him. Which war 
of their giants Cornelius Sevcrtis thus deftribeth: 

Tentavere ( nefas ) olim detrudere niundo 
Sydera, captivique Jovis transferre gigantes : 
lmperium , Ifl vdlo leges imponere coelo. 

The giants did advance their wicked hand 
Againft the ftars, to thruft them headling downj 
And robbing Jove of his impartial crown, 

On conquered heavens to lay their proud com¬ 
mand. 

Whereby was meant that Nimrod purpofed to 
raife the building of Babel to that height, as God 
neither by drawing waters from the deep, nor by 
any conjunction of the ftars, fhould bury them un¬ 
der the moifture of a fecond flood, but that by this 
building (if they had been herein victorious) they 
would have given the law to heaven it felf. Alfo 
the making of leagues, peace and covenants among 
heathen nations and kings, confirmed by facrifice, 
whereof Virgil both in the eighth and twelfth of his 
Aineids hath a touch, was as it feemeth borrowed 
from Mofes, Exod. 24. WI10, when he read the 

book of the covenant, fprinkled the people with 
blood. 

> We find alfo many remembrances of Seth, the 
paternal anceitor of Enoch and Noah: for Ame- 
nophis, the fame king of Egypt, which reigned at 
fuch time as Mofes carried thence the children of 
Ifrael (as of late fome learned men, miftaking his 
time, fuppofed) called his fon and fucceflor Set ho, 
of Seth, and of the fame Seth (as many men of 
good judgment have granced) were the princes of 
Thrace called Seuthes, whereof there were many ve¬ 
ry famous. k But herein was the memory of Seth 
nioft manifeftly preferved, that the Egyptians wor- 
fhipped Seth, as their molt ancient parent, and of 
the firft: tradition, in honour of whom they called 
a principal province Sethcitica. 1 We alfo find in 
Bitbynia the city of Setbia, and others of the fame 
name clfewhcre. And fore from the Egyptians did 
the Grecians borrow this kind of theology, tho’ 
they lcorned to acknowledge any antiquity prece¬ 
ding their own; and that they might not feem to 
learn elfewhere, they gave the fame names to their 
own idols which the Egyptians did to theirs. 

Sect. V. 


For altho’ thereby the c Etbnicks would under¬ 
stand juftice it fell to have failed, as it is a viitae 
abftract, and may be confidered without a perfon; 
yet as it is ufual among the ancient poets to delcribe 
virtues and vices by the perfons of men and wo¬ 
men, as defire by Cupid, valour by Mars, beauty 
or luft by Venus, fo do they alfo the perfons of men 
by like virtues and vices; and therefore by juftice 
and Aftrea, Enoch: the juftice and piety of Enoch 
being in the fame manner expreft, as that of Noah 
was by Mofes, for Noah was faid to be a juft 
man; > And Noah walked with God. And of E- 
nocb it is written, f that be walked with God, and 
be was no more feen: for God took him away. 

From this ftory alfo pf the firft age, and from 
that part where Mofes remembreth the giants be¬ 


0 / the three chief,'eft Jupiters'; and the firange ftory 
0 / the third . 

B UT of all thofe armies of Jupiters remembred 
by the ancients, Cicero maketh but three, be- 
caufe thofe were of mod fame: which other writers 
have alfo done, who fought out, and laboured in 
their originals. 

The firft was Jupiter , the fon of Aft her and Dies 
fo called, becaufe the one had reference to his celel- 
tial conditions (for Aitber is as much as Aiming or 
pure fire) the other difeovered his natural virtues, 
which days and times make more ported, and arc 
the witneftes of mens aft ions. 

The fecond was faid to be the fon of Coelum or 
heaven, for the fame former refped; and this Jupi¬ 
ter was an Arcadian, and king of Athens. 


• Phora. I. de natura Deorum. Paufan. 1 . 4, 5, & 10. in Protag. 

!• *• ,* Nat Com. 1 . z. c. 2. f (Jen. 7. * Gen. j. 22, 24. 

Plut. in iiid. 15>uabe, 1 . 17. 


b Gen. 4. 20, 21, 22. <■ J.att 1 . 4. c. 27. d Ov. Met 

b Lib. de Civitatc Dei. i Jofepn. 1 . 1. contra Appian. 


Digitized by 


Gooft 


52 ^The History of the World. Book I. 


The third, of whom all the Grecian fables were 
dcvifed, was of Crete (now Candie') the fon of Sa¬ 
turn and Ops. The name derived from the Latin is 
taken of Juvans Pater, from the Greek word Zeus, 
it fignifieth life, but fomcwhat (trained. Boccas in 
his genealogy of the Gods conceiveth, that his name 
was borrowed from Jupiter the planet •, but whe¬ 
ther that (tar had fucli a name, before the fame was 
given to men, I know not. Jupiter is hot and 
moift, temperate, modeft, honeft, adventurous, li¬ 
beral, merciful, loving, and faithful (that is) giving 
thefe inclinations. And therefore thole ancient kings 
beautified with thefe conditions, might be called 
there after Jupiter •, but howfoever diey were, or 
were not with thofe virtues enriched, yet, by imi¬ 
tation, all kings in the eldeft times afliimed thofe 
titles and furnames: great princes affc&ing as high 
titles of honour and reputation of die world (how¬ 
foever deferved) as the worthieft, tliat ever were, 
acquired by their well-defervings. Jovts omnes re- 
get vocarunt antique \ The ancients called all kings 
Jupiters, as Tzelzes in his varia hijloria confirmeth: 
lieges oiim Joves vocarunt omnes: In old time all 
nations called their kings Jupiters. But where this 
laft and mod remembred Jupiter was born it is un¬ 
certain. 4 Some there are that make him of Crete: 
others, that he was but lent thither by his mother 
Ops or Opts, to be foftered and hidden from the fu¬ 
ry of Titan his uncle: becaufe it was conditioned 
between Saturn and Tit an y that Saturn being a youn¬ 
ger brother, and reigning (for his own life) by Ti¬ 
tan' s permiffion, he fliould put to death all his male 
children, left the Titans might be interrupted by 
any of them in their fucccfiion •, which agreement 
becaufe Saturn performed in his firft born, it is 
feigned that Saturn devoured his own children. 
Hereof Lycophron , thus turned into Latin. 

Hand Jit pinguior y 

Crtulis fepuUbrum quod fit ipfe filiis. 

Saturn to be the fatter is not known. 

By being the grave and burial of his own. 

This compofition between Titan and Saturn } Si¬ 
bylla alfo witnefteth in thefe; 

Concept is verbis •, Titan jurare coegit 

Saturnum, de fe natum ne nutriat ullum t 

Quo pofjint regnare fenis pojl fata nepotes. 

Tilings thus agreed: Titan made Saturn fwear. 

No fon to nourifli \ which by reigning might 

U furp the right of Titan's lawful heir. 

But Opts, the mother of Jupiter, being delivered 
at once both of Jupiter and Juno , conveyed Jupiter 
(firft called LyJamas) into Crete, as (he did after¬ 
wards his two brothers, Neptune and Pluto : where 
he was brought up in Gnoffus , the chief city of that 
ifland, by b Cre/la the king, or by the Curetes , a 
people and nation thereof. 

Others challenge him to be of Thebes, and a The- 
lan: others call him an Arcadian: others make 
him of Mejfena . The like contention is found a- 
mong the Greeks touching his education and firft 
foftering. Some affirm, that he was fed by honey¬ 
bees : in recom pence whereof he changed their black 
coats and fkins into yellow, a reward well fitting 
fiich a God: others, that he was nourilhed by bears: 
others, by goats: and of all thefe the idle Greeks 
have many pretty tales. But in the end when Titan 
had knowledge, that Saturn had broken his faith, 
he let on him, and took him and his wife prifoners, 
whom Jupiter again refeued and delivered. 


But laftly, the father and the fon equally ambiti¬ 
ous, the one doubted the other. Saturn being the lefs 
powerful fled into Italy, and left his kingdoms in 
Greece to his fon. And altho’ this prince at the 
firft purchafed great honour, and for his many vir¬ 
tues the name of Jupiter was given him , yet, af¬ 
ter he was once fettled and became potent, he gave 
himfelf over wholly to palliardife and adultery, 
without all refpedt of honour, law, or religion. 
And it is reported by fuch, as do aferibe the acti¬ 
ons of many to one Jupiter, that not therewith fa- 
tisfied, he was afterwards known to offend in the 
fin of Sodom with Ganymedes and others ; and did 
not only begin with inccft, marrying his own fiftcr 
Juno, but he ravifhed, betrayed, dole away, and 
took by ftrong hand all the beautiful women born 
in his time, within the limits of his own kingdoms, 
or bordering them. Among whom thefe hereafter 
written were of greateft fame, Niobe, Laodemia and 
Alctnena the wife of Amphitryon, by whom he had 
Pelafgus, Sarpcdon, Argus and Hercules: by Tayge- 
te he had Taygctus, of whom the mountain Tayge- 
tus took name, with another fon called Saon, of 
whom Savona : by Antiope he had Amphion and 
Zetus : by Leda, Cajlor and Pollux , Helen and Cly- 
temncflra : by Danae Per feus: by Jordana Deuca¬ 
lion : by Charme (the daughter of Eubulus) Brito- 
martis: by Protcgenia he had Atblius the father of 
Endyn.ion j anti by lo (the daughter of Inacbus ) 
Epapbus, the founder of Memphis in Egypt: which 
Epapbus married Libya, of whom that country 
took name, for fo the Greeks afterwards called 
Africa. He raviffied ALgina, the daughter of 
ALfopus, and carried her into the ifland Oenopia 
or Oenotria, afterwards called ASgina, on whom 
he begat yEacus : by Torbebia he had ArcheJi- 
laus and Carbius : by Ora Colaxes : he had alfo 
Dardanus by Eleblra, who built Dardanium , af¬ 
terwards Ilium and Troy. He begat the brothers 
Talici, on Thalia, and on Garamantis Hiarhas. He 
had befides thefe (if they belie not their chief God) 
Phileus and Pilumnus, inventors of bakers craft, 
and I know not how many more •, but I know well 
that he could not be father to all thefe, who were 
born in ages fo far differing. And of thefe his fe- 
veral ravifhments, betrayings, dealing away of mens 
wives, daughters and fons, buying of virgins, and 
the like, came in all thofe ancient fables of his trans¬ 
formations into (howers of gold, eagles, bulls, birds, 
and beads, and of him, and by him (in effect) all 
that rabble of Grecian forgeries. And yet did not 
the Greeks and Romans fear to entitle this monfter, 
Optimus Maximus, tho’ Cicero in his fecond book de 
natura deorum affirms,that he deferv’d nothing lefs: 
And in his oration pro domo fua rcproacheth Clodius 
for his inceft, by the name of Jupiter. His burial 
was in Crete (faith Lucian) c Cretenfes non folum na¬ 
tum apud fe & fepultum Jovem tejlantur, fedetiam 
fe pule brum ejus ojlendunt. The Cretans or Candi- 
am do not only avow that Jupiter was born and 
buried among them, but they (hew his grave and 
fepulchre: which Epipbanius allb confirmeth, for 
in his time there remained the monuments of his 
tomb in the mountain Jafius. This Callimachus 
in his hymns alfo witnefleth, but as offended there¬ 
at, faith thus: 

The Cretans eveT liars were, they care not what they 
fay ; fliv’ft alway. 

For they a tomb have built for thee, O king, that 

d Diodorus Siculus tells by way of report from the 
Libyan fables, confirmed (as he faith) by fome Greek 
writers, that the original of thefe gods was from the 


» Nat. Ccm. 1 . t. c. 7. b Eufeb. in Temp. * Luc. in Sncrif. 


d Died. \ 2. c 5. 


Digitized by 


Googl 


weftern 

e 





Chap. VI. The History of the W o r l d. $3 


weftem parts of Africk. For there among the At¬ 
lanta* reigned one Uranus (which ftgnifieth heaven) 
called fo for his great skill in Afirology, and for his 
knowledge, and benefits to the people, honoured by 
them as a God after his death. He had by many 
wives, forty-five fons^ but by his principal wife 
Tit (a he had feventeen fons and two daughters, all 
which were called after their mother’s name Ti- 
tants. Of Titea likewife it is faid, that ihe for her 
goodnefs was canonized as a goddefs, being dead, 
and called the Earth , as her husband was ftiled Hea¬ 
ven. But of all the children of Titea, her daughter 
Bafilea (which name founding as queen in Englifb , 
fhe is by the Latin tranflator of Diodorus called Re¬ 
gina) excelling the reft as far in virtue as in years, 
was by general confent of her brethren, and of the 
people, appointed to rule as queen after her father’s 
death, being as yet a virgin. She took to husband 
her brother Hyperion , to whom (he bare a fon and 
a daughter, called Sun and Moon. The beauty and 
towardlinefs of thefe children moved her brethren 
to envy, and bred in them a fear of being excluded 
from the fucceflion: wherefore they took the boy 
and drowned him in the river Ertdanus, now cal¬ 
led Po. The lofs of this child caufed his filler to 
break her own neck-, and the lofs of both her chil¬ 
dren made the mother to play many mad pranks, 
dancing with cymbals, after a wild falhion, in fight 
of all the people, before whom (he is faid to have 
vanilhed away. Ere lhe died, her fon (as die fable 
hath it) fignified unto her in a dream, that he and 
his filler by the providence of God (hould become 
immortal, that alfo the Sun and Moon (hould be 
called by their names, and that their death lhould 
be revenged upon their murderers. According to 
which it is (aid, that the people did ib call thofe two 
planets, and withal held herfelf as a goddefs, and 
termed her the great mother, which name they had 
formerly given to her, for her motherly care in che- 
rilhing her brethren whilft they were young. Hy¬ 
perion and his race being extinguilhed, the other 
fons of Uranus divided the kingdom. Of thefe At¬ 
las and Saturn were chief. Atlas reigned over the 
countries lying about the mountains, which after¬ 
wards bare his name } a juft and wife prince, deep¬ 
ly (kilfiil in AJirology , and for invention of the 
fphere faid to have fupported heaven. He had ma¬ 
ny fons, but the principal of them, called Hefperus , 
being ofhis father’s qualities and (ludies, was laid to 
have been carried away by the wind, from the top 
of an high hill in the midft of his contemplations, 
and his name, in honour of him, impofed by the 
people upon the morning (lar. The feven daughters 
of Atlas were alfo faid to have been excellent ladies, 
who accompanying fuch as came to be deified, or 
regiftred among the worthies, brought forth children, 
anfwerable in quality to thofe that begat them. Of 
thefe it is held, that the feven (lars called Pleiades 
took name. Saturn the brother of Atlas reigned in 
Siiilia i part of Africk and Italy. Jupiter, another 
of the fons of Uranus , reigned in Crete , who had 
ten fons which he called Curetes \ he called that ifiand 
after his wife’s name Idea \ in which ifle he died, 
and was buried. But this Jupiter mud not have 
been that great one, but uncle to the great Jupiter , 
if thefe fables of the Libyans were true. Saturn (as 
thefe Libyans tell the tale) was a great tyrant, and 
fortified ftrong places, the better to keep his people 
w fubjedioa His filler Rhea was married to Ham- 
mon y who reigned in fome part of Africk. Ham- 
tnon loving others as well as his wife, or better, got 
a daughter, called Minerva , near to the river Tri¬ 
ton, who thereupon was called Tritonia. He alfo be- 
gat on Amaltbea a fon called Bacchus , whom he 
caufed. fecredy, for fear ofhis life, to be brought up 
No. 4. 


at Nyfa, an ifiand in the river Triton , under the tu¬ 
ition of his daughter Minerva, and certain nymphs. 
To Amaltbea he gave in reward a goodly country, 
that lay on the ftatoaft, bending in form of a horn, 
whence grew the tale of Amaltbea 's plentiful horn, 
famous among the poets. When Rhea heard this 
news, (lie fied from her husband to her brother 
Saturn, who not only entertained her as a filler, 
but took her to wife, and at her inftigation made war 
upon Hammond, vanquiftied him by the afiiftance 
of the Titans, and made him fly into Crete. The 
Curetes, Jupiter's children before-mentioned, held 
the ifiand at that time which was new named Crete 
by Hammon, after the name of Creta the king’s 
daughter, whom he took to wife, and had with 
her (women as may feem being very gracious in 
thofe times) the kingdom. Bacchus was grown a 
proper young man, had found out the making of 
wine, the art of planting trees, and many things 
elfe commodious for mankind, before the flight of 
his mother-in-law. Now therefore hearing report of 
all that happened, and that Saturn was coming a- 
gainfl him with the Titans ; he levied an army, to 
which the Amazons, living not far from Nyfa, added 
great forces, in love of Minerva who was entred 
into their profeflion. So Bacchus leading the men, 
and Minerva the women, they fot forward againft 
Saturn, met him, overthrew him, and taking ma¬ 
ny of the Titans prifbners, returned to Nyfa ; where 
pardoning the prifoners, that promifod to become 
his true followers, he prepared for a fecond expe¬ 
dition. In the fecond expedition he behaved him- 
felffowell, that he won the love of all the people 
by whom he pafied -, infomuch, that partly for good 
afle< 5 lion to him, partly in hatred of Saturn's rigo¬ 
rous government, he was greatly (lengthened, and 
the enemy as much enfeebled by daily revolts. 
Coming to the city of Ilammon, he won a battle of 
Saturn , before the very walls. After which Saturn 
with his wife Rhea fled by night, fetting the town 
on fire to defpite Bacchus. But they were caught 
in their flight, pardoned by Bacchus, and kindly 
entreated. Saturn had a young fon by Rhea, cal¬ 
led Jupiter. This child Bacchus took with him in 
a great expedition that he made into the eaft coun¬ 
tries -, and coming into Egypt, he left this Jupi¬ 
ter, being then a boy, governor of the country -, 
but appointed unto him as an overfoer, one Olym¬ 
pias, of whom Jupiter grew to be called Olympius. 
Whilft Zhtrr/wr travelled thro’ all nations, as far as 
into India , doing good in all places, and teaching 
many things profitable to the life of man -, the 
Titans had found out his father Hammond in Crete, 
and began to war upon him. But Bacchus return¬ 
ed out of India •, with whom Jupiter from Egypt, 
and his filler Minerva, together with die reft that 
afterwards were held as gods, joining all their forces, 
went into Crete, overthrew the Titans, chafed them, 
took, and flew them, and freed the world of them 
all. After all this, when Hammond and Bacchus 
were dead, they were dcify’d ; and the great Jupi¬ 
ter the fon of Saturn fucceeding them, reigned lord 
alone over all the world, having none of the Titans 
left alive, nor any other to dillurb him. Between 
this tale of the Libyan gods, and the Egyptian fa¬ 
bles of Oftris, there is a rude refembiance, that 
may caufe them both to be taken for die crooked 
images of fome one true hiftory. For the expedi¬ 
tions of Oftris, and of Bacchus the wars of die gi¬ 
ants in the one (lory, of die Titans in die other; 
the kingdom of Egypt given by Hercules Libycus to 
Ortis, by Bacchus to Jupiter, the rattles of Ifis, 
and the cymbals of Bafilea, with many petty cir- 
cumflances, nearly enough refemble each other, 
howfoever not alike fitted to the right per fons. San- 
O choniato 

Digitized by Google 


$4- *The History of the World, Book t 

choniato (as ‘■Euftbius cites him) would have all thefe genealogy he adds Elius or the Sun, as father ot 
to be Pbenicians, and is earned in faying, that it Uranus •, and among the children of Uranus , Jape¬ 
's* atrueftory, and no allegory. Yet he makes it tus, Batilus , and Dagon (whom Diodorus doth not 
feem the more allegorical, by giving to Uranus or mention by their names) giving withal to Uranus 
heaven for daughters. Fate and Beauty , and the the proper name of Terrenus or indigena , and of 
like, with addition of much fabulous matter, omitted Illus to Saturn , but omitting Jupiter of Crete. The 
by Diodorus , tho’ Diodorus have enough. To the pedigree of them is this. 



Sect. VI. 

Of Cham, and other wicked ones, whereof fome got , 
feme affefted the name of gods. 

O F Jupiter Belus, the Ion of Saturnus Babyloni- 
cus , otherwife Nimrod , it feemeth that Cicero 
had not heard (at leaft by that name) who was more 
ancient than any of the former three by him remem- 
bred : for long after thele times were the Greeks but 
falvages, if theyfeek no farther off for their gods. 

But the Egyptians , even after the flood, began 
(fomewhat before this Chaldean Jupiter) to intitle 
Cham , the parent of their own Mizraim , Jupiter 
Cbammon , or Hammon. For the etymology of this 
word [Hammon] which the Greeks deduce ab arenis, 
from the lands, is ridiculous (faith b Peucer) neither 
yet is his own much better, who brings it from 
/fammath , which fignifieth heat: becaule the laid 
temple of Jupiter Hammon was feated in Libya , 
where the air is exceeding hot and fcorching. And 
as for the antiquity of die latter Jupiter (among the 
Greeks and Romans the moll renowned) it is certain' 
that he was born not long before the war of Troy, 
as by many of his fons is made manifell •, namely. 


Cajlor, Pollux, Hercules, Sarpedon, and others, 
which lived in that age of Priamus , under whom, 
and with whom, Troy was dellroyed. 

Now feeing that mortal men, and the moll wick¬ 
ed, were elleemed immortal among the heathen; 
it was not to be wondred at, that Alexander Mace - 
don, Tiberius , Nero, Caligula, and others fought to 
be numbred among them, who were as deformed 
monllers as the rell: For by what realbn could the 
lame deity be denied unto Laurentia and Flora, 
which was given to Venus ? leeing they were as no¬ 
torious and famous harlots as Ihe was. 

Sect. VII. 

That the ivifer of the ancient heathen had far better 
opinions of God. 

B U T that ever Pythagoras , or Plato , or Orphe¬ 
us , with many other ancient and exccllendy 
learned, believed in any of thefe fooleries, it cannot 
be fufpedled, tho’ fome of them (over-bufily) have 
mixed their own inventions with the feriptures : for, 
in punilhment for their fidlions, did Pythagoras 
hang both IJomer and Hejiod in hell, where he 


« Eufeb. 1 . 2. c. 7. *• Peucer de Omcul. 


feigned 


Digitized by vjOOQie 
































Chap» VI. The HistorV 

feigned that they were perpetually flung and pinch¬ 
ed with ferpents. Yet it cannot be doubted, but 
that Homer had read over all the books of Mofes, as 
by places ftolen thence almoft word for word, 
may appear •, of which Juft in Martyr remembreth 
many in that treatife converted by Mirandula. As 
for Plato, tho’ he dilfemblcd in fome things, for 
fear of the inquifuion of the Areopagites, yet St. 
Auguftine hath already anfwered for nim (as before 
remembred) El min fee iis deleflatus ejl, qu£ de 
uno Deo tradita fwrant \ And he was greatly de¬ 
lighted in the ao&rine of one God, faith Juftin 
Martyr. Now however Laflantius pleafed to re- 
prehertd Plato , becaufe (faith he) Plato fought know¬ 
ledge from the Egyptians and die Chaldeans , neg¬ 
lecting the Jews and books of Mofes: a Eu- 
febius , Cyrillus , and Origen , find reafon to believe 
the contrary, thinking that from thence he took 
the grounds of all by him written of God, or fa¬ 
vouring of divinity: and the fame opinion had St. 
Ambrofe of Pythagoras. 

But whether it were out of the fame vanity, which 
poflefs’d all thofe learned philofophers and poets, 
that Plato alfo publifh’d (not under the right authors 
names) diofe things which he had read in the ferip- 
tures •, or fearing the feverity of the b Areopagitls , 
and the example of his matter Socrates , by them put 
to death by .poifon, I cannot judge. JuJIin Mar¬ 
tyr (as it feemeth) aferibeth it wholly to Plato's fear, 
whole words among many other of the fame effect, 
arc thefe, c Plato MoJts mentionem facete, ob id , quod 
unttm folumque Dctitn ducuerat, ftbi apud Atbcnien- 
fes tutum non putavit, verities Arcopagum ■, Plato 
tearing the Areopagitcs thought it not fate for him 
among the Athenians to make mention of Mofes, 
that he taught that there is but one God. But for 
that divinity which he hath written in Tim<eo \ Id 
ipfum de Deo dijfcruit qued fft Mofes \ He difeourfed 
and taught the fame of God (faith JuJIin Martyr ) 
which Mofes did. For where it pleafed God by 
his angel to anfwer Mofes, Ego fum exiftens (which 
is) * 1 am ; and exijlcns miftt me ad vos, I am hath 
fent me unto you herein did Plato (faith Juftine 
Martyr) no otherwife differ than that Mofes ufed 
the word [ qut ] and Plato the word \_quod:~\ Mofes 
enim qui exiftit ( inquit ,) Plato quod exiftit. For Mo¬ 
fes faith. He who is \ Plato , T'hat which is. Now 
of God’s incomprchcnfible nature, and of the dif¬ 
ficulty either to conceive, or exprefs the fame, he 
giveth this teflimony: e Genitorcm univerfitatis tarn 
difficile eft invenire, quam invent urn impoffbik digne 
profari \ It is as hard to find out the Creator of the 
univerfal, as it is impoffible, if he were found, to 
fpeak of him worthily. And what can be more 
agreeable to die majefty of God’s nature, than this 
property by Plato acknowledged ? 1 Deus bonus , (ft 
quidem, Deus caufa bonorum •, malorum autem om¬ 
nium non caufa ; God is abfolutely good, and lb 
(affuredly) the caufe of all that is good but of any 
thing that is evil he is no caufe at all: and again, 
Charitas Dei fuit caufa faflionis tnundi, iffi originis 
omnium rerum ; The love of God was the caufe of 
the world’s creating, and the original of all things. 
Apuleius the Platonift, Summus Deus infinitus eft, 
non folum loci exclufione, fed ctiam nature dignitate : 
& nihil eft Deo ftmilius & gratius, quam vir animo 
ferfetto bonus ; The moft high God is alfo an infi¬ 
nite God, not only by exdufion of place, but by 
the dignity of nature: neither is there any thing 
more like or more acceptable to God, dian a man 


of the World. 5$ 

of a perfedt heart; 6 Thales affirmed, that Gcsd com¬ 
prehended all things, and that God was of all things 
the moft ancient, quia nunquam effe coepit, becaufe 
he never had any beginning: Zeno, that God be¬ 
held even the thoughts of Men: Athenodorus, that 
therefore all men ought to be careful in the aCtions 
of their life, becaufe God was every where prefent, 
and beheld all done. But what can be more agree¬ 
able to Mofes' s ftory of the creation, than tjiis opi¬ 
nion and defeription of the world’s beginning in Eu¬ 
ripides, fcholar of Anaxagoras ? 

Caelum terraque unius forma fuit: 

Sed cum fuijfcnt abjunfla amplexu mutuo, 

Emerfit omnis inlucem res progenita, 

Arbures, aves, fer*, quafque affiert mare, 
Genufque mortalium. 

Heaven and earth one form did bear: 

But when disjoined once they were 

From mutual embraces; 

All things to light appeared then, 

Of trees, birds, beafts, fifties, and men 

The Hill remaining races. 

And as in Pythagoras, in Socrates, and in Plato: 
fo we find the fame excellent underftanding in Or¬ 
pheus, who every where exprefled the infinite and 
foie power of one God, tho’ he ufes the name of 
Jupiter, thereby to avoid the envy and danger of 
the time j but that he could attribute thofe things 
to the Tons of men and mortal creatures, which he 
doth to this Jupiter, there is no man who hath ever 
heard of God, that can imagine. 

Nomina Deorum (faith Mirandula) quos Orpheus 
canit y non decipientium damonum, a quibus malum 
& non bonum provenit $ fed naturalium virtutum di- 
vinarumque funt no min a \ The names of thofe gods 
whom Orpheus doth fing, are not of deceiving de¬ 
vils, from whom evil comes, and not goodnefs ; 
but they are the names of natural and divine vir¬ 
tues. Yea, that he yet reacheth higher, and fpeak- 
eth of God himfc-lf, this his inftruCtion to Mufeus, 
and the hymn following teach us. Refpiciens vero 
ad divinum hunc fermonem ei diligenter animum ad¬ 
vene, intendens cordis rationis capax conceptaculum : 
re flam autem afeende viam, & folum afpice mundi 
regem. Unus ejl ex fc genitus, ex eo omnia nata funt: 
ipfe vero in illis verfatur, nec quifquam eum intueri 
pot eft mortalium, fed ipfe mhilominus omnes intuetur. 

Then marking this my facred fpeech, but truly 
lend 

Thy heart, that’s reafon’s fphere, and the right 
way afeend. 

And fee the world’s foie king. Firft, he is fimply 
one 

Begotten of himfelf, from whom is born alone 
All elfe ; in which he’s ftill, nor could it ere befall 
A mortal eye to fee him once, yet he fees all. 

And again the fame author. 

Jupiter omnipotent, (ft primus, (ft ultimus idem} 
Jupiter eft caput (ft medium: Jovis omnia munus • 
Jupiter eft fundamen humi fffi ftellantis Olympi. 
Jupiter (ft mas eft, fffi foemina nefeia mortis. 
Spiritus eft cunflis, validi vis Jupiter ignis. 

Et pelagi radix, Sol, Luna eft Jupiter ipfe. 

Rex, (ft origo ftmul rerum eft, (ffi terminus idem. 
Nam prius occuluit, magno poft numint, facrum 
Cor referans bonus in dulcem dedit omnia lucem. 


* Eufcb. prxp. evang. 1 . 11. Cyril, cont. Julian. Origen. cont. Celfum. Aml'r. ad Iren. ep. 6. 1 . i. k Areogagus, or domus 
cu ttions Mart is, Mart’/ bill: a btufe •wherein capital matters •were tried: fo called at firft* becaufe Mars therein firft pleaded his 
r <»ujc for the murder of Hulirrothos. Paufan. in Attic. Nat. Com. 1 . z. c. 7. « Juft. Mar. adm. ad gent tbl. 8 14. ut Tup. 

Lxod. 3. 14. c lnTimcto. f De Legib. 1. 10. * Laertius. 


The 


Digitized by 


Googl< 







56 


r » 

*The History vf the World. Book I. 


lofophers, thou .canll not but find in them fome 
part of the veflcls of God, as in Plato , God the 
Creator of the world : in Zeno prince of the Stoicks, 
Hell and immortal fouls. And this is certain, that 
if we look into the wifdom of all ages, we lhall 
find, that there never was man of folid underftand- 
ing or excellent judgment •, never any man whofc 
mind the art of education hath not bended ; whole 
eyes a foolifh fuperflition hath not afterwards blind¬ 
ed ; whofe apprehenfions are fober, and by a pen- 
five infpedfion advis’d ; but that he hath found by 
an irrefiftible neceffity, one true God, and ever- 
lafting Being, all for ever caufing, and all for ever 


The firft of all is God, and the fame laft is he. 

God is the head and midft, yea from him all 
things be. 

God is the bafe of earth, and of the ftarred fky. 

He is the male and female too, fhall never die. 

The fpirit of all is God, the fun, and moon, and 
what is higher. 

The king, th’ original of all, of all the end. 

For clofe in holy breaft he all did comprehend. 

Whence all to blefied light, his wondrous power 
did fend. 

Now befides thefe former teftimonies, that all 
the learned men of ancient times were not fo ftupid fuftaining ; which no man among the heathen hath 
and ignorant, as the Egyptians, Grecians , and other with more reverence acknowledged, or more learn- 
nations by them infcdted were, I will only repeat edly exprefs’d, than that Egyptian Hermes , how- 
two or three other opinions, and leave the reader to foever it failed afterwards in his pofterity: all being 
thofe large and learned colle&ions of Juflin Martyr , at length by devilifh policy of the Egyptian priefts 
Clemens, LaRantius, Eufebius , Eugubinus, Peucer, purpofely obfeur’d ; who invented new Gods, and 
Pleffis, Dante us, and others. For Cleantbes the thole innumerable, beft forting (as the devil per- 
Stoick, being demanded of what nature God was, fuaded them) with vulgar capacities, and fitted to 
deferib’d him by thefe attributes and properties, keep in awe and order their common people. 
Bonus, jujlus, fanRus, feipfum poffidens, utilis, fpecio- 


futy optimus, feveruty liber , femper commoduSy tututy 
gloriofuSy char it as y &c. Good, juft, holy, poflef- 
fing himfelf, profitable, beautiful, beft, fevere, free, 
always doing good, fafe without fear, glorious, and 
felf-cnarity. Epicbarmus affirm’d, that God who 
beheld all things, and pierced every nature, was 
only and every where powerful: agreeing with De¬ 
mocritus. Rex omnium ip/e folus ; He is the only 
King of all kings j and with Pindar us the poet, 
Deus unuSy Pater , Creator fummuSy atque optimus 
Artifex, qui progreffus ftngulis diverJ'os fecundum me- 


Sect. VIII. 

That Heathenifm and Judaifmy after many wounds, 
were at length about the fame time under Julian 
miraculoufly confounded. 

B UT all thele are again vanifhed: for the in¬ 
ventions of mortal men are no lefs mortal than 
themfelves. The fire, which the Chaldeans wor- 
fhipped for a God, is crept into every man’s chim¬ 
ney, which the lack of fuel ftarveth, water quench- 
eth, and want of air fuffocateth : Jupiter is no 


rita prtebct'y One God, the Father, the moft high more vexed with jealoufies ; death hath per- 


Creator, and beft Artificer, who giveth to every 
thing divers proceedings according to their deferts. 
This God (faith Antifthenes) cannot be refembled 
to any thing, and therefore not elfewhere known ; 
Nifi in patria ilia perenniy cujus imaginem nullam 
babes , Save only in that everlafting country, whole 


fuaded him to chaftity, and her to patience; and 
that time which hath devoured it lelf, hath alfo 
eaten up both the bodies and images of him and his: 
yea, their ftately temples of ftonc and dureful 
marble. The houfes and fumptuous buildings e- 
reefted to Baal, can no where be found upon the 


image thou haft none at all. Hereof alfo Xenopha- earth ; nor any monument of that glorious temple 
net ColophoniuSy Units Deus inter Dcos & homines conlecrated to Diana. There 
maximuSy nec corpore, nec mente mortalibus ftmilts \ 

There is one God among Gods and men moft 
powerful, neither corporally, nor mentally like un¬ 
to mortals : and Xcnophon t Deus qui omnia quality 
omnia quiefeere facity magnus potenfque, quod om¬ 
nibus patet : qualis autem forma ftt y nemini patety 
nift ipfi foliy qui luce fua omnia perlujlrat God 


to Diana. 1 here are none now in 
Pheniciay that lament the death of Adonis ; nor 
any in Libya, Creta, Tbcffalia, or elfewhere, that 
can afk counfel or help from Jupiter. The 
great God Pan hath broken his pipes •, Apollo's 
priefts are become fpeechlefs ; and the trade of 
riddles in oracles, with the devil’s telling mens for¬ 
tunes therein, is taken up by counterfeit Egyptians, 
who fhaketh all things, and fetteth all diingat reft, and cozening aftrologers. 

is great and mighty, as is manifeft to all: but of But it was long ere the devil gave way to thefe 
what form he is, it is manifeft to none, fave only his overthrows and difhonours: for after the temple 
to himfelf, who illuminateth all things with his own of Apollo at Delphos (one of his chief manfions) 
light. Finally, Plato faith, Totius rerum nature was many times robbed, burnt, and deftroyed j 
Caufa, & Ratio, Origo Deus,fummus animiGeni- yet by his diligence the fame was often enrich’d, 
tor, aternus animantium Sofpitator, ajfiduus mundi repaired, and re-edified again, till by the hand of 
fin Opifexyfine propagation Genitor, neque loco neque God himfelf it received the laft and utter fubver- 
tempore ullo comprehenfus \ eoque paucis cogitabilis , ne- fion. For it was firft robbed of all the idols and 
mini effabilis ; God is the Caufe, Ground, and Ori- ornaments therein by the Eubean pirates; fecondly, 
ginal of the whole nature of dungs, the moft high By the Phlegians utterly lack’d: thirdly, By Pyr- 
Fatherof die foul, the eternal Preferver of living rhus the fon of Achilles ; fourthly, By the army 
creatures, the continual Framer of his world, a Be- of Xerxes : fifthly. By the captains of the Pho- 
getter without any propagation, comprehended nei- cenfes: Gxthly, By Nero, who carried thence five 
ther in any place, nor time •, therefore few can hundred brazen images: all which were new made, 
conceive him in thought, none can exprefs what he and therein again let up at the common charge, 
is. Therefore was it faid by St. Jerome , *Si enim But whatfoever was gathered between the time of 
cunRos philofophorum revolvas libroty neceffe ejl ut Nero and Conftantine , the Chriftian army made 
in eis reperias aliquam partem vaforum Dei , ut apud fpoil of, defacing as much as the time permitted 
Platonem , Fabricatorem mundi , Deum: apud Zeno- them ; notwithftanding all this it was again glori- 
nem Stoicorum principem, inferos & immortales ani- oufly rebuilt, and fo remain’d till fiich time as 
mas, &c. II* thou confider all the books of the phi- Julian the Apojiate lent thither to know the fuc- 


Digitized by 


GoogI 


cels 


e 


1 Hieron. in Com. in Dan. in princip. 





5 / 


Chap. VII. The History 

cefs of his Parthian entcrprife, at which time it 
was utterly burnt and conl'umed with fire from hea¬ 
ven ; and the image of Apollo hiinfdf, and all the 
reft of the idols therein molten down and loft in the 
earth. 

The like fuccefs had the Jem in the fame Ju¬ 
lian's time, when by his permiflion they aflembled 
ihemfelves to rebuild the temple of Jerufalem : for 
while they were bufied to lay the foundations, their 
buildings were overthrown by an earthquake, and 
many thoufands of the Jews were overwhelmed with 
the ruins, and others (lain, and fcattered by tem- 
peft and thunder: though * Am. Marcellinus re¬ 
ports it more favourably for thejewr, aferibingthis 
to the nature of that element. For, faith he, Al- 
Jypius and the ruler of the province of Judea, being 
by Julian bufied in the re-edifying of this temple, 
flaming balls of fire iflfuing near the foundation, and 
oft confuming the workmen, made the enterprize 
fruftrate. 

Sect. IX. 

Of the lajl refuges of the devil to maintain bis 
kingdom. 

N OW the devil, becaufe he cannot play upon 
the open ftage of this world (as in thole days) 
and being ftill as induftrious as ever, finds it more 
for his advantage to creep into the minds of men ; 
and inhabiting in the temples of their hearts, works 
them to a more effe&ual adoration of himfelf than 
ever. For whereas he firft taught diem to facrifice 
to monfters, to dead (tones cut into faces of beads, 
birds, and other mix’d natures ; he now fees be¬ 
fore them the high and (hining idol of glory, the 
all-commanding image of bright gold. He tells 
them that truth is the goddefs of dangers and op- 
preflions; that chaftity is the enemy of nature: 
and laftly, that as all virtue (in general) is without 
tafte: fo plcafure latisfieth and delighteth every 
(enfe: for true wifdom (faith he) is exerciled in no¬ 
thing elfe, than in the obtaining of power to op- 
preft, and of riches to maintain plentifully our 
worldly delights. And if this Arch-politician find 
in his pupils any remorfe, any feeling or fear of 
God’s future judgment, he perfuades them that God 
hath fo great need of mens fouls, that he will ac¬ 
cept them at any time, and upon any conditions: 
interrupting by his vigilant endeavours all offer of 
timeful return towards God, by laying thofe great 
blocks of rugged poverty, and defpifed contempt 
in the narrow paflage leading to his Divine Pre¬ 
fence. But as the mind of man hath two ports, die 
one always frequented by the entrance of manifold 
vanities the other defolate and overgrown with 
graft, by which enter our charitable dioughts and 
divine contemplations : fo hath that of death a 
double and twofold opening : worldly mifery puf¬ 
fing by the one, worldly profperity by the odier : 
at the entrance of the one we find our lufterings and 
patience to attend us: (all which have gone before 
us to prepare our joys) at the other our cruelties, 
covetoufnefs, licentioulnefs, injuftice, and oppref- 
fions (the harbingers of mod fearful and terrible 
forrow) (layingfor us. And as the devil, our moft 
induftrious enemy was ever moft diligent: fo he is 
now more laborious dun ever; the long day of 
mankind drawing fad towards an evening, and the 
world’s tragedy and time near at an end. 


! - * r 

of the World: 

chap. VII. 

Of NO AH’; flood. 

Sect. I. 

Of God's fore-warning and feme human tefthno- 
mes: and fane doubting touching the truth of 
Noah’r flood. 

O F this deftrudtion it pleafed God to give 
warning unto Noah : who (faith b Jofephus) 
fearing to perifli among the reft, Secedens 
cum fuis t in aliam regionem migravit ; He depart- 
with his children, and travelled into another regi¬ 
on. And of thefe giants, from whom Noah with¬ 
drew himfelf, Berofus writeth in this manner : That 
they exceeded in all forts of inhuman and unnatural 
-wickednefs, and that they were contemptores & re¬ 
ligions & Deorum Contemners of religion and of 
the Gods : among which mighty men (faith Bero¬ 
fus) Unus erat qui Deorum venerantior, ifl pruden- 
tior cun ft is, &c. buic nomen erat Noah-, There was 
one more wife and reverencing the Gods than the 
reft, whofe name was Noah ; who with his three 
fons Sem, Japhet and Cham, and with their wives, 
and the wife of Noah (namely Titea the great. Pan¬ 
dora, Noela, and Noegla) preferved themfelves in 
the aik. This ark God commanded Noah to pre¬ 
pare : c And God faid unto Noah, make thee an ark 
of pine-trees : thou /halt make cabins in the ark, and 
Jhalt pitch it within, and without, with pitch. For 
God made d Noah to know that an end of all 
flefh was at hand, and that the graves of the re¬ 
bellious and cruel generations were already falhion’d 
in the clouds, which foon after fhould fwallow up 
and cover all living creatures, which breathed in the 
air: Noah and his family excepted. 

But this univerfal grave of waters, and general 
deluge, hath not been received by all : for divine 
teftimonies do not perfuade all natural men to thofe 
things, to which their own reafon cannot reach : 
* Dum obvoluta in obfeuro veritas latet ; Whilft the 
trudi lieth wrapp’d up in obfeurity. Many there 
are who have difputed againll the univerfality of 
this overflowing, and have judged that this flood of 
Noah fell but in fome particular places and king¬ 
doms : moved fo to think, becaufe in elder ages 
there have been many other floods (as they fuppofe) 
of that nature. Hereof Nicolaus Damafcenus writ¬ 
eth in this manner, as his words are cited by Jo- 
fepbus, * Efl fuper Minyadam excelfus mons in Ar¬ 
menia, qui Baris appellatur, in quo multos confugientes 
fermo efl diluvii tempore liberatos, ifl quendam fimul 
in area deveftum in hujus verticeLeflffe, lignorumjue 
reliquias multo tempore confervatas, qui furtajfe is 
fuit, de quo etiam Mofes Judxorum legiflator fcribit: 
thus far this author. There is (laith he) above Mi- 
nyada (or the country of Minya) an exceeding high 
mountain in Armenia, called Baris j on which it is 
reported, that many having fled thither, were faved 
in the time of the deluge : and that one was carried 
in an ark, and refled upon the top of the mountain, 
whereon there remained a long time after certain 
pieces thereof and this might be the fame, of which 
Mofes the law-giver of the Jews maketh mention. 
And of this opinion were the Tbalmudifls (faith An- 
nius) dut many giants faved themfelves upon mount 
Sion. 

But Berofus (who after Mofes was one of the moft: 
ancient, howfoever he have been fince deformed 


* Am. Mar. I. 23. cap. 1. h Joliph. 1. 1. cap. 4. 
Jofeph. Ant. 1. 1. c. 4. Eufeb. de pnep. 1 . 9. c. 4. 

No. 


« Gen. 6. 14. d Gen. 6. 13. e Lad. in Pr*f. de falfa relig. 


Digitized by 


and 

Google 


4 - 


P 




58 *The HistoRY of the W o R L b. Book I. 


and corrupted) doth in the fubftance of all agree 
with Mofes as touching the general flood, taking 
from thence the beginning of his hiftory in thefe 
words: Ante aquarum c/adem famofam, qua uni- 
verfus periit orbis, ifle. Before that famous deftruc- 
tion of waters, by which the world univerfal pe- 
ri/hed : witnelfing withal, that Noah, with his wife 
Titea, and his three Tons, with their wives (in all 
eight perfons) were only faved. 

S E C T. II. 

Of the flood in the time of Ogyges : and that this 
was not Noah’s flood. 

B UT from the vanity of the Greeks, the corrup¬ 
ters of all truth (faith Lailantius') who with¬ 
out all ground of certainty vaunt their antiquity. 
Came the error firft of all : who therein flattering 
themfelves alfo, fought to perfuade the world, that 
there was no flood preceded the flood of Ogyges, 
king of the Thebans in Baeotia, or rather of At¬ 
tica •, and therefore faith Rhodoginus, 1 Ogygium id 
appellant poet* tanquam per vet us dixeris, ab Ogyge 
vetufliflimo \ The poets gave the name of Ogygia 
to things exceeding ancient, as of Ogyges tire moft 
ancient. 

But let Ogyges be as ancient as thole men can 
make him, yet it is manifeft, that he lived but in 
Jacob's time (tho’ b Eufebius makes him later, and 
in Mofes' s time) and was born 67 years after him. 

There is alfo an opinion, that Ogyges was Cad¬ 
mus (and then was he far later) as Rhodoginus in 
the ninth book of his antiquities remembreth : Sunt 
tamen qui in ALgypto regnajfe autument hunc\ unde 
fit Cadmus qui in Gneciam profeilus Thebas condi- 
dit, & bovt jugulato fie nuncupatas \ quoniam Sy- 
rorum lingua bos dicitur Thebe. There are ( faith 
he) who think that this Ogyges did reign in Egypt, 
whereby he fhould be Cadmus, who travelling in¬ 
to Greece built Thebes , fo named of a beef flain: 
bccaufe in the Syrian language a beefis called Thebe. 

But this flood of Ogyges fell in the year of the 
world 3440, according to Eufebius, who followed 
the account of the Septuagint : and the flood of 
Noah in the year 2242, after the fame account ; 
and lo there came 1200 years between thefe floods, 
wanting but two, though herein Eufebius was much 
millaken, and corrected this opinion in his Chro-, 
nology. Now although the very year and time of 
this overflowing in Achaia, or rather Attica, be not 
precifely fet down, but that there is a great diffe¬ 
rence among writers, yet whofoever makes it moll 
ancient, finds above 500 years difference between 
that and the general flood. 

For c Paulus Oroflus affirms, that this tempell 
fell upon the Athenians but 1040 years before Rome 
was built. Bucholzerus faith it was 1043 elder 
than Rome \ which was founded (according to the 
fame Bucholzerus) in the world’s year 3219 , tho’ 
after the account which I follow (and whereof I 
will give my reafons in the ftory of Abraham) it 
was built in the world’s year 3280. Now the ge¬ 
neral flood preceded the building of Rome (faith 
Bucholzerus) 1563 years: and the flood of Ogyges 
(as before) 1043. Hence it followeth by eafy cal¬ 
culation, that (if he place Ogyges in his true age) 
the difference between thefe two floods mull be 520 
years, to which we (allowing 60 more) find 580. 
And that this of Ogyges was not the fame of Noah 
(except we call Noah Ogyges prifeus, d as fome do) 
it appears by this, that the flood of Ogyges then 
king of Attica or Ogygia, did not extend it felf any 


farther than the banks of Archipelago, or AEgtan 
fea. For whereas e Mela, Pliny, and Solium wit- 
nefs, that the city of Joppe in Judoa was founded 
before the flood; and that ( notwithftanding the 
weight of waters) their remained on certain altars 
of ftone the title of the king, and of his brother 
Phineus, with many of the grounds of their reli¬ 
gion : lure, it is no where found among prophane 
hiilorians, nor in the feriptures, that ever the flood 
of Ogyges fpread it felf over any part of Syria, much 
lefs over all the earth. But that it drown’d . both 
the regions of Attica about Athens, and that of A- 
chaia in Peloponnefus, it is very probable. For ic 
feemeth that at that time it was, when Helicc and 
Bur a were fwallowed up (cities feated on the north 
part of Peloponnefus ) of which Ovid. 

( Si quteras Helicen, ifl Buran, Achaiclos urbes, 

Invenies fub aquis. 

Bura and Htlice on Achaian ground 

Are fought in vain, but under fea are found. 

Of this flood of Ogyges was invented the fable 
of & Apollo and Diana. For Latona, the daughter 
of Cceus, the fon of Titan, being beloved and for¬ 
ced by Jupiter, and by him gotten with child, 
Juno thereat enraged, permitted her (as they fay) 
no part of the earth to be delivered on •, and with¬ 
al caufed the monltrous ferpent Python to follow 
and affright her, wherefoever fhe travelled, till at 
length arriving at the ifle of Ortygia Ihe was there 
received : in which fhe was delivered, firft of Di¬ 
ana, and then of Apollo, being twins ; whereof 
Barlaam makes this expofition: That at fuch 
time as the deluge (which happened in Ogyges'% 
reign) ceafed, out of the abundant moifture of the 
earth (heat by putrefaction being thereto mix’d) 
there were exhaled fuch thick mills and fogs, that 
in Attica, and along the coafts of the Aegean fea, 
neither the beams of the fun by day, nor of 
the moon by night, could pierce the air, or be per¬ 
ceived by the inhabitants: fo as when at length (the 
earth being dried, and thefe vapours dilfipated) the 
air began to be clear, the people of h Ortygia 
efpied the light of the moon fomewhat before day, 
and in the ft me morning the fun alfo appeared : 
fabuloufly (becaufe Diana reprefented the moon, 
and Apollo the fun) they were reported to be born 
in the ifle of Ortygia thereof afterwards called De¬ 
los, which fignifieth manifeftation. 

And furely it is not improbable, that the flood 
of Ogyges, being fo great as hiftories have reported 
it, was accompanied with much alteration of the 
air fenfibly difeerned in thofe parts, and fome un- 
ufual face of the Ikies. Narro in his books Degente 
populi Romani (as he is cited by ' St. Augufline) re- 
porteth out of Caflor, that fo great a miracle hap¬ 
pened in the liar of Penus, as never was feen before, 
nor in after-times: for the colour, the greatnefs, the 
figure, and the courfe of it, were changed. This 
fell out as Adraflus Cyzicenus, and Dion Neapolites, 
famous Mathematicians, affirmed, in the time ot 
Ogyges. 

Now concerning the courfe of that or any pla¬ 
net, I do not remember, that I have any where 
read of fo good aflrologers flourilhing among the 
Greeks, or elfewhere, in thofe days, as were likely 
to make any calculation of the revolutions of the 
planets fo exaCl, that it fhould need no reformation. 
Of the colour and magnitude. 1 fee no reafon why 
the difference found in the liar of Vtnus fhould be 
held miraculous •, confidcring that lefler mills and 


» Rhod. 1 . 15. c 33. b F.ufcb. dc pm:p. F.vang. 1 . to. C. 3. Ca. 
•? Plin. I. 3. So!, c. 47. Joj'pe oppidum antiquiliimum orbe toto, 
f GviJ. Mcum. 1 . 1 j. 303. * Nat. Com. J. 1. c. 6. h Plin. 1 . 


t. « I.ib. 1. c. 7. d Xenophon, Annianus * Mela, 1 . 
utpote ante iuundaticr.cm terrarum conditum. Soiin. ibid. 
,. c. 11. 1 Aug. de Civit. Dei, 1 . 21. c. b. 

fogs, 


Digitized by 


Googl 


e 




Chap. Vit. The History of the World. 59 


fogs, than thofe which covered Greece with fo long 
darknefs, do familiarly prefent our fenfes with as 
great alterations in the fun and moon . That the 
dgure (hould vary, qucftionlcfs it was very (fringe : 
yet I cannot hold it any prodigy i for it (lands well 
with good reafon, that the fide ot Venue which the 
fun beholds, being enlightened by him, the oppo- 
(ite half (hould remain (hadowed ; whereby that 
planet would, unto our eyes, deferying only that 
part whereon the light falleth, appear to be horn¬ 
ed, as the moon doth feem i if diuance (as in other 
things) did not hinder the apprehenfion of our fen¬ 
fes. 

GaltUus, a worthy Aflrologer now living, who by 
the help of perfpe&iveglafies hath found in theflars 
many tilings unknown to the ancients, affirmeth fo 
much to have been dilcovered in Venus by his late 
obfervations. Whether fome watery difpofition of 
the air might prefent as much to them that lived 
with Ogyges, as Galiheus hath feen thro’ his inllru- 
ment •, I cannot tell; fure I am, that the difeovery 
of a truth formerly unknown, doth rather convince 
man of ignorance, than nature of error. One thing 
herein is worthy to be noted, that this great, but 
particular flood of Ogyges, was (as appeareth by 
this of Sr. Auguftine) accompanied with fuch unulu- 
al (and therefore the more dreadful, tho* natural) 
figns teftifying the concurrence of caufes with eftefts 
in that inundation •, whereas the flood of Noah, 
which was general and altogether miraculous, may 
feem to have had no other token, or forefhewing, 
than the Jong preaching of Noab himfelf, which 
was not regarded : * for they were eating and drink¬ 
ing, when the flood came fuddenly, and took 
them all away. 

Sect. III. 

Of Deucalion’/ flood : and that this was not Noah’/ 

flood: nor the Umbri in Italy a remnant of any 

univerfal flood. 

A Second flood of great fame, and of which the 
f \ time is more certain, was that of Deucalion in 
Tbeflalia, of which St. Auguf ine out of Vdrro. His 
temporibus (ut Varro feribit) regnante Atbenienfibus 
Cranao , fuccejfore Cecropis (ut autem noflriy Eufebi- 
us (s' Hieronymus) adbuc eodem Cecrope permanante. 
Diluvium fuit, quod appellatum efl Deucalionis i 
(that is) In thefe times (as Varro reporteth) Crauaus 
the fucceflor of Cecrops governing the Athenians , or 
(as our Eufebius and Jerome fay) Cecrops yet living, 
that flood (called Deucalion's) happened. 

And in the beginning of the i ith chapter ol the 
fame t8th book, he uieth thefe words. Eduxit ergo 
Mofes ex /Egypto populum Dei mviflimo tempore 
Cecropis Atbenicnflum regis, cum apud AJfyrios regna¬ 
nt Afcatadety apud Sicyonios AJaratbus y apud Argi- 
vos tnopas. Mofes led the people of God out of 
Egypt about the latter times of Cecrops king of the 
Athenians , A/catades reigning over the Ajfyrians, 
over the Sicyonians Marat bus, and over the Atgives 
Triopas: foas leaving die curiofity of a few years, 
Wore or lels, it appeareth, that this flood of Deu¬ 
calion was either at the egreflion of the children of 
Ifrael out of Egypt, or near it: and dien after Noah 
753 years, according to FuncliuSy who makes Ce¬ 
crops to live in the year of the world 2409, or if we 
follow Mercatory then 739 years after Noahy and 
in die year of the world 2395. But if Deucalion 
were born in the age of the world 2356, according 
to Codoman ; then giving unto Deucalion 40 years 
of age when this flood happen’d, it falleth within 
one year of Mercator’s account. But Deucalion by 

a Luke 17. 27. k Cedi. 1 . 1. f. 34. « Clem. A!cx. 


ali approved hiftorians is faid to have been 82 years 
old at that time. Now Clemens Alexandrinus dates 
the time of this flood of Deucalion , and the con¬ 
flagration and burning in Phaeton's time, by the 
reign of Crotopus king of the Argives , but Crotopus 
lived king of the Argives 6 years after Ifrael depart¬ 
ed Egypt , which makes 20 years difference accord¬ 
ing to FunRius , who will have this flood and burning 
to have fallen 14 years before Mofes left Egypt: for 
he gave of the world’s years to the flood and burn¬ 
ing the year 2440, and to Mofes's egreflion the year 
2454. And yet b Cedrenus thinks that Mofes was 
more ancient, and lived with Inachus v but that can¬ 
not be true: for then had the flood of Deucalion , 
and the burning of Phaeton, preceded the flood of 
Ogygesy which is deny’d by all: for that of Thefld- 
ly (called Deucalion's) follow’d that of Attica (called 
Ogygia) at lcaft 250 years, or thereabouts. Eufe- 
biuty in his Chronology , makes it 230 years, and fo 
doth P. Orofeus: Eufebius about the 50th year of 
Alofes's life, and Cyrillus about the 67th, and both 
after Noah's flood 770 years: for thele be Clemens 
Alexandrinns's words: c Fuit autem in Gracia tem¬ 
pore quidem Phoronei, qui fuit pofl Inacbum, inunda- 
tio quae fuit tempore Ogygis i There happened in 
Greece in the time of PhoroneuSy who lived after Ina¬ 
chus the flood of Ogyges. Now if the flood of Ogyges 
in Attica were 1020 or 1016 years before the firft 
Olympiady according to F.ufebius and Oroflus (as 
before) then is it manifeft, that taking 763 out of 
this number of 1020, it falls out that Oyge/’s flood 
happened before the Hebrews left Egypt 2 50 years, 
or 260 years, according to the difference between 
the opinions of d Eufebius and Orofus . And for 
my felf(who rather follow thofe Chronologers, which 
give 60 years more to Abraham after the flood, than 
the reft) I reckon the times which come between 
thefe floods in this fort. The general flood was in 
the year of the world 1656. Jacob was born in the 
year of the world 2169, fo as from the beginning 
of the flood to Jacob's birth, there were confum’d 
513 years. Ogyges’s flood happened too years after 
Jacob was born ; and therefore after the general 
flood 613 years. Now Deucalion was born in the 
year of the world 2356, and had lived 82 years, 
when his kingdom of Theffaly was overwhelmed 
(which added to 2356, make 2438) his flood was 
after Noah's flood ended 782 years. And hereto 
Annius's Xenophon agreeth, who makes 700 years 
between the general flood and Deucalion's birth ; to 
which add 8 2 years of his age (as before) and then the 
flood of Theffaly followed the general 782 years. 
The words of that Xenophon are thefe: Ab inunda- 
tione terrarum ad ortum Deucalionis , fecundo anno 
Spheeriy feptingenti fupputantur a uni, quinut us annos 
duos ffl octogmta 'Tbeflaliam vidit inundatam : From 
the drowning of the world to the birth of Deucalion y 
in the fccond year of Spbjerus are numbred 700 
years, and when Deucalton was 82 years old, he 
law Tbeflalia drowned. This flood happened in the 
winter time about Parnaffus : witneis c Ariflotle in 
the firft of his Meteors. And Varro (whom St. Au- 
gufline fo often citeth for his excellent learning, cfpe- 
cially in antiquities) findeth this flood of Deucalion 
to have happened in the time of Cranaus , who l'uc- 
ceeded Cecrops: Oroflus thinks it fomewhat later, 
Amphitryon reigning in Athens , the third from Ce¬ 
crops. Only this ot Deucalion was very great, and 
reached not only over Theffaly it felf, and the regi¬ 
ons adjoining weftward ; but it covered the greatdl 
part of Italy : and cither the fame, or fome other 
particular flood then happening opprefs’d Egypt, 
faith Eufebius. And therefore did the Greeks either 

. 1(10. ex Ctef. * Eufeb. in Chron. « Arid. c. 14. 

Digitized by Goo^tb 


6 o The History 

think it, or feign it to be univerfal; and Deucalion , 
then king, faving himfelf and fome others on the 
mountain of Theffaly (of all other the higheft, faith 
* Solinus) was by reafon thereof (as * Strabo wit- 
nefleth) laid to be the preferver of mankind. That 
this flood covered a great part of Italy, 2 Pliny and 
Solinus make it probable: who affirm that the peo¬ 
ple then inhabiting Italy were therefore called *o/a- 
6g/oi, quia ab imbribus diluvii fuperfuiffent j and 
therefore alfo were they efteemed the mod ancient 
nation, as Strabo confirmeth in his firft book, and 
Trezenius in his fecond : which Umbri thefe authors 
make the parents of the Sabines , and the Sabines to 
be the parents of the Samnites , Piceni, Lucani, Bru- 
tii, and all others inhabiting anciently the banks of 
the Mediterranean fea. But that thefe Umbri were 
not the inhabitants of Italy before the flood of Noah , 
and fo took name by faving themfelves upon the 
Apennine mountains, the fcriptures teach us: (hew¬ 
ing who, and who only, then were preferved, which 
is fufficient. b Report hath adventured further, tel¬ 
ling us that the firft people, which after the general 
flood inhabited Italy, were the Camefenes (fo named 
from Camefe , whom Cato in originibus , another of 
Annius’s authors, names for a confort of Janus) 
which people lived altogether a favage life v till fuch 
time as Saturn arriving on thofe coafts, devifed 
Jaws to govern them by ; the memory of whole 
aeffs in that region Diodore and Thallus among the 
Greeks , Nepos, Cajfius and Varro among die Latins 
have preferved ■, and of whom Virgil ■, 

c Primus ab atbereo venit Saturnus Olympo , 
Arma Jovis fugiens , & regnis exul ademptis. 

Is genus indocile , ac difperfum montibus alt is 
Compofuit, legcfque dedit , Latiumque xocari 
Maluit. 

Saturn defeended from the heavens high. 
Fearing the arms of Jupiter his fon. 

His kingdom loft, and banifh’d thence doth fly. 
Rude people on the mountain tops he won 
To live together, and by laws : which done, 

He chofe to call it Latium. 

And afterwards in the verfes following he fpeak- 
eth of the Attfones , and after them of the Sicani: 
nations, which again fought to difplant the ancient 
inhabiters: 

d Turn mantis Aufonia , & gentes venere Sicani. 

Then came th ’ Aufonian bands, and the Sicanian 
tribes. 

Of thefe Sicani (which left Spain and fat down in 
Italy ) e Thucydides and Pliny give teftimony : who 
were again expelled by the Ligir , faith Thucydides. 
After all diefe plantations and replantations came 
the Umbri , defeended of the Gauls (faith l Annius) 
not of thofe Gauls oi France , but of diofe of Scythia, 
who commanded a great part of Italy, even all He- 
truria and Campania , as * Herodotus, Pliny , and 
Dionyfius , have allured us •, and therefore this flood 
of Deucalion was long after that of Noah. For all 
thofe nations were planted in Italy, and difpoflefs’d 
of Italy again, before the Umbri were ever heard 
of, or had being. So that kingdom was firft called 
Camafcne, then Latium or Saturnia , then Aufonia, 
then Sicania , before the Umbri (in whofe time Deu¬ 
calion's flood happened) poflefs’d the fame, about 
306 years before the war of Troy: Lycaon then go¬ 
verning Arcadia ; who being the father of twenty- 


bf the World. Book I, 

two fons, the youngeft, called h Oenotrius , invaded 
Italy, who gave it the name of Oenotrta. This 
name it held until Italus of the fame nation chang’d 
it into Italy, after his own name, about * 250 years 
before the fall of Troy. After thefe came the Pe- 
lafgi, of whom Pliny in his 3d book and 5th chap¬ 
ter i and Strabo in his 5th i Thucydides in his 6th 
fpeaks at large: and after them the Lydi under Tyr- 
rbenus their captain, that gave name to the Tyrrhe- 
ni •, who cafting thence the Umbri, took from them 
three hundred caftles, and built therein twelve ci¬ 
ties ; to which (after they had poffefs’d and pafs’d 
over the Apennine mountains) they added divers 
others, whereof Tclfna (afterward Bononta) was one. 

Now that there was not anciently fuch a nation, 
as thefe Umbri, in thofe parts, I do not affirm : ha¬ 
ving refpett to the teftimonies before repeated. And 
Stephanas thinks, that the name was derived from 
the Greek word Ombros \ but that thefe Umbri of 
Italy were defeended of the nation of Scythians (cal¬ 
led Galli) it fhall be fhewed hereafter. 

Sect. IV. 

Of fome other records tefifying the univerfal flood: 
and of two ancient deluges in Egypt: and of fome 
elfewbere. 

S T. Augufine out of Varro affirmeth, that the 
Greeks and Latins made not any mention of the 
univerfal flood, becaufe they had nothing of anti¬ 
quity foregoing that of Ogygcs ; and therefore (ac¬ 
cording to Rbodoginus before remembred) were all 
things among the Greeks (which antiquity had worn 
out of knowledge) called Ogygia, which we in Eng- 
lifi commonly call worm-eaten, or of defaced date. 
But as all the parts of the earth were fucceffively 
planted and peopled ; and as all nations had their 
proper times, and not their beginning at once and 
at die inftant: fo did every family which afterward 
became a great people, with whom the knowledge 
of divine letters was not received, find no parent of 
more antiquity, than fuch as they had themfelves, 
nor allow of any before their own •, and as the Gre¬ 
cians, fo did others vaunt themfelves to be Indigence, 
and growing out of the earth, or invent fome other 
prophane or ridiculous beginning. But the Chalde¬ 
ans had certain knowledge of Noah’s flood, as Re- 
rofus witnefleth ; and Nicolaus Damafcenus maketh 
particular mention thereof (as is aforefaid) tho’ he 
alfo affirm by hearfay, that fome giants laved them- 
felves upon the mountains Baris in Armenia , but 
fpeaketh not thereof as from any authority approv¬ 
ed : ufing the word fermo ef , that fuch a fpeech 
there was. And k Eufebius remembreth a place out 
of the ancient hiftorian Abydenus : who writeth that 
Siffitbrus, to preferve himfelf from a flood foretold 
him by Saturnus, fled to the hills of Armenia by 
fhip, ad Armeniam navigio confugiebat: who the 
third day (after the waters were fallen) fent forth 
birds, that finding no land to reft on, returned again j 
which he alfo did a fecond time, but at the third re¬ 
turn the birds feet were covered with mud and flime. 
To this effeeft are Eufebius ’s words out of Abydenus, 
which may feem a true defeription (tho* in other 
terms) of Noah’s flood. 

Cyrillus alfo affirmeth, that Alex. Polyhifor ma¬ 
keth mention of this general flood. And Plato in 
Timceo produceth an Egyptian prieft, who recounted 
to Solon out of the holy books of Egypt, the ftory 
of the flood univerfal, which (faith he) happened 
long before the Grecian inundations. Frier Annins ’s 


» Solin. 1 . 14. Strabo, 1 . 9. Plin.l. 3. c. 14. Sol. c. 7. Plin. ibid. b Atlienatus Dipnofoph 1 . 15. out of Draco Corcyr.vus 
that Cainete txas tbe nvift and fiftr of Janus. Lad. I. 1. C. 13. c yEn. 1 . 8. 319. <* Virg. 1 . 8. ALn. ’ * Thucyd-i. 6 Pan. 1 . 

3. c. 5. 1 Annius ex SamueleThalmuJilta. * Herod. 1 . t. Plin. 1 .3.c. 5. Dion, 1 . 1. & z. b Pauiliu. .-Vicad. 1 . 8. ’Anil, 

uol. 7.C. 10. b Euftb.de prap. Evang. 1 .9. c. 4. 

Xenophon 

Digitized by VjOOQlC 










Chap. VII. The History 

Xenophon remembreth a flood, which alfo ’•Diodo¬ 
rus Siculus confirmeth, fomewhat more ancient than 
that of Ogyges in Attica. For he named the gene¬ 
ral flood for the firft, which happened (faith he) 
under the old Ogyges , fub prifeo Ogyge, which was 
Noah •, he calleth the fecond Niliaca : Hercules and 
Prometheus then living 44 years before that of At¬ 
tica, in the 34th year of Belocbus king of the A Sy¬ 
rians, tho’ I do not believe him as touching the 
time. But this flood covered a great part of the 
nether Egypt, efpecially all that region fubject to 
Prometheus ; and hereof came the fable of the Vul¬ 
ture on Prometheus's liver, afterward flain by Her¬ 
cules of Egypt: which fiction Diod. Siculus deliver- 
eth in there words: b Eluvium propter curfus velocita- 
tatem profunditatemque aquarum Aquilam tunc ap- 
pellatum, Herculem cum confilii magnitudine , turn 
virtute, volunt e vejligio comprefjiffe , 6? aquarum 
impetum ad priorem curfum convertiffe : unde & Gr<e- 
a quidam poetet rem geftam in fabulam vertentes, 
Herculem tradunt aquilam Promethei jecur depafeen- 
tern occidife. This flood (meaning of Nilus) for the 
fwiftnels of his courfe, as alfo for the depth, was in 
thofe days called the Eagle: but Hercules by his 
great judgment and virtue did again comprefs and 
ftrengthen this river, fo tar extended and overfpread, 
turning it into the old channels: whence certain 
Greek poets (converting this labour and work of 
Hercules into a table) devifed that Hercules flew the 
eagle, which fed on Prometheus's liver meaning, 
that he delivered Prometheus of that forrow and tor¬ 
ment, which for the lofs of his people and coun¬ 
try (by the waters deftroy’d and cover’d over) he 
fuffered. 

A fourth flood chanced about Pharus in Egypt , 
where Alexander Macedon built Alexandria , as An- 
nius conceiveth out of his Xenophon , who in this 
brief fort writeth of all thefe inundations ■, c Inundati¬ 
ons plures fuere: primes novimejlris inundatio terra- 
rum fub prtfco Ogyge : fecunda Niliaca, &c. There 
were many inundations (faith the fame Xenophon) 
the firft which was univerfal of nine months, and 
this happened under the firft Ogyges : the fecond was 
Niliaca , and of one month’s continuance in the time 
of Hercules and Prometheus , Egyptians: a third of 
two months under Ogyges Atticus: the fourth of 
three months in Thefjalia under Deucalion ; and a. 
fifth of the like continuance (called Pharonica ) un¬ 
der Proteus of Egypt , about the time of Helen's rape. 
Diodorus in his 5th book and 1 tth chapter, taking 
the Samothraces for his authors, remembreth a flood 
in Afia the lefs, and elfewhere, of no Jefs deftructi- 
on than any of the other particular inundations, fay¬ 
ing, that the fame happened before that of Deucar 
lion: the fea of Pont us and Hellefpont breaking in 
over the land. 

But there have been many floods in divers times 
and ages, not inferiour to any of thefe two laft re-, 
membred, Niliaca and Pharonica in Egypt: as in 
the year of our redemption 590, when, in Oftober 
of the fame year, Gregory then being bifhop of 
Rome, there happened a marvellous overflowing in 
Italy, and efpecially in. the Venetian territory, and 
in Liguria , accompanied with a moft fearful ftorm 
of thunder and lightning: after which followed the 
great plague at Rome , by reafonof the many dead 
krpents caft up and left upon the land, after the 
waters decreafed and returned. And in die year 
1 +46* there perifhed 10000 people by the break- 
mgin of the fea at A Dordrocb in Holland: of which 


rf the W o R l b. 61 

kind I take that flood to be of Ackaia or Attica. 
Before that, and the year 1283, e Tritbemius fpeak- 
eth of an earthquake which fwallowed many thou- 
fands: and after that of a flood in Eriejland , in which 
there perifhed 100000 perlons. Strozius Sigog. in 
his Mayya omnif aria, telleth of an inundation in Ita¬ 
ly, in the time of pope Dama/us , in which alfo ma¬ 
ny cities of Sicily were fwallowed: another in the 
papacy of Alexander the fixth: alfo in the year 1515, 
Maximilian being emperor. He alfo remembreth. 
a perilous overflowing in Polonia , about Ctacovia, 
by which many people perifhed. Likewife Viginier , 
a French hiflorian fpeaketh of a great flood in the 
fouth part of Languedoc, which fell in the year of 
our Lord 1557, with fo dreadful a tempeft, as all 
the people attended ihercin the very end of the 
world and judgment day ; faying, that by the vio¬ 
lent defeentofthe waters from the mountains, about 
Nifmes , there were removed divers old heaps and 
mountures of ground, and many other places torn 
up and rent: by which accident there was found 
both coin of filver and gold, divers pieces of plate, 
and vefiels of other metal, fuppofed to be hidden 
at fuch time as the Goths invaded that province, in 
die year 1156. 

Sect. V. 

That the flood of Noah was fuptrnatural, tho' font 
fay it might have been fortfeen by the jlars. 

N OW howfoever all thefe floods and many other, 
which have covered at feveral times feveral 
regions, not only in thefe parts of the world, but in 
America alfo (as I have learned of fome ancient 
foothfayers among them) may be aferibed to natu¬ 
ral caufes and accidents; yet that univerfal flood (in 
the time of Noah) was poured over the whole face 
of the earth by a power above nature, and by the 
fpecial commandment of God himfelf, who at that 
time gave ftrength of influence to the ftars, and 
abundance to the fountains of;the deep: whereby 
the irruption of waters was made more forcible, than 
any ability of nature could effect, or any fecond 
caufes by whatlbever union could perform, without 
receiving from the fountain of all power, ftrength, 
and faculties fupernatural. Henricus Meclinienjis , a 
fcholar of Albertut Magnus, in his commentaries 
upon the great conjunctions of Albu Mafar , obfer- 
veth, that before the flood of Noah, the like con¬ 
junction of 'Jupiter and Saturn happened in the laft: 
degree of Cancer , againft that conftellation fince 
called tiie Ship of Argos \ by which the flood of 
Noah might be foretold, becaufe Cancer is both a 
watery fign, and the houfe of the moon, which is 
the lady of the fea, and of moifture, according to the 
rules ot a/h onomy, and common experience. And 
this opinion 1 Petrus de Aliaco upon Genefis con¬ 
firmeth, affirming, that altho’ Noah did well know 
this flood by divine revelation, yet (this conjunction 
being notorious) he could not be ignorant of the fe¬ 
cond caufes thereof : for thofe were not only figns, 
but alfo working caufes, by ftrength received from 
the firft caufe, which is God himlelf: and further, 
that by & CatarraElte coeli ( Englijbed the windows of 
heaven) Mufes meant this great and watery con¬ 
junction ; the word C CatarraEl* ] fignifying flow¬ 
ing down or coming down. Now (faith P. de Alia¬ 
co ) it pleafed God to ordain by the courfe of the 
heavens fuch a conftellation, by which all men 
might behold therein their deftruction towards, and 


' Diod. 1. 


1 . k Nat. Com. 1. 4. C. 6. * Xcnoph. de xquiv. Comm, per Annium, fbl. 37. d \funder. * Eclipfis, i terrx- 

motujcominui mulca hominiim millia oppreflerunt. h rifia quoqoc per maritimos flufius tota prone fubmerfa Kilt, Sc pericrunt plufquam 
Jooooo. f dljo j e Concordia Theolog. 4 c Aitrolog. Gen. 7. 11. * 7he word x«tiapp*KTnf properly fegnifieth any place of flop- 

tpge, againft which t/je force of the water being naturally carried do jl rewards, dnjhetb and breaketb ; of aefeiooen albilo, ori ran go. Hence 
" nult n iKi/nci do not only open but alfo Jbut, the word bath been expounded (windows) for ban and food^atet. 

No. 4. 


thereby 


Digitized by 


Goo g 



62 The History 

thereby forfake thofe wicked ways wherein they 
walked, and call unto God tor mercy. 

Of this judgment was Gul. Pariftenfs, who un- 
derftood that the words CatarraEl* eoeli , or windows 
Of heaven, were to be taken for the former conjun¬ 
ction, or for thefe watery figns. Cancer, Ptfces, 
Pleiades, Hyades and Orion, and of the planets, 
Mars, Fenus and the Moon : which are the forci¬ 
ble caufes of the greateft inundations. His own 
words are thefe, Nondum intelligo prophet am Htbr<e- 
erum catarraftas eoeli vocdfft, niji partes illas cceli, 
<fu<e generative funt phiviarum (3 inundationum 
ctqndrum, males fkntftgna aquatica, ut Cancer, 13 c. 
as aforefaia. As yet (faith he) I perceive not what 
the prophet of the Hebrews meaneth by thofe words 
ZCatarraR* eoeli , or windows of heaven] unlefs 
he thereby underftands thofe celeftial powers, by 
whole influences are engendered the rain, and inun¬ 
dations of waters, fuch as are the watery figns of 
Comer, ( 3 c. 

But in a word, as it might pleafe God, that in 
the courfe of his unfearchable wifdom this conjun¬ 
ction fhould at fuch time be: fo did he (as atore- 
fard) add vigour and faculty, and gave to every o- 
peration increafe of virtues, violent eruptions to 
fprings and fountains, commanding them to caft 
out the whole trealure and heap of their waters •, ta¬ 
king retention from the clouds, and condenfing air 
into water by the miniftry of his angels, or howfo- 
cver elfe belt pleafed his all-powerfolnels. 

Sect. VI. 

7 "hat there was no need of any new creation of matter 
to make the univerfalflood j and what are Catar- 
raCbe cceli, Gen. vii. u. 

N OW if it be objected, that God doth not cre¬ 
ate any thing of new (for God refteth the fe- 
venth day, that is, he did not then after create any 
new fpecies) which granted, it may feem that then 
all the earth and air had not waters fufficient to co¬ 
ver the habitable world fifteen cubits above the high¬ 
eft mountains. Of this propofition, whether God 
hath lb reflrained himfelf or no, I will not difpute ; 
but for theconfequent (which is) that the world had 
want of water to overcover the higheft mountains, 
I take that conceit to be unlearned and foolilh : for 
it is written, that the fountains of the great deep were 
broken up, that is, the waters forlook the very bowels 
of the earth ; and all whatfoever was difperfed there¬ 
in, pierced and broke thro’ the face thereof. Then 
let us confider that the earth had above twenty-one 
thoufand miles: the diameter of the earth according 
to that circle feven thoufand miles; and then from 
the fupcrficies to the center fome three thoufand five 
hundred miles: take then the higheft mountain of 
the world, Caucafus, Taurus, Olympus, or Atlas, 
the mountains of Armenia or Scythia , or that (of 
all others the higheft) in Tennerif, and 1 do not find,, 
that he who looketh higheft, ftretcheth above thir¬ 
ty miles upright. It is not then impoflible, anfwer- 
ing rcafon with reafon, that all thofe waters mixed 
within the earth three thoufand five hundred miles 
deep Ihould not well help to cover the fpace of thirty 
miles in height, this thirty miles upright being found 
in the depths of the earth one hundred and fixteen 
times: for the fountains of the great deep were bro¬ 
ken up, and the waters drawn out of the bowels of 
the'earth. Secondly, If we confider what proportion 
the earth beareth to the extenfion of the air over and 
above it, welhall find the difference exceeding great. 
If then it pleafed God to condenfe but fo much of 
this air as every where compafieth and embraceth the 
earth, which condenfation is a converfton of air into 


of the World* Book I. 

water, a change familiar in thofe elements, it will 
not feem ftrange to men of judgment, yea but of 
ordinary underftanding, that the earth (God fo 
pleafing) was covered over with waters without any 
new creation. 

Laftly, for the opinions of Gulielmus Pariftenfis, 
and Aliacenfts, to which I may add Berofus and 
others, that fuch a conjunction there was, fore- 
fhewing that definition by waters which followed ; 
and that by the words Cararraft.e cceli , or windows 
of heaven, was meant this conjunction ; there needs 
no other anfwer than that obfervation of Ludovictts 
Fives , who affirmeth that by the graveft aftrolo - 
gers it was obfcrved, that in the Year 1524, there 
fhould happen the like conjunction, as at Noab’s 
flood, than which (faith he) there was never a more 
fair, dry, and feafonatde year: the like deitruCtion 
was prophefied of the year 1588. But Picas earl 
of Mirandula proveth that there could not be any 
fuch conjunction at that time. 

To conclude, I find no other myftery in the 
words Catarrafto eoeli , than that the clouds were 
meant thereby : Mofes ufing the word windows of 
heaven (if that be the fenfe of the words) to exprefs 
the violence of the rains, and pouring down of wa- 
ters. For whofoever hath feen thofe fallings of 
water, which fometimes happen in the Indies , which 
are called the fpouts (where clouds do not break 
into drops, but fall with a refiftlefs violence in one 
body) may properly ufe that manner of fpeech 
which Mofes did ; that the windows or flood-gates 
of heaven opened : (which is) that waters fell con¬ 
trary to cuftom and that order which we call na¬ 
tural. God then loofened the power retentive in 
the/uppermoft air •, and the waters fell in abundance: 
Behold (faith * Job) he which holdeth the waters, 
and they dry up -, or better in Latin, Et omnia fic - 
cantor ; And all things are dried up •, but when be 
fendeth them out, they dtftroy the earth : and in 
the 26th chapter, he bindeth the waters in the clouds-, 
but thefe bonds God loofed at that time of the ge¬ 
neral flood, and called up the waters which flept in 
the great deep : and thefe joining together cove¬ 
red the earth, till they had performed the work of 
his will: which done, b he then commanded them to 
return into their dark and vaft caves, and the reft 
(by a wind) rarified again into air, formerly con- 

denfed into drops. 

- ✓ 

Sect. VII. 

Of fome remainder of the memory of Noah among 
the heathen, 

N O All commanded by God, before the fall of 
thofe Waters, entred the ark which he had 
built, with his own wife, and his fons, and his fons 
wives, taking with them of every creature, which 
took life by generation, feven of the clean, and of 
the unclean two. Noah , according to Philo , fig- 
nifieth quietnefs; after others, and according to the 
prophecy of his father Lantech, ceflation ; to whom 
after-times gave' many names anfwering his anti¬ 
quity, zeal, virtue and other qualities: as, thefirfi 
Ogyges, bccaufe in the time of the Grecian Ogyges 
there was alfo a great ffopd of Acha'ta : Saturn 
they called him, bccaufe he was the father of na¬ 
tions : others gave him the name of Prometheus, 
who was laid to fteal away Jupiter's fire j fire in 
that place being taken and underftood for the know¬ 
ledge of God ancf heavenly things. Others think, 
that he was fo called for his excellent wifdom and 
forefight. He had alfo the name of Janus (id ejl) 
vino/us, becaufe Jain fignifieth wine in the Hebrew. 
And fo TertuUittn finds him written m Itbris ritua - 


Digitized by Lnoogle 


Job 12. 15. 


* Gen. 8. i. 





Chap. VII. The History 

libus, in the 'books of ceremonies, preceding both 
Saturn, Uranus and Jove : which three enjoyed an 
elder time than all the other ancienteft feigned 
gods. And this name Jain is taken from the He¬ 
brew and Syrian, and not from the Latin \ for it 
was in ufc before there was any Latin nation, or 
any kingdom by that name known. Of the anti¬ 
quity of Janus, Fabius PiRor giveth this teftimo- 
ny. Jani at ate nulla erat Monarchia, quia morta- 
libus pe Ror thus madam loafer at ulla regnandi cup't- 
ditas, [3c. Vinum (3 far primus populos docuit Janus 
ad facrificia: primus enim aras (3 pomceria (3 fa- 
era docuit In the time of Janus (faith he) there 
was no monarchy: for the defire of rule had not 
folded it felf about the hearts of men. Janus firft 
taught the people to facrifice wine and meal: he 
firft fet up altars, inflituted gardens and folitary 
groves, wherein they ufed to pray; with other ho¬ 
ly rites and ceremonies. A greater tellimony than 
this there cannot be found among the heathen, which 
in all agreeth fb well with the feriptures. For firft, 
whilft Noab flourifhed, there Was not any king or 
monarch ; Nimrod being the firft that took on him, 
foveraign authority. Secondly, a Noab after the 
flood was tire firft that planted the vine, and be¬ 
came a husbandman ; and therefore offered the firft - 
fruitsof both (to wit) wine and meal. Thirdly* 
He was the firft that raifed an altar, and offered 
b facrifice to God, a thankfgiving for his merciful 
goodnefs towards him. Noah was alfo fignified in 
the name of Bifrons (which was given to Janus) 
becaufc he beheld the times both before and after the 
flood, c 3>uia praterita never it, (3 futura profpexerir, 
faith Arnobius. Becaufc he knew what was pa/l, 
and provided for what was to come. He was alfo 
in the perfon of Jams fhadowed by the name of 
Chaos , and frmen orbit , The feed of the world ; 
becaufc as out of that confuted heap was drawn all 
kinds of beafts and plants: fo from Noab came all 
mankind: whereof Ovid in the perfon of Janus: 

d Me Chaos antiqni (nam fum res prifea ) vocabant, 

Afpite quant longi femporis afla cam. 

The ancients called me Chaos : my great years 

By thofe old times, of which I fing, appears. 

He was alfo entituled Caelum (3 Sol , Heaven 
and the Sun, for his excellent knowledge in aftro- 
nomy : Fertumms, Bacchus and Liber Pater not 
that latter, which Diod. Siculus., and Alexander 
Aphredifens fb call, becaufc he was die reftorer of 
the Greeks to their former liberty, but in refpe£fc of 
the flood. For the Greeks called iJber i><, and his 
nurfes Hyades, of rain, becaufc Noab entered the 
ark, when the fun join’d with the ftars l fades, 3 
conftellation in the brow or neck of Taurus, and 
ever after a monument of Noah’s flood. He was 
alfo by others fumamed Triton, a marine god, the 
fon of Neptune : beceaufe he lived in fafety on the 
waters. So was he known by the name of 'Diony* 
fus, quaft Aionucoav, mtotem pungent, bite-brain e t 
wit-ftmger, tho’ Diodorus conceives otherwife, and 
derives that name d patre & loco, of his father and 
the place Of his birth (to wit) of Jove, and Nyfa-i 
a town of Arabia Foelix, faith Sttidas out of Orpheus. 
He had alfo the by-name of 1 Taurus , or Tanrepha- 
pn ; becaufc he firft yoked oxen and tilled the 
ground, according to that at' Mofes ; t And Noah 
became an husbandman. Now howtoever the Gre¬ 
cians vaunt of their Theban Bacchus (otherwife Dio- 
ttyfus) it is. certain that the name was borrowed, and 
the invention ftolen from Noab. But this name of 


of the World. 63 

Bacchus, more anciently Boachus, was taken (faith 
C til. Stuikius , and out ofhim Dan<eus) from Noa- 
chus [jV] being chang’dinto [if] •, and it is the more 
probable, becaufe it cannot be doubted but that 
A o.w was the firft planter of the vine alter the 
flood : and of Noab (the firft and ancient Bacchus ) 
were all thofe *fables deviled, of which Diodorus 
complaineth in his fourth book and fifth chapter. 
This firft Bacchus (to wit) Noab was fumamed 
Nyfius of the mountain Nyft in India , where the 
Grecian Bacchus never came, whatfoever themfelves 
feign of his enterprizes ; and thefe mountains of 
Nyfa join with thofe of Paropanifus , and thofe o- 
ther eaftern mountains, on which the ark of Noab 
refted after the flood. 

Furthermore, to the end that the memory of this 
fecond parent of mankind might the better be pre- 
ferved, there were founded by his iffues many great 
cities which bare his name ; with many rivers and 
mountains: which oftentimes forgat that it was 
done in his regard, becaufe the many names given 
him brought the fame confufion to places as to him- 
lelf. Notwithftanding all which, we find the city 
of Noah upon the banks of the Red-fea and elfe- 
where : the river of» Noas in Thrace , which Strabo 
callcth Noarus ; Ptolemy, Dams ; dividing Illy¬ 
ria from Pamnia. Thus much for the name. 

Sect. VIII. 

Of fundry particulars touching the ark : ds the place 
where it was made, the matter, fajbion and name. 

N OW in what part of the world Noah built 
the ark, it doth not appear in the feriptures, 
neither do I find any approved author that hath 
written thereof; only Goropius Became in his Indo- 
Scythia conceiveth, that Noah built his afk near 
the mountains of Caucafus , becaufe on thofe hills 
are found the goodlieft cedars : for when Alex. 
Macedon made the war among a people Called Ny- 
f<ti , inhabiting the other fide of Caucafus , he found 
all their burials and fepulchres wrought over with 
cedar. To this place (faith Becanus) Noah repair¬ 
ed, both to feparate himfelffrorrt the reprobate giants, 
who rebelled againft God and nature, as alfo be¬ 
caufe he would not be interrupted in the building 
of the ark ; to which alfo he addeth the conveni* 
cncy of rivers, to tranfport the timber which he ufed, 
without troubling any other carriages. 

Ohly this we are fore of, that the ark was built 
in Ibtne part of the eaftern world j and, td my on- 
derftanding, not far from' the place where it refted 
after the flood. For Noah did not ufc any mart 
or fail (as in other fhips) and therefore did the ark 
no otherwife move than the hulk dr body of a 
fhip doth in a calm Tea. Alfo becaufc k is not 
probable, that during thefe continual and downright 
rains there were any winds at all, therefore was the 
ark little moved from the place where k was fa- 
fhicmed and fet together. For it is written ; k God 
made a wind to pafs upon the earth y and the waters 
ceaftd ; and therefore it may be gathereds that du-t 
ring the fall of the waters, there was not any 
ftorm or forcible wind at all, which could drive the 
ark any great diftance from the place where it was 
firft by the waters lifted up. . This is alfo the more 
probable, if that ancient opinion be true, as it is Very 
likely, that the ark had fundam planum ; A flat bot¬ 
tom, and not rais’d in form of a fhip with a fharp- 
nefs forward, to cut the waves for the better fpeed. 

This kind of veiTel the Hebrews Call Thebet, and 
the Greeks Larttax , for fo they termed DtxaUon’s 


Gen. 9. to. b Gen. 8. zo. 
Ijtn. o. 20. h Stuck k in libris 
Strabo, I. ». *Gen. 8. i. 


« Arn. coitt. Gent. 1 . 6. d Ovidde fiirtis, 1 . i. 
convivaiibus & Dameus d« prima mundi sitatc. 


e Nat. Com. 1 . 5. c. 13. * Ccelius. 

* Plin. I. 6. Steph. de Uib. Herod. 1 . 4. 





The History of the World. Book I % 


(hip : 'and fome fay, that the hill Par naff us, to 
which in eight days he arrived, was firft called 
Larnaffus , and by the change of [L] into [P] 
Parnajj'us •, but *Paufanias thinks that it took name 
of a fon of the nymph Cleodor<e, called Parnajj'us., 
the inventor of auguration. 

b Peuctros finds the word {Pamd(fus\ to have no 
affinity with the Greek, but thinks it derived from 
the Hebrew word Nabas, which fignifieth augura¬ 
tion and divination : or from Har or Parai, as in 
his chapter of oracles in the leaf before cited. 

c Jofephus calls the ark Macbina , by the general 
name of a huge frame: and Epiphanius out of 
the Hebrew Aron j but herein lieth the dif¬ 
ference between Aron and Tbevet, that Aron fig¬ 
nifieth properly the ark of the fanctuary, but The- 
vet fuch a veffel as fwimmcth, and beareth it lelf 
upon the waters. 

Laftly, this ark of Noah differed from the fafhion 
of a fhip in this, that it had a cover and roof, with 
a cred in the midft thereof, and the fides declining 
like the roof of an houfe •, to die end, both to caft 
off the waters,and that thereunder i Noab himfelf and 
his children might fhelter and feparate themfelves 
from the noifomenefs of the many bealls, which 
filled the other rooms and parts of the ark. 

Ot what wood the ark was built it is uncertain. 
The Hebrew Word Gopher , once, and in this place 
only, ufed, isdiverfly underftood and tho* the mat¬ 
ter be of little importance, yet this difference there 
is, that the Geneva tranfiation calls it pine-tree ; the 
Rabbi nr, cedar •, the Seventy, fquare timber ; the La¬ 
tin. , fmooth timber. Others will have it cyprefs- 
trees, as dedicated to the dead, becaufe cyprefs is 
worn at funerals. But out of doubt, if the word 
Gopher fignify any fpecial kind of timber, Noah 
obeyed the voice of God therein ; if not, he was 
not then curious as touching the kind or nature of 
the wood, having the promife of God, and his 
grace and mercy for his defence. For with Noah 
God promifed e to ejlablijh his covenant. ' Pliny af- 
firmeth, that in Egypt it was the ufe to build (hips 
of cedar, which the worms eat not ; and he avow- 
eth, that he faw in Utica , in the temple of Apollo, 
cedar beams, laid in the time of the foundation of 
the city, and that they were ftill found in his time, 
which was above 1188 years after; proving there¬ 
by, that this kind of wood was not fubjett to pu- 
trifying or moulding in a very long time. But in 
that it is cafy to cut, light to carry, and of a fweet 
favour, lading alfo better than any other wood, and 
becaufe near the place where the ark reded, there 
are found great (tore of thefe cedar-trees, as alfo 
in all the mountains of the ead, befides thole of 
Likanus, it is probable enough that the ark might 
be of that wood: which hath befides the other com¬ 
modities the greated length of timber, and there¬ 
fore fitted to build (hips withal. Pererius conceiv- 
eth that the ark had divers forts of timber, and 
that the bottom had of one fort, the deck and par¬ 
tition of another all which may be true or falfe, 
if Gopher may be taken for timber in general. True 
if is, that cedar will ferve for all parts of, a (hip, 
as well for the body, as for mads and yards. But 
Noah had mod refpeft to the direction received 
from God : to the length, breadth, and height, 
and to the partitions of foe ark *, and to pitch it, 
and to divide it into cabins, thereby to (ever the 
clean beads from the unclean, and to preferve their 
feveral forts of food •, and that it might be capable 
of all kind of living creatures, according to the 
numbers by God appointed. All which when 


Noah had gathered together, he cad his' confidence 
wholly on God, who by his angels deered this 
fhip without a rudder, and direded it without the 
help of a compafs or the north-dar. The pitch 
which Noah ufed, is by feme fuppofed to have been 
a kind of bitumen, whereof there is great quantity 
about the valley of * Sodom and Gomorrah , now 
the dead fea or Afphaltes : and in the region of 
Babylon , and in foe IP’eJl- Indies : and herein it ex- 
ceedefo other pitch, that it melts not with the fun, 
but by the fire only, after the manner of hard wax. 

Sect. IX. 

That the ark was of fujficient capacity. 

T HE ark, according to God’s commandment, 
had of length three hundred cubits, fifty of 
breadth, and thirty deep or high: by which pro¬ 
portion it had fix parts of length to one of breadrh, 
and ten times in length to one of depth •, of which 
St. Augufline, h Procutdudio figura ejl peregrinantis in 
hoc fteculo civitatis Dei (hoc ejl) Ec cleft a, qua fit fal- 
va per lignum, in quo pependit Mediator Dei & 
hominum , homo Cbrijlus Jefus : nam 6? men- 
fura ipfa longitudinis , altitudinis , latitudinifque ejus 
Jignificat corpus bumanum , in cujus veritate ad ho¬ 
mines prtnunciatus ejl venturus, & venit , &c. With¬ 
out doubt (faith he) it is a figure of foe city of God, 
travelling in this world as a dranger (that is) of the 
Church, laved by the tree whereupon the Mediator 
between God and man, the man Jefus Chrijl did 
hang: for even the very meafure of the length, 
height, and breadth, anfwereth foe (hape of man’s 
body, in the truth whereof the coming of Chrid 
was foretold and performed. 

By what kind of cubit the ark was meafured, it 
hath been a difputed quedion among the fathers, 
and others and foe differences are in effed thefe: 
the fird kind of cubit (called the common) con¬ 
tained! one foot and a half, meafured from the (harp 
of the elbow to the point of the middle finger. The 
fecond (foe palm cubit) which taketh one handful 
more than foe common. The third is called Re¬ 
gius cubitus , or the Perftan cubit, which exceedeth 
foe common cubit three inches. The fourth is the 
facred cubit, which containeth the common or vul¬ 
gar cubit double, wanting but a quarter or fourth 
part. Ladly, there is a fifth cubit, called geome¬ 
trical, which containeth fix common cubits. But 
of all thefe forts, which were commonly meafured 
by the vulgar cubit, the alteration and diminution 
of mens datures hath made the difference.'- For as 
there is now a lefs proportion of bodies: ib is the 
common cubit, from the (harp of the elbow to the 
point of foe middle finger, of lefs length than it 
was in elder times. 

St. Augufline confidering the many forts of beads 
and birds which the ark held, with their food and 
water, was fometimes of opinion, that the ark had 
proportion after the geometrical cubit, which con¬ 
taineth almod fix of the common. For * meafuring 
the ark by the vulgar cubit, it did not exceed the 
capacity of that veflel built by Hiero of Syracufe, 
or the (hip of Ptolemy Philo-pater. But St. Au- 
gujline (who at the fird was led by Origen) chan¬ 
ged his judgment as touching the geometrical cu¬ 
bit ; and foOnd upon better confideration, that there 
needed not fo huge a body to preferve all forts of 
creatures by God appointed to he referved. For it 
was not needful to take any kinds of fifhes into the 
ark,becaufe they were kept living (faith St. Augufline) 
in their own element. k Non fuit necejfe confervare 


• Stcph. dc Urb. fol. 
c. 40. * Pererius. 

de Civit Dei, 1 . 5. C. 27 


227. k De Oracul. fol. 94. 
h De Civitate Dei, 1 . 15. 


« F.piph. m Aneor. * Gen 
26. * Athen. dipnofop. 1 . 


6.16. e Gen 6. 18. ♦Pitots. 
4. Plutaich. in vita Demetrii. * Aug 


Digitized by 


Googl 


e 


in 





Chap. VII. The History 

in area qua poffent in aquis vivere j non folum merfa 
ftcut pi fees, verum fupernatantia ficut mult* alites \ 
It was not needful to conferve thofe creatures in 
the ark, which could live in the waters > and not 
only fifties, which can live under water, but alio 
thofe fowls which fit and fwim on them. And 
again, Terra, non aqua , malcditta \ quia /Idam 
non hujus, fed illius fruclum vetitum comedit $ It 
was the earth, and not the waters, which God 
curfed: for of the forbidden fruit of the earth, 
and not of the fea, did Adam eat •» lb as St. Au- 
guftine gathereth hereupon (as aforefaid) that fo 
huge a frame needed not. 

And if we look with the eyes of judgment here¬ 
unto, we lhall find nothing monltrous therein ; al- 
tho’ the imaginations of men, who (for the moft 
part) have more of mifehief and of ignorance, than 
of any reverend reafon, find many impofiibilities in 
this work of God. But it is maniteft, and un¬ 
doubtedly true, that many of the fpecies, which 
how feem differing and of feveral kinds, were not 
then in rerum natura. For thofe beafts which are 
of mix’d natures, either they were not in that age, 
or elfe it was not needful to prelerve them : fee¬ 
ing they might be generated again by others, as 
the mules, the hyena’s, and the like : the one be¬ 
gotten by affes and mares, the other by foxes and 
wolves. And whereas by difeovering of ftrange 
lands, wherein there arc found divers beads and 
birds,differing in colour or ftature from thofe of thefe 
nothern parts, it may be fuppofed by a fuperficial 
confideration, that all thofe which wear red and 
pyed fkins, or feathers, are differing from thofe 
that are Ids painted and wear plain rufiet or black; 
they are much miftaken that lo think. And for 
my own opinion, I find no difference, but only in 
magnitude, between the cat of Europe , and the 
ounce of India \ and even thole dogs which are 
become wild in Hifpagniola , with which the Spa¬ 
niards ufed to devour the naked Indians , are now 
changed to wolves, and begin to deftroy the breed 
oftheir cattle, and do alfo oftentimes tear afunder 
their own children. “The common crow and rook 
of India is full of red feathers in the drown’d and 
low illands of Caribana and the black-bird and 
thrufh hath his feathers mix’d -with black and car¬ 
nation, in the north parts of Virginia. The dog- 
filh of England is the lhark of the fouth ocean: 
for if colour or magnitude made a difference of 
fpecies, then were the negroes, which we call the 
black-mores, non animaha rationaha , not men, 
but fonie kind of ftrange beafts: and lb the giants 
of the fouth America l hould be of another kind, 
than the people of this part of the world. We al¬ 
fo fee it daily that the natures of fruits are changed 
by tranfplantation, fome to better, fome to worfe, 
efpecially with the change of climate. Crabs may 
be made good fruit by often grafting, and the belt 
melons will change in a year or two to common 
cucumbers by being fet in a barren foil. Therefore 
taking the kinds precifely of all creatures, as they 
were by God created, or out of the earth by his 
ordinance produced *, the ark, after the meafure of 
the common cubit, was fufficiently capacious to con¬ 
tain of all, according to the number by God ap¬ 
pointed : for if we add but half a foot of meafure 
t0 the common cubit, which had a foot and a half 
of giantly ftature (and lefs allowance we cannot 
give to die difference between them and us) then 
did the ark contain 600 foot in length, and too 
foot in breadth, and 60 foot in depth. 

But firft of all, to make it manifeft that the geo¬ 
metrical cubit is not ufed in the feripture, the fta- 


of the World. 65 

ture of the giants therein named may fuffice. For 
if the bed of u Og king of Bajban had been nine 
geometrical cubits long, it had taken 54 cubits of 
the common, which make 80 foot: and c Goliab , 
who had the length of 6 cubits and a handful (which 
makes nine foot and a handful, a proportion cre¬ 
dible) if thefe cubits had been geometrical, then 
had been 54 foot in height and upwards, which 
were monftrous and moft incredible ; for (accord¬ 
ing to this proportion) the head of Golub had been 
nine foot long, and far weightier and bigger than 
all David's body, who carried it away. 

Again, If the geometrical cubit had been ufed for 
a meafure in the feripture, as many commentators 
have obferved, then would the altar (appointed to 
contain five cubits of length, five of breadth and 
three of height) have reached the length of 27 foot 
upright, and fo muft their priefts have afeended by 
fteps or ladders to have performed their facrifices 
thereon, which was contrary to God’s command¬ 
ment given in thefe words: d Thou Jbalt not go up 
with Jlcps unto mine altar , that tby Jhamt be not 
difeovered thereon \ and therefore was the altar but 
three common cubits high, which make four foot, 
that their priefts ftanding thereby might execute 
their office: wherefore I may conclude, that the 
cubit mentioned in the feriptures was not the geo¬ 
metrical, but the ordinary cubit of one foot and a 
half, according to the meafure of giantly ftature ; 
which meafure (doubtlefs) might give much die 
more capacity to the ark, altho’ it be alfo probable, 
that as the men were, fo were the horfes whereon 
they rode, and all other creatures, of a correfpon- 
dent fize. And yet, as I take it, tho’ by this 
means there were not any whit the more room in 
the ark, it were not hard to conceive, how all the 
diftind fpecies of animals, whofe lives cannot be 
preferved in the waters, might according to their 
prefent quantities be contained in a veffel of thofe 
dimenfions which the ark had •, allowing to the 
cubit one foot and a half of our now ufual meafure: 
whence it followeth of ncceffity, that thofe large 
bodies which were in the days of Noab might have 
room fufficient in the ark, which was meafured by 
a cubit of lengdi proportionable. 

How the appointed number of creatures, to be 
laved, that is, feven of the clean, two of the unclean 
(with neceffary food) might have place in the ark, 
But<eo hath very learnedly declared: the brief fum 
of whofe difeourfe to that purpofe is this : The Lngtb 
of the ark was three hundred cubits , which multi¬ 
plied by the breadth , namely fifty cubits , and the pro- 
dull by the height of thirty cubits , jheweth the whole 
concavity to have been 450000. Now whereas die 
polls, walls, and other partitions of lodgings may 
feem to have taken up a great part of the hollow ; 
the height of the roof, which (the perpendicular be¬ 
ing one cubit) contained 7500 cubical cubes, was 
a fufficient recompence ; if therefore in a (hip of 
fuch greatnefs we feek room for 89 diftind fpecies 
of beafts, or (left anyfhould be omitted) for 100 
feveral kinds, we fliall eafily find place both for 
them, and for the birds, which in bignefs are no 
way anfwerable to them, and for meat to fuftain 
them all. For there are three forts of beafts, whofe 
bodies are of a quantity belt known ; the beef, the 
ftieep, and the wolf: to which the reft may be re¬ 
duc’d, by faying (according to Ariftotle) that one 
elephant is anfwerable to four beeves, one lyon to 
two wolves, and fo of the reft. Of beafts, fome 
feed on vegetables, others on flelh. There are one 
and thirty kinds of the greater fort, feeding on ve¬ 
getables : of which number, only three are clean, • 

« 1 Sam. 17. 4. Exod. zo. 26. 

^ Digitized by 


No. V. 


Acoft. hilt. Indue. Dcut. 3. 11. 


according 


66 *fhe History 

according to the law of Mofes, whereof feven of a 
kind entered into the ark, namely, three couples for 
breed, and one odd for facrifice : the other eight 
and twenty kinds were taken by two of each kind •, 
fo that in all there were in the ark one and twenty 
great beads clean, and fix and fifty unclean, efti- 
mable for largenefs as 91 beeves ; yet for a iupple- 
ment (led perhaps any fpecies be omitted) let them 
be valued, as 120 beeves. Of the lefler fort, feed¬ 
ing on vegetables, were in the ark fix and twenty 
kinds, edimable with good allowance for fupply, 
as fouxfcore ffieep. Of thofe which devour flefh, 
were two and thirty kinds, anlwerable to threefcore 
and four wolves. All thefe 280 beads might be 
kept in one dory or room of the ark in their fcve- 
ral cabins *, their meat in a fecond: the birds and 
their provifion in a third, with place to fpare for 
Noah and his family, and all their necefiaries. 

Sect. X. 

'flout the ark rejfed upon part of the bill Taurus 
(or Caucafus) between the Ead-Indies and Scy¬ 
thia. 

t I. 

A prefer it ion of fome queflions left material : with 
a note of the ufe of this queflion, to find out the 
Metropolis of nations. 

W HAT time Noah took to build the ark, I 
leave to others to difpute -, but he received 
the commandment from God 100 years before the 
waters fell : and had therefore choice of time and 
leifure fufficient. As for the number of decks and 
partitions, which Origen divides into four, St. s/u- 
guflme into three, I will not trouble the reader with 
the controverfy : or whedier thole creatures, which 
fomctimes red on the land, other times in the wa¬ 
ters, as the crocodiles (now called Alegartos) the 
fea-cows or fea-horfes, were kept in the ark, or 
no, I think it a needlefs curiofity ; and yet to this 
faith Pererius , and others before him, that a fiffi- 
pool might be made as well within the ark, as in 
Hierd s ffiip of Syracufe. Ladly, to confider or la¬ 
bour to difprove the foolery of the Hebrews , who 
fuppofe that the ark was lightened by a carbuncle, 
or had windows of crydal to receive in light, and 
keep out water, were but to revive the buried va¬ 
nities of former times. But that which I feek mod 
to fatisfy my felf and others in, is in what part of 
the world the ark reded after the flood: becaufe 
the true underdanding of fome of thefe places (as 
the feat of the terredrial paradife , and the reding 
of the ark) do only and truly teach the world’s 
plantation, and the beginning of nations, before and 
after the flood •, and all dory, as well general as 
particular, thereby may be the better underdood. 

t II. 

A propofal of the common opinion, that the ark refi- 
ed upon fome of the hills of Armenia. 

A N D firft, for the true place where the ark 
reded after the flood, and from what part 
of the world the children of Noab travelled to 
their firft fettlement and plantation, I am refolved 
(without any prefumption) that therein the mod 
writers were utterly miftaken. And I am not led 
fo to think out of my humour or newnefs of opi¬ 
nion, or Angularity *, but do herein ground my 

* Gen. 8. 4. k See c. 7. $. 1. ' Hicron. 51. 27. 


of the World. Book I. 

felf on the original and firft truth, which is the 
word of God \ and after that, upon reafon, and the 
moft probable circumftances thereon depending. 
For whereas it is written, * that the ark flayed upon 
one of the mountains of Ararat, which the Chal¬ 
dean paraphraft hath converted Kardu , meaning 
the hills Gordtei or Gorditei in Armenia the greater 
(as the words Gordtei and Kardu feem to be one 
and the fame) of which opinion alfo the moft of our 
interpreters are; I find neither feripture nor reafon 
which teacheth any fuch thing: to wit, that it 
reded on that part of Ararat , which is in the 
greater Armenia . b Nicolaus Damafcenus calls this 
mountain of Ararat , Baris, being the fame which 
the Chaldean nameth Kardu , to which mountain 
the frier Annius (citing this place out of Jofephus) 
makes him find another adjoining, called Ocila, 
and to fay that the ark (of which Mofes the law¬ 
giver of the Hebrews wrote) did firft take ground 
on this Ocila. But I do not find any fuch moun¬ 
tain in being, as this Ocila v neither is there any 
mention of it in the place of Jofephus. Strabo re- 
membreth a promontory in Arabia Faelix, of that 
name, and Pliny finds a mart-town fo called in the 
fame, which Ptolemy calls Ocilis , Pinetks Acyla, 
and Niger Zidon. But this Ocila of Damafcenus., 
or rather of Annius , feemeth to be one and a part 
of the Armenian mountains. Berofus calleth thofe 
mountains of Armenia Gorditei , and Curtius Cord<ei: 
Ptolemy Gordtei and Gorditei •, of which the country 
next adjoining is by this Nicolaus Damafcenus cal¬ 
led Ninyada , perhaps (as c Becanus conje&ures) for 
Myliada or rather Minni ; which word is ufed for 
Armenia Minor. And the very word of Armenia 
feems to be compounded of this word Minni , and 
Aram : as if we ffiould fay Minni of Syria ; for 
that Armenia alfo was a part of Syria , d Pliny wit- 
nefleth. Epipbanius placeth the Cardyes about thefe 
mountains, whom others call Gordieni or Gordeni. 
The mountains are feated apart from all other to 
the north of that ledge of the mountains called 
Taurus, or Niphates , in the plains of Armenia the 
great, near the lake of Thofpitis : whence the river 
of Tigris floweth in 75 degrees of longitude, and 
41 and 42 degrees of latitude. One of the moun¬ 
tains Gorditei (that 'which furmounteth the reft) 
Epiphanius calls Lnbar, which in the Armenian 
fignifieth a place of defeent : but this out of 'Jofe¬ 
phus which name (faith Junius) was of the event, 
becaufe of Noah's coming down with his children. 
But this alfo I take to be a fuppofed event •, feeing 
any hill, from whence on every fide we mud de- 
feend, may thus be called: as Junius corrects the 
place in Jofephus Ab'So( Kubaris.) That the 
place is thus to be read, he conjedtureth, becaufe 
Jofepb. 1 . 1. c. 4. lays, the place is called 'a*o&x- 
tm«/ov (as it were the defeent or coming down) 
and Epiphan. •/. 1. cont. H<eref. calls it Ao$<*p *• 
which word in the Armenian and Egyptian tongue 
fignifieth defeent, of Lubar , which is to defeend ; 
whence alfo Lubra is a fynagogue , becaufe it was 
commonly built on fome high place : whereof alfo 
the Latin Dtlubrum may feem to be derived 1 and 
Ails vi. 9. they that belonged to the fynagogue 
of the Egyptians are called Libert ini, for Lubra tern. 
Yet this opinion hath been embraced from age /to 
age: receiving a habit of ftrength by time, and 
allowance without any farther examination v altho’ 
the name of Lubar might otherwife rightly be 
given, efpecially to that mountain, by reafon that 
the paflage was more fair, up and down unto it, 
than to any of the reft adjoining. 

d Nat. Hift. 1 . 5. c. 12. e Jofeph. de Antiq. I. i-c. 4. 

lyGOOgkl. ¥be 









Chap. VII. The History of the World. 67 


t hi. 

The firjl argument againft the common opinion. They 
that came to build Babel, “would have come fooner, 
bad they come from fo near a place as Armenia. 

B U T there are many arguments to perfuade 
me, that the ark of Noah did not reft it felf 
in any part of Armenia , and that the mountain A- 
rarat was not Baris , nor any one of the Gordiaan 
mountains. 

For firft, it is agreed by all who follow * Be- 
rofus , that it was in the 130th year, or in the year 
igi after the flood, when Nimrod came into the 
valley of Sbinaar, which valley was afterwards cal¬ 
led Babylonia, Cujh and Chaldea. If then the ark had 
firft found land in Armenia , it is very improbable, 
that the children of Noah , which came into that val¬ 
ley, could have fpent fo many years in fo fhort a 
pafCige: feeing the region of Mesopotamia was only 
interjacent, which might by eafy journeys have been 
palled Over in twenty days; and to haften and help 
which paffage the navigable river of Tigris offered 
it felf, which is every where tranfpaflable by boats 
of great burden: fo as where the defart on the one 
fide refilled their expedition, the river on the con¬ 
trary fide ferved to advance it •, the river rifing out 
of the lame ledge of mountains, or at the toot of 
diem, where the ark of Noah was firft fuppofed to 
fettle it felf; then, if the nations which followed 
Nimrod ftill doubted the furprife of a fecond flood 
(according to the opinions of the ancient Hebrews ) 
it foundeth ill to the ear of reafon, that they would 
have fpent many years in that low and overflown 
valley of Mefopotamia , fo called of the many rivers 
which imbroider or compafs it: for the effects wit- 
nefied their affedtions, and the works, which they 
undertook, their unbelief; being no fooner arrived 
in Sbinaar , but they began to provide themfelves of 
a defence (by erecting Babel) againft any future 
or feared inundation. Now at Babel it was that 
Nimrod began his kingdom, the firft known city 
of the world founded after the flood, about 131 
years, or (as others fuppofe) ten years later : though 
(formy felf) I rather think, that they undertook 
that work in two refpedts, firft, to make themfelves 
famous, b To get us a name (faith the text:) Second¬ 
ly, thereby to ufurp dominion over the reit. 

IV. 

The fecond argument , that the eajlern people were 
moft ancient in populofety, and in all human glory. 

F OR a fecond argument: the civility, mag¬ 
nificence and multitude of people (wherein the 
call parts of the world firft abounded) hath more 
weight than any thing which hath been, or can be 
faid for Armenia , and for Noah's taking land there. 
And that this is true, the ufe of printing and artil¬ 
lery (among many other things which die eaft had) 
may eafily perfuade us, that thofe fun-rifing nati- 
tions were the moft ancient. The certainty of this 
report, that the Eaft Indians (time out of mind) 
have had guns and ordnance of battery, confirmed 
by the Portugals and others, makes us now to un¬ 
derhand, that the place of Philoftratus in vita Apol- 
lonii Tianeei, l. 2. c. 14. is no fable, tho’ exprefs’d 
in fabulous words: when he faith, that the wife 
men, which dwell between Hypbafes and Ganges , ufe 
not themfelves to go forth into battel: but that 
they drive away their enemies with thunder and 
lightning lent from Jupiter. By which means there 
ft is laid, that Hercules yEgyptius and Bacchus , join¬ 
ing their forces, were defeated there *, and that this 


Hercules there eaft away his golden Ihield. Fot 
the invention of letters was ignorandy aferibed to 
Cadmus , becaufe he brought them firft into Greece: 
of which die people (then rude and favage) had rea¬ 
fon to give him the honour, from whom they re¬ 
ceived the benefit. But it is true, that letters are 
no lels ancient than Seth or Enoch were: for they 
are faid to have written on pillars of ftone (as be¬ 
fore remembred) long before the flood. But from 
the eaftern world it was that John Cuthenberg, a 
German , brought the device of printing : by whom 
Conradus being inftru&ed, brought the pradice 
thereof to Rome : and after that, Nicolaus Gerfon , a 
Frenchman , bettered both the letters and invention. 
And, notwithftanding that this myftery was then 
fuppofed to be but newly born, the Cbinaos had let¬ 
ters long before either the Egyptians or Pbenicians 
and alfo the art of printing, when as the Geeks had 
neither any civil knowledge, or any letters among 
them. 

And that this is true, both the Portugals and 
Spaniards have witneffed, who about an hundred 
years fince difeovered thofe kingdoms, and do now 
enjoy their rich trades therein : for the Cbinaos ac¬ 
count all other nations but favages in refped of 
themfelves. : * 

And to add ftrength to this argument, the con- 
queft and ftory of Alex. Macedon may juftly be 
called to witnefs, who found more cities and fump- 
tuofity in that little kingdom of Porus, which lay 
fide by fide to the Eaft India, than in all his other 
travels and undertakings. For in Alexander's time, 
learning and greatnefs had not travelled fo far to 
the weft as Rome : Alexander efteeming of Italy 
but as a barbarous country, and of Rome is of a 
village. But it was Babylon that ftood in his eye, 
and the fame of the eaft pierced his ears. And if 
we look as far as the fun-rifing, and hear Paulus 
Fenetus what he reporteth of the uttermOft angle 
and ifland thereof, we (hall find that thofe nations 
have fent out, and not received, lent knowledge, 
and not borrowed it from the weft. For the far¬ 
ther eaft (to this day) the more civil, the farther 
weft the more favage. And of the ifle of Japan 
(now Zipingari) Fenetus maketh this report. Incola 
religioni, liter is, (ft fapientiee funt additliftimi , (ft 
veritatis indagatores acerrimi ; nihilillis frequentius 
oratione, quam (more no fir 0) f'acris in delubris exer- 
cent : unum cognof 'cunt principem, unum Deum ado- 
rant. The iflanders are exceedingly addicted to 
religion, letters and philofophy, and moft diligent 
fearchers out of truth: there is nothing among 
them more frequent than prayer, which they ufe in 
their churches after the manner of Chriftians. They 
acknowledge one king, and worlhip one God. The 
antiquity, magnificence, civility, riches, fumptuous 
buildings, and policy in government, is reported 
to be fuch by thofe who have been employ’d into 
thofe parts, as it feemeth to exceed (in thofe for¬ 
merly named, and divers other particulars) all other 
kingdoms of the world. 

+ v. 

The third argument, from the wonderful reftftar.ee 
which Semiramis found in the Eaft Indies. 

B UT for a third argument, and alfo of a treble 
ftrength to the reft, I lay che invafion of Semi¬ 
ramis before the indifferent and advifed reader: who 
may confider in what age fhe lived, and how foon 
after the world’s new birth fhe gathered her army 
(as Diodorus Siculus out of Ctejias reporteth) of 
more than three millions to invade India, to which 


Digitized by 


Googl 


he 

e 


• Bcrof. 1. 1 . 


* Gen. 10. 10. Bcrof. I. i. 



68 The History of the World. Book I. 


he joineth alfo 500000 horfe, and 100000 waggons: 
whereof if we believe but a third part, it (hall fuf- 
fice to prove that India was the firft planted and 
peopled country after the flood. Now as touching 
the time wherein lhe lived : all hiftorians confent, 
that lhe was the wife of Ninus ; and the moll ap¬ 
proved writers agree, that Ninus was the fon of 
Belus, and Belus of Nimrod y that Nimrod was the 
fon of Cujhy Cujb of Cham , and Cham of Noah. 
And at fuch time as Nimrod came to Shinaar, he 
was then a great nation, as by the building of the 
city and tower of Babel may appear •, and being 
then fo multiplied and increased, the two defcents 
caft between Nimrod and Semiramisy brought forth 
in that time thofe multitudes, whereof her army 
was compofed. Let us then fee with whom lhe en¬ 
countered in that war with this her powerful army: 
even with a multitude, rather exceeding, than equal¬ 
ing her own, conduced by Staurobates king of In¬ 
dia beyond Indus \ of whofe multitudes this is the 
witnefs of Diodor. Siculus. Staurobaies y avitis majo- 
ribuSy quam qu<e erant SemiramidiSy copiis i Stauro¬ 
bates gathering together greater troops than thole of 
Semiramis. If then thefe numbers of Indians had 
beenencreafed but by a colony fent out from Shinaar 
(and that alfo after Babel was built, which no doubt 
took fome time in the performance) this encreafe 
in the eaft, and this army of Staurobates mull have 
been made of Hone, or fomewhat elfe by miracle. 
F or as the numbers which Semiramis gathered might 
eafily grow up in that time from fo great a troop 
as Nimrod brought with him into Babylonia (as 
lhall be demonftrated hereafter in the ftory of Ifraei) 
fo could not any fuch time, by any multiplication 
natural, produce lb many bodies of men, as were 
in the Indian Army victorious over StmiramiSy if 
the colonies fent thither had been fo late as Babel 
overturned, and the confufion of languages. For 
if we allow 65 years time after the flood, before 
Nimrod was born: of which 30 years to Cujhy ere he 
begat Seba, after whom he had * Havilaby Sabtah, 
Raamahy and Sabtecha : and then 30 years to Raa- 
maby ere he begat Sheba and Dedan, both which 
were born before Nimrod: and five years to his five 
elder brothers, which make 65, and then twice 
30 years for two generations more, as for Nimrody 
Sheba and Dedan with others, to beget their fons, 
and that a third generation might grow up, which 
makes in all 125 years, there will then remain fix 
years to have been fpent in travelling from the 
eaft, ere they arrived in Shinaar in the year after 
the flood 131. And fo the followers of Nimrod 
might be of fufficient multitude. But as for thole 
which make him to have arrived at Shinaar in the 
year 101: and the confufion to have been at Pcleg’s 
birth, thefe men do all by miracle: they beget 
whole nations without the help of time, and build 
Nimrod's tower in the air •, and not on thofe low 
and marlhy grounds (which require found founda¬ 
tions) in the plains of Shinaar. For except that 
huge tower were built in a day, there could be 
no confufion in that year 101, or at Peleg’s birth. 
And therefore it is far more probable, that Nimrod 
ufurped regal authority in the 131ft year after the 
flood (according to Berofus) and that the work of 
Babel lafted forty years (according to Glycas) b ho- 
minibus in ea perficienda tot is 40 annis inc affirm la¬ 
bor antibus i Men labouring in vain 40 years to fi- 
nifh it. By which account it falls out, that it was 
170 years after the flood, ere a colony were fent in¬ 
to Eafl India j which granted (the one being the 
main body, and the other but a troop taken thence) 
it can hardly be believed, that Staurobates could 


have exceeded Semiramis in numbers: who being 
then emprefs of all that part of the world, gather¬ 
ed the moft of nations into one body. 

f VI. 

The fourth argument from divers conf.derations in 
the perfon of Noah. 

F ourthly, It is no way probable, that Noah , 
who knew the world before the flood, and had 
lived therein the long time of 600 years, was all 
that fpace, 130 years after the flood, without any 
certain habitation: no, it will fall out, and better 
agree with reafon, that Nimrod was but the con¬ 
ductor of thofe people, by Noah deftined and ap¬ 
pointed to fill and inhabit that middle part of the 
earth and the weftern world (which travels Noah 
put over to young and able bodies) and that Noah 
himfelf, then covered with many years, planted him¬ 
felf in the fame place which God had affigned him; 
which was where he firft came down out of the 
ark from the waters: for it is written, that after 
Noah came down out of the ark he planted a vine¬ 
yard, and became a husbandman : whofe bufinefs 
was to drefs and manure the earth, and not to range 
over fo many parts of the world, as from Armenia 
into y Irabia Foolixy where he fhould (if the tradi¬ 
tion be found) have left certain colonies: thence into 
Africa towards Triton ; then into Spainy where 
they fay he fettled other companies •, and built cities 
after the names of Noela and Noegla his Ions wives: 
from thence into Italy, where they fay he found 
his fon Cham the Saturn of Egypt , who had cor¬ 
rupted the people and fubjeCts of Gomer in his ab- 
fence: with whom Noah (as they make the ftory) 
had patience for three years •, but then finding no 
amendment, they fay, he banifhed him out of Ita¬ 
ly. Thefe be but the fancies of Berofus Annianus , 
a plain imitation of the Grecian fables. For let eve¬ 
ry reafonable man conceive, what it was to travel 
far in fuch a foreft as the world was, when after fb 
great a rotting of the earth by the flood, the fame 
lay wafte and overgrown for 130 or 140 years, 
and wherein there could hardly be found either path 
or paflage through which men were able to creep, 
for woods, bufhes and briars that in thofe years 
were grown up. 

And there are fo many reafons, proving that 
Noah never came into the valley of Shinaar, as we 
need not fufpett his paffage into Italy or Spain: for 
Noah, who was father of all thofe nations, a man 
reverenced both for his authority, knowledge, ex¬ 
perience and piety, would never have permitted his 
children ana iflues to have undertaken that unbe¬ 
lieving prefumptuous work of Babel. Rather by 
his prefence and prevalent perfuafions he would 
have bound their hands from fo vain labours, and, 
by the authority which he received even from God 
himfelf, he would have held them in that awful 
fubjeftion, as whatfoever they had vainly conceived 
or feared, yet they durft not havedifobey’d theper- 
fonal commandment of him, who in the beginning 
had a kind of regal authority over his children and 
people. Certainly, Noah knew right well, that the 
former deftruftion of mankind was by themlelves 
purchafed through cruelty and difobedience •, and 
that to diftruft God, and to raife up building againft 
his Almighty power, was, as much as in them lay* 
a provocation of God to lay on them the fame, if 
not a more lharp affliction. Wherefore, there is no 
probability, that ever he came fo far weft as Ba¬ 
bylonia •, but rather, that he fent thofe numbers 
which came into Shinaar (being the greateft troop, 


* Gen. 10. 7* & Glyc. in Gen. & deTurris exftructione, fol. 173. 


Digitized by 


Googl 


bccaufc 

e 











Chap. VII. The History <?/ A World. 69 


becaufe they had the greateft part of the world to 
plant) under Nimrod, or thofe upon whom he ulurp- 
ed. Nauclerus and Creleftinus take the teftimony 
of Methodius bifliop of Tyre for current, that there 
were three leaders of the people after their encreafe 
(to wit) Nimrod, Suphene and Juktan : of which 
Nimrod commanded the iflues of Cham, Jcktan of 
Sem, and Suphene of Japbet. This opinion I can¬ 
not judge of, altho’ I will not doubt, but that fo 
great a work as the world’s plantation could not 
be affe&ed without order and conduction. 

Of the fons of Son : Joktan, Havila and Ophiry 
are efpecially noted to have dwelt in the Eajl-In¬ 
dies. The reft of Sem' s iflues had alfo the regions 
of Perfia and the other adjoining to Indus, and 
held alfo a part of Chaldea for a time : for Abra¬ 
ham inhabited Ur, till he was thence called by God ; 
and whether they were the fons of Joktany or of all 
the reft a certain number ( Cham and his ifliie only 
excepted) that Noah kept with himfelf, it cannot 
be known. Of which plantation I fhall fjieak at 
large in the chapter following. 

Now another reafon which moves me to believe 
that Noah ftayed in the eaft, far away from all thofe 
that came into Shinaar , is that MoJ'es doth not in 
any word make mention of Noah in all the ftory of 
the Hebrews , or among any of thofe nations which 
contended with them. And Noah, being the fa¬ 
ther of all mankind, and the chofen fervant of God, 
was too principal a perfon, to be either forgotten 
or negleCted, had he not (in refpeCt of his age and 
weariiome experience of the world) withdrawn him¬ 
felf, and refted apart with his belt beloved, giving 
himfelf to the fervice and contemplation of God 
and heavenly things, after he had directed his chil¬ 
dren to their deftin’d portions. For he landed in a 
warm and fertile foil, where he planted his vine¬ 
yard, and drefs’d the earth •, after which, and his 
thankfgiving to God by facrifice, he is not re- 
membred in the feriptures, becaufe he was fo far 
away from thofe nations of which Mofes wrote : 
which were the Hebrews chiefly, and their enemies 
and borderers. 

t VII. 

Of the fenfelefs opinion of Annius the commentator 
upon Berofus \ who finds divers places where the 
ark refted\ as the Cafpian and Gordisean hills, 
which are three hundred miles afuncler \ and alfo 
fame place of Scythia. 

I T remaineth now that we examine the arguments 
and authorities of frier Annius , who in his com¬ 
mentaries upon Berofus and others, laboureth mar- 
velloufly to prove, that the ark of Noah refted up¬ 
on the Armenian mountains called Cafpii •, which 
mountains feparate Armenia from the upper Media, 
and do equally belong to both. And becaufe all 
his authors fpeak of the mountains Gordi<ei, he hath 
no other fhift to unite thefe opinions, but by unit¬ 
ing thofe far diftant mountains together. To effect 
which he hath found no other invention, than to 
charge thofe men with error which have carefully 
overfeen, printed, and publifhed * Ptolemy's geo¬ 
graphy, in which they were altogether diflevered : 
tor that laft edition of Mercator's fets thefe hills 
five degrees (which makes three hundred Englifh 
miles) afunder. And certainly, if we look into 
thofe more ancient copies of Villanovanus and o- 
thers, we fhall find nothing in them to help An¬ 
nius withal: for in thofe the mountains Cafpii ftand 
feven degrees to tire eaft of the Gord'tcei, which 
make 420 miles. And for thofe authors, by whofe 


authority Annius ftrengthneth himfelf, Diodorus , 
whom he fo much followeth, giveth this judgment 
upon them in the like difpute. b Aberrarunt vero 
omnes, non negligentia, fed regnorum fetus ignorant idy 
They have all erred (faith he) not through negli¬ 
gence, but through ignorance of the fituation of 
kingdoms. But for an induction, to prove that 
the ark of Noah flood on the mountains of Arme¬ 
nia, he beginneth with the antiquity of the Scythians: 
and to prove the fame, he citeth c Marcus PortiuS 
Cato, who avoweth, that 250 years before Ninus 
the earth was overflown with waters •, Et in Scy¬ 
thia Saga renatum mortale genus ; And that in Scy¬ 
thia Saga die flock of mortal men was renewed. 
The fame author alfo teacheth that the Umbri be¬ 
fore remembred (who were fo called, becaufe faved 
from Deucalion’s flood) were the fons of the Galli, 
a nation of the Scythians. Ex his veniffe Janum 
cum Dyrim (ft Gallis pi ogenitoribus Umbrorum ; 
From thefe Scythians , he faith, that Janus came 
with Dyrim and with the Galli the progenitors of 
the Umbri ; and again, Equidem principatus ori¬ 
gins femper Scythis tribnitur ; Certainly the prime 
antiquity of oflf-fpring is always given to the Scy¬ 
thians. And herein truly I agree with Annius , 
that thofe regions called Scythia and now Tart aria, 
and by fume writers Sarmatia Afiatica , were among 
the firft peopled : and they held the greateft part 
of Aft a under tribute till Ninus's time. Alfo d Pli¬ 
ny culleth the Umbri , which long fince inhabited 
Italy, Gens antiquijjima , A molt ancient nation, 
who defeended of tlufe Scythian .. Now that which 
Annius laboureth, is to prove that thefe ancient 
Scythians (meaning the nephews of Noah ) did firft 
inhabit that region of the mountains, on which the 
ark refted ■, and confefling that this great fhip was 
grounded in Armenia , he feigned a nation of Scy¬ 
thians called Araxea , taking name of the moun¬ 
tain Ararat , near the river of Araxes. And be¬ 
caufe his author Cato helpeth him in part (to wit, 
that in Scythia mankind was reftored after the 
great flood, 250 years before Ninus) and in part 
utterly deftroyeth his conceit of Armenia , by ad¬ 
ding the word Saga, as in Scythia Saga renatum 
mortale genus , In Scythia Saga mankind was re- 
ftor’d : he therefore in the Proem of his commen¬ 
tary upon c Berofus, leaveth out the addition of Saga 
altogether in the repitition of Cato's words, and 
writes, i Homines in Scythia falvatos. For Scythia 
Saga or Setae is undoubtedly under the mountains 
of Paropanifus, on which, or near which, it is moft 
probable that the ark firft took ground j and from 
thofe eaft parts (according to t Mofes) came all thofe 
companies which crcCtcd the tower of Babel in 
Shinaar or Babylonia. 

But now the Lieft authority which Annius hath, 
is out of Diodorus: where he hath read, that the 
Scythians were originally Armenians, taking name 
a Scytha rege eoturn, from Scytha their king. But 
(in a word) we may fee his vanity, or rather in¬ 
deed his falfhood, in citing this place. For Dio¬ 
dorus, a moft approved and diligent author, begin- 
eth in that place with thefe w'ords, Tabulantur Scy- 
thee ; The Scythians fable ; and his interpreter in 
the table of that work, giveth this title to that very 
chapter. Scytbarum origo (ft fucceffus, fabula The 
original and fuccefs of the Scythians, a fable. And 
indeed there needs no great difproof hereof, fince 
Ptolemy doth diredtly delineate Scythia Saga, or 
Saco:, and lets them in 130 degrees of longitude : 
and the Per fans (faith Herodotus) call all the Scy¬ 
thians Saca, which Pliny confirmeth: for in re- 
fpe< 5 t that thefe Sucre (faith L Pliny) are the next 


_ * Ptof. AA.-tTab. 3. S Diod. l.c. x. c Cato de orip.par; prim*. 
Tab- 7 - t Gen. 11. 2. h Lib. 6. c. 17. 

No. 5. 


4 Plir. 1 . 3. c. 14 * Berof. I. 1. f Ptol. Afix 

S Scythians 

Digitized by VjOOQ 1C 


70 The History 

Scythians to the Perftans, therefore they give all the 
reft that name. Now tlut any nation in Armenia 
can neighbour the Perftans, there is no man bc- 
lievcth. But this fuppofed Scythia Araxea in Ar¬ 
menia Jieth in 78 degrees of longitude (that is) 42 
degrees diftant from, the Sac<e \ and the country 
about Araxes, Ptolemy calleth Coltbene and Sodu- 
cene and Sacapene, without any mention of Scythia 
at ail: and yet all thofe which are or were reputed 
Scythians, either within Irnaus or without, to the 
number of 100 feveral nations, are by 4 Ptolemy 
precifely fet down. 

But to come to thole later authors, whereof fome 
have written, others have feen a great part of thofe 
north-eaft regions, and fearched their antiquities with 
great diligence : firft, Marius Niger boundeth Scy¬ 
thia within Irnaus , in this manner: (for Scythia 
without theft mountains is alfo beyond our pur- 
pofe.) Scythia intra Imaum montem ea ef, quoe 
proprio Vocabulo Gaff aria hoc tempore dicitur : ah oc- 
cafu Sarmatia A/iatica : ab oriente Imao monte : a 
f'eptcntrione Terra incognita : a meridie Saccis, Sog- 
dianiSy MargianiSy ufquc ad oflia Oxx amnis in Hyr- 
canum mare exeuntis \ et parte ipfius marts bine uf- 
que ad Rba fiuminis oflia terminatur : Scythia with¬ 
in the mountain Irnaus is that part of the world, 
which in their own fpcech is at this time called 
Gaffaria ; and the fame is bounded on the weft- 
fidc by Sarmatia Afatica (or ot Afia) on the eaft 
by the Imaan mountains: on the north by unknown 
lands: on the fouth by Saccce (which are the Saco) 
the Sogdianiy and the Margiani, to the mouth of 
OxuSy falling into the Hyrcan fea, and by a part of 
the fame fea, as fiir as the mouth of Rha. b 

Now if Niger fets all Sarmatia Afatica, to the 
weft of Scythia, then Sarmatia ( c qu<e magna fant re- 
gio eft, quoe innumeras nationes complctlitur $ 
Which is a great region, comprehending innume¬ 
rable nations (laith Niger ) much of it being be¬ 
tween Scythia and Armenia, doth fu/Hcicntly war¬ 
rant us, that Armenia can be no part of Scythia ; 
and to make it more plain, he diflevereth Sarma¬ 
tia it ftlf from any part of Armenia, by the regions 
ot d Colchis, Iberia, Albania which he leaveth on the 
right hand of Sarmatia, and yet nukes Sarmatia 
but the weft bound of Scythia. 

And for Paulus Venetus, he hath not a word of 
Armenia among the Tartarian, or Scythian nations; 
neither doth his fellow frier John Plancarpio (cited 
by Vinccntius in his defeription of Scythia) make 
any mention of Armenia 1 neither doth Hay tonus, 
an Armenian born, of the blood of thofe kings (tho* 
afterwards a monk) ever acknowledge himiclf for 
a Tartarian, or of the Scythian races defeended : 
tho’ he writes that ftory at large, gathered by Ni¬ 
colaus Sale uni, and (by the commandment of pope 
Clement V.) in the year 1307 publifhed. 

Neither doth Matthias d Micbon (a canon of 
Cracovia in Polonia) a Sarmatian born, and that 
travelled a great part of Sarmatia Afatica, find 
Armenia any way within the compafs of Tartaria , 
Scythia, or Sarmatia ; and yet no man (whole 
travels are extant) hath oblerved fo much of thofe 
regions as he hath done: proving and difproving 
many things, heretofore fubjedl to difpute. And 
among others he burieth that ancient and received 
opinion, that out of the mountains Riphxi and 
Uyperborei in Scythia, lpring the rivers of Tanais 
or Don, Volga or Edel •, proving by unanfwerable 
experience, dut there are no luch mountains in 
return natura ; and indeed the heads and foun- 


of the Wo R l d. Book I. 

tains of thofe famous rivers, are now by the trade 
of Mufcovia known to every merchant, and that 
they arife out of Jakes, low, woody, and marlhy 
grounds. The river of Tanais or Don, arifetii to 
the fouth of the city Tttllet, fome twenty Englifb 
miles, out of a lake called hvanoivefero in the great 
wood Okenitzkilies or Jepiphanolies. Volga, which 
Ptolemy calls Rba, and the Tartars call Edel, rifeth 
out of a lake called Frowst, in the great wood 
Vodkonzki: from which lake the two other famous 
rivers flow of Boryflhenes (now Nyeper) and Dfuina 
or Dizidna. And diis learned “Polonian doth in 
this fort bound the European Sarmatia. In Sar¬ 
matia of Europe arc the regions of Ruffians, Lithua¬ 
nians, Mufcovtans, and thofe adjoining, bounded 
on the weft by the river of ' Vi (fa, the name per¬ 
chance mifprinted Viffa for Viflula, a river which 
parts Germany and Sarmatia: and for the e;ift bor¬ 
der he nameth Tanais or Don. Sarmatia Afatica 
he cutteth from Europe by the fame river Tanais , 
and the Cafpian fea, to with-hold it from ftretching 
farther eaft : this Afan Sarmatia being part of that 
Scythia which Ptolemy called) Scythia intra Imaum 
montem ■, Scythia within the mountain Irnaus. And 
the lame Matthias Micbon farther affirmeth, that 
the Scythians (which frier Annins would make Ar¬ 
menians') came not into Sarmatia Afatica it felt, 
above three hundred and a few odd years before his 
own time: theft be his words. Confat earn effe 
gentem novam , If adventitiam a partibus orientis 
(mutatis fedibus) paulo plus abhinc trecentis annis 
Afue Sarmatiam ingreffam : It is manifeft (faith he, 
fpeaking of the Scythian nation) that this is a late 
planted nation, come from the coalts of the eaft ; 
from whence they entered into Afia, and gat new 
feats a little more than three hundred years fince : 
For indeed before that time the Goths or Pouloci 
inhabited Sarmatia Afatica. And this Matthias 
lived in the year 1511, and this his difeourfe of 
Sarmatia was printed at Augufla in the year 1506, 
as Bucholzerus in his chronology witnefleth. Now 
theft Scythians (faith he) came from the eaft ; for 
in the eaft it was that the ark of Noah relied -, and 
the Scythce Sac# were thofe people which lived at 
the north foot of thofe mountains of Taurus or Ara¬ 
rat, where they encounter or begin to mix tJtcm- 
felves with die great Irnaus. And were there no 
other teftimony than the general defeription of the 
earth now extant, and the witnefs of Ptolemy, it is 
plain, that between all parts of Armenia and Scy¬ 
thia, there are not only thofe three regions of Col¬ 
chis, Iberia, and Albania, but the Cajpian fea: on 
the eaft fhore of which fea, but not on the weft, or 
on that part which any way toucheth Armenia ; 
there are indeed a nation of Scythians (called A- 
r iacte) between Jaxartus and Jaclus \ but what are 
thefe Scythians to any Ariac<e, or Scythia Araxea, 
which Annius placeth in Armenia, more dian the 
Scythians of Europe. 

t VIII. 

The fifth argument: The vine mufl grow naturally 
near the place where the ark rtfled. 

T O this if we add the confideration of diis 
part of the text, 8 That Noah planted a vine¬ 
yard, we lhall find that the fruit of the vine or rai- 
fin did not grow naturally in that part of Armenia , 
where diis refting of the ark was fuppofed : for it 
the vine was a ftranger in Italy and France, and 
brought from other countries thither, it is not pro- 


1 Tab. Af:x 7 & S. S Rha nmv Wolga. c Com. 2. Afue, fol. 472. d Ad mcricUm fievo Bofphoro parf fejtentricralb p°n- 
te ttuxini ufquc in oftiurn Ccracis iluvii : unde rcliftis a parte dextra Colchis, Ibcris, Allanilquc in Littus Hyrc. ni maris p r y vc “ 
nit. Spec. hilt. 1. 30 e Sig. Hcrberilcin. f Cranzeus callcth this rfcur WiiLuif, Isigrr Dravamansu. l*om Mela Viiula, 
&-Plin. V illillus. 8 Gen. 9. 20 . 

bable 


Digitized by 


Google 



Chap. VII. The History c/ World. 71 


bablethat it grew h&turally in Armenia, being a 
far colder country. For : Tyrrhenus firft brought 
vines into France, and Safurnus into Latium : yea 
at fuch tittie as 1 Brennus and the Gauls invaded Ita¬ 
ly there were few or no vines in France. For (faith 
Plutarch in the life of Camillus) the Gauls remained 
between the Pyrencei and the Alps, near unto the 
Senones, where they continued a long time, until 
they drunk wine, which was firft brought them out 
of Italy ; and after they tafted thereof they halted 
to inhabit that country, which brought forth fuch 
pleafant fruit: fo as it appeared, that the plant of 
the vine was not natural in France, but from Italy 
brought thither •, as by Saturn from elfewhere into 
Italy. 

Now it is manifeft that Noah travelled not far to 
feek out the vine. For the plantation thereof is re- 
membred, before there was any counfel how to dif- 
pofc of the world among his children; and the 
firft thing he did was to till the ground, and to 
plant a vineyard, after his facrifice and thankfgiv- 
itig to God ; and wherefoever the ark refted, there 
did the vine grow naturally. From whence it 
doth no where appear that he travelled far : for die 
l'criptures teach us, that he was a hufbandman, and 
not a wanderer. 

t IX. 

An finer to an objection out of the words of the text: 
The Lord fcattered them from thence upon the 
face of the whole earth. 

A N D that all the children of Noah came toge¬ 
ther into Shinaar, it doth not appear, faving 
that it maybe inferred out of thefe words \_frum 
thence'] becaufe it is written : So that the Lord fcat¬ 
tered them from thence upon all the earth \ which 
hath no other fenfe, but that the Lord fcattered 
them (to wit) thofe that built this tower : for thofe 
were from thence difperfed into all the regions of 
the north and fouth, and to the weft ward. And 
by thefe words of Sibylla (as they are converted) it 
feemeth that all came not together into Shinaar, for 
they have this limitation : flhiidam eorum turrem 
adifiedrunt alt if imam, quaft per earn cal urn ejfcnt af- 
cenfuri \ Certain of them built a molt high tower, 
as if they meant thereby to have fealed the heavens. 

■[ X. 

An an fiver to the objection of the name of Ararat, 
taken for Armenia: and the height of the hills 
there. 

B U T before I conclude this part, it is neceffa- 
ry to fee and confidcr, what part of feripture, 
and what reafon may be found out to make it true 
or probable, that the ark of Noah was forfaken by 
the waters on the mountains of Armenia. For the 
text hath only thefe words: b The ark refled on (or 
upon) the mountains of Ararat or Armenia, faith 
the marginal note of the Geneva, the Chaldean Pa- 
raphrijl calls it Kardu \ of which the higheft hath 
the name of Lubar, faith c Epipbanius. Now this 
Ararat (which the Septuagint do not convert at all, 
but keep the fame word) is taken to be a mountain 
of Armenia, becaufe Armenia it felf had anciently 
that name: foas firft out of the name, and fecond- 
ly out of the height (which they fuppofe exceeded 
all others) is the opinion taken, that the ark firft fat 
thereon. 

But thefe liippofitions have no foundation: for 
neither is Ararat of Armenia alone, neither is any 
part, or any of thofe mountains, of equal feature to 


many other mountains of the world; and yet it 
doth not follow, that the ark found the higheft 
mountain of all others to reft on: for the plains 
were alio uncovered, before Noah came out ot die 
ark. Now if there were any agreement among 
writers of this Ararat, and that they did not differ 
altogether therein, we might give more credit to 
the conceit. For in the books of the Sibyls it is 
written, that the mountains of Ararat are in Phry¬ 
gia, upon which it was fuppofrd that the ark flay’d 
after the flood. And the better to particularize 
the place and feat of thefe mountains, and to prove 
them in Phrygia, and not Armenia, they are placed 
where the city of Coeicues was afterwards built. Like- 
wile in die fame defeription lhe maketh mention of 
Marfyas, a river which runneth through part of 
Phrygia, and afterwards joincth it felf with the river 
Meander : which is far from the Gor dican mountains 
in Armenia. We may all'o find a great miftaking 
in Jofepbus (tlio’ out of Berofus, who is in effcfl the 
fuller of diis opinion) that jofepbus lets Ararat be¬ 
tween Armenia and Parthia, towards Adiabene, and 
affirmeth withal, that in the province of Cocron, by 
others Kairos and Arnos, fo called by reafon that 
the waters have from thence no defeem, nor iffue 
out, the people vaunt that they had in thofe days 
referved Ibme pieces of Noah's ark. But Parthia 
toucheth nowhere upon Armenia , Sox Armenia bor- 
dereth Adiabene, a province of AJfyria : fo that all 
Media and a part ot Afjyria is between Parthia and 
Armenia. Now whereas die difeove ry of the moun¬ 
tains Curdiai was firft borrowed out of Berofus by 
Jofepbus ; yet die text which Jofepbus citeth out of 
Berofus, differs far from the w'ords of that Berofus, 
which wandereth up and down in thefe days, fet 
out by Annius. For Berofus cited by Jofepbus hath 
thefe words: Fertur & navigii bujus pars in Armenia , 
apud montem Cordiaorum juperefl'e, & quofdam bitu¬ 
men inde abrafum fecum reportare , quo vice amulcti 
loci bujus homines uti folent (which is) It is reported 
alfo that a part of this fliip is yet remaining in Ar¬ 
menia upon die Cordiean mountains ; and that di¬ 
vers do lerape from it the bitumen or pitch, and 
carrying it with them, they ufe it inllead of an 
amulet. But Annius' s edition of the fragment of 
Berofus ufeth thefe words: Nam elevata ab aquis 
in Gordian montis vert ice quievit, cujus adhuc dicitur 
aliqua pars ejfc, £•? homines ex ilia bitumen tollere 
quo muxime utuntur ad expiationem •, For the whole 
ark being lifted up by the waters, refted on the top 
of the Gordiean mountains, of which it is report¬ 
ed that fomc parts remain, and that men do carry 
thence ot the bitumen to purge by facrifice there¬ 
with. So as in thefe two texts (bdides the diffe¬ 
rence of words) the name is diverfly written: the 
ancient Berofus writes Cordiai with a £C] and the 
fragment Gordiat with a [G :] the one that the bi¬ 
tumen is ufed for a prelervative againft poifon or 
inchantment; the other in facrifice ; and if it be 
laid that they agree in the general, yet it is reported 
by neither from any certain knowledge, nor from 
any approved author: for one of them ufeth the 
word \_fertur -,3 the other [ dicitur:] the one, that fo 
it is reported ; the other, that fo it is faid : and 
both but by hearfey, and therefore of no authority 
nor credit. For common bruit is 1b infamous an 
hiftorian, as wife men neither report after it, nor 
give credit to any tiling they receive from it. 

Furthermore, thefe mountains which Ptolemy calls 
Gordnei, are not thofe mountains which himlelf 
giveth to Armenia, but he calleth the mountains of 
Armenia Mofhici. Thefe be his own words: d Mon¬ 
tes Armenia nominantur ii t qui Mofchici appellantur t 


* Servius iEneid. Eutropius. b Gen. 8. 14. 


c Epiph. 1 . 1. cont. Hxref. 4 Ptol Afix* Tab. 


Digitized by 



qui 






!The History of the World. Book I. 


7 ^ 

q ui protenduntur ufque ad fuperjacentcm partem Ponti 
Cappadocum & mom qui Paryardes dicitur : The 
mountains of Armenia are they which are called 
Mofcbici, which ftretch along to the higher part of 
Pontus of the Cappadocians j alfo the hill which is 
called Paryardes ; which mountains Pliny calleth 
* Pariedri, and both which lye to the north o (Gor- 
di<ei or Baris, in 43 and 44 and a half •, and die 
Gordiaan mountains in 39 and a half: from the 
northermoft of which did the Georgians take their 
names, who were firft Gordians and then Georgians , 
who, amidft all the ftrength of the greateft infidels 
of Perfia and Turkey , do ftill remain Cbriflians. 
Concerning the other fuppofitions, that the moun¬ 
tains of Gorditei, otherwife Bans, Kardu or Lubar 
(which Ptolemy calleth Torgodiaion) are the higheft 
of the world, the fame is abfolutcly fiilfe. 

-f- XI. 

Of Caucafus, and divers far higher hills than the 
Armenian. 

F OR the beft Cofmograpbers with others, diat 
have feen the mountains of Armenia, find them 
far inferiour, and under-fet to divers other mountains 
even in that part of the world, and elfewhere: as 
the mountain Athos between Macedon and Thrace , 
which Ptolemy calls Olympus , now called Lacas 
(faith Caflaldus) is far furmounting any mountain 
that ever hath been feen in Armenia : for it cafteth 
lhade three hundred furlongs, which is thirty-feven 
miles and upwards: of which Plutarch , 0 Athos 

adumbrat later a Lemnue bovif, Athos fhadoweth 
the cow of Lemnos. Alfo the mount of Olympus in 
Theffaly is faid to be of that height, as neither 
the winds, clouds, or rain overtop it. Again, the 
mountain of Antandrus in Myfia, not far from Ida, 
whence the river Scamandrus floweth, which run¬ 
neth through Troy , is alfo of a far more admiration 
than any in Armenia , and may be feen from Con- 
Jlantinople. There are alfo in Mauritania near the 
fca, the famous mountains of Atlas , of which He¬ 
rodotus. Extat in hoc mart mom, cut nomen Atlas, 
it a fublimis efj'e dicitur, ut ad illins verticem oculi 
snort alium per venire non poffnt \ Upon this coaft 
there is a mountain called Atlas , whole height is 
faid to be fuch as the eye of no mortal man can 
difeern the top thereof. And if we may believe 
Ariftotle, then are all tliefe inferiour to Caucafus, 
which he maketh the moll notorious both for breadth 
and height. c Caucafus mom omnium maximus, qui 
aflivum ad ortum funt, acumine atque latitudine, cu¬ 
ius juga a foie radiantur ufque ad conticinium ab ortu : 
(ft iterum ab occafu. Caucafus (faith Ariftotle ) is the 
greatefl mountain both for breadth and height of 
all thofe in the north-eall, whofe tops are lightned 
by the fun beams, ufque ad conticinium (which is, 
faith Macrobius ) between the firft crowing after 
midnight and the break of day: others affirm, that 
the top of this mountain holds the fun beams when 
it is dark in the valley ; but I cannot believe either: 
for the higheft mountain of the world known, is 
that of Tencrif in the Canaries : which although it 
hatli nothing to the weftwardofit for 1000 leagues 
together but the ocean fea, yet doth it not enjoy the 
fun's company at any fuch late hours. Befides, 
thefe mountains which Ariftotle calleth Cattest, are 
thofe which feparate Colchis from Iberia \ though 
(indeed) Caucafus doth divide both Colchis, Iberia 
and Albania , from Sarmatia : for he acknowledg¬ 
ed! that the river of Phafts rileth in the fame moun¬ 
tain, which himfclt calleth Caucafus, and that Pha- 
fts Ipringeth from thofe hills which funder Colchis 


from Iberia, falling afterwards into Euxinus: which 
river (it is manifeft) yieldeth it felf to the fea two 
degrees to the north of Trapezus (now Trabefunda) 
howfoever Mercator brings it from Paryardes. 

-f- XII. 

Of divers incongruities, if in this ftory vue fhould take 
Ararat for Armenia. 

S O as itdoth firft appear, that there is no cer¬ 
tainty what mountain Ararat was: for the 
books of the Sibyls fet it in Phrygia •» and Berofus 
in Armenia : and as for Berofus' s authority, thofe 
men have great want of proofs that borrow from 
thence. 

Secondly, That Baris was the higheft hill, and 
therefore moft likely that the ark grounded thereon, 
the aflertion and fuppofuion have equal credit: for 
there are many hills which exceed all thole oiAr¬ 
menia 1 and if they did not, yet it doth not follow 
(as is before written) diat the ark fhould fit on the 
higheft. 

Thirdly, It cannot be proved that there is any 
fuch hill in Armenia, or in rerum natura, as Baris \ 
for Baris (faith Jerome) fignifieth high towers: and 
Co may all high hills be called indifferently ; and 
therefore we may better give the name of Baris to 
the hills of Caucafus (out of which Indus rifeth) than 
to any hills of Armenia. For thofe of Caucafus in 
the eaft, are undoubtedly the higheft of A ft a. 

Fourthly, The authors thcmfelves do not agree 
in what region the mountains Gordtcei Hand: for 
Ptolemy diftinguifheth the mountains of Armenia 
from the Gordiean, and calleth thofe of Armenia 
Mofcbici and Patyardes, as aforefaid. Now Pary¬ 
ardes is feated near die middle of Armenia , out of 
which on die weft fide rifeth Euphrates, and out of 
the eaft fide Araxis: and the mountains Mofcbici 
are thofe hills which disjoin Colchis, Iberia and Al¬ 
bania (now the country of the Georgians) from Ar¬ 
menia. 

't- XIII. 

Of the contrary ft nation of Armenia to the place no¬ 
ted in the text : and that it is no marvel that 
the fame ledge of hills running from Armenia to 
India, Jhottld keep the fame name all along: and 
even in India be called Ararat. 

L Aftly, we mud blow up this mountain Ararat 
it felf, orelfe we muftdig it down, and carry 
it out of Armenia ; or find it elfewhere, and in a 
warmer country, and (withal) fet it eaft from Sbi- 
naar: or elfe we fhall wound the truth it felf with 
the weapons of our own vain imaginations. 

Therefore to make the miftaking open to every 
eye, we muft underftand, that Ararat (named by 
Mofes) is not any one hill, fo called, no more than 
any one hill among thofe mountains, which divide 
Italy from France, is called the Alps: or any one 
among thofe, which part France from Spain , is the 
Pyrenean but as thelc being, continuations of ma¬ 
ny hills, keep one name in divers countries: foall 
that long ledge of mountains, which Pliny calleth 
by one name a Taurus, and Ptolemy both Taurus, 
Niphates, Coatras , Cor onus, Sart phi , until they en¬ 
counter and crofs the mountains of the great Imam, 
are of one general name, and are called die moun¬ 
tains of Ararat or Armenia, becaulc from thence or 
thereabouts they feem to arife. So all thefe moun¬ 
tains of Ilyrcania, Armenia , Cor axis, Cafpii, Alof- 
chici, Amazontci , Eniocbi, Scythici (thus diverfly 
called by Pliny, and others) Ptolemy calls by one 
name Caucafus , lying between the leas Cafpittnt and 


» Plin I. 6. c. 9. k Plutar. Muiift. Cofin. « Ariflot. Met. cor. I. 1. c. 13. * Pliny in bis thfinuitn >.f I.ycia, 1 . j. c. 27. 

Euxinus: 


Digitized by 


Google 








Digitized by boogie 

























Digitized by 


Googl 




r 


Chap. VII. The History of the World. 73 


Euxinus: as all thofe mountains which cut afunder 
America, even from the new kingdom of Granado, 
to the (freight of Magellan, are by one name called 
Andes. And as thele mountains of Ararat run eaft 
and weft : fo do thofe marvellous mountains of [ma¬ 
ns ftretch themfelves north and fouth j and being of 
like extent, well near, are called by the name of 
imaus, even as Pliny calleth thele former hills Tau¬ 
rus, and Mofes the hills of Ararat. The reafon of 
feveral names given by Ptolemy was, thereby the 
better to diftinguifh the great regions and kingdoms, 
which thefe great mountains bound and dillever *, 
as Armenia, Mesopotamia, AJfyria , Media, Sufana, 
Perfia, Partbia, Caramania, Aria, Margiana, Bac- 
iria, Sogdiana and Paropanifus: luving all thefe 
kingdoms either on the north or fouth-fule of them. 
For all the mountains of Afia (both the Id's and the 
greater) have three general names (to wit) Taurus, 
Imaus, and Canca/us: and they receive other titles, 
as they fever and divide particular places and regi¬ 
ons. For thefe mountains which funder Cilicia from 
the reft of Afta the* lefs on the north-fide, are called 
Taurus-, and thofe mountains which part it from 
Comagena (a province ol Syria) are called Amanus: 
the mountains called Taurus running eaft and weft, 
as Imaus doth north and fouth. Though Taurus 
die river of Euphrates forceth her paflage, leaving 
the name of Amanus to the mountains on her weft- 
bank ; and on her eaft-fide the mountains are fome- 
dmes known by the name of Tdurus (as in Ptolemy’s 
three tables of A fid) and fometimes Nipbatcs (as in 
the fourth) retaining that uncertain appellation fo 
long as they bound Armenia from Mefopotamia: and 
after the the river of Tigris cutteth them afunder, 
they then take the name of Nipbates altogether, un¬ 
til they feparate AJfyria and Media •, but then they 
call themfelves Coatras, tho’ between die upper and 
nether Media, they do not appear, but altogether 
difeontinue. For at Mazada in Media they are 
not found, but run through the eaftern Media by 
pieces: in the middle of which region they call 
themfelves Orontes , and towards the caft-part Coro- 
nus \ out of the fouthern part whereof the river of 
Bagradus rileth, which divideth the ancient Perfia 
from Caramania : and then continuing their courfe 
euftward by the name of Cor onus, they give to the 
Partbians and Hyrcanians their proper countries. 
This done, they change themfelves into the moun¬ 
tains of Saripbi, out of which rifeth the river Mar- 
gus, afterwards yielding herfelf to Oxus (now Abid) 
and drawing now near their ways end, they firft 
make themfelves the fouth border of Baclria, and 
are then honoured with the title of Paropanifus ; 
and laftly of Caucafia, even where the famous river 
of Indus with his principal companions Ilydafpis 
and Zar<edrus fpring forth, and take beginning. 
And here do thefe mountains build themfelves ex¬ 
ceeding high, to equal the ftrong hills called Ima¬ 
us of Scythia, which encounter each other in 35, 
36, and 37 degrees of latitude, and in t40 of lon¬ 
gitude : of the which the weft parts are now called 
Lelanguer , and the reft Nagracot ; and thefe moun¬ 
tains in this place only arc properly called Caucafe 
(faith 1 Ptolemy ) that is, between Paropanifus and 
Imaus: and improperly, between the two feas of 
Cafpium and Pontus. 

f XIV. 

Of thcbejl vine naturally growing on the fouth fide of 
the mountains Caucafi, and towards the Eaft-In- 
dies: and of other excellencies of the foil. 

OW in this part of the world it is, where the 
mountain and river Janus, and the moun¬ 


tain Nifetts (fo called of Bacchus Nifeus or Nod) 
are found: and on thefe hight-ft mountains of that 
part of the world did Goropius Becanus conceive 
that the ark of Noah grounded after the flood : of 
all his conjectures the mod probable, and by belt 
reafon approved. In his ludofeytbia he hath ma¬ 
ny good arguments, tho’ mix’d with other fiintafti- 
cal opinions of this fubjeft. And as the lame Be¬ 
canus alio notetli; that as in this part of the world 
arc found the belt vines: fo it is as true, that in the 
fame line, and in 34, 35, and 36 degrees of fep- 
tcntrional latitude are the molt delicate wines of 
the world, namely, in Judea, Candia, and orher 
parts of Greece: and likewife in this region of Mar¬ 
giana, and under thele mountains, i’/r^oaffirmeth 
that the molt excellent vines of the world are found ; 
the clufters of grapes containing two cubits of 
length: and it is the more probable, becaufc this 
place agreeth in climate with that part of Palefina, 
where the fearchcrs of the land by Mofes’s direction 
found bunches of equal bignefs at b EJhcol. 

The fruitfulnci's of this place, to wit, on the fouth 
bottom of thefe hills, Curtius wicnefleth. For in 
Margiana, near the mountains of Meros, did Alex¬ 
ander feuft himfdt and his army ten days together, 
finding therein the mod delicate wine of all other. 

f XV. 

The concluf.on, with a brief repeating of divers chief 
points. 

A N D therefore to conclude this opinion of 
Ararat, it is true, that thofe mountains do 
alfo traverl'e Armenia: yea, and Armenia it felf 
fometimes is known by the name of Ararat. But 
as c Pliny giveth to this ledge of high hills, even 
from Cilicia to Paropanifus and Caucafus, the name 
of Taurus: and as the hills of France and Germany 
are called the Alps: and all between France and Spain 
the Pyrenees : and in America the continuation of 
hills for 3000 miles together, the Andes: fo was 
Ararat the general name which Mofes gave them 
the diverfiry of appellations no otherwile growing, 
than by their dividing and bordering divers regions 
and divers countries. For in the like cafe do we 
call the fca, which entreth by Gibraltar, the Medi¬ 
terranean and inland fea; and yet where it wafh- 
cth the coafts of Carthage, and over-againft it, it is 
called Tyrrhenian; between Italy and Greece, Ioni¬ 
um : from Tenice to Durazzo,Adriaticum : between 
Athens and Afia, Aigettm: between Sejlus and Aby- 
dtts, Uellefpont: and afterwards Pontus, Propontis 
and Bofphorus. And as in thefe, fo is the ocean to 
the northeaft part of Scotland called Deucaledoni- 
cum : and on this fide, the Britift fea: to the eaft, 
the German and Baltick, and then the Frozen. 

For a final end of this queftion we muft appeal to 
that judge which cannot err, even to the word of 
truth, which in this place is to be taken and follow¬ 
ed according to the plain fenfe: feeing ic can admit 
neither diftiiuftion, nor other conftrudion than the 
words bear literally, becaufe they are ufed to the 
very fame plain purpofe of a defeription, and the 
making of a true and precife difference of places. 
Surely where the fenfe is plain (and being fo under- 
ftood, it bringeth with it no fubfequent inconveni¬ 
ence or contrariety) we ought to be wary, how we 
fancy to our ielves any new or ftrange expofition j 
and (withal) to refolve our felves, that every word 
(as aforefaid) hath his weight in God’s book. And 
therefore we muft refpeft and reverence the teftimo- 
nies of the feriptures throughout, in fuch fort as St. 
Augufime hath taught us touching the gofpel of 



* Ptol. Tab. A fix. 


k Numb. 13. 24. 


« Lib. 5. c. 27. 

T Chrifil 

J 


Digitized by 


Google 


No. 5. 









74 


The History of the World. Book f. 


Chrijl Jeftts, which Is, Nequis aliter accipiat, quod 
(narrantibus difcipulis Chrifti) in evangelio legerity 
quam ft ip/am ftianum Dei, quam in proprio corpore 
geft ah at, confpester it. That no man otherwife take 
or underftand that which he readeth in the gofpel 
(the difciples of.Chrift having written it) than it he 
had feenthe very hand of the Lord, which he bare 
in his own body, letting it down. 

. The words then of Mofes which end this difputc 
arc thefe; 4 And as they went from the eaft they 
found a plain in the land of Sbinaar, and there they 
abode \ which proveth without controverfy, that 
Nimrod, and all with him came from the eaft into 
Sbinaar •, and therefore the ark of Noah refted and 
took land to the eaftward thereof. For we mult 
remember, that in alj places wherefoever Mofes ma- 
keth a difference of countries, he always precifely 
nameth towards what quarters of the world the 
lame were feated: as where he teacheth the planta¬ 
tion of JoElan, he nameth Sephar, a mount in the 
eaft: where he remembreth Cain’s departure from 
the prefence of God, he addeth: b And Cain dwelt 
in the land of Nod towards the eaft-fide of Eden : 
and when he deferibeth the tents and habitations of 
Abraham after he departed from Sechem, he ufeth 
thefe words: c Afterwards removing thence unto a 
mountain eaftward from Bethel, he pitched his tents: 
having Bethel on the weft fide, and Hai on the eaft: 
and afterwards in the 9th verfe of the fame chapter 
it is written v And Abraham went forth journeying 
towards the fouth: alfo when d Ezekiel prophefy’d 
of Gog and Magog, he fheweih that thele nations of 
Togorma were of the north quarters : and of the 
queen of Saba it is written. That c fte came from the 
fouth to vifit Solomon : And the• magi (or wife men) 
came out of the eaft to offer prefents unto Chtift. 
And that all regions, and thefe travels were precile- 
ly fet down upon the points of the compafs and 
quarters of the world, it is moft manifeft : for Eden 
was due eaft from Judea, Saba fouth from Jerufaltm: 
the way from Bethel to Egypt diredly fouth •, and 
the Coclefyrians, the Tubalines and Magogians inha¬ 
bited the regions diredly north from Paleftina: and 
fo of the reft. But Armenia anfwereth not to this 
description of Sbinaar by Mofes. For to come out 
of Armenia, and to arrive in that valley of Babylo¬ 
nia, is not a journeying from the eaft, nor fo near 
unto the eaft as the north: for Armenia is to the 
weft of the north it felf; and we muft not fay of 
Mofes (whofe hands the Holy Ghoft direded) that 
he erred toto ccelo , and that he knew not eaft from 
weft. For the body of Armenia ftandeth in 43 
degrees feptcntrional, and the north part thereof in 
45 j and thofe Gordiean mountains, whereon it was 
fuppofed that the ark refted, ftand in 41. But Ba¬ 
bylonia , and the valley of Sbinaar are fituated in 3 5, 
and for the longitude (which maketh the difference 
between eaft and weft) the Gordiean mountains ftand 
in 75 degrees, and the valley of Sbinaar in 79 
and 80. And therefore Armenia lieth from Sbinaar 
north-weft, 9 5 degrees from the eaft j and if Arme¬ 
nia had been but north, yet it had differed from 
the eaft one whole quarter of the compafs. But 
Gregory and Jerome warn us. In fcripturis ne mini¬ 
ma differentia omitti debet: nam ftnguli fermones, 
fyllabce, apices (ft puntta in divina feriptura plena 
(unt fenfibus. In the fcripturcs the leaft difference 
may not be omitted: for every fpecch, Syllable, 
note or accent, and point, in divine feriptures 
are replcniflied with their meanings. And there¬ 
fore feeing Mofes teacheth us that the children of 
Noab came from the eaft, we may not believe 
writers (of little authority) who alfo fpeak by hear- 


fay, and by report, Ut fertur, (ft ut dicitur , as Be- 
rofus and Nicolaus Damafcenus, determining herein; 
without any examination of the text’, at all adven¬ 
ture. But this is infallibly true, that Sbinaar lieth 
weft from the place where the ark of Noah refted 
after the flood ; and therefore it firft found ground 
in the eaft, from whence came the firft knowledge 
of all things. The eaft parts were firft civil, which 
had Noah himfelf for an InftrucWr: and diredly 
eaft from Sbinaar , in the fame degree of 35, are the 
greateft grapes and the beft wine. The great ar¬ 
mies alfo, which overtopped in number thofe mil¬ 
lions of Semiramis, prove that thole parts were firft 
planted: and whereas the other opinion hath neither 
feripture nor rcafon fufficient: tor my felf, I build 
bn his words who in plain terms hath told us, that 
the fons of Noah came out of the eaft into Sbinaar, 
and there they abode. And therefore did the ark 
reft on thofe caftern mountains, called by one gene¬ 
ral name ’Taurus, and by Mofes the mountains of 
Ararat, and not on thofe mountains of the nordi- 
weft, as Berofits firft feigned, whom moft part of 
the writers have followed therein. It was, I fay, 
in the plentiful warm eaft where Noah refted, where 
he planted the vine, where he tilled the ground, and 
lived thereon. Placuit veto Noacho agriculture ftu- 
dium, in qua tradauda ipfe omnium peritiffimtis effe 
dicitur : ob eamque rem fua ipfius lingua IJh-Adamatb 
(hoc eft) telluris vir appellatnr celebratufque eft ; The 
ftudy of hufbandry pleafed Noah (faith the excel¬ 
lent learned man Arias Montanus) in the knowledge 
and order of which it is faid, that Noah excelled all 
men: and therefore was he called in his own lan¬ 
guage a man exercifed in the earth. Which alfo 
fheweth that he was no wanderer: and that he 
troubled not himfelf with the contentions beginning 
again in the world, and among men, but fray’d in 
his deftin’d places, and in that part of the world, 
where he was firft delivered out of the prifon of the 
ark, whereinto God had committed him to pre- 
ferve him and mankind. 


CHAP. VIII. 

Of the firft planting of nations after the 
flood; ana of the fons of Noah, Shem, 
Ham, and Japhet, by whom the earth was 
re-peof>led. 

Sect. I. ‘ 

Whether Shem and Ham were elder than Japhet. 

O F thefe fons of Noah, which was the eldeft 
there is a queftion made. 8 St. Auguftine 
efteemed Shem for the eldeft. Ham tor the 
fecond, and Japhet for the youngeft: and herein 
the opinions of writers are divers. But this we 
find every where in the feriptures, and efpecially in 
Mofes, that there was never any refpedl given to the 
eldeft in years, but in virtue, as by the examples of 
Enoch, Abraham, Jacob and David , is made mani¬ 
feft. In a few words, this is the ground of the con¬ 
troverfy: the Latin tranflation, and fo the Geneva, 
hath converted this feripture of Genefts x. 21. in 
thefe words; Unto Shem alfo the father of all the 
fons of Lleber, and elder brother of Japhet, were 
children born. But Junius agreeing with the Scptua- 
gint, placeth the fame words in this manner: To Shem 
alfo the father of all the fons of Heber, and bio- 
ther of Japhet, the eldeft fon were children born : 
fo the tranfpofition of the word [elder'] made this 


a Gen. 11. 2. SGen. io. 30. 4. 16. c Gen. 12. 8. 
Civic. Dei, 1 . 16. c. 3. 


d E2ek. 38. 6. * Match. 12 42. f Match.. 2. 1. 


t Augufl. Je 

difference. 


Digitized by 


Goog[< 







Chap. VIII. The History of the W o r l-d. 


difference. Ftfr if the word {elder'] had followed af¬ 
ter Japbet, is.it is in.the Vulgar.tranflation pla¬ 
ted before if, tfien had it been as plain for Japbet , 
as it is .by thtfe tranfladons .for Stem. NoW. (the 
matter being otherwife indifferent) feeing God’s 
bleffings are trot tied to firft and laft in blood, 
Jbat to the eldeft in piety, yet the arguments are 
ftronger for Japbet than for Sbem. And where the 
fcriptures are plainly underftood without any 
danger or inconvenience, it feemeth ftrange why 
any man of judgment fhould make valuation of 
CDnjefhiral arguments, or mens opinions. For it 
appeareth that Noah,in the five hundredth year of his 
life, begat the firft of his three fons Sbem, Ham, 
and Japbet : and in the fix hundredth year, to wit, 
the hundredth year following,came the general flood •, 
two years after which • Sbem begat Arpbaxad, 
Which, was in the year 602 of Noah's life, and in 
the year of Shem's life one hundred : fo as Sbem 
k was but one hundred years old, two years after the 
flood: and Noah begat his firft-bom, being 500 
years old ; and therefore, were Sbem the elder, he 
had then been 100 years old at the flood, and in 
the fix hundredth year of Noab's life, and not two 
years after. Which feeing the fcriptures before re- 
membred hath denied him, and that it is alfo writ¬ 
ten : b Then Noah awoke from bis wine, and knew 
•what bis younger fon bad done unto him , to wit , Ham \ 
ofneceflity the firft place doth belong to Japbet. 
This younger fon fo converted by the vulgar and 
Geneva, Junius turns it Filius minimus , his young- 
eft fon •, but St. Cbryfoftom takes it otherwife, and 
finds Ham to be the middle or fecond brother, 
and Japbet the youngeft fon of all: which Flam, 
for his difobedience and the contempt of his father, 
{whofe nakednefs he derided) was difinherired, and 
loft the pre-eminency of his birth, as c Efau and 
'Reuben did. Pererius conceiveth that Ham was 
called the younger in refpeft of Sbem the eldeft, 
but avoweth withal, that the Hebrew hath not that 
precife difference of younger and youngeft, becaufe 
it wanteth the comparative degree. It is true that 
Sbem hlmfelf was always named in the firft place, 
yet whereas in the firft verfe of the tenth chapter 
of Genefts, Sbem is accounted before Japbet ; in the 
fecond verfe Mofes leaveth to begin with the iflue 
by Sbem , and reciteth the children of Japbet firft. 
So the firft place was given to Sbem for his electi¬ 
on and benediction, and for this weighty rcfpc< 5 t, 
that the Hebrew nation, Abraham , the prophets, 
David and Chrijl our Saviour were defeended of 
him. And therefore, whether we fhall follow the 
vulgar, Pagninus, and the Geneva , who agree in 
this conversion, Sbem frater Japbet major ; or with 
the Septuaginty Junius, and Tremelius , Sbem fratri 
Japbet major is j or with Pererius, Sbem frater Ja- 
pbet tile magnus : inferring that Sbem was the great 
and famous brother of Japbet, let the reader judge. 

But for ought that I have feen to the contrary, 
it appeareth to me that Japbet was the eldeft. For 
where Pererius qualifieth the ftrength of the former 
argument, that Sbem* s age at the time of the flood 
did not agree with the elderfhip (with a fuppofition 
that the fcriptures took no account of fmallcr num¬ 
bers) I do not find in the fcriptures any fuch ne- 
gle« at all: For it is written, that A Shem was an 
hundred years old, and begat Arpbaxad two years af¬ 
ter the flood: and again in the 12th verfe, So She la 
lived after he begat Ebar four hundred and three 
jearty &c. So as the number of two years, of three 
years, of five years, and afterwards of two years 
were always precifcly accounted. 


Sect. II. 

Of divers things that in all reaftn are to beprej'unied, 
touching the firft planting of the world, as that all 
biflorics mufl yield to Mofes : that the world was 
not planted dll at once , nor Without great directi¬ 
on : and that the known great lords of the flrfl 
ages were of the iffue of Ham. 

B UT let us go unto the world’s plantation after 
the flood, which being righrly underftood, we 
Ihall find that many nations have fuppofed or 
feigned themfelves thofe anceftors and fathers, which 
never faw or approached the bounds of their coun¬ 
tries, and of whom they are by no way or branch 
defeended. For it is plain in the fcriptures how the 
fons and iflucs of Noah were diftributed, and what 
regions were firft planted by diem, from whence 
by degrees the reft of the world was alfo peopled. 
And if any profane author may receive allowance 
herein, the fame muft be with this caution, that 
they take their beginning where the fcriptures end. 
For fo for as the ftory of nations is therein handled, 
we muft know that both the truth and antiquity of 
the books of God find no companions equal, either 
in age or authority. All record, memory, and 
teftimony of antiquity whatfoever, which hath come 
to the knowledge of men, the fame hath been bor¬ 
rowed thence, and therefore later than it, as all care¬ 
ful obfervers of time have noted : among which 
thus writeth Eufebius in the proem of his chrono¬ 
logy. Moles is found more ancient than all thofe 
whom the Grecians make mofl ancient, as Homer, 
Hefiod, and the Trojan war ; and far before Her¬ 
cules, Mufieus, Linus, Chiron, Orpheus, Caftor, 
Pollux, ./Efculapius, Bacchus, Mercurius, and A- 
pollo, and the reft of the Gods of the nations, their 
ceremonies, or holy rites, or prophets : and before all 
the deeds of Jupiter, whom the Greeks have fated 
in the top and highefl turret of their divinity. 

For of the three Jupiters remembred by * Cicero t 
the ancienteft was the fon of Ait her, whofe three 
fons begotten on Proferpina, were born at Athens , 
of which Cecrops was the firft king: and in the end 
of Cesrops's time did Mofes bring the children of If- 
rael out of Egypt. Eduxit Mofes populum Dei ex 
ALgypto novijjimo tempore Cecropis Atbenicnfis regis } 
Mofes brought the children of Ifracl out of Egypt, 
in the laft days of Cecrops king of the Athenians, 
faith 1 St. Auguftine : and yet was not Cecrops the 
founder of the city it felf, but T’hefeus long after 
him. But bccaufe the truth hereof is diverfly pro¬ 
ved, and by many learned authors, I will not cut 
nfunder the purpofe in hand by alledging many au¬ 
thorities, in a needlefs queftion, but leave it to the 
proper place. 


The fons of 
Japbet were* 


f Gomer. 
Magog. 
Madai. 
Javan. 

Fubal. 
Mefljacb. 

and 

Tiras. 


:rhc fans ofs 

Gmn were ?£**"*• 
C Togorma. 

(" Elifha. 
The fons of j Tarfhis. 
Ja van were ft Kittim , & 
\ Dodanim. 


Firft, We are to confider that the world after the 
flood was not planted by imagination, neither had 
the children of Noah wings, to fly from Shinaar to 
the uttermoft border of Europe, Africa, and Aft a 
in haftc, but that thefe children were directed by 
a wife father, who knew thofe parts of the world 
before the flood, to which he difpofed his children 
after it, and font them not as difeoverers, or at all 


• Gen. 11. 10. 
1-18. c. 11. 


k Gen. 


• In Gen. i Gen. 11. 10. * Cicero dc Nat. Deorum, 1 . * De Civit. Dei, 


adventure. 

Digitized by Google 














7 6 The History of the World.' Book I. 


adventure, but aligned and allotted to every fon, 
and their iflues, their proper parts. And not to 
hearken to fabulous authors, who have no other 
end than to flatter princes (as Virgil did Augujlus 
in the fittion of ALntas) or elfe to glorify their 
own nations : let us build upon the feriptures thein- 
felvcs, and after diem upon reafon and nature. Firft 
therefore, we muft call to mind and confider, what 
manner of face the earth every where had in the 130th 
year after the great inundation, and, by comparing 
thofe fruitfulleft valleys with our own barren and 
cold ground, inform our felves thereby, what won¬ 
derful defarts, what impaflable faftnefs of woods, 
reeds, briers and rotten grafs, what lakes, and 
(landing pools, and what marfhes, fens, and bogs, 
all die face of the earth (excepting the mountains) 
was pellered withal. For it in this our climate 
(where the dead and deftroying winter deprefieth 
all vegetative and growing nature, for one half 
of the year in effect) yet in twenty or thirty years, 
tliefe our grounds would not all overgrow and be 
covered (according to the nature thereof) either with 
woods or with other offenfive thickets and bufli- 
ments : much more did all forts of plants, reeds, 
and trees, profper in the moft fruitful valleys, and 
in the climate of a long and warm fummer, and 
having withal the ftart of 130 years to raile them- 
felves without controulment. 

This being confidcred, it will appear, that all 
thefe people which came into Sbinaar , and over 
whom A imrod either by order or ftrength took the 
dominion, did after the contufion of languages, and 
at fuch time as they grew to be a mighty people, 
difpcrfc themfelves into the regions adjoining to the 
faid valley of Sbinaar , which contained the belt 
part of MeJopotamia , Babylonia, and Chaldea , and 
from the borders thereof in time they were propa¬ 
gated : feme of them towards the fouth, others to¬ 
wards the welt and north. And altho’ there were 
allotted to Shorn many regions both eall and welt 
from Sbinaar, with the dominion of Palejlina, which 
the Canaanites firft poflels’d ; yet could he not en¬ 
joy the lot of his inheritance on the fudden, but by 
time anti degrees. For we find, that Abraham the 
true fucceflbr of Shem, dwelt in Chaldea at Ur ; 
and from thence (called by God) he refted at 
Charran in Mesopotamia : from whence after the 
death of Tbare, he travelled to Sicbcm in Palejlina 
and yet there had palled between Shem and Abra¬ 
ham (reckoning neither of themfelves) feven de- 
feents, before Abraham moved out of Chaldea : 
where, and in Babylonia, all thofe people by Nimrod 
commanded, inhabited for many years, and whence 
Nimrod went out into Affyria, and founded Nineveh. 
Indeed the great mafters of nations (as far as we can 
know) were, in that age of the ilfues of Ham the 
blelfing of God given by Noah to Shem and Japhet 
taking lefs cflcdt, until divers years were confuincd j 
and until the time arrived, which by the wifdom 
of God was appointed. For of Cbus , Mizraim, 
and Canaan came the people, and princes, which 
held the great kingdoms of Babylonia , Syria, and 
Egypt, for many defeents together. 

Sect. III. 

Of the ijles of the Gentiles in Japhet’/ portion : of 
Berofus’/ too fpeedy feating Gomer the fon of Ja¬ 
phet in Italy *, and another of Japhet’/ font Tu¬ 
bal in Spain : and of the antiquity of Longinque 
Navigation. 

T O begin therefore where Mofes beginneth with 
the Ions of Japhet, among whom the ifles of 
the Gentiles were divided : which divifion, as well 

a Gen. 9. 27. W Funft. C 


to Japhet's fons, as to the re It which came into 
Sbinaar , was (if the divifion were made at P ha leg's 
birth) in the year of die world 1757 or. 175.8, and 
(by that account) in the year after the flood one 
hundred and one, of which queftion elfewhere. 

The habitations proper to the fons of Japhet were 
the ifles of the Gentiles, .which include all Europe, 
with all the iflands adjoining and compafling it a- 
bout: Europe being alfo taken for an ifland, both 
in refpett that the lea Hellespont and ZEgcum, Bof- 
phorus and Euxinus cut it off from the great con¬ 
tinent of A ft a, as alfo becaufe Europe it felf is, in 
effect, furrounded with water, faving that it is faltned 
to Afta by the north ; for it hath thofe feas before 
named to the ealt, the Mediterranean to die fouth 
and fouth-weft, the ocean to the weft, and Britijh, 
German and Baltick fca, with that of Glaciale to the 
north-north-eall, and north-welt. Bcfides, it hath 
about it all the Cyclades or ifles lying between Greece 
and the lefler AJia, and the ifles of Rhodes , Cyprus , 
Crete or Candia , Sicilia , Corfica , Sardinia , Malta , 
the ifles of Brittany and Zealand , with their young 
ones adjacent. 

This partition and portion of Japhet, with the 
part which he held in Afa and the north, which 
was alfo very great, anfwereth to that blefling of 
God by Noah. * Dilatet Deus Japhet *, Let God 
fpread abroad (or encreafe the pofterity of) Japhet, 
and let him dwell in the tents of Shem. For tho’ 
Junius here ufeth the word [ alliciat ] and not [di¬ 
latet ] and the Geneva perfuadeat > yet the Septua- 
gint have dilatet or amplified ; and fuch was die 
blefling given to our fathers, which God promifed 
to Abraham and his feed for ever. And the dwel¬ 
ling in the tents or tabernacles of Shem was a bJef- 
fing by God to the pofterity of Japhet: noting 
not only an enJargment of territories ; but that 
thereby they ftiould be made participant of God’s 
.church. But to come to Japbet'% fons, of whom 
Gomer is the eldeft. This Gomer (if we may be¬ 
lieve Berofus and Annius, whofe authority the 
greateft number of all our late writers have follow¬ 
ed) did in the tenth year of Nimrod's reign depart 
from Babylonia, and planted Italy: which alio 
b Funtlius confirmeth in thefe words. Anno decimo 
Nimrodi, &c. In the tenth year of Nimrod's reign, 
Gomerus Gallus planted a colony in that land after¬ 
wards called Italy: and in the twelfth year of the 
fame Nimrod's reign. Tubal feated himfelf in A- 
furia in Spain (now called Bifcay) which was in the 
140th and in the i42d years after the flood, accord¬ 
ing to Berofus. But this opinion is very ridiculous: 
For before the confufion of tongues the children of 
Noah did not feparate themfelves, at leaft fo many 
of them as came with Nimrod into Sbinaar. Let 
us therefore confider with reafon, what time the 
building fuch a city and tower required, where there 
was no prepared matter, nor any ready means to 
perform fuch a work as Nimrod had erected (and 
as Funtlius himfelf out of his author Berofus wit- 
nefieth) Ad altitudinem (5? magnitudinem tnontium ’, 
To the height and magnitude of the mountains. 
Sure that both this city and tower were almoft 
built, the feriptures witnefs. 1 But the Lord came 
down to fee the city and tower , which the fons of 
men built. Let us then but allot a time fuffici- 
ent for the making of brick to fuch a work, of the 
greateft height (and therefore of circuit and foun¬ 
dation anfwerable) that ever was. For where the 
univerfal flood covered the higheft mountains fit- 
teen cubits ; Let us build us a city and a tower 
(faith Nimrod ) whofe top may reach unto the hta- 
ven : meaning, that they would raile their work 
above fifteeen cubits higher than the higheft nioun- 

hronol. • Gen. c. n. 

rain. 


Digitized by 


Google 









{ 

Chap. VIII. The History of the World. 77 


rain , otherwife they oould not allure themfclvcs 
from the fear of a fecond inundation : a great part 
whereof was finilhed before k fell, and before they 
left the work. They alfo began this building upon 
a ground, the moft opprefled with waters of all the 
world: as by the great ruin which thefe waters for¬ 
cibly overbearing and overflowing, made in die 
time of the fucceeding emperors, is made manifeft, 
approved alfo by the prophet Jeremy, fpeaking of 
Babylon in thefe words Tbou that due lie ft upon 
many waters . It cannot be doubted but that there 
needed a fubftantial foundauon for fo high a rais’d 
building on a marfhy ground : and to which Gly- 
tas upon Genefts giveth forty years. For it feem- 
eth, chat the tower was near finilhed when God 
overthrew it: it being afterwards written. So the 
Lord fcatlered them from thence upon all the earth, 
and they left to build the city . Out of which place 
it may be gathered (becaufe the tower is not then 
named) thi they very near had performed the 
work of their fuppos’d defence, which was the tower: 
and that afterwards they went on with the city ad¬ 
joining, wherein they inhabited. It is alfo to be 
noted , that rill Inch time as this confufion feized 
them (whereupon the tower was thrown down) thefe 
nations did not difperfe themfelves: for a from 
fhence the Lord fcattered them upon all the earth, 
that was, when they perceived not one another’s 
fpeech. Now to think that this work in the new- 
■nefs of the world (wanting all inftruments and ma¬ 
terials) could be performed in ten years \ and that 
1 Tubal and Gornerm the fame year could creep thro’ 

r 3000 miles of defart, with women, children, and 

[• cattle ; let thofe light believers, that neither tie 

l themfelves to the fcripture, nor to reafon, approve 

t it, for I do not. And if the ark of Noah was too 

s years in building, or but near fuch a time, and then, 

a when the world had flood 1556 years, it were more 

:• than foolifhnefs and madnefs it felf, to think that 

it fuch a work as this could be performed in ten ; 

;■ "when the world (from the flood to the arrival at 

it Babel, and beginning of this building there) had' 

0 but 131 years, and whereof they had fpent fome 

1 part in travelling from the eaft. Again, if all Aft a 

1, let to their helping hands in the building of the 

temple of b Diana, and yet they confumed in that 
; work 400 years (or be it but half that time) and 

. in fuch an age as when the world flourifhed in all 

: forts of artificers, and with abundant plenty of ma¬ 

terials and carriages, this work of the tower of Ba¬ 
bel could hardly (with all the former wants fup- 
pofed) be ere&cd in thofe few years remembred. 
And for conclufion, let all men of judgment weigh 
with themfelves how impoffible it was for a nation 
or family of men, with their wives and children, and 
cattle, to travel 3000 miles through woods, bogs, 
and defarts, without any guide or conductor ; and 
we fhall find it rather a work of 100 years than of 
100 days. For in the Weft-Indies, of which the 

l Spaniards have the experience, in thofe places 

where they found neither path nor guide, they have 
not entered the country ten miles in ten years. And 

• if Nimrod’s people fpent many years by the account 
before remembred in palling from the Eaft-Indies, 
or the higher part thereof, which ftandeth in 115 

• degrees of longitude, until they came into Shinaar 
which lieth in 79 degrees (die diftance between 

: thofe places containing 36 degrees, which make 

720 leagues, which is 2160 miles) and did all the 

• way keep the mountains and^hard ground ; then the 
difference between Babylon and Bijcay is much more: 

; for the body of Bifcay lieth in ten degrees, and 

Babylon or Shinaar (as aforefaid) in 79 : fo the 

* Gen. k Pli„. « lf a . 66. 8. * Diod. Sical. 1 . 

oicul. 1 . 1. pi^ 1 - c ( Thucyd. 

’ No. 5. 

i 


length of way from Shinaar to Aftuua or Bifcay , 
is 69 degrees, which make 13^0 leagues, or at 
miles +140. And therefore if Nimrod took di¬ 
vers years to find Shinaar, which was but 2160 
miles: or (fuppoling that the ark relied in Aimer 
uia) little above 400 miles, there is no catifc to rive 
contrary, but to allow as many years to Gomer and 
Tubal to travel 3000 miles to countries lefs known 
unto them by far, than die land of Shinaar was te 
Nimrod. For Paradife was known to Noah before 
the flood, anil fo was the region of Eden by Mofet 
afterwards remembred •, but what he underload of , 

moll part of’ die world elfe, it is unknown. And 
therefore did Annius ill advife himfelf to plant 
Gomer in Italy , and Tubal in Spain , in the 10th and 
12 th of Nimrod's reign: c Shall the earth be brought 
forth in one day , or Jhall a nation be born at once ? 

But it may be objected, that the fans of Japhet 
might come by fea, and fo five this great travel 
through defarts by land. But we never read of any 
navigation in thofe days, nor long after. Surely 
he that knoweth what it is to irnbark fo great' a 
people, as we may Juftly fuppofe thofe conduiflors 
carried with them, will not calily believe, that there 
were any veflels in thofe -days to tranlport armies, 
and w'irhal their cattle, by whofe inilk they lived 
and fed their children : for milk and fruit were the 
banqueting difhes of our forefathers. And in the 
eldelt times, even the kings and fathers .of nations 
valued themfelves by the herds and numbers of their 
cattle : who had flocks of fheep, and great droves 
and herds of their own, and their own fhepherds ; 

and herdfmen. Now if Tubal had pafs’d by fea 
from any part of Palcftina, Syria or Cilicia, he 
might have made good choice within the Sfreights, 
and not have overgone Granada, Valencia, and 
other provinces in that tradl; pafs’d the Streigbts 
of Gibraltar, difdain’d all Andalufta and Portugal, 
with all thofe goodly ports and countries, and nave , 

fought out the iron, woody, and barren country of 
the world, called Bifcay , by a long and dangerous 
navigation. But before the journey of the Argonauta, 
there were fcarce any veflels that durfl crofs the 
leas in that part of the world : and yet that which 
Jafon had, if the tale be true, was but a galley, ] 

and a poor one (God knows) and perchance .fuch i 

as they ufe this day in h eland ; which altho’ it car¬ 
ried but four and fifty pafiengers, yet was it far 
greater than any of the former times : 6 Erat emm 
antea parvarum navicular urn ufus ; For in former 
times they ufed very fmall veflels. I deny not but 
that the Tyrians gave themfelves of -old to far-off | 

navigations, whence Tibullus aferibed the;invention i 

of fliips unto them. . ; • j 

* Prima ratem ventis credere doUa Tyros. 

Tyrus knew firfl how fliips might ufe the wind. 

And for thofe boats { Longa naves, .or gallies, 

Pliny faith, that jEgefias alcribeth the device, to 

Paraius: and Philoftephanus to Jafon : Cteftas to 

Samyras v and Saphanus to Scmiramis : Arcbimachus 

to / Egeon 1 to which invention the Erythrai arc 

faid to have added certain numbers of oars, and 

then tAminocles the Corinthian to have encreafed 

them: the Carthaginians afterwards to have brought 

them to four banks :itlie Quinque Remi firfl to have 

been ufed by Nefichthon the Salaminian, with wliich 

veflels in thofe parts of the world, die Remans 

ferved themfelves in die Punick war. But thefe 

be, perhaps, but the partialities of writers, or their 

ignorance. For there arc that as conilantly cafl . 

the devifing of thefe gallies on Sefoftris, tho’ Se- 

i 

[, c. 4. fol. 115. « Tibal. Eleg. 7. Strabo, l.n6. Diod. 

U miramis 

Digitized byouuvu: 












78 The History 

miramis ufed them in the paflage of her army over 
Indus in Abraham’s time. So it is faid, that a Damns 
was the firft that brought a Ihip into Greece : and yet 
the Samothracians challenge the invention ; and yet 
Tertullian , on the contrary, gives it to Minerva: 
Others to Neptune ■, Thucydides to the Corinthians. 
And fo ignorant were the people of thofe ages, as the 
Egyptians ufed to coaft the fhores of the Redfea upon 
raffs devifed by king Erythrus : and in the time of 
th z Romans, the Britains had a kind of boat (with 
which they crofs’d the feas) made of fmall twigs, 
and covered over with leather: of which kind I 
have feen at the Dingle in Ireland , and clfewhere. 
Naves ex corio circumftut* in oceano Britannico (faith 
Textor:) of which Lucan the poet: 

Primum cana falix y madtfallo vimint , parvam 
Texitur in puppim, cafoque induta juvenco, 
Vebloris patient tumidum fuperenatat amnem. 

Sic Venetus flagnante Pado , fuftoque Britannus 
Navigat Oceano. 

The moiftned offer of the hoary willow 
Is woven firft into a little boat: 

Then loth’d in bullock’s hide upon the billow 
Of a proud river, lightly doth it float 
Under the waterman : 

So on the lakes of overfwelling Po 
Sails the Venetian : and the Britain fo 
On th’ out-fpread ocean. 

And altho’ it cannot be denied, when Noah by 
God’s infpiration was inftrutted in fo many parti¬ 
culars concerning the ark, that then many tilings 
concerning navigation were firft revealed ; yet it 
appears that there was much difference between the 
ark of Noah , and fuch fhips as were for any long 
navigation. Yea, ancient ftories fhew, that it was 
long after thefe times, ere any durft prefume upon 
any long voyages to fea: at leaft, with multitudes 
of women, and children, and cattle: as alfo com¬ 
mon reafon can tell us, that even now when this 
art is come to her perfection, fuch voyages are ve¬ 
ry trouhlefome and dangerous. So as it doth ap¬ 
pear, that there was not in that age of Nimrod , 
any fhip, or ufe of fhips, fit for any long naviga¬ 
tion. For if Gomer and Tubal had paffed them- 
felves and their people by fea •, the exercife of na¬ 
vigation would not have been dead for fo many 
hundred years after. Leaving therefore the fabu¬ 
lous to their fables, and all men elfe to their fancies, 
who have caft nations into countries far off, I know 
not how, I will follow herein the relation of Moftes 
and the prophets \ to which truth there is joined 
both nature, reafon, policy, and necefficy : and to 
the reft, neither probability, nor poffibility. 

Sect. IV. 

Of Gog and Magog, Tubal and Mefcch, featedfirft 
about Afia the lefts , out of Ezekiel xxxviii. 39. 

■V T OW altho* many learned and reverend men 
have formed (I know not whereby led) a 
plantation of the world, which alio hath been and 
is received : yet I hope I may be excufed, if I dif¬ 
fer altogether from them in many particulars. Cer¬ 
tainly, that great learned man of this latter age. 
Arias Mont anus, was alfo in fome things much 
miftaken: and for Joftephus , as he hath many good 
things, and is a guide to many errors withal, fo 
was he in this plantation of the world very grofs 
and fabulous, whereby both Euftebius, Hierojolymita- 
nus , Epipbanius , and others,that have taken his tefti- 
monies for current, have been by him far milled. 

* PLin.- 1 ;* 7 - c. 56. Eufeb. de pr.rp. Evang c 1. Tm. 


of A World. Book I. 

But the better to conceive what regions of the world 
Gomer the firft fon of Japhet poflels’d, as alfo Tu¬ 
bal, it is needful to begin with Magog \ becaulc 
the feriptures take moft knowledge of Gog and Ma- 
gog, which two names have troubled many commen¬ 
tators, faitli Matth. Beroaldus , who hath laboured 
herein with great diligence, and whom (of all that 
ever I read) I find moft judicious in the examina¬ 
tion of this plantation. He takes authority from 
the prophet Ezekiel chiefly, who in the 38th and 
39th chapter direCleth us what nations the Gomeri- 
ans , Tubalines , and Togormians were, together with 
the Magogians: of which Gog was prince or 
chief conductor in their attempts againft Iftrael : 
for befides the portions of Europe , and the north- 
eaft parts of the greater Afia , which Japhet's iffues 
poflefs’d, all Afia the lefs was peopled by them. 
And that thofe of the ifiue of Japhet (whom Eze¬ 
kiel fpeaks of) were feated hereabout, it may beft 
appear, if we confider the circumftances of the place, 
and the dependency upon the former,’ prophecy in 
the 37th chapter: for in that 37th chapter, b Eze¬ 
kiel prophefieth of the uniting of the two kingdoms 
of Iftrael and Judah , after their delivery from cap¬ 
tivity. • - 

By which prophecy of EzekieU it appeareth, 
that God purpofed to gather together his people, to 
give life to dead bones, and to rule them by one 
prince. For to that purpofe it is written •, And Da¬ 
vid my ftervant flsall be king over them , arid they 
Jhall have one fbepberd , that is, they lliall be unit^ 
ed as they were in David's times. Hereupon in 
the 38 th chapter Ezekiel prophefieth againft thofe 
nations, which fhould feek to impeach this.union, 
and difturb the people of Iftrael, whom God pur¬ 
pofed to receive to grace, and promHed to 'reftore. 
And fo in the fame chapter are thofe narions cou¬ 
pled together, which infefted the Iftraelites after their 
return, and fought to fubjeCt them: all which were 
the fubjeCts or allies of Gog, prince of the Mago¬ 
gians, or Coeleftyrians , next bordering Paleftina or 
the holy land, followed alfo by the reft of the na¬ 
tions of Afia the lefs, which lay north from Ju¬ 
dea. The words of Ezekiel are thefe ; c Son of man, 
ftet thy face againft Gog , and againft the land of Magog 
the chief princes of Meftecb (or Moftoch ) and Tubal : 
and afterward, Behold, I come againft the chief 
prince of Meftecb ana Tubal: and in the fixth verfe, 
Gomer and all bis bands , and the boufte of Togorma 
of the north quarters. Herein Ezekiel having firft 
delivered the purpofe of his prophecy, teacheth 
what nations they were, that fhould in vain aflail 
Iftrael. He joineth them together under their prince 
Gog , and fneweth that their habitations were on 
the north quarters of Judab, and how feated and 
joined together. Gog fignifieth in the Hebrew 
(faith St. Jerome) tetlum or covering of a boufte : 
and Pint us upon Ezekiel affirmeth, that by Gog 
is meant Antichrift : for, faith he, Anticbriflus erit 
diaboli tegument um ftub ftpecie human a \ That An¬ 
tichrift fhall be the covering of the devil under hu¬ 
man form. He addeth that Magog is as much to 
fay as Gog: the letter [/V/] being an Hebrew pre- 
pofition, and importetn as much as of or from : fo 
.ne taketh Magog for thofe people which follow An¬ 
tichrift. So far Pint us, at leaft in this, is not amifs, 
that ne expoundeth Magog not for any oneperfon, 
but for a nauon, with which agrecth this obferva- 
tion of Beroaldus. Magog, faith he, in Hebrew is writ¬ 
ten Ham Magog, which fheweth Magog to be a re¬ 
gion or nation: for the letter \_He~] which is ufed 
but for an Emphafis (which the Hebrews call Heli- 
aiedia) is never added to proper names of men, but 

de Coron. Mil. * Ezek. 37, 19. < Ezek. 38". z. 


Digitized by 


Googl 


often 

e 







Chap. VIII. 7*he History of the World* 


ohen to place. So as Gog was prince of that nati¬ 
on (called either Magog, or according to others the 
people of Gog) aJfo prince of Mefecb (or Mofoib) 
and of Tubal: as by the firft verfe of the 39th 
chapter is made manifeft, Behold, I come agatnfl 
thee Gog the chief prince of Mefecb and Tubal. This 
mull needs be meant by the fucceflors of Seleucus 
Nuanor , who did not (as other conquering nations) 
leek to make the Jews their tributaries only, but 
‘ endeavoured by all means, and by all kind of vio¬ 
lence, to extinguifti the religion it felf (which the 
Hebrews profefs’d) and the acknowledging of one 
true God: and to force them to worlhip and ferve 
the mortal and rotten Gods of the heathen \ of 
which nothing remained but the very name, and 
dead images. a St. Ambrofe and Ifidore take Gog 
for the nation of the Goths: belike, becaufe they 
invaded Europe, and lack'd Rome and many other 
places and cities thereabouts* Hermolaus Barbarus 
out of Pomp. Mela derives the Turks from die Scy¬ 
thians, efteemed Magogians of Gog. Many take 
Gog for the proper name of a man : others of a re¬ 
gion: others lor a nation inhabiting a region, as 
Junius, who fays that Gog is the name of a nation, 
denominated from him whom the Greek ftories call 
Gyges: who in former time having llain Candaules 
the Lydian, gave his own name to that nation, 
thence after called Gygades: and therefore alfo the 
Gygean lake, which lake b Strabo alfo findeth in Lydia 
(of which Gyges was king) 40 furlongs from Sar¬ 
dis. Pliny calleth it Gygtum Jlagnum. Herodotus 
and Nicander fet it about the rivers of Hyllus, and 
Maandtr ; but the difference is not great. Marius 
Niger maketh mention of this Gyges king of Lydia: 
who after he had fubdued the country about the ri¬ 
ver Rboditls which runneth into the Hellefpont, 
called the promontory Trapefe after his own name 
Gyges. Thefe opinions do alfo feem to ftrengthen 
that of e Junius. For Magog, faith he, is that part 
of Afia the lefs, which Halyattes obtained \ and af- . 
ter him his fon Crtefus ; who (as d Junius further, 
notes) having mattered all thofe regions as far fouth 
as Libanus, in that border built the city Gigarta or 
Gogkarta (which in the Syrian fignifieth the city of 
Gog) feated in Coelefyria, whofe people were the an¬ 
cient enemies of the Jews. 

Now that Magog is found in Coelefyria, Pliny af- 
firmeth, faying ; Coelefyria habet Bambycen, qua a- 
lio nomine Hierapotis vocatur, Syris vero Magog ; 
Coelefyria hath it in Bambyce, which by another 
name is called Hierapotis, but of the Syrians, Ma¬ 
gog. He further telleth us that the monttrous idol 
Atergatis, called by the Greeks Derceto, was here 
worlhipped •, Lucian makes mention hereof, faying 
that the city had anciendy another name, which yet 
he expreffeth not •, forbearing perhaps the word 
Magog, as founding nothing elegantly in the Greek. 
But ifwe may believe * Strabo, dien was Edejfa in 
Mefopotamia the lame Bambyce or Hierapotis, where 
the fame idol was worlhipped. Ortelius is doubt- 
fid whether one of thefe authors did not miftake the 
place of this Bambyce or Hierapotis. It may well 
enough be that the fame name and religion was 
common to them both. Certain it is, that both of 
them lay due north from Palejlina, and were both 
fubjedl unto the kings of the race of Seleucus. Now 
I do not condemn the opinion of Hermolaus Barba- 
rus following Jofepbus, but grant that perhaps Ma- 
i°g might alfo be the father of the Scythians *, not- 
withftanding that in this place, where Gog is made 
the prince of Magog, the nations of Coelefyria, and 
the north parts adjoining, be meant by Magog : for 
hy a latter plantation from thefe parts, they might 


79 

be propagated into Scythia. Yet it is not to be de¬ 
nied, that the Scythians in old times coming out of 
the north-eall, watted the better part of Afia the 
lefs, and pofiefs’d Coelefy ria , where they built both * 
Scytbopoiis and Hierapotis, which the Syrians call- 
Magog. And that to this Magog Ezekiel had refe¬ 
rence, it is very plain: for this city Hierapotis, or 
Magog, ftandeth due north from Judea, according 
to the words of Ezekiel, that from the north quar¬ 
ters thofe nations fhould come. For as the kings of 
the fouth which intefted die Ifraelstes were the Pto¬ 
lemies kings of Egypt: fo diofe of the north were 
die kings of Afia and Syria, the fuccefiors of Se¬ 
leucus, the fuccelfor of Alexander Macedon. Guliel- 
mus Tyrius thinks that this Hierapotis is that Rages, 
mentioned in the ttory of Tobias. 1 Pliny takes it not 
only to have been called Bambyce, as we have faid, 
but alfo Edefi'a: not that by Euphrates, but ano¬ 
ther of the fame name •, now the known name is 
Alepo : for fo Bellonius expounds this Hierapotis, or 
Magog. This city had the tide of facred, as the 
facred city (for fo the word Hierapotis fignifieth) 
yet was it a place of molt deteftable idolatry ; and 
wherein was worlhipped the idol of the mermaid 
Atergatis, or Atirgitis, according to Pliny, which 
the Greeks call Derceto. 

If then we confer the words of Ezekiel in the 
3d verfe of the 38th chapter, wherein hejoineth 
together Gog, Mefech, and Tubal: and withal re¬ 
member rhat Hierapotis was the city of Magog, 
which alfo is feated direttly north from Judea: 
with whom alfo Ezekiel coupleth Gomer, and all 
his bands of the north quarters; we may, as I con¬ 
ceive, fafely conclude, that thefe followers and 
vaflals of Gog (which were northern nations in 
refpett of Judea) were not the Gomerians of France, 
nor the Tubalines of Spain, but a people of letter 
Afia, and Ccelefyria: and therefore that the opini¬ 
ons of Berofus, Jofepbus, and whofoever elfe hath 
followed them therein are to be rejetted. But if 
Jofepbus refer himfelf to later times, and think 
that fome colony of the Tubalines might from Iberia 
and Afia pafs into Spain (to wit, from that piece of 
land between Colchis or Mengretia) and Albania 
(moft part poflefled by the Georgians) then is his 
judgment of better allowance. For without any 
repugnancy of opinions, it may be granted, that 
in procefs of time thefe people might from their firft 
habitation pafs into the countries near the Euxine 
Sea, and from thence in after-ages into Spain. 

jofepbus makes mention of the Iberi, faying, 
that they were anciently called Thobelos, as of Tu¬ 
bal ; from whence, faith Juftin, they paffied into 
Spain to fie arch out the mines of that region: having 
belike underftood that it was a foutherly country, 
and mountainous. For it feemeth that the Tuba¬ 
lines, called Cbalybes, lived altogether by the ex¬ 
change of iron, and other metals, as Apollonius 
witneffeth in thefe following verfes, telling how the 
Argonauts did vifit them. 

Hac gens tellurem rigido non vertit aratro, 

Sed Jerri venas feindit fub montibus alt is : 
Mercibus bac mutat, qua vita alimenta minifirant. 

The Cbalybes plough not their barren foil, 

But undermine high hills for iron veins: 
Changing thepurchafe of their endlefs toil 
For merchandife, which their poor lives fuftains. 

But it is more probable, that Spain was firft peo¬ 
pled by the Africans, who had ever fince an affec¬ 
tion to return thither, and to re-people it anew. 
This appeared by the Carthaginians of old, who 


’ fib. 2. de Fid? fc Strabo, f. 13. « Suid. co!. toy. * Jun. in Ezek. 38. r Strabo, I. »6. t Lib 4. Cap. dc hello Sacro. 

were 

Digitized by VjOOQiC 

















80 The History of the World, i * t Book L 

were daftly drawn to pafs over the ftreights into inforcing them to fpoil their neighbour, to whom- 
that country and after by the Moors who held in their original they were as near joined, as after-' 
Granado, and the fouth parts 800 years, till the wards in the feats which they poffdTed.) For thaa 
time of Ferdinand and Ifabel. And either of thefe the warlike nations of Germany were in elder age* 
opinions are more probable, than that in the 12th accuftomed to be beaten by the Gauls , the author^ 
year of Nimrod's reign. Tubal pafs’d into Spain, ty of Cefar affirming it, is proof fufficient. But in 
and therein built St. Oval: a poor town, and a poor times following they purfued richer conquefts, am! 
device, God knows. Certain it is, that we mull more eafy, tho’ further diftant, by which (to omir 
find Mofoch or Mefech, and Tubal neighbours, and their other enterprifes not here to be fpoken of) they 
Gomer and Togorma not far off, or elfe we lhall were drawn at length into Afia the lefs, and occu- 
wrong Ezekiel: for he called Gog the leader or pied thofe parts, which had formerly been held by 
prince of Mefech and Tubal , and maketh Gomer their progenitors. I fay, not that they claimed 
and Togorma their afliftants. And that Mefccb in- thofe lands as theirs by delcent •, for likely it is, that 
habited AJia, Funfltus (tho* he followed Berofus') they knew little of their own pedigree. Neither 
confeffeth, for thefe be his words Mefacus, qui a can any man therefore deny, that they were of old 
Mofe Mefech, prifeos Mefitos ab Adula monte ufque feated in A fa, becaufe in late ages they returned 
ad Ponticamregionem pofuit: b<ec regio pofea Cap- thither unlefs he will think, that all thofe nations 
padocia dicla eft, in qua urbs Mazica, (ftc. hac eft which from tar parts have invaded and conquered 
terra Magog principalis: Mefacus, whom Mofes cal- the land of Shinaar, may by that argument be 
leth Mefech, placed the ancient Meftans from the proved not to have iffued from thence at the firth, 
mount Adulas, unto the coaftof Pontus. This re- Now concerning Sarnothes (for his excellent wif* 
gion was afterwards called Cappadocia, in which is dom furnamed Dis) whom Annins makes the bro- 
the town Mazica, &c. this is the principal coun- thcr of Gomer and Tubal (which brother Mofes nc- 
try of Magog. And this doth Annius alfo avow, ver heard of, who fpake his knowledge 0 fjapbet's 
and yet forgets that Gog was prince both of Mefech fons) they mull find him in feme old poet: for 
and Tubal: and therefore, that the one was a nati- Funftius a great Berofan confeffeth: * ©/«'; bis 
on of Spaniards, the other of Cappadocians , is very Sarnothes fuerit incertum eft \ Who this Sarnothes 
ridiculous Spain lying diredtly weft, and not north was it is uncertain 1 neither is there any proof that 
from Judea. Alfo Ezekiel in the 27th chapter, where he was that fame Dis, whom b Cefar faith the Gauls 
he prophefieth of the deftruftion of Tyre, nameth fuppofe to be their anceftor \ yea, and Fignier con- 
Mefech and Tubal jointly. And for a final proof, felieth with Funclius: c Mats on ne ft ayt qui il 
that thefe nations were of a northern neighbour land eftoit •, No man knows who he was. 

(how far foever ftretched) Ezekiel in the 38th chap¬ 
ter makes them all horfemen. Thou, and much Sect. V. 

people with thee, all ft, all ride upon horfes, even a j-n //jg fMus Bcrofus >, p nluru That tbe\n.. 
great multitude and a mighty. Then if any man lian Janus was Noah. 

believe that thefe troops came out of Spam over J 

the Pyrenees, and firft pafs’d over a part of France, T) LI T before I go on with Noah's fons, I think 
Italy, Hungary and Sarmatia, and imbark’d again jj it neceffary to difprove the ficlion which An- 
about the Ilellefpont, or elfe compaffed all Pontus nitts hath of Noah himielf: an invention, indeed, 
Euxinus, to come into the Idler Afia, which is very ridiculous,’tho’warranted, as he hath wrefted, 
half the length or compafs of the then known world, by thofe authors of whom himielf hath commented: 
he may be called a ftrong believer, but he ffiall ne- as the fragment of Berofus, Fabius Pittor, Cato, 
ver be juftified thereby. But on the contrary it is Lavinius and others. For c Annius feeks to per- 
known, that Seleucis was a province neighbouring fuade us, that Noah (furnamed Janus) was the fame 
Paleftina or Judea, and that Hierapolis, or Magog, which founded Genoa, with other cities in Italy, 
joined unto it: whofe princes commanded all Syria, wherein he lived 92 years. This to difprove, by 
and Afia the lefs, namely, the Seleucidte ; and held Mofes 's filence, is a fufficient argument to me, if 
it, till Scipio Afiaticus overthrew Antiocbus the there were nothing elfe to difprove it. For if he 
great: after which they yet poffefs’d Syria till the vouchfafed to remember the building of Babel, 
time of Tigranes : and whether Mefech be in Cappa- Erec, Acbad, Chalne and Nineveh by Nimrod, 
docia, or under Iberia, yet is it of the Tubalines, Noah was a man of too great mark to be forgotten, 
and one and the fame dominion. with all the a<fts he did in 92 years. But it were a 

Of Gomer the like may be laid. Firft he feated ncedlefs labour for me to difprove the authority of 
himfelf with Togorma, not far from Magog and Tu- that Berofus, on whom Annius groundeth, feeing 
bal, in the borders of Syria and Cilicia. After- fo many learned men have fb demonftratively prov- 
wards he proceeded further into Afia the lefs ; and ed that fragment to be counterfeit. Befides that, 
in long trad of time his valiant iffue filled all Ger - Tatianas the Affyrian, in his oration againft the 
many, refted long in France and Britain, and pof- Greeks, avoweth, that the ancient and true Berofus 
felled theutmoft borders of the earth, accomplifh- wrote only three books, dedicated to Antiocbus the 
ing (as Melantlhon well notes) the fignification of fucceflbr of Seleucus Nicanor : But * Annius hath 
their parents name, which is utmoft bordering. But deviled five books, wherewith he honoureth Bero- 
when thefe borderers wanted further place, where- fus. And whereas Berofus handled only the eftate 
into they might exonerate their lwelling multitudes, of the Chaldeans and Affyrians, Annius hath filled 
that were bounded in by the great Ocean, then did this fragment with the bufinefs of all the world, 
they return upon the nations, occupying the coun- And if we may believe Eufebius better than Annius, 
tries, through which they had formerly palled, op- then all the kings of the Latins (before Eneas) con- 
prefiing firft their neighbours, afterwards the peo- fumed but 150 years: whereas no man hath doubt- 
pie more remote. Hereupon it was (as the worthy ed, but that from Noah to Eneas's arrival into ita- 
reftorer of our antiquities, Mr. William Camdenly, there pafs’d 1126 (after the leaft rate of the He- 
hath noted) that they were called Cimbri, which in. brew account) and (after Codoman ) 1291. For Ja- 
their old language doth figmty robbers-, neceffity *wr(who was the firft of their kings) lived at once 

• » 

» In Chron. b Cxfar. Comment. « Vignier pars 1. Chron. a Ann. de Hetrufc. Pnft. de aur focula. Cato de origin. Lavin. 
illuil dc Gal.. * Jofcpli. 1 . 1. 

Digitized by 


\\r 










Si 


Chap. VIII. The History of the World. 


with Ruth, who married Booz, in the world’s year 
(as fome reckon) 2717, after the flood 1064, and 
Noab died 350 years after the flood : and fo there 
pafs’d between Janus of Italy, and Noab furnamed 
Janus , 704 years. For Saturnus fucceeded Janus, 
Picus after Saturnus, Faunas after Picas, and La- 
tinus followed Faunus: which Latinus lived at once 
with Tautanes the 27th king of AJfyria: with Pe- 
lafgus of Peloponnefus: with Demophoon of Athens ; 
and Sampfon judge of Ifracl. Now all thefe five 
kings of the Latins having confumed but 150 years j 
and the laft of them in the time of Sampfon : then 
reckoning upwards for 150 years, and it reacheth 
Ruth, with whom Janus lived. 

T rue it is, that the Greeks had their Janus ; but 
tins was not Noab : fo had they Ion the fon of Xu- 
thus, the fon of Deucalion, from whom they draw 
the fonts, who were indeed the children of Javast, 
the fourth fon of Japbet. For the Vulgar tranfla- 
tion (where the Hebrew word is * Javan) writes 
Greece, and the Septuagint Hellas \ which is the 
fame. So had they Medus the fon of Medea, whom 
they make the parent of the Modes, tho’ they were 
defeendedof a far more ancient father, to wit, Ma- 
dai the 3d fon of Japbet. 

Laftly, we fee by a true experience, that the 
Britijb language hath remained among us above 
2000 years, and the Englijb fpeech ever fince the 
invafion of the Angles: and the fame continuance 
have all nations obferved among themfelves, tho’ 
with fome corruption and alteration. Therefore 
it is ftrange if either Noab (by them called Janus) 
had left in Italy his grand-child Gomer after him, 
or Tubal in Spain, that no plain refemblance of the 
Hebrew, Syrian , or Scythian (which no time could 
have quite extinguifhed) fhould have been found in 
the languages of thofe countries. For which rea- 
fons we doubt not but thefe perfonal plantations of 
Janus, Gomer, Tubal, &c. in Italy, Spain , or France, 
are merely fabulous. Let the Italians therefore 
content themfelves with the Grecian Janus, 
which commanded them and planted them, and 
who preceded the fall of Troy but 150 years, faith 
Eufebius, which was in the time of Latinus the 5th 
king: which alfo St. Augufine and JuJlin confirm : 
and this agreeth with reafon, time and poflibility. 
And if this be not fufficient to difprovc this vani¬ 
ty, I may out of themfelves add thus much : that 
whereas fome of them make Vejla (others Camafe- 
na) the wife of this Janus, who instituted the holy 
fire of the veftal virgins in Rome (the Latins and 
Romans taking from Janus all their idolatrous and 
heathenilh ceremonies) there is no man fo impious, 
as to believe that Noab himfelf (who is faid by Mo- 
fes to have walked with God, to be a juft man, and 
whom God of all mankind made choice of) could 
be either ignorant of the true and only God, or 
f<> wicked and ungrateful, to fet up or devife any 
heathen, favage, or idolatrous adoration, or have 
mftituted any ceremony, contrary to that which he 
knew beft-pleafing to God himfelf. 

Sect. VI. 

That Gomer alfo and his fon Togorma of the pofte- 
f tty of Japhet were firjl ftated about Afia the 
lefs: and that from thence they fpread weflward 
into Europe : and northward into Sarmatia. 

0 turn now to the fons of Noah, and tho 
JL world’s plantation after the flood: therein I 
obferve, that as both reafon and neceflity taught 
them } fo, when they multiply’d in great numbers, 


and difperfed themfelves into the next countries 
bordering to their firft habitations, and from thence 
fent forth colonies elftwhere, it was in fuch a man¬ 
ner as that they might repair to each other, and 
keep intelligence by river : bccaufc the land was 
yet defart and overprefs’d with woods, rteds, bogs, 
and rotten marlhcs. As when Nimrod feated in Ba¬ 
bylonia, Cbus took the fouth-part of Chaldea, down 
the river of Gebon, by which he might p.tfs to and 
fro from Babylon to his own plantation: thofe alfo, 
which were of the race of Sbem, inhabiting at Ur 
or Orcboa near the lakes of Chaldea, might by the 
lame river get up to Babylon, and receive fuccour 
from thence. All which tradt of land upon Ge¬ 
bon fouthward, Mofes in the deferiprion of Para- 
dife calleth the land of Cujh : becaule the domini¬ 
on and empire was then in the hands of Nimrod a 
Cujhite, by whom the children of Sbem (which 
came into that valley, and flay’d not in the eaft) 
were for a while opprels’d* till God afterward by 
the feed of Abraham made them his own nation and 
victorious. Havilah, the brother of Nimrod, and 
fon of Cufj, took both banks of Tigris, efpecially 
on the eaft-fide of the river: by which river his 
people might alfo pafs to and fro to Babel. 

The imperial feat of which region of Ilavilab 
or Sufi an, was anciently called Cbufian, or Cbufan, 
afterwards Sufa. Cujh himfelf took the banks of 
Gebon, and planted thofe countries weftward, and 
fouth-weft-ward towards Arabia the ftony, and the 
defart, where b Ptolemy placcth the city of Chufidia, 
firft Cbufta. 

Seba, and Sheba, with the reft that planted A- 
rabia Feeiix, had Tigris to convey them into the 
Per fan gulf, which wafheth the banks of Arabia 
Feeiix on the eaft-fide: fo as thofe fons of Cufls might 
take land down the river as they pleafed. Alfo the 
city of Nineveh was by Nimrod founded on the 
laid river of Tigris: and from thence a colony pafs’d 
to Cbarran, ftanding alfo upon a navigable branch 
of Euphrates. In like manner did Japbet’s fons 
fettle themfelves together, and took their feats in 
Afia the lefs, from whence they might indifferently 
ftretch themfelves northward, and weftward, in¬ 
to the next parts of Europe, called the Ifes of the 
Gentiles. And it feemeth very agreeable to reafon, 
that both Gomer, Magog and Tubal, fat down firft 
of all in that part of Syria, to the north of Pale- 
Jhna and Pbenicia : and from thence Gomer or his 
children pafs’d on into Afia the lefs, as thofe of 
Magog and Tubal did 5 from whence the Tubalines 
fpread themfelves into Iberia: and the Magogians 
more northerly into Sarmatia. The firft Gomeri- 
ans, and firft planters in Afia the lefs, held the 
country of the Cymmerians (witnefs Herodot. lib. 4.) 
the fame region which was afterwards by the Gallo- 
greeks called Galatia, to whom St. Paul wrote his 
epiftle, fo intituled. This nation of the Cymmeri¬ 
ans (whom the invincible Scythians afterwards dif¬ 
perfed, and forced from their firft plantations) gave 
names to divers places ; as to the mountains a- 
bovc Albania (called Cymmerini) and to the city 
of Cymmeris in Phrygia: alfo Bofpborus Cymmeri- 
us took appellation from this nation, in the outlet 
whereof was alfo a city of that name called Cym- 
merian: which Pliny faith (miftaking the place) 
had fome time the name of Cerberion \ but Cerberi- 
on was a town in Campania i fo called of the un¬ 
healthful waters, favouring of brimftone: which 
Augujlus caufed to be cleanl'ed by letting in the wa¬ 
ter of the lake Lucrinus . 

The children of Tubal ranged as far as Iberia, 


Tab *9 ‘ andfi the place tfliai.66. 19 . [for Javan] Heliada: and [for tbeplural JavaminJ Hellcn*. * Pto!. Ai'-c 


No. VL 


Digitized by 


Googlt 


to 















82 The History if the World. . Book I. 


to whom the Mofchici were neighbours, which o- 
thers write Me fitch. The prophet Ezekiel (cou¬ 
pling them together) calleth Gog the prince of Me- 
fchech and Tubal. For thefe Mefchi (which Pto¬ 
lemy calleth Mofchi ) inhabit Syracena a province of 
Armenia, direflly fouth from the mountains Mof- 
chict, in the valley between the mountains Mofchi- 
ci and the mountains Paryardes: out of whofe 
north part fpringeth the river Phafis i from the ealt 
part Araxis i and from the weft Euphrates: and 
of this Mefchecb are defcended alfo the Mofcovians 
(faith Melanftbon) and it may be, that in procefs 
of time fome of them inhabited thofe regions alfo: 
For Mefiech (faith Melandhori) lignifieth extendens , 
enlarging or ftretching forth. Togorma alfo at firft 
did inhabit amongft his parents and kindred. The 
Togormians were alfo called Giblei , a people neigh¬ 
bouring the Sydonians in Gabala , a Tetrarchy of 
Phcnicia , the fame which Pliny calleth Gaben: from 
whence * Solomon had his moft excellent mafons, 
which hewed (tones for the temple of Jerufalem. 
Thence the Togormians ftretched into the lefs Ar¬ 
menia , whofe kings were hence called b Ttgranes , 
and their cities Tigranokart* : of which cities Ti- 
granes, fubdued by Lucullus die Roman , built one. 
Hierofolymitanus hath planted the Togormians in 
Barbary : forgetdng the prophecy of Ezekiel againft 
the Tyrians j c They of the houfe ofTogorma, brought 
to thy fairs borfes, and borfemen , and mules , which 
could not well be driven over die whole length of 
the Mediterranean fea, but from the neighbour 
countries by land. But Jofcpbus takes them for die 
parents of the Phrygians \ which I do not deny, but 
they might be in the enfuing ages: and fo might 
the Tubalines be of the Spaniards •> but it was from 
Iberia , and many hundred years after the 12th of 
Nimrod's reign. The Jews conceive that the Turks 
came of thofe Togormians , becaufe their emperor is 
called Togar. The Chaldeans make them the fathers 
of the Germans. But Laonicus affirms, diatthe Turks 
defcended of the Crtm Tartar , which borders Muf- 
covy. But for thefe fub-derivations it were infinite to 
examine them. Only of the firft and fecond plan¬ 
tation, and of the firft nations after die flood is the 
matter which I labour to difeover ; and therein to 
open the ignorance of fome, and the cormption of 
other fabulous writers. And this we mull note, that 
thofe grand-children of Noah which were of a more 
quiet fpirit, or (perchance) of lefs underftanding, 
and had not therefore the leading of colonies fent out, 
their proper habitadons could be hardly known: only 
reafon hath taught us, that they dwelt among the reft, 
and were cover’d with the fame of others, who took 
on them the conduction and dominion over the reft. 

From Madai the 3d fon of Japhet , were the 
Aledes. The Grecians bring them (as before) from 
Medus the fon of Medea. 

Sect. VII. 

Of Javan the fourth fon of Japhet: and of Mefch 
of Aram, and Mefhech of Japhet. 

O F Javan the 4th fon of Japhet came from 
the lanes, which were afterwards called the 
Greeks : and fo the Latin and Greek interpreters for 
Javan write Greece , as in Jfaiah. Et mittam ex 
its qui falvati fuerint ad gentes , in mare, in Italiam, 
(ft Graciam: And I will fend thofe that efcape of 
them to nadons in the fea, in Italy and in Greece. 
The Geneva here ufeth the word [Tarfiijlf^ for Tar- 
Jus , a city in Cilicia , tho’ Tarjis in many places 
be taken for the fea. The Tigurine and the Gene¬ 
va ufe the names Tubal and Javan , and not Italy 


and Greece : keeping the fame Hebrew words. Of 
the Iones were the Athenians , though their, ft Ives 
dream that they were Aborigines , or men without 
anccftors, and growing (as it were) out of the foil it 
fclf: who abounding in people, fent colonies into 
Afia the lefs, of whom came the Iones of thofe parts. 
Others d derive the Athenians from Ion the Ion ot 
Xuthus, the fon of Deucalion , but the antiquity of 
Javan marrstlie fafhion of that Juppofition, who lo 
many years preceded Xttrhus, Ion , or Deucalion. 
Paufanias tells us that Xuthus Hole out ot Tbcffaiy 
with all his father’s treafure, and his brothers por¬ 
tions, and arriving at Athens , he was gracioufly 
received by Ericlheus , who gave him his daughter 
in marriage *, of whom he received two Tons, Ion 
and Achceus, the fuppoled anceftors of th e Athenians. 
For Attica was called Ionia (faith Plutarch in the 
life of Thefeus ) who, when he had joined Megara to 
Attica , ereCted a pillar in that IJthmus or Strait , 
which fafteneth Peloponnefus to the other part of 
Greece: writing on that part which looketh towards 
the eaft, thefe words: H<ec non funt Peloponnefus , 
aft Ionia •, Thefe countries are not ol Peloponnefus, 
but of Ionia: and on the other fide which looketh 
towards the fouth, and into Peloponnefus , this : 
Thefe parts are Peloponnefus , and not Ionia. 

Strabo out of Hecataus affirmelh, tlx.it die Iones 
came out of Afta into Greece , which is contrary to 
the former opinion : that the Iones ot Greece tranf- 
porting certain companies into Afta the lefs, the 
name of Jones was diereby therein retained. And 
tho’ Strabo knew no more thereof than he learned 
of the Greeks themfelves, yet I find this conjecture 
of Hecatitus reafonable enough. For tho’ it were 
to him unknown, yet fure I am that Afta the left 
had people before Greece had any : and that Javan 
did not flic from Babylonia into Greece , but took 
Afia the left in his paffage ; and from dxence pafs’d 
over the neareft way, kaving his own name to fome 
maritimate province on that fide, as lie did to that 
part of Greece fo called. But yet Strabo himklf be¬ 
lieved, that Ionia took the name from Ion the fon 
of Xuthus: for fo much he had learned from them- 
felves which was alfo the opinion of Paufanias. 
True it is, that the Greeks in after-times cafi them¬ 
felves into that part of Afta the lefs, oppofite unto 
them, which they held for divers years. And 
howfoever the Greeks vaunt thcmlelves to be the fa¬ 
thers of nations, and the moft ancient; yet all ap¬ 
proved hiftorians (not their own) deride and difprove 
their pride, and vanity therein. For this difpute of 
antiquity (among prophane writers) refted between 
the Scythians and the Egyptians , as Juftin out of 
TroguSy in the war between Vtxoris of Egypt , and 
Tanais of Scythia , witneflfeth: which preceded far 
the reign of Ninus, and was long before the name 
of Greece was ever heard of. And it isalfomanifeft, 
that in Cecrops' s time, the Greeks were all fava- 
ges without law or religion, living like brute beafts 
in all refpefls ; and Cecrops (faith * St. Auguftine') 
lived together with Mofes. 

The 6th fon of Japhet was Mefecb , whom the 
Septuagint call Mofoch , a part of thofe nations com¬ 
manded by Gog the chief prince of Mefch and 
Tubal. But this we mull remember, that be¬ 
tween Mefecb the fon of Aram, and Mefiech (or 
MofecE) the fon of Japhet, there is little difference 
in name, and both by divers interpreters di- 
verfly written. Montanus with the Vulgar writtth 
Mefchy the fon of Aram Mes j the Geneva Mafi \ 
Juntas Mefch. But it maybe gathered our of the 
120th Pfalmy that cither Mefttech the fon of Ja- 
pbety was the parent of thofe people, or gave name 


* » Kings 5. 18. s Jun. in Gen. 10. 3. e Ju. 27. 14. * Thucyd. * Aug. dt Civitate Dei, lib. 18. c. 10. 

^Digitized by CjOO^ 1C 



Chap. VIII. The History 

to that province wherein David hid himfelf: or 
elfe (which may rather feem) that it took name 
from Mefcb the fon of Aram. For David bewail¬ 
ing his exile (while he lived among a barbarous 
and irreligipus people) yfeth thefe words. * IVoe 
is me that I remain in Mefecb, and dwell in the tents 
of Kedar : which Junius converteth thus. Hei mibi 
quia peregrinor tarn diu : babito tanquam Scenit<e 
Kedareni : The Septuagint gives it this fenfe, Woe 
is me becaufe my habitation (or abode) is prolonged, 
who dwell with the inhabitants of Kedar j with 
which this of the Latin agreeth: Hcu mibi, quia in- 
colatus mens prolongatus eft, babitavi cum babitan- 
tibus Kedar : The Chaldean otherwife, and in thcle 
words, 0 me miferum, quia peregrinatus fum Afia- 
nis, babitavi cum tabtrnaculif Arabum: O wretch 
that I am, for I have travelled among thole of 
Afia, I have dwelt in the tabernacles of the Ara¬ 
bians. But howfoever or whichfoever converfion 
be taken for the bell, yet all make mention of Ke¬ 
dar ; which is a province of Arabia Petrie a ; and 
the Chaldean putteth Afia inftead of Mefecb \ but 
the Hebrew it felf hath Mefecb. And if it be to 
be taken for a nation (as it is mod likely, becaufe 
it anfwers to Kedar , the name of a nation) feeing 
Mejb the fon of Aram, i Cbron. 1 7. is called Me- 
Jhec , it is indifferent whether this nation took name 
from Mejhech or Mejb, both bordering Judea, and 
like enough to be commanded by one prince •, for 
lo Ezekiel makes Mefecb and Tubal. But as tor 
thofe that take Mefecb out of the word Mofoch 
(given by the Septuagint ) to be the Mufcovian *, 
fure they prefume much upon the affinity of names, 
as aforefaid. And fure I am, that David never tra¬ 
velled fo far north ; (for to him Mufcovia was ut¬ 
terly unknown) but about the border of Kedar , it 
may be, he was often in all the time of his perfe- 
cution : the fame being a city on the mountains of 
Sanir or Galaad. And yet Arias Mont anus makes 
Mofoch the father of the Mufcovians ; and herein 
alio Melanflbon runs with the tide of common opi¬ 
nion, and fets Mefecb in Mufcovia , tho’ with fome 
better advice of judgment; as, firlt feated in Cap¬ 
padocia, and from thence travelling north-ward : 
expounding the places of the 120th pfalm [Hei 
mibi quod exulo in Mefecb~\ to fignify, Gent is ejus 
fait at cm infignem ejfe •, That the terity of that na¬ 
tion exceeded; which fiercenels or brutality of the 
Mufcovians, David never proved, or, perchance, 
never heard of. But the fame ferity or cruelty, 
which thofe nothern Mufcovians had, may as well 
be aferibed to the Arabians and Kcdarens. For this 
country took name of b Kedar the fecond fon of JJb- 
mael, of whom a people of equal fiercenels to any 
of the world were begotten, both in thofe times 
and long after, even to this day (if the Arabians, 
ijbmaelites and Saracens may be accounted one 
people :) the fame being forelhewed by the fpeech 
of the angel to Hagar, Gen. xvi. 12. And be fball 
be a wild man : his bandJhall be againfi every man, 
and every mans band againfi bim. Now Arabia 
the defan, faith Pliny, confronteth the Arabians 
Cocblei on the eaft, and the Cedreei foudi-ward, 
both which join together upon the Nabatbcei. So 
it appeareth, as before, that Mefecb, Tubal, Gomer , 
Togorma and Magog, neighboured Canaan and If- 
rael, and that Kedar alfo did join to Mefecb'. all 
which were regions of Syria , or of Afia the lefs. 
Commanded by the fucceffors of Seleucus , enemies 
of the re-eftabklhment of Ifrael and Judah. But as 
I have already laid, it might well be, that long af¬ 
ter the firft plantation the iffue of Mefecb , or Mofoch , 
might pals into Cappadocia, and thence into Hyr- 

* Pfid. 120. c< h G«n. ac. it. « Moitan. in Chr. 
Georg 1. .3 


of the \V <j R L D. 83 

canids and give names, both to Mazcga in the one, 
and to the mountains Mofcbici in the other, and 
from thence might fend people northerly in Muf¬ 
covia ; and fo all opinions faved. But all lavage 
nations, overgrown and uncultivated, do (for the 
moll part) Ihew a late plantation 3 even as civility, 
letters, and magnificent building witnefs antiquity. 

Tiras the feventh fon of Japhet , which c Mont a- 
ttus reckons among the Tons of Gomer, was the fa¬ 
ther of die Thracians, as all authors (wordiy of exa¬ 
mination) affirm. Jcfepbus was the firft that deter¬ 
mined hereof : and becaufe the feriptures are alto¬ 
gether filent, what part of the world Tiras peopled, 
the conjectures are indifferent, and give no ground 
at all ol dilpute. It followeth now to lpeak of the 
Tons of Gomer, which were three: 

Afcancz , Riphatb and Togorma. 

Sect. VIII. 

Of Afcanez and Riphath, the two eldefi font of 
Gomer. 

A S CA N E Z was the father of thofe which 
the Greeks call Rbegini , faith Jofcpbus, but 
he gives no reafon why. 

Eufcbtus makes Afcancz the father of the Goths \ 
die Jews in their Targunt make him the root of the 
German nation, but their expolitions are commonly 
very idle. Pliny findeth Afcania in Phrygia , near 
the rivers o ( Hylas and Cios : d Melanflbon being of 
the fame opinion, that the Tuifcones were defend¬ 
ed of the Afcanez (tor Tuifcones, faith he, is as 
much to fay, as of the Afcanez, Prapofito arti- 
culo die Afcanez') and that the word fignifieth a re¬ 
ligious keeper of fire : it being an ancient fuperfti- 
tion to pray at the fire of facrifices, as afterwards 
at the tombs of martyrs. Not far from Phrygia 
was the lake Afcania, known by that name in the 
Romans time. And among the kings which came 
to the fuccour of Troy, was Afcanius, Deo fimilis , 
faith c Homer, Like unto God; becaule he was 
beautiful and ftrong: for in the fame manner doth 
Virgil grace Eneas, Os burnerofque Deo fimilis ; In 
face and body like one of the gods. Virgil alfo rc- 
membreth fuch a river together witli the hills Gar^ 
gar a ; as 1 1 lias ducit amor trans Gargara, tranfquc 
fonantem Afcanitim : Appetite leads them both over 
the mountains Gargara and the roaring Afcanius. 
But this Pliny maketh more plain in the defeription 
of Phrygia. For he placeth the city of Brillion 
upon the river Afcaniuss which is adjoining to My- 
fia, and is near the border of rhe Trojan empire : 
and the lake Afcanez he directs us to find by die 
defeription of Prufia, founded by Hannibal at the 
foot of Olympus * which lieth far within the coun¬ 
tries of Bitbynia : and then from Prufia to Nicea arc 
accounted five and twenty miles, in which way this 
lake lieth, even between Prufia and Nicea ; and fo 
Junius, as I conceive him, takes them of Afcanez 
to be the inhabitants of Pontus and Bitbynia, and 
thofe north parts of Afia. Stcpbanut de Urbibus 
makes it a city of Troas, built by Afcanius the fon 
of Eneas, faying, that there was another of that 
name in Myjia. Of Afcanii, a lake of Bitbynia, 
Ptolemy witnefieth : and Strabo giveth Afcania both 
a lake, a river, and a town in Myfia, near unto 
Cio \ which alfo agreeth with Pliny : for Pliny 
findeth Prufia , before fpoken of, near Cio, and caJ- 
leth the iflands before Troy, Afcanes. 

Now whether thelc places took name pf Afcanez 
the fon of Gomer, or of Afcanius the fon of Eneas, 
it might be queftioned : fure it is, that Afcanius 
which brought fuccour to the Trojans , could not take 

4 MclanfUion in Carion. 1 . t. « Horn. Iliad, z. * Virg 

Digitized by GoogU« 









84 The History 

his name from Eneas's fon, who was then either 
exceeding young, or rather unborn: and it feemeth 
that the countries whence thofe fuccours came, were 
not out of any part of Phrygia, or Myfia , but far¬ 
ther off, and from the north parts of all Afia the 
lefs, which by Jeremy is called Afcanez , by the fi¬ 
gure Synecdoche, as Junius thinketh. Out of thofe 
teftimonies therefore which deceive not, we may 
confidently determine. For of the prophet Jeremy 
we fhall learn of what nation the AJcanez were, 
whole words are thefe : 4 Set up a fiandard in the 
land, blow the trumpet among the nations againfl her, 
call up the kings of Ararat , Minni , and Afcanez 
againfl her , &c. meaning, againfl: the Babylonians, 
Ararat was Armenia the greater, as mod interpre¬ 
ters confent, fo called of the mountains of Ararat 
which run thro* it: Minni the Idler Armenia: Ar¬ 
menia being compounded of Aram and Minni * for 
Minni was the ancient name, faith Junius and o- 
thers before him, and Aram anciently taken for 
Syria , which contained all that traCf from Euphra¬ 
tes to the fea-coafts of Phtnicia and Paleflina ■, 
and therefore Mefopotamia being in elder times but 
a province of Syria , the feriptures difference it in the 
the ftory of Jacob and Efau, and call it Aram-pa- 
dan. Then if thefe two nations were of the Arme¬ 
nians, and Afcanez joined with them (who alto¬ 
gether united under Cyrus and Darius, came to the 
fpoil of the Babylonian empire) we fhall err much to 
call Askenaz Germany or Almain, for we hear of no 
Swart Ruttiers at that fiege. But the Askenaz were 
of thofe nations which were either fubjeCt or allied 
to the Medes: of which, if any of them came after¬ 
wards into Phrygia, I know not: for the difperfion 
of nations was in after-times without account. But 
for the opinion of Eufebius, who makes them to be 
Goths •, or that of Jofepbus, who calls them Rhe- 
gini ; or of the Jews, who will have them to be 
Almains, when they confirm it either by feriptures 
or reafon, I will think as they do. 

Of Riphatb, the fecond fon of Gomer , there is 
mention in the firft of Chronicles. Beroaldus and 
Pererius think that he wandered far off from the 
reft of his brothers, and therefore no memory of 
is plantation. But I fee nothing to the contrary, 
ut that he might feat himfelf with the reft of his 
family •, for there wanted no room or foil in thofe 
days for all the fons and grand-children of Noah. 
Therefore I take it to be well underftood, that the 
Riphei were of Riphath, which the Greeks after¬ 
wards, according to Jofepbus , called the Paphlago- 
nes: and Riphei, faith Melanfthon, fignifieth giants. 
Thefe people were very famous in the north parts, 
and in Sarmatia : the moft of number and power 
among them, Sarmatarum gens maxima Heneti’, 
The greateft number of the Sarmatians were the He- 
neti, who fpoke the ancient Polac: which being 
firft called Riphei (for the love of fome of their 
leaders or kings) changed their names and became 
Heneti (a cuftom exceeding common in thofe times) 
and dwelt firft in Paphlagonia, as Homer witnefleth, 
and fo doth Apollonius in his Argonauticks : now, 
when thefe Riphei, afterwards Heneti, fought new 
regions, they came along the fhores of Euxinus, and 
filled the north part of Europe, containing RuJJia, 
Lithuania, and Polonia. From thence they crofs’d 
thwart the land, and peopled Illyria, deftrous, faith 
Melanfthon, of a warmer foil of fruit and wine. 
Th Heneti or Veneti, whom Melanfthon taketh 
to be one people, filled all that land between the 
Baltick and Adriatick fca •, and to this day the 
name of the gulf Fenedtcus is found in RuJJia. This 
nation, after they were poflefs’d of Lithuania and 


of the Wo rl d. Book I. 

Polonia, difturbed the plantation of the Boii and 
Hermondurii. Therefore it feemeth to me, that of 
Riphath came the Riphei , afterwards Heneti *, and 
fo thinketh Arias Montanus, firft feated in Paphla¬ 
gonia, but in courfe of time lords of Sarmatia, and 
thofe other parts before remembred, chiefly between 
the rivers of Vifiula and Albis. The name, faith 
Melanftbon, fignifieth wandering or wanderers, or 
Nomades, a people which lived by white meats and 
fruits, as indeed all nations did in the firft ages. 

Of the third fon of Gomer, Togotma, I have fpo- 
ken already •, now therefore of Javan's children, 
which were four: 

Eli fa, tharfis, Cethim , and Dodanim. 
Sect. IX. 

Of the four fons of Javan : and of the double fignifi- 
cation of Tharfis, either for a proper name or for 
the fea. 

O F Eli fa or Elipha, came the Moles : and of 
this Elifa all the Greeks were called Hel¬ 
lenes, faith Montanus. Melanfthon makes Elifa 
the father of the Moles in Afia fide ; Others of Elis 
in Peloponnefus, or of both. And feeing the Greeks 
were del'cended in general of Javan, it is probable 
that the Moles and the Elei, took name of Elifa, 
his eldeft fon. c Ezekiel fpeaking of ‘tyre, nameth 
the ifles of Elifa. Hyacinthus & purpur a de infulis 
Elifa fafta funt operimentum tuum : Blue filk and 
purple brought from the ifles of Elifa, was thy 
covering: The Chaldeans for Elifa write Italia, 
but the Vulgar, the tigurine, the Geneva, and Ju¬ 
nius keep the word Elifa •, and fo I think they 
might do with reafon : for there was not found 
any fuch purple dye in Italy in thofe days, nor fince 
that I can read of. But thofe ifles of Elifa were by 
a better conjecture the ifles of Greece *, and the belt 
purple was found afterwards at tyre itlelf, and be¬ 
fore that, and among the Cyclades, and on the 
coaft of Getulia. 

tharfis, the fecond fon < 5 f inhabited Cilicia, 

of which tharfis is the Metropolis. Montanus for 
tharfis in Cilicia, underftands Carthage in Africa ; 
but (referving the refpeCt due to fo learned a man) 
he was much miftaken in that conjecture. The 
Chaldean paraphraft puts Carthage for tharfis, but 
it hath no authority, nor warrant of reafon therein. 
So likewife, where it is written, that the (hips of 
Solomon went every three years to tharfis, and 
brought thence gold, filvcr, elephants teeth, 13 c. 
The Chaldean paraphraft tranflates tharfis [Africa.] 
But Solomon's fhips were prepared in the Red fea at 
Ezion-gaber, in the bay of Elana, near unto Madi- 
an, where Jethro, Mofes's father-in-law, inhabited > 
a province of Arabia Petr*a, Idumea, or ot the 
Chufites ; and they failed to the higher part of die 
Eafi- Indies. For it had been a ftrange navigation 
to have fpent three years in the paflage between 
Judea and Carthage, or any other part of Africa, 
which might have been failed in fix or ten days. 
And if fo great riches might have been found with¬ 
in the bounds of the Mediterranean fea, all the other 
neighbouring princes would foon have entertained 
that trade alfo. But this enterprize of Solomon is in this 
fort written of in the firft of Kings: Alfo king Solomon 
made a navy of fhips in Ezion-gaber, which is btfeda 
Elatb and the brink of the Red fea in the land of 
Edom: and Hiram font with the navy bis fervants, 
that were mariners, and bad knowledge of the fea, 
with the fervants of Solomon : and they cam to 
Opbir, and fetch'd from thence 420 talents of gold. 
See. But as the nations about Pontus thought 


Digitized by 


Good 


e 


« Jer. 5 *. * 7 - 


* Melanfth. in Canon. 
















Chap. VIII. The History o/' World. $5 


no fea in the world like unto their own, and 
doubted whether there were any other lea but 
that only (whereof it came that Pont us was a word 
tiled for the fea in general;) fo becaufe the Ifraelites 
and the Pbenicians knew no other fea than that of 
the Mediterranean in the beginning ; and that the 
people of Tbarfis had the greateft Ihips, and were 
the firft navigators in thole parts with fuch veflels, 
they were therefore called men of the fea: and the 
word Tharfts ufed often for the fea. And where¬ 
as it’s laid that the Ihips of Solomon went eve¬ 
ry three years to Tharfts , that phrafe is not ftrange 
at all: for we ufe it ordinarily wherelbcver we na¬ 
vigate, namely, that the king’s Ihips are gone to 
the fea, or that they are fet out every year, or eve¬ 
ry three years to the fea ; and therefore Tharfts was 
not therein named, either for Carthage, Africa , or 
India , but ufed for the fea it fclf. But in this place 
Tbarfis is truly taken for Tharfts , the chief city in 
Cilicia , founded by Tharfts the 2d fon of Javan , 
or by his fucceflors, in memory of their firft parent. 
To this city arrived Alex. Mace don , before he gave 
the firft overthrow to Darius, and calting him- 
felf into the river to bathe and walh his body, he 
fell into an extreme fever, and great danger of 
death : and in this city of Tbarfis was St. Paul born. 
Now this agreeth with the reafon and nature of a 
plantation. For (Gomer and his other fons inhabit- 
ting Afa the lefs, and that part of Syria adjoining) 
Javan , who was to pafs over the fea into Greece , 
took the edge of the fame coaft, and firft planted 
the/ones on that fliore: gave the iflands between Afa 
the lefs and Greece , to Eli fa, and left Tharfts upon 
the fea-fide in Cilicia of whom that city took name. 

The 3d fon of Javan was Cethim , of whom 
were the Romans and Italians , faith Beroaldus , but 
I allow better of Melantiboris opinion, who makes 
Cethim the father of the Macedonians. Cethim is 
a voice plural, faith he, and fignifieth percujfores, 
tho’ in that refpe<ft it may be meant by either. But 
it feemeth more probable, that place of Jfaiab 23. 
(according to Melantlbon) had relation to Alexan¬ 
der and the Macedonians. H<ec calamitas ab Efai 
prceditta eft, qui capite vicefimo tertio inquit , ventu¬ 
res effe ever fores Tyri ex terra Cittim This calami¬ 
ty, faith Me land h on , was forefhewed by Ifaiab the 
prophet, who in the 23d chapter pronounced, that 
the deftroyers of Tyre were to come out of Cittim. 
And altho* the children of Jfrael efteemed all men 
iflanders, which came to them by fea, and fcpa- 
rate from that continent (and fo alfo Cittim might 
be taken for Italy, faith Beroaldus) yet we muft take 
the firft performance of the former prophecy, which 
took effect by the deftrudlion of the Tyrians by 
Alexander: who after feven months fiege entred that 
proud city, and cut in pieces 7000 principal citi¬ 
zens} ftrangled 2000, and changed the freedom 
of 13000 others into bondage and fiavery. Now, 
that Macedon was taken for Cethim , it appeareth 
plainly in the firft of the Maccabees , in thefe words: 
After that Alexander the Macedonian, the fon of 
Philip, went forth of the land of Cethim, and flew 
Danus king of the Perftans and Medes. Jofepbus 
fets Cethim in the ifle of Cyprus, in which, faith he, 
there remaineth the city Citium , the country of 
Zeno the philofopher (witnefs Laertius ) which city 
Pintus upon Ezekiel affirmeth, that it flood in St. 
Jerome’s time. So it may be, that all the iflands 
in ancient times by the Hebrews were called the 
iflands of Cethim : and in that fenfe might Cyprus 
be fo called alfo} and yet becaufe Tbarfis was the 
very next port to Cyprus , and diredlly over-againft 
k> it is alfo very probable, that Cethim dwelt by 
his brother Tharfts: and finding that ifland too 
flrait for his people after they were increafed. 
No. 6. 


and that the reft of the coafts, both on Aft a fide 
and Greece , were inhabited by his father and bro¬ 
thers, he lent colonies over the Egean fea, and in¬ 
habited Macedonia. 

Dodanim the 4di fon of Javan, and the young- 
eft brother (by the moft opinions) fat down at Rhodes 
as near Cethim , Tharfts and Eltja, as he could. For 
Dodanim and Rkvdanim are ufed indifferently by 
many tranfl.uors: the Hebrew [ D) and the Hebrew 
[/?] are fo like, as the one may eafily be taken for 
the other, as all Hebricians affirm. There is alfo 
found in Epirus the city of Dodona , in the province 
of Mol'.Jfta. And as Cethim , when he wanted foil 
in Cyprus: fo Dodanim (feated in a far lefs ifland) 
did of neceftity fend his people farther off; and keep¬ 
ing along the coaft, and finding Pelopunnefus in 
the poflelfion of Elifa, he palled a little farther on 
the weft-ward, and planted in Epirus. And tho* 
the city of Dodona was not then built, or (perchance) 
not fo ancient as Dodanim himfelf, yet his pofteri- 
ty might give it that name in memory of their firft 
parent, as it happened all the world over. For 
names were given to cities, mountains, rivers, and 
provinces, after the names of Noah’s children, and 
grand-children } not in all places by themfelves, 
but by their fucceflors many years after : every of 
their families being defirous to retain among them 
by tliofe memories, out of what branch themfelves 
were taken, and grafted elfewhere. And becaufe 
great kingdoms were often by new conquerors new¬ 
ly named, and the greateft cities often fired and 
demolifhed: therefore thofe that hoped better to 
perpetuate their memories, gave their own names, 
or the names of their anceftors, to mountains and 
rivers, as to things (after their judgments) freeft 
from any alteration. 

Thus then did Javan fettle himfelf and his chil¬ 
dren, in the edge and frontier of Afa the lefs, to¬ 
wards the fea-fhorc: and afterwards in Greece, and 
die iflands and neighbour provinces thereof, as Ja- 
phet dieir father had done in the body of the lefler 
Afa, together with Javan’s brethren, Gomer, Ma¬ 
gog, Madai, Tubal, Mefecb, and the reft round 
about him. And in like fort did Chufh (the fon 
of Cham) people Babylonia, Chaldea , and the bor¬ 
ders thereof towards the weft and fourh-weft : and 
the fons of Chufh (all but Nimrod, who held Baby • 
Ionia it felf) travelled fouth-ward in Arabia Foelix , 
and fouth-weft-ward into Arabia Petr it a : the reft 
of his children holding die regions adjoining to 
Nimrod. Mizraim the brother of Chufh in like man¬ 
ner took the way of Egypt: and his brother Cana¬ 
an the region of Paleftina adjoining. The fons of 
Canaan had their portions in Canaan , of whom all 
thofe nations came, which were afterwards the 
enemies both to the Hebrews, and to thofe of the 
fons of Sbem, which fpread themfelves towards the 
well, and the borders of the Mediterranean fea: of 
which I lhall fpeak hereafter. But firft of the fons 
of Cham or Ham, which were four: 

Chufh, Mizraim, Phut and Canaan. 
Sect. X. 

That the feat of Chufh the eldefl fon of Ham was in 
Arabia, not in Ethiopia: and of ftrange fables, 
and ill tranflations of feripture, grounded upon the 
miftaking of this point. 

t I- 

Of Jofephus’j tale of an Ethiopefs wife of Mofes, 
grounded on the miftaking of the feat of Chufh. 

T HAT Ham was the father of the Egyptians , 
it is made manifeft in many feriptures, as in 

y 

Digitized by 











Book r. 


86 The History 

the 150th Pfalm, ver. 51. Then Ifrael came to Egypt, 
and Jacob was a fir anger in the land of Ham: and 
in the 78th Pfalm * He flew all the firft-born in E- 
gypt, even the beginning of their Jlrength, in the 
tabernacles of Ham. There is alfo found a great 
city in Thebaida, called Cheramis (as it were, the 
city of Ham) of which name 1 Herodotus alfo dif- 
covers an ifland in the fame region. But becaufe 
Chujh is the elder fon of Ham, it agreeth with or¬ 
der to fpeak firft of him. Now tho’ I have already 
in the defeription of Paradife handled this queflion, 
and, I hope, proved that Chujh could not be Ethi¬ 
opia : yet feeing it cometh now to his turn to fpeak 
for himfelf, I will add fome farther proof to the 
former. For the manifeflarion hereof ftts many 
things flrait, which had otherwife very crooked 
conltruflions, and fenfelcfs interpretations. Surely, 
howfoever the Septuagint and Jofephus have herein 
failed, yet it is manifefl that Chujh could not be 
Ethiopia , but Arabia (to wit) bodi that Arabia cal¬ 
led Petreea , and a part of Arabia the happy and 
the the defart: which regions Chujh and the Chu- 
files prefently planted, after they left Babylonia to 
Nimrod, wherein they firft fat down all together. 
And there is nothing which fo well cleareth this 
controverfy, as the true interpretation of the place, 
Numb. xii. 1. where Mofes* s wife is called a Cbufite j 
together with fome places which fpeak of Nabu- 
cbodonofor's conquefts. For whereas Jofephus and 
the Septuagint in the place, Numb. xii. 1. as alfo 
elfewhere, underftand Chujl) for Ethiopia, we mud 
give credit to Mofes himfelf therein ■, and then it 
will appear diat Jofephus was grofly miftaken, 
or vainly led by his own invention. For Jofe¬ 
phus prefuming that Chujh was Ethiopia, and there¬ 
fore that the wife of Mofes (which in feripture. 
Numb. xii. 1. is called a woman of Cujh) was a 
woman of the land of Ethiopia, feigneth that Thar- 
bis the daughter of the king of Ethiopia, fell in love 
with die perfon and fame of Mofes, while he be- 
fieged Saba her father's city \ and to the end to 
obtain Mofes for her hufband, fhe pradifed to be¬ 
tray both her parents, country, and friends, with 
the city it felf, and to deliver it into Mofes' s hands. 
The tale (if it be worth the reciting) lyeth thus in 
Jofephus. After he had deferibed the ftrength of 
the Ethiopian city Meroe, which he faith at length 
Cambyfes called fo from the name of his filler (the 
old name being Saba) he goeth on in thefe words: 
b Hic cum Mojes defidere exercitum otiofum eegre fer¬ 
rety hofie non audente manus conferere, tale quiddam 
accidit. Erat Aithiopum regi filia, nomine Tharbis, 
ific. which talc hath this fenfe in Englijh j When 
Mofes was grieved that his army lay idle, becaufe 
the enemy befieged, durft not fally and come to 
handy ftrokes, there happened this accident in the 
meanwhile. The Ethiopian king had a daughter 
called Tbarbis, who at fome aflaults given beheld 
die perfon of Mofes, and withal admired his valour. 
And knowing that Mofes had not only upheld and 
reftored the falling ellate of die Egyptians, but had 
alfo brought the conquering Ethiopians to the very 
brink of fubverfion : thefe things working in her 
thoughts, together with her own affedlion, which 
daily cncneafed, fhe made means to fend unto him 
by one of her trullieft fervants to offer herfelf un¬ 
to him, and become his wife •, which Mofes on this 
condition entertained, that fhe fliould firft deliver 
the city into his poffeflion: whereunto fhe conde- 
feending, and Mofes having taken oath to perform 
this contrafl, both the one and the other were in- 
ftantly performed. 


of the World. 

■\ n. 

A difpute againfi the tale of Jofephus. 

T HIS tale (whereof Mofes hath not a word) 
hath Jofephus fafhioned, and therein alfo 
utterly miftaken himfelf, in naming a city of Ara¬ 
bia, for a city of Ethiopia : as he names Ethio¬ 
pia it felf to have been the country of Mofes* s wife, 
when (indeed) it was Arabia. For Saba is not in 
Ethiopia, but in Arabia, as both Strabo and all 
other geographers, ancient and modern, teach us, 
faying that die Sabeans are Arabians, and not E- 
t bio plans -, except Jofephus can perfuade us, that 
the queen of Saba which came Iroin the fouth to 
hear the wifdom of Solomon, were a Negro, or 
black-moor. And tho’ D ami anus a Coes fpeaks of 
certain letters to the king of Portugal from Prefer 
John of the Abijfnes: wherein that Ethiopian king 
would perfuade the Portugals that he was defeend- 
ed of the queen of Saba, and of Solomon ; yet it 
doth no-where appear in the feriptures, that So¬ 
lomon had any fon by that great princefs: which 
had it been true, it is likely that when Sijhac king 
of Egypt invaded Roboam, and fack'd Jerufalem, 
his brother (the fon of Saba and Solomon ) who 
joined upon Egypt, would both have impeached 
that enterprize, as alfo given aid and fuccour to 
Roboam againll Jeroboam, who drew from him 
ten of the twelve tribes to his own obedience. 
Neither is it any thing againft our opinion of Mo- 
fes's wife, to have been an Arabian, that the 
feriptures teach us, that Mofes married the daugh¬ 
ter of Jethro prieft of Midian or Madian : which 
(landing on the north coaft of the Red feu, over- 
againfl the body of Egypt, and near Efion Gaber, 
where Solomon provided his fleet for India, in the re¬ 
gion of Edom, may well be reckoned as a part of 
Arabia, as the Red lea is called Sinus Arabicus. For 
Eduntaa joineth to the tribe of Juda by the north, 
to Arabia Petr*a by the eaft, to the Mediterranean 
by the weft, and to the Red fea by the fouth-eaft. 
And if we mark the way which Mofes took when 
he left Egypt, and concluded Ifrael thence, it will 
appear that he was no flranger in Arabia: in die 
border whereof, and in Arabia it felf, he had former¬ 
ly lived 40 years *, where it fcemeth, that befules his 
careful bringing up in Egypt, he was inftruded by 
Jethro in the Egyptians learning. For Jofephus con- 
fefteth, and St. Stephen confirmeth, that he was learn¬ 
ed in all the wifcfom of the Egyptians. But on the 
other fide this text makes much againft Jofephus, 
where it is written in Exodus ii. 15. Therefore Mo¬ 
fes fled from Pharaoh, and dwelt in the land of 
Madian or Midian, and not in Ethiopia. And in 
the 3d chapter it is as plain as words can exprefs, 
in what region Madian was, where it is written. 
When Mofes kept the fheep of Jethro his father- 
in-law, prieft of Madian, and drove the flock to 
the defart, and came to the mountain of God in Ho- 
reb. Now that mount Horeb is not in Ethiopia, 
every infant knoweth. And if we may believe Mo¬ 
fes himfelf, then was not the wife of Mofes put- 
chafed in that manner which Jofephus reporteth 
(which was for betraying her country and friends) 
neither had fhe the name of Tharbis, but of Sip- 
pora, or Zippora : neither was lhe a rtegro, but a 
Madianitijh. And as God worketh the greateft 
things by the fimpleft means: fo it pleafeJ him from 
a fbepherd to call Mojes, and after him David , 
and by them to deliver his people firft and lafl. 
For L Mofes fitting by a weft (as diiconfolate and 
a ftrangcr) defended the daughters of Re-gucl 


* Herod, in Futerpe. * Anriq. 1 * 2 c. 5. c fc*od 2 


from 


Digitized by LjOoqlc 






Chap. VIII. The History < 

from the other fhepherds, and drew them water to 
water their Iheep : upon which occafion (by God 
ordained) he was entertained by Jethro, whole 
daughter he married : and not for any betraying of 
towns or countries. 

From hence all’o came Jethro to Mofes at Re- 
pbidirn, not far from Idumea, and finding the in- 
fupportuble government of fuch a multitude, he ad- 
viled him to diftribute this weighty charge, and to 
make governors and judges of every tribe and fa¬ 
mily. And if Jethro had been an Ethiopian , it 
had been a far progrefs for him to have palled 
thro* all Egypt with the wife and children of MoJ'es, 
and to have found Mofes in the border of Idunuea : 
the Egyptians hating Mofes and all tlut favoured 
him. But the palling of Mofes thro’ Arabia Pe- 
tr<ea (which joineth to Madian) proveth that Mo¬ 
fes was well acquainted in thole parts: in which 
the fccond time he wandered forty years, and did 
by tliel'e late travels of his feek to inftrutt the chil¬ 
dren of lfracl in the knowledge of one true God, 
before he brought diem to the land of plenty and 
red. For he found them nourifhed up with the 
milk of idolatry, and obftinate in the religion of 
the heathen, and finding that thofe ftilf plants could 
not be bowed or declined, either by perfuafion or 
by miracle, he wore them out in the defans, as 
God directed, and grafted their branches anew, 
that from thole he might receive fruit, agreeable 
to his own defire, and God’s commandments. 

Laftly, This opinion of Jofephus is condemned 
by Augujlinus Cbrtfamenfts , where alio he repre- 
hendeth Apollinaris , who avowed that Mofes had 
married both Tharbis and Sepbora : his own words 
have this beginning 1 Mentitur etiam Apollinaris 
duns uxores babutffe Mofen, &c. Apollinaris alfo 
lieth in affirming that Mofes had two wives : and 
who doth not perceive thefe things feigned by 
them ? For it is manifeft, that the wife of Mofes 
was Zepbora , daughter to the prieft or prefident of 
Madian : and that Madian cannot be taken for E- 
tbiopia beyond Egypt, being the fame tlut jointth 
to Arabia : fo tar Chrifamenfis . 

+ III. 

Chulh ill expounded for Ethiopia, Ezck. xxix. 10. 

N ' O W as Chujb is by the Septuagint converted 
Ethiopia , and the wife of Mofes therefore 
called /Etb'iopiffa : fo in the conqueft of Nabucho- 
donofor is Ethiopia written for Arabia : tor by the 
words of Ezekiel it is manifeft that Nabuchodono- 
for was never in Ethiopia. b Behold, faith Ezekiel t 
(fpeaking of the perfon of this great AJfyrtan ) / 
come upon thee , and upon thy rivers, and I will 
make the land of Egypt utterly wafie and deflate, 
from the toiler of Seveneh, even to the borders of the 
black-moors: which tail words fhould have been 
thus converted: / rom the tower of Seveneh to the 
borders of the Chufites or Arabians: between which 
two is fituated all Egypt. For to lay, from the 
borders of Seveneh to the Ethiopiansfhuth no fenfe 
at all. Seveneh it felf being the border of Egypt, 
confronting and joining to Ethiopia , or the land of 
the black-mores. So as if Nabuebodonofor' s con- 
qudt had been but between Seveneh and the border 
of Ethiopia , it were as much to fay, and did ex- 
prefs no other victory than the conqueft of all that 
land and country, lying bitween Middlefex and 
Buckingham x where both the countries join together ; 
or all the north parts of England between Berwick 
and Scotland : for this hath die fame fenfe with the 
former, if any man fought to exprels by thefe two 


of the W o R ld. 8 7 

bounds, the conqueft of England, Berwick being 
the north border of England , as Seveneh or Syene 
is the fouth bound of Egypt , leated in Thebaida 
which toticheth Ethiopia. But by the words of 
Ezekiel it appeareth, that A 'abuebodonofor never 
entered into any part ot Ethiopia , altho’ the Sep¬ 
tuagint, the Vulgar, the Geneva, and all other, in 
edict, have written Ethiopia for Chujb. 

-V IV. 

Another place of Ezekiel, c hap. xxx. vcr. 9. hi like 
manner tmjlaken. 

A N D as the former, fo is this place of Ezekiel 
miftaken, by being in this fort converted. 
In die ilia tgrecheniur nuncii a facie me a in trieri- 
bus ad conterendam /Ethiopia confidential! : which 
place is thus turned into Englijh by the Genevians: In 
that day Jhall there mefengers go forth from me in 
fhips to make the carelefs Mores afraid. Now the 
Latin for [Ihips] hath the Greek word Trieres for 
Triremes which are galleys of three banks, and 
not Ihips. But that in this place the translation 
ftiould have been, as in the former, amended by 
ufing the word Chujb, or Arabia for Ethiopia, or 
the Black-mores, every man may fee which meanly 
underftandeth the geography of the world, know¬ 
ing, that to pafs out of Egypt into Ethiopia, there 
need no gallics nor Ihips, no more than to pafs 
out of Northampton into Leicefterjhire : Ethiopia 
being die conterniinate region with Egypt , and npt 
divided fo much as by a river. Therefore in this 
place of Ezekiel it was meant, that from Egypt 
Nabuebodonofor ftiould fend gallics along the epaft pf 
the Red fea, by which an army might be tranfpor- 
ted into Arabia the happy and the (tony (fparing 
die long wcarifome march over all Egypt and die 
delarts of Pharan ) which army might thereby fur- 
prize them unawares in their fccurity and confi¬ 
dence : for when Nabttcbodonofor was at Seveneh, 
within a mile of Ethiopia , he needed neither galley 
nor Ihip to pafs into it: being all one large and 
firm land with Egypt , and no otherwife parted from 
it, than one inland Ihire is parted from anodier •, 
and il lie had a fancy to have rowed up the river 
but for plcafure, he could not have done it; for 
the fall of Niltis (tumbling over high and ftcep 
mountains) called Catadupie Nili were at hand. 

Laftly, As I have already oblcrved, the fons of 
every father feated themfclves as near together as 
poflibly they could, Gomer and his fons in Afia the 
lefs ; Javan and his fons in Greece and jtlie ifland* 
adjoining •, Sbem in Perfia and caftward. So the 
fons and grand-children of Chuf from die river of 
Gchon , their father’s firft feat, inhabited upon the 
fame, or upon lomc other contiguous unto it, a$ 
Nimtod and liavilab on the one fide, and Saba 9 
Sheba, and Sabtecha, with the reft, did on the other 
fide. And, to conclude in a word, the fft brews had 
never any acquaintance or fellowfhip, any war, 
treaty of peace, or other intelligence with the Ethio¬ 
pian Black-mores , as is already remenibred in dip 
chapter of Pat adife. 

t V. 

A place of Ifuiah xviii. 1. in like manner corrupted 
by taking Chufli for Ethiopia. 

A ND as in thefe places before-rcinembrccj, fo 
in divers others is the word Ethiopia put for 
Arabia or Chuf, which puts the llory (where it i^ 
fo underftood) quite out of fquare j one kingdom 
diereby being taken for another. For what fenfe 


* Sixt Sencnf. Bibl. b Ezck. 29. io 


Digitized by 












88 The History of the World. Book I. 


hath this part of fcripture, Ifaiab 18. Fa tena cym- 
balorum alarum aua eft tram flumina Ethiopia > 
or according to tne Septuagint in thefe words. Fa 
terra navium alarum qua eft tram fluvios Ethiopia ? 
Woe to the land lhadowing with wings, which is 
beyond the rivers of Ethiopia , fending ambafladors 
by fea, even the vefiels of reeds upon the waters. 
Fa terra umbrofa ora\ Wo to the land of the Iha- 
dy coaft, faith Junius. The former tranflators un¬ 
derstand it in this fenfe; that the waters are Iha- 
dowed with the fails, which are fignificatively cal¬ 
led the wings of the (hips; the other, that the coaft 
of the fea was fhadowed by the height of the land. 

But to the purpofe: That this land here fpoken 
of by the prophet Ifaiab is Egypt , no interpreter 
hath doubted: for they were the Egyptiam that fent 
this meflage to the Ifraelites which lfaiah repeat- 
eth, and by the former tranflation every man may 
fee the tranfpofition of kingdoms: for hereby E- 
gypt is tranfported unto the other fide of Ethiopia , 
and Ethiopia fet next unto Judea, when it is the land 
of Cbujb and Arabia indeed that licth between Ju¬ 
dea and Egypt, and not Ethiopia , which is feated 
under the equinoctial line. And of this Beroaldus 
asketh a material queftion, to wit. What region 
that fhould be, of which the prophet fpeaketh, and 
placeth it beyond the rivers of Ethiopia : Nam de 
ignota agi regione did nequit For it cannot be laid 
that he treateth of an unknown region. Now if 
Ethiopia it felf be under the equinodti.il line, with 
whom the Jews had never any acquaintance, why 
fhould any man dream that they had knowledge of 
nations far beyond that again, and beyond the ri¬ 
vers of Ethiopia ? except we Shall impioufly think 
that the prophet fpake he knew not what, or ufed 
an impertinent dif'courfe of thofe nations, which 
were not difeovered in 2000 years after, inhabit¬ 
ing as far fouth as the Cape of Good Hope , com¬ 
monly known by the name of Bona Efperanza. 

+ vi. 

‘that upon the like mi faking, both Terrhaca in the 
ftory of Senacherib, and Zera in the ftory of A fa 
are unadvtfedly made Ethiopians. 

A N D by this tranflation is the ftory of Sena¬ 
cherib utterly miftaken in the caufc of his 
retreat. For Senacherib was firft repul fed at Pelu- 
fium, at the very entrance of Egypt from Judea: 
when having certain knowledge that thirrhaca 
(which all the interpreters call king of a Ethiopia) 
was on the way to fet on him, he began to with¬ 
draw himfelf: and fearing to leave his army in two 
parts, he fent threatning mefiengers to Hezekiah 
king of Judah, perfuading him to fubmit himfelf: 
the tenor whereof is fet down in the fecond of Kings 
in thefe words: Have any of the gods of the nat ions 
delivered his land out of the hands of the king of 
y Ifhur ? IVbere is the god of Ilamab ? &c. by 
which proud ambaffage, if he had obtained entrance 
into Jerufalem, he then meant to have united that 
great army before Jerufalem commanded by Rab- 
fakeh with the other which lay before Peluftum, a 
great city upon the branch of Nilus next Arabia. 
For b Senacherib had already maftered the moft 
part of all thofe cities in Judea and Benjamin with 
a third army (which himfelf commanded) being 
then at the fiege of Lebna. But upon the rumour 
of that Arabian army led by their king fhirrhakeh 
(whom c Jofephus calls tharftces) Rabfakeh hafted 
from the fiege of Jerufalem, and found Senacherib 
departed from d Lachifh, and fet down before Leb¬ 
na, which was afterwards called EUutheropolis, as 

• Jo'cph. 1 . 10. c. 1. I> 2 Kiigs 19. • Antiq. 1 . 10. 

t i Chron. 14. 


fome have fuppos’d. But while he had ill fuccefs 
at Peluftum and feared Thirrhakeh, God himfelf, 
whom he leaft feared, ftruck his army before Je¬ 
rufalem by the angel of his power, lb as 158000 
were found dead in the place, as in the life of He¬ 
zekiah is hereafter more largely written. And 
that this army of thirrhakeh was from Arabia, Jo¬ 
fephus himfelf makes it plain. For he confefieth 
in the tenth book the firft chapter of the JewiJb 
antiquities, that it was come to Senacberib's know¬ 
ledge, that the army which was a foot (both to re¬ 
lieve the Egyptians and the Jews) march’d towards 
him by the way of the defart: now the defart which 
lay indifferent between e Jerufalem and Peluftum, 
was that of Pbaran or Sur, which alfo toucheth 
on the three Arabia's , to wit, the ftony, of which 
it is a part, the delart, and the happy •, and by no 
other way indeed could the Arabians come on to 
fuccour either Peluftum or Jerufalem. But, that 
there is any defart between Peluftum and the fouth 
part of Egypt, hath never yet been heard of, orde- 
feribed, by any cofinographer or hiftorian. So then 
this fcripture of the fecond of Kings, verfe the ninth, 
hath the fame miftaking as the reft. For here the 
word [Cbu/h] is alfo tranflated Ethiopia ; and in 
this fenfe have all the interpreters, but Junius, ex- 
prelfed the beginning of the ninth verfe. He beard 
alfo men fay of thirrhakeh king of Ethiopia, &>c. 
whereas it fhould have been thus converted with 
Junius. Audiens autem de thirrhakeh rege Cbujbi : 
He heard alfo of thirrhakeh king of the Chufttes. 
For they were the Chufttes and Arabians, whole 
houfes and cities were next the fire, and upon whom 
the very fmoke of Judah flaming was blown, be¬ 
ing their neareft neighbours : and fo were not the 
Ethiopian Black-mores under the equinoctial, whom 
neither war nor peace (which difeovereth all regi¬ 
ons) ever found out, faith * Pliny. For this king 
was no more king of Ethiopia than Zerah was, 
who invaded 6 /ifa king of Judah, with an army 
of a million and three thoufand chariots. Indeed, 
how fuch an army and thofe chariots fhould pals 
thro’ all Egypt (the kings of Egypt being mighty 
kings) let all men that know how thele regions 
are feated, and how far diftant, judge. For prin¬ 
ces do not eafily permit armies of a million to run 
thro’ them ; neither was there ever any fuch ftrength 
of black-mores heard of in that part of the world, 
or elfewhere. Neither are thefe Ethiopians fuch 
travellers or conquerors > and yet is this king Ze¬ 
rah alfo called king of Ethiopia. But the word 
Chufb being firft fo converted for Ethiopia, the reft 
of the interpreters (not looking, into the feats of 
kingdoms, or the portabilities of attempts, or in- 
vafions) followed one another in the former mifta- 
kings. 

f VII. 

A farther expofttion of the place, lfaiah xviii. 1. 

C oncerning thefe words in that 18th chapter 
of Ifaiab,Navium alarum, Wing’d Ihips (fo the 
Septuagint turn it) or Cymbalo alarum (according 
to the Latin) Sails whiffling in the winds, or terra 
umbrofa ora (after Junius) the land of a Jhadowcd 
coaft, or, the land lhadowing with wings, as our 
Englifh Geneva hath it. The two firft interpre¬ 
tations of die Septuagint and St. Jerome luve one 
fenfe in eflfeCt. For the fails are commonly called 
the wings of a Ihip -, and wc ufe to fay ordinarily 
when our Ihips fail flowly, that flic wanteth wings: 
(that is) when her fails are either worn or.,too nar¬ 
row •, and we alfo ufe the fame phrale of the wind 
whiffling in the fails. And it may be that the 

2 King< 19. c Lib. 10. cap. i. * fiin. i $• c. 9. 

Egyptian* 


Digitized by 


Google 


Chap. VIII. The History 0/ & World. 89 


Egyptians employ’d fo many of thole fmall Ihips, 
as their fails were faid to give a lhadow over die 
Red fea. But to make both interpretations good, 
j Pint us (upon Ifaiab) affirmeth, that the word [Sa¬ 
fa/ 3 doth figiufy both to lhadow and to gingle, 
which is, to make a kind of cymbaline found: fo 
as the meaning of this place, laith Pint us , is this: 
IVo to thee, O Egypt-, which doji promife to others 
faftguard, under the Jbadow of thy wings, which 
indeed feemeth to agree with the argument of the 
18th chapter of Ifaiab : and this phrafe is often elfe- 
where ufed, as in the 16th Pfalm, Sub umbra ala¬ 
rum tuarum protege me ; Defend me under the lha¬ 
dow of thy wings. The boats of reed fpoken of 
are of two kinds •, either of balket-willow covered 
with hides (as anciendy in Britain) or a tree made 
hollow in the bottom, and built upon both Tides 
with canes. Of the one fort I have feen in Ireland , 
of the other in the Indies. 

1 1 

Sect. XI. 

Of the plantation and antiquities of Egypt. 

t I- 

That Mizraim the chief planter of Egypt, and the 
reft of the font of Ham, were feated in order , 
one by another. 

T H E fecond fon of Ham was Mizraim , who 
(according to the place of a fecond brother) 
was fent fomewhat farther off to inhabit. For 
Cbujh firft poflefs’d Chaldea on the well-fide of Ge- 
bon chiefly: and from thence, as he increafed in 
people, lb he entred Arabia , and by time came to 
the border of the Red fea, and to the foath-eaft 
fide of Judea. Mizraim's brother (with Phut) pafs’d 
over into Africa. Mizraim held Egypt: and Phut 
(as a third brother) was thrull farther off into Mau¬ 
ritania. Canaan took the fea-coaft, and held the 
fide of Paleftina: and thefe four brothers poflefs’d 
all that tradl of land, from Gehon in Chaldea , as 
far to the well as the Mediterranean fea: compre¬ 
hending all Arabia Deferta , and Petreea , all Canaan 
which embraceth Galileo, Samaria , and Judea > 
with the two Egypts ; whereof the nether is bound¬ 
ed by Memphis on the fouth, and by the Mediterra¬ 
nean fea on the north: and 'Thebaida (called the up¬ 
per Egypt ) llretcheth it fclf towards the fouth as far 
as Syene, the border of the Ethiopians or Black- 
mores. All the reft of the coaft of Africa wellward. 
Phut peopled ; which brothers had not any other 
nation or family that dwelt between them. And in 
the fame manner did all their fons again, and all 
the fons of the reft of Noah's children, fort them- 
felves. 

t II. 

Of the time about which the name of Egypt began to 
be known : and of the Egyptians lunary years, 
which made their antiquities feem more fabu¬ 
lous. 

T HIS flourilhing kingdom polfeft’d by Miz¬ 
raim, changed her ancient name, and be¬ 
came Egypt , at futh time as Mgyptus (otherwifeRa- 
as fome think) the fon of Belus chaced thence 
nis elder brother Danaus , lhifting him into that 
part of Greece , now called More a, by whom the 
Argils were made Danai abandoning their proper 
names: which happened 877 years after the flood, 
tn the time of JoJhua, as St. Auguftine conjedureth 
out of Eufebius. But in Homer's Odyjfes it appeareth, 
that the Egyptians were fo called at the time of the 


! Trojan war. And before this, Egypt was known 
by divers other names, as Oceana, Aria , Ofiriana, 
&c. And Manethon (whom Jofephus citeth in his 
firft book againft Appion) numbreth all the kings of 
Egypt after Mofes* s departure, who confumed 393 
years. By which other men conjedure, that the 
Egyptians took on them that name 330 years after 
JoJhua , and about 1000 years after the flood. But 
where Jofephus in the fame book taketh Ifracl to be 
thofe Hycfos , which he alio calleth pajlores or Ihep- 
herds, which are faid to have reigned in Egypt 511 
years, whom alfo he calleth his anceftors (mean¬ 
ing the anceftors of the Jews ;) in this I am fure he 
was grofly deceived, or that he vainly boafted ; 
for the Ifraelites had no fuch dominion as Manethon 
feigneth : nor abode in Egypt fo long a time by 
many years. 

Of the Egyptian antiquities there are many fan¬ 
cies in Trogus, Herodotus, Plato, Diod. Siculus , Me¬ 
la, and others. For they affirm (faith Pomp. Mela) 
that there had reigned in Egypt 330 kings before 
Amafis , who was contemporary with Cyrus ; and 
that they had memory and ftory of 13000 years; 
and that the liars had four times changed their 
courfe, and the fun twice let in the eaft. Thefe 
riddles are alfo rife among the Athenians and 
Arcadians , who dare affirm that they are more 
ancient than Jupiter and the moon, whereof On id : 

* Ante Jovem genitum terras habuiffe feruntur 

Arcades: (ft tuna gens prior ilia Juit. 

The Arcadians the earth inhabited 

Ere yet the moon did lhine, or Jove was bred. 

But for thole 13000 years it may well be true: 
feeing it is certain that the Egyptians reckon their 
years by months, which makes after that account 
not above 1000 or 1100 years, whether we take 
their months or lunary years to have been of the 
firft kind of 27 days and 8 hours ^ orotherwife 29 
days and 12 hours ; or after any other of thofe 5 
diverfities of their lunary years. 

f III. 

Of certain vain ajfertions of the antiquity of the 
Egyptians. 

G Erardus Mercator, in his chronology, reafon- 
eth for the Egyptians antiquity in this man¬ 
ner j that the 16th Dynafty (where Eufebius begins 
to reckon the Egyptians times) had beginning with 
the general flood: and that therefore the firft of the 
other fifteen reached the creation, or foon after it. 
To which conjedure of Mercator, Pererius maketh 
this anfwer: that therein Mercator was firft deceiv¬ 
ed, becaufe he taketh it for granted, that the be¬ 
ginning of the 16th Dynafty was at once with the 
general flood: which Eufebius maketh 292 years 
after, and in the time of Abraham. Secondly, 
Mercator maketh the beginning of the lhephcrds 
Dynaftia (being in number the 17th) in the time of 
their firft king. Salt is, to have been in the year of 
the world 1846, which Eufebius findeth in the 
world’s age 2140. For the 16th Dynaftia was be¬ 
gun but in the 292d year after the flood, as they 
account, and continued 190 years. Thirdly, where¬ 
as Mercator maketh every Dynaftia to endure 
115 years, Eufebius reckoneth many of them at 
left than 100 years: for the 28th had but 6 years •, 
the 29th but 20, and the 30th but 18 years. 

Now Annius, in his fupplement of Manethon , af¬ 
firmeth, that all thefe 15 Dynaflies lafted but 162 
years : and that the firft of the 15 began but in 


No. 6. 


* De Faft. 1 . i. 


z 


i the 

Digitized by VjOOQ 1C 





9 ° 


< The History 0/ the World. Book h 


the 131ft year after the flood: fo as where Merca¬ 
tor makes all the 15 to precede the flood, and the 
16th to have been then in being at the time of the 
flood, /.Innius makes them all after it. But the 
contrariety of falfhood cannot be hidden, tho’ dif- 
guifed. For Annius had forgotten his former opi¬ 
nion and aflertion, that it was in the 131ft year that 
Nimrod with the fons of Noah came into the val¬ 
ley of Shinaar: fo he forgets the time which was 
confumed in the building of Babel: and that be¬ 
fore the confofion of fpeech there was no dilperft- 
on, nor far-off plantation at all. And tho’ he ha- 
ftily convey’d Gomer into Italy., and Tubal into 
Spain , in the 10th year of Nimrod’s reign (which 
was 10 years after his arrival into Babylonia) yet here¬ 
in he is more unadvifed. For he makes Egypt pof- 
fefs’d, and a government eftablifliedin the very firft 
year ot the arrival of Nimrod into Shinaar , before 
all partition, or any expedition far off or near in 
queftion : for from thence (that is, from Babel) did 
the Lord feat ter them upon all the earth. 

f IV. 

Againfl Pererius: that it is not unlikely , but that E- 
gypt -was peopled within 200 years after the crea¬ 
tion j at leaf, that both it, and the mojl part of 
the world , were peopled before the flood. 

B U T whereas Pererius feeketh to overthrow 
this antiquity of the Egyptians , touching their 
Dynaflies (which Eufebius doth not altogether de- 
ftroy, but leffen) I do not find any great ftrength 
in this opinion of Pererius (to wit) that it was either 
unlikely or impoffible that Egypt fhould be peopled 
within 100 or 200 years after Adam, in the firft 
age. And whereas he fuppofeth that it was not 
inhabited at all before the general flood, I do veri¬ 
ly believe the contrary: and that not only of E- 
gypt, but the better part of all the world was then 
peopled : Pererius’s words are thefe : Quomodo e- 
nim primos mtindi ducentos, vel etiam centum annos 
Adami proles adeo multiplicari potuit, ut ad ALgyptum 
ufque habitandum fjf complendum propagata fit, &c. 
For how could the children of Adam be fo multi¬ 
plied in the firft two hundred, or in the firft hun¬ 
dred years of the world, and fo propagated as to 
inhabit and fill Egypt ? for allowing this, faith Pe¬ 
rerius , we muft alfo confefs, that there were then 
both the AJfyrians, and other nations. 

Now feeing tire feriptures are filent herein, and 
that it is no point of our faving belief, it is lawful 
for every man to be guided in this and the like 
queftions by the beft reafon, circuinftance, and 
likelihood ; and herein, as in the reft, I proteft 
that I do not gainfay any man’s opinion out of 
any crofting or cavilling humour: for I think it 
the part of every Chriftian, rather to reconcile dif¬ 
ferences, where there is poftibility of union, than 
out of froward fubtilty, and prejudicate refolved- 
nefs, to maintain factions needlels, and dangerous 
contentions. 

Firft therefore to this opinion, that Egypt was 
not planted fo foon after Adam , no, not at all be¬ 
fore the flood, I fay there is no reafon why we 
fhould give a lefs increafe to the fons of Adam , than 
to the fons of Noah. For their length of life, which 
exceeded thofe which came after the flood double, 
and (after a few years) treble, is an infallible proof 
of their ftrength and ability, to beget many chil¬ 
dren : and at that time they obferved no degrees of 
kindred, nor confanguinity. And that there was 
a fpeedy increafe of people, and in great numbers, 
it may in fome fort appear by this, that Cain , who 
(being fearful that the death of Abel would have 
been revenged on him) withdrew himfelf from the 


reft, which were afterwards begotten, and dwelt in 
the land of Nod , and there by the help of his 
own iffues, built a city (called Enoch) after the 
name of his firft-born. Now if it be gathered that 
Nimrod came into the valley of Shinaar with fo 
many multitudes, as fufficed to build the city and 
tower of Babel: and that to this increafe there was 
given but 130 years by Berofui, and alter the ac-* 
count of the feriptures (reckoning, as it is common¬ 
ly underftood, by the birth of Arphdxad, Selah, 
Heber, and Phaleg) but 101 years: I fee no caufi* 
to doubt, but that in the infancy of the firft age;' 
when the bodies of men were moft perfect, even 
within 130 years (the fame, if not a greater) num¬ 
ber might lx increafed : and fo within 70 years af¬ 
ter (that is, by fuch time as the world had ftood 
200 years) as well Ajfyria, Syria , and Egypt , might 
be poflefs’d before the flood, as they were within 
the fame or lefs time after it. Neither doth it agree 
with the circumftance, or true ftory of the Baby¬ 
lonian and Affyrian empire, that all thofe people, 
which w'ere increafed in the firft too or 130 years 
after the flood, came into Shinaar and Babylonia. 
For that ever Noah himfelf came out of the eaft, 
as there is no feripture or authority to prove it, fo 
all probable conje&ure and reafon it fell denies it. 
Again, thofe multitudes and powerful numbers, 
which Semiramis (but the 3d from Nimrod) found 
in India , confidered with her own army of dirce 
millions (and Ihe left not all her kingdoms emp¬ 
ty) do well prove, that if the world had fuch 
plenty of people in fo few years after the flood, 
it might alfo be as plentifully filled in like time be¬ 
fore it. For after their own account- Ninus go¬ 
verned Babylonia and Ajfyria but 292 years after the 
flood of Noah. And thefe troops of Semiramis 
were gathered out of all thofe eaftern kingdoms, 
from Media to the Mediterranean fea ; when there 
had now pafs’d from the flood to the time of this 
her invafion, fomewhat lefs or more than 360 years: 
for much more time the true chronology cannot al¬ 
low j tho’ I confefs, that in refpedf of the ftrange 
greatnefs of Semiramis’ s army, and the incredible 
multitudes gathered, this is as fhort a time as 
can well be given. And if but one half be true 
of that which is faid, that her army confided of 
1300000 footmen, and 500000 horfemen, it muft. 
needs be, that long before Semirami’% reign, the 
greateft part of Afta (whence her huge army was 
gathered) was foil of people: yea Arabia it felf 
(much part whereof is barren) muft long before 
this time of Semiramis have been plentifully peopled; 
when Ninus having a determination to make him¬ 
felf mafter of all (nations, entered notwithftanding 
in league with the king thereof: whom therefore he 
either feared, or fought his afliftance. And if Ara¬ 
bia were then fo well replenifhed, I fee no caufe but 
Egypt might alfo be peopled. Now if we may 
believe Trogus Pompeius (epitomiz’d by Juflin , 
lib. 1.) Egypt was a moft flourifhing and magnifi¬ 
cent nation before Ninus was born. For thefe be 
his own words, fpeaking of Ninus: Fucre qtiidem 
temporibus antiquioribus Vexoris rex sF.gypti, (Jc. 
But there were in times more ancient Vexoris king 
of Egypt , and Tanais king of the Scythians: of 
which the one invaded Ponttts , the other Egypt. 
And how full of people all that part of the world 
was, the conquefts of Ninus witncls, who fubdued 
with no fmall force the Armenians , the Modes, and 
afterwards the Baclrians ; yea, all that whole body 
of Afta on this fide India. For Diodorus out of Ctefias 
numbreth the armies, wherewith Ninus invaded Zo- 
roafler, at 1700000 footmen, and 200000 horfe- 
men: and the ftories generally fhew, that though 
Zoroafler' sarmy was for fhort of this, yet it was 

greater 


Digitized by 


Google 





Chap. VIII. The History 0 / ^ World. 9 1 


greater than any that thofe parts of the world ever 
fince beheld. But to what end fhould I feek for fo¬ 
reign authority ? for no man doubteth but that E- 
gypt was poffefs’d by Mizraim, the fon of Ham \ 
and that it was an eftablifhed kingdom, filled with 
many cities in Abraham's time, the feriptures tell 
us. And fure to prepare and cultivate a defolate 
•and overgrown ground, to beautify it with many 
cities, laws, and policies, cannot be efteemed a la¬ 
bour of a few days : and therefore it muft be in¬ 
habited in alefstime than 200 years after the flood ; 
and in the fame time, if not in a Ihorter, before 
the flood. For if fo many millions of men were 
found within 300 years after the general flood ; fo 
as not only Babylon , and AJfyria , Battria, Arme¬ 
nia^ Media, Arabia , Egypt , Paleflina, yea, the 
far-off Libya on the one fide, and India on the o- 
ther, and Scythia , inferior to neither, were all filled : 
into what fmall corner 1 ; could then all thofe nations 
be comprefs’d, which 1656 years brought forth be¬ 
fore die flood ? Even neceflity, which cannot be re¬ 
fitted* caft the abundance of mens bodies into all 
parts of the known world ; efpecially, where death 
forbare the father, and made no place for the lbn, 
till he had beheld living nations of his own body. 


+ V. 

Of ftme other reafons agatnft the opinion of Pererius* 

F OR what a ftrange increafe did the long 
lives of the firft age make, when they conti¬ 
nued 800 or 900 years. Surely, we have reafon 
to doubt that the world could not contain them, ra¬ 
ther than that they were not fpread over the world. 
For let us now reckon the date of our lives in this 
age of the world: wherein if one exceed 50 years, 
ten for one are cut off in that pafiage, and yet we 
find no want of people ; nay, we know the multi¬ 
tude fuch, as if by wars or peftilence they were not 
fbmetimeS taken off by many thoufands, the earth 
with all theinduftry of man could not give them 
food. What ftrange heaps then of fouls had the 
firft ages, who enjoyed 800 or 900 years as afore- 
laid ! Thefe numbers, I fiy, cannot be counted or 
conceived. For it would come to the fame rec¬ 
koning in cflett, as if all thofe which have been 
born in Britain fince three or four hundred years be¬ 
fore the Norman conqueft (faving fuch as by acci¬ 
dent or by violence were cut oft ) were now alive ; 
and if to thefe there were added as many as by 
polygamy might have been increafed. For (to omit 
that the giants and mighty ones of the firft age ob- 
ferved no law of matrimony) it is to be thought, 
that thofe lovers of the world and of plealure, when 
they knew the long and liberal time which nature 
had given them, would not willingly or haftily 
prefent themfclvcs to any danger which they could 
fly from or cfohcw. For what human argument 
hath better perfuafion to make men carelcfs of life, 
and fearlcfs of death, than the little time which 
keeps them afunder, and that fhort time alfo ac¬ 
companied with I'o many pains and difeafes, which 
this envious old age of the world mingleth toge- 
ther, and foweth with the feeds of mankind. 

. Now if that Berofus or Annins may be alledged 
for fufficicnt authors, whom Pererius himfelf in this 
flueftion citeth, then is it by them affirmed, and by 
Jofepbus confirmed, that the city of Enoch was feat- 
• d near Libanus in Syria : and if other parts of Sy- 
tia were peopled in Cam's time, I fee no caufc why 
P&lfjlwa (which is alio a province of Syria) and E- 
g)pt y which neighboureth it, could be left dcfolate 
both all the life-time of Cain , and all thofe times 
between his death and the flood, which were by 
cibmation 700 or 800 years. And fure, tho’ this 


fragment of Berofus, with Annius's comment, be 
very ridiculous in many places (the ancient copies 
being corrupted or loft) yet all things in Berofiis are 
not to be rejetted. Therefore St. Jerome for fuch 
authors gives a good rule : Bona eorum eligamus , 
vitemus contraria \ Let us chufe what is good in 
them, and rejett the reft. And certainly in the very 
beginning of the firft book, Berofus agreeth, in et- 
feft, with Mofet , touching the general flood: and 
in that firft part Berofus affirmeth, that thofe mighty 
men and giants which inhabited Enoch , command¬ 
ed over all nations, and fubjetted the univerfal 
world : and tho’ that phrafe [of all the world ] be 
often ufed in the feriptures for a part thereof; as in 
the fecond of the Acts e That there were dwelling 
at Jerufalem Jews, men that feared God of every 
nation under heaven r yet by words which follow 
in Berofus , it is plain that his words and fenfe were 
die fame: for he addeth from the fun’s rifing to 
the fun’s fetting, which cannot be taken for any 
fmall part thereof. Again, we may fafely conjec¬ 
ture, that Noah did not part and proportion the 
world among his fons at adventure, or left them as 
difeoverers, but direfted them to thofe regions which 
he formerly knew had been inhabited. And it can¬ 
not be denied that the earth was more paflable and 
eafy to travel over before the flood, than after ir. 
For Pererius himfelf confefleth, that Attica (by 
reafon of mud and dime which the water left upon 
the earth) was uninhabited 200 years after Ogyges’s 
flood, whereby we may gather that there was no 
great pleafure in palling into far countries after the 
general deluge, when the earth lay, as it were, in- 
copfed for 100 or 130 years together. And there¬ 
fore was the face thereof in all conjetture more beau¬ 
tiful, And lefs cumberfome ro walk over in die firft 
age, than after the general overflowing. 

i 

t VI. 

Of the words of Mofes, Gen. x. verfe the laft , where* 
upon Pererius grounded bis opinion . 

L ASTLY, whereas Pererius draws this argu¬ 
ment out of the laft verfe of the tenth of Gene- 
Jis } And out of thefe were the nations divided after 
the flood : Quo fignificatur talent diviftonem non fuif- 
fe ante diluvium 1 By which it appeareth, faith Pe¬ 
rerius , that there was no fuch divifion before the 
flood : which he alfo feeketh to confirm out of the 
1 ith of Genefts , becaufe the divifion of tongues was 
caufe of the difperfion of the people. This confe- 
quence. Quo fignificatur , (ftc. feemeth to me very 
weak •, the text itfelf rather teacheth the contrary : 
For out of thefe , faith Mofes , were the nations di¬ 
vided in the earth after the flood j inferring, that 
before the flood the nations were divided out of 
others, tho’ after the flood out of thefe only. But 
whatfoever fenfe may be gathered from this place, 
yet it can no way be drawn to the times before the 
flood, or to any plantation or divifion in that age: 
for if there were none elfe among whom the earth 
could be divided after the flood, but Noah's fons, 
wherein doth that neceflary divifion controul the 
planting of the world before it ? And whereas it is 
alledged that the confufion of fpeech was the caufe 
of this difperfion, it is true, that it was fo for that 
prefent *, but if Babel had never been built, nor 
any confufion of languages at all, yet increafe of 
people and time would have enforc’d a farther-off 
and general plantation: as Berofus (lib. j.J fays well, 
that when mankind were exceedingly multiplied, 
Ad comparaudas novas fedes neceflitas compellebat j 
They were driven by neceflity to feek new habita¬ 
tions. For we find, as it is before laid, that within 
300 years after the flood, there were gathered to- 

Digitized by 


A 







92^ The History 

gether into two armies, fuch multitudes as the val¬ 
ley about Babylon could not have fuftained thofe 
numbers with their increafe for any long time: all 
Afia the greater and the letter; all Scythia , Arabia , 
Palejlina , and Egypt , with Greece , and the iflands 
thereof j Mauritania and Libya being alio at that 
time fully peopled. And if we believe Berofus , 
then not only thofe parts of the world, but (within 
140 years after the flood) Spain, Italy and France 
were alfb planted : much more then may we think, 
that within 1656 years before the flood, in the 
time of the chief ftrength of mankind, they were 
replenifh’d with people. And certainly feeing all 
the world was overflown, there were people in all 
the world which offended. 

f VII. 

A conclufton refolving of that which is moft likely , 
touching the Egyptian antiquities: with fomewhat 
of Phut ( another fon of Ham) which peopled 
Libya. 

r*T“iHerefore for the antiquity of the Egyptians , as 
X I do not agree with Mercator , nor judge with 
the Vulgar, which give too much credit to the E- 
gyptian antiquities : fo I do not think the report of 
their antiquities fo fabulous, as either Pererius or 
other men conceive it. But I rather incline to this, 
that Egypt being peopled before the flood, and two 
or three hundred years more or lefs after Adam , 
there might remain unto the fons of Mizraim fome 
monuments (in pillars or altars of ftone or metal) 
of their former kings or governors: which the E- 
gyptians having added to the lift and roll of their 
Kings after the flood, in fucceeding time (out of the 
vanity of glory, or by fome corruption in their 
priefts) fomething beyond the truth might be infert- 
ed. And that the memory of antiquity was in fuch 
fort preferved, Berofus affirmeth it of the Chal¬ 
deans , and fo doth Epigenes. For they both write, 
that the ufe of letters and the art of ajlronomy was 
known to thfc Babylonians 3634 years before Alexan¬ 
der % conqueft : and this report Annius findeth to 
agree and reach to the ume of Enoch , who was born 
1034 years before the flood, and wrote of the world’s 
deftrudtion, both by water and fire ; as alfo of ChriJTs 
coming in judgment \ as St. Jude hath witnefled. 
But leaving thefe antiquities to other mens judg¬ 
ments, and every man to his own reafon, I will 
conclude this plantation of Egypt. It is agreed by 
all, that it was peopled by Mizraim , and that it 
took the name of Egypt from ALgyptus the fon of 
Belus y as aforefaid. Being divided into two regi¬ 
ons, that part from Memphis or Nicopolis to the Me¬ 
diterranean fea, was called the inferiour Egypt ; fur- 
named alfo Delta ; becaufe the feveral branches of 
Nilus breaking afunder from one body of the ri¬ 
ver, gave it the form of the Greek letter Delta , 
which is the form of a triangle. That branch, 
which ran toward die north-eaft and embraced the 
fea, next unto the defarts of Sur and Pharan , had 
on it the city of Peluftum , where Senacherib was 
repulfed : the other branch, which yielded it felf 
to the falt-water towards the north-eaft, is beauti¬ 
fied by that famous city of Alexandria : the upper 
part of Egypt is bounded between Memphis and Sy- 
ene near Ethiopia , and had the name of Thebaida, 
of that ancient city of Thebes , which (according to 
Homer) was adorned with 100 gates: and therefore 
called Civitas centum portarum , and by the Greeks 
Diofpolis ; in the feriptures No-bamon , which fig- 
nifieth multitudes of inhabitants, exceeding belief. 
* Jofephus calls Egypt Merfm of Mizraim: and b //e- 


of the World. Book I. 

rodotus affirms, that it had once the name of The- 
bais. 

Phut the third fon of Ham took the next portion 
of land to his brother Mizraim, and inhabited Libya , 
whofe people were anciently called Pbutei , faith 
c J°f e pbus, and Pliny mentioneth the river Fut in 
Mauritania : which river from the mountain At¬ 
las, known to the inhabitants by the name of Dy- 
ris, he maketh to be diftant the fpace of 2 00 miles. 

It alfo appeareth in the 30th chapter of Ezekiel , 
that Phut, Chujh and Lud were contermini and af- • 
fociates with the Egyptians. 

Sect. XII. 

Of the eleven fons of Canaan, the fourth fon of Ham. 

'h I- 

Of the bounds of the land of Canaan , with the 
names of his eleven fons. 

C ANAAN , the fourth fon of Ham, poflefs’d 
all that region called by the Romans Palejlina ; 
in the feriptures Galilea , Samaria and Judea ; in 
the latter times known by the name of the Holy Land 
and Jury ; the limits whereof are precifely fet down 
by MofeSy Genefis 10. Then the border of the Ca- 
naanites was from Zidon as thou goejl to Gerar until 
Azzab, and as thou goejl unto Sodom and Gomorrba , 
and Admaby and Zeboim , even unto Lajha. Now 
how/oever thefe words of the Hebrew text [as thou 
goejl ] be converted, Mofes's meaning was, that Ge¬ 
rar was the fouth bound of Canaan , and Zidon the 
north ; Sodom and Gomorrba the eaft, and the other 
cities named, flood on the frontiers thereof. For 
Gerar ftandeth in a right line from Gaza , in the 
way of Egypt , the utter moft territory of Canaan 
fouthward: and this was properly the land of Ca¬ 
naan. 

Now the Ions of Canaan which poflefs’d this 
country, and inhabited fome part of the borders 
thereof, were in number eleven: 

1. Zidon. 

2. Heth or Chet bus. 

3. Jehu ft or Jebufeus. 

4. Emori or Emoreus, or Amoreus. 

5. Girgejbi or Girgefeus. 

6. Hevi or Cbiveus. 

7. Arki or Harkeus. 

8 . Sini or Sineus. 

9. Arvadi or Arvadeeus. 

10. Zamari or Samareus , or Tzemarius. 

11. Hamatbi or Hamatbeeus , or Cbamatbaus. 

Of which the moft renowned were the Hethites , 
Gergefites, Amorites, Hevites , Jebufites , and Periz- 
zites : which Perizzites were defeended of Zamari 
or Samareus , or from fome of his. 

-I- II. 

Of the portions of Zidon and Heth. 

Z IDON the firft-born of Canaan , built the 
famous city of Zidon in Phenicia , which af¬ 
terward fell in partition to the tribe of AJfer : for 
AJfer , Zabulon and Naphtali had a great part of 
the ancient Phenicia diftributed among them ; but 
the AJferites could never obtain Zidon itfclf. 

The fecond fon of Canaan was Heth or Cethus : 
of whom came the Hethites , or Hittites , one of 
thofe feven principal nations (commanders of Ca¬ 
naan) appointed by God to be rooted out: namely. 


• Jofeph. 1.1. Ant. c. 7. b Herodot. Euterpe. « Lib. 5. c. 1. 


the 


Digitized by 










Chap. VIII. The History <?/ A World. 93 


the Gergefites, the Amorites, the Canaanites, the 
Perizzites and Hevites, and the Jebufites. The 
Hittites inhabited about Berfabe, and towards He¬ 
bron, near the torrent Befor, and about *Gerar, which 
Alofts maketh the uttermoft limit of Canaan, hav¬ 
ing the defart of P bar an to the fouth: for about 
Berfabe (otherwife Puteus juramenti) four miles from 
Gaza dwelt Hetb and his pofterity, as far to the 
north-eaft as Hebron, and Mamre ; and of Ephraim 
the Hittite did b Abraham buy the field of Sarah's 
burial. Of which nation Rebecca bewailed herfelf 
to Ifaac, faying, c That Jbe was weary of her life 
for the daughters of Heth. The giants Anakim were 
of thefe Hittites, a ftrong and fierce nation, whofe 
entertainments by the kings of Ifrael againft them, 
the Syrians greatly fear’d : as in the fecond of the 
Kings •, d Ifrael bath hired againfl us the kings of the 
Hittites. 

* III. 

Of the Jebufitcs and Amorites. 

J E B US EUS the third fon of Canaan, of whom 
came the Jebufites, and whofe principal feat 
was Jebus, afterwards Jerufalem , were alfo a va¬ 
liant and ftubborn nation, and held their city and 
the country near it, till fuch time as David by God’s 
afiiftance recovered both : yet were not the Jcbu- 
Jites extinguilhed, but were tributaries to Solomon. 

Amoreus was the fourth fon of Canaan, of whom 
the Amorites took name, who inhabited that land 
to the eaft of Jordan below the lea of Galilee, hav¬ 
ing Arnon and the mountains of Galaad on the eaft, 
and Jordan on the weft ; of whom Og, king of Ba- 
fan , and Sibon, overthrown by Mofes, were prin¬ 
ces. 

The Amorites had alfo many other habitations 
dilperled within the bounds of Canaan : as behind 
libanus in the edge of Ccelefyria, or Syria Libanica. 
They had alfo their being in the mountains of e Juda, 
and in Idumxa near the Metropolis thereof, called 
Duma. And hereof it came, that all the Canaa- 
nites were fometimes called Amorites: as in Genefis 
xv. For the wickednefs of the Amorites is not yet full. 
And that this was alfo a powerful nation, we find 
in the prophet Amos ; 1 let dejlroyed I the Amo¬ 
rist before them , whofe height was like the height 
of a cedar , and he was Jlrong as the oaks. 

•{• IV. 

Of the Gergefites, Hevites and Harkites. 

^1 1 H E fifth fon of Canaan was Gergefeus or Ger- 
JL gefion, otherwife Girgafi, who inhabited on 
the eait-fide of the lake of Tiberias, or the fea of 
Galilee, where Ptolemy fets the city Gerafa , which 
Jofephus calls Gefera in the territory of Decapolis. 
Here it was that Chrift difpoflefs’d the pollefs’d 
with devils $ and the Gergefites defired him to de¬ 
part their coafts •, becaufe their fwine filled with the 
evil fpirits drowned themfelves in the fea of Galilee. 
Gergefeus alfo built Berytus, fometime Geris, after¬ 
wards Fcelix Julia, three miles from the river Ado- 
nis in Phenicia, in which the Romans held a garri- 
fon, and to which Augufius gave many large pri¬ 
vileges. 

. Heyeus the fixth fon, and father of the Hevites, 
•nhabited under Libanus near Emath. Theft He- 
vites, howfoever the Caphthorim expelled a good 
Pittof them (as in Deuteronomy the fecond is re- 
membred) yet many of them remained all the war 
°f Jofhua, and afterwards to the time of Solomon. 
For God was not pleafed utterly to root out thefe 


nations, but they were fometimes made tributaries 
to die Ifraelites, and at other times ferved, in 
their falling away from the true worlhip of God) 
to afflidt them : for as it is written Judges iii. They 
remained to prove Ifrael by them, whether they 
would obey the commandments of God. 

The feventh fon was Araceus or Harki, who be¬ 
tween the foot of Libanus and the Mediterranean fea, 
over-againft Tripolis, built the city of Arcbas, Arce, 
or Area, afterwards Arachis. 

fV. 

Of Sini and Arvadi. 

S INEUS the eighth fon, Hierofolymitanus fees 
at Caparorfa, which Ptolemy finds in Judea, 
not far from Jebus v to the fouth thereof, faith Ju¬ 
nius. But it is more probable, that Sineus founded 
Sin, which St. Jerome calls Sim \ Ptolemy , Simyra 
Mela and Pliny, Simirus, Brocbard, Sycon (called 
Synocbis) near Area. Pererius thinks that Sineus 
inhabited the defarts of Sinai, or diereabouts •, but 
hereof there is no odier certainty than the report of 
Broebard,who took view of all thefe places, affirming 
that Sineus built Synochis, as Zidon built Zidon. 
There is alfo another nation of Sini, written with 
the letter C, otherwife Kenxi, who defeended of 
Hobab the Ion of Raguel the Madianite, who aflift- 
ed the Ifraelites, in their conduction thro’ the wil- 
dernefs of Pharan. But theft Cinxi were admit¬ 
ted among the Ifraelites, and had a portion of land 
with the » Napbtalims, befides their habitations with 
the Amalekites : againft thefe Cinxi Balaam pro- 
phefied, that they fhould be deftroyed by the Af- 
fyrians. 

The ninth fon was Aradeus or Arvadeus, who in 
the ifle of h Aradus built the city Arados : oppofite 
againft which iftand, on the main of Phenicia, they 
founded another city of that name, which for op- 
pofidon was afterwards called Ant aradus. To this 
city came St. Peter, faith Clement, and in this ifle 
preached the gofpel •, and founded a church in ho¬ 
nour of our lady : but we find no fuch work of his 
in the Ads of the Apoftles. Both thefe two were 
very famous, and places of fkilful feamen, whom 
Ezekiel remembreth in his prophecies againft the 
Tyrians. * The inhabitants of Zidon and Arvadwere 
thy mariners. 

t vi. 

Of Zemari. 

Samareus or Zemari, the tenth fon, there 
\J are divers opinions. Some think that he 
inhabited in Ccelefyria at Edeffa, and founded Sa¬ 
mar aim, which in Jofhua is placed in the tribe of 
Benjamin. There is alfo Samaraiim (of the fame 
orthography) upon the mountains of Eplnaim, faith 
k Beroaldus, mentioned in the fecond of Chronicles 
xiii. 4. which the Latin converted! amifs, faith he, 
by Semeron. The Hierofolymitan paraphraft makes 
Samareus (of whom were the Perizzitesj the pa¬ 
rent of the Emiffani, which Pliny calls the Hemi- 
feni, in Ccelefyria •, and it may be that it was their 
firft habitation, and that they afterwards inhabited 
thofe other places before remembred. But that 
they founded Samaria, both the Hebrew orthogra¬ 
phy, and this place in the firft of Kings (fpeaking 
of Omrt) difproveth. l Atid he bought the mountain 
Samaria, or Sbemeron, of one Sbemer, for two ta¬ 
lents of fiver, and built in the mountain : and cal¬ 
led the name of the city which he built, after the 


*Gen. 10.19. t> Gen-23. « Gen. 27 46. * 2 Kings 7. 6. c Deut. 1. 

Imliua 19 j 2 . h Gul. Tyr. Vitr. 4 Ezelc. 27. 8. k Bcroald. in Chron. 1 . 4. 

No. 6. A a 


Num. 1^. f Amos 2 % Judg. 4- 

* 1 Kings 16. 24 


Digitized by 


Goov'tr 







The History of the World., . [ i: Book I, 


94 

name of Sbemir , lord of the mountain Samaria. But 
of all thefc places I /hall fpeak more at large in the 
conqueft of the Holy Land by the children of Ifrael. 
Of whomfoever the Samaritans were defcended, fure 
I am, that they were ever a perfidious nation, and 
bafe: for as long as the ftate of the Jews flood up, 
they always called themfelves Jews -, when it fuffer- 
ed or funk, they then utterly denied to be of that na¬ 
tion or family j for at fuch time as they were return¬ 
ed from their firft captivity, they became a mix’d 
nation j partly of the colonies of the AJfyrians , and 
partly of the naturals. 

f VII. 

Of Hamathi. 

T H E lafl of Canaan's Tons was Hamatheus , or 
(according to the Hebrew} Hamathi of Ha¬ 
math, faith Beroaldus, of whicn (the afpiration ta¬ 
ken away) the lame is pronounced Emath, where¬ 
of Hamatheus was prefent. Jofephus and St. Je¬ 
rome confound Emath with Antioch , not that An¬ 
tioch which ftandeth on the river Orontes on the 
frontier of Comagena , between the mountain Caffius 
and the province of Pieria , and Seleucis , of which 
St. Peter was bifhop, and in which St. Luke and 
Ignatius were born: but Antioch furnamed Epi¬ 
phania, as Beroaldus fuppofeth, which ftandeth be¬ 
tween Aparttea and Emefa in Caffiotis. Yet indeed 
Emath cannot be taken for either ; for both that 
Antioch upon Orontes , and that which neighboureth 
Emefa , are farther off feated from Canaan , than 
ever any of thole nations ftragled. And whereas 
St. Jerome fetteth Emath , which he confoundeth 
with Epiphania , in the tribe of Naphtali j it is ma¬ 
tt if eft that Epiphania , which ftandeth to the north of 
Emefa , hath all the province of Laodicea between 
it and any part of the land divided. And if Liba¬ 
tion it (elf were not fhared among the tribes, then 
could not Epiphania belong unto them : for both 
the provinces Laodicea and Libanica are between 
Epiphania and any part of the Holy Land , and 
therefore Emath fo taken could not be a part of 
Naphtali , as in the 13th of Jofjua is direftly pro¬ 
ved. For Jofjua counting the lands that remained 
unpoftefs’d,reckonethall mount Libanon towards the 
fun-rifing, from Baal-gad under mount Herman , 
until we come to Ilamath. And this reafon, among 
others, is ufed, that Emath was not in Nephta- 
lim, or any way belonging to the children of Ifrael: 
becaufe David accepted the prefents of Touhu * king 
of Emath , and therewithal conditions of peace j 
which he would not have done, if that territory had 
ever belonged to the children of Ifrael , but would 
have recovered it without compofition, and by 
ftrong hand, as he did the reft. But this argument, 
as I take it, hath no great weight: for if the pro- 
mife which God made be conlidered, as it is writ¬ 
ten in b Deuteronomy , then might Emath be com¬ 
prehended, tho’ feated altogether without the 
bounds of the land promifed, according to the de- 
feription of Mofes and JoJhua ; for Emath is indeed 
fituate on the other fide of the mountain of Her¬ 
man, which joincth to Libanus , and is otherwife 
called Ittirea. But whereas Hamath is named in Jo- 
fhua xix. 35. and written in die Latin converfion 
Emath ; therein, faith Beroaldus , was St. Jerome 
miftaken. Emath or Ittirea is that over the moun¬ 
tains, and the city in Nephtalim Ihould be written 
Hamath \ and fo the Septuagint , underftanding the 
difference, write it Ammath and not Emath , the 
fame which indeed belonged to the Ncphtalims , 
feated on die fouth-fide of Libanus to the eaft of 


Affedim : which St. Jerome writes Emath, Jofephus 
Hamath , others Ematbin , or Amatheos , and the 
people Amathein ; of which, as I take it, RabJ'a- 
keh vaunreth in the fecond of Kings \ c Where is the 
God of Hamath I' 


Sect. XIII. 

Of the fons of Ghulh, excepting Nimrod, of wh 
hereafter. 


f Seba, ' 
Havila , 

The fons of] Sabta , 


on 


Chufh were 


Raama , ^ 
Sabteca , 
Nimrod. 


And the fons of ) $hcba 
Rna„a were ^ 


t I, 


That mofl of the fons of Cliulh were feated in 
Arabia the happy: and of the Sabeans that rob¬ 
bed Job: and of the queen that came to Solomon. 

S EBA or Saba was the eldeft fon of Chufh , the 
eldeft fori of Ham, to- make a difference be¬ 
tween him and his nephew Sheba, the fon of his 
brother Raama; O'r Regma (or Ragma , after Mon- 
tanus) his name is written with afingle [6’] Someth, 
and Sheba the fon of Regma with an [A] afpirate, 
which is the Hebrew Schin. Seba the eldeft fon of 
Chufh, Regma his brother, and Sheba the fon of 
Regma , poltcfs’d both the Ihores of Arabia Faelix. 
Saba took that part toward the Red fea, as neareft 
his father Chufh , and the land of the Chufites : Reg¬ 
ma and Sheba , the eaft coaft of the fame Arabia, 
which looketh into the gulf of Perfta ; of which 
Pliny : Sabtei Arabum populi propter thura clartj/i- 
mi ad utraque maria porreRis gentibus habitant ; 
The Sabeans , people of Arabia , famous for their 
frankincenfe, extending their nations, dwell along 
both the teas, to wit, the Per fan and the Arabian 
or Red fea. This country was afterwards called 
Arabia a populi mixtione, faith Pofeltus. To this 
agreeth Ptolemy , who fetteth the city of Saba to¬ 
wards the Arabian or Red fea, and the city Rhe- 
gama towards the Per fan , with whom alfo we may 
leave Sabta : for fo much Alontanus gatliereth out 
of Ptolemy, bccaufe he remembreth a nation (cal¬ 
led Stabai) near the P erf an fea v and Maffabatbet 
which defcended of them. But Montanus hath fent 
Regma, or (as he calls him Rhama) into Car mania, 
for which I fee no reafon. Jofephus, who only 
attended his own fancies, hath baniftied Saba or 
Seba to the border of Ethiopia. But Beroaldus 
thinks it ft range, that the Sabcei, which ftole away 
Job's cattle, fhould run thro* all Egypt, and all 
Arabia Petraa , and find out Job in ‘Tracor.itis be¬ 
tween Paleflina and Coclefyria 1200 miles off. Now 
as this conjcdhirc was more than ridiculous, fo do 
I think, that neither the Sabxi on the Red fea, nor 
thofe toward the Perfan fea, could by any means 
execute the ftcalth upon Job, whichfocver Bero¬ 
aldus (hall take for neareft. But thcl'e were the Sa- 
b<ci of Arabia the defart, where Gnilandinus Mel¬ 
chior affirmeth out of his own experience, that the 
city Saba is feated: the fame which Ptolemy calls 
Save, now Semifcafac : and from this Saba in 
Arabia the defart, came thofe magi or vnfemtn 
which worfhipped Chrift, faith Melchior, whole 
words are theie : The magi came neither out of Me- 
fopotamia (as Chryfoftome, Jerome, and Ambroie 
fuppofccl) nor out of Arabia the happy , as many 
Wife men do believe, but out of Saba in Arabia the 
defart : which city when my felf was there, was (as I 


« 2 Kings 18. 34. 

Digitized by 


judged 

Google 


1 2Sam. 8. 9. fcDcut. u. 24. 




95 


Chap. VIII. *rhe History 

judged it) called Semifcafac. And to approve this 
opinion of Guilandinus, it appeareth that the Sab*i 
were neighbours to Job, and lay fit to invade and 
rob him. For both the other nations (as well thole 
on the Per fun fea, as thofe on the Red fea) are fo 
disjoined with large defarts, as there is no pofiibi* 
lity for ftrangers to pals them, efpecially with any 
numbers of cattle, both in refpeft of die mountains, 
of the lands, and of the extream want of water in 
thofe parts: Ubi ntc homines nec befit* videntur, 
nee aves, into nec arborts, neegermen aliejuod, fed non 
nifi monies fexofi, altijfimi, afperrmi\ Where there 
are found neither men nor beaft, no not fo much as 
birds, or trees, nor any pallure, or grafs, but only 
fharp, and high, ftony, and craggy mountains. Be- 
roaldus and Pererias conceive that the queen of Saba 
which came to vifit Solomon , was of the Sab*i on 
the eaft fide of Arabia Faelix ; but the contrary feem- 
eth more probable, that Ihe was queen of Saba 
towards the Red fea: for Solomon at that time com¬ 
manding all that part of /.Iraki* Peir*a, betwixt 
ldunuea and the Red fea, as far down as Midian or 
Madian, and Ezion Gaber: and this queen of Saba, 
which inhabited the weft part of Arabia Faelix, be¬ 
ing hi$ neighbour, might without any fat travel en¬ 
ter his territories, free from all danger of furprize 
by any other prince or nation. 

But to avoid tedioulhefs, it is manifeft that Seba 
or Saba, Sabi a, Raama , or Rbegma, with his Ions 
Sheba and Dedan , and Sabteca , were all the pof- 
feflors of Arabia the happy and the defart: only 
Havila and Nimrod dwelt togedier on die eaft fide 
of Chujh , who held Arabia Petr*a. Now for Sab- 
ta , there is found of his name die city of Sabbat ha 
or Sabot a in the lame Arabia: of which both *P ti¬ 
ny and Ptolemy ; who withal nameth Sabot ale , 
within the walls whereof diere were fomedmes 
found fixty temples. Ezekiel joineth the father 
and the fon togedier, b The merchants of Sheba and 
Raama were thy merchants. And that they were 
the eaftem Arabians their merchandize witnefieth, 
formerly repeated in the chapter of Paradife. For 
Jofepbus's fancies, that Saba was the parent of the 
Ethiopians about Meroe , and Sabta of the Ethiopi¬ 
ans Afiablari , they be not worthy any farther an¬ 
swer than hath already been given: efpecially fee¬ 
ing thefe cities, preferving the memory of the names 
of Saba and of Sabta in Arabia , were yet remaining 
in Ptolemy’s time, tho’ in fome letters changed. 
As alfo in the coafts adjoining, the names of other 
of the brethren of the family of Chujh , With little 
alterations are preferved. In Arabia the defart is 
found the city Sab* or Save (now Semifcafac) with 
the city of Rhegana for Rbegma » and the nation by 
Ptolemy hitnfelf called Raabeni of Raamah. In Ara¬ 
bia the happy is found the city of Rhegama , and Ra- 
bana , which alfo keepeth the found of Rbegma , the 
city of Saptba or Saptah , not far from the eaft coaft 
of Arabia : as alfo die Metropolis and chief ciry, in 
the body of the fouth part of Arabia , called with¬ 
out difference or alteration Sabatha ; and to the 
weft of Sabatha towards the Red fra the great ci¬ 
ty of Saba •, and the nation adjoining, Sab*i: and 
to the fouth thereof again towards the ftraight en¬ 
trance of the Red fea, the region of Sabe. To 
all thefe his brodiers and nephews which were fcat- 
ed on the eaft fide of Arabia, Havilah by the paf- 
fage of Tigris was a neighbour, to whom he might 
pafs by boat even unto Rbegma the city of Raama 
or Rbegma , fet near the river of Lar towards the 
mouth of the Perfian fea, which ftood in Ptolemy’s 
time. 

* Plin. 1 . 12. c. 14. PtoJ. Tab. 6. Afi*. b Ezek. 27. 22. « 

°f tbt plural number, as aim of the dual . e Jer. 46. 9. 


of the \V o r L D. 

1 11. 

Jofephus’; opinion of Dedan, one of the ijfue of 
Chufh, to have been feated in vuefi Ethiopia, d.J- 
proved out of Ezekiel and Jeremy. 

A N D whereas Jofephus (whom in this St. Je¬ 
rome followcth, as not curious herein) lent 
Dedan the Ion of Raamah into weft Ethiopia , it is 
ftrangc that Ezekiel ftiould couple Sheba , Raamah , 
and Dedan together ; Dedan in the 15th verfe, and 
Sheba ami Raamah in the 22d verfe, to be the mer¬ 
chants of Tyre, if Dedan had dwelt in weft Ethio¬ 
pia, which is diftant from Raamah and Sheba (the 
habitation of his father and brother) above 4000 
miles. Befules which the merchandise that the De¬ 
danses brought to Tyre doth not make them naked 
Black-mores. For they of Dedan (faith Ezekiel) 
were thy merchants in precious cloths for thy cha¬ 
riots ; and thefe welfcrn Ethiopians never faw cloth, 
till die Portugals leeking thole coafts traded with 
them : the mere-handi le of the country being hides, 
ekphants teeth, fome gold and amber, civit cats, 
and rice, but nothing at all of any manufacture: and 
all thefe they exchanged for linen, or iron chiefly. 

But in thole days the weft part of Africa within 
die body of .die land was known only by imagina¬ 
tion: and, being under the burnt zone was held 
uninhabitable. And therefore that the negroes of 
weft Ethiopia , which inhabit about Setra, Lia¬ 
na, or Niger, could cither pals by fea or land to 
Tyre in the bottom of the Mediterranean fea, were 
a ftrange, or rather a foolilh fancy. Now to put 
it out of difpuce that Dedan alfo dwelt by the reft: 
of the children of Chu fh, which feats they held by 
that name in the time of Jeremy the prophet, let us 
Hear. Jeremy's own words : Fly ye irdjabitants of 
Dedan, for i have brought the defiruclion of F.fau 
upon-htm. Hereby it appeareth that Dedan was a 
neighbour to the Idumcans : and ldum*a is a pro¬ 
vince of Arabia Petr*a : and Dedan which dwelt 
on the north part of Arabia Feetix, joined in that 
part to Petr*a, the feat of his grand-father Chufi) ; 
which neighbourhood and fellowlhip of Dedan and 
the Id it means is alfo confirmed by Ezekiel \ e I will 
firetch out mine hand upon Edom, and defiroy man 
and beafi out of it, and 1 will make it defolate from 
Teman: and they of Dedan Jhall fall by the fovord. 

Sect. XIV. 

Of the ijfue of Mizraim : of the place of Jeremy, 
chap. ix. ver. 7. 

FT E R Chujh it followcth to fpeakof A//2- 
raim’s foils, whole names (faith d St. Augnf- 
tiiu:) were plural, to fignily the nations which 
came from them. Ltidim the cldeft fon of Mizraim 
was the father of the Libyans in Africa: and the 
reft of his brothers difperfed themfelves into all re¬ 
gions adjoining. Among the foils of Shew there 
is alfo Lud •, but he is differenced from Lud the 
fon of Mizraim by the fingular number: the 
fon of Shem being written Lud, the fon of Miz¬ 
raim Ludim : and yet thefe names and nations are 
often confouhded, notwithftanding the apparent 
difference both of names and nations. For that Lu¬ 
dim the fon of Mizraim was the parent of the Liby¬ 
ans in Africa, and that he was feated not far from 
Mizraim his father, appeareth by the prophet Je¬ 
remy, who joineth them in this fort together. K Come 
up ye borjes, and rage ye chariots, and let the va¬ 
liant mot come forth,* the Black-mores and the Li¬ 
byans which bear the fijield : for thofe nations affift- 
ed the Egyptians being of one parent defended. 

Eztk. 1515* 4 terms rraficn im in tit Hebrew, is commonly a 

Digitized by 






9 6 The History of the World. Book I. 


And in Ezekiel, Phut and Lud are joined together. 
Ethiopia (or Chujh ) faith Ezekiel c. xxx. ver. 5. 

Phut and Lud , and all the common 'people , 
the men of the land that are in league Jhall fall 
•with them by the f 'word: which is as much to fay, 
as the fons of Chujh (which were the Chufites) the 
fons of Mizraim (which were the Egyptians) and 
the Libyans (defcended of his fon Lud ) with other 
the inhabitants of Egypt and Africa (hall fall toge¬ 
ther. Hierofolymitanus finds allb in Africa a na¬ 
tion of the Lydians. And I believe it: becaufe 
Jeremy joineth the Libyans and Lydians together in 
the place before remembred. But Libya in Africa 
is by the Hebrews called Ludim (faith Arias Monta- 
nus) tho’ 2 Chron. xii. 3. they feem to be called 
Lubim or Lubtei, a name fomewhat nearer the word 
Lybies , and by which it may feem that the truer 
writing is, not Libyes, but Lybies. Neither is it 
here to be omitted, that Pintus (upon the 30th of 
Ezekiel) underftandeth that which is fpoken of in 
the 5th verfe of Lud, not to be meant of the Liby¬ 
ans at all: for he will have this threatning to be 
meant againft the people of Lyda, a city, faith he, 
between Egypt and Palejlina , which opinion I could 
not miflike, if the city of Lyda were fo feated. 
But Lyda (which Ihould be written Lydda with a 
double D , and is the fame city which was after¬ 
wards Diofpolis , in which St. Peter cured Eneas of 
the palfy) ftandeth near the torrent Gaas, not far 
from Joppe, the port of Jerufalem. Yet it is not 
impoflible but that this city might have Lud for the 
founder. For there are many cities of one name 
founded in all the regions of the world, and far a- 
funder •, as after the names of Alexander , Seleucus , 
and Antiocbus , many cities called Alexandria , Se- 
leucia , and Antiochia , fo of divers others. St. Je¬ 
rome maketh Lebabim to be the father of Libya who 
was the 3d fon of Mizraim : and fo doth PoJIellus ; 
and either opinion may be true. 

The reft of Mizraim'% fons have no proper coun¬ 
tries given them in the feriptures, faving Cajluhim 
and Caphtorim, of whom came the Pbilifitnes, whom 
the feriptures call Pelcfet. 

Thele Cajluhim inhabited Caffiotis , a region ly¬ 
ing in the entrance of Egypt from Palejlina , in which 
die lake Sir bonis and the mountain Cajfius are found: 
not far from whence Pompey was buried. 

Caphtorim feated near Cajluhim in that trail of 
Egypt called Sethrotis , not far from Pelufium. Stra¬ 
bo calls it Sethrotis ; Stephanas and Pliny, Setbroitis , 
of the city Setbron : which Ortelius takes to be the 
fame which Ptolemy calls Hercules parva. Of the 
Cajluhim and Caphtorim came the Philijlines , which 
are called by the Septuagint Allopbyli, which is, 
Alienigeme , ftrangers, or of a ftrange kindred. 
Thele Philijlines inhabited the fouth part of the 
holy land towards Egypt , of whom Palejlina took 
name. For the Hebrews (faith Ifidore ) do not ule the 
letter [F] but inftead of it [FA.] Their principal 
cities were Gaza, Afcalon , Azotus, Geth, and Acca- 
ron: and the people of them called Gazai, Afcalo- 
nita , Azotit , Gethtei, and Accaronit*. Ifidore af¬ 
firms, that Afcalon was firft called Pbilijiim: and 
of that city die country adjoining. But where Ifi¬ 
dore had it I know not. 

The firft known king of the Philijlines was that 
Abimelech, who had a liking to Abraham's wife j 
with whom Abraham made a covenant and league. 
This Abimelech dwelt indeed at this time in Gerar j 
but it is written that he was alfo king of the Phili¬ 
jlines, in thefe words: • IVherefore Ifaac went to 
Abimelech king of the Philijlines unto Gerar. Now 
in regard that this or fome ancienter Abimelech go- 

* Bafil upon the 33./ Pfalm. Jerome upon the 29 th of Ezekiel. 
Book, Chap. vii. Sett. iii. 15. *2 Kings 16. 9. 


verned the commonwealth greatly to his glory, the 
reft of his luccelfors called themfelves by the fame 
name. The Philijlines commanded that tract of 
land upon the Mediterranean fea to the northward, 
from the caftle of Pilgrims (otherwife Ceefarea Pa- 
lejlina or Strut on's tower) which was the fouth bor¬ 
der of Phenicia, to Gaza , or to the river of Egypt. 
The Anakims, or ftrong giants, were of thefe Phi¬ 
lijlines , and Goliab was of ,eth, one of the five 
cities above-named. They had fometimes five kings, 
faith Uranus. They maftered the lfraelites at feve- 
ral times above 150 years, and kept them tributa¬ 
ries, till they were weakened by Sampfon and Sa¬ 
muel ; but in the end this yoke was taken off by 
David , and laid on themfelves. 

It is objected, that becaufe thefe cities and the 
countries adjoining were held by the fons of Miz¬ 
raim, therefore did the lfraelites difpoffefs the fons 
of Mizraim, and not of Canaan , by forcing thole 
places. 

To this faith Pererius, thataltho* the Palejlines 
or Philijlines held it in the time of Jdfhua, yet at 
the time of the promife it was poflefs’d by the Ca- 
naanites \ as in the 2d of Deuteronomy. TheHe- 
vites dwelt in the villages unto Gaza. And what 
marvel if (the Canaanites being the greater pan) the 
denomination were from them ? for that the Phi¬ 
lijlines were of Caphtor , and lb of Mizraim, and 
not of Canaan , befides Mofes , the prophet Jeremy 
witneffeth : b The Lord will deflroy the Philijlines , 
the remnant of the iffue of Caphtor : and in like 
manner in Amos , the Philijlines are faid to be the 
reliqties of Caphtorim ; c Have not I brought up 
Ijrael out of the land of Egypt, and the Phtlifines 
from Caphtor, and Aram from Kir ? fo I read this 
place with divers of the learned. For whereas the 
Vulgar hath, & PaUJlinos de Cappadocia, (J Syros 
de Cyrene , this converfion Beroaldus condemneth \ 
where Caphtor is taken for Cappadocia , and Cyrene 
for Kir. For Cyrene is a city directly weft from 
Egypt , between Ptolemais or Bane and Apollonia ; 
but Kir in A fa under the AJfyrians: Junius hath it 
Kir, and not Cyrene \ and fo hath the Geneva. But 
Pererius calls Caphtorim Cappadocia , according to 
the Vulgar tranllation, to which he is bound: and 
yet it is not altogether improbable if he mean Cap¬ 
padocia in Palejlina, and not that a Cappadocia by the 
fea Pontus in the north of Afia the left. For whe¬ 
ther they inhabited Setbreites , or Cappadocia of 
Palejlina , it is not certainly known. And lure in 
this manner he may expound Cappadocia to be am¬ 
biguous, as well as he doth Cyrene: taking it here 
not for Cyrene in Africa , but for a place in Media. 
For it is written in the 2d of'Kings, that Teglat- 
pbalajfer king of the AJfyrians carried away the in¬ 
habitants of Damafcus into Kir : and fo JoJephus 
fee ms to underftand this Kir , for Cyrene in Media , 
calling this Cyrene Media fuperior : for it was the 
manner and policy of the AJfyrians to tranfplant 
the people conquered by them, as they did the Sa¬ 
maritans or lfraelites , and other nations. And here¬ 
of it came that Kir was called Syro-Media : becaufe 
the Syrians by the AJJ'yrians were therein captived. 

Sect. XV. 

Of the ijfue of Sem. 

t I. 

Of Elim, Affur, Arphaxad, and Lud. 

I T remaineth laftly to fpeak of the fons of Sem, 
who were thefe: 

k Jtr. 47. 4. « Amos 9. 7. * Of which fit in the fictnd 

I. Alum, 






Chap. VIII. The History World. 97 


1. Alam, or Elam. 

2 . AJhur. 

3. Arphaxad. 

4. Lud , and 

5. Aram. 

The pofteriry of Sem, Mofes rccounteth after the 
reft: becaufe from them he proceedeth in order 
with the genealogy and ftory of the Hebrews. For 
of Sem was Abraham defeended. 

Of thefe five fons the feriptures remember the 
length of the life of Arphaxad only, and only the 
children of him and Aram, the reft are barely fpo- 
ken of by rehearfal of their names, faving that it 
may be gathered, that AJfur (who was fuppofed to 
found Nineveh ) was alfo faid to be the father of 
the AJfyrians, whofe iflues of Cham inftantly con¬ 
tended for the empire of the eaft: which fometimes 
the AJfyrians, fometimes the Babylonians obtained, 
according to the virtue of their princes. This is 
the common opinion, which alfo teacheth us, that 
all the eaft parts of the world were peopled by AJ¬ 
fur, Elam and Lud (faving India) which I believe 
Noah himfelf firft inhabited: and to whom Ophir 
and Havilab the fons of foil an afterwards repaired. 
Hi fitii Sem ah Euphrate Jluvio partem Afiee ufque 
ad oceanum lndicum tenuerunt •, Thefe fons of Sem 
(faith St. Jerome) held all thofe regions from Eu¬ 
phrates to the Indian ocean. 

Of • Elam came the Elamites , remembred, Ads 
ii. 9. and the princes of Perfia ; which name then 
began to be out of ufe and loft, when the Perftans 
became matters of Babylonia : the eaft Monarchy 
being eftabli/hed in them. Some prophane writers 
diftingui/h Elam from Perfia , and make the Ela¬ 
mites a people apart. But Sufa (which the ferip¬ 
tures call Safari) in Elam was the king’s feat of 
Perfia (witnefs Daniel viii. 2.) And If aw (faith 
He) in a vifion, and when I Jaw it, 1 was in the 
palace of Sufan, which is in the province of Elam. 
This city is embraced by the river EuUus (accord¬ 
ing to h Ptolemy) in Daniel, Ulai : and fcated in 
the border of Suftana. 

AJJtur (as moll hiftorians believe) the 2d fon of 
Sent, was father of the AJfyrians, who dildaining 
the pride of Nimrod , parted from Babel, and built 
Nineveh, of equal beauty and magnitude with Ba¬ 
bylon, or exceeding it. But we fhall iri due place 
difprove that opinion. Every man’s hand hath 
been in this ftory, and therefore I fhall not need 
herein to fpeak much: for the AJfyrians fo often 
invaded and fpoiled the I/raelites, deftroy’d their 
cities, and led them captives, as both in divine and 
human letters there is Urge and often mention of 
this nation. 

But howfoever Herodotus and D. Siculus extend 
this empire, and honour this nation with ample 
dominion ; yet was not the ttate of the AJfyrians 
an y fuch power, alter fuch time as Sardanapalus loll 
the empire. For Senacberib, who was one of the 
powerfulleft princes among them, had yet the moun¬ 
tain Taurus for the utmoll of his dominion towards 
the north eaft, and Syria bounded him towards the 
w <df, notwithftanding thofe vaunts of Senacberib in 
Ifaiah xxxvii. 11. Have the gods of the nations de¬ 
livered them whom my fathers have defiroyed ? as 
flozan, and Haran, and Refeph, and the children of 
Eden which were at TelaJJar. H' here is the king 
°f Hamath, and the king of Arphad, and the king 
°f the city Sepharvaim, flcna and lvab ? all thcle 
indeed were but petty kings of cities, and fmall 
countries ; as Haran, in Mefopotamta; Refeph, in 
Palmyrena : Hamath, or Einatb , in Iturea under 

* J°%h Ant. ). t. c. 7. k Ptol. Afise. Tab. c. e Jfa. 7. 
Df'it, 23.4. Mu. 3. Rnrnl. 1. 19. Pl'al. 59. *Strab 1 . 1 

No. VII. 


Lib anus : the ille of Eden : Sephcr, and others of 
this lore. Yea Nabucbodonofor, who was moft pow¬ 
erful, before the conqueil of Egypt had but Chaldea, 
Mefopotamia, and Syria, with Palefiina and Pbe• 
nicia parts thereof. But in this qutftion of AJfur, 
I will fpeak my opinion freely when I come to 
Nimrod, whofe plantation I have omitted among the 
reft of the Chufites , becaufe he eftablifhed the firft 
empire: from whom the rpoft memorable ftory of 
the world taketh beginning. 

Of Arphaxad came the Chaldeans, faithS. Jerome, 
and Jofephus, but it mull be thofe Chaldeans about 
Ur : for the fons of Cham poflefs’d the reft. It is true 
that he was the father of the Hebrews : for Arphaxad 
begat She la, and Sbela Heber , of whom hereafter. 

And that Lud, the 4th fon of Sbem, gave name 
to the Lydians in Afia the lefs, is the common opi¬ 
nion, taken from Jofephus and St. Jerome \ but I 
fee not by what reafon he was moved to ftraggle 
thither from his friends. 

t IF 

Of Aram and his fons. 

A Ram, the 5th and laft fon of Shem , was the pa¬ 
rent of the Syrians : of which c Damafcus 
was head. Their name was changed from Aram 
or Aramites by Syr us (frith d Eujebius out of Jofe¬ 
phus) which Syrus lived before Mofes was bom ; the 
fame which others call the fon of Apollo. Mefopo¬ 
tamia alfo being but a province of Syria, had the 
name of Aram Nabaraiim, which is as much to 
fay, as Syria duorum Jluviorum, Syria compafled 
with two rivers (to wit) Tigris and Euphrates. The 
feriptures call it Mefopotamta, Syria, and Padan 
Aram, and the Greeks Mefopotamta fimply. 

• * Arife and get thee to Padan Aram (faith Ifaac to 
Jacob) to the boufe of Bethuel thy mother's father, 
and thence take thee a wife. Strabo alfo remem- 
breth it by the ancient name of Aram or Aramea, 
as thefe his own words converted witnefs. s Quos 
nos Syros vocamus, ipfi Syri Aramenios & Arameos 
vacant •, thole which we call Syrians (faith he) them- 
felves call Aramenians and Arameans. 

Aguinlt this opinion that Aram the fon of Sem, 
was the father and denominator of the Syrians in 
general (and not only of thofe in Syria Inter-amnis, 
which is Mejopotamia) fome read Gen. xxii. 21. Ke¬ 
nt u cl, the father of the Syrians: where others out 
of the original read Kemuel, the fon of Aram. Nei¬ 
ther is it any inconvenience for us to underftand 
the word [iwm] here, not for the nation, but for 
the name of fome one of note ; the rather, becaufe 
in the hitlory of Abraham and Ifaac (which was 
in time long before Kemuel'% pofterity could be fa¬ 
mous) we find Mefopotamia called Aram i and that 
with an addition: fometimes with Nabaraiim, and 
fometimes of Padan, to diftinguifh it from another 
Aram, which (as it feems) then alfo was called 
Aram. For whereas Junius thinks in his note up¬ 
on Gen. xxv. 20. that Padan Aram ought to be re- 
ftrained to fome part of Mejopotamia (to wit) to 
that part which Ptolemy calls Anccbaritis (fo called 
from the river Cbaboras, which dividing it, run¬ 
neth into Euphrates) the promifeuous ufe of Pa¬ 
dan Aram, and Aram Nabaraiim (which latter 
appellation queftionlefs comprehends the whole 
Mefopotamia) may feem to refute this opinion: ef- 
pecially feeing the fignification of this appellation 
agreeth with the whole region. For it fignifieth 
as much as the yoke of Syria, which name agrees 
with this region: becaufe the two rivers (as it 
were) yoked together go along it. The reliques 

8. d Eufcb. ic. (> e Gen. 28 2. See Gen 25. 20. alfi 

^ ^ Digitized by Google 










98 *The History 

of the name Padan appear in the name of two 
cities in Ptolemy , called Aphadana (as Junius hath 
prell noted) the one upon Cbaborus, the other up¬ 
on Euphrates. 

f Uz or Hus , 

The Tons 

of Aram were jGether , and 

C Mefch or Mes. 

. Uz or Hus inhabited about Dantafcus , and built 
that city, lay Jofephus and * St. Jerome. But Tof- 
tatus miltaking this opinion, both in them and in 
Lyra, who allb followeth Jofephus , affirmeth that 
Abraham's, fteward Eliezer was the founder there¬ 
of-, tho* it were likely that Hus , the eldeft fon 
of Aram dwelt near unto his father, who inhabited 
the body of Syria. For Hus was a region of the 
lame, adjoining to Arabia the defart, and to Ba- 
tanea or Traconitis: whereof the prophet Jeremy : 
b Rejoyce and be glad O daughter of Edom that dwell¬ 
ed in the land of Hus. Hus therefore is feated be¬ 
yond Jordan, in die eaft region of Traconitis , ad¬ 
joining to Bafan, having Batanea Gaulonitis , and 
the mountain Stir to the eaft, Edrai to the fouth, 
Damafcus north, and Jordan weft: having in it 
many cities and people, as may alfo be gathered 
out of Jeremy. e And all forts of people : and all 
the kings of the land of Hus. In this region dwelt 
Job, defeended of Hus, the fon of Nabor , the bro¬ 
ther of Abraham (faith St. Jerome') and married Di¬ 
nah the daughter of Jacob , faith Philo. 

Hult he 2d fon of Aram, St. Jerome makes the fa¬ 
ther of the Armenians: and Get her the 3d fon, pa¬ 
rent to the Arcananians or Carians: which opini¬ 
on (becaufe I find not where to let him) I do not 
difprove, tho* I fee no reafon why Gether lhould 
leave the fcllowlhip of his own brethren, and dwell 
among ftrangers in Afta the lefs. Junius gives 
Hul (whom he writes Chut) the defart of Palmyre- 
tta , as far as Euphrates , where Ptolemy fetteth the 
city of Cholle. 

Gether (faith Jofephus) founded the Batlrians: 
but Jofephus gave all Noah's children feathers, to 
carry them far away in all hafte. For mine own 
opinion, I always keep the rule of neighbourhood, 
and think with Junius (to wit) that Gether feated 
himfelf near his brothers, in the body of Syria , and 
in the province of Caffiotis , and Seleucis, where 
Ptolemy placeth Gindarus, and the nation by Pliny 
called Gindareni. 

Junius alfo giveth to Mes or Mefch the north part 
of Syria, between Cilicia and Mefopotamia, near the 
mountain Mafius. The certainty of thofe plantati¬ 
ons can no otherwife be known than by this probabi¬ 
lity, that Aram the father (of whom that great regi¬ 
on took name) planted his fons in the fame land a- 
bout him: for he wanted no fcope of territory for 
himfelf and them neither then when the world was 
newly planted, nor in many hundred years after : 
and tnerefore there is no reafon to call them into the 
defart parts of the world, fo far afunder. And as ne- 
celTity and policy held them together for a while: 
fo ambition (which began together with angels and 
men) inhabiting the hearts of their children fet 
them afunder. For altho’ thefe fons of Aram , and 
the fons of the reft of Noah's children, kept them- 
fclves within the bounds of fome one large kingdom 
yet therein every one alfo fought a province apart, 
and to themfelves giving to the cities therein 
built, their own names, thereby to leave their me¬ 
mory to their pofterity: the ufe of letters being then 
rare, and known to few. 


of the VV o r l d. Bods. I. 

In this fort did the pride of the Spaniards in A- 
merica eaft them into fo many provinces: every one 
emulating and difdaining the greatnefs of others, as 
they are thereby to this day fubjett to invafion, ex¬ 
pulsion, and deftrueflion: fo as (Nova Hifpania,zxv\ 
Peru excepted, becaufe thofe countries are unaccef- 
fible to ftrangers) an eafy force will eaft them out 
of all the reft. 

Mes , the 4th fon, is made the parent of the Mee- 
nians : d of whom fomething hath been fpoken al¬ 
ready. Arphaxad , the 3d fon of Shem, begat 
Shelah and Heber. Heber had two fons, Pba- 
leg and Jotlan: and in PbaJeg's time was the 
earth divided. 

-f- III. 

Of the divifion of the earth in the time of Phaleg, 
one of the fons of Heber, of the ijfue of Sem. 

T H F. many people which at the divifion (at 
Phaleg's birth) were then living, and the 
thorough plantation of all the eaft part of the world 
(at his death) hath made a doubt, whether the 
earth were divided at either. The Hebrews (faith 
Pererius out of Sedar Holam, one of their chroni¬ 
cles) affirm that this partition happened at the 
death of Phaleg: and Phaleg was bom in the year 
after the flood ioi, and lived in all 239 years, 
which numbers added," make 340. And therefore 
was it fo many years after the flood, ere the chil¬ 
dren of Noah fevered themfelves. But to this opi¬ 
nion of the Hebrews , and the doubt they make how 
in fo few years as 101 (the time of Phaleg's birth) 
fo many people could be increafed ; Pererius gives 
this anfwer, That if 70 perfons of the family ot Jo~ 
cob increafed to 600000 fighting men in 215 
years (befides women, children, and impotent per¬ 
fons) how much more is it likely, that fo foon af¬ 
ter the flood the children of Noah might inafhorter 
time bring forth many multitudes, having receiv¬ 
ed the blcffing of God, Increafe and multiply , and 
fill the earth ? What ftrength this anfwer hath, let 
others judge: for the children of Ifrael were 70, 
and had 215 years time: and the fons of Noah were 
but three, and had but 101 years time, to the 
birth of Phaleg. 

Others conceive that Phaleg took that name after 
the divifion, in memory thereof: as e Jofephus and 
St. Augufline , who reafon in this manner. If the 
divifion were at Phaleg's death (which happened 
in the year, which is commonly held to be the 48th 
of Abraham , but was by more likely computation 12 
years before his birth) then was the divifion 38 
years after Ninus , who governed 52 years: in the 
43d year of whofe reign Abraham was bom. But 
when Ninus began to rule the 1 Affyrians So years 
before this divifion (as this divifion is placed by 
the Hebrews , Jerome and Chryfofiom) then was 
the earth fo peopled in all the eaft and northern 
parts, as greater numbers have not been found 
at any time fince. For Ninus aflociated to him- 
felf Ariteus king of Arabia , a people wheat that 
time (faith Diodorus Siculus) plurimum opibus at - 
qne armis pr<eftabant , exceeded both in riches and 
bodies of men, fubdued many cities in Amenta j 
received Barzanis into gruce then invaded Me¬ 
dia, and crucified Pharnus the king thereof, with 
his wife and feven children ; vanquifhed all thole 
regions between Nilus and Tartais, she Egypti¬ 
ans, Phenicians, the kingdoms of Syria, and all 
the nations of Perfia, to the • Hyreanian fea.’ For 
the numbers which followed 'Ninus (already re- 
membred out of Ctefias) agamft ■ Zoroafter, and 


■ Hieron. in Trad. Hebraic. •> Jer. Lam. 4. 21. «Jcr 25.20. 
Civitate Dei, 1 . 16. c. 11. f Peter, in Gen. 1 . 15. c. 10. 


•* Chap. viii. ScS!. 7. « jofeph. • 1 . 1. .Art. iAqg-t* 


Digitized by 


others: 

Google 







Chap. VIII. The History of the \Yorld. 


others: and Zoroafier on the other fide, who made 
refiftance with 400000, prove it fufficiently, that 
ifthedivifion had not happened before the death 
of Phaleg, there had needed no divifion at that 
time at all. For fome of them were fo ill fatis- 
fied with their partitions, as they fought to be ma¬ 
ilers of all i and greater armies were there never 
gathered than by Ninus and Semiramis: wherefore 
in this opinion there is little appearance of the truth. 

But for that conceit, that if the divifion had been 
made at the birth of Phaleg , there were not then 
fufficient numbers born to fill the earth : it was ne¬ 
ver meant that the earth could be filled every where 
at the very inftant,but by time and degrees: and fure- 
ly whatfoever men’s opinions have been herein, yet 
it is certain, that the divifion of tongues and of 
men mull go near together with the ceafing of the 
work at Babel: and that the enterprife of Babel 
was left off inftantly upon the confiifion of langua¬ 
ges, where followed the execution of the divifion ; 
and fo neidier at the birth nor death of Phaleg: 
for Phaleg was born in the year 101 after die flood, 
which was the year that Nimrod came into Shinaar, 
or 10 years after he arrived, faith Berofus. 

Now if it be objected that Phaleg (the etymolo¬ 
gy of whofe name fignifieth divifion) mull have 
lived without a name, except the name had been 
given him at the time of this confufion and parti¬ 
tion. To this obje&ion it may be anfwered, that 
the change of names upon divers accidents is not 
rare in the feriptures : for Jacob was called Ifrael 
after he had wreftled with the angel ; Abraham 
was firft Abram-, and Edom Efau and that Pha¬ 
leg being a principal man in this divifion had his 
firft name upon this accident changed, it is moft 
probable. 

And laftly, whereas die Hebrews , St. Jerome 
and Chryfoft-m account Heber for a great prophet, if 
that by giving his fon the name of Phaleg, he fore¬ 
told the divifion which followed. To this I fay, 
I do not find that Heber deferved any fuch honour, 
if he had thereupon fo called his fon : for divifion 
and difperfion followeth increafe of people of ne- 
ceflity •, and this prophecy (if any fuch had been) 
might alfo have reference to the divifion, which 
afterwards fell among the Hebrews themfelves. 

But if we give a reafonable time to the building of 
the tower and city of Babel , in which time many 
people (by reafon and by demonftrative proof) 
might be increas’d: and that upon the fall thereof 
the confufion and divifion followed (whereupon 
Phaleg took name) then in this opinion there is no¬ 
thing either curious or monftrous. 

•f- IV. 

Of the fons of Joflan, the other fun of Heber. 
r 1. Elmodad. 

2. Saleph , or Salep, or Sheleph. 

3. Afamath, or Chatzar. 
j 4. Jare, or Jaraah, or Jerath. 

5. Hadoram. 

The fons ofj 6 °f Uxa ll. , 

lotion v/erc* 7 * Dick lack, or Dtcla. 

j an g or ^ 

9. Abimael. 

10. Sheba, or Seba. 

11. Ophir , or Opir. 

12. Hav'tla , or Chavila, and 
.13. Jobab. 


A 


99 

or India, even from the river Cophe or Choas, 
which is one of the branches or heads of Indus, 

But the certain places of thole thirteen fons can¬ 
not be gathered out of the feriptures, the words of 
Moles being general. 3 And their dwelling was from 
Mefha as thou goefi unto Sephar a mount in the eafl. 
Of all thelc thirteen fons, there were only three me¬ 
morable, to wit, Sheba, Ophir and Havilah. Con¬ 
cerning whole names, to avoid confufion, it is to 
be obferved, that among the fons of Chufh , two 
of them had alfo the names of Seba and Havilah. 
Abrab im had alfo a third Saba or Sheba , his grand¬ 
child by his wife Ketura. But Seba the fon of Chufh , 
and Sheba the fon of Rhegma his nephew, we have 
left in Arabia Foelix : and Havilah the fon of Chufh 
upon ‘Tigris. Saba the grand-child of Abraham 
was (as fome have thought, the father of the So- 
beans in Perfta : of which nations Dionyfius de or- 
bis fitu maketh mention. Primum Sabeei j pojl bos 
funt Paffagar dee, prope vero bos funt Tafci : The 
firft are Sabeans ; after thefe be Paffagardee ; and near 
thefo the Tafci. And whereas it is written: b But 
unto the fons of the concubines which Abraham had, 
Abraham gave gifts, and fent them away from Ifaac 
his fon (while be yet lived) eaflward to the eafl coun¬ 
try : hereupon it is fuppofcd,that this Saba the fon of 
Abraham wandered into Perfta: for Perfia was ac¬ 
counted the furthermoft eaft country in refpecfl of 
Judea •, which alfo c Ovid fetteth under die fun-ri- 
fing. Yet feeing the reft of Abraham's fons feated 
themfelves on the borders of Judea, I rather chufe 
to leave Saba the fon of Abraham in Arabia the de¬ 
fart, where Ptolemy fetteth a city of that name. 

But Saba the fon of Jotlan, the fon of Heber, as 
I conceive, inhabited India it felf. For d Dionyfius 
Afer in his Periegefis, or defeription of the world, 
which he wrote in Greek verfe, among the regions 
of India findeth a nation called the Sabai. Taxilus 
bos inter medios babitatque Sab ecus *, In the midft 
of thefe dwell the Sabeei , and the Taxili, faith this 
Dionyfius. 

t v. 

Of Ophir one of Jo&anV fons, and of Peru, and of 
that voyage of Solomon. 

O PHIR alfo was an inhabitant of the Eafl- 
Indies, and, as St. Jerome underftands it, in 
one of the iflands plentiful with gold, which are now 
known by the name of Molucca. Jofephus under¬ 
ftands Ophir to be one of thofe great head-lands in 
India, which by a general name are called Cherfo- 
nefi, or PeninfuU ; of which there are two very no¬ 
torious, Callccut and Malacon. Percrins takes it 
rightly for an ifland, as St: Jerome doth, but he 
fets it at the head-land of Malacca : but Ophir is 
found among the Moluccas farther eaft. 

Arias Montanus out of 2 Chronicles iii. 6. ga¬ 
thers, that Ophir was Peru in America , looking in¬ 
to the weft ocean, commonly called Mare del Sur, 
or the fouth fea •, by others, Mare pacificum. The 
words in 2 Chronicles are thefe: And he overlaid 
the houfe with precious Jlones for beauty •, and the 
gold was gold of Parvaim. Junius takes this gold 
to be the gold of Havilah, remembred by Mojes in 
the defeription of Paradife : c And the gold of that 
land is good: finding a town in Characene a province 
of Sufiana called Barbatia, fo called, as he thinks, by 
corruption for Parvaim : from whence thofe kings 
fubjefted by David, brought this gold, with which 
they prefented him ; and which David preferved 
for the enriching of the temple. 

But this fancy of Peru hath deceived many men 
before Montanus and Plefjis, who-alfo took Ophir 


LL thofe fons of JoElan, according to St. Je¬ 
rome, dwelled in the eaft parts of the world, 

^Gen. 23, 6. *Metam. 1 . i. ^ Tc?r Jf lahaeJ T*£iaoi «V<Tf«r* e Gen 2. 11, 12 


* Gen. 10. 30. 
1 6. c. 28. 


Digitized by 


Googl< 


for 










IOO 


7’he History 

for Peru. And that this queftion may be a fubjcft 
of no farther difpute, it is very true, that there is 
no region in the world of that name : fure I am, 
at lealt, that America hath none, no not any city, 
village or mountain fo called. But when Francis Pi- 
farro firft difeovered thofe lands to the fouth oi Pa¬ 
nama, arriving in that region which Atabaliba com¬ 
manded, a prince of magnificence, riches and do¬ 
minion inferior to none, fome of the Spaniards ut¬ 
terly ignorant of that language, demanding by 
figns, as they could, the name of the country, and 
pointing with their hand athwart a river, or torrent, 
or brook that ran by, the Indians anfwered Peru, 
which was either the name of that brook, or of wa¬ 
ter in general. The Spaniards thereupon conceiving 
that the people had rightly underftood them, fet it 
down in the diurnal of their enterprife, and fo in the 
firft dtfeription made, and fent over to Charles the 
emperu'.ir, all that weft part of America to the fouth 
of Panama had the name of Peru, which hath con¬ 
tinued ever fince, as divers Spaniards in the Indies 
allured me •, which alfo Acojla the Jefuite, in his 
natural and moral hiftory of the Indies , confirm- 
eth. And whereas Montanas alfo findeth, that a 
part of the Indies, called Jucatan, took that name 
of JoElan, who, as he fuppofeth, navigated from the 
utmoft eaft of India to America : it is moft true, 
that ’Jucatan, is nothing elfe in the language of that 
country, but [What is that ? ] or [ What Jay you? ] 
For when the Spaniards asked the name of that 
place (no man conceiving their meaning, one of 
the lavages anfwered Jucatan, which is. What ask 
you ? or. What fay you. The like happened touch¬ 
ing Parta, a mountainous country on the fouth fide 
of Trinidado and Margarita : for when the Spani¬ 
ards inquiring, as all men do, the names of thofe 
new regions which they difeovered, pointed to the 
hills afar off, one of the people anfwered, Paria, 
which is as much to fay, as high hills or mountains. 
For as Paria begins that marvellous ledge of moun¬ 
tains, which from thence are continued to the Strait 
of Magellan ; from eight degrees of north latitude 
to fifty two of fouth j and fo hath that country ever 
fince retained the name of Paria. 

The fame happened among the Englijh , which 
I fent under Sir Richard Greeneville to inhabit Vir¬ 
ginia. For when fome of my people asked the 
name of that country, one of die favages anfwer¬ 
ed, Wingandacon, which is as much to lay, as, You 
•wear good cloaths, or gay cloaths. The fame hap¬ 
pened to die Spaniard in asking the name of the 
ifiand Trinidado: for a Spaniard demanding the 
name of that felf place which the fea incompaffed, 
they anfwered Caeri , which fignifieth an ifiand. 
And in this manner have many places newly difeo¬ 
vered been intitled, of which Peru is one. And 
therefore we mull leave Ophir among the Moluccas, 
whereabouts fuch an ifiand is credibly affirmed to be. 

Now altho’ there may be found gold in Arabia 
it felf (towards Perfta) in Havilah, now Suftana , 
and all along that Eaji-Indian lhore ; yet the greateft 
plenty is taken up at the Philippines , certain ifiands 
planted by the Spaniards from the Eajl-Indies. And 
by the length of the paffage which Solomon's lhips 
made from the Red lea (which were three years in 
going and coming) it feems diey went to the ut- 
termoft eaft, as the Moluccas or Philippines. Indeed 
thefe that now go from Portugal, or from hence, 
finilh that navigation in two years, and fomeumes 
Ids: and Solomon's lhips went not above a tenth 
part of this our courfe from hence. But we mull 
confider, that they evermore kept the coaft, and 
crept by the Ihorcs, which made the way ex- 


of the W o r l d. Book I. 

ceeding long. For before the ufe of the compafs 
was known, it was importable to navigate athwart 
the ocean •, and therefore Solomons lhips could not 
find Peru in America. Neither was it needful for 
the Spaniards themfelves, had it not been for the 
plenty of gold in the Eaft-India ifiands, far above 
the mines of any one place of America , to fail 
every year from the weft part of America thither, 
and there to have ftrongly planted, and inhabited 
the richeft of thofe ifiands: wherein they have built 
a city called Manilla. Solomon therefore needed 
not to have gone farther off than Ophir in the eaft, 
to have fped worfe: neither could he navigate from 
the eaft to the weft in thofe days, whereas he had 
no coaft to have guided him. 

Toftatus alfo gathereth a phantaftical opinion out 
of Rabanus, who makes Ophir to be a country, 
whofe mountains of gold are kept by griffins: 
which mountains Solinus affirmeth to be in Scythia 
Afatica, in thefe words. Nam cum auro (ft gem- 
mis ajftuant, griphes tenent univerfa , alites fero- 
ciffima, Arimafpi cum his dimicant, (ftc. For where¬ 
as thefe countries abound in gold, and rich ftone, 
the griffins defend the one and the other, * a kind 
of fowl the fierceft of all other •, with which grif¬ 
fins a nation of people, called Arimafpi, make war. 
Thefe Arimafpi are faid to have been men with one 
eye only, like unto the Cyclopes of Sicilia i of which 
Cyclopes Herodotus and Arifteus make mention: 
and fo doth Lucan in his third book, and 1 Vale¬ 
rius Flaccus, and b Diodorus Siculus in the ftory 
of Alexander Macedon. But for mine own opinion, 
I believe none of them. And for thefe Arimafpi , 
I take it, that this name fignifying one-eyed was 
firft given them by reafon that they ufed to 
wear a vizard of defence, with one fight in the 
middle to ferve both eyes j and not that they had 
by nature any fuch defedt. But Solinus borroweth 
thefe things out of Pliny, who fpeaks of fuch a na¬ 
tion in the extreme north, at a place called Gifo- 
litron, or the cave of the north-eaft wind. For 
the reft, as all fables were commonly grounded up* 
on fome true ftories, or other things done, fo might 
thefe tales of the griffins receive this moral. Tnat 
if thofe men, which fight againft fo many dange¬ 
rous paflages for gold, or other riches of this woiTd, 
had their perfedl lenfes, and were not deprived of 
half their eye-fight (at leaft of the eye of right rea¬ 
fon and underftanding) they would content them¬ 
felves with a quiet and moderate eftate ; and not 
fubjedt themfelves to famine, corrupt air, violent 
heat, and cold, and to all forts of miferable difeafes. 
And tho’ this fable be feigned in this place, yet if 
fuch a tale were told of lome other places of the 
world, where wild beafts or ferpents defend moun¬ 
tains of gold, it might be avowed. For there are 
in many places of the world, efpecially in America , 
many high and impartible mountains which are 
very rich and full of Gold, inhabited only by 
tygers, lions, and other ravenous and cruel beafts: 
unto which if any man afeend (except his ftrength 
be very great) he fhall be fure to find the fame 
war, which the Arimafpi make againft the griffins: 
not that the one or other had any fenfe of the gold, 
or feek to defend that metal, but being difquieted, 
or made afraid of themfelves or their young ones, 
they grow inraged and adventurous. In like lort 
it may be faid that the Alcgartos, which the Egyp¬ 
tians call the Crocodiles , deiend thofe pearls which 
lie in the lakes of the inland : for many times 
the poor Indians are eaten up by them, when they 
dive for the pearl. And though the Alegartos 
know not the pearl, yet they find favour in the 


flelh 

Digitized by G00g[e 


a Flacciis, 1. 6. 


fc Diod Sicul. !. 16. 











I 


Digitized by 


Googl 


e 








*« 


% 

ESS WER. K 



S ABE. KFaIIa 
l£!i Aden 


% Br COLLONIIV? 5EJVT OVTBT ^.ABA R HEG-AIA 
\yn THE RE.5T OF THE. SONS OF CHVS WAJ 
TJ/F R^-ST OF ARABIA THE. HAPPIE TECTLED 




Digitized by 


Google 



































IOI 


Chap. IX. The History of the W orld. 


flefh and blood of the Indians, whom they de¬ 
vour. 

f VI. 

Of Havilah the [on of Jo&an, who alfo faffed into 
the Eaft-Indies : and of Mefha and Sepher nam¬ 
ed in the bordering of the families of Jo&an : 
with a conclufion of this difcourfe touching the 
plantation of the world. 

O F Havilah the fon of Joclan there is nothing 
elfe to be faid, but that the general opinion 
is, that he alfo inhabited in the Eafi-Indies in the 
continent, from which Ophir pafs’d into the i(lands 
adjoining. And whereas Ganges is faid to water 
Havilah., it is meant by Havilah in the Eajl-Indies, 
which took name of Havilah the fon of Joel an : 
but Havilah, which Pifon compafieth, was fo cal¬ 
led of Havilah, the fon of Cbujb, as is formerly 
proved by this place of ftripture: * Saul fmotctht 
Amalckites from Havilah , as thou comefl to Shur, 
which is before Egypt. But that Saul ever made 
war in die Eajl-Indies, no man hath fufpeCted. For 
an end we may conclude, that of the thirteen fons 
of Joftan, thefe three Saba, Havilah, and Ophir ; 
tho* at the firft feated by their brethren about the 
hill Mafias , or Mtfa, Gen. x. 30. to wit, between 
Cilicia and Mefopotamia \ yet at length either theni- 
felves or their iflues removed into the Eafi- Indies, 
leaving the other families of Joflan, to fill the 
countries of their firft plantation, which the ferip- 
ture defines to have been from Mejh unto Sephar. 
And altho’ St. Jerome takes Mefh to be a region 
of the Eafi-Indies, and Sephar a mountain of the 
lame (which mountain Montanus would have to 
be the Andes in America) tiiofe fancies are far be¬ 
yond my underftanding. For the word [eafi] in 
the fcripturcs, where it hath reference to Judea, is 
never farther extended than into Perfia. But Mefcb 
is that part of the mountain of Mafias in the north 
of Mefopotamia , out of which the river Chaboras 
fpringeth, which runneth by Charran : and in the 
fame region we alfo find for Sephar (remembred 
by Mofes) Sipphara by Ptolemy, (landing to the 
eaftof the mountain Mafius •, from whence Julian 
having many Cons, fome of them might pafs into 
India, hearing of the beauty and riches thereof. 
But this was in procefs of time. 

The other farnion of planting I underftand not, 
being grounded but upon mens imaginations, con¬ 
trary to reafon and polfibility. And that this moun¬ 
tain in the eaft was no farther off than in thofe re¬ 
gions before remembred, it appearctli by many 
places of the feripture where the lame phral'e is ufed: 
as in Numbers xxiii. 7. Balac the king of Moab hath 
brought me from Aram, out of tbs mountain of the 
eafi ; which was from the eaft part of Mefopotamia. 
For Balac brought Balaam out of Mefopotamia 
(witnels this place of Deuteronomy xxiii. 4.) Becaufe 
they hired Balaam the fon of Beor, of Pethor in 
Aram Nabaraiim, to curfe thee : for Aram Naha- 
raiim was Syria Eluviorum, which is Mefopotamia, 
as aforefaid. 

This plantation of the world after the flood doth 
beft agree, as to me it feems, with all the places of 
feripture compared together. And thefe be the re¬ 
ports of reafon and probable conjecture ; the guides 
which I have followed herein, and which I have 
chofen to go after, making no valuation of the opi¬ 
nions of men, conducted by their own fancies, be 
they ancient or modem. Neither have 1 any end 
herein, private or publick, other than the dilcovery 
of truth. For as the partiality of man. to himfelf 
hath difguis’d all things, fo the factious and hire- 

No. 7 . 


ling hiftorians of all ages (clpecially of thefe latter 
times) have, by their many volumes of untrue re¬ 
ports, left honour without a monument, and virtue 
without memory : and inftead thereof, have erect¬ 
ed ftatues and trophies to thofe, whom the darkefl 
fbrgctfulnefs ought to have buried, and covered over 
for evermore. And altho* the length and diflolv- 
ing nature of time hath worn out or changed the 
names and memory of the world’s firft planters af¬ 
ter the flood (I mean the greateft number and mod 
part of them) yet all the tootfteps of antiquity (as 
appears by that which hath been fpoken) arc not 
quite worn out nor overgrown: tor Babylon hath 
to this day the found of Babel *, Phcnicia hath Zi- 
don, to which city the eldeft fon of Canaan gave 
name ; fo hath Cilicia That fits \ and the Armenians , 
Medcs, Hiberians, Cappadocians, Phrygians, the Sy¬ 
rians, Idumeans, Libyans, Moors, and other nations, 
have prd'erved from the death of forgctfulnefs fome . 
figns of their firft founders and true parents. 


C H A P. IX. 

Of the beginning and eflablifbing of Go - 
vernment. 

Sect. I. 

Of the proceeding from the firfi government under 
t. e eldcfi of families to regal, and from regal ab- 
fulute to regal tempered with laws. 

I T followeth now to intreat how the world be¬ 
gan to receive rule and government, which 
(while it had fcarcity of people) underwent no 
other dominion than paternity and elderfhip. For 
the fathers of nations were then as kings, and the 
eldeft of families as princes. Hereof it came, that 
the word [elder] was always ufed both for the ma- 
giftrate, and for thofe of age and gravity : the fame 
bearing one fignification almoft in all languages. 
For in Numbers xi. God commanded Mofes to gather 
together 70 of the elders of the people, and go- 
vernours over them : the Hebrew bearing the fame 
fenfe, which the Latin word Senes or Semores doth. 
So it is written in Sufannah, Then the affembly be¬ 
lieved them as thofe that were the elders and judges 
of the people. And fo in the words of thofe falle 
judges and witnefles to Daniel, Shew it unto us, fee¬ 
ing God hath given thee the office of an elder. De~ 
mofihenes ufeth the fame word for the magiftrate 
among the Grecians. Cicero in Cato, giveth two 
other reafons for this appellation: Apud Lacedtemo- 
nios qui ampliffimum magiftratum gerunt, ut funt, 
fie etiam appellantur Senes : Among the Lacedemo¬ 
nians the chief magiftrates, as they are, fo are they 
called Eldermen: and again. Ratio prudentia 

nifi effeut in fenibus non fumnitrm concilium majores 
nofiri appelldffent Sena turn ; If reafon and advife- 
ment were not in old men, our anceftors had never 
called the higheft council by the name of a fenate. 

But tho* thefe reafons may well be given, yet we 
doubt not but in this name of [elders] for gover¬ 
nors or counfellors of (late, there is a fign that the 
firft governors were the fathers of families ; and 
under them the eldeft fons. And from thence did 
the French, Italian and Spaniard, take the word 
[Signor] and out of it [Seignoury] for lordfhip and 
dominion: fignifying, according to Loyfeau, puif- 
fance in propriety, or proper power. The kinds 
of this Seignoury, Seneca makes two : the one,i Po- 
t eft as aut impertum. Power or command : the other, 
Proprietas aut dominium. Propriety or tnafterlhip; 

C c 


* 1 Sam. ij. 7. 


*bc 

Digitized by Google 









102 


The History.-o/ World. Book L 


the correlative of the one is the lybjccl, of the other 
tile Have. Ad Cxfa rent, f.iith he, pot eft as omnium 
pertinet, ad fmgulos proprietas ; Co far hath power 
over all, and every man proprietor in his own. 
Aik] again, C^efar omnia mperio poffidet , ftnguli 
tlominio } Cefar holdcth all in his power, and eve¬ 
ry man poffefleth his own. Put as men and vice 
began abundantly to incrcafe, fo obedience (the fruit 
of natural reverence, which but from excellent feed 
fcldom ripeneth) being exceedingly overfhadowed 
with pride and ill examples, utterly widiered and 
tell away. And the toft weapons of paternal per- 
fuaftons (after mankind began to ncglcCl and for¬ 
get the original and firfl: giver of life) became in 
all over-weak, either to refill the firll inclination of 
evil, or after (when it became habitual) to con- 
ftrain if. So that now, when the hearts of men 
were only guided and fleered by their own fancies, 
and tofs’d to and fro’ on the tempelluous feas of the 
world, while wildom was fevered from power, and 
llrength from charity ; * Neceflity (which bindeth 
every nature but the immortal) made both the wife 
and foolifh underlland at once, that the cllate of 
rcafonable men would become far more miferablc 
than that of beafls, and that a general flood of 
confufion would a fecond time overflow them, did 
they not by a general obedience to order and do¬ 
minion prevent it. For the mighty, who trufled 
.in their own llrengths, found others again (by in¬ 
terchange of times) more mighty than themlelves : 
the feeble fell under the forcible ; and the equal 
from equal received equal harms. Infomuch, that 
licentious diforder (which feemed to promile a li¬ 
berty upon the firll acquaintance) proved upon a 
better trial, no lefs perilous than an unendurable 
bondage. 

Thefc arguments by neceflity propounded, and 
by reafon maintained and confirmed, perfuaded all 
nations which the heavens cover, to lubjeCt them- 
felves to a mailer, and to magillracy in fomc de¬ 
gree. Under which government, as the change 
(which brought with it lefs evil, than the former 
mifehiefs) was generally pleafing: fo time (making 
all men wife that obferve it) found fomc imper¬ 
fection and corrofive in this cure. And therefore 
the fame neceflity which invented, and the fame 
reafon which approved foveraign power, bethought 
i: felf of certain equal rules, in which domi¬ 
nion (in the beginning boundlcls) might alfo dif- 
cern her own limits. For before the invention of 
laws, private affeCfcions in fupreme rulers, made 
their own fancies both their treafurers and hang¬ 
men : meafuring by this yard, and weighing in this 
balance both good and evil. 

For as wildom in clderlhip preceded the rule of 
kings, fo the will of kings forewent the inventions 
of laws. Popu/us nullis legibus tcuebatur ; arbitria 
principum pro legibus erant ■, I'lic people were not 
governed by any other laws than the wills of prin¬ 
ces. Hereof it followed, that when kings left to 
be good, neither did thole mens virtues value them, 
which were not fancied by their kings, nor thole 
mens vices deform them that were.. Amor interdum 
minis 'jidety inter dum nihil videt , Love fees one 
while too much, anodier while Hark nothing. 

1 lence it came to pals, that afeer a few years (for 
direction and reftraint of royal power) Jaws were 
cflablilhed : and diat goverment which had this, 
mixture of equality (holding in an even balance 
fupreme power and common right) acquired the; 
title of regal •, the other (which had it not) was 
known for tyrannical : the one God ellablifhed in. 
favour of his people j the other he permitted for. 
their affliction. 


In the infancy of this regal authority, princes, as 
they were chofen for their virtues only, lb did they 
meafure their powers by a great deal of modera¬ 
tion. And therefore (faith Fabius Pittor)*Princi¬ 
pe s, quia jufli erant , & religionibus deditinjure ha¬ 
bit i Dii y ditli ; Princes, becaufe they were juft 
and religious, were rightly accounted and called 
Gods. 

And tho’ (fpcaking humanly) the beginning of 
empire may be aferibed to reafon and neceflity • 
yet it was God himfelf that firll kindled this light 
in the minds of men, whereby they faw dut they 
could not live and be prelerved without a ruler.and 
conduClor: God himfelf by his eternal providence 
having ordained kings i and the Jaw of. nature 
leaders and rulers over others. For the very bees 
have their prince, the deer their leaders j and 
cranes (by order impofed) watch for their own fafe- 
ty. * The moft High bearetb rule over the king¬ 
doms of men •, and appointtth over it wbomfoever he 
pleafetb. d By me, faith IVifdom, fpoken by the Son 
of God) kings reign i by me princes rule j and it if 
God (faith * Darnel) that fetteth up kings, and taketit 
away kings : and that this power is given from 
God, Chrifl himfelf witnefleth, fpeaking to Pilate % 
1 Thou couldeft have no power at all againfl me ex¬ 
cept it were given thee from above. 

It was therefore by a threefold juftice that the world 
hath been governed from the beginning, to wit, by 
a juftice natural : by which the parents and elders 
of families governed their children, and nephews, 
and families, in which government the obedience 
was called natural piety: again, by a juftice divine, 
drawn from the laws and ordinances of God ; and 
the obedience hereunto was called confcience : and 
laftly,by a juftice civil,begotten by both the former j 
and the obedience to this we call duty. That by 
thefe three thofe of the eldeft times were command¬ 
ed } and that the rule in general was paternal, it is 
moft evident: for Adam being lord over his own 
children, inftruCied them in the fcrvice of God his 
Creator t as we read, Cain and Abel brought ob¬ 
lations before God, as they had been taught by 
their parent, the father of mankind. 

Sect. II. 

Of the three commendable forts of government with 
their oppofites : and of the degrees of human fo- 
ciety. 

W HAT other policy was exercifed, or 
ftate founded after fuch time as mankind 
vas greatly multiplied before the flood, it cannot 
be certainly known, tho’ it feems by probable con¬ 
jecture, that the fame was not without kings in that 
firfl age : it being pofiible that many princes of 
the Egyptians (remembred among their antiquities) 
were before the general flood and very likely, 
that the cruel oppreffions in that age proceeded f rom, 
fome tyranny in government, or trom fomc tough¬ 
er form of rule, than the paternal. 

8 Berofus aferibeth the rule of the world in thofe 
days to the giants of Libanus, who mattered (faith 
he) all nations from the fun-rifing to tire tim-fet. 
But in the fecond age of the world, and after fuch 
time as the rule of elderfliip failed, tiiree feveral 
forts of government were in feveral times eflablifhed 
among men, according to the divers natures of pla¬ 
ces and people. .• 

The tirft, the moft ancient, moft general, and 
moft approved, was the government of one, ru¬ 
ling by juft lows, called Monarchy : to which Ty¬ 
ranny is oppofed, being alio a lole and ablbluce 
rule, exerciled according to the will of the com- 


* Ncceflitas eft Annum judicium, Sc immutabilts providentix potcilas. 
3# 15. e Dan. 2. 21. f John 19. 21. ’ rBerof. 1 . 1. 


Dc aureo (rciilo, par. 1. « Dan. 5. 21. * Prov. 


Digitized by 


mander, 

Google 









Chap. IX. 7 ht History 

juinder, without refpcd or obfervation of the Jaws 
of God or men. For a Jawful prince or ma- 
giftrate (faith Ariftotle) is the keeper of right and 
equity: and of this condition ought every magi- 
lfrate tt> be, according to the rule of God’s word. 
x 7 u ^i es officers Jhalt thou make thee in tby 
<• -ties: and theft JbaUjudge the people with righteous 
judgment. 

The fecond government is of divers principal 
perfons eftablilhcd by order, and ruling by laws, 
called Ariftocracy , or Optimatum poteflas ; to which 
Oligarchy (or die particular faction and ufurpation 
of a few great ones) is oppoled: as die Decemviri , or 
Triumviri , and the like. 

The diird is a ftate popular (or government of 
the people) called Democratia, to which is oppofed 
Ocblocratia , or the turbulent unjuft ruling of the 
confufed multitude, fcditioufly fwaying the ftate, 
contrary to their own laws and ordinances. Thcfe 
diree kinds of government are briefly exprefs’d by 
Tholoftnus: Unius , pattsorum, & multorum j Of 
one, of tew, of many. 

Now as touching the beginning and order of 
policy fince the lecood increafe ot mankind, the 
tame grew in this fort: firft of all, every father, 
or eldcft of the family, gave laws to his own ifiues ; 
and to the people from him and them increafed. 
Thefe, as they were multiply’d into many houfholds 
(man by nature loving fociety) joined their cotta¬ 
ges together in one common field or village, which 
the Latins call Vicus , of the Greek encoe, which 
fignifieth a houfe, or of the word ( Via} becaufe it 
hath divers ways and paths leading to it. And as 
the firft houfe grew into a village, fo the village 
into that which is called Pagus (being a fociety of 
divers villages) lb called of the Greek Trttyu, which 
fignifieth a fountain: becaufe many people (having 
their habitations not far afunder) drank of one 
fpring or ftream of water. To this word the Eng- 
lijh hundreds, or (as fome think) (hires anfwcrcth 
not unfitly. 

But as men and impiety began to gather ftrength, 
and as emulation and pride between the races of 
the one and the other daily increafed: fo both to 
defend themfelves from outrage, and to preferve 
fuch goods as they had gathered, they began to join 
and fet together divers of their villages, invironing 
them firft with banks and ditches, and afterwards 
with walls: which being fo compaffed were then 
called Oppida ; cither alt opponendo ft bofti'ous , be¬ 
caufe walls were oppofed againft enemies, or ab opi- 
bus % becaufe thither they gadicred their riches tor 
iafety and defence: as alfothey were called L’rbes, 
ab or be ; becaufe when they were to build a ci¬ 
ty, they made a circle with a plough (faith Varro) 
therewith mealuring and comparing the ground 
which they went to inclofe or fortify. And altho’ 
Urbs and Civitas be often confounded, yet the dif¬ 
ference was anciently in this, that Urbs fignified no 
other than the very walls and buildings, and Civi¬ 
tas was taken for the citizens, inhabiting therein: 
fo called of Civis ; arid that, ab eo quod multitudo 
coivity of coming togedier. But all inhabitants 
within thefe walls are not properly citizens, but 
only fuch as are called free-men •, who bearing pro- 
portionably the charge of the city, may by turns 
become officers and magiftrates thereof: the reft go 
under the name of lubjecfts, tho’ citizens by the 
lame general name of fubjccfs are alfo known. For 
every ciuzen is alfo a lubjed, but not every fubjed 
a citizen: perhaps alfo lome ciuzen (as the chief 
magiftrate, if he be to. be termed one of the citi¬ 
zens) is no fubjed •, but of this we need not ftand to 


of the Worl D. 103 

inquire. The word (magiftrate] is taken a magi- 
ftro., from a mafter, and the word fmailer] from the 
adverb magis (as alfo magiftcria , precepts ot art) or 
elfe from the Greek word ( megtftos .] and fo the 
Greeks call them megifiaues, whom the Latins call 
magnates or magiflratus. 

The office and duty of every magiftrate Arifto- 
ile hath written in few words : “ A magiftrate or 

prince, faidi he, is the keeper of right and equity ; 
but the fame is beft taught by St. Pauly who expref- 
ferh both the caufe efficient and final, that is, by 
whom magiftrates and princes are ordained, toge¬ 
ther with their duties and offices. c A magiftrate 
is tin minifter of God for thy wealth \ but if thou do 
evil, fear : for be bearetb not the fword for nought. 
For he is the minifter of God, to take vengeance on 
him that doth evil. He alfo teacheth in verfc 
1,2. That every foul ought to be fubjetl to the 
higher powers, becaufe they are r by God ordained ; 
and that -who fever reftftetb that power, reftftetb God, 
the giver and fountain thereof: and fhall not only 
be therefore fubjed to the judgment and condemna¬ 
tion of man, but of God: For ye muft be fubjeSl, 
faith he, not becaufe of -wrath only, but alfo for con¬ 
ference fake. ver. 5. 

The examples are not to be numbred of God’s 
punifhments upon thole that have refilled authority, 
by God ordained and ellablifhed. Neither ought 
any fubjed therefore to refill the power of kings, 
becaufe they may be taxed with injuftice or cruelty: 
for it plcafeth God fometimes to punifh his people 
by a tyrannous hand: and the commandment of 
obedience is without diftindion. The prophets and 
Cbnft himftlf fubjeded themfelves to the power of 
magiftracy. Chrtfl commanded that all due to Cefar 
fhould be given unto him: and he pay’d tribute 
for himfelf and Peter. d Jeremy commanded the 
Ifraelitcs (even thofe that were captives under hea¬ 
then kings) to pray for them, and for the peace of 
Babylon. So e Abraham pray’d for Abimeltch ; and 
Jacob blefled the king of Egypt. And it is accepta¬ 
ble in the fight of our Saviour, faith Paul, that ye 
make fupplications and prayers for kings, and for all 
that are in authority : and if for fuch kings as were 
idolatrous, much more for Chriftian kings and ma¬ 
giftrates. And fo much did St. Cbryfoftom in his 
homily to the people, prefer monarchical govern¬ 
ment, as he rather commended the rule of kings 
(tho’ tyrants) than that they fhould be wanting: 
Pneftat regein tyrannum habere, quam nullum •, bet¬ 
ter a tyrannous king,than no king: To which alfo 
Tacitus fublcribeth: Prceftat (faith Tacitus in the 
firft of his hillory) fib malo principe eff'r, quam 
nullo\ It is better to have a bad prince than none at 
all. And be they good kings (which is generally 
prduppoled) then is there no liberty more late, than 
to lerve them : Ncque cnim libertas tutior ulla eft, 
laith Claudian, quam domino ftrvire bo no ; No liber¬ 
ty, faith he, more fate for us than to be fervants 
to the virtuous. And certainly howloever it may 
be difputed, yet is it fafer to live under 011c 
tyrant, than under 100000 tyrants: under a wife 
man that is cruel, than under the foolifh and bar¬ 
barous cruelty of the multitude. For as Ageftlaus 
anfwercd a citizen of Sparta that defired an altera¬ 
tion of the government, that kind of rule which a 
man would difdain in his own houfe, were very un¬ 
fit to govern great regions by. 

Laftly, as many fathers ercfled many cottages 
for their many children: and as (for the rcafon be¬ 
fore remembered) many houfholds joined them- 
fclvcs together, and made villages ; many villages 
made cities : fo when thefe cities and citizens joined 


* Deut 16. 18. <> F.thic. 5. e Rom. 13.4. d Jcrtm. 39. 7. 


e Gcn. 20. 17. 27 10. 

Digitized by 


Googl 


together, 

’e 







ic>4 7 *he History 

together, and eftablifhed laws by confent, affocia- 
ting themfelves under one governor and govern¬ 
ment, they fo joined were called a commonwealth: 
the fame being fometimes governed by kings-, 
fometimes by magiftrates; fometimes by the peo¬ 
ple themfelves. 

Sect. III. 

Of the good government of the firjl king:. 

N OW this firft age after the flood, and after 
fuch time as the people were increafed, and 
the families became ftrong, and difperfed into fevc- 
ral parts of the world, was by ancient hiftorians 
called golden: ambition and covetoufnefs being as 
then but green, and newly grown up, the feeds 
and efFefts whereof were as yet but potential, and in 
the blowth and bud. For while the law of nature 
was the rule of man’s life, they then fought for no 
larger territory than themfelves could compafs and 
manure: they erefted no other magnificent build¬ 
ings, than fufficient to defend them from cold and 
tempeft : they cared for no other delicacy of fare, 
or curiofity of diet, than to maintain life : nor for 
any other apparel than to cover them from the cold, 
the rain and the fun. 

And fore if we underftand by that age (which 
was called golden) the ancient fimplicity of our 
forefathers, this name may then truly be call upon 
thofe elder times: but if it be taken otherwife, then, 
whether the fame may be attributed more to any one 
time than to another (I mean to one limited time, 
and none elfe) it may be doubted. For good and 
golden kings make good and golden ages ■, and all 
times have brought forth of both forts. And as 
the infancy of empire (when princes play’d their 
prizes, and did then only woo men to obedience) 
might be called the golden age : fo may the begin¬ 
ning of all princes times be truly called golden : for 
be it that men affedl honour, it is then befl purcha- 
fed ; or if honour affedl men, it is then that good 
defervings have commonly theleaft impediments: 
and if ever liberality overflow her banks and bounds, 
the fame is then beft warranted both by policy and 
example. But age and time do not only harden 
and fhrink the openeft and mod jovial hearts, but 
the experience which it bringeth with it, layeth 
princes torn eflates before their eyes, and withal 
perfuadeth them to compaflionate themfelves. And 
altho’ there be no kings under the fun whofe means 
are anfwerable unto other men’s defires -, yet fuch 
as value all things by their own refpe&s, do no 
fooncr find their appetites unanfwered, but they 
complain of alteration, and account the times in¬ 
jurious and iron. And as this falleth out in the 
reign of every king \ fo doth it in the life of every 
man, if his days be many: for our younger years 
arc our golden age •, which being eaten up by time, 
we prail'e thole l'eafons which our youth accompa¬ 
nied : and indeed the grievous alterations in our 
felves, and the pains and difeafes which never part 
from us but at the grave, make the times feem fo 
differing and difpleafing: efpecially the quality of 
man’s nature being alfo fuch, as it adoreth and ex- 
tolleth the palfages of the former, and condenineth 
the prelent Hate how juft foever. » Fit human* 
mahgnitatis vitio , ut Jemper vetera imlaude, pr<e- 
fentia in fajlidio fint It comes to pafs, faith Taci¬ 
tus , by the vice of our malignity, that we always 
extol the time paft, and hold the prefent faftidious. 
For it is one of the errors of way-ward age: Quod 
fint laudatores temporis a 6 li \ That they are praifcrs 
of forepafifed times, forgetting this advice of Solo- 

* Tacit, in Diil.deOrat. bEcclcf. 7. 10. c Arnob. 1 . 


« 

of the VJ o r l d. Book 

mon: b Say not then ) why is it that the former days 
were better than thefe ? for thou doji not inquire 
wifely of this thing: to which purpofe Seneca , Ma¬ 
jor es no fir i queflt funt t nos quenmur y pofleri que¬ 
rent ur, tverfos effe mores , regnare nequitiam, in de¬ 
tenus res hominum , £5? in cmne nefas labi ; Our an- 
ceftors have complained, we do complain, our 
children will complain, that good manners are 
gone, that wickednefs doth reign, and all things 
grow worfe and worfe, and fall into all evil. Thefe 
are the ufoal difeourfes of age and misfortune. But 
hereof what can we add to this of Jrnoiius: C A r ova 
res quandoque vetus fiet , vetus temporibus quibus 
coepit nova fuit & repentina -, Whatfoever is new, 
in time (hall be made old: and the ancienteft things 
when they took beginning were alfo new and fud- 
den. Wherefore not to Hand in much admiration 
of thefe firft times, which the difeontentments of 
prefent times have made golden, this we may fet 
down for certain, that as it was the virtue of the 
firft kings, which, after God, gave them crowns: 
fo the love of their people thereby purchafed, held 
the fame crowns on their heads. And as God 
gave the obedience of fubjedts to princes: fo (re¬ 
latively) he gave the care and juftice of kings to 
the fubjedts ; having rcfpedl, not only to the kings 
themfelves, but even to the meaneft of his crea¬ 
tures. d Nunquam particulari bono fervit omne bo- 
num -, The infinite goodnefs of God doth not attend 
any one only: for he that made the finall and the 
great, carcth for all alike: and it is the care which 
kings have of all theirs, which makes them be¬ 
loved of all theirs i and by a general love it is, 
that princes hold a general obedience: for Potef- 
tas humana radicatur in volnntatibus hominum } All 
human power is rooted in the will or difpofitions of 
men. 

Sect. IV. 

Of the beginning of nobility: and of the vain vaunt 
thereof without virtue. 

A N D with this fopreme rule and kingly au¬ 
thority began alfo other degrees and differen¬ 
ces among fobjedfs. For princes made eledtion of 
others by the lame rule, by which themfelves were 
chofen; unto whom they gave place, truft and 
power. From which employments and offices 
fprung thofe titles, and thofe degrees of honour, 
which have continued from age to age to thefe 
days. e But this nobility, or difference from the 
vulgar, was not in the beginning given to the fuc- 
ceffion of blood, but to fucceflion of virtue, as here¬ 
after may be proved. Tho’ at length it was fuffi¬ 
cient for thofe, whofe parents were advanced, to be 
known for the fons of fuch fathers: and fo there 
needed then no endeavour of well-doing at all, or 
any contention for them to excel, upon whom glo¬ 
ry or worldly nobility necefTarily defeended: Yet 
hereof had nobility denomination in the beginning, 
that fuch as excelled others in virtue were fo called: 
Hinc diftus nobilis , quafi virtute pr* aliis notabilis. 
But after fuch time as the deferved honour of the 
father was given in reward to his poftcrity, St. Je¬ 
rome judged of the fucceflion in this manner : Ntbtl 
aliud video in nobilitate appetendum, rift quod nobi- 
les quadam necefftate conjirmgantur, ne ab antiquo¬ 
rum probitate degencrent I fee no other thing to 
be affe&ed in nobility, than that noblemen are by 
a kind of ncceffity bound not to degenerate from 
the virtue of their anceftors. For if nobility be vir¬ 
tu: & antique diviti*, virtue and ancient riches, 
then to exceed in all thole things which are extra 
bomincm , as riches, power, glory, and the like, 

2. 4 Willi. 6. 7. e Vcrus nobilis non nafeitar, fed fit 

do 


Digitized by LnOOQie 







Chap.IX. The History of the World! i 05' 


do no otherwife define nobility, than the Word 
animal alone doth define a reafonable man. Or 
if honour, according to L. Vives, be a witnefs of 
Virtue and well-doing: and nobility, after Plu¬ 
tarch, the continuance of virtue in a race or lineage: 
then are thofe, of whom virtue is extinguifhed, but 
like unto painted and printed papers, which igno¬ 
rant men worlhip inftead of Chrift, our Lady, and 
other Saints : men, in whom there remain but the 
dregs and vices of ancient virtue : flowers and herbs, 
which by change of foil and want of manuring are 
turned to weeds. For what is found praife-worthy 
in thofe waters, which had their beginning out of 
pure fountains, if in all the reft of their courfe 
they run foul, filthy, and defiled ? 1 Ex terra fer- 
tili producitur aliquanio cicuta venenofa, (3 ex terra 
flerili pretiofum aurum \ Out of fruitful ground ari- 
fcth fometimes poiloning henbane: and out of bar¬ 
ren foil precious gold. For as all things confift of 
matter and form, fo doth Cbarron (in his chapter 
of nobility) call the race and lineage but the mat¬ 
ter of nobility: the form (which gives life and per* 
fe<ft being) he maketh to be virtue and quality, 
profitable to the commonweal. For he is truly and 
entirely noble, who maketh a Angular profeflion 
of publick virtue, ferving his prince and country, 
and being defeended of parents and anceftors that 
have done the like. • And altho’ that nobility, 
which the fame author calleth perfonal (the fame 
which our felves acquire by our virtue and well 
defervings) cannot be ballanced with that which is 
both natural by defeent, and alfo perfonal; yet if 
virtue be wanting to the natural, then is the per¬ 
fonal and acquired nobility by many degrees to be 
preferred t for, faith Cbarron , this honour, to 
wit, by defeent, may light upon fuch an one, as in 
his own nature is a true villain. There is alfo i 
third nobility which he calleth nobility in parch¬ 
ment, bought with filver or favour: and thefe be 
indeed but honours of affection, which kings with 
the change of their fancies wifh they knew 1 well how 
to wipe off again. But futely if we had as much 
fcnfe of our degenerating in worthinefs, as we have 
of vanity in deriving our felves of fuch and fuch 
parents, we fhould rather know fuch nobiliry (with¬ 
out virtue) to be fhame and difhonour, than no- 
blenefs, and glory to vaunt thereof. b fFhat cala¬ 
mity is went mg (faith Bernard) to bint that is born 
in fin, of-a potJh are body and barren mind? for 
(according to the fame father) Dele fucum fugacis 
honoris hujus , 13 male coronata nitorem gloria, ( 3 c. 
Wipe away the painting of this fleeting honour, 
and the glittering of the. ill crowned glory, that 
then thou may*ft confider thy felf nakedly: for 
thou cameft naked out of tiny mother** womb. 
Cameft thou thence with thy mitre, or gliftering 
■with jewels,or gamifhed with filks, or adorned with 
feathers, or fluffed with gold ? if thou -fearer and 
blow away all thefe by thy confideration as certain 
morning clouds, which do or will foon pafs over, 
thou fhalt meet with a naked, and poor, and wretch¬ 
ed, and miferable man, and blufhing becaufe he 
is naked, and weeping becaufe he is bom, and re¬ 
pining becaufe he is born to labour, and not to ho¬ 
nour. ■ . . . • 

For as. touching the matter of all men, there is 
no difference .between it and duft : which if c tbou 
doji not believe (faith St. Cbryfoftom) look into the 
fepulcbres and monuments of tby anceftors, and they 
Jball eaftly perfuade tbee by their own example , that 
tbou art duji and dirt : fo that if man feem more 
noble and .beautiful than dufti this proceedetb not 


from the iiverfity of his nature, but front the cun¬ 
ning of bis Creator. 

6 For true nobility ftandeth in the trade 

Of virtuous life ; not in the flefhly line: 

For blood is brute, but gentry is divine. 

And howfbever the cuftom of the world Have 
made it good, that honours be call by birth upon 
unworthy iflfues: yet Solomon (as wife as any king) 
reprehendeth the lame in his fellow princes. e There 
is an evil (faith he) that I have feen under the fun , 
as an error that proceedetb from the fact of him 
that ruleth. Folly is fet in great excellency. ' 


CHAP. X. 

Of Nimrod, Belus and Ninus: and of me• 
memorable things about thofe times. 

Sect. I. 

That Nimrod was the firfl after the flood that 
reigned like foveraign lord: and that his beginning 
feemetb to have been of juft authority. 

T H F. firft of all that reigned, as foveraign 
lord after the flood, was Nimrod , the fon of 
Chufb , diftinguifhed by Mofes from the reft 
(according to St. Auguftine) in one of thefe two 
refpedbs: either for his eminency, and becaufe he 
was the firft of fame, and that took on him to com¬ 
mand others: or elfe in that he was begotten by 
Cbujh , after his other children were alfo become 
fathers ; and ef a later time than fome of his grand¬ 
children and nephews. Howfbever, feeing Mofes 
in eiprefs words calleth Nimrod the fon of Cbujh, 
other miens conje&ures to the contrary ought to 
havje no refpedh This empiry of Nimrod, both 
the fathers, and many later writers, call tyrannical: 
the fame beginning in Babel (which is) confufion. 
But it feemeth to me, that MelanElbon conceived 
not amifs hereof: the fame expofition being alfo 
made by the author of that work called Onomafti- 
eum Tbeologicum , who affirms that Nimrod was 
therefore called Amarus Dominator , a bitter or fe- 
vere governor,' becaufe his form of rule feemed at 
firft far more terrible than paternal authority. And 
therefore is he in this refpeft alfo called a mighty 
hunter: becaufe he took and deflroyM both beafts 
arvd thieves. But St. AugufHne underftands it other- 
wife, and converts the word [ante] by [contra'] af¬ 
firming therein, that Nimrod was a mighty hunter 
againft God, Sic ergo intel/igendus eft gigas ille, vena- 
tor contra Dominum •, So is that giant to be under- 
ftood, a huntet againft the Lord. But howfbever this 
word [a mighty hunter ] be underftood •, yet it ra¬ 
ther appeareth, that as Nimrod had the command 
of all thofe, which went with him from the eaft 
into Shinaar: fo this charge was rather given 
him, than by him ufurped. For it no where is 
found, that Noah himfelf, or any of the fons of 
his own body, came with this troop into Babylon : 
no mention at all being made of Noah (the years 
of his life excepted) in the fucceeding ftory of the 
Hebrews : nor that Sem was in this difobedient 
troop, or among die builders of Babel. 

The fame is alfo confirmed by divers ancient 
hiftorians, that Nimrod, Suphne, and JoRan were 
the captains and leaders of all thofe which came 
from the eaft. " And tho* Sem came not himfelf fo 


'Pim.iiiEttt. s Bernard. 1.2. de Confider. ad Eugen. Pap. 
* Mm. . Ecdef. io. 

No. 7. 


e Chryfoft. homil. 2. dc incompofua Dei na.tura, con. 5. 

D d Ux 


Digitized by 


Google 








io6 The History of:the World; Book I. 


far weft as Shinaar (his lot being call on the eaft 
parts) yet from his fon’s nephew Heber, the name 
and nation of the Hebrews (according to the gene¬ 
ral opinion) took beginning, who inhabited the 
fouthermoft parts of Chaldea about the city of Ur ; 
from whence Abraham was by God called into Char- 
ran , and thence into Canaan. 

And becaufe thole of the race of Sem which 
came into Chaldea were no partners in the unbelie¬ 
ving work of the tower: therefore (as many of the 
fathers conje&ure) did they retain the firft and 
moll ancient language, which the fathers of the 
firft age had left to Noah-, and Noah to Sem 
and his ilfues. 1 In familia Heber remanfit hac lin¬ 
gua i In the family of Heber this language remained 
(faith St. Augufiine out of Epiphanus -,) and this lan¬ 
guage Abraham ufed : yea, it was anciently and 
before the flood the general fpeech : and therefore 
firft called (faith Caclejlinus) lingua bumana , the 
human tongue. 

We know that Goroipius Becanus following Theo- 
doret. Rabbi Mofes, ALgyptius, Vergara , and others, 
is of another opinioh •,. but howfoever we deter¬ 
mine of this point, we may with good probabili- 
relolve, that none of the godly feed of Sem were 
e chief leaders of this prefumptuous multitude. 
And feeing it is not likely but that fome one was 
by order appointed for this charge, we may imagine 
that Nimrod rather had it by juft authority, than 
by violence of ufurpation. 

Sect. II. 

That Nimrod, Belus and Ninus, were three difiintt 
perfons. ' • 

.. r * 

B Enzo, and out of him Naucleruf, \yith others, 
make many Nimrods. Eufebias confounds him 
with Belus% and fo doth St. ’Jerome upon -.Qfta i 
and thefe words of St. Augufiine feem toi make 
him of the fame opinion. b Ibi autetn Ninus regna- 
bat pop mortem patris fui Belt, qui primus illic reg- 
naverat 65 annos •, There did Ninas reign after the 
death of his father Belus, who firft governed in 
Babylon 65 years. But it could not be unknown 
to St. Augufiine, that Nimrod was the eftablifher 
of that empire : Mofes being plain and direCl 
therein. For the beginning of Nimrod’/ kingdom 
(faith he) was Babel, Erec, Accad, and Chalne* 
in the land of Shinaar: wherefore ; Nimrod was 
the firft king of Babel. And certainty it bell 
agreeth with reafon, • that Ninus was the third, 
and not one with Nimrod, as Mercator (led by 
Clement) fuppofed: for in Ninus' s time, the 
world was marvelloufly replenilhed. And if St. 
Augufiine had undoubtedly taken Belas for Nim¬ 
rod, he would have given him the name which 
the fcriptures give him, rather than have bor¬ 
rowed any thing out of prophane authors. And 
for thofe words of St. Augufiine (qui primus illic 
regnaverat , who was the firft that reigned there) 
fuppofed to be meant by Belus .*< thole words do 
not difprove that Nimrod was the,founder of the 
Babylonian empire. For altho’ Julius Cefar over¬ 
threw the liberty of the Roman commonwealth, 
making himfelf perpetual dictator t yet Auguf- 
tus was the firft eftablilhed emperor, and the firft 
that reigned ablolutely by foveraign authority over 
the Romans, as an emperor. The like may be 
faid of Nimrod, that he firft brake the, rule of 
elderlhip and paternity, laying the foundation of 
foveraign rule, as Cefar did *, and yet Belus was; 
the firft, who peaceably, and with a general 
allowance, exerciled fuch a power. Pererius is of 


opinion, that Belus and Nimrod were the lame, be¬ 
caufe many things are faid of them both agreeing 
in time: for it was about 200 years after the flood, 
as they account, that Belus reign’d: but fuch a* 
greement of times prove it not. For fo Edward III. 
and his grandchild Richard II. were kings both 
in one year j the one died, and the other in the 
fame year was crowned king. 

And yet the opinion, that Nimrod and Belus 
were one, is far more probable than that of Merca¬ 
tor, who makes Ninus and Nimrod to be the fame; 
For it is plain, dm the beginning of Nimrod's 
kingdom was Babel, and the towns adjoining : but 
the firft and molt famous work of Ninus was the 
city of Ninevtb. 

Now whereas D. Siculus affirmeth that Ninus 
overcame and fupprefs’d the Babylonians, the fame 
rather proveth the contrary, than that Ninus and 
Nimrod were one perfort. For Ninus eftablilhed 
the feat of his empire at Nineveh in AJfyria , 
whence the Babylonians might (perchance) in difdain 
thereof fall from his obedience, whom he reco¬ 
vered again by ftrong hand ; which was ealy: Ba¬ 
bylon being not walled till Semiramids time. 

- ■ Dicitur alt am 

Cothhbus muris cinxiffe Semiram is urbent. 

Semiramis with walls of brick the city did in¬ 
dole. 

Further, where it is alledged, that as the fcrip¬ 
tures call Nimrod mighty: fo Jufiin hath the lame 
of Ninus, which is one of Mercator's arguments: 
it may be anfwered, that fuch an addition might 
Jiave been given to many other kings as well. For 
if we may believe Jufiin •, then were Vexorit 
Jcing of Egypt, and Tanais of Scythia, mighty king! 
before Ninus was born. And if we may com¬ 
pare the words of Mofes (touching Nimrod) with 
die undertakings of Ninus, there will be found 
great difference between them. For whereas Mer¬ 
cator coneeiveth that it : was too early for any 
that lived about the time of the confufion of 
languages, to have invaded and maftered thole 
cities lo far removed from Babel, namely Erec, 
Accad and Cbalnt: which work he . therefore a- 
fcribedi to Ninus, as a man of the greateft under¬ 
taking *, and confequendy would have Nimrod to 
have been long after the dme, in which, we fuppofc 
he flourifhed and both thofe names, of Nimrod 
and Ninus to belong to one perfon, to wit, to 
Ninus : to theft things to make fome sanfwer. Firft, 
I do not find that fuppofidon croc, that ever 
Nimrod invaded any of efiefe cities 1 but chat he 
founded them and built them from the ground, 
being the firft after the flood, that .Conduced 
the childvtn of Noah into thofe parts-: and 
therefore had nothing built or ertxfled , to his 
hands. • j !•;. • 

Befides, whereas thefe cities in many mens opi¬ 
nions are foupdto Hand far away from Babylon, 
I find no teafon to bring roe to that belief. The 
city of Accad i which the Septuagint calls Jrcbard, 
and Epiphanius Arphal \ ■ Junius takes -to e be Nr -; 
fibis in Mefopotamia: for the region thereabout, 
the Cofmograpbets (faith he) -call Atauimur bar ~Ac- 
cadene. Others underftand Nifibis and Nineveh 
to be one city: fo do Strabo and StrphunUf con¬ 
found it with Cbarran ; bat all sniftaken. For 
NifibiSj Accad, and Cbarruu are diftin& places. 
Tho’ I cannot deny Actadene to be a region of Me- 
fopotamid , the fame ^hsch Ariat Mntadui 'out of 
St. Jerome calls Achad: and fo do the Hebrews 


J Aug. de Civitate Dei, 1 . 6. c. 11. * De Civitate Dei. 

* 


•'arfo 











Chap. X. The History of the World. iof 


alfo call Nifibis, which feemeth to be the caul? of 
this miltaking. As for the city of Erec , which 
the Septuagint call Orecb, St. Augnfline Ortg, and 
Pagninus Erec , this place Junius underftands for 
Arraca in Suftana: but there is alfo a city in Co- 
megena called At ace: and indeed likelihood of 
name is no certain proof, without the afliftancc of 
other circumflances. 

Concerning die third city (called Chalneb) fonie 
take it for Calanifis: of which * Am. Marcellinnsi 
St. Jerome takes it for Seltucia *, Hierofolymitanus 
for Ctejpbon: others do think it to be the Agrani 
upon Euphrates , deftroy’d and razed by the Per- 
fians. But let Mofes be the moderator and judge 
of this difpute, who teacheth us diredlly, that 
thefe cities are not feated in fo divers and di- 
ftant regions; for thefe be his words : And the 
beginning of his kingdom (fpcaking of Nimrod) 
•was Babel, Erech, Act ad, and Chalneb, in the 
land of Shinaar : fo as in this valley of Shinaar, 
or Babylonia, or Chaldea (being all one) we mull 
find them. And therefore I could (rather of the 
two) think with Fiterbienfts, that thefe four made 
but one Babylon, than that they were cities far re¬ 
moved, and in fevcral provinces, did not the pro¬ 
phet Amos precifely diftinguifh Chalne from Ba¬ 
bylon. Go you (faith Amos, vi. 2.) to Chalne, and 
from thence go you to Hamath, and then to Gath of the 
Philiftines. The Geneva tranflation favouring the 
former opinion, to fet thefe cities out of Shinaar, 
hath a marginal note exprefling that Shinaar was 
here named: not that, all thefe cities were therein 
feated, but to diftinguifh Baby Ion of Chaldea, from 
Babylon in Egypt ; out I find little fabftance in 
that conceit. For fare I am, that in the beginning 
of Nimrod's empire, there was no fuch Babylon, 
nor arty city at all to be found in Egypt: Babylon 
of Egypt being all one with the great city of Cairo, 
which was built long after, not far from the place 
where ftood Memphis . die ancient city, but not fo 
ancient as Babylon upon Euphrates-. J -Now 'that 
Chalne is fttuate in the valley of Shinaar, it hath 
been formerly proved in the chapter of Paradife. 
So as for any argument that may be brought to 
the contrary, from die remote fmration of thefe 
three cities from Babylon, we may continue in our 
opinion, that Nimrod, Belus, and Nmu :, were dil- 

tindl and fucceflivc kings. ’ * ••• • 

j ; •«»: w ., • - . 

: :.L .x .. * /v r.i «> • 

S s-g-T. III. ,*„,».•» . { •' 

, % * m • t » * I 

Tlsat Nimrod, not Afftrrj built Nineveh: and that 
it is probable out of dfaiah ''that AfTur 
built Ur for the ChMdees. /' .'V* ‘ 

N O W as of Ninirod: • fo are the opinions of 
writers difFereht : tOudhing AfftiPf and touch*- 
fog the beginning of that great ftate ^'Babylon arid 
Affyria: a controverfy wetrifohify- dirputed with¬ 
out any direft proof, cortclufiori-, or certainty. But 
to me (of whom, where ‘the feriptures are filentj 
the voice of reafon faith the beft he&ring) the inter¬ 
pretation of Junius is mod agreeable •, who be--> 
fides all neceffary conl'equence doth notdisjoyn the 
fenfeofthe feriptures therein, nor confufe the un- 
derftanding thereof. For in this fort he converteth the 
Hebrew text. Erat enrm printlpittm regnt ejus Ba- 
bcl,& Erec, If) Ac cad, Chalneb,in terra Shinaar is \ 

e terra hac proceffit in Affyriam atbi tcdifccrvlt Nini- 
ven: (which is) For the beginning of fais kingdom 
was Babel, and Erech, -xrABAccad, and Chalneb, in the 
land oiShinaar.- and he? went forth of this'land into 
A//)rht,zr\d built Ntnrvehi So as Junius takes 'Affat 

1 • • * •• : • •'! l . 7 \% t 


in this place, not for any perfon, but for the regiofi 
of Affyria: the land being fo called in Mofes' s time, 
and before it. For certainly the other conftruclion, 
(where the Word [ Affur') is taken tor A (fur the fon 
of Sem) doth not anfwer the order which Mofes 
obferveth thro’ all the books of Genefts, bur is quite 
contrary unto it. For in the beginning of the 10th 
chapter he fetteth down the fons of Noah in thefe 
words. Now thefe are the generations of the fons 
of Noah: Shem, Ham, and Japhet, unto whom fons 
were born after the flood : then k followeth imme¬ 
diately. 7 he fons of Japhet were Gomer, See. fo as 
Japhet is laft named among Noah's fons, be he eldeft 
or youngeft: becaufe he was firft to be fpoken of: 
with whom (having laft named him) he proceeds 
and fets down his ifliie, and then the ifTue of his 
fons : firft, the ifTue of Gomer , Japhet's eldeft fon j 
and then fpeaks of Javan and his fons : tor of the 
reft of that family he is filent. Anon, after he 
nuinbreth the fons of of Ham, of which Cujh was 
the eldeft: and the fons of Cujh and Mizraim ; 
and afterwards of Canaan \ leaving Shem for the 
laft, bccaufe he would not disjoin the ftory of the 
Hebrews. But after he beginneth with Shem, he con- 
tinueth from thence by Arpbaxad, Shcla, and He- 
her, unto Abraham ; and fo to Jacob, and the fa¬ 
thers of that nation. But to have brought in one 
of the fons of Shem in the middle of the generations 
ot Ham, had been againft order •» neither would 
Mofes have pafsVl over lb flightly the erc<ftion of 
the Affyrian empire, in one of the fons of Shem, 
if he had had any fuch meaning ; it being the fto- 
ry of Shem' s fons which he moil attended. For 
he nameth Nimrod apart, after the reft of the fons 
of Cujh, becaufe he founded the Babylonian and Af¬ 
fyrian empire: and in the 1 ith chapter lit; returns 
to fpeak of the building of Babel in particular, ha¬ 
ving formerly named k in the 10th chapter, with 
thofe other cities which Nimrod founded in Shinaar. 
And as he did in the 10th chapter, fb alfo in the 
1 ith he maketh no report of Shem, till fuch time 
as he had finifh’d fo much of Nimrod as he meant 
to touch : and then he beginneth with the ifliie ol 
Shem, which he conrinuerh to Abraham and ffrael. 
And of Junius's opinion toucliing Affur, was Cal¬ 
vin : to which I conceive that P. Comeftor in 
Hift or ia Scholaflica gave an entrance, who after he 
had delivered this place in fome other fenfe, he 
-ufeth thefe words. Fel intelligendvm non eft de 
Affur filio Sem, &c. fed A (far. id eft, 'tegnum Af- 
fyriorum rude egreffum eft, frtbd tempore Sarug fre- 
avi Abrahami faflum eft (which is) Or elfe it is not 
to bc^underflood of Affur thcjfon of Shem, &c. but 
Affur (that is the kingdom of the Affyrians) came 
from thence {viz. from Babylon) or was made out of 
k ; which happened in the time of SarUg the greaV 
grandfather of Abraham. After which ne reconci- 
Jeth the differences in this fort: If you take the an¬ 
cient Belus (meaning Nimrod) to be the firft erec¬ 
tor of the Affyrian empire, or the firft founder there¬ 
of, it is true, Quantum ad initium , refpetting the 
beginning y but others conceive, that it had be¬ 
ginning from Ninus, which is alfo true, Quantum 
ad regni ampliationcm, regarding the enlargement 
of the empire. To this I may add the opinion ot 
Epiphanius confirmed by Cedrenus, who takes Af¬ 
fur to be the fon of Nimrod: and fo doth Mctho- 
Aius, and Fiterbienfts, St. Jerome and Cyrillus, and 
now laftly, b Tomiellus who faith, he took upon 
hinl that name of Affur after he had beaten 
the Affyrians , as Sepia did of Africanus. Atsr fas 
conqucit in Africa : and that Affur was> common 
name to the kings of Affyria, as it ajfpeareth by 


.j ’l.iiibx 23 - *: * Xdroidl. Annul. Sacr. iA G^n. ic. '* - 


Digitiz 


by 


Googl 


many 

"e 











ioS The History of the World. Book L 


many fcriptures, as Pfalm lxxxi. Jfaiab x. Hofea 
v, (fte. but to help the matter, he makes Nimrod 
of the race of Sbem, and the fon of /ran. But, 
Rabanus Maurus, who was archbilhop of Mentz 
in the year of Chrift 8 54, an ancient and learned 
writer, underftands this place with Come for, or 
Comeflor with him, agreeing in fubftancc with 
that tranflation of Junius : to which words of Mo- 
fes he giveth this fenli b,De bac terra AJfyriorum pul- 
lulavit imperium, qui ex nomine Nini, Beli filii, 
Nilum condiderunt , urbem magnam , &c. Out of 
this land grew the empire of the Affyrians, who 
built Ninus the great city, fo named of Ninus the 
fon of Belus. On the contrary, Calvin objefbeth this 
place of Jfaiab xx iii. 13. Behold tbe land of the 
Chaldeans, this was no people., Affur founded it by 
the inhabitants of the wildernefs *, than which there 
is no one place in the fcriptures that hath a greater 
diverfity in the tranflation and underftanding j in- 
fomuch as Michael de Palatio upon Jfaiab (tho* 
in all die very diligent) pafleth it over. But Cal¬ 
vin fcemeth hereby to infer, that becaufe Affur 
founded the ftate of the Chaldeans , therefore alfo 
Affur rather than Nimrod eftabliihed the Affynan 
empire, and built Nineveh : contrary to the former 
tranflation of Junius , and to his own opinion. Now 
out of the Vulgar (called Jerome's, tranflation) it 
may be gathered, that Affur both founded and 
ruin’d this ftate or city of the Chaldeans , by If at ah 
remembred : unto which city, people, or ftate, 
he plainly telleth the Tyrians, that they cannot truft 
or hope for relief thence. Or rather it may be ta¬ 
ken, that the prophet maketh this city of Chaldea , 
and that ftate, an example unto thole Phenicians , 
whom in this place he ioretelleth of their ruin : 
which city of Chaldea being of ftrength, and care¬ 
fully defended, was notwithftanding by the Affyri- 
ans utterly wafted and deftroyed: whereby he 
giveth them knowledge, and foretelleth them 
that their own city of Tyre (invincible, as (them- 
.felves thought) mould alfo foon after be over- 
turnccl-by the fame Affyrians : as indeed it was by 
Nabuchodonofor. And thefebe the words of Jerome \ 
Ecce terra Cbaldjeorum , tails populus non fust, 
Affur fundavit earn, in captivitatem traduxerunt ro- 
buftos ejus , fuffodcrunt domos ejus , pofuit earn in 
ruinam ; which is, Behold the land of the Chalde¬ 
ans, fuch a people there were not (or this was no 
people, after the Geneva ) Affur, or the Affyrians 
founded it, they carried away their ftrong men 
captive, they undermined their houfes, and ruined 
their city. The Septuagint exprefs it but in a part 
of another verfe, in tnefe words ; Et in terra 
Cbaldteorum, (ft beec defolata eft ab Affyriis , quoni- 
am ynurus ejus corruit , making the fenfe perfect by 
the preceding verfe, which altogether may be thus 
underftood. If thou go over to Chittim (which ts 
Macedon or Greece) yet thou fhalt have no reft, 
(!peaking to the Tyrians) neither in the land of the 
Chaldeans, for this is made defolate by the Aflyri- 
ans, becaufe their walls fell together to the ground. 
Pagninus and Vatablus convert it thus, Ecce terra 
Chafdsim , ifte populus non erat illic ohm mm Af- 
fur fundavit earn navibus , erexerunt arces illius, 
contriverunt eedes ejus, pojjierunt earn in ruinam : 
which may be thus engliined. Behold the land of 
the Chaldeans, this people was not once therein in¬ 
habiting : for Aflur built ft a harbour for Jbips, 
they ere/led the towers thereof \ and again brake down 
the houfes thereof, and ruinated it, Junius in the 
place of fhips fets the word [pro Barbaris] that is, 
for the Barbarians : and the Geneva , by the Bar¬ 
barians. But this is undoubted, that the prophet 
Jfaiab (as mav be gathered by all the fenfe of the 
chapter) did therein affure the Tynans of their future 


deftruftion, which accordingly fell on them: where- 
in (for the more terror) he maketh choice to note 
the calamities of thole places, cities and regions, 
whofe trade the ftate and greatnels of the Tyrians 
was maintained ; as by the Cilicians from Tbarfis ; 
from the Macedonians, and other Grecians under the 
name of Ciitim ; alfo by the Egyptians, the Chal¬ 
deans and the reft. For Tyre was then the mart- 
town of the world moll renowned. And (as it ap¬ 
pears in our difeourfe of Paradije) not the leall 
part of her chief merchandile came in by the city 
Ur, or Urchoa in Chaldea, where the body or 
chief ftream of Euphrates (even that ftream which 
runneth thro* Babylon and Otris , which now fal- 
lcth into Tigris ) had his paflage into the Perfean 
gulf > though now it be Hopped up. For (as we 
have heretolore noted) the Arabians, that defeended 
from Sheba and Raamah, dwelling on the eaft banks 
of the Perftan gulf, trading with the Tyrians (as 
thofe of Eden, Charran and Chalne did) tranlported 
their merchandife by the mouth of Tigris, that is, 
from Teredon, and of Euphrates, that is, from Ur 
or Urchoa -, and then by Babylon, and thence by 
river and over land they conveyed it into Syria, 
and fo to Tyre , as they do this day to Aleppo. So 
then Ur of the Chaldees was a port-town, and one 
of thofe cities which had intelligence, trade and ex¬ 
change with the Tyrians: for it Hood by the great 
lakes of Chaldea, thro* which that part of Euphra¬ 
tes ran, which paflage is now ftopt up. Ejus cur- 
fum vetuftas abolevit (faith Niger j And Pliny, Lo¬ 
cus ubi Euphrates oft turn fuit, /lumen falfum i Time 
hath worn away the channel of Euphrates: and the 
place where the mouth thereof was, is a bay of fair 
water. Thefe things being thus, certainly (not 
without good probability) we may expound the 
city of the Chaldees , whofe calamities Jfaiab here 
noteth for terror of the Tyrians to be the city an- 
ciendy called Ur •, and by Hecataus, Comerina } 
by Ptolemy, Urchoa ; and by the Greeks , Chaldeeo- 
polis , The city of Chaldea ; which the fons of 
Sbem, until Abraham' s time, inhabited. And where¬ 
as in all the tranflations it is faid, that Affur both 
founded it and ruin’d it: it may be underftood, that 
Affur the founder was the fon of Sbem ; and Af¬ 
fur the deftroyers were the Affyrians, by whom 
thofe that inhabited Ur of Chaldea, were at length 
opprefled and brought to ruin : which thing God 
forefeeing, commanded Abraham thence to Cbar- 
ran, and fo into Canaan. And if the Hebrew 
word by Vatablus and Pagninus convened [by fhips] 
do bear that fenfe, the fame may be the better ap¬ 
proved *, becaufe it was a-port-town: and the ri¬ 
ver fo far up as this city of Ur, was in ancient 
time navigable, as both by Pliny and Niger ap- 
peareth. And if the word [for the Barbarians] or 
[by the Barbarians] be alfo in the Hebrew text, it is 
no lefs manifell* that the moll barbarous Arabians 
of the defart were and are the confronting, and next 
people of all other unto it. For Chaldea is now 
called Arachaldar, which fignilieth defart lands, be¬ 
caufe it joineth to that part of Arabia fo called : 
and Cicero (calling thofe Arabians by the name ol 
Jtureans) addeth that they are of all other people 
the mod favage ■, calling them. Homines omnium 
maxime bar bar os. 

. So as this place of Ifaiab, which breedeth fome 
doubt in Calvin, proveth in nothing the contrary 
opinion, nos in any part weakeneth the former tranl- 
lation of Junius, nor the interpretation of Comeflor 
and Rabanus. . L For tho’ other men have not con¬ 
ceived (for any thing that I have read) that AJfut 
is in this place.diverfly taken.. (as for the fon of 
Sbem, when he'is fpoken of as a builder of Ur ; 
and when, as a adeftroyer thereof, then for the Af- 

fyrian 


Digitized by 


Goog[ 


e 












Chap. X. The History 0/ World. 109 


fjrian nation) yet certainly the evidence of the truth, 
and agreement of circumflances feem to inforce it. 
And fo this founding of the city of the Chaldees by 
Ajfur (into which the moft of the pofterity of Sent 
that came into Sbinaar, and were leparate for the 
idolatry of the Cbufites and Nimrodians , retired 
themfelves) hath nothing in it to prove that the 
fame Ajfur built Nineveh , or that the fame Ajfur 
was all one with Ninus \ except we will make Aj- 
fur, who was the fon of Shem, both an idolater 
and the Ion of Belus. For (out of doubt) Ninus 
was the firft notorious facrificer to idols, and the 
firft that fet up a ftatue or image to be honour¬ 
ed as God. Now if Ajfur muft be of that race, 
and not of the family of Sem , as he muft be 
if he founded Nineveh, then all thofe which feek to 
give him the honour thereof, do him by a thou- 
fand parts more injury, by taking from him his 
true parent and religion. 

Befides, if this fuppofed Ajfur whom they make 
the founder of Nineveh (and fo the fon of Belus ) 
were any other, and not the fame with Ninus •, 
then what became of him ? Certainly he was very 
unworthy and obfeure, and not like to be the foun¬ 
der of fuch an empire and fuch a city, if no man 
have vouchfafed to leave to pofterity his expulfion 
thence, and how he loft that empire again, or 
quitted it to Ninus *, whofe ads and conquefts are 
fo largely written, and (according to my appre- 
henfion) far differing from truth. It will therefore 
be found beft agreeing to feripture and to realon, 
and beft agreeing with the ftory of that age written 
by prophane authors, that Nimrod founded Babel, 
Erech, and Accad, and Chalne, the firft works and 
beginnings of his empire, according to Mofcs y and 
that thefe works being finifh’d within the valley of 
Shinaar y he look’d farther abroad, and fet in hand 
the work of Ninus y lying near unto the fame ftrcam 
that Babel and Chalne did: which work his grand¬ 
child Ninus afterwards amplified and finilhed, as 
Semiramis (this Ninus's wife) did Babylon. Hence 
it came to pafs, that as Semiramis was counted the 
tbundrefs of the city which fhe only finifh’d: fo 
alfo Ninus of Nineveh. 6 )uam quidem Babylonem 
potuit injlaurare •, She might repair or renew Ba¬ 
bylon, faith St. Augujline. For fo did Nabuchodo- 
nofor vaunt himfelf to be the founder of Babylon 
alfo, becaufe he built up again fome part of the 
wall overborn by the fury of the river : which work 
of his flood till Alexander's time ; whereupon he 
vaunted thus: 4 Is not this great Babel which I 
have built ? 

Sect. IV. 

Of the ails of Nimrod and Belus, as far as now 
they are known. 

B U T to return to the ftory, it is plain in Mo- 
Jes y that Nimrod (whom Philo interpreted! 
transfugium, and Julius Africanus furnamed Saturn) 
was the eftablifher of the Babylonian monarchy, of 
whom there is no other thing written, than that his 
empire in the beginning confifted of thofe four 
cities before remembred, Babel y Erecb y Accad and 
Chalne : and that from hence he propagated his 
empire into AJfyria ; and in AJfyria built four 
more cities, to wit, Nineveb y Rehobotb, Celah, and 
Refen. And feeing that he fpent much time in 
building Babel it felf and thofe adjoining, and that 
his travels were many ere he came into Shinaar y 
that work of Babel (fuch as it was) with the o- 
ther three cities, and the large foundation of Ni¬ 


neveh, and the other cities of AJfyria which he 
builded (confidbred with the want of materials, and 
with other impediments) were of greater difficulty 
than any thing performed by his fucceflbrs in many 
years after: to whofe undertakings time had given 
fo great an increafe of people ; and the examples 
and patterns of his beginning lb great an advance¬ 
ment and encouragement: in whofe time (faith Gly- 
cas ) all thefe nations were called Meropes, A Jer- 
monis linguarum terr<eque divijone ; By realon that 
the earth and the fpeech were then divided. 

Belus or Bet, or Jupiter Belus, fucceeded Nim¬ 
rod, after he had reigned 114 years ; of whofe adls 
and undertakings there is little written. For it is 
thought that he fpent much of his time in difbur- 
dening the low lands of Babylon, and drying and 
making firm ground of all thofe great fens and 
overflown marlhes which adjoin’d unto it. For 
any of his wars or conquefts there is no report, o- 
ther than of his begun enterprife againft Sabatius 
king of Armenia, and thofe parts of Scythia which 
Bcrofus calls Scythia Saga, whofe fon and fucceflbr 
Barzanes became fubjecl and tributary to Ninus, 
that followed the war to effe<ft, which was by his 
father Belus begun. 

Sect. V. 

That we are not to marvel bow Jo many kingdoms 
could be ereHed about thefe times : and of Vexo- 
ris of Egypt, and Tanais of Scythia. 

r-pl HAT fo many kingdoms were erected in 
1 all thofe eaftern parts of the world fo foon af¬ 
ter Nimrod (as by the ftory of Ninus is made ma- 
nifeft) the caufes were threefold ; namely, oppor¬ 
tunity, example and ncceflity. For opportunity, be¬ 
ing a princefs liberal and powerful, beftoweth on 
her firft entertainers many times more benefits, than 
either fortune can, or wifdom ought; by whofe 
prefence alone the underftanding minds of men re¬ 
ceive all thofe helps and fupplies, which they either 
want or wifti for : fo as every leader of a troop 
(after the divifion of tongues and difperfion of peo¬ 
ple) finding thefe fair offers made unto them, held 
the power which they poffefs’d, and governed by 
diferetion all thofe people, whom they conduced 
to their deftin’d places. For it cannot be concei¬ 
ved, that when the earth was firft divided, mankind 
ftraggled abroad like beads in a defart ; but that 
by agreement they difpofed themfelves, and under¬ 
took to inhabit all the known parts of the world, 
and by diftindt families and nations: otherwife 
thofe remote regions from Babylon and Sbinaar, 
which had kings, and were peopled in Ninus's 
time, would not have been poffefs’d in many hun¬ 
dreds of years after, as then they were ; neither did 
thofe that were fent, and travelled far off (order 
being the true parent of profperous fuccefs) under¬ 
take fo difficult enterprizes without a conductor 
or commander. Secondly, The example of Nim¬ 
rod with whom it fucceedcd well, ftrengthened eve¬ 
ry humour that afpired. Thirdly, Neceffity re- 
folved all men by the arguments of common mi- 
feries, that without a commander and magiftrate, 
neither could thofe that were laborious, and ofho- 
nell difpofuions, enjoy the harveft of their own tra¬ 
vels : nor thofe which were of little ftrength, fe. 
cure themfelves againft forcible violence: nor thofe 
which fought alter any proportion of greatnefs, 
either poffefs the fame in quiet, or rule and order 
their own minifters and attendants. 

That thefe caufes had wrought thefe effeifls, the 


E e 


Digitized by 


Googl 


under- 

e 


' No. 7. 


* Dan. 4. 27. 







no 


The History 

undertakings and conquefts of Ninus (the fon of 
Belus) made it apparent: for he found every where 
kings and monarchs, what way focver his ambition 
led him in the wars. 

But Nimrod (his grandfather) had no companion 
king, to us known, when he firft took on him lo- 
veraignty and foie commandment of all thofe the 
children of Noah, which came from the eaft into 
Babylonia : tho* in his life-time others alfo raifed 
themfelves to the fame eftate •, of which hereafter. 
Belus, his fon and fuccefior, found Sabatius king of 
Armenia and Scythia, fufficiently powerful to refill 
his attempts : which Sabatius I take to be the fame 
which Jujtm calls Tanais •» and Ihould conjecture, 
that Mizraim had been his flexor is, were it not 
that I vehemently fufpedt fome error (as *Juflin 
placeth him) in the time of that Fexoris , who by 
many circumftances feems to me rightly accounted 
by the judicious and learned Reiuecctus all one with 
the great Sejbflris, that lived certain ages alter Ni¬ 
nus. This Belus, the fecond king of Babylon, 
reigned 65 years, according to the common ac¬ 
count. 

Sect. VI. 

Of the name of Belus, and other names affine un¬ 
to it. 

W HENCE this fecond king and fuccelfor 
of Nimrod had the name of Bel, or Belus, 
queftion hath been made •, for it fcemeth rather a 
name impofed, or (of addition) given by Ninus, 
than aftumed by Belus himfelf. 

Cyrillus againft Julian calls the father of Ninus, 
^rie/a/,affirming that he was the firft of all men that 
caufed himfelf to be called a god ; which were it 
l'o, then might the name of Belus be thence deriv’d. 
But Bel, as many learned writers have obferved, 
fignifieth the fun in the Chaldean tongue •, and there¬ 
fore did Ninus and Scmiramis give that name to 
their father, that he might be honoured as the fun, 
which the Babylonians worlhipped as a god. And 
as this title was affumed in after-times by divers 
others of the Chaldean princes, and Babylonians 
Satrap<e : fo was it ufed (in imitation) by the chief 
of the Carthaginians and other nations, as fome 
hiftorians have conceived. 

To this Bel, or Belus, pertain (as in affinity) 
thofe voices of Baal, Baalim, Belphegor, Beelpba - 
gor, Belfebub , and Bcelfephon. Thofe that are learn¬ 
ed in the Hebrew and Chaldean, convert the word 
Baal by the Latin, Princeps militia. Chief in the 
war, tho’ Daniel was fo called (faith Suidas) ob 
honorem explicationis arcanarum rerum j In honour 
of his expounding fecrets. b St. Jerome makes Bel, 
Reel, and Baal, to have the fame fignification: and 
faith, that the idol of Babylon was fo called, which 
Ninus in memory of his father fet up to be wor¬ 
lhipped : to which that he might add the more ho¬ 
nour and reverence, he made it a fan&uary and 
refuge for all offenders. Hence (faith c Lyranus) 
came idolatry, and the firft ufe of images into the 
world. *]fidore doth interpret Bel by Fetus, old 
or ancient ; adding, that as among the AJfyrians 
it is taken for Saturn and the Sun: fo in the Pti- 
nick or Carthaginian language it fignifieth God. 
Gtycas makes it an Ajffyrtan name properly ; and 
Jofephus, a Tyrian. He alfo affirmeth, that the 
idol which the Moabites worlhipped (by them e- 
reifted on the mountain Phegor, or Peor, and called 
Baal) is the fame which die Latins call Priapus , 
the God of gardens ; which alfo was the opinion of 
* St. Jerome. But that the word Bel, or Reel, was 
as much to fay as God, appeareth by the word 


of the W o R l d. Book I. 

Beelzebub, the idol of Aocaron. For Bel, or Beil, 
foundeth [God] and Sebub [flics or hornets:] hy 
which name notwitliftanding the Jews exprcls 
the prince of devils. But the prophet Hojea teach- 
eth us the proper fignification of this word from 
the voice of God himfelf; And at that day (faith 
the Lord) thou Jhalt call me Ifiii, and Jbalt call me 
no more Baalim : for / will take away the name of 
Baalim out of their mouths. For altho’ the name 
of Baal, or Bahai, be juftly to be ufed towards 
God; yet in refpedt that the fame was given to 
idols, God both hated it and forbad it. And the 
ufing of the word Bel among the Chaldeans for the 
fun, was not becaufe it properly fignifieth the fun, 
but becaufe the fun there was worlhipped as a god: 
as alfo the fire was, Tanquam Solis particula. As 
for the words compounded (before remembred) as 
Belphegor, and Belfephon > Beljephon is expounded 
out of Facias, Domtnus fpccuLe vel cufiodia i The 
lord of the watch tower, or of the guard: the 0- 
ther word noteth the idol, and die place wherein it 
was worlhipped. It is alfo written Belptorot Baal- 
peor : and Peor, they fay, is as much as denuda - 
lit *, and therefore die word joined exprelfcth a 
naked image. Some there are that call this Belas, 
die fon of Saturn j for it was ufed among the an¬ 
cients to name die father Saturn, the fon Jupiter, 
and the grandchild Hercules. * Saturn: diuntur fa¬ 
miliar um nobihum, regum qui urbes condiderunt ft- 
nifjimi •, primogenti eorum Joves {J fun ones \ Her¬ 
cules vero nepotes eorum fortiffimi The ancienteft 
of noble families, and kings which founded cities, 
are called Sat urns i their firft-born Jupiter s and 
Juno's their valiant nephews Hercules. But this 
Belus (faith L. Fives) was famous by re.sfon of his 
warlike fon Ninus, who caufed his father to be 
worlhipped as a God by the name of f Jupiter Ba¬ 
by lonius, whom the Egyptians (tranfported by the 
dreams of their antiquity) make one of theirs. For 
Neptune, fay they, upon Libya the daughter of 
Epaphas, begat this Jupiter Belus, who was father 
to sEgyptus. They add, that this Belus carrying a. 
colony to the river of Euphrates there built a city, 
in which he ordained priefts after the Egyptian man¬ 
ner. But were there any Belus the fon of Epaphas 
and Jjis, or of Nptune and Libya, or with Eufe- 
bius of Tclegonus, who after the death of Apis 
married Jfis, Cecrops then reigning in Atbe-s, die 
fame was not this Babylonian Belus of whom 
we fpeak, but radier fome other Belus, of whom 
the Egyptians fo much vaunted. 

Sect. VII. 

Of the worjlipping of images begun from Belus in 
Babel. 

A S for the Babylonian Belus, he was the molt 
ancient Belus, and the inventor ol Agrono¬ 
my, if Pliny fay true : from whence the Egyptians 
might borrow both the name and the doc¬ 
trine. Some part of the temple, in which his lla- 
tue or image was honoured as a god, the fame au¬ 
thor affirmeth that it remained in his time. 

Of die fepulchre of Bolus, b Strabo writeththus. 
Over the river, faith he, there are gat dens, •where 
they fay the ruins of Belus’x tomb, which Xerxes 
broke up, arc yet remaining. It was a [quart P]r 
ramis made of brick , a furlong high, and on every 
fide it had a furlong in breadth. It appears by 
* Cyril againft Julian, that he obtained divine wor- 
ffiip yet living: tor fo he writes of him (calling 
him Arbelus : Arbelus, vir fuptrbus & arrogant, 
primus hominum dicitur d fubditis deiiatis nomen 


, See more of this, 1 . 2 .of this firft part, c. 2. $. 6. *> Hicr. in Ofe. c. 

•••f rier in Oic. c. 4. & 9. ( Auetor. de requit. I. r. « Died. J. 3. 


2. « Lyr. in fapien. Salom. c. 11. d [M- 

s Strabo, 1. ij. c. 3. 4 L. 4- cant. Julian. 

Digitized by' LiOC 


I. 8. c. 11. 

acccpijfe: 








Ill 


Chap. X. The History of the World. 


actepiffe: perfeverdrunt igitur AJfyrii , (J finilim* 
itiii gentes facrificantes ei. Atbelus, A man very 
proud and arrogant, is accounted to be the fir ft 
of all men that was ever honoured by their fubjefts 
with the tide of deity (or with the name of God) 
the Affyrians therefore and the bordering nations 
have perfevered, facrificing to him. Even Arias 
alfo, whom Saidas calls fhuras, who fucceetled 
next after Ninjas, was made an idol-god among 
them, if we credit Saidas. 

After Ninas (that is, after Ninyas) Thuras reign¬ 
ed (faith Suidas) whom they called after the name 
of the planet Mars •, a man of lhape and fierce tiif- 
pofition, who bidding battle to Caucafus of the 
Hock of Japbet, flew him. The Affyrians wor- 
Ihipped him for their God, and called him Baal 
(that is) Mars j thus far Suidas. Neither is it un¬ 
likely but that many among idolatrous nations were 
deified in their life-times, or foon after; tho’ I de¬ 
ny not but that the molt of their images and Statu* 
were firft erected without divine worfhip, only in 
memory of the glorious a< 5 ts of benefactors, as Gly- 
cas rightly conceiveth •, and fo afterwards the de¬ 
vil crept into thofe wooden and brazen carcales, 
when poftcrity had loll the memory of their firft 
invention. Hereof Ifidore fpeaketh in this man¬ 
ner. Quos aulem Pagani Decs afferunt homines fue- 
runty (jf pro uniufcujufque vit<e meritis 1 el magni¬ 
ficent! a, colt apud fttos pofil mortem cccperunt: fed 
(dremonibus perfuadentibus) auos iili profiua vicrr.oria 
bonoraverunt, minores Deos exiftirndrunt: ad ijla 
vero magis excolenda accefferunt poet anon figmenta ; 
They were men, faith he, whom the Pagans affirm¬ 
ed to be Gods: and every one for his merits or 
magnificence began after his death to be honoured 
of his own. But at length (the devils perfuading) 
they accounted them Idler gods, whofe memories 
they honoured : and the fiftions of the poets made 
the opinions (concerning the honours of the dead) 
much more fuperllitious. 

And that the worlhipping of images was brought 
in by the Pagans , and heathen nations, it is not 
Ifidore alone that witnefleth j but Gregory: a Gcn- 
tihtas (faith he) inventrix caput efil imaginum ■, 
Gentilifm is the invcntrels and ground of images : 
and Ambrofe \ b Gentes lignum adurant , tanquam 
imaginem Dei ; The Gentiles adore wood as it were 
the image of God. c Eufebius alfo affirmeth as 
much, and calleth the worlhipping of images a 
cuftom borrowed of the heathen. The like hath 
“St. Augufiline againft AJirnautus. Et verentur 
(faith e Laclantius) ne relifto vana fit , fii nihil -aide- 
ant quod adorent ; They fear their religion would be 
vain, fliould they not fee that which they worfhip. 

And (out of doubt) the lehoolmcn fhift this fe-ar- 
ful cuftom very llrangcly. For feeing the very 
workmanlhip is forbidden, how can the heart of 
a wife Chriilian fatisfy it fclf with the diftindion 
of Doulia and Uyperdoulia , which can imply no¬ 
thing but fomc difference of worlhipping of thofe 
images after they arc made ? and it is of all tilings 
the moll ftrange, why religious and learned men 
fliould flrain their wits to defend die life of thofe 
things, which the feriptures have not only no where 
warranted, but exprefly in many places forbidden, 
and curled die pra&ifers thereof. Yet this do¬ 
ctrine of the devil was fo ftrongly and fubtilly 
rooted, as neither the exprefs commandment of 
God himfell. Thou fall r.ot make any graven image , 
nor all the threatnings of Mofcs and the prophets af¬ 
ter him could remove, weed it, or by fear, or by 
any perfuafions, lead the hearts of men from it. 
for where Hull we find words of greater weight. 


or of plainer iuflnuftion than rhele? Take there¬ 
fore good heed to your fehes (for ye favs no image 
in the day that the Lord fpake unto you in Horcb 
out of the midfl of thefire) that ye corrupt not your 
fclvesy and make you a gra ven image, or represent a- 
tion of any fgnre 7 whether it be the liker.cfs of male 
or female. 

And betides the exprefs commandment, Thou 
fait make thee no graven image , and the prohibi¬ 
tion in many feriptures, fo it is written in the book 
of ll'ifdom. That the invention of idols was the be¬ 
ginning of v. boredom : and the finding of them the 
corruption of life : for they were not from the begin- 
fiingy neither fall they continue for ever. 

And whereas the fchoolmen affirm, that the 
prophets fpake againft the worlhipping of die hea¬ 
then idols, it is manifeft that Mojcs fpake of ima¬ 
ges of the living God, and not of Baal and the reft 
of that nature. For you faw no image (faith Mofes) 
that day that the Lord fpake unto you in Horcb. 
Surely it was excellently faid of Bafly Noli aliquam 
in illo for mam imaginariy ne circumfcribas earn mente 
tua y Do not imagine any form to be in God, left 
thou limit or circumfcribe him in thy mind too. 
Now, if the great Bafil thought it a preemption 
unlawlul to reprefent a pattern of the infinite God 
to our own thoughts and minds, how far do thofe 
men prefume tlut put him under thegreafy pencil 
of a painter, or the nifty ax, or other inftrument 
ot a carpenter or carver. 

For as this dilhonour to the infinite and in- 
comprchenfible God began in Babel: lo did the 
devil tranfport and lpred this invention into 
all the regions adjoining, and into Egypt and 
Greece. 

The Romans for a while refilled the erettion of 
thefe idols and images, refilling to fet them in their 
temples for 170 years, obferving therein the law of 
Nunta who thought it impiety to refemble things 
moll beautiful, by things moll ball*. But Tarqui- 
rtitts Prifcus afterwards prevailing, and following 
the vanity of the Grecians (a nation of all others 
under the fun moll deluded by Satan ) fet up the 
images of their Gods which (as * St. Augufline 
witnefleth) that learned Varro both bewailed, and 
utterly condemned : and which Seneca thus deri- 
deth. Simulachta dcorum veuerantur t Mis fuppli- 
cauty genu pofito ilia adoranty & cum bate fujptci- 
anty Jabros qui ilia Jecere contemnunt \ The images 
of the Gods are worfhipped, thofe they pray unto 
with bended knees, thofe they adore •, and while they 
fo greatly admire them, they contemn the handi- 
cruitfmcn that made them : which alfo Sedulius the 
Poet in this fort i'cofled at. 

Ucu mi fieri qui vana colunty qui cordc finijlro 
Religiofa fibi fculpunt fimulachray fiuumque 
latlortm fugiunt, if qu* fiacre verentur. 

£h/is furor efi ? qu* tar.ta animos dementia ludit ? 
i t volucrcm, turpemque bovcm y torvumquc dra- 
conem , 

Scmi-homincmquc cancm fupplcx homo promts adorct. 

Ah wretched they that worfhip vanities. 

And confecrate dumb idols in their heart. 
Whom their own Maker (God on high) defpile. 
And fear the work of their own hands and art. 
What tury ? what great madnefs doth beguile 
Mens minds ? that man fliould ugly fhupes adore, 
Of birds, or bulls, or dragons, or the vile 
Half-dog half-nun on knees for aid implore. 

And tho’ this device was barbarous, and firft, 
and many years pnuftifed by heathen nations only, 


4 Orcg. Ncfic t hr. h Amb. in Pfal. 10S. 


Eufeb. 1 . ~.c. i 3 . d A«jr C- il 0 I a. 1 ?. c. 2 * fVCixir. Dei. 1 4. c 31. 

till 


Digitized by 


Google 




11 2 > 


The History 

till the Jews were corrupted in Egypt, yet it is 
not Seneca alone that laugheth to fcorn the igno¬ 
rant ftupidity of his nation : but Juflin Martyr re- 
membreth how the Sibyls inveighed againft images: 
and Hofpinian , how Sophocles taught, that it was 
pernicious to the fouls of men to ereCl and adore 
thole Babels. Strabo and Herodotus witnefs, that 
the Perfians did not ereCl or fet up any ftatue of their 
gods. Lycurgus never taught it the Lacedemoni¬ 
ans, but thought it impiety to reprefent immortal 
natures by mortal figures. Eufebius alfo witnefleth 
in his fixth book de praparatione evangelic a, that it 
was forbidden by a law in Serica, or among the 
Bradmans in India, that images Ihould be worlhip- 
ped. The fame do ‘Tacitus and Crinitus report of 
the ancient Germans. Many other authors might 
be remembred that witnefs the difdain which the 
heathens themfelves had of this childilh idolatry: of 
which Hofpinian hath written at large in his trail 
de origine imaginum. And it was truly faid, Omnia 
mala exempla bonis initiis orta funt •, All ill exam¬ 
ples have lprung from good beginnings. The hea¬ 
then at firft made thele ftatua and images, but in 
memory of fuch remarkable men, as had deferved 
belt of their countries and commonwealths: Effigies 
hominum (faith Pliny) non Jolebant exprimi nifi ali- 
qua Ulufiri caufa perpetuitatem mereniium ; Men 
were not wont to make pi&ures, but of men which 
merited for fome notable caufc to be perpetually 
remembred. And tho’ of the more ancient Pa- 
pifts, fome have borrowed of the Gentiles (as ap- 
peareth in Laclantius) that defence for images: 
That Simulachra are pro dementis literarum, ut per 
ea difeerent homines Drum invifibilem cognofcere\ 
Images (fay they, and fo before them the heathen 
faid) are inftcad of letters, whereby men might 
learn to know the invifible God : in which under- 
ftanding (perhaps) they no otherwife eflccmed them 
than pictures indeed j yet as that of Baal or Bel, fet 
up in memory of Belus the Babylonian, became af¬ 
terwards the moft reverenced idol of the world, by 
which fo many nations (and they which were appro¬ 
priate to Godhimlelf) were mifled and call away: 
lo thofe very flocks and flones, and painted canva- 
fes (called the pictures of Chrift, or Lady, and 
others) were by thoulands of ignorant people, not 
only adored, but efleemed to have life, motion, 
and undcrflanding. On thefe flocks we call (faith the 
book of fHifdom) when we pafs through the raging 
waves, on thefe flocks more rotten than the Jhip that 
carrietb us. 

This heathen invention of images became fo 
fruitful in after-times, breeding an infinite multi¬ 
tude of gods, that they were forced to diflinguifh 
them into degrees and orders ; as Dii confentes, feu 
majorum gentium •, feledi , patritii, infigniores, dii 
medii: counfelling gods, or gods of the mightieft 
nobility ; feleCl gods, patritian, gods of mark, and 
common gods (which the Romans called Medioxu- 
mi) dii injimi, and terreflrial hero’s, and multitudes 
of other gods: of which St. Augufline hath made 
large mention in his bookie Civitate Dei, lib. 14. 
But (faith Laftantius ) among all thofe mifera- 
ble fouls and rotten bodies, worlhipped by men 
more like to their idols, did Epimenules Cretenfls 
(by what good angel moved I know not) ere ft in 
the Athenian fields, altars to the unknown God, 
which flood with the fame title and dedication 
even to the times of St. Paul: who made them firft 
known to whom thofe altars belonged, and opened 
their eyes which were capable of grace, that they 
might dilcern the difference betwixt that light which 


if the World. Book L 

lighteneth every man, and the obfeure and (linking 
mifl wherein the devil had fo many years led and 
milled them. And it fufficed not that the multitude 1 
of thefe gods was fo great in general, or that eve¬ 
ry nation had fome one which took particular and 
lingular care of them •, as Jupiter in Crete, Ifis 
in Egypt, in Athens Minerva, in Samos Juno, in 
Paphos Venus, and fo of all other parts *, but every 
city, and almoft every family, had a god apart. 
For it is written in the 2d of Kings xvii. 18, 31. the 
men of Babel, made Succotb Benotb, and the men 
of Cuth made Nergal, and the men of Hamath made 
Ajhima, and the Avins made Nibhaz and Tarrack, 
and the Sephernaims burnt their children in the 
fire to Adramelech. All which how plainly hath the 
prophet If a. c. xliv. derided ? Men cut down trees, 
rinde them, burn a part of them, make ready their 
meat, and warm themfelves by the fire thereof , and of 
the refidue be maketb a god, an idol, and prayetb unto 
it: but God bathfhut their eyes from fight, and their 
hearts from under flan ding. It is therefore fafeft for 
a Chriflian to believe the commandments of God fo 
direCl againft idolatry, to believe the prophets, 
and to believe St. Paul, who fpeaketh thus 
plainly and feelingly. My beloved fly from idolatry, 
1/peak as unto them which have underflanding, judge 
ye what I fay. 

\ 

Sect. VIII. 

Of the wars of Ninus: and laflly of bis war againfi 
Zoroafter. 

U NTO this Belus fucceeded Ninus , the firft 
that commanded the exercife of idolatry, 
the firft that injurioufly invaded his neighbour-prin¬ 
ces ; and the firft that without flume or fear com¬ 
mitted adultery in publick. But as of Belus there 
is no certain memory (as touching particulars :) fo 
of this Ninus (whole ftory is gathered out of pro- 
phane authors) I find nothing fo warrantable, but 
that the lame may be difputed, and in the greateft 
part doubted. For altho’ that piece of Berofus let 
out and commented upon by Annius hath many 
good things in it, and giveth great light (as Chry- 
tteus noteth) to the underflanding of Diodorus Si¬ 
culus, Dion, Halicarnaffeus, and others: yet Lodo- 
vicus Hives, B. Rhenanus, and others after them, 
have laid open the imperfeClion and defefts of the 
fragment j proving direftly that it cannot be the 
fame Berofus which lived in Alexander's, time, ci¬ 
ted by a Athena us and Jofephus: and whofe ftatue 
the Athenians erefted, faith Pliny. Yet it is front 
him chiefly, that many have gathered the fucceflion 
of the Babylonian and Affiyrian princes, even from 
Nimrod to the 18th king Afcatades, and to the 
times of Jofhua. For of Metaflhenes an hiftorian, 
of the race of the Per flan priefts, there are found 
but certain papers «^r fome few lines of the Chaldean 
and Affiyrian monarchies : but he afterwards in the 
collection of the Per flan kings is not without his 
errors. 

Cteflas of Cnidus (a city adjoining to Halicar- 
naffiusj who lived together with Cyrus the younger, 
and with Artaxerxes Mnemon, gathered his hif- 
tory out of the Perflan records, and reacheth as 
far upwards as Ninus and Semiramis: and tho’ in 
the ftory of Cyrus the younger, Xenophon approveth 
him in fome things, and Atbenaus, Pauftnias and 
Tertullian cite him •, yet fo bafe and apparent are 
his flatteries of the times and princes with whom he 
lived, and fo incredible are the numbers which he 
finds in the armies of Ninus, and cfpecially of 


Semiramis » 


Digitized by 


Googl 


e 


a Athcn 1. 14. Joftph. corn. Appion. 1 . \. &. 7 






Chap. XI. The History <?/ & World. 113 


Semiramis ; as whatfoever his reports were, times 
have confumed his works, faving fome very few 
excerptions lately publifhed. 

And therefore in things uncertain, feeing a long 
difeourfe cannot be pleafmg to men of judgment, 
1 will pafs over the atts of this 3d Afiyrian , in as 
few words as I can exprefs them. St. Auguftine af¬ 
firms that Ninus mattered all Aft a, India excepted. 
Others fay that he won it all, fave India, Baftria , 
and Arabia. For he made Aricus of Arabia the com¬ 
panion of his conquefts, with whom he entered in¬ 
to a ftraight league of amity, becaufe he command¬ 
ed many people, and was his kinfman, and a Cbu• 
file, and the neareft prince confronting Babylonia. 
His firft enterprife was upon Syria , which he might 
eafily fubdue, both becaufe he invaded it on the hid¬ 
den, and becaufe it lay next him: and alfo becaufe 
the Arabians and their king Aricus (which bordered 
Syria) aflifted him in the conqueft thereof. 

The king of Armenia, Barzanes , he forced to ac¬ 
knowledge him, and to aid him in his war againft 
Zoroafter : for from Armenia he bent himfelf that 
way towards the eaft; but that ever he commanded 
the letter Afia, I do not believe, for none of his fuc- 
ceflors had any poffettion therein. 

His third war was againft Pbarnus , king of the 
Medes , whom it is faid that he overthrew, and 
cruelly murdered with his feven children, tho’ others 
affirm that they all died in one battel againft him. 
Whether he invaded Zoroafter before the building 
or amplifying of Nineveh , or after, it is uncertain. 
It is faid that he made two expeditions into Baftria: 
and that finding little or ill fuccefs in the firft, he 
returned, and let the work of Nineveh forward: 
and then a fecondtime entred Baftria with 1700000 
foot, and 200000 horfe, and 10600 chariots: be¬ 
ing encountred by Zoroafter with 400000. But * Ni¬ 
nas prevailing, and Zoroafter being (lain, he entred 
farther into the country, and befieged the chief ci¬ 
ty thereof, called Baftraor Baclrion (faith b Stepha¬ 
nas :) which by a paffage found, and an affault given 
by Semiramis (the wife of Menon) he entred and pof- 
fefs’d. Upon this occafion Ntnus both admiring 
her judgment and valour, together with her perfon 
and external beauty, fancy’d her fo ftrongly, as 
(neglcfting all princely refpefts) he took her from 
her hufband, whofe eyes he threatned to thruft out 
if he refitted to content. He therefore yielding to 
die pafrion of love in Ninus , and to the paffion of 
forrow in himfelf, by the ftrong perfuafions of 
fliamc and difhonour, caft himfelf headlong into 
the water and died. 


CHAP. XI. 

0/ Zoroafter, fuppofed to have been the 
chief author of magick arts: and of the 
divers kinds of magick. 

Sect. I. 

That Zoroafter was noi Cham, nor the firft inven¬ 
tor of aftrology, or of magick: and that there were 
divers great magicians of this name. 

Z Oroafter king of the Baftrians, Vincent ius fup- 
pofeth to be Cham, the fon of Noah : a fan¬ 
cy of little probability. For Cham was the 
paternal anceftor of Ninus , the father of Chus, the 
grand-father of Nimrod , whofe fon was Belus, the 
father of Ninus. It may be that Vincentius had 
heard of that book which was called Scripture 


Cham , devifed by fome wicked knave, and fo in- 
titled : of which Sixtus Sencnfts hath made the due 
mention. 

It is reported by c Cafiianus , that Screnut Abbas 
gave the invention of magick to Cham, the fon 
of Noah : fo did Comeftor in his fcholaltical hifto- 
ry: wich art (faith he) with the feven liberal fei- 
ences he writ in fourteen pillars: feven of which 
were made of brafs, to refill the defacing by the 
waters of the flood j and feven of brick againft the 
injury of fire. There was alfo another devifed dif¬ 
eourfe, which went under the title of Propbetia 
Cham. Cafiianus out of Serenus hath fomewhat 
like unto this of Comeftor. Thefe be Cajfianus’s 
words : Cham (filius Noah) qui fuperftitionibus 
iftis (ft facrilegis fuit artibus inf eft us , feiens nullum 
fe pofie fuper bits memorialem librum in arcam pror- 
fus inferre, in qua erat cum patre jufto, &c. Cham 
(the fon of Noah ) who was infe&ed with thefe fu- 
perftitions, and facrilegious arts, knowing that he 
could not bring any book or memorial of that na¬ 
ture into the ark, wherein he Was to remain with 
his godly father, caufed the precepts and rules there¬ 
of to be graven in metal and hard ftone. 

St. Augufline noteth, that Zoroafter was faid to 
have laugh’d at his birth, when all other children 
weep •, which prefaged the great knowledge which 
afterwards he attained unto : being taken for the 
inventor of natural magick and other arts ; for the 
corrupter, faith Pliny and Juftin. But I do not 
think that Zoroafter invented the doflrine of the 
horofeopes or nativities : or firft found out the na¬ 
ture of herbs, ftones, and minerals, or dieir fympa- 
thetical or antipathetical workings ; of which I 
know not what king of Chaldea is alfo made the 
inventor. I rather think that thefe knowledges 
were far more ancient, and left by Noah to his fons. 
For Abraham who had not any acquaintance with 
Zoroafter (as Jofephus reporteth) was no lefs learn¬ 
ed herein than any other in that age, if he exceed¬ 
ed not all men then living: differing from the wif- 
dom of after-times in this, that he knew and ac¬ 
knowledged the true caufe, and giver of life and 
virtue to nature and all natural things; whereas 
others (forgetting God’s infinite, dilperfed, and 
univerfal power) admired the inftruments and at¬ 
tributed proper ftrength to the things themfelves 
(from which the effects were fenfible) which be¬ 
longed to that wifdom, d Which being one , and re¬ 
maining in it felf, can do all things and reneweth all. 

Now whether this Zoroafter (overthrown by Ni¬ 
nus) were the fame which was fo excellent a natu¬ 
ral ill, it is doubted. For Zoroafter the magician, 
Cteftas calls Oxyartes, whom Pliny finds of a later 
time. And if Zoroafter were taken away by a fpirit 
(being in the midft of his difciples) as fome authors 
report, then Zoroafter , (lain by Ninus , was not the 
magician: which is alfo the opinion of e Scaliger. 

Again, * Jofephus and Cedrenus affirm that Seth 
firft found out the planets, or wandring ftars, and 
other motions of the heavens: for if this art had 
been invented by Zoroafter , he could not have at¬ 
tained to any fuch excellency therein, in his own 
life-time •, but being a man (as it feemeth) of Angu¬ 
lar judgment, he might add fomewhat to this kind 
of knowledge, and leave it by writing to pofteriry. 

But of this Zoroafter there is much difpute: and 
no lefs jangling about the word and art of magick. 
Arnobius remembreth four to whom the name of 
Zoroafter , or Zoroaftres, was given: which by Her- 
modorus and Dixon feemeth to be but a cognomen , 
or name of art, and was as much to fay, as aftro- 
rum cultor. The firft, Arnobius callcth the Bach :- 


* Aug. de Ciritate D*i. * Steph. de Urb. • CaJIian. id Ofta. Col. c. * 1. * Wifd. 

No. VIII. F f 


7. *$calig in Euf. *Jof. 1 . r ant c 4 


Digitized by 


Goog[< 







114 The History of the World. Book I. 


an, which may be the fame that Ninus overthrew: 
the fecond, a Chaldean, and the aftronomer of Ni¬ 
nus : the third was Zoroafler Pamphylius, who lived 
in the time of Cyrus, and his familiar: the fourth 
Zoroafler Armenius , the nephew of Hoftianes, which 
followed Xerxes into Greece : between whom and 
Cyrus there pafs’d 78 years. Suidas remembreth a 
fifth, called Perfomedus fapiens: and Plato fpeak- 
eth of Zoroafler the fon of Oromafdes i which Picus 
Mirandula confirmeth. 

Now of what nation the firft and chief Zoroafler 
was, it is doubted. Pliny and Laertius make him 
a Ptrfian. Gemiflbius or Pletho, Ficinus and Steu- 
cfjius make him a Chaldean. But by thofe books 
of one Zoroafler , found by Picus Mirandula , it ap- 
peareth plainly, that the author of them was a 
Chaldean by nation, do’ the word ( Chaldean) was 
as often given to the learned priefts peculiarly, as 
for anydillinguifhmentof nations. Porpbyrus makes 
the Cbaldeei and Magi divers } Picus the fame. 
But that this Zoroafler was a Chaldean both by na¬ 
tion and profefTion, it appeareth by his books, 
which (faith Picus) were written in the Chaldean 
tongue j and the comment in the fame language. 
Now that the Magi and they were not differing, 
it may be judged by the name of thofe books of 
Zoroafler , which in an epiftle of Mirandula to Fici¬ 
nus, he faith, to be intitled, Patris Ezre Zoroaftris 
Melchior magorum oracula. 

S E C T. II. 

0 / the name of Magia: and that it was anciently 
far diverfe from conjuring and witchcraft. 

N OW for magick itfelf; which art (faith 1 Mi¬ 
randula) pauci intelligunt, multi reprehendunt \ 
Few underftand, and many reprehend: Et ficut canes 
ignotos femper allatrant , As dogs bark at thole they 
know not: fo they condemn and hate the tilings 
they underftand not: I think it not amifs (leav¬ 
ing Ninus for a while) to fpeak fomewhat thereof. 

It is true that many men abhor the very name 
and word [Magus] becaufe of Simon Magus , who 
being indeed, not Magus, but Goes , that is, fami¬ 
liar with evil fpirits, ufurped that title. For ma- 
gick, conjuring and witchery are far differing arts, 
whereof Pliny being ignorant, fcoffeth thereat. For 
Nero , faith b Pliny, who had the moft excellent ma¬ 
gicians of the eaft, fent him by Tyridates king of 
Armenia, who held that kingdom by his grace, 
found the art after long ftudy and labour altogether 
ridiculous. 

c Magus is a Perflan word primitively, whereby 
is exprefs’d fuch a one as is altogether converfant in 
things divine. And, as d Plato affirmeth, the art 
of magick is the art of worlhipping God. To which 
effect Apollonius in his epiftles expounding the 
word [ t ««'y<Gf ] faith, that the Perfians called their 
gods juofy»c: whence headdeth that Magus is either 
6 Karol (ji/Viv 6f^or 3 rpxTrfcu 7 )(< Stein, that is, that 
Magus is a name fometime of him that is a God 
by nature *, fometimes of him that is in the fervice 
of God: in which latter fenfe it is taken. Matt. 
ch. ii. ver. r. And this is the firft and higheft 
kind : which • Piccolominy callcth divine magick: 
and thefe did the Latins newly intitle fapientes or 
wife men: For the fear and worfhip of God is the 
beginning of knowledge.. Thefe wifemen the Greeks 
call Philofophers : the Indians Brachmans : which 
name they fomewhat nearly retain to this day, 
calling their priefts Brantines ; among the E- 
gyptians they were termed priefts ; with the He¬ 
brews they were called Cabalifls, Prophets, Scribes, 


and Phartfees : amongft the Babylonians they were 
differenced by the name of Chaldeans : and among 
the Perfians Magicians: of whom Arnobitis (fpeak- 
ing of Hoflanes, one of the ancient magicians) 
ufeth thefe words, * Et verum Deum rnerita ma- 
jeflate profequitur , ange/os miniflros Dei, fed 

veri, ejus venerationi novit afflflere. Idem deemo- 
ms prodit terrenos, vagos, humanitatis inimicos. 
Soflhcnes (for fo M. Foelix callcth him, not Hoflanes ) 
aferibeth the due majefty to the true God, and ac¬ 
knowledged diat his angels are minilters and mel- 
fengers which attend the worfhip of the true God. 
He alfb hath delivered that there are devils earthly 
and wandring, and enemies to mankind. 

His majefty alfo in his firft book of Demonology, 
c. iii. acknowledged, that in the Perflan tongue 
de word [Magus’] imports as much as a contem- 
plator of divine and heavenly fciences, but unjuft- 
ly fo called, becaufe de Chaldeans were ignorant 
of the true divinity. And it is alfb right which his 
majefty avoweth, that under the name of magick, 
all other unlawful arts are comprehended, and yet 
dod his majefty diftinguifh it from necromancy, 
witchcraft, and the reft: of all which he had 
written largely and moft learnedly. For the ma¬ 
gick which his 8 majefty condemned, is of that kind 
whereof the devil is a party. Daniel, in his 2d 
chapter, named four kinds of thofe wifemen: Ario- 
li, Magi, Malefici, & Cbaldeei. Arioli the old La¬ 
tin tranftation called Sophiflas : Vatablus and Pag- 
ninus, Genethliacos, or Phyflcos, or Philofophers, or 
(according to de note of Vatablus) Naturalifts : 
Nempe funt Magi apud Barbaras, quod philofopbi 
apucl Gr<ecos (fcilicet) divtnarum humanarumque re¬ 
rum feientiam profitentes ; For de Magi are tlie fame 
with the Barbarians, as the Philofophers are wid 
de Grecians , that is, men that protefs the know¬ 
ledge of dings both divine and human. The 
Greek and de Englifh call them inchanters; Juni¬ 
us magicians; Caftalion conjedturers : in the Syri¬ 
an they are all four by one name called Sapientes 
Babylonis, The wifemen of Babel. 

The fecond fort Vatablus, Pagnin, Junius, and 
our Englijh call Aftrologers, Jerome and the Septu- 
agint. Magicians. 

The third kind are Malefici, or Veneflci \ in 
Jerome, Pagnin, and the Septuagint, lPitches , or 
Poifoners\ in Junius, Prccfligiatores, or Sorcerers, 
as in Englifb. 

That witches are rightly fo called Veneflci, 
or Poifoners \ and that indeed there is a 
kind of Malefici, which without any art of ma¬ 
gick or necromancy, ufe de help of the devil to 
do mifehief, his majefty confirmed in the firft 
chapter of his fecond book : fpeaking alfo in the 
fifth chapter of deir practice, to mix the powder 
of dead bodies with other things by the devil pre¬ 
pared i and at other times to make pictures of wax, 
or clay, or otherwife (as it were Sacr ament alitcrj 
to eft’edt dofe things, which de devil by other 
means bringeth to pafs. 

The fourth, alltranflatorscall Chaldeans: who 
took upon dem to foretel all things to come, as 
well natural as human, and their events: and this 
they vaunted to perform by the influences of the 
ftars by them obitrved, and underftood. 

Such were, and to this day partly (if not al¬ 
together) are de corruptions, which have made 
odious the very name of magick, having chiefly 
fought (as is de manner of all itnpoftures) to counter¬ 
feit the higheft and moft noble part of it, yet fo as 
they have alfo crept into the inferiour degrees. 

A fecond kind of magick was dat pan of Aflro- 


* Pic. Mir. fol. 81. fcPlin. 1 . 30. hill. nat. 'Porphyr. & Apul. 
Hug Linfchot. { In Odlavio Minutii Fcclicis cum Arnobio, pag 360. 


* Plato, in Alcib. * Piccol. de defin. Prov. 1.7 Jolm 

* Dzmonolog. 1 . 2. c. 1. 

Digitized by 






Chap. XI. "The History o/ World, Ji5 

logy, which had refpedt to (owing and planting. Thus writeth Zoroafler, word for word, God the > 
and all kinds of agriculture and husbandry : which firft incorruptible, evcrlafting, unbegotten, without 
was a knowledge of the motions and influences of parts, molt like himfclf, the guide of all good, ex- 
the ftars into thofe lower elements. petting no reward, the bed, the wileft, the father 

Philo Judeeus goeth farther, affirming that by of right, having learn’d juftice without teaching, 
this part of magick or aftrology , together with the perfect wife by nature, the only inventor thereof, 
motions of the ftars and other heavenly bodies, A- Sixtus Senenfis , * fpeaking of die wifdom of the 
braham found out the knowledge of the true God, Chaldeans , doth diftinguilh thofe wife men into five 
while he lived in Chaldea : * §>ui contemplatione orders, to wit, Cbafcedint , or Chaldeans: Afaphim, 
creaturarum cognovit Creatorem (faith Jo, Damaf- or Magicians: Cbartumim •, (which he mandates 
cen.) Who knew the Creator by die contemplation Ariolt or Sopbifts) Mechafphim, or Malefici, or Fe- 
of the creature. Jofephus reporteth of Abraham, nefici, Witches, or Poifoners •, and Gazarim Au- 
that he inftrudted the Egyptians in arithmetick and gures, or Arujpices, or Diviners. 
aftronomy, who before Abraham's coming unto . Chafedim were diofe which had die name of 
them knew none of thefe lciences. Chaldeans , which were aftronomers •, Hi cttlorum 

And fo doth b Archangelus de Burgo in defence of mot us diligent ijfime fpe£larunt\ Thefe did molt di- 
Mirandula againft Garftas. Alexander (3 Eupole- ligently conteoiplate the motions of die heavens : 
mtn dicunt, quod Abraham fanciitate (3 fapientia whom Philo in die life of Abraham deferibeth. 
omnium praftaiitiftimus Cbaldceos primum, detndt - Afaphim were in the old Latin tranflation called 
Phceniccs, dcmim A.gyptios facer dotes aftrologiam philofophers : of the Septuagint and of Jerome , ma- 
13 divina docuerit: Alexander (faith he) meaning gicians: Qui , de omnium tam divtnarum qvam hu- 
Alexander Polyhiftor , and Eupolemon affirm, that manarum rerum canfis pbitofophati funt 3 Who dif- 
Abraham the holieft and wifelt of men did firft teach courfed of the caufes of all diings, as well divine 
the Chaldeans , then the Phenicians, laftly the E- as humanof whom Origen, makes Balaam the 
gyptian priefts aftrology and divine knowledge. fon of Bear, to be the firft : but * Laertius aferibeth 
The third kind of magick containeth the whole the invention of this art to Zoroajlres the Perfian. 
philofophy of nature ; not the brablings of the b Ari - . Cbartumim , or inchantcrs, the difciples (faith St. 
Jlotelians, but that which bringeth to light the in- Anguftine , Pliny and Jujlin) of another Zoroajlres : 
moft virtues, and draweth them out of nature’s who corrupted the admirable wifdom of the wag;, 
hidden bofom to human ufe, Virtutes in centro cen- which he received from his anceftors. 
tri latentes ; Virtues hidden in the center of the • Mecafphim , or Fenefui, ox Witches, are thofe 
center, according to the chymifts. Of this fort of which we have fpoken already out of his mi- 
were Albertus, Arnoldus de villa Nova, Raymond, jefty’s book of Demonology. 

Bacon, and many others; and before thefe, in elder Gazarim , or Arufpices , after St. Jerome , which 
times, and who better underftood the power of na- divine from the entrails of beads flain for facrifices: 
ture, and how to apply things that work to things or by Gazarim others underftand Augttres , who di- 
thatfuffer, were Zoroafter before fpoken of: Apol- vine by the flying, finging, or feeding of birds. 
lonius Tyaneeus remembred by St. Jerome to Pauli- : By this diftindtion we may perceive the difference 
nus ; in fome mens opinion Numa Pompilius a- between thofe wife men which the kings of Babylon 
mong the Romans: among the Indians, Thefpton : entertained ; and that the name and profeffion of 
among the Egyptians, Hermes : among the Baby- the magi among the ancient Perfians was moft ho- 
lonians, Budda : the Thracians had Zamolxis : the neft. For as Peucer truly obferveth, b Pr*erant re- 
Hyperborians (as is fuppofed) Abbaris: and the It a- ligioni Pcrficee, ut in populo Dei Levitce, ftudiifip, 
lianSyPct. Aponenfes. The magick which thefe men vert philofopbiee dediti erant: nec quifquam Rex 
profefs’d is thus defin’d. Magia ejl connexio d viro Perfarum poterat effe, qui non antea magorum dif- 
fapiente agent turn per naturam cum patientibus, fibi ciplinam Jcientiamque percepiffiet. The magi (faith 
congruenter refpondentibus, ut inde opera prodeant he) were the chief minifters of the Perfian religion, 
non fine corum admiratione qui caufam ignorant: as the Levitcs among God’s people, and they were 
Magick is the connexion of natural agents and pa- given to the ftudies of true philofophy : neither 
dents, anfwerable each to other, wrought by a wife could any be king of the Perfians , who had not 
man to the bringing forth of fuch cfte&s, as are firft been exerdfed in the myfteries and knowledge 
wonderful to thole that know not their caufes. In of the magi. Sixtus Senenfis in the defence of Origen 
all thefe three kinds which other men divide into againft Pvlychronius and Thcopbilus hath two kinds 
four, it feemeth that Zoroafter was exceedingly of magick ; his own words are theJ'e: *Et ne quern 
learned , efpecially in the firft and higheft. For in moveant pramijfa Polycbronii (3 Theophili tefiimo- 
his oracles he confefteth God to be the Creator of nia, feiendum ejl dupltcem cjje viagiam \ alteram 
the univerfal: he believeth of the ‘Trinity, which ubique ab Origene damnatam, qute per feeder a cum 
he could not inveftigate by any natural knowledge: d<emonibus inita aut vere aut appar enter operatur 
he fpeaketh of angels, and of Paradife : approveth alteram ab Origene laudatam, qu£ ad prahiccn na- 
the immortality of the foul : teacheth truth, faith, turalis philofopbue pcrtinct docens admirabiles res o- 
hope, and love, difeourfing of the abftincnce and perari ex applicatione mutua naturalium virtutum 
charity of the magi : which oracles of his, d Pfel/us , ad invicem agent ium ac patientium : That the tef- 
Ficinus , Patritius, and others have gathered and ti monies of Tbeopbilus and Polychronius , faith he, 
tranflated. may not move any man, it is to be underftood that 

Of this Zoroafier , * Eufebius in the theology of magick is of two forts, the one every where con- 
the Phenicians ufing Zoroafier’s own words: H<ec demned by Origen •, which worketh (whether truly 
ad verbum feribit (laith Eufebius) Deus primus or feemingly) by covenants made with devils : the 
incorruptibilium , fempiternus, ingenitus, expert par- other commended by Origen ; which appertaincth to 
tium, fibi ipfi fimillimus, bonorum omnium auriga, the pradlic part of natural philofophy, teaching to 
munera non expeftans, optimus: prudentifiimus, pater work admirable things by the mutual application of 
juris, fine doclrina jufiaiam pcrdoSus , natura per- natural virtues, agent and fuffering reciprocally. 
fcclus, fapiens, facree nature unicus inventor, ( 3 c. This partition Jerome doth embrace in die firft of 

* De vit. fanct. Give. Annal. fol. 180. •> Zee upon hit Comment, in A dc Civit. Dei, 1 . if?, c. 2. * Totoinnv.indoiu- 

cet Trias, cujus .Monas ell prniceps. Cunfta namque pcrfecit pater, & monti uaiiidit tecund c. <1 Flail. & Ficin. « Deprap. 
Evang. L i. c. 7. ( Lib. 2. fol. 46. * Laert. 1 . t. 11 Peucer. dc divinnt. in c. de mag. fol. 155, Sc 136. * Bib 1 . 6 fol 424 

Digitized by CjOO^ It 







116 The History of the World. Book I. 


his commentaries upon Daniel > where confidcring ad operandum expedientium fafla funt, opera darno- 
of the difference which Daniel makes between thefe num credebantur ab ignorantibus btec. De openbus 
four kinds of wife men formerly remembred, he bujufmodi eft magia naturally quam necromantiam 
ufeth this diftindtion -, Quos nos Hariolos, cateri multi improprie vocant. The marvelloufnefs of fbme 
(id eft) Incantatores interpretati funt , vi- works, which indeed are natural, hath been the 
dcntur mibi efie qui verbis rem peragunt \ magi, caufe of this (lander : but becaufe thefe works have 
qui de fingulis philofopbantur \ malefic t, qui fanguine been done by procurement of devils joining the na- 
utuntur (ft vichmis, (ft ftepe contingunt corpora mor- cures together, or mingling them, or howfoever 
tuorum : porro in Chaldxis Genetbliacos fignificari fitting the natures to their working, they were 
puto , quos vulgo mathematicos vocant. Confuetu- thought the works of the devils by the ignorant. 
do autem communis magos pro maleficis accipit, qui Among thefe works is natural magick, which men 
aliter habentur apudgentem ftuam , eo quod fint pbi- call very improperly necromancy. 
lofopbi Chaldaorum : (ft ad artis bujus J'cientiam Mirandula in his Apology goeth further : * For 
reges quoque (ft principes ejufdem gentis omnia faci- by under ft anding, faith he, the uttermoft adivity of 
unt ; unde (ft in nativitate Domini Salvatoris ipfi pri- natural agents ive are aflifled to know the divinity 
mum or turn ejus intellexerunt, (ft venientes in fane- of Chrift : for otherwife (to ufe his own words) 
tarn Bethlehem adoraverunt puerum, ftella defuper Ignoratis terminis potent ue (ft virtutis rerum natu- 
oftendente. They whom we call fbreerers, and ralium, fiat nos dubitare ilia eadem opera, qua br¬ 
others interpret inchanters, feem to me fuch as per- cit Chrift us , pop fieri per media naturalia \ The 
form things by words ; magicians, fuch as handle terms or limits of natural power and virtue not un- 
every thing philofophically ; witches, that ufe blood derftood, we muft needs doubt whether thofc very 
and facrifices, and often lay hands on the body of works which Chrift did, may not be done by na- 
the dead : further, among the Chaldeans I take tural means: after which he goeth on in this fort: 
them to be fignified by the name of conjedhirers up- Ideo non bareiice , non fuperftitiofe dixi , fed verifft- 
on nativities, whom the vulgar call mathematicians, me (ft Catbolice , per talem magiam adjuvari nos in 
But common cuftom takes magicians for witches, cognofcenda divinitate Cbrifti Therefore I faid not 
who are otherwife reputed in their own nation : heretically, not fuperftitioufly, but moft truly and 
for they are the philofophers of the Chaldeans : yea catholickly, that by fuch magick we are further- 
kings and princes of that nation do all that diey do ed in knowing the divinity of Chrift. And fee- 
according to the knowledge of this art: whence at ing the Jews and others the enemies of Chriftian 
the nativity of the Lord our Saviour they firft of religion, do impudently and impioufly objedt, that 
all underftood his birth, and coming unto holy thole miracles which Chrift wrought were not a- 
Betblehem did worfhip the child , the ftar from a- bove nature, but by the exquifite knowledge there- 
bove (hewing him unto them. By this therefore it of performed: Mirandula , a man for his years fol- 
appeareth that there is great difference between the ler of knowledge than any that this latter age hath 
do&rine of a magician, and the abule of the word, brought forth, might with good reafon avow, that 
For tho’ fome writers affirm, that Magus hodie di- the uttermoft of nature’s works being known, the 
citur, qui ex foedere faflo utitur diaboli opera ad works which Chrift did, and which (as himleif 
rem quameunque *, That he is called a magician witnefleth) no man could do, do manifeftly tefti- 
now-a-days, who having entered league with the fy of themfelves, that they were performed by that 
devil, ufeth his help to any matter •, yet (as our hand which held nature therein but as a pencil. 
Saviour faid of divorce) it was not fo from the be- and by a power infinitely fupreme and divine: and 
ginning. For the art of magick is of the wifdom thereby thofe that were faithlefs, were either con- 
of nature •, other arts which undergo that title were verted or put to filence. 
invented by the falfhood, fubdety and envy of the 

devil. In the latter there is no other dexftrine, than Sect. III. 

the ufe of certain ceremonies per malam fidem , by q'Pjat the good knowledge in the ancient magick is not 
an evil faith : in the former no other ill, than the t0 lt condmned j tho' the devil here as in other 

inveftigation of thofe virtues and hidden properties kinds, hath fought to obtrude evil things under 

which God hath given to his creatures, and how the „ ame a „j (ohur of d 
fitly to apply things that work to things that fuf- * 

fer. And tho’ by the Jews thofe excellent magi- QEEING therefore it is confefled by all of 
dans, philofophers and divines, which came to |3 underftanding, that a magician (according to 
worfhip our Saviour Chrift, were termed Mechaft the Per fan word) is no other than Divinorum cul- 
chephim, or Mecafphim ; yet had they no other rea- tor (ft interpret ; A ftudious obferver andexpoun- 
fon than common cuftom therein. Confuetudo au- der of divine things : and the art itfelf (I mean the 
tent communis magos pro maleficis accipit ; Common art of natural magick) no other, Quam naturalis 
cuftom, Ciith * St. Jerome , underftandeth witches philofophia abfoluta confummatio. Than the abfo- 
under the riihpe of magicians : and antiquity, faith lute perfection of natural philolophy. Cerain- 
b Peter Martyr, by the word [.magi] underftood good ly then it proceedeth from ignorance, and no 
and wife men. c &>uid igitur expavefeis magi nomen way forteth with wife and learned men promifeue , 
formidolofe , nomen evangelio gratiofum, quod non ma- and without difference and diftindtion, to confound 
Jcficum (ft veneficum , fed fapientem fonat (ft facer- lawful and praife-worthy knowledge with that im- 
dotem ? O thou fearful one, faith Ficinius , why pious, and, to ufe St. Paul's words, IVitb thofe beg- 
doubteft thou to ufe the name of Magus, a name garly rudiments, which the devil hath fhuffkd in, 
gracious in the gofpel, which doth not fignify a and by them bewitcheth and befooleth gracelcls 
witch or conjurer, but a wife man and a prieft? men. For if we condemn natural magick, or die 
For what brought this (lander to that ftudy and wifdom of nature, becaufe the devil, who knoweth 
profeffion but only idle ignorance, the parent of more than any man, doth alfo teach witches and 
caufelefs admiration? i Caufafuit mirificentia quo- poifoners the harmful parts of herbs, drugs, minc- 
rundam operum , qua revera opera naturalia funt : rals, and excrements : then may we by the fame 
veruntamen quia procuration damonum naturas ip- rule condemn the phyfician, and tiie art of heal- 
fas vel conjungentium, vel commifcentium , vel aliter ing. For the devil alfo in die oracles of Ampbia- 

• Hicron. in Dan. k Pet. Mart. loc. c Mar. Ficin. part prim. fol. 573. d Gul. Parifien. de lege, c. 14. * Fol. 8o- 


rotas. 


D 







Chap. XI. The History 0/ World. 117 


rnus, Amphilochus, Trophonius, and the like, taught 
men in dreams, what herbs and drugs were proper 
for fuch and fuch difeafes. Now no man of judg¬ 
ment is ignorant, that the devil from the beginning 
hath fought to thruft himfelf into the fame employ¬ 
ment among the minifters and fervants of God, 
changing himfelf for that purpofe into an angel of 
light. He hath led men to idolatry as a doctrine 
of religion ; he hath thruft in his prophets among 
thofe of the true God *, he hath corrupted the art 
of aftrology, by giving a divine power to the ftars, 
teaching men to efteem them as gods, and not as 
inftruments. And (as* Bunting obferveth) it is true 
that judicial aftrology is corrupted with many fu- 
perfticions: but the abufe of the thing takes not 
away the art; confidertng that heavenly bodies (as 
even general experience iheweth) have and exercife 
their operation upon the inferiour. For the fun, 
and the ftar of Mars do dry ; the moon doth 
moiften, and govern the tides of the fea. Again, 
the planets, as they have fcveral and proper names, 
fo have they feveral and proper virtues : the ftars 
do alfo differ in beauty and in magnitude ; and 
to all the ftars hath God given alfo their proper 
names, which (had they not influences and virtues 
different) needed not. h He count eth the number 
of the ftars, and calleth them by their names. But 
into the good and profitable knowledge of the ce- 
leftial influences, the devil ceafeth not to fhuffle in 
his fuperftitions : and fo to the knowledge of the fe- 
cret virtues of nature hath he faftned his do&rine of 
characters, numbers and incantations ; and taught 
men to believe in the ftrength of words and letters: 
(which without faith in God arc but ink or com¬ 
mon breath) thereby either to equal his own with 
the all-powerful word of God, or to diminifh the 
glory of God’s creating word, by whom are all 
diings. 

Moreover, He was never ignorant, that both 
the wife and the Ample obferve when the fea-birds 
forfake the fhores and fly into the land, that com¬ 
monly fome great ftorm followeth ; that the high 
flying of the kite and the fwallow betokeneth fair 
weather that the crying of crows and bathing of 
ducks forefhew rain : for they feel the air moilten- 
cd in their quills. And it is written in "Jeremy the 
prophet, '■ Even the ftork in the air knoweth her 
appointed times , and the turtle , and the crane , and 
the pmallow. Hereupon this enemy of mankind 
working upon thefe, as upon the reft of God’s 
creatures, long time abufed the heathen, by teach¬ 
ing them to obferve the flying of fowls, and there¬ 
by to judge of good or ill fucccfs in the war ; and 
withal to look into their entrails for the fame, as 
if God had written the fecrets of unfearchable pro¬ 
vidence in the livers and bowels of birds and bcaits. 
Again, becaufe itplcafed God fometimes by dreams, 
not only to warn and teach his prophets and a- 
poftles, but heathen princes alfo; as d Abitneleth 
to reftore Sarah to Abraham ; becaufe he admo- 
nilhed Jofeph , and by dream informed Jacob, La¬ 
ban, Pharaoh , Solomon , Paul, Ananias, the Magi 
of the eaft, and others. For as it is remembred 
m Job: * In dreams and viftons of the night when 
fttep falletb upon men, &c. then God openetb the ears, 
that he might caufe man to return from his enter- 
pife : therefore, I lay, doth the devil alfo prac- 
tile his divinations by dreams, or after ' Parificnfts, 
Divinitatis imitationes. His mock divinity. This 
mi the end grew lb common, as Ariftides compiled 
an Epbemerides of his own dreams : Mithridates 

* Bunt, in Chron. k Pfal. 147. 4. « Jer. 8. 7. <1 

* Codex de malefic. Sc mathemat. leg. Sc fi accepts. 

No. 8. 


of thofe of his concubines. Yea, the Romans find¬ 
ing the inconvenience hereof, becaufe all dreams, 
without diftin<5tion of caules, were drawn to divi¬ 
nation, forbad the fame by a law, as by the words ot 
prohibition, *Aut narrandis fomniis occultam ali- 
quam art cm divinandi, it may appear. Likewife 
by the law of God in Deuteronomy xiii. feducing 
dreamers were ordered to be flain. Yet it is not 
to be contemned that Marcus Antonius was told a 
remedy in his dream for two grievous difeafes that 
opprefs’d him ; nor that of Alexander Mace don for 
the cure of Ptolemy's poifon’d wound ; nor that 
which h St. Auguftine reporteth of a Millanoife, 
whofe fon (the father dead) being demanded a debt 
already paid, was told by his father in a dream where 
the acquittance lay to difeharge it •, nor that of 
Aftyages of his daughter, and many others of like 
nature. Of the reafon of all which, forafinuch 
as the caufe is not in ourfclvcs, this place denieth 
difputc. 

Sect. IV. 

That Daniel’; mijliking Nabuchodonofor*; condemn¬ 
ing of the magicians doth not juftify all their 
praftices. ' 

B U T it may be objected, that if fuch divina¬ 
tions as the heathens commonly ufed were to 
be condemned in them, who took on them very 
many and ftrange revelations: how came it to pals 
that Daniel both condemned the hafty fcntence of 
Nabuchodonofor againft the magicians of Chaldea , 
and in a fort forbad it ? efpccially confidering that 
fuch kind of people » God himfelf commanded to 
be (lain. To this divers anfwers may be given. 
Firft, It feemeth that Daniel had refpett to thofe 
Chaldeans, becaufe they acknowledged that the 
dream of the king, which himfelf had forgotten, 
could not be known to any man by any art, either 
natural or diabolical: For there is no other (faid the 
Chaldeans ) that can declare it before the king , except 
the Gods, whofe dwelling is not with JleJlj : and here¬ 
in they confcfTcd the power of the ever-living 
God. 

Secondly, It may be conjectured, and that with 
good reafon, that among fo many learned men, 
fome of them did not exercife thcmfelves in any 
evil or unlawful arts, but were merely magicians 
and naturalifts: and therefore when the king com¬ 
manded to kill all, Daniel perfuaded the contrary, 
and called it a hafty judgment, which proceeded 
with fury without examination. And that fome of 
thofe mens ftudies and profclfions were lawful, it 
may be gathered by Daniel's inftrudtions: For 
himfelf had been taught by them, and was called 
chief of the inchanters •, of which fome were term¬ 
ed Soothfayers, others AJlrologians , others Chal¬ 
deans, others Magi or IVifemen : and therefore of 
diftinft profeflions. 

Thirdly, Daniel mifliked and forbad the execu¬ 
tion of that judgment, becaufe it was unjuft. For 
howfoever thofe men might deferve punilhment for 
the pra&icc of unlawful arts (tho’ not unlawful ac¬ 
cording to the law of that ftate) yet herein they 
were altogether guiltlefs. For it exceeded human 
power to pierce die king’s thought, which the devil 
himfelf could not know. So then in Daniel's diflike, 
and hindering of the execution of fentence of death 
pronounced againft the magicians, there is no abfo- 
lute juftifying of their praftice and profefiion. 

Gen. 12. 17. * Job 34. 17. f G Parifien. tie leg. 24. 

h Aug de cura pro mortuis agenda. « Dcuc. 13. and id. 

G g Sect- 

Digitized by Google 





1x8 


*Ihe History 

Sect. V. 

The abufe of things which may be found in all kinds, 
is not to condemn the right ufe of them. 

N Otwiftanding this mixture every where of 
good with evil, of fallhood with truth, of 
corruption with cleannefs and purity ; the good, the 
truth, the purity in every kind may well be em¬ 
braced : as in the ancient worfhipping of God by 
facrifice, there was no man knowing God among 
the elders, that therefore forbare to offer facrifice 
to the God of all power, becaufe the devil in the 
image of Baal, Aftaroth , Chemoth , Jupiter , Apollo, 
and the like, was lo adored. 

Neither did the abufe of aftrology terrify Abra¬ 
ham (if we may believe the mod ancient and religi¬ 
ous * hiftorians) from obferving the motions and 
natures of heavenly bodies i neither can it dehort 
wife and learned men in thefe days from attribut¬ 
ing thofe virtues, influences, and inclinations to 
the liars and other lights of heaven, which God 
hath given to thofe his glorious creatures. 

The fympathetical and antipathetical working of 
herbs, plants. Hones, minerals, with their other ut- 
moll virtues fometimes taught by the devil, and 
applied by his minifters to harmful and unchari¬ 
table ends, can never terrify the honed and learned 
phyfician or magician from the ufing of them to 
the help and comfort of mankind: neither can the 
illufions whereby the devil betrayeth fuch men as 
are fallen from God, make other men rejedl the ob- 
fervation of dreams \ fo far as with a good faith 
and a religious caution they may make ufe of them. 

Lallly, The b prohibition to mark flying of fowls 
(as figns of good or evil fuccefs) hath no reference 
at all to the crying of crows againft rain, or to any 
obfervation not fuperflitious, and whereof a reafon 
or caufe may be given. For if we confound' arts 
with the abufe of them, we fhall not only condemn 
all honell trades and interchange among men (for 
there arc that deceive in all proteflions) but we fhall 
in a Ihort time bury in forgetfulnefs all excellent 
knowledge and all learning, or obfeure and cover 
it over with a moll fcorntul and beggarly igno¬ 
rance : and (as Pliny teacheth) we fhould fliew our 
felvcs Ingratos erga eos , qui labore curaque lucem 
nobis aperuerunt in hac luce •» Unthankful we fhould 
Ihew ourfelves toward thofe, who with pains and 
care have difeovered unto us light in this light. 

Indeed not only thefe natural knowledges are 
condemned by thofe that are ignorant; but the ma- 
thematicks alfo and profeflors thereof ; tho’ thole 
that are excellently learned judge of it in this fort. 
c Jn fpeculo mathematico verum illud , quod in omni 
feibili queeritur , relucet j non modo remota fimilitu- 
dine, fed fulgida quadam propinquitate *, In the glafs 
of the mathematicks, that truth doth fhine, which 
is fought in every kind of knowledge •, not in an 
obfeure -image, but in a near and manifeft repre- 
fentation. 

Sect. VI. 

Of the divers kinds of unlawful magick. 

I T is true that there arc many arts, if we may fo 
call them, which are covered with the name of 
magick, and efteemed abufively to be as branches 
of that tree, on whofe root they never grew. The 
firft of thefe hath the name of Necromancy or Goe- 
tia : and of this again there are divers kinds. The 
one is an invocation at the graves of the dead, to 
whom the devil himfelf gives anfwer inftead of 
thofe that feem to appear. For certain it is, that 


of World. Book I. 

the immortal fouls of men do not inhabit the dull 
and dead bodies, but they give motion and under- 
ftanding to the living: death being nothing elle but 
a fcparation of the body and foul: and therefore 
the foul is not to be found in the graves. 

A fecond practice of thofe men, who pay tribute, 
or are in league with Satan, is that of conjuring or 
of raifing up devils, of whom they hope to learn 
what they lift. Thefe men are fo diftradted, as to 
believe that by terrible words they make the devil 
to tremble; that being once impaled in a circle 
(a circle which cannot keep out a moufe) they there¬ 
in, as they fuppofe, infconce themfelves againft that 
great monfter. Doubtlefs they forgot that the devil 
is not terrified from doing ill, and all that is con¬ 
trary to God and goodnefs •, no, not by the fearful 
word of the Almighty: and that he feared not to 
offer to fit in God’s feat *, that he made no fcruple 
to tempt our Saviour Chrift, whom himfelf called 
the Son of God. So, forgetting thefe proud parts 
of his, an unworthy wretch will yet refolve himfelf, 
that he can draw the devil out of hell, and terrify 
him with a phrafe : whereas in very truth, the obe¬ 
dience which devils feem to ufe, is but thereby to 
poffefs themfelves of the bodies and fouls of thofe 
which raife them up ; as his majefty in his book 
aforenamed hath excellendy taught, That the devil's 
obedience is only fecundum quid, fcilicet, ex padto ; 
refpedtive, that is, upon bargain. 

I cannot tell what they can do upon thofe fimple 
and ignorant devils, which inhabit d Jamblicus' s ima¬ 
gination ; but fure I am, the reft are apt enough to 
come uncalled : and always attending the cogitati¬ 
ons of their fervants and vafials, do no way need any 
fuch inforcement. 

Or it may be that thefe conjurers deal altogether 
with Cardan's mortal devils, following the opinion 
of'Rabbi Avornathan and of Porphyrias, who taught 
that thefe kind of devils lived not above a thoufand 
years : which Plutarch , in his treatife De oraculorum 
defeftu, confirmeth, making example of the great 
god Pan. For were it true, that the devils were in 
awe of wicked men, or could be compelled by them, 
then would they always fear thofe words or threats, 
by which at other times they are willingly maftered. 
But the f familiar of Simon Magus , when he had lift¬ 
ed him up in the air, call him headlong out of his 
claws, when he was fure he fhould perifh with the 
fall. If this perhaps were done by St. Peter's pray¬ 
ers (of which St. Peter no where vaunteth) yet the 
fame prank at other times uj)on his own accord the 
devil play’d with 8 Theodotus: who tranfported (as 
Simon Magus was fuppofed to have been) had the 
fame mortal fall that he had. The like fuccefs had 
Budas , a principal pillar of the Manichean herefy, 
as h Socrates in his ecclefiaftical hiftory witneffeth : 
and for a manifeft proof hereof, we fee it every day, 
that the devil leaves all witches and forcerers at the 
gallows, for whom at other times he maketh him¬ 
felf a Pega/us , to convey them in hafte to places far 
diftant, or at leaft makes them fo think : > For to thofe 
that received not the truth, faith St. Paul, God Jball 
fend them Jlrong illufions. Of thefe their fuppofed 
tranfportations (yet agreeing with their conteflions) 
his majefty, in the 2d book and the 4th chapter of 
the Demonology , hath confirmed by unanfwerable 
reafons, that they are merely illufive. Another 
fort there are who take on them to include fpirits 
in glafles ^and cryftals: of whom Cufanus : k Fa- 
tui funt incantatores, qui in ungue (5? vitro volunt 
fpiritum includere : quia fpiritus non clauditur cor - 
pore ; They are foolifh inchanters which will 


* Eufcb. ex Artnpan. Sc Polyhill. S Dcut. 18. 10. • Culan. Comp. Theolog. c. 1. 6 Sunt in mundo genus quod- 

duin potcllatum value divilum, uidifcretum Sc inconfideratum ; Sc quod neque verum a talfo, neque poflibile difeemitab impoflibili. 
L. Vivesincap. 11. I. 10. * Aug. de Civit. Dei, 1 . 10. { Cufan. cxer. I. 2. t Eufcb. hill. Ecd. 1 . 5. c. 16. b Lib. t. 

c. 2 1. » 2 Theff. 2. * Exercit. 1 . 2. 

fhut 


Digitized by 


Google 






Chap. XI. 7 *he History of the World. 119 


/hut up their fpirits within their nails or in a glafs * 
for a fpirit cannot be inclofed by a body. 

There is alfo another art befides the aforemen¬ 
tioned, which they call Tbeurgia, or white magick ; 
a pretended conference with good fpirits or an¬ 
gels, whom by facritice and invocation they draw 
out of heaven, and communicate withal. But the 
adminiftring fpirits of God, as they require not 
any kind of adoration due unto their Creator : fo 
feeing they are moft free fpirits, there is no man fo 
abfurd to think (except the devil have corrupted 
his underftanding) that they can be conftrained or 
commanded out of heaven by threats. Wherefore 
let the profeffors thereof cover themfelves how they 
pleafe by a profeffed purity of life, by the miniftry 
of infants, by falling and abftinence in general ; 
yet all thofe that tamper with immaterial fubftan- 
ces and abftradt natures, either by facrifice, vow, 
or inforcement, are men of evil faith, and in the 
power of Satan. For good fpirits or angels can¬ 
not be conftrained ; and the reft are devils which 
willingly obey. 

Other forts there are of wicked divinations: as 
by fire, called Pyromantia : by water, called Hy- 
dromantia : by the air, called Mat*otechnia y and 
the like. 

The Iaft, and, indeed, the worft of all other is 
fafeination or witchcraft: the pradtifers whereof are 
no lefs envious and cruel, revengeful and bloody, 
than the devil himfelf. And thel'e accurfed crea¬ 
tures having fold their fouls to the devil, work two 
ways ; either by the devil immediately, or by the 
art of poifoning. The difference between necro¬ 
mancers and witches, his majefty hath excellently 
caught in a word: that the one (in a fort) command, 
the other obey the devil. 

There is another kind of petty witchery (if it be 
not altogether deceit) which they call charming of 
beafts and birds, of which 1 Pythagoras was accufcd, 
becaufe an eagle lighted on his lhoulder in the Olym¬ 
pian fields. But if the fame exceeded the art of 
falconry, yet was it no more to be admired than 
Mahomet' s dove, which he had ufed to feed with 
wheat out of his ear: which dove, when it was hun¬ 
gry, lighted on Mahomet's lhoulder, and thruft his 
bill therein to find his breakfaft: Mahomet per- 
fuading the rude and fimple Arabians, that it was 
the Holy Ghoft that gave him advice. And cer¬ 
tainly if Banks had lived in elder times, he would 
have lhamed all the inchanters in the world: for 
whofoever was moft famous among them, could ne¬ 
ver mafter or inftrudt any beaft as he did his horfe. 

For the drawing of ferpents out of their dens, 
or killing them in their holes by inchantments 
(which the Marftans , a people of Italy , pradtifed. 
b Colubros difrumpit Marfa cantu , Inchanting Mar - 
fta makes the fnakes to burft.) That it hath been 
ufed, it appears Pfalm lviii. 6. tho’ I doubt not, 
but that many impoftures may be in this kind ; and 
even by natural caufes it may be done. For there 
are many fumes that will either draw them out or 
deftroy them ; as womans hair burnt, and the like. 
So many things may be laid in the entrance of their 
holes that will allure them: and therein I find no 
other magick or inchantment, than to draw out a 
moufe with a piece of toafted cheefe. 

Sect. VII. 

Of divers ways by which the devil feemetb to work 
bis wonders . 

B U T to the end that we may not doat with the 
Manisbees , who make two powers of Gods: 


that we do not give to the devil any other domi¬ 
nion than he hath (not to fpcak of his ability, 
when he is tho minitler of God’s vengeance, as 
when Egypt , according to David , was deftroyed 
by evil angels) he otherwife worketh but three 
ways: the firft is, by moving the cogitations and af- 
fedtionsof men: the fecond, by the exquifite know¬ 
ledge of nature ; and the third, by deceit, illufion, 
and falfe femblance. And that they cannot work 
what they would, G. Parifienfts giveth three caufes: 
the firft a natural impotency: the fecond, their own 
reafon diffwading them from daring over much, or 
indeed (and that which is the only certain caufe) 
the great mercy of the Creator, c Tenens eos ligates 
(faith the fame author) velut immaniffmas belluas. 
St. Augufline was of opinion, that the frogs which 
Pharaoh's forcerers produced were not natural, 
but that the devil (by betraying of their fenfesthat 
looked on) made them appear to be fuch. For 
as Vairus obferveth, thofe frogs of the inchanters 
were not found corrupted as thofe of Mofes were, 
which might argue that they were not creatures 
indeed. Hereof faith Sr. Augufline, Nee fane dec- 
mtnes naturas creanty fed qu* a Deo create funt 
commutanty ut videantur effe quod non funt ; The 
devils create not any natures, but lo change thofe 
that are created by God, as they feem to be that 
which they be not: of which in the 83d queltion he 
giveth the reafon. Daemon quibufdam nebulis implet 
omnes meatus intelligenti*, per quos aperire lumen ra- 
tion'ts radius mentis filet', that is. The devil fills 
with certain clouds all pafiages of the underftanding, 
by which the beam of the mind is wont to open the 
light of reafon. 

And as Tertullian in his book de anima rightly 
concciveth, if the devil can poffefs himfelf of the 
eyes of our minds, and blind them, it is not hard 
for him to dazle thofe of the body. For (out of 
doubt) by the fame way that God pafieth out, the 
devil entreth in, beginning with the fancy, by 
which he doth more eafily betray the other faculties 
of the foul: for the d fancy is moft apt to be abufed 
by vain apprehenfions. 

Aquinas on the contrary held that thofe frogs were 
not imaginary, but fuch indeed as they feemed: not 
made magic* artis ludibrio , which indeed agreeth 
not with the art, but (according to Thomas) per ap- 
tam & idoneam agentium (j? patientium applicationem y 
By an apt and fit applying of agents and patients. 
And this I take to be more probable. For Mofes 
could not be deceived by that Height of falfe fem¬ 
blance •, and St. Augufline in another cafe like unto 
this, to wit, of the turning of Diomedes's compa¬ 
nions into birds, per a diva cum pajjivisy inclineth 
rather to this opinion: tho’ I am not perfuaded that 
St. Augufiine believed that of Diomedes. And this 
opinion of Thomas., G. Parifienfts , a man very learn¬ 
ed, alfo confirmeth. For fpeaking of natural ma¬ 
gick, he ufeth thefe words. * De bujufmodi autem 
operibus ejl fubita generatio ranarum , & pediculo- 
rum t & vermium y aliorumque animalium quorundam : 
in quibus omnibus fila natura operatur, verum ad - 
bibitis adjutoriiSy qua ipfa femina naturee confortant 
& acuunty ita ut opus generationis tantum accelerent , 
ut eis qui hoc nefeiunt non opus natur<e videatur (qu* 
tardius talia efficere confuevit) fed potentia deemonum, 
(flc. to which he addeth: §>ui autem in hiis doth 
funt talia non mirantur , fed folum Creatorem in hiis 
glorificant ; In fuch works, faith he, the fudden 
generation of frogs, and lice, and worms, and 
fome other creatures is: in all which nature alone 
worketh ; but by means ftrengthening the feeds of 
nature, and quickning them v in fuch wife that they 


* .£lun.!. 6. not. Hiftor. k Lucil. in Satyr. e Gul. Parif. dc univerfo, p. 2. c. 70. 
e Df leg. c. 24. foj. 67. 


d Maxima vis ert phaiitafia: ad crrorcs. 


Digitized by 


Googl 


fo 

e N 








120 


The History 

fo haften the work of generation, that it feemeth to 
the ignorant not to be the work of nature, which 
ufually worketh more leifurely, but they think it is 
done by the powers of devils. But they who are 
learned in thefe arts marvel not at fuch working, 
but glorify the Creator. Now by thefe two ways, 
the devils do mod frequently work, to wit, by 
knowing the uttermoft of nature; and by illufion : 
for there is no incomprehenfible or unfearchable 
power, but of God only. 

For fhall we fay, he caufed fometimes thunders, 
lightnings, and tempefts \ and can infedt the air, as 
well as move it or comprefs it ; who knows not 
that thefe things are alfo natural ? or may it be ob- 
je< 5 ted that he foretelleth things before they happen, 
which exceedeth nature, and is no illufion ? it is 
true, that he fometimes doth it; but how ? in elder 
ages he ftole his knowledge out of the predictions of 
the prophets : and he foretold the death of Saul, at 
fuch time as he was in his own poffefiion and power 
to difpole of. And he that hath lived from the in¬ 
fancy of the world to this day, and obferved die 
fuccefs of every council: he that by reafon of his 
fwift motions can inform himfelf of all places, and 
preparations: he that is of counfel with all thofe 
that ftudy and praCtife fubverfion and definition: 
* he that is prince of the air, and can thence better 
judge, than thofe that inhabit die earth: if he 
fhould not fometimes, yea if he Ihould not very 
oftentimes, guels rightly of things to come (where 
God pleafeth not to give impediment) it were very 
ftrange. For we fee that wife and learned men do 
oftentimes by comparing like caufes conceive right¬ 
ly of like effedts, before they happen: and yet 
where the devil doubteth, and would willingly 
keep his credit, he evermore anfwereth by rid¬ 
dles, as, 

Crafus Halym penetrans magnam fubvertit opum vim . 

If Crafts over Halys go. 

Great kingdoms he fhall overthrow. 

Which anfwer may be taken either way: either 
for the overthrow of his own kingdom, or of his 
enemies. And thus far we grant the devil may 
proceed in predictions, which otherwife belong to 
God only ; as it is in Jfaiab , Shew the things that 
are to come hereafter , that we may know that ye 
are gods : Jhew us at all times and certainly what 
is to come. b Soli us enim divinre intelligent ire ac fapi- 
enti<e ejl occulta nbffe (ft revelare -, It is only proper 
to God’s underftanding and wifdom to know and 
reveal hidden things. 

Sect. VIII. 

'That none was ever raifed from the dead by the power 

of the devil: and that it was not the true Samuel 

which appeared to Saul. 

r» 10 conclude, it may be objected that the devil 

1 hath raifed from the dead: and that others 
bynis power have done the like, as in the example 
given of Samuel raifed by the witch of Endor: 
which were it true, then might it indeed be affirm¬ 
ed that fomeof the devil’s aCts exceeded all the pow¬ 
ers of nature, falle femblance, and other iilufions. 
c Juft in Martyr was fometimes of the opinion, that 
it was Samuel indeed: and fo was Ambrofe , Lyra, 
and Burgenfis i from which authorities thofe men 


of the World. Book I. 

borrow ftrength which fo believe. But Martyr 
changed his opinion : and fo did St. Auguftine , 
who at firft feemed to be indifferent: for in his quef- 
tions upon the Old and New Teftament, he ac- 
counteth it deteftable to think that it was Samuel 
which appeared : and thefe be his words elfewhcre 
to the fame effcCl: In requie funt anima piorum a 
corpore feparatre, impiorum autem poenas luunt, do¬ 
nee ijlarum ad vitam teternam, illarum vero ad refer - 
nam mortem qure fecunda dicitur corpora revivifeant■, 
The fouls of the godly feparated from their bodies 
are at reft, but thofe of the wicked fuffer punifh- 
ment, till the bodies of the juft rife to eternal life, 
and of the wicked to an eternal and fecond death. 

And (befides d St. Auguftine) Juftin Martyr, Ili- 
larius , T'ertullian , Atbanafius , Chryfoftom , and o- 
thers, believed firmly, and taught it: that the fouls 
of men being once feparate from their bodies, did 
not wander on the earth at all. Credere debemus 
(faith Cyril) quum a corporibus fanilorum aninu abi- 
erinty tanquam in manus charijftmi patris Bonitati 
divinre commendari ; We muft believe when the fouls 
of holy men are departed fromtheir bodies, that they 
be commended to the divine Goodnefs as into the 
hands of a mod dear father. < If then they be in hea¬ 
ven, the power of the devil cannot ftretch lo high: 
il in hell, ab inferno nulla eft redemptio y from hell 
there is no redemption. For there are but two habita¬ 
tions after death ; Unum f faith Auguftine) in ignereter- 
no -y alterum tn regno eeterno ; The one in eternal 
fire i die other in God’s eternal kingdom. And tho’ it 
be written in Jure Pontiftcio, that many there are who 
believe that the dead have again appeared to the liv¬ 
ing j yet the Glofs upon the lame text finds it ridicu¬ 
lous. *•' Credunt (ft male , quia funt pbantafmata (faith 
the Glofs}) They believe, and they believe amifs, be- 
caule they be but phantafms, or apparitions. For 
whereas any fuch voice hath been heard, faying, I 
am the foul of fuch a one *, b<tc oratio a fraude at- 
que deceptione diabolica eft *, That fpeech is framed 
by the fraud and deception of the devil, faith Chrs- 
foftom. Likewife of the fame faith Tertullian. Ab- 
ftt ut animam cujuftibet fanfti, nedum prophet re, a d<e- 
monio credamus extraftam i God forbid that we Ihould 
think that the foul of any holy man, much lefs ol 
a prophet, Ihould be drawn up again by a devil. 

It is true that the feriptures call that apparition 
Samuel -, fo do they the wooden images Chei ubms: 
and falfe brazen gods are called gods, and the like. 
And whereas theie of the contrary opinion build up¬ 
on that place of the 26th of Eccleftafticus (a book 
not numbered among the canonical feriptures) as St. 
Auguftine himfelf in his treatife, if it be his, de cur a 
pro mortuis agenda, confeffeth ; yet Siracides follow¬ 
ing the literal fenfe and phrale of the feriptures, 
proveth nothing at all: for tho* the devil would wil¬ 
lingly perfuade, that the fouls (yea even of juft men) 
were in his power, yet fo far is it from the promifes 
of the feriptures, and from God’s juft and merciful 
nature, and fo contrary to all divine reafon, as St. 
Auguftine (or whofoever wrote that book before ci¬ 
ted) might rightly term it a deteftable opinion lo 
to think. For if God had fo abfolutely forfaken 
Saul, that he refufod to anfwer him either by dreams, 
by Urim, or by his prophets: it were fottilh to con¬ 
ceive, that he would permit the devil, or a wicked 
witch to raife a prophet from the dead in Saul' s re- 
fpedt : it being alfo »contrary to his own divine law 
to ask counfel of the dead ; as in Deuteronomy 18, 
and elfewhere. Therefore it was the devil, and not 


* F.phef. 2. 2. Sc 6 . 12. Diabolus magnum habet rerum ufum : quar res multtun habet moment! in quovis negotio. Aug. de Aniina, c. 
26, 27, Si c. *> Guil. Parifienfis de iegib. ca. 24. c J u d. Martyr in colloq. cum i ryphene inrdp. ad Ortho, quarit. 52. Ambr. 
in Luc. I. 1. c. 1 . Lyra in Reg. 1. Aug. ad Simpl. 1 . 2. p. 3. De Civitate Dei, 1 . 13. c. 8. * Aug. de verb. ApoJt. 18. Jult. Mar. 
ad Orthodox, q. 75. Hilar. pfaJ. 2. in hue. Tert. de Anuna in fin. Athan. q. 13. Cluyfoft. hom. 19. in Evtuig. Matth. * 26. 
q. 5. F.pifcopi. f i Kings 17. 22. 2 Kings 4. 34. Nullus enim magus aut damon monuum veir unquam excitnvit. 

Wier. de folcin. 


Digitized by 


GooqIc 









Chap. XII. The History o/ the World. t it 


Ac foul of 4 dead body, that gave anfwer and 
advice. 

But bocaofe Helias and Helizeus had raid'd fome 
from the dead by the power of God •, thofe devils 
which St. Attgufiine calleth ludificatores animantium 
fibi fttbietterum, mockers of their own vafials, call¬ 
ing before their eyes a femblance of human bodies, 
and framing founds to their ears like the voices of 
then, do alfo perfuade their gracelefs and accurfed 
attendants, that themfelves both poflefs, and have 
power over the fouls of men: Eludit dtabolus aciem 
turn fpeftantium, turn etiam cogitantium, faith L. 
Fives •, The devil beguileth the fenfe both of the 
beholders, and of thofe that fo imagine. Thefe 
then are the bounds of the devil’s power, whom if 
we will not fear, we mull fear to fin. For when he 
is not the inftrument of God’s vengeance, he can 
touch no man that makes not himfelf his voluntary 
vaffal: potefi ad malum invitare , non potefi trahere , 
faith St.Aunfiine, he can allure, but he cannot in- 
force to evil. Such as think otherwife may go into 
the number remembred by Lucretius. 

Nam veluti pueri trepidant y atque omnia coeds 

In tenebris metuunt: fie nos in luce timemus. 

We fear by light, as children in the dark. 


CHAP. XII. 

Of ike memorable buildings 0/Minus, and 
of his wife Semiramis: and of other of 
her alls. 

S £ c t. I. 

Of the magnificent building of Nineveh by Ninus : 
and of Babylon by Semiramis. 

B U T to come bock to Ninas the amplifier 
and finifher of Nineveh: whether he perform¬ 
ed it before or after the overthrow of Zoroa - 
firr y it is uncertain. As for the city it fdf, it is 
agreed by all prophane writers, and confirmed by 
the feriptures, that it exceeded all other in circuit, 
and aniwerable magnificence. For it had in com- 
pafs 4 440 ftadia, or furlongs -, the walls whereof 
were an hundred foot upright, and had fuch a 
breadth as three chariots might pafs on the rampirc 
m front: thefe walls were garnifhed with 1500 
towers which gave exceeding beauty to the reft, and 
a ftrength no lefs admirable for the nature of thofe 
times. 

But this city (built in the plains of Ajfyria, and 
On the banks of Tigris, and in the region of Eden) 
was founded long before Ninus's time j and (as an¬ 
cient hiftorians report, and more lately Nauclerus) 
had the name of CampfoTy at fuch time as Ninus 
amplified the fame, and gave it a wall, and called 
it after his own name. 

For thefe works of Babylon and Nineveh begun by 
Nimrod in Chaldea , and in Ajfyria, Ninus and Se- 
Pnramis made perfecfl. 6 Ninus finifhed Ninevehy 
Semiramis Babylon: wherein fhe fought to exceed 
her husband by far. Indeed in the hrft age when 
princes were moderate, they neither thought how to 
invade others, nor teared to be invaded: labouring 
to build towns and villages for the ufe of themfelves 
and their people without either Walls or towers 
and how they might difeharga the earth of woods, 
briars, bufhments, and waters, to make it more 
habitable and fertile. But Semiramis living in that 


age, when ambition was in ftrong youth: and pur- 
pofing to follow the vonqueft which her husband had 
undertaken, gave that bcaury and ftrengdi to Baby- 
Ion which it had. 

Sect. II. 

Of the end of Ninus: and beginning of Semiramis’; 
reign. 

T HIS fhe did after the death of her husband 
Ninus: who after he had maftered Baflria, and 
fubjetted unto his empire all thofe regions between 
it and the Mediterranean fea and Hellespont (Afia the 
lefs excepted) and finifhed the work of Nineveh, he 
left the world in the year thereof 2019 a ^ ter 
reigned 52 years. Plutarch reporteth, that Semira¬ 
mis defired her husband Ninus , that he would grant 
unto her the abfolute loveraign power for one day. 
Diod. Siculus out of Atheneus , and others, fpeak of 
five days. In which time (moved either with defire 
of rule, or licentious liberty, or with die memory of 
her husband Menon , who perifhed for her) fhe caufc 
ed Ninus her husband to be (lain. But this feemeth 
rather a fcandal caft on her by the Greeks , than that 
it had any truth. 

Howfoever Ninus came to his end, Semiramis 
took on her after his death the foie rule of the Affy- 
rian empire: of which Ninus was faid to be the firft 
monarch, becaufe he changed his feat from Babylo¬ 
nia in Chaldea to Nineveh in Ajfyria. t Juftin re¬ 
ports that Semiramis (the better to invert herfclf, and 
in her beginning without murmur or offence to take 
on her fo great a charge) prefonted herfelf to thfc 
people in the perfon of her fon Ninias or Zameis , 
who bare her external form and proportion without 
any fenfible difference. 

This report I take alfo to be feigned, for which 
many arguments might be made. But as Ihe ruled 
long, fo fhe performed all thofe memorable a< 5 ts 
which are written of her by the name of Semiramis , 
and fubferibed that letter which fhe lent to the 
king of India (her laft challenge and undertaken con- 
queft) by her own name. And were it true that her 
fon Ninias had fuch a ftature at his father’s death, 
as that Semiramis (who Was Very perfonable) could 
be taken for him •, yet it is very unlikely that fhe 
could have held the empire from him 42 years after 
by any fuch fubtilty (for fo long fhe reigned after 
the death of her husband :) but it may be true that 
Ninias or Zameis (being wholly given to his plca- 
fures, as it is written of him) Was well plcafed with his 
mother’s profperous government and undertakings. 

Sect. III. 

O/Semiramis’j parentage , and education t and me- 
tamorphofis of her mother. 

S OME writers (of which Plutarch is one) make 
this famous woman to have been of bafe paren¬ 
tage, calling her after the name of her country, a 
Syrian. Berofus calls her after the name of her city 
wherein fhe was born, Semiramis Afcalonitis , of 
Afcalon, the ancient city and metropolis of the Phi- 
lift ines. Others report her to be the daughter of 
Derceta, a Court izan of Afcalon, exceeding beautiful. 
Others fay that this Derceta or Dercetis, the mother 
of Semiramis , was fometime a reclufe, and had 
profefs’d a holy and a religious life, to whom there 
was a temple dedicated feated on the bank of a lake 
adjoining to Afcalon > and afterwards falling in love 
with a goodly youhg man, fhe was by him made 
with child, which (for fear of extreme punifhment) 
fhe conveyed away, and caufed the fame to be hid- 


* Juliin ! 1 Diod. 1. *. Sabel. J. *X i. V Hefod. 1. i. Jullin. 1. i. Diod. 1. 2,& j. « -dilian. 1. 7. ex Dionc. 

No. 8. H h den 


Digitized by 


Googh 









122 


7 he History 

den among the high reeds which grew on the banks 
of the lake: in which (while the child was left to 
the mercy of wild beafts) the fame was fed by cer¬ 
tain birds, which ufed to feed upon or near thofe 
waters. But I take this tale to be like that of Lupa 
the harlot that fbftered Romulus. For fome one or 
other adjoyning to this lake had the charge and fo- 
fteridge of this child, who being perchance but fome 
bafe and obfeure creature, the mother might there¬ 
by hope the better to cover her difhonour and breach 
of vow ; notwithftanding which fhe was call from 
the top of her temple into the lake adjoining, and 
(as the poets have feigned) changed by Fenus into a 
fi/h, all but her face, which ftill held the fame beau¬ 
ty and human fhape. It is thought, that from this 
Derceta the invention of that idol of the Pbiliflints 
(called Dagon ) was taken : for it is true, that Dagon 
had a man’s face, and a fifh’s body: into whofe tem¬ 
ple when the ark of God was brought, the idol fell 
twice to the ground: and at the fecond fall there re¬ 
mained only the trunk of Dagon , the head being 
broken off: For fo St. ’Jerome hath converted that 
place. Vatablus, Pagninus, and Junius writ it by 
Dagon only, which fignifieth a fifh, and fo it only 
appeared : the head thereof by the fecond fall being 
fundred from the body. 

For my felf I rather think, that this Dagon of 
the Philijlines was an idol reprefenting Triton , one 
of thofe imaginary fea-gods under Neptune. For 
this city being maritimate (as all thofe of the Phili¬ 
jlines were, and fo were the beft of Pbenicia) ulcd 
all their devotions to Neptune , and die reft of the 
petty gods which attended him. 

Sect. IV. 

Of her expedition into India, and death after difeom- 
fiture : with a note of the improbability of her vices. 

B U T for her pedigree I leave it to the Affyrian 
heralds : and for her vicious life I aferibe the 
report thereof to the envious and lying Grecians. 
For delicacy and eafe do more often accompany li- 
centioufnefs in men and women, than labour and 
hazard do. And if the one half be true which is 
reported of this lady, then there never lived any 
prince or princefs more worthy of fame than Semira- 
mis was, both for the works fhe did at Babylon , and 
elfewhere, and for the wars fhe made widi glorious 
fuccefs : all but her laft enterprife of India ; from 
whence both Strabo and Arianus , report that fhe 
never returned: and that of all her mofl powerful 
army there furvived but only 20 perfons: the reft 
being either drowned in the river of Indus, dead of 
the famine, or flain by the fword of Staurobates. But 
as the multitude which went out are more than realbn 
hath numbred: fo were thofe that returned lefs than 
could have efcaped of fuch an army, as confifted of 
four millions and upwards. For thefe numbers which 
fhe levied by her lieutenant Dtrcet<eus (faith * Sui- 
das) did confiftof footmen three millions; of horfe- 
men one millon; of chariots armed with hooks on 
each fide one hundred thoufand; of thofe which 
fought upon camels as many; of camels for burden 
two hundred thoufand ; of raw hides for all ufes three 
hundred thoufand ; of gallies with brazen heads three 
thou/ands, by which fhe might tranfport over Indus 
at once tliree hundred thoufand foldiers : which 
gallies were furnifhed with Syrians, Pbenicians, Ci~ 
ticians , and men of Cyprus. Thefe incredible and 
impofiible numbers, which no one place of the earth 
was able to nourifh (had every man and beaft but 

♦ • SuiJ. f. 845. lit. S. b Procl 


of the World. Book I. 

fed upon grafs) are taken from the authority of Cte ♦ 
ftas whom Diodorus followeth. But as the one may 
be taxed with many frivilous reports: fo Diodorus 
himfelf hath nothing of certainty, but from Xerxes’ $ 
expedition into Greece, and afterwards: whofe army 
(tho’ the fame was far inferior to that of Simira- 
mis) yet had it weight enough to overload the belief 
of any reafonable man. For all authors confent, that 
Xerxes tranfported into Greece an army of 1700000 
and gathered together (therein to pafs the Uellefpont) 
three thoufand gallies, as Herodotus out of the leve- 
ral provinces whence thofe gallies were taken hath 
col levied the number. 

But of what multitude foever the army of Semira¬ 
mi s confifted: the fame being broken, and over¬ 
thrown by Staurobates upon the banks of Indus, 
canticum cantavit extremum , file fang her laft fong; 
and (as antiquity hath feigned) was changed by the 
gods into a dove (the bird of Fenus) whence it came 
that the Babylonians gave a dove in their enfigns. 

S E C T. V. 

Of the temple of Belus built by Semiramis: and of 
the pyramids of Egypt. 

A Mong all her other memorable and more than 
magnificent works (befides the wall ot the 
city of Babylon ) was the temple of Bel, credted in 
the middle of this city, invironed with a wall carried 
four fquare of great height and beauty, having on 
each fquare certain brazen gates curioufly engraven. 
In the Core of the fquare fiic raifed a tower of a fur¬ 
long high, which is half a quarter of a mile ; and 
upon it again (taking a bafis of a lefs circuit) Ihe 
feta fecond tower ; and fo eight in all, one above 
another : upon the top whereof the Chaldeans priefts 
made the obfervation of die ftars, becaufe this tower 
overtopped die ordinary clouds. 

By beholding the ruins of this tower, have many 
travellers been deceived; who fuppofe that they 
have feen a part of Nimrod's tower, when it was 
but the foundation of this temple of Bel (except this 
of Bel were founded on that of Nimrod.) There 
were burnt in this temple one hundred thoufand ta¬ 
lents of frankincenfe every year (faith Herodotus.) 
This temple did Nabuchodonofor adorn with the 
fpoilsof Jerufalem, and of the temple of Solomon : 
all which veiTels and ornaments Cyrus redelivered. 
This temple Xerxes evened with the foil; which 
Alexander is faid to have repaired by the perfuafions 
of the Chaldeans. I deny not that it might have 
been in his defire fo to do ; but he enjoyed but a 
few years after Babylon taken, and therefore could 
not perform any fuch work, the Egyptians (faith 
b Proclus ) inhabiting a low and level ground, and 
given to the fame fuperftition of the ftars that die 
Chaldeans were, erected in imitation, and for the 
fame fervice and ufe, the Pyramids by Memphis , 
which were confpicua undique navigantibus, faith 
Pliny. Of thefe pyramids c Bellonius, a careful ob- 
ferver of rarities (who being in Egypt mounted by 
fteps to the top of the highell) maketh this report: 
Le meilleur archer qui feroit a fa fommite, & tirant 
une flecbe en l’air, a peine pouroit I’envoyer hors de 
fa bafe qu'elle ne Je tombafl fur les degrez. The belt 
archer funding on the top of one of thefe pyramids, 
and Ihooting an arrow from thence into the air as 
far as he can, with great difficulty fliall be able fo to 
force the fame, but that it will fall upon fome of 
the degrees or fteps. 

in Tinuco, I. i. « Bell. 1. z. 


7 > he End of the Firft Book. 


Digitized by 


THE 

Google 









