TITLE: The history of Godefrey of Boloyne and of the conquest of Iherusalem
IDENTIFIER: TheHistoryOfGodefreyOfBoloyneAndOfTheConquestOfIherusalem
URL: https://archive.org/download/TheHistoryOfGodefreyOfBoloyneAndOfTheConquestOfIherusalem/MdUD1833W55131893_djvu.txt

) 


) 


BEN  D.  ZEVIN 

CLEVELAND 


From  his  Library  of  Books 
about  Books 


/ 


/ 


t  TfitoctoreWaAt&lotittS 


jrvm 


Mt- 


fai  rt?/pf$ 


: 


rne  msroRY  of  eooefReY  of  so- 
Loy^e  hj^d  of  rne  coj^Qaesr  of 
weRasHLejvi, 


■i^B^Hm 


P 


f 


RG  bye  courageous  faytes  and 
valyaunt  actes  of  noble  illust- 
rous  and  vertuous  personnes, 
ben  digne  to  berecounted,putin 
memorye,and  wreton,to  tbende 
that  tber  may  be  gyuen  to  tbem 
name  inmortal,  by  souuerayne 
Jaude  and  preysvng,  &  also  for 
to  moeue  &  tenflawme  the  bertes  or  tbe  redars  and 
bierers,  for  tescbewe  and  flee  werhes  vycious,  dis~ 
bonnestand  vytuperable,  and  for  tern  pryse  andac- 
complyssbe  enterprises  bonnestes,and  werkesof 
gloryousmeryte,  to  lyuein  remembraunce  perpetu- 
,  al  J?  for  as  it  is  so,  tbat  tbystoryagrapbes  baue 
wreton  many  a  noble  bystorye,  as  wel  in  metre  as  in 
.prose,  by  wbicbe  tbactes  and  noble  f ayttes  of  tbe 
auncyent  conquerours  ben  bad  in  remembraunce, 
and  remayne  in  grete,  large,  and  aoumed  volumes, 
and  so  sbal  abyde  in  perpetual  memorye,  to  tben- 
tente  tbat  gloryous  prynces  and  bye  men  of  noble 
and  vertuouse  courage,  sbold  take  ensample  tem- 
pryse  werkys  leeful  &  bonneste.  f yrst,  for  goddes 
quarell,in  mayntenynof  ourefaytband  tbelibertees 
of  boly  cbircbe,  for  tbe  recuperacion  of  tbe  boly 
land,  wbicbe  our  blessyd  lord  Ibesu  Criste  batb 
u  ^wcc*  by  bis  blessyd  presence  bumayne,  and  by 
sbedyng  tberin  for  oure  redem  prion  bis  precious 
blood,  ffor  tbe  releef  of  sucbe  cristen  men  as  tbere 

f   C Irih  !?  l^Ctc  mv9CrVc  and  tbraldome,  and  also 
for  the  defence  of  tbeyr  royammes,  londes,  enbery- 

tage8,and6ubgctte6,&fortbysecau6e8tendeuoyre 
tbeymintbeyrnoblepersone8,witballetbeyrpuys~ 

"J 


saunces  and  power,  tadresse  and  remyse  tbeym  in 
tbeyrauncyentfrauncbysesandlyberte,Hcordyng 
to  tbat  we  fynde  wrcton  in  boly  scripture  of  many 
noble  bistoryes,  wbicb  were  bere  ouer  long  to  re- 
berce.  But  in  especial  of  tbre  noble  and  mooste 
worthy  of  alle  otberXbat  is  to  wytte,fyrst  of  due 
losue,  tbat  noble  pryn  ce,  wbicbe  ladde  &  conducted 
tbe  cbilderen  of  Israbel,  tbe  cbosen  people  of  Cod, 
oute  of  deserte  in  to  tbe  londeof  promyssvon,  tbe 
londe  flowing  mylke  &  bony.  Secondly,  or  Dauyd 
tbe  kynge  and  boly  propbete,  wbome  God  cbaas 
after  bis  berte,andacbyeuyd  many  grete  bataylles, 
gouemyng  tbe  sayd  cbosen  people  of  God  by  tbe 
space  of  fourty  yeris,  Hnd  tbe  tbyrde,of  tbe  noble 
ludas  JYIacbabeus,bow  be  deif  ended  tbe  sayd  peo- 
ple in  fygbtyngmany  and  merueyllous  bataylles, 
for  veray  zeele  and  loue  of  bis  lawe,  &mayntenyng 
of  tbe  same  vn  to  tbe  detb,  for  wbicb  causes  a/f or- 
sayd,  tbe  names  of  tbyes  tbre  abvde  perpetuel,  for 
tbre  of  tbe  moste  and  nobleste  or  tbe  iewys,andin 
tbe  n  ombre  of  tbe  moost  digneandmoostwortby, 
]^D  by  cause  valyaunce  &  prowesse 
is  remembryd  emong  tbe  gentyles 
&  paynemes,  as  emong  XTbebrewes, 
1  fynde  wreton  of  tbe  incredible  cbe- 
ualrous  prowesse  of  tbe  noble  and 
valyaunt  Hector  of  XTroye,  wbos  ex- 
cellentacteswryten,Ouyde,  Homer,  Virgyle,  Dares, 
Dyctes  andotber  dvuerse,  &  ecbe  better  tban  otber, 
rebercbyng  bis  noble  vermes,  strengtbe  and  bu- 
manyte.  Secondly,  of  Hlysaundre  tbe  arete  kynge 
of  JVIacedone,  wbicb  domyned  &  bad  to  bym  obeys- 
iv 


saunttbevnyuersalworUlHndtbetbyrde,tbenoble 
7ulyus  Cezar,  Gmperour  of  Rome,  wbos  noble 
actes  ben  wreton  by  poetes,  as  Lucan,  Stace  and 
otber,  and  dayly  remembryd  as  newe  and  ffressbe 
as  be  yet  lyuyd,  (Ubicbe  tbre  ben  sette  as  for  tbe 
moost  wortby  emong  tbe  gentyles  and  paynems. 
"^JOCCl  lete  vs  tbenne  remembre  wbat 
bystoryes  ben  wreton  of  cristen  men, 
of  wbom  tber  be  many  wreton.Butin 
especial,  as  for  tbe  best  &  wortby  est, 
1  fynde  fyrsttbe  gloryous,most  ex- 
cellent™ rris  tyme,andfyrst  founder 
of  tbe  round  table,  kyng  Hrtbur,  kyng  of  tbe  Bry- 
tons,  tbat  tyme  regnyng  in  tbis  royamme,  of  wbos 
retenue  were  many  noble  kynges,  prynces,  lordes  & 
knygbtes,  of  wbicb  tbe  noblest  were  knygbtes  of 
tbe  round  table,  of  wbos  actes  and  bistoryes  tbere 
be  large  volumes,  and  bookes  grete  plente  and 
many,  O  blessyd  lord,  wban  1  remembre  tbe  grete 
and  many  volumes  of  Seynt  <3raal,6balebot,and 
Laun  celotte  de  Lake,  ©awayn ,  per  ceual,  Lyon  el,  & 
TTristram,  &  many  otber,  of  wbom  were  ouerlonge 
toreberce,andalsotomevnknowentButtbystorye 
of  tbe  sayd  Hrtbur  is  so  gloryous  and  sbynyng, 
tbat  be  is  stalled  in  tbe  fyrst  place  of  tbe  moost 
noble,  beste  and  wortbyest  of  tbe  cristen  men  jj? 
Secondly,  of  Cbarlemayne,  tbe  grete  emperour  of 
Mllemayne,and  kyng  of  f  raunce,  wbos  noble  actes 
a?  C0"^UC8tC8  ben  wreton  in  large  volumes  witb 
tbe  noble  faytesand  actes  of  bis  douze  pieres,  tbat 
is  to  save,  Rowlon  d  &  Oly u  er,  witb  tbe  otber,  wbos 
nameandrenommee  abydetb  also  perpetuel,and  is 


stalled  in  the  second  place  emongetbemostwortby 
of  cristen  men  j&Of  alle  tbyec  bistoryes  afor  re- 
berced,  tbe  bookes  and  volumes  ben  bad  in  Latyn, 
ftenegb  and  Snglyssbe,  and  otber  langage, 

nejN  JVG  as  for  tbe  tbyrd  of  tbe  cris- 
ten  prynces,  taken,  reputed  and  re- 
nommed  for  to  be  egal  emong  tbyse 
wortby  and  best  tbat  euer  were,  I 
menetnenoble(3odefroyofBoloyne, 
wbicbe  now  but  late,  not  yet  four  C 
yere  sytb,  beflowred,and  was  stalled  in  tbe  tbyrde 
stalle  of  tbe  moost  wortby  of  cristen  men,  wbos 
bystoryeis  made  and  wreton  in  Latyn  &  f  renssbe 
in  large  and  grete  volumes,  Hnd  as  not  knowen 
emongevs  bere,  wbicbe  ben  adiacent&  neygbbours 
to  tbe  place  of  bis  natyuyte,  wbos  noble  bystorye 
Hate  fonde  in  a  booke  of  f  renssb,  al  alonge  of  bis 
noble  actes,valyaunces,  prowesses,  &  accomplys- 
sbementofbisbyeempryses.Inwbicbelfyndevery 
causes,  as  me  semetb,mocbe  semblable&lykevnto 
sucbe  as  we  baue  now  dayly  tofore  vs,  by  tbe  mes- 
creauntes  &  XTurkes  emprysed  ayenst  cristendom, 
and  yet  mocbe  more  nowe  tban  were  in  bis  dayes. 
for  in  bis  dayes  tbe  Curkes  bad  conquerd  vpon 
cristendom  but  vnto  tbe  braas  of  Seynt George  by 
Constan  tynople,  and  badno  f oote  on  tbis  syde  tbe 
sayd  braas, But  at  tbis  daye  it  is  so  tbat  tbey  baue 
comen  ouer  &  goten  tbat  im  perial  cyte,  Constan  ty- 
nople aforsayd,  and  many  royamme  and  countre, 
to  tbe  grete dommageand  burte  of  alle  cristendom. 
jfi?XTo  tberesistence  of  wbome,as  yet,  f ewe  cristen 
prynces  baue  put  tbeym  in  deuoyrj^Cbenne  I  re- 


&-— ■ 


tome  agayn  vnto  the  conqueste  atsucbe  tyme  as 
tbey  were  come  to  the  sayd  braas,tbat  by  the  dyly- 
gen  t  solicitude  of  a  pour  beremy  te,  tbe  sayd  ©ode- 
frroy  of  Boloyne,  &  otber  dyuerse  prynces,  lordes 
and  conryn  peple,auowed  tbe  croysyng&  empryse 
to  warre  agayn  tbe  mescreauntes,  and  to  recouere 
tbe  boly  cyte  of  Iberusalem :  wbicbe  afterward  tbey 
acbyeuyd,  and  conquerd  fro  tbe  sayd  braas  vnto 
tbe  boly  lande,  and  recouerd  tbe  boly  cyte  of  Iberu- 
salem, as  in  tbis  sayd  book  al  alonge  and  playnly 
sbalappere.  In  wbicbe  cyte  tbe  sayd  ©odeffroy  was 
elect  and  cbosen  for  bis  vertue,  prowesses  blessyd 
disposition,  to  be  kyng  of  tbe  sayd  Iberusalem,  & 
tbe  londe  tberabout, 

RS^  ^KsjnejSfJSfe  I,  tbus  vysytyng  tbis  no- 
ble bystorye,  wbicne  is  no  fable  ne 
fayned  tbynge,  but  alle  tbatis  tberin 
trewe,  considerynge  also  tbe  grete 
puyssaunce  of  tbe  Tlurke,  grete  ene- 
mye  of  oure  cristen  f aytb,  destroyar 
of  cristen  blood,  and  vsurpar  of  certayn  empyres 
and  many  cristen  royammes  and  countrees,&now 
late  tbis  saydyere  batb  assaylled  tbe  cyte  and  castel 
in  tbe  isle  of  Kbodes  wbere  valyauntly  be  batb  be 
resisted;  but  yet  not  witbstondyng  be  batb  ap- 
procbed  morener,  &  batb  taken  tbe  cyte  of  Ydronte 
in  puylle,  by  wbicbe  be  bad  goten  an  entre  to  entre 
in  to  tbe  royamme  of  JSaples ;  and  fro  tbens, witb- 
outebe  be  resisted,  vnto  Rome  andYtalye,towbos 
resistence  X  besecbe  almygbty  ©od  to  prouyde,  yf 
it  be  biswylleXbennemesemetb  Unnecessary  &ex- 
pedyen  t  f  or  alle  cristen  pryn  ces  to  make  peas,amy  te 

vij 


andallyaunceecbewitb  other,  and  prouyde  by  tbeyr 
wysedommes  the  resistence  agayn  bym  for  the  de- 
fense of  our  f ay  tb,  and  moder  boly  cbircb,  andalso 
for  tbe  recuperacion  of  tbe  boly  londeand  boly  cyte 

oflberusalem,inwbicbeourble88yd8auyour,lbesu 
Cris t,  redem ed  ve  wi  tb  bis  precious  blood,  &  to  doo 
as  tbis  noble  prynce  0odeffroy  of  Boloyne  dyde, 
witbotber  noble  and  bye  prynces  in  bis  companye. 
TTbenne  for  tbexbortacion  of  alle  cristen  prynces, 
lordes,  barons,  knygbtes,  gen  tilmen,marcbauntes! 
and  all  tbe  comyn  peple  of  this  noble  royamme, 
ttlalys  and  ynonde,  I  baue  emprysed  to  translate 
tbts  book  of  tbe  conquest  of  Iberusalem  out  of 
frenssb  m  to  our  maternal  tongue,  to  tbentente 
tencourage  tbem  by  tbe  redyngand  beeryng  of  tbe 
merueyllous  btstoryesberin  comprysed,andof  tbe 
boly  myraclessbewyd,tbateuery  man  in  bis  party e 
endeuoyre  tbey  m  vn  to  tbe  resis  ten  ce  afore  say  d,an Id 
recuperacion  of  tbe  sayd  boly  londe  &  And  for  as 
mocbeaslhnoweno  cristen  fcyngebetter  prouydin 
armes,andforwbom  godbatb  shewed  more  grace 

andinallebisemprysesgloryous^aynquyssbour' 
bappy  and  eurous,  tban  is  our  naturel,  lawful,  and 
souerayn  lord  and  moost  cristen  kynge,  Gdward 
by  tbe  grace  of  god,  fcynge  of  Gnglond  and  of 

fraunce,andlordofYrlond,vndertbesbadoweof 
wbos  noble  protection  1  baue  acbyeued  tbis  svm  ole 
translacion,  tbatbe  of  bis  moost  noble  grace  wold 
adresse,  styre,  or  commaunde  somme  noble  capv- 
taynof  bis  subgettes  to  empryse  tbiswarre  acravn 
tbe  saydtTurhe  and  betben  peple,  to  wbicbelcan 

tbynketbateuery  man  wyllputbis  band  to  in  tbevr 
vxxj  7 


wmmmm 


proprc  persones,  and  in  tbeyr  meuable  goodesj? 
"Cbenne  to  bym,my  moost  drad  naturcl  and  soue- 
rayn  lord,  I  adresse  tbis  sample  &  rude  booke,  be- 
secbyngbis  moost  boimteuous  and  baboundaunt 
grace  to  receyue  it  of  me,  bis  indigne  and  bumble 
subgette,  <nilliam  Caxton,and  to  pardonne  me  90 
presumynge,  Besecbyng  almygbty  God  tbat  tbis 
sayd  book  may  encourage,  moeue,  &  enfiamme  tbe 
bertes  of  somme  noble  men,  tbat  by  tbe  same  tbe 
mescreauntes  maye  beresistedandputtetorebuke, 
cristen  f  ay  tb  en  creaced  and  enbaun  ced,  and  tbe  boly 
lande,witntbebles8ydcyteofIberusalem,recouerd, 
and  may  come  agayn  in  to  cristen  mens  bondes. 
"Cbenne  I  exborte  alle  noble  men  of  bye  courage  to 
see  tbis  booke,  and  bere  it  redde;  by  wbicb  ye  sbal 
see  wbat  wayes  were  taken,  wbat  noble  prowesses 
and  valyaunces  were  acbyeuyd  by  tbe  noble  com- 
pany es,  &  especial  by  tbe  said  noble  prynce  Code- 
ffroy  of  Boloyne,duc  of  Loreyne,  by  wbicbe  be  de- 
seruyd  tbe  name  of  one  of  tbe  moost  wortby  tbat 
euer  were,  and  ys  stalled  in  tbe  tbyrd  stalle  of  tbe 
cristen  conquerours,  &in  tbe  nyntbeof  tbemooste 
wortby,  wberebisnameandrenommesbalremayne 
and  abyde  perpetueU  Hnd  for  to  deseruetbe  tentbe 
place,!  besecbe  almygbty  God  to  graunt  &ottroye 
to  our  sayd  souerayn  lord,  or  to  one  of  bis  noble 
progenye,  I  meane  my  lord  prynce,  and  my  lord 
Rycbard,  due  of  Yorke  and  J^orfolke,  to  wbom  I 
bumbly  besecbe,at  tbeyr  leyzer  and  playsyr,  to  see 
and  bmreddetbissympleoook,  by  wbicb  tbeymay 
be  en  coraged  to  deserue  lawde  and  nonour,  and  tbat 
tbeir  name  and  renomme  may  encreace  and  remayn 

ix 


perpetuel,  &  after  tbte  lyf  ebort  and  traneytorye, 
all  we  may  atteyneto  come  to  the  euerlastyngjyf  in 
beuen,  where  ieioyeandreete  witboute  ende,Hmen, 

^Re^e  f  or  x:o  K^oaie  -cne  cojrceNtre  of 
-cms  book,  Ye  srhj.  p^HYjwe  see  by  t;Re 
trHB^e  f  o^ooiYN©  aiReROf  eaeRY  crhpt:- 
YRe  trRentretrR  hl  hko]W36. 

"IRefyrstcbaptretreatetb  bow  Grades  conqucrd  perse 
s  and  slewe  Cosdroe  and  brought  in  to  Ibcrusalcm  tbe 

J  veray  crosse,  capitulo  primo,  p,  n 
Rowt  be  puyssaunt  Cosdroe  wasted  tbempyre  of  Rome,  for 

tauenge  tbe  detb  of  tbemperour  JVlauryce,  fader  to  bis  wyf, 

capitulo  ij,  p.  4* 
Row  tbis  puvssaunt  hyng  entred  in  to  Iberusalem,  and  de- 

maunded  dylygently  of  tbe  temple,  and  reedefyed  it,  and 

assigned  grete  reuenues  to  entretiene  it,  capitulo  iii,  o.  «>. 
Row  Cbarlemayne  by  bis  lyberalyte  gate,  for  tbe  prouffvt  of 

cristen  peple  in  betbenesse,  tbamyte  of  betben  prynces, 

capitulo  in;,  p,  6,  *  r        ' 

Of  tbenoysetbatsourdedemonge  tbe  betben  peplediscord- 
ynge  in  tbeir  lawe,  and  bow  tbey  of  egypte  yssued  oute  of 
tbeyr  londe,  and  of  tbe  euy lies  and  barmes  that  tbey  dyde, 
capitulov,p,9.  *    y    * 

Rowthafnyction, iniuryes,  &  torm entesof  cristen  men grewe 
in  tbe  tvmeof  calypbe  Retbam,  capitulo  vi,  p,  10, 

now  at  tbe  requeste  of  tbemperour  of  Constantinople  tbe 
cristen  men  obteyned  licence  to  bylde  agayn  tbe  cbircbe  of 
tbe  boly  sepulcre,  capitulo  vij,  p.  14* 

Of  tbeXTurkes,  fro wbens  tbey  cam,  and  bow  tbey  grewe  in  to 
grete  puyssaunce,  &  dyde  chose  tbeym  a  hyng  for  to  mavn  - 
tene  tbeir  warrys,  capitu  lo  viij,  p.  17,  * 

Of  tborryble  synnes  regnyng  thenne  in  cristiente,  as  wel  in 
tbyse  partyes  as  in  tbo  partyes,  capitulo  ix,  p,  21, 

Of  a  batay lie  that  tbemperour  Romayn  of  Constantinople 
badayenstaprynceof  tborientnamed Belpbet,cap,x  02/ 

Of  many  maner  torm  en  tes,  tbat  tbe  cristen  peple  suffrecl  for 
tbeir  synnes  in  tbat  tyme,  capitulo  xj,  p.  27, 

Row  after  tbey  bad  been  iiijC  Ixxxx  yere  in  tbe  seruage  of  tbe 
betben  men,  our  lord  pourueyed  remedye  for  bis  cristen 
peple,  capitulo  xij,  p.  29, 

Rowpeter'Cberemyteentreprisedtbe  more  bardly  bis  viacre 
by  tbe  reuelacion  or  vysyon  tbat  be  sawe  in  bis  sleeo.  ca- 
pitulo xiij,  p.  32.  K 
x 


Of  the  persecucions  of  the  cbirebe  in  that  tyme,  and  bow  the 
popeVrbanwasputoutoftbeseeofRomebytbebyssbop 
of  Rauenne,  capitulo  xiiij,  p.  34* 

Of  a  general  counseyl  tbat  tbe  pope  Vrban  ordeyned  for  tbe 
reformation  of  holy  cbircbeandtbamendementof  tbe  peo- 
ple, capitulo  xv,  p.  37. 

Row  many  noble  and  bye  men,  and  other  moyen  peple  of  tbe 
royamme  of  f  raunce  crossyd  tbeym  for  to  goo  ouer  see, 
capitulo  xvj,  p.  40. 

Che  names  of  noble  men  tbat  enterprysed  this  pylgremage, 
as  wel  on  tbis  syde  tbe  see  as  beyonde  tbe  montaynes, 
capitulo  xvij,  p.  43. 

Of  tbauentures  tbat  a  rowteof  cristen  men  bad  in  tbis  vyage, 
of  whom  one  Gaultyer  without  knowlecbe  was  capitayne, 
capitulo  xviu,  p.  45* 

Row  pieter  Cberemyte  was  cbyef  and  capitayne  of  a  grete 
booste,  in  tbis  vyage  toward  tbe  boly  londe,  cap*  xix,  p.  48* 

Row  somme  of  tboost  of  peter  Cberemyte,  vnwytyngbym, 
sette  f yre  in  tbe  subarbys  of  ]^yz  at  tbeyr  departing,  cap- 
itulo xx,  p.  50* 

Row  peter  Cberemy te  was  aduertysed  of  al  tbis,  and  of  tbe 
barme  tbat  ensiewed,  capitulo  xx],  p.  52. 

Rowtbemperour  of  Constantinople,  beyng  aduertysed  of 
tbies  oultrages,  sente  bis  messagers  to  peter  "Cberemy te, 

capitulo  xxi)tp*  55*  _        _, 

Of  tbe  mayntenyng  of  tboost  of  peter  Cberemy  te,  and  bow 

tbre  M  Ducbemen  toke  a  castel  by  assault,  and  slewe  alle 

tbeym  tbat  were  tberin  witb  tbe  swerd,  capitulo  xxiij,  p.  57* 
Row  Solyman,  lordof  tbat  countre,  reprised  and  toke  agayn 

tbe  castel,  and  slewe  alle  tbe  Ducbemen  tbat  were  tberin, 

capitulo  xxiiij,p.  59*  .    ^     t  .    ~ 

Rowourmen  armed  tbeym  fortauenge  tbeDucbemen,andof 

arecountre  tbat  tbey  badayenst  Solyman,  cap.  xxv,  p.  60. 

Row  peter  Cberemyte,  beyng  in  Constantinople,  was  ad- 
uertysed of  tbis  disconfyture,  and  saued  tbre  thousand 
cristen  men  beyng  in  grete  daunger,  capitulo  xxvj,  p.  62. 

Row  a  preest  named  Godecban  made  bymself  captayn  of  xl 
tbousandDucbemen  in  tbis  vyage,andof  tbeyr  oultrages, 
capitulo  xxvij,  p.  63.  _  .       .      n^. 

Row  two  C  thousand  cristen  mena/foote,and  tbre  thousand 
on  bor8bak,witboutecapitayn,assembledin  this  pylgrem- 
age, and  of  tbeyr  mayntene,  capitulo  xxviij,p*  07 

Row  tbis  peple  began  to  destroye  tbe  londe  of  the  kyngof 
Rongrye  by  cause  be  wold  not  graunte  them  leue  to  passe, 
capituloxxix,p.6Q. 


■ 


Row  the  due  Godeffroy  of  Boloynebeyngwitb  a  grete  boost 

cam  \>ntoRongrye,and  sente  bismessagers  to  tbc  hyngto 

demande  passage,  capitulo  xxx,  p.  71. 
Row  tbemessagers  of  due  Godeffroy  declared  tbeyr  message 

\>nto  tbe  hynge  of  Rongrye,  ana  tberupon  bis  answere, 

capitulo  xxxj,  p.  73. 
Row  tbe  sayd  hynge  sente  for  to  f  etcbe  tbe  due  Godeffroye, 

and  bow  be  wen  te,  &  of  tbe  deuyses  tbat  tbey  bad  to  gvdre, 

capi  tu  lo  xxxij,  p.  77. 
Row  tbe  due  Godefroy  sente  bis  messagers  to  tbemperour 

of  Constantynople,  to  tbendetbatbesbolddelyuerto  bym 

Ruon  le  JVIayne  and  other  tbat  be  belde  in  pryson,  capitulo 

xxxiij,  p.  79. 

Row  du  c  Godeffroy  cons  trayn  ed  tbem  perour  by  force  to  ren - 

dreanddelyuer  bis  prysoners,  capitulo  xxxiiij,  p.  81  • 
X:bc  grete  despyte  tbat  tbemperour  tohe  tbat  due  Godeffroy 

refused  to  goo  in  to  Constantynople  vnto  bym,  capitulo 

xxxv,  p.  83* 
Of  tbe  description  of  tbecyteof  Constantynople,  &of  manv 

countrees  and  londes  tberabout,  capitulo  xxxvi,  p.  84. 
Row  our  peple  brente  tbeyr  lodges,  and  tohe  tbeyr  barnoys, 

and  of  an  assault  tbat  tbe  Grebes  made  on  tbem,  capitulo 

xxxvij,  p.  86. 
Row  after  our  peple  began  to  destroye  tbe  contre,and  of  a 

message  froBuymont  \>nto  due  Godeffroy,  &  tbe  answere 

of  tbe  due  vpon  tbe  same  agayn,  capitulo  xxxviij,  p.  88. 
Row  tbemperour  appeased  the  due  Godeffroy,  and  sente  fbr 

bym,  and  of  tbonourtbat  be  dyde  to  bym,  cap.  xxxix,  p.  90. 
Of  tbe  yeftes  tbat  tbemperour  made  to  due  Godeffroye,  to 

tbe  barons,  &  to  tbe  gentilmen  of  bis  booste,  cap.  xl,  p.  92. 
Row  Buymon  t  was  made  capitayn  of  a  grete  booste,  and  tbe 

names  of  many  nobles  or  tbooste,  and  of  tbeyr  maytene 

capitulo  xlj,  p.  94. 
JVIessagers  and  lettres  fro  tbemperour  to  Buymont,  and  tbe 

contenue  of  tbe  same,  as  fblowetb,  capitulo  xli|,  p.  96 
Row  Buymont  approcbed  Constantnople,  and  was  sente  for 

to  come  to  tbe  emperour,  and  bow  by  tbe  prayer  of  due 

Godeffroye  be  wente  toward  bym,  capitulo  xliij,  p,  qs 
Row  tberle  Robert  of  f  laundres  witb  bis  boost  aporoebvd 

Constantynople  and  bow  tbemperour  sente  for  bvm  and 

of  tbeyr  deuyses  to  gydre,  capitulo  xliiij,  p.  100.         * 
Of  tbe  mayntyene  of  tboost  wbicbe  tberle  of  Tbolouee  and 

tbe  bissbop  of  puy  brought  ouer  see,  capitulo  xlw  d  101 
Hmbassadours  of  tbemperour  to  tbe  sayd  erle  and  bvssboo 

and  of  tbe  contenue  of  bis  lettres,  &  of  tbedaunaerwberin 

tbe  sayd  bissbop  was,  capitulo  xlvj,  p.  103 
xi'i 


Row  tberle  of  Tbolousc,  beyng  with  tbemperour,  wolde  not 

doo  bommageto  bym,andof  tbedespytetbat  tbemperour 

dyde,  capitulo  xlvij,  p.  105. 
Row  tbemperour,  for  tau  en  gehym  and  tberle,  made  his  cone- 
stables  ten  buss  be  tbem,  &  assaylle  tboost  of  tberle,  cap- 
itulo xlviij,  p.  107. 
Row  at  thynstaunte  prayer  of  tbe  barons  of  tbooste,  tberle 

made  homage  to  tbemperour, wbicb  tbenn  egaf  gretey  ef  tes 

to  bym  and  bis,  capitulo  xlix,  p.  110. 
Row  due  Robert  of  Normandye,  and  other  here  named,  ap- 

proucbed  Constantinople,  and  made  bommage  to  tbem- 
perour, capitulo  I,  p.  112. 
Row  tbemperour  sente,  for  to  destroye  our  cristen  men,  one 

bis  seruaunt,  f aynyngto  be  a  trewe con duy tour  andguyde, 

capitulo  Ij,  p.  114* 
Of  tbe  situacion  of  J^ycene,and  bow  our  peple  approucbed 

tberto,m  eru  ey  llyngof  tbe  place,  andof  tbe  s  trengtbe,capi- 

tulo  lij,  p.  115. 
Row  tbe  puyssaunt  *Curke,  Solyman,  with  a  grete  booste 

aduysed  tyme  and  boure  to  assaylle  &  smy te  on  our  peple, 

for  to  reyse  tbe  siege,  capitulo  liij,  p.  116. 
Row  Solyman,  beyngin  tbemontaynes,  sente  bis  messagers 

to  tbem  of  tbe  toun,  and  of  tbe  com  forte  that  be  gaf  to 

tbeym,  capitulo  liiij,  p.  117. 
Row  tbe  messagers  of  Solyman  were  taken  by  our  men,  and 

by  tbem  was  knowen  tbe  couyn  e  of  tbe  say  d  Solyman,  capi- 

tulo  lv,  p.  118. 
f>ow  a  grete  batay  11  of  Solyman  cam  and  smote  on  our  peple, 

and  of  tbende  of  tbe  sckarmucbe,  capitulo  Ivj,  p.  119* 
Row  our  barons  were  lodged  in  tbe  say  d  siege,  of  tbeirmayn- 

tene,  and  bow  euery  day  tbey  enforced  tbem  tassaylle  tbe 

toun,  capitulo  Ivij,  p.  121. 
Row  our  barons  made  castellys  of  tree  and  approucbed  tbe 

toun,  and  bow  tbey  witbin  brake  one  of  tbeym,  and  slewe 

tbem  that  were  tberin,  capitulo  Iviij,  p.  123. 
Of  tbe  counseyl  tbat  our  men  toke  for  tassiege  tbe  toun  by 

water,  for  to  constrayne  tbem  not  for  to  entre  ne  yssue, 

capitulo  lix,  p.  124. 
Row,  after  tbe  cy  te  was  assieged  by  water  and  by  londe,  our 

men  assaylle  it; and  of  a  sbotte  tbat  due  Godeffroy  dyde 

sbote,  capitulo  lx,  p.  125. 
Row,  after  many  assaultes,  oure  men  beyng  in  counseyl,  a 

JvOmbard  cam  to  tbem,  wbicbe  offred  to  make  an  engyne 

tbat  sbold  destroy e  tbe  toun,  capitulo  Ixi,  p.  128. 
f>ow  after  tbat  this  engyne  was  so  wel  wrought,  tbe  w^f  of 

xiij 


Solyman,  with  tweyne  of  her  cbilderen,  wente  out  of  the 
toun,  and  were  taken  by  our  men,  capitulo  Ixij,  p.  i30. 

Row  tbemperour  sente  arete  barons  for  to  receyue  tbe  toun, 
after  tbat  our  peple  bad  acerteyned  bym  tbat  tbey  wold 
yelde  it,  capitulo  Ixiij,  p.  132, 

Row  our  boost  departed  on  tbeyr  iourneye,  and  bow  somme 
departed  fro  tbeyr  f  elawsbip,  &  bowSolyman  determined 
tassaille  them,  capitulo  Ixiiij,  p.  134* 

Of  tbe  bataylle  tbat  Solyman  bad  ay  ens  t  somme  of  oure 
peple  tbat  were  departed  fro  tbeyr  f  elawsbip  f olyly,  cap- 
itulo IXV,  p.  136, 

Of  tbe  dylygence  tbat  due  Godeff  roy  made  wban  be  was  ad- 

uertysed  berof,  and  bow  Solyman  was  disconfyted,  and 

bis  lygnage  taken,  capitulo  Ixvj,  p.  137. 
Row  tbe  fourth  day  after  tbis  vyctorye,  our  peple  went  fbrtb 

on  tbeyr  waye,  and  of  tbe  grete  mesease  of  tbe  booste  tbe 

same  daye,  capitulo  Ixvij,  p.  140. 
Row  somme  of  tbe  grete  barons  of  tboste,  after  to  baue  ap- 

proucbedHntbyocbetbelasscdepartedfortogoovytavlle 
them,  capitulo  Ixviij,  p.  142. 

Rererecoun  ted  tbystorye  of  somme  aduentures,  tbat  tbenne 

fylle  in  tboost  of  cristen  men,  capitulo  Ixix,  p.  144* 
RowCancre,  tbat  was  departed  fro  tboost,  assieged  Carse, 

and  toke  it  by  certayn  couenaunt,  capitulo  lxx,p.  146. 
RowBawdwyn,broderofGodeffroy,secbyngbisaduenture8 

saweXTancreandbis  peple  tof ore  rarscandadressyd  bym 

to  tbeym,  capitulo  Ixxj,  p.  147, 
Of  tbenuye  tbatBawdwynandbis  peple  bad,  to  see  tbebaner 

of  T:ancreon  tbe  walle  of  tbe  toun,  &  bow^ancredeparted, 

capitulo  Ixxij,  p.  148. 

Rowalytilafter,T:ancrecamtotbecyteofHnamystre,wbicbe 
tbe  TTurkes  belde,  and  toke  it  by  assault,  cap.  Ixxiij,  p.  150 

Row  Bawdwyn  entred  in  to  Cbarse,  and  bow  tbre  bonderd 
pylgryms  were  slayn  of  tbeCurkes  afore  tbe  same  toun 
capitulo  Ixxiiij,  p.  151. 

Row  tbe  peple  of  Bawdwyn  knewe  tbe  departyng  of  tbe 
Curkes,  and  of  tbe  slaughter  of  tbe  cristen  men,  capitulo 
Ixxv,  p.  153. 

Rowtbe  saydBawdwyn  retomedto  tbe  grete  boost,  and  bow 
Tancre  mayntened  bym  mocbe  wel  in  conqueryng  coun- 
trees,  capitulo  Ixxvj,  p.  157*  ' 

Row  Bawdwyn  conquerd  a  grete  con  tre  vpon  tbe  Curkes  bv 
the  counseyl  of  a  knygbt  Srmyne,  named  pancrace.  cao- 
itulo  Ixxvij,  p.  158.  '     K 

xiv 


Row  tbey  of  Rageesen  te  theirmessagers  toBawdwyn,  pray- 

engbym  that  Be  wold  come  to  tbeym,  capita  lolxxviij,  p.  160. 
Row  this  due  that  was  at  Rages  varyed  for  to  holde  this  that 

be  bad  promysed  to  Bawdwyn,  capitulo  Ixxix,  p.  163. 
Row  Bawdwyn  wente  tassaylle  f amosette,  a  cy  te  nygbe  to 

Rages,  capitulo  Ixxx,  p*  164* 
Row  tbey  of  tbe  toun  of  Rages  slewe  tbeyr  due,  and  cbaas 

Bawdwyn  for  to  be  tbeyr  lord,  capitulo  Ixxxj,  p,  166, 
Row  Bawdwyn  wenteandassieged  the  tounofSororge,nygh 

to  Rages,  &  tone  it,  &  of  bis  ordenaunces,  cap.  lxxxij,p.  i68. 
Row  tbe  grete  boost  cam  to  fore  JMarese,  and  bow  tbe'eurhes 

that  were  witbin  fledde,  and  bow  our  peple  payned  tbem  to 

conquere  countrees,  capitulo  Ixxxiij,  p*  169* 
Row  it  was  commaunded  vnto  alle  tbe  barons  to  come  to 

tboost,  for  to  goo  vnto  Hntbyocbe,  andof  somme  recoun- 

trees  that  tbey  bad  in  tbe  waye,  capitulo  Ixxxiiij,  p.  172, 
Row  Hntbyocbe  by  sucession  of  tyme,  bad  dyuerse  names, 

andof  tbe  noblesse  of  auncyente,  capitulo  lxxxv,p,  175, 
Of  tbe  situacion  of  Hntbyocbe,  capitulo  Ixxxvj,  p.  176. 
ttlbo  was  tben  lord  of  Hntbyocbe,  and  by  what  man  er  be  was 

comen  vnto  this  seygnorye,  capitulo  Ixxxvij,  p.  178. 
Diuerseoppinyonsof  ourmen  tofore  tbey  badassiegedHn- 

tbyocbe,  andbow  tbey  acorded  alle  for  tassiege  it,  capitulo 

Ixxxviij,  p*  i8o« 
Row,  after  tbe  situacion  of  tbe  toun,  ecbe  of  tbe  bye  barons 

of  tboost  were  lodged  at  tbe  sayd  siege,  cap,  Ixxxix,  p.  182. 
Row  ourpeple  assembled  in  counseylfortofyndetbemoyen 

for  to  sende  for  vytaylle,  and  of  a  brydge  tbat  tbey  made, 

capitulo  Ixxxx,  p.  184* 
Row  our  peple  stopped  a  yate  without  forth,  and  of  a  castel 

of  tree  tbat  tbey  made,  capitulo  Ixxxxj,  p.  186. 
Row  oure  peplewere  in  grete  mescbyef ,  for  as  mocbe  as  tbey 

of  tbe  toun  yssued  and  en tred  in  &  out  witb  grete  rowtes, 

capitulo  Ixxxxij,  p.  187. 
Of  tbe  f amyne  and  mortalyte  of  tboost,  after  tbat  tbey  bad 

be  at  tbe  sayd  siege  tbe  space  of  two  monetbes,  capitulo 

Ixxxxiij,  p.  189. 
Row  our  peple  ordeyned  grete  rowtes  for  to  goo  for  vytaylle, 

f  "dtp  reteyne  tbe  peple  wbicbe  fledde  for  bongre,  capitulo 

Ixxxxtiij,  p.  191, 
Row  Buytnont  and  tberle  of  f  laundres  mayntened  tbeym, 

beyng  in  fburage,  of  tbeyr  recountrees,  and  of  tbe  gayn  tbat 

tbey  made,  capitulo  Ixxxxv,  p.  193. 
Rowagrete  rowte  of  cristen  men  were  in  tbis  tyme slayn  by 

tbe  "Curkes  bytwene  f ynemye  fi'Cerme,  cap,  bexxxvj,  p.  195. 

xv 


Row  the  vntrewe  Greke  katyns  departed  fraudelously  fro 

tboost,  and  other  moo  by  the  en  sample  of  bym,  capitulo 

Ixxxxvij,  p.  196. 
Row  the  prelates  of  tboost  counselled  to  doo  penaunce  for 

tappesegod,  &  of  tbordenaunces  tbat  were  made  tescbewe 

synne,  capitulo  Ixxxxviij,  p.  198. 
Row  Buymont  f onde  a  subtil  remedye,  for  to  delyuer  and 

purge  tboost  of  tbespyes  of  tbe  Curkes,  capttulo  Ixxxxix, 

p.  202. 
Row  tbe  calypbe  of  Ggypte  sente  bis  messagers  witb  grete 

yef  tes  vnto  our  boost,  capitulo  C,  p.  202. 
Row  Hncean,  lord  of  Hntbyocbe,  and  tbe  barons,  sente  vnto 

tbe  "Curkes  tbeyr  neygbbours  for  to  demaunde  socours, 

capttulo  Cj,  p.  203» 
Row  oure  peple  knewe  tbe  couyne  of  tbcCurkes;  of  tbem- 

bussbetbattbey  made,  andoftbeyrvyctoryeandgayn  tbat 

tbey  bad,  capitulo  Cij,  p.  205* 
Row  tbe  burkes  of  Hntbyocbe  sprangout,and  assaylled  tbe 

lodgys  of  our  peple,  capitulo  Ciij,  p.  207, 
Of  a  castel  tbat  our  men  made,  of  somme  pylgryms  tbat  ar- 

ryued  atte  porte,  and  bow  tbey  were  disconfyted  by  a  bus- 

sbement  of  Curkes,  capitulo  Cttij,  p.  208* 
Of  a  bataylle  wbere  ourmen  auenged  tbem  of  tbe'Curkes,  and 

of  a  stroke  tbat  due  ©odeffroy  gaf  in  tbis  bataylle,  cap- 

tuloO,  p.  2J3. 

Row  tbe  cristen  men  tbanhed  our  lord  of  tbis  vyctorye,  and 

made  a  castel  in  tbeir  mabommerye,  wbere  tbey  founde 

grete  gayne,  capitulo  Cvj,  p.  217. 
Of  a  f  ortresse  tbat  "Cancre  made  ouer  tbe  ryuer,  and  bow  be 

deff  ended  it  valyauntly,  capttulo  Cvij,  p.  219 
Row  tbenne  tbe  "turkes  of  tbe  toun  began  to  baue  mesease 

and  sorowe,  and  our  peple  ease,  capitulo  Cviij,  p.  221. 
Row  tberle  Gstyeuen  of  Cbartres  and  of  Bloys  fledde  fro 

tbooste  shamefully,  capitulo  Cix,  p.  223. 
Row  a  cristen  man,  Gmyrf  eryus,  wbicbe  was  in  Hntbyocbe, 

acqueynted  bym  witb  Buymont,  capitulo  Cx,  p,  225, 
Of  som  deuises  tbat  tbe  said  emirf  ertus  sent  to  Buymont, 

&  in  wbatmaner  beacorded  to  delyuer  bym  tbe  toun,  cap- 
itulo CXJ,P*  227,  . 
Row  Buymont  discouertd  tbis  tbyng  to  due  Godeffroy,  to 

Ruon  le  JMayne,  to  tbe  due  of  j^ormandye,  and  to  tberle  of 

f  laundres,  capttulo  Cxtj,  p.  229, 
Of  tbe  grete  socours  tbat  tbe  soudan  of  perse  bad  sente  to 

tbem  of  Hntbyocbe,  and  bow  Corbagat  assieged  Rages, 

capitulo  Cxiij,  P*  230. 
xvj 


Row  oure  men,  aduertysed  of  the  grete  boost  of  Corbagat, 

sente  somme  of  tbeyr  knygbtes  for  to  esteme  tbem,  and 

wbat  tbey  reported  of  that  tbey  bad  seen,  cap.  Cxiiij,  p.  232. 
Of  tbe  counseyl  that  oure  peple  toke  for  to  ordeyne  tbeyr 

nedes,  wban  tbey  sawe  tbe  comyng  of  this  rygbte  grete 

boost,  capitulo  Cxv,  p.  233. 
Row  after  that  Buymon  t  bad  declared  bis  f ay  te  to  alle  tboos  t, 

tbey  acorded  that  tbe  toun  sbold  be  bis,  sauf  tberle  of 

Hbolouse,  capitulo  Cxvj,  p.  235. 
Row  tbey  of  Hntbyocbe  bad  fere  of  treson,  and  bow  tbey  as- 
sembled in  counseil,  &  of  tbatwbicb  Cmirferius  deposed 

tberat,  capitulo  Cxvij,  p.  238. 
Of  tbe  mescbyef  that  the'Curkesmade  euery  day  to  tbe  cris- 

ten  men  tbat  were  in  Hntbyocbe  enbabytyng  with  them, 

capitulo  Cxviij,  p.  240. 
Of  tbe  dylygence  tbat  Buymont  made  in  this  werke,  and 

emyrf  eriusslewe  bis  broder,  and  delyuerd  tbe  toun  to  tbe 

cristen  men,  capitulo  Cxix,  p.  243. 
Of  tbe  maynteneof  tbe  cristen  men  in  this  pryse,  &  of  tbaf - 

fraye  of  tbe  TTurkes  of  tbe  toun,  capitulo  Cxx,  p.  246. 
RowHncean,  lordof  Hntbyocbe, fledde  by  a  posteme  outeof 

tbe  toun,  and  be  was  recountredand  put  to  detb,  capitulo 

Cxxj,p.248. 
Row,  after  tbat  our  men  bad  made  grete  slaughter  of  tbeyr 

enemyes,  our  men  belde  counseyl  for  to  take  tbe  dongeon, 

tbenne  beyng  seased  of  tbe  "Curkes,  capitulo  Cxxij,  p.  250. 
Row,  wbyles  tbat  tbooste  gamyssbed  tbe  toun,  sommc  of 

tboostCorbagat  cam  rennyng  to  fore  it,  cap.  Cxxitj,  p.  252. 
Row,  tbe  tbyrd  day  after  tbe  getynge&  pryseof  Hntbyocbe, 

Corbagat  with  bis  boost  arryued  to  fore  it,  capitulo  Cxxiij, 

p.  254. 
Row  after  tbat  tbe  due  was  witbin  tbe  barres  of  tbe  toun, 

many  of  bis  men  slayn,  tbe'Curkes  entred  in  to  tbe  toun, 

capitulo  Cxxv,  p.  256. 
Row  oure  cristen  men,  tbat  a  lytil  tofore  bad  assieged  tbe 

toun,  were  nowassieged  in  tbe  same,  capitulo  Cxxvj,  p.  258. 

2?  Corbagat  dyde  do  assaylle  a  f ortresse  wbicb  tberle  of 

flaundres  kepte  without  tbe  gate,  and  of  tbat  ensiewed, 

^?&xtul°  c**™j>  P.  260. 

or  the  grete  f  amyneand  mesease  tbat  our  men  suff red  in  tbe 
CTtc5fHntbyocbe,beyngassiegedonallesydesbytbesaid 

Corbagat,  capitulo  Cxxviij,  p.  262. 
Row  tbeXZurkes,  felyng  tbat  ourmenwereinsucbemescbyef 
of  bongre,  enforced  tbem  for  tassaylle  tbe  cyte,  capitulo 
Cxxix,  p.  264. 

xvij 


RowCorbagat  sente  his  men  of  armes,  f ortoslee tbemaron- 

ners  tbatwereattbeportewberof  ourmenhada  gretelosse, 

capitulo  Cxxx,  p.  265* 
Row  Guyllem  de  Gratemenylle  and  bis  f claws  f  ugitifs  cam 

in  to  Hllexandrye  tbc  lasse,  capitulo  Cxxxj,  p*  267. 
Row  tbcrlc  of  Cbartrcs  discouraged  tbemperour  of  Con- 
stantinople, tbat  be  sbold  not  goo  and  socoure  our  peple 

in  Hntbiocbe,  capitulo  Cxxxij,  p*  268. 
Row  by  tbe  warnynges  of  the  sayd  erle,  tbemperour,  wbicbe 

wold  baue  goon  and  socoured  our  men,  retomed  shortly, 

capitulo  Cxxxiij,p.  271* 
Row  our  peple  in  Hntbyocbe,  beyng  aduertysed  berof ,  were 

alle  discouraged,  and  Corbagat  enbaunced  in  pryde,  cap- 
itulo Cxxxiiij,P«  273* 
Row  tbe  spere  was  founden  tbatlbesus  was  percyd  on  tbe 

crosse  witb,  &  of  tbe  comfort  tbatour  pilgrims tohetbere/ 

by,  capitulo  Cxxxv,  p*  275* 
Row  peter  "Cberemy  te  was  sent  by  our  men  vnto  Corbagat, 

tbe  wordes  tbat  be  sayd,  &  answere  of  tbe  sayd  Corbagat, 

capitulo  Cxxxvj,  p*  277* 
Row  tbe  sayd  peter  retorned  in  to  tbe  toun,  and  wold  openly 

baue  sayd  bis  message,  and  of  tbe  subtyl  counseyl  of  tbe 

due,  wbicbe  wold  not  suffre  it,  capitulo  Cxxxvij,  p*  281* 
Row  tofore  er  our  men  departed,  tbey  made  redy  tbeyr  ba- 

taylles  right  wel  in  poynt,andof  tbenombreof  tbem,cap- 

itulo  Cxxxviij,  p*  283, 
Row  Corbagat  was  aduertysed  of  tbyssuyng  of  our  peple, 

and sente  archers  f  or todeff ende  tbe  brydgc,  and  bow  tbey 

were  disconfy  ted,  capitulo  CxxxCx,  p«  287* 
Row  ouremen  reioysed  them  of  adewe  descendyngf  ro  beuen, 

andoftbeyrmaynteneinapproucbyngtbe'Curke8,capitulo 

Cxi,  p«  288, 
Row  Corbagat  ordeyned  bis  batay  lies,  &  bow  tbe  two  boostes 

marcbed  to  gydre  in  batay  lie,  capitulo  CxU,  p.  289, 
Of  tbe  fleyng  of  Corbagat,  and  of  somme  'Curhes  gadred  to 

gydreandagayn  discomfytedby  ourmen,  cap,  Cxlij,  p.  292. 
Row  our  peple  retorned  fro  tbe  cbaas,  and  wente  to  tbe  py  11- 

age,  and  of  tbe  grete  ryebesses  tbat  tbey  fonde,  capitulo 

Cxliaj,  P*  295, 
Of  tbe  f  ayr  ordenaunces  tbat  oure  peple  made  in  tbe  cbircbes 

of  Hntbyocbe,  and  in  other  townes  by,  after  this  victorye, 

capitu  lo  Cxliiij,  P*  298* 
Row  our  peple  sente  ambassadours  to  tbemperour  of  Con- 
stantinople, for  to  somone  bym  for  to  come  socoure  them 

as  be  bad  promised,  capitulo  Cxlv,  p.  301, 
xviij 


Rowtbepylgrymsoftboostdesiredtogoovntolberusalem, 
for  tescbewe  tbe  mortalyte  and  tacomplyssbe  tbeyr  vowe. 
capitulo  Cxlvj,  p.  302. 

Cbe  dvlygence  tbat  due  Godeffroye  made  for  to  socoure  a 
Curhe,  to  wbom  be  bad  promised  to  belpe  bym,and  bowbe 
reysed  tbesiege,  beyngtof  orebiscaeteC  cap.  Cxlvii,  p.  305. 

°f80InScpyigPm8  9°VJ)8  froHntbyocbe  toward  tbe  due 
©odeffroye,  tbat  were  distressed  by  tbe  "Curkes  and  res- 
cowed  by  tbe  due,  capitulo  Cxlviij,  pi  307. 

now  tbeduc  alway  enforcedbym  to  augmente  cristiente,  and 
of  somm  e  fortresses  by  bym  beten  and  destroyed,  capitulo 
Cxlix*  p.  308. 

Row  tbe  knygbtes  of  Rages  wold  baue  betrayed  Bawdwyn 
tbeyr  lord,  &  bowbe  was  tberof  aduertysed,  cap.  CI,  p.  300. 

now  tberle  Bawdwyn  was  in  daunger  of  detb,  by  tbe  treson 
of  aJCurk  named  Balac,  capitulo  Clj,  p.  311. 

?^I^I  f.5rf  ^°tU8C  tokc  tnc  c?te  of  Hlbane,  and  tberin 
constitueda  bissbop,  capitulo  Clij,  p.  315. 

?WV  t^JK?LCt£tornc? in  toHntbyocbe,and  toke  counseyl 

itulo $fij,  p?3i6?rU  ®*      ' and  °f  tbi8  tbat  f  olowctn>  "P" 

Row  tbe  due  Godeffroy  wold  goo  to  Rages  to  vysyte  bis 

^Sm^U^^HS^  bi8^aT  to  Jberusalem,  and  of  somme 
of  bis  aduentures,  capitulo  Cliiij,  p.  319. 
Row,  after  tbe  cyte  of  Hlbane  was  conquerd,  a  grete  debate 
aroos  bytwene  tberle  of  TTbolouse  and  Buymont,  capitulo 

ClV,  p«  320« 

Row,  at  tbe  request  of  tbe  comyn  peple,  tberle  of  ^bolouse 
ordevned  day  for  to  conduyte  tbem,  capitulo  Clvj,  p.  322, 

now  tberle  of  ^bolouse  auengyd  bym  of  somme  burkes 
robbours  wbicb  robbed  bis  boost,  capitulo  Clvij,  p.  325, 

now  tberle  of  rbolouse  approcbyd  witb  bis  boost  vnto 
/irebys,  andof  tbe  situacion  of  tbesame,  cap.  Clviij,  p.  327, 
L?  tou"namcdx:ortu08^  wbicbe  Raymont  toke  witb  a 
J£WIC  of  P^l?rym8*  and  of  tbe  departyng  of  tbe  other  ba- 

pJS"8*  capitulo  Clix,  p.328. 

i2pfI,S-duc-a88icffcd  <3ibelet,and  of  a  trayson  by  wbicbebe 

andSJSiS!  murmur«l  of  tbe  spere  founden  in  Hntbyocbe, 

tho^«£  ^?cmTTadc tbat  bapped  in  tbe  presence  of  alle 

Of?h°miSfapituloC^i»P*334- 

of^^^dcoteffVPtccomcnwitnournienintotboo8te 

eIJSSS^tZiand  of  tbc  ^euerence  tbat  was  don  to  tbem, 
capiruio  Clxu,  p,  336. 

Of  an  embassadefro  tbemperour  of  Constantynople  comen 

xix 


to  our  pylgryms,  and  of  tbanswer  to  the  sayd  am  bassiate. 

capitulo  Clxiij,  p.  338,  ' 

Row  the  comyn  peple  complayned  tbem  of  this,  that  they 

wente  not  bastely  to  Iherusalem,  capitulo  Clxiiij,  p.  341. 
Of  tbegretc  dylygence  that  our  men  made  f or  tapprocbe  to 

Iherusalem,  and  of  thatyaunces  of  somme  "Curkes  made 

vnto  them,  capitulo  Clxv,  p.  343. 

Rowtbecristenmenof  Bethlehem  receyuedmocbewelOncre 
and  bis  rowte,  and  sette  bis  baner  in  tbe  cbircbe  of  our  ladv. 
capitulo  Clxvj,  p.  347. 

Of  tbardauntdesiretbattbepeplebadt08eelberusalem,and 
bow  tboost  approcbed,  &  was  lodged  by  ordenaunce,  cap- 
itulo Clxvij,  p.  348. 

Of  tbe  situacion  of  Iherusalem,  and  of  tbe  descripcion,  and 
also  of  many  other  cytees,  townes,  &countrees  tberaboute, 
capitulo  Clxviij,  p.  351. 

Row  Iherusalem  bath  badmany  names,  after  dyuerse  lordes 
tberin  regnyng,  and  yet  of  tbe  situacion  wel  at  longe,  cac- 
itulo  Clxix,  p.  353.  r 

Rere  tbystorye  deuysetbof  many  merueyllous  edefyces  con- 

teynedintbesamecyteofIberusalem,andwbomadetbem, 
capitulo  Clxx,  p.  355. 

Row  tbe'Curkesoflberusalem,  whan  tbey  knewe  tbe  comyng 

of  oure  booste,  stopped  tbe  pyttes  and  fontaynes  of  tbe 

toun,  capitulo  Clxxj,  p.  358* 
Of  tbe  nombre  of  tbem  of  tboost,  of  tbem  of  Iherusalem,  & 

bow  our  men  lodged  tbem  in  tbe  siege  to  fore  Iherusalem, 

capitulo  Clxxij,  p.  360. 
Row  our  men  began  tassay  lie  Iherusalem,  and  of  tbe  grete 

dyligence  that  they  dyde  to  make  engyna  for  to  take  it, 

capitulo  Clxxiij,  p.  362* 
Row  our  peple  were  in  grete  mescbyef  atte  sayd  siege,  &  bow 

tbe^urkes  deserted  tbem,  by  cause  tbey  mygbt  yssueand 

en  tre  in  and  out  of  tbe  toun,  capitulo  Clxxiiij,  p.  365. 
Row  tbe  burkes  enforced  tbem  to  make  merueyllous  encrvns 

ayenst  oures,  and  of  tbe  mescbyef  don  to  tbe  cristenmen 

dwellyng  in  tbe  toun,  capitulo  Clxxv,  p.  367. 

In  this  tymearryuedasbipof  Genewysatteporteof  Ralaooe 
and  bow  tbeyr  messagers  cam  in  to  tbooste,  and  of  tbevr 
request,  capitulo  Clxxvj,  p.  368* 

Row  alle  tbe  pylgryms,  euericbaf  ter  bis  estate,  payned  tbem 
to  make  tbengyns  for  tbassault,  capitulo  Clxxvii  o  371 

Of  tbe  fayr  processions  that  oure  pylgryms  made/to  tbende 
that  god  sbold  gy ue  to  tbeym  vy ctorye,  and  bow  tbey  par- 
donned  ecbe  other  tbeyr  male  talentes  &  euyll  wylles,  cap- 
tu  lo  Clxxviij,  p.  372* 
xx 


Rowouremen  sodenly  transportedin  thenygbttbeyrengyns 
vnto  that  other  parte  of  the  toun  for  tassaylleon  thatsydc. 
capitulo  Clxxix,  p.  374, 

Row,  the  daye  f  olowyng,  oure  peple  made  a  merueyllous  as- 
sault, andbowtbe€urhes  defended  them  subtyllyandwel, 
capitulo  Clxxx,  p.  376, 

Cbe  nygbt  departed  tbe  sayd  assault,  our  peple  witbdrewe 

tbem,and  bow  tbey  watched  tbeyr  engyns,  and  tbe  Curkes 

tbe  toun,  capitulo  Clxxxj,  p.  379. 
now  oure  peple retomedagayn  on  tbemorn  to  thassault,and 

of  tbe  sorceryes  that  they  wold  baue  charmed  one  of  our 

engyns,  capitulo  Clxxxij,  p.  380. 
Of  tbe  dispar  of  our  peple  at  tbe  sayd  assault,  and  bow  they 

wererecomfortedbyaknyghtvnknowenandeuydentmyr- 

acles,  capitulo  Clxxxiij,  p.  382. 
now  tberle  of  Cbolouse  assaylled  vygorously  toward  tbe 

south,  and  of  tbardaunt  desire  that  ecbe  man  bad  to  doo 

wel,  capitulo  Clxxxiiij,  p.  384. 
Oftbe  pryse  and  takyngof  Iberusalem,  and  bow  due  Gode- 

tfroy  entred  fyrston  tbe  walles.and  wbofolowed,  capitulo 

Clxxxv,p.385. 
Of  tbe  mayntenyng  of  our  peple  en  tred  in  to  tbe  toun  toward 

tbe  nortbeest,  and  tberle  of  Cbolouse,  berof  al  ignoraunt, 

assaylled  alwey,  capitulo  Clxxxvi,  p.  388. 
nowxjn  "Curhes  wereslayn  in  tbe  temple,  andof  tbe  gretetre- 

sour  tbat  Cancre  f  onde  in  tbe  temple,  cap.  Clxxxvi],  p.  390. 
Of  tbe  ordenaunces  tbat  tbe  cristen  men  made  tofore  tbey 

vnarmed  tbem  after  tbat  tbe  toun  was  taken,  capitulo 

Clxxxviij,p.392. 
Row  tbe  cristen  men,  tbat  bad  charged  theyr  message  for 

tbeyr  delyueraunce  to  peter  Cberemyte,  knewe  bym,  cap- 
itulo Clxxxix,  p.  395. 
now  tbey  clensyd  tbe  toun  of  tbe  dede  bodyes;  of  many  o- 

tber  ordenaunces,  &  bow  tbe  dongeon  was  yolden  to  tberle 

of  Cbolouse,  capitulo  Clxxxx,  p.  396. 
nowtbebyebaronsoftboostassembledfortolcboseakynge 

of  Iberusalem,  and  tboppynyon  of  tbe  clergye  vpon  the 

same,  capitulo  Clxxxxj,  p.  399. 
now  tbe  due  Godeffroy  was  cbosen  kynge  of  Iberusalem,  and 

bow  be  was  presented  to  our  lord  in  bis  cbircbe  of  tbe  boly 

sepulcre,  capitulo  Clxxxxij,  p.  402. 
now  due  Godeffroy  after  bis  election  requyred  tberle  of 

Cbolouse  tbat  be  sbold  delyuer  to  bym  tbe  tour  Oauyd, 

capitulo  Clxxxxiij,p.  404. 
Of  a  patriarke  electe  &  chosen  inlherusalem,  &  bow  there  was 

f  ounden  a  part  of  tbe  veray  crosse,  cap.  Clxxxxiiij,  p.  406. 

xxj 


Row  due  Godeffroy  payned  bym  toamende  tberoyamme;  of 
bis  good  conditions  and  statutes,  cap,  Clxxxxv,  p.  407. 

Of  the  sayeng  of  the  countesse  of  Boloyne,  moder  of  the 
saydductbatsbesaydofberiij  oldest  sones  was  verefyed, 

capitulo  Clxxxxvj,  p*  4*0* 
OftbewagyngofabatayllewbicbwasbytweneducGodefroy 

and  an  bye  baron  of  Hlmayne,  capitulo  Clxxxxvij,  p.  411* 
Of  a  f  ayr  f  ay  te  of  armes,  wbicb  that  tbe  due  dide  in  a  bataille 

that  tbemperour  of  Hlmayne  bad  ayenst  tbem  of  Saxone, 

capitulo  Clxxxxviij,  p.  413.  jt 

Rowtbe\>alyauntducGodeffroyaugmentedbolycbircbe,and 

be  woldneuer  bere  crowne,  capitulo  Clxxxxix,  p.  416. 
Row  tbe"Curkesof  Hrabe&of  Cgypte  madetbeirsommance 

for  to  come  in  to  Sury  tassaylle  our  cristen  men,  capitulo 

CC,  p.  418, 
Rowtbecrystenmen,wbantbeyknewetbysetydynges,cryed 

to  god  for  mercy  and  for  to  bauevyctorye,  cap,  CCj,  p»420* 
Rowoure  men  assembled  and  ordeyned  tbeyr  bataylles  for 

tofygbteayensttbe'Curkes^ndbowtbe'curkesweredis- 

confyted,  capitulo  CCij,  p.  422, 
Row  somme  of  oure  barons  wolde  retorne  borne,  after  that 

tbey  bad  don  tbeyr  pylgremage,  capitulo  CCiij,  p.  426* 
Row  Buymontand  Bawdwyn,acerteyned  of  tbeconquest  of 

tberusalem,  wold  accomplyssbe  tbeyr  pylgremage,  cap- 
itulo CCiiij,  p*  429* 
Row  our  cristen  men  chosen  a  very  patriark  in  tberusalem, 

and  assigned  to  bym  rentes,  capitulo  CC\>,  p.  432* 
Rowbytbatysementofsommemenagretedebatesourdedby/ 

twenetbeduc&tbepatriarkoftberu8alem,cap.CCvj,p*433. 
Rere  recountetb  tbistorye,  bow  tbe  fourth  part  of  tberusa- 
lem cam  vnto  tbe  patriahe  of  tbe  same,  cap.  CCvij,  p.  435* 
Of  tbe  same  mater,  capitulo  CCviij,  p.  43/* 
Row  due  Godeffroy,  f ortaugmente  cristiente,  assyeged  one 

of  tbe  tounes  of  tbe  "Curkes,  capitulo  CCix,  p.  440. 
Row  tbe'Curkes  brought  presentes  to  tbe  ducGodeffroyeat 

tbe  sayd  siege  &  of  tbeyr  deuyses  to  gydre,  cap.CCx,  p.  442 
RowBuymontveas  taken  in  goyngtoJVIeletene,wbicbecytetbe 

lordoftbetounwoldbaueyoldentobym,cap.CCxj,p.444. 
Row  tbe  due  Godeffroy  assembled  bis  peple  and  entred  in  to 

Hrabye,  and  of  tbe  gayn  that  be  made,  of  two  grete  strokes 

tbat  ne  smote  on  two  camellis,  and  of  bis  detb,  capitulo 

CCxij,p»44^  M  : 

Rere  endetb  tbe  table  of  tbe  content  and  cbaptres  nombred 

of  tbis  present  book,  entitled  tbe  siege  and  conqueste  of 

tberusalem  by  cristen  men. 
xxij 


^ 


f)ere  beaynnetb  tbebokeintituled  Bracks,  and 
also  of  ©odefrey  of  Boloyne,  tbe  wbicbe  spek- 
etb  of  tbc  conquest  of  tbc  boly  tonde  of  Ibe- 
rusakm,  conteynyng  diuerse  warres  andnobte 
faytes  of  Hrmes  made  in  tbe  same  royamme, 
and  in  tbe  con  trees  adiacent,  and  also  many  j 
meruayllous  werkes  bapped  and  fallen,  as  wel 
on  tbis  syde,  as  in  tbo  partyes  tbis  tyme  du- 
ryng,  and  bow  tbe  valyant  due  ©odefrey  of 
Boloyne  conquerd  witb  tbe  swerd  tbe  sayd 
royamme,  and  was  kynge  tbere. 
IO>e  first  cbapitre  treatetb  bow  Bracks  con- 
querd perse  &  slewe  Cosdroe,  &  brought  in  to  | 
Jerusalem  tbe  very  crosse,  capitulo  prtmo  & 

\Y)G  Huncyent  bystoryes  sa~  & 
1  ye  tbat  Bracks  was  a  good  s 
crysten  man,andgouernour 
of  tbempyre  of  Kome,  but  ! 
in  bis  tyme  JNflacbomet  bad 
ben,  wbicbe  was  messager 
of  tbe  deuil,  and  made  tbe 
peple  to  vnderstonde  tbat 
I  be  was  a  propbete  sente  from  our  lorde.  In  tbe 
tyme  of  feracks  was  tbe  fals  lawe  of  JMacbo- 
met  sowen  and  sprad  abrode  in  many  partyes 
of  tboryent,  &  namely  in  Hrabye,  in  so  mocbe 
itbattbepryncesoftbelondesyetwoldnotgyue 
faitb  to  bis  secte  tbat  be  precbid  and  taugbt, 
wbicbe  is  cursed  and  euyl,  but  be  constrayned 
tbem  by  force  and  by  swerd  to,  and  alk  tbeir 
subgets  toobeye  to  rris  commandemens,  and| 


•AST 


'4wa: 


tobyleuem  bte  lawejfrSlban  ewdcBbadeom- 
quSdptret,  and  bad  elayn  p8droc'"b#  *^a! 
Suteeaunt  kynge,  be  brought  agayn  to  Iberuea- 
Cbc  vVcrleee,  wbicbc  tbcy  bad  Wde  ™  » 
Ocrec  and  abode  and  dwellyd  in  tbc  londeof  Sur- 
£?n£l  didedo  ordevne  and  cboee  a  patnarke,  a 
m^b%e7man%S^ 
eril  be  dvdc  do  make  agayn  tbe  ^trcbee.and  ba- 
hXd  tbc  boW  pUcce,  and  cleneed  tbem  tbat  tbc 
Kn<:o9d?oPc  of  Perec  bad  emeton  doun  and 
ScVtrovcd^eraclce  eette  grctc  entente  and  made 
Seoetee  for  to  re wre  tbem, and  wbilee  be  en- 
Sndcd  tber  aboute,  Romar,  tbc  eone  of  Captap, 
wbfebe  was  aprynee  of  Hrabe,  tbe  tbtrde  af  ter JVIa- 
A*m*am  tn  to  tbte  contree  named  palcetyne, 
StTeo'Srtc  nombreof  pcple  tbat  alle  tbe  londe 

2? eouRitb  tbem,  and  bft*,aJ*SS 
force  a  mocbc  etronge  cyte  of  tbat  londe :  namca 
w£c  from  tbens  bedrewe  bym  toward  Damaskc, 
I^Sd  tbe  cvtc&by  etVcngtbe  tokc  byt,ffor 
he  bad ^eo0g«te  aTombrl  of  people  tbat  notbyna 
n\vytrc8&cbymjyq,cmpcroUrncracto,wb»cft 

?ct  dwellyd  in  a  parte  of  tbte  londe  named  Cylyce, 
berde  tydyngce  of  tbie  peple,  and  ecnte  good  ee- 

ficrcbe  tbetr  couine,  for  be  deeyred  mocbc  to  baue 
I  doo  witb  tbyee  peple  on  tbe  fclde,  and  fygbtc 
Ldchaee  tbem  out  of  tbe  londee  &  cvteee  wbtcbe 
IbevedloCrtetente&to  tbempyreofW.But 
™h?«  hie  meeeagere  cam,  be  bad  by  tbcm  know- 
&«?5S?*»t  be  bad  not  peple  ynowb  to 
t>bte  ayenlt  tbem,  ffor  tbey  were  eo  fyere  and  eo 


orguyllous  of  tbe  grete  nombre  of  pcplc  that  tbey 
bad,  that  tbcy  tbougbtc  notbyng  mygbt  restate 
tbemj^Hnd  tber  vpon  Heracles  bad  deliberation 
&  counseilled  witb  bis  peple,  tbat  it  sbold  be  lest 
dishonour  to  departe  and  retome  in  to  bia  contre, 
tban  auff re  bia  peple  to  be  destroyed,  and  mygbt 
not  amende  it  XTbua  tbenne,  be  departed  out  of 
Surye,  by  cauae  tbe  kyngeof  Hrabe  and  bia  peple 
were  of  so  grete  power  and  ao  proude,as  tbcy  tbat 
fonde  alle  tbe  contre  babandonned  totbem,fror  in 
a  abort  tyme  tbey  bad  conquered  alle  tbe  contre  of 
Surye  vnto  Ggypte^One  tbyng  tbat  waa  to  fore 
bappenned  in  tbya  contree,  wbycbc  beelp  mocbe 
tbem  of  Hrabe  tencrece  tbeir  power,  ffor  Cosdroe 
tbe  puisaaunt  kynge  of  perse,  of  wbom  I  baue 
spoken  to  fore,  bad  ben  witb  grete  puiaaaunce  in 
Surye,  and  bad  destroyed  tbe  cytees  and  castels, 
brent  townes  and  cbircbes,  and  slayn  grete  partye 
of  tbe  peple,  and  tbe  remenaunt  bad  brougbt  in  to 
captiuite,  &  toke  tbe  cy te  of  Iberusalem  witb  force, 
and  slewe  witbin  tbe  toun  xxxvjM  men,  Hnd  bare 
away  witb  bym  tbe  veray  crosse  tnat  our  lord  Ibesu 
Cryste  suffred  detb  on  for vs,  and  laddewitb  bym 
tbe  patriarke  of  Iberusalem  named  Zacbarye,  and 
brougbt  bym  witb  bym  witb  tbe  otber  caytyf  s. 


b2 


Here  recountetb  tbistorye  bow  tbat  tbc  puissaunt 
feynge  Cosdroe  wastyd  tbc  empyre  of  Rome,  for 
tauenge  tbc  dctb  of  tbemperour  JVlaurice,  fader  of 
bis  wyf ,  capitulo  i)^^ 

3|0<Gtl  I  sbal  telle  yow  wby  be  bad 
bo  doon ;  lyfce  as  Isayde,bewas 
i  arygbtmygbtykynge,nowbad 
tber  be  an  emperour  at  Rome, 
named  JMauryce,  wbicbe  as  we 
fjmde  was  mocbe  acqueynted 
witb  seint  Gregorie,  &  was  bis 
gossib,ff  ortbesayd  seynt6re- 
fgoryt  bad  crtstenyd  to  bym  a  dougbter  named 
^ariej^Cbis  JVlaurice  gaf  ber  in  maryage  to  tbis 
Cosdroe,and  tber  by  wasagrete  frensbip  bytwene 
tbem  &  grete  alyaunce  bytwene  tbem  of  perse  and 
tbe  Romaynes  as  lonae  as  tbemperour  lyued,  in 
sucbe  wyse  tbat  for  tbe  loue  of  bis  wyf  and  tbe 
Romayns,  wbyebe  were  Cristen,  tbys  emperour 
made  Cosdroe  to  be  baptised  j?  But  after  it  be- 
fylletbat  f ocaslewe  in  treson  tbis  emperour  JMau- 
rice,  and  was  emperour  in  bis  place,  and  was  called 
f  oca  Cezar.  Sdban  Cosdroe  berd  berof  be  bad  mer- 
veyllous  grete  sorow,  grete  desdayne,  grete  orgu- 
yel,  &  grete  bate  ayenst  tbe  pepleof  tbe  Romayns, 
by  cause  tbat  be  wbicbe  bad  slayn  tbeyr  lordevn- 
trewly,  and  was  yet  blody  of  tbe  blood  of  tbe  em- 
perour, tbey  bad  cbosen  to  be  tbeir  lord,  and  bad 
gyuen  to  bym  tbempire;  if  or  tbis  cause  beentended 
to  bis  power  to  burte  and  destroye  al  tbempire  of 
Rome.  Hnd  for  tbis  cause,  for  tauenge  tbe  detb  of 
tbefaderofbiswyf,wbicbeofteenticedbymtberto, 


,be  entred  in  to  the  londcof  Surye,  wbicbe  tbennc 
>was  subget  to  tbempyre  of  Rome,  and  wasted  and 

destroyedit,  lykeas  I  bauesaid  to  fore, and voyded 
•  almost  alle  tbe  peple  tbat  was  tberin.  for  wbicbe 

cause  tbis  kynge  fiomar  aforsaid,and  bis  pepleof 

Hrabe,  tbat  f onde  tbis  londe  so  voyde,  myabt  tbe 

better  doo  tbeyr  wy  lies  witb  alle- 

I  How  tbis  puissaunt  kynge  entred  in  to  Xberusa- 
lem,  &  demaunded  dylygently  of  tbe  TTemple,  and 
i  reedyfied  it,  and  assigned  grete  reuenues  tberto  for 
tentretene  it,  capitulo  iij^^ 

ir>H]^  tbey  cam  in  tbe  boly  cyte 
of  tberusalem,  tbey  f  onde  it  de- 
stroyedand  deserte,  sauf  a  f  ewe 

cristen  men  wbicbedwellyd  tbere 
I  andweresuffred  tbattbey  sbold 
I  lyue  as  cristen  men,  and  make 
agayn  tbeir  cbircbes,  and  tbat 
J  tbey  sbold  baueapatriarkejfiTln 
tbewbile  tbat  tbismygbty  prynceduellid  in  Iberu- 
salem,  be  began  tenquyre  mocbe  ententifiy  of  tbe 
peple  of  tbe  toun,  and  pryncipally  of  tbe  patriarke 
wbicbe  was  named  Sopbonye,  and  bad  ben  cbosen 
jarter  JModeste,  wbicbe  was  deed,  of  wbom  I  baue 
uPa  u  ^for^in  wbat  place  tbe  templeof  our  lord 
naa  bewban  TTitus  tbe  pryncedeffeted&  destroyed 

TnAtuylc'  .c  9bcwid  t0  ty™  tbe  very  certayn  place, 
tlfSlj ef  on^mentes,  and  a  parteof  tbe  muraylles 

}h*ll  ~£C  t^cnnc  ?ct  apperyng,  Remade  anon  to 

be  sought  and  to  be  broubt  to  bym,  without  longe 

taryeng,  grete  nombre  of  masons  &  of  carpenters, 

*and  dide  do  be  sette  stones  of  marble  andof  otber 

b3  5 


manere,  and  allc  tbynges  necessarye  tberto  be  dide 
do  assemble  as  mocbc  as  sbold  nede,  and  demsed 
tbc  mancr  and  ordinance  of  tbc  mesure,  and  of  tbc 
dyspences  for  to  make  tbc  temple*  Hnd,  as  be  was 
a  noble  prynce  of  bye  affaire  and  noble,  be  brought 
anon  to  ende  tbis  tbat  be  bad  emprised,in  sucbe 
wise  tbat  tbe  temple  was  reedef yed  in  sucbe  forme 
andestateasityetapeeretbXbissaidepryncebym 
self  assygned  grete  rentes  and  reuenues  if  or  euer 
more,  for  to  sustene  and  repayre  alle  tbat  sbold  be 
nedef  ul  to  tbedyfices  and  otber  necessities  of  tbe 
temple,  and  for  tbe  seruvng  of  tbe  lygbt,  day  and 
nygbt,  by  tbe  bandes  or  tbem  tbat  be  commysed 
to  kepe  tne  templej^XTber  is  in  tbe  same  temple, 
witbin  and  without,  letters  of  golde  musaique  in 
tbe  Ian  gage  of  Hrabe,  wbicbe  deuy  se  as  we  su  ppose, 
wbo  was  be  tbat  reedefyed  tbe  temple,  and  wbat 
tyme,  and  bow  mocbe  it  coste  to  rebylde  it 
Row  Cbarlemayne  by  bis  lyberalite  gate  for  tbe 
prouffyt  of  cristen  peple  in  betbenes,  tbamytye  of 
betben  prynces,capitulo  iiij^^ 

]r>QS  it  bapped  tbat  tbis  boly 
cyteof  Iberusalcm,  for  tbe  syn- 
nes  of  tbe  peple, was  in  seruage 
&  in  tbe  daunger  of  betben  pe- 
ple longe  tyme,  tbat  is  to  wete 
ccccxxxriijyere  contynuelly,but 
not  allway  in  one  mancreXbey 
were  one  tyme  better,  &  anotber 


tyme  werse,ly  he  as  tbe  lordes  cbaunged,wbicbe  were 
of  dyuerse  maners  and  condicions,  but  neuertbeles 
tbise  peple  were  alway  in  subiectionj!?  It  bapped 


tbatonegretelorde  of  this  saide  lawebadnygbe  in 
bis  seignorye  allc  tbc  londe  of  tboryent,  sauf  only 
YndeXbisprynce  was  namedHaron,and  bis  sur- 
name Ressit.  tbis  man  was  of  so  grctc  cortosye, 

ofsogretelargesscofsobyevygoun&ofsogrete 
affaires  in  allc  good  maners,tbat  yet  tbc  paynems 

spekeofbym,lykeastbeydooinfraunceofCbarle- 
mayn/Cbey  were  botbe  in  onetyme,  tbisHaron  and 
tbis  Cbarlemain ,  &  tberf ore,  in  tbeir  tyme,  tbe  cris- 
ten  peple  in  Xberusalem  were  in  better  poynt  tban 
tbei  bad  euer  be  to  fore  vnder  ony  of  tbe  betben  pe- 
ple, ffor  Cbarlemayn  tbe  good  emperour,wbicbe  so 
mocbetrauailled  and  suffryd  for  our  lorde,and  so 
mocbe  enbaunced  tbe  f aytb  of  Xbesu  Criste,  to  tb- 
ende  tbat  tbe  cristiente  in  Surye  mygbt  be  tbe  bet- 
ter and  more  debonairly  cberyssbed  and  entreated, 
pourcbassed  so  longe  tbat  be  bad  tbe  loue  and  ac- 
queyntaunce  of  tbe  said  Haron,  by  messages  tbat 
wenteandcam.Cdberof  tbis  Haron  badmocbegrete 
ioye,andaboue  alletbepryncesof  tbeworld  belou- 

idandbonouredtbemperourCbarlemayne,andtbe 
cristenpepletbatwerevnderbyrn-Hndalletbeboly 
places  tbat  were  vnder  bis  power,  be  wolde  tbat  tbey 
sbold  be  entretiened,mayntened  andwell  aoumea, 
ly  ke  as  Cbarlemayne  bad  desyred  and  sen te  to  bym 
worde,wberof  it  semed  tbat  our  peple  beynge  tbere, 
weremorevndertbepowerofCbarlemaynetbanvn- 
25  a  Powcr  of  tbc  betben  men,  <Oban  be  mygbt 
^U  i  5  j  mc88aSfCTB  of  Cbarlemayne,  be  charged 
andladedtbemaUewitbricbe88esoftboryent,witb 
clotbesofsylkcwitbspyces^ewelesofgoldcofdy- 

uersefacion6,&witbrycbepreciou86tone6,wbicbe 
b4  ? 


he  sen te  to  bts  f  rende  Cbarlemayn,  &  largely  be  gaf 
and  rewarded  the  messagers.flnd  emonge  al  other 

tbmge^besenteintofraunceanolypbant/Cbisde- 
bonayrte  pourcbased  the  good  Cbarlemayn  for  the 
crysten  men  that  were  in  captiuyte  vnder  the  said 
ttaron,  and  tn  lykewyse  the  saidHaron,  f or  tbeloue 
tbatbebare  to  Cbarlemayn,  pourcbassed  for  other 
ensten  men  that  were  in  al  betbenes  vnder  dyuerse 
lordes,  as  in  6gypte,  &  in  fluf rique,  that  is  to  seve 
m  fllexandrye,  and  in  Cartage,  for  be  sente  arete 
yef  tes  and  mocbe  good  to  sustene  tbe  poore  ens- 
ten  men,  &  sente  grete  presentes  vnto  tbeyr  lordes 
and  matstres  myscreaun  tes,  andamyable  letters,  in 
sucbe  wise,  tbat  be  pourcbassed  tbeir  loue  and  ac- 
gueyntaunce,  by  wbicbe  tbey  conteyned  tbem  more 
debonairly  vnto  enstiens  tbat  were  in  tbeyr  subiec- 

^i^^^^^P^nceCbarlemaynvnto 
tbe  betben  lordes,  tbat  were  f er  fro  bym,  for  it  is  to 
be  btleutd,  tbat  y  f  be  bad  ben  nygbe  to  tbem,  tbat  be 
wold  baue  essayed  for  to  baue  delyuerd  in  another 
maner  the  peple  of  our  lord,  lyke  as  be  dyde  rycrbt 
gloriously  m  many  places. 


8 


Of  tbe  noysetbat  sourded  emongetbe  betben  men 
discording  in  tbeyr  lawe,and  bow  tbey  of  Ggypte 
yssued  out  of  tbeyr  londe,  and  of  tbc  euyllis  tbat 
tbey  dyde,  capitulo  v^a? 

JNf  tbis  season  it  bapped  tbat  a 

grctc  debate  sourdcd  bytwene 

tbe  mescreauntesof  Ggypte,  & 

tbe  mescreaun tes  of  perse,  ff  or 

eueryebe  partye  of  tbis  peple 

wold  baue  tbe  seignourye  vpon 

tbe  otberXbe  rote  of  tbis  grete 

.  bateandenuyesourded&aroos 

oftbatwbycbediscorded,andyetdyscorde,ofcer- 

tayn  poyntesof  tbeyr  lawe,in  sucbe  wise  tbat  tbey 

bauedyuerse  names,  £ortbey  tbat  boldetbelaweof 

.perse  baue  tbe  name  in  tbeyr  langage  Souni.  Hnd 

tbeyoftbelaweofegyptebenamedSiba,andtbey 
be  not  so  f erre  fro  tbe  very  crysten  lawe,as  ben  tbe 
otberj^It  bapped  tbat  tbey  of  Ggypte  yssuedout 
of  tbeyr  londe,&  conquered  alle  tbe  londesvntoHn- 
'  tyocbe,and  emonge  tbeotber  cy  tees  tbat  were  taken, 
'  tbe  boly  cyte  of  Iberusalem  cam  vnder  tbeyr  power 
and  seignouryeXbe  peple  tbat  were  tbere  in  capti- 
uy te  were  resonably  wel  entreated,  tyl  it  bapped  by 
tbe  suffraunce  of  god  tbat  bis  peple  sbold  becbas- 
tised,and  tbat  was  by  adesloyal  and  cruel  lord  and 
calypbe  of  Ggypte, wbicbe  was  named  fiecam.  He 
passed  in  malyce  and  cruelte  allebis  predecessours 
m  sucbe  wysetbat  tbe  peple  of  bis  owen  lawe  belde 
bym  as  wode  of  pryde,  of  rage,  &  of  f alsebed-  6m- 
onge  tbe  otber  tyrannyes,  be  commanded  to  caste 
doun  to  tbe  ground  tbe  cbyrcbe  of  tbe  sepulcre  of 


our  lordelbesu  Cry  ste,  wbicbe  bad  ben  made,  first 
of  Constantyne tbemperour,  by  a  noble patryarke 
of  Iberusalem named  fytaxymcand  after  reedefyed 
by  JVIodest  tbat  otber  patriarke  Jf  In  tbe  tyme  of 
Heracles,  of  wbom  we  baue  spoken  to  fore,  be  sen  te 
to  tbem  afals  calipbe,onebis  bay  tywbicbe  was  lord 
of  Rames,  and  named  Dyart,  Xihxe  dyde  tbe  com- 
mandement of  bis  lord,&  caste  itdoun  to  grounde. 
In  tbis  tyme  was  patriarke  of  tbis  cbyrcbe  a  rigbt 
valyaunt  man  named  Oreste,  and  was  vncle  vnto 
tbis  vntrew  kynge  of  Ggypte,  broder of  bis  moder, 
and  tbis  was  tbe  reson  wby  be  was  so  cruel  ayenste 
crystiente,  fP or  tbe  beetben  men  sayde  tbat  be  sbold 
neuer  bef  erme  in  tbeyr  lawe,  by  cause  be  bad  acrys- 
ten  moder,  Hnd  for  to  take  away  tbis  suspecion  be 
destroyed  tbis  boly  cbircbe  of  tbe  boly  sepulcre, 
wbicbe  was  tbe  f ontayne  &  begynnyng  of  our  very 
creaunce* 

How  tbaffliccyon,  iniuries  &  tormentes  of  crysten 
men  grewe  in  tbe  tyme  of  calypbe  fiecam,  capitulo 

RO  tbenne  fortbon  began  tbes- 

tate  of  our  peple  at  Xberusalem 

Jj  to  be  more  greuous  &  more  sor- 

owful  tban  it  was  wonte  to  be, 

if or  tbey  toke  grete  displaysir  at 

tbeyr  berte  for  tbe  cbircbe  of  tbe 

resurrexion  of  our  lorde,  wbicbe 

tbey  sawe  so  destroyed  emonge 

tbem,  Hnd  on  tbat  otber  syde  tbey  were  charged 

ouer  sorowf  ully  wytb  tributes,  taskes  &  tayllages, 

10 


ayenst  the  custome  &  preuy  leges  graun  ted  to  tbem 
of  betben  prynces,  Hnd  also,  tbey  weredeffendedto 
make  ony  f estes  on  tbe  dayes  of  tbeyr  bye  f estes, 
bu  t  tberme  tbey  were  com  pelly  d  to  trauay  lie  by  force 
and  angre,  or  tbey  were  commanded  not  to  yssue 
outof  tbeyr  bowses  nedores,  but  boldetbem  cloos 
wytbin,  to  tbende  tbat  tbey  sbold  make  no  sem- 
blaunce  of  feste  wytbin  tbem,  Hnd  yet  also  tbey 
mygbt  not  be  tberin  in  pees  ne  assured,  but  tbey 
caste  at  tbem  by  tbe  wyndows  grete  stones,  don  ge, 
dyrte,  and  foul  ordure,  Hnd  yf  it  bapped  som tyme 
a  crysten  man  to  saye  a  ligbt  worde  tbat  dyspleas- 
ed  ony  of  tbe  betben  men,  anon  be  sbold  be  taken 
like  a  murderer,  and  brought  to  pryson,and  sbold 
lose  tberf ore  bis  fyste  or  fote,  or  be  was  brought  to 
tbe  gy  bet,  &  alle  tbe  good  tbat  be  bad,  was  brought 

intotbebandesoftbecalypbe,Sometymetbeywold 
take  tbe  cbyldren  of  tbe  crysten  peple,  botbe  sones 
and  dougbtres,in  to  tbeyr  owne  bowses,  and  made 
tbem  mescreauntes  ayenst  tbeyr  wylle,  and  sorn- 
tymeby  betynge,and  another  wytb  lyes  &  flaterye, 
made  many  yonge  folke  to  renye  our  faytb,  Hnd 
thus  tbey  dyde  to  our  peple  mocbe  sbame  and  grief 
^But  notwytbstondyng,ofood  crysten  men  lefte 
not,  but  admonested  &  contorted  tbe  peple  to  suf - 

u  <J  -^9  w*th  a  Sooc*  ^crtc  anc*  vcr*  P*™**™*  for 
the  faitb  of  Xbesu  Criste,and  promysed  tbem  for 

tbise  shames,  tbe  ioye,  tbonour  and  tbe  glorye  of 

beuen,wbicbeeuersbalendureXbegoodcristenpe- 

l  C<5P*C£ 80 10  ??drc>  tbat  tbey  enforced  tbem  to 
bolde  &  kepe  tbeir  cristen  faytb  tbe  more  surely  by 
cause  tbey  dyde  tbem  so  mocbe  barm,  and  repreen 


u 


C  ebolde  be  oucr  longc  a  tbinge  to 
rccountcto  you  alle  tbemeeeaeeeand 
tbc  myecbiefe  tbat  tbc  pcplc  of  our 
lord  endured  tbat  tyme,  but  I  ebal 
sbewyow  one  exampel,  to  tbende  tbat 
by  tbeeame  yevnderetonde  tbe  more 
of  other.  One  of  tbe  betben  men,  ouermocbe  mali- 
cioue  &  vntrewe,  wbicbe  bated  of  ouermocbe  cruel 
bate  tbe  crieten  men,  be  aduieed  and  tbougbte  on 
a  day  bow  bemygbte  brynge  tbem  to  detb,  ne  eawe 
wel  tbat  alle  tbecytebeld  tbe  temple  in  mocbe  grete 
honour  and  reuerence,  wbicbe  wae  reedefyed,  &  tbe 
laye  peple  named  it  tbe  temple  dominue,  and  tbat 
,  tbey  wbicbe  bad  tbe  charge  to  kepe  it  dide  al  tbeir 
peyne  to  kepe  it  cleen  &  nette,  ]Vow  tberwae  a  place 
,to  fore  tbe  temple,  wbicbewae  named  tbaitreof  tbe 
temple,  wbicbe  tbey  wolde  kepe  ae  dene  ae  crieten 
men  kepe  tbeir  cbircbee  and  aultree,  Hnd  tbie  vn- 
treu  man,  tbat  1  baue  eaid  yow  of  to  fore,  toke  by 
nygbt,  in  euche  wiee  tbat  no  man  eawe  it,  a  dede 
bound  al  roten  and  etynkyng,and  brought  it  in  to 

tbeeameaitretoforetbetemple,Ontbemorn,wban 
tbey  of  tbe  toun  cam  to  tbe  temple,  tbey  fonde  tbie 
dogge*  'Cbenne  eourded  and  arooe  a  crye,  a  noyee, 
and  a  clamour  eo  grete  thumb  alle  tbe  toun  tbat 
tber  wae  notbinge  epoken  of  but  of  tbie  bounde, 
XTbey  aeeembled,  and  put  out  of  doubte  tbat  tbie 
wae  not  doon  ne  caete  there  but  by  tbe  crietyene, 
Hlle  tbe  betben  men  accorded  to  tbie  poyntthatalle 
tbe  crieten  pepleehold  beput  todeth  with  the  ewerd, 
and  there  were  theyr  ewerdee  drawen  redy  out  of 
tboee  that  eholde  emyte  of  all  their  beedee, 
12 





JVlOJ^Ge  the  crysten  men  was  a 
yonge  man  of  a  mocbe  grctc  bcrtc  & 
of  grctc  pyte,  and  spak  to  tbc  peple, 
&  said  to  tbcm:  fair  lordes,  troutbe 
it  is,  tbat  I  am  not  culpable  in  tbis 
'tbinge,  nc  none  of  yow,  as  I  byleue 
icertaynly.  But  it  sbold  be  ouermocbe  gretc  dom- 
mage  yf  we  alle  sbold  deye  tbus,  ff  or  by  tbis  sbold 
alle  tbc  cristendomme  be  quencbid  in  tbis  londe, 
wberf ore  1  baue  tbougbt  in  my  self,  bow  X  sbal  de- 
)lyuer  yowalle,  by  tbayde  of  our  lord*  Zxoo  tbynaes 
}X  desyreof  you,  for  tbe  loueof  god,  tbat  oneis  that 
ye  praye  formy  sowle  in  your  orisons,  tbat  other  is 
tbat  ye  deporte  &  bonoure  my  poure  lygnage.  for 
I  will  take  tbis  tbinge  on  me,and  saye tbat  1  allone 
baue  doon  tbis  f  ayt,  wbicbe  tbey  put  on  vs  allejfiF 
Cbey  tbat  doubted  tbe  detb  bad  grete  ioye  wban 
tbey  berd  tbis,  &promysed  to  bym  tbeir  orisons, 
and  tbonoure  of  bis  lygnage*  In  tbis  maner,  tbat 
tbey  of  bis  lygnage  euermore  on  palmsonday  sbal 
bere  tbolyue,  wbicbe  signyfyetb  Ibesu  Criste  wban 
be  cam  intoiberusalem.TIbus  tbis  man  cam  to  fore 
tbe  lustice,  and  said  to  tbem  tbat  tbe  otber  cristcn 
men  were  notbyng  culpable  in  tbis  fayt,and  sayde 
tbat  be  bym  self  bad  doon  tbe  dede  jj^Cdban  tney 
berde  tbis,  tbey  delyuerd  all  tbe  otber,  and  be  only 
bad  bis  beed  smeton  of* 


13 


fiowat  the  requeste  of  tbempcrourof  Constat!  ty- 
noblc  the  cristen  men  obteyned  lycence  to  bylde 
agayntbecbircbeoftbebolysepulm,capitulovii>ft 

OCr>e  diseases  suffred  tbe  pe~ 
ple  of  our  lord  in  tbis  tyme;  but 
tbesu  cryste,tbatwelcan  settere- 
mediesin  tbinges  merueillous  & 
out  of  ordre,  &recomforte  tbem 
after,  ffortbis  vntrewe  prynceof 
Ggipte,  fiecam,  deyde,  and  bis 
uA  sone,  named  Daber,regned  after 


->ymXbisDaberrenewedtbealyaunceswitbtbem- 
peroure  of  Constantynoble,  wbyebe  bad  to  name 
Romayn^andwasnamedinsumameSliopolitans, 
fie  prayde  tbe  said  Daber,  wbom  be  mocbe  louyd, 
tbat  be  wold  suffre  tbat  tbe  Christen  men  mygbt 
redefye  tbe  cbircbe  of  tbe  boly  sepulcre,  wbicbe  bis 
fader  bad  do  beten  doun :  be  graun  ted  it  for  tbe  loue 
of  tbemperourjjFlt  was  not  longe  after  tbat  tbis 
emperour  deyde,  &  after  bymregned  Constantyn, 
wbicbe  bad  to  surname  JVIonomaques,  wbicbe  is  to 
saye  in  Greceas  a  man  fygbtyng  alloneXbepoure 
cristen  tbat  were  in  Iberusalem  bad  lycence  for  to 
make  agayn  tbeir  cbircbes,  but  tbey  bad  not  tbe 
power,  for  tbeir  pouerte,  and  berupon  tbey  bad  a 
counseyl  tbat  tbey  wold  sende  to  tbemperour,  and 
requyre  bvm  for  goddes  sake  tbat  be  wold  belpe  & 
socour  or  bis  almesse,  for  tbe  reedefyengof  tbis 
boly  werke, 

H 


RSR  was  in  the  toun  of  Iberusalem 

a  good  man  named  loban  Cariain- 

tes,  bom  in  Constantinople,  &  bad 

ben  agretegentilman  of  tbecontre  as 

of  bis  lignage,  but  yet  was  be  more 

gentil  of  berte  &  good  maners,  Tbis 

man  was  comen  on  pylgremage  to  tbe  boly  sepul- 

cre, and  bad  lef te  alle  tbe  bobaunceand  tbonour  of 

tbe  world,  and  bad  taken  tbabyteof  relygion,  ffor 

(to  folowe  our  lord  Ibesu  Criste  in  pouerte  in  tbe 

place  wbere  be  suffred  pouerte  and  messease  for 

vs^TTbis  aaidloban  wasprayd  of  alle  tbe  cristen 

'  peple  tbere,  tbat  be  would  en  trepryse  tbis  message 

>f or  to  goto  tbemperour,  for  tbe  loue  of  god  and  of 

tbem.  Re  dyde  it  witb  a  good  wylle,  and  departed, 

and  cam  in  to  Constantynoble,and  spak  to  tbem- 

perour,  &  didealle  tbat  be  was  requyred,  ffor  tbem- 

perour  graunted  tbat  be  wolde  make  alle  tbe  dis- 

pencestbatsboldbenedefultotbebyldyngof  tbis 
boly  cbircbe,  &  wolde  reedefye  it  at  bis  owen  coste 
j^Cbis  loban  was  mocbe  ioyous  wban  be  bad  so 
wel  accomplissyd  bis  message,  &  toke  leue  of  tb- 
emperour, and  cam  agayn  in  to  Iberusalem,  Cdban 
be  bad  said  to  tbe  peple  tbe  good  tydinges  tbat  be 
brougbt,  tbey  made  grete  ioye,  &  many  wepte  grete 
teeres  for  py  te,by  cause  tbey  tbougbte  tbat  our  lord 
wolde  not  al  way  forgete  tbem,  wban  be  bad  doo  to 
tbem  sucb  comfortejjSPIn  tbis  tyme  was  patriarke 
in  Iberusalem  an  boly  man  named  JSfycef ores. 


'5 


pBJMpeROaR  held  rygbt  wcl  bis 
promesse,fforbesente  without  tary- 
eng  grete  partye  of  bis  tresour,  and 
dide  do  make  tbc  cbyrebe  of  tbc  boly 
ecpulcrc  mocbe  bye  in  tbestate  and 
manere  tbat  it  is  yet,  &  was  f  ul  made 
tbe  yere  of  tbincamacion  of  our  lord  a  JYIxlviij,and 
bad  ben  xxxvij  yere  destroyed,  Cbis  was  rygbt  tbe 
yere  to  fore  tbat  our  peplerecouerd  tbe  cy  te j^^lban 
tbecristen  men  there  bad  made  agayn  tbe  cbircbe, 
tbey  were  mocbe  ioyous,  and  were  also  tberin  well 
comforted  of  all  tbeyr  meseases  and  repreues  tbat 
J  tbey  suffred,  wberof  tbey  bad  grete  plente,  not  only 
in  Iberusalem,  but  also  in  alle  tbe  cytees  aboute,  as 
in  Betbleem,  and  in  tbe  cyte  where  Hmos  tbe  pro- 
pbete  was  bom,named  CecuajgFHs  of  teas  tbeCa- 
lipbe  sente  in  to  tbe  landeanewe  bayly,  so  of  te  were 
sette  on  tbem  new  tributes  &taillages,wbicbe  tbey 
mygbt  not  wel  pave;  and  yf  tbey  payed  not,  anon 
tbey  menaced  tbem  for  to  caste  doun  tbeir  cbircbes 
to  tbe  ground,  &  saide  tbey  bad  of  tbeir  lord  com- 
mandement  sotodoo.'Cbus  in  this  sorowwere  tbe 
cristen  peple,  one  wbile  vnder  tbem  of  Sgipte,  an- 
other tyme  vnder  tbem  of  perse,  but  tbis  was  not 
but  yet  a  begynning  to  tbem,  as  wban  tbey  cam 
vnder  tbe  power  of  tbe  Curques,  If  or  tbe  XTurques 
conquerd  tbe  royame  of  perse,  &  also  of  e<*ypte 
Zbue  tbe  boly  cyte  fylle  in  to  tbeir  demayne,  wbicbe 
demened  it  so  cruelly  and  tormented  it  so  cruely, 
tbat  it  semed  to  tbe  pepleof  our  lord  tbat  tbey  bad 
be  in  frauncbise  and  in  grete  reste  vnder  tbem  of 

egypte  &  of  persej^XTbusbeldetbeCurkestbem 
there  viij  yere, 
16 


,Of  the  burkes,  fro  wens  tbey  cam,  and  bow  tbey 
grewe  in  to  grete  puisaunce,  and  didc  cbese  tbcm  a 
(   yrigc  f  or  to  mayntene  tbeir  warres,  capitulo  viij,*£ 

HOR  as  mocbe  as  we  baue  spoken 
of  tbe  burkes,  and  sballe  of te 
spefce  of  tbem  in  tbis  book,  me 
semetb  good  that  I  saye  to  yow 
fro wbens  tbis  peple  cam  first,  & 
wberby  tbey  bad  so  grete  power. 
HbeOirhe  andOirhemans  cam 
-  out  of  a  lynage,  rote,  &  of  a  con- 
tre  toward  tbe  eest wbicbe  is  in  Hsye,  and werea  pe- 
ple mocbe  rude  and  without  ordynaunce,ne  bad  no 
contreye,ne  no  certayn  dwelling  place,  butwent  all 
,aboute  fro  londe  to  londe,  &  sought  pastures  for 
tbeir  beestis,ne  neuerduellid  in  castel  ne  toun.Hnd 
wban  tbey  wolde  meue  from  one  place  to  another, 
tbenne  wen  teeuery  lynage  by  bym  self,  &  they  made 
in  euery  kynredor  lygnage  a  prince  wbicbe  was  tbeyr 
iusticer ;  by  tbise  prynces,  all  tbeir  mesfeates  and 
trespeaces  were  redressyd  and  amendid,  and  tbey 
obeyed,  and  dide  tbat  be  or  tbey  commandedXbey 
caryed  witb  tbem  alle  tbeyr  tbynges,  seruauntes, 
menages,  bousbold,  tbeir  oxen,  kyen,  sbeep,&  otber 
beestis.In  tbis  tbynge  was  alle  tbeyr  ryebesse,  tbey 
laboured  no  londe  by  eeryng  ne  sowyng,  ne  tbey 
coudeneytberbyenesellcffortbeybadnomoneye; 
but  tbeir  beestes,  tbeir  cbese  &  mylke,  changed  tbei 
for  to  baue  otber  tbinges  tbattbey  n eded j^Cdban 
tbey  bad  ben  in  one  place,  and  bad  nede  to  goo  in 
toanotber,  tbey  sente  tbe  wisest  of  tbeir  peplevnto 
tbe  princes  of  tbe  contre,  &  tbey  made  couenantes 
ci  17 


for  tbem  for  to  dwelle  in  tbeir  wodes  and  pastures 
for  the  tribute  tbat  tbey  sbold  paye  lyke  as  tbey 
sbold  accorde* 

OGd  it  bapped  tbat  a  grete  partye  of 
tbis  peple  departed  fro  tbeotber,  and 
entred  in  to  tbe  londe  of  perse,  and 
fonde  tbis  londe  mocbe  plentyvous 
of  pastures,  &  ryofbt  good  of  sucbe 
as  tbey  neded,  and  gar  to  tbe  kynge 
tbe  trybute  tbat  tbey  were  accorded  fore,  &dwellyd 
tbere  t  can  not  telle  now  Ion  ge.  Oris  peple  began  to 
growe  and  multeplye  in  sucbe  wise  tbat  tbere  were 
of  tbem  a  meruayllous  grete  nombre,  in  so  mocbe 
tbat  tbe  kyngeand  tbey  of  tbe  contre  self  began  to 
baue  grete  doubte  of  tbem  &  fere,  leste tbey  mygbt 
doo  barme  by  tbe  power  tbat  ouermocbe  grewe  and 
encrecedjSFRere  vpon  tbey  bad  a  counseyl  emonge 
tbem,  tbat  tbey  wold  dryue  &  cbasse  tbem  by  force 
out  of  tbeyr  londe,  but  after  tbey  cbaungect  tbeyr 
counseyl,  and  semed  better  tbat  tbey  sbold  charge 
tbem  wytb  sucbe  trybutes  tbat  tbey  mygbte  not 
suffre,  &  tbenne  tbey  sbold  departe  by  annoy,  and 

oftbeirowneagrementlykeas  tbey  were  come/Cbus 
tbey  dyde,  but  tbey  suffred  longe  tbise  greues,  til 
atte  laste,  wban  tbey  mygbte  nomore  suffre,  tbey 
counseylled  emong  tbem  self  tbat  tbey  wold  no- 
more  paye  to  tbe  kyngej^COban  tbe  kynge  berde 
tbis,  be  didc  do  cry e  tburgb  alle  bis  royamme,  tbat 
tbey  sbold  yssue  ou  t  of  it  by  a  certayn  day  tbat  was 
named  to  tbem,  &  tbat  tbey  sbold  passe  tbe  flood 
named  Cobar,  wbicbe  is  vtterist  part  of  tbe  roy- 
amme of  perse  on  tbat  other  syde^Hndwban  tbey 
18 


were  departed,  &  on  the  playn,  tbey  sawe  tbem  self 

ouer  and  apperceyued  that  tbey  were  so  greteplente 

of  peple  that  no  londemygbt  suffer  tbem,ne  with- 

stonde  tbem  yf  tbey  belde  bem  to  gydre*  for  to  fore, 

.wban  tbey  dwellidm  perse,  tbey  dwellid  fer  a/son- 

\dre,in  sucbe  wise  tbat  tbey  knewe  not  tbeir  power; 

'but  now  wban  tbey  sawe  tbat  tbey  were  so  many, 

tbey  bad  meruaillous  grete  desdayne  of  tbat  tbey 

sbad  suffred,and  tbe  pryde  and  grieuousnesof  one 

'prince,  ^bey  take  counseyl  emonge  tbem,and  sawe 

tbat  no  peple  mygbt  resiste  tbem,  but  mygbt  con- 

quere  alle  londes  tber  aboute* 

CTC  one  tbyngedestrobled  tbem,  and 
tbatwas,tbeybadno  kyngeon  tbem* 
Hnd  tbennetbey  dydein  tbis  manere, 
tbey  f  onde  emonge  tbem  an  bondred 
lignages,  of  wbicbe  euericb  bad  bis 
J  meyne,&euery  lignage  brougbtfortb 
an  arowe  marked  in  sucb  wise  tbat  tbe  arowe  of  ecbe 
lignage  mygbt  be  knowen  JP  Hnd  wban  alle  tbise 
arowes  were  brought  to  gydre,  tbey  called  a  lytil 
1  cbylde,  and  commanded  bym  to  take  vp  sucbe  one 
as  be  wolde,  ffor  tbey  bad  acorded  emonge  tbem, 
£jP)  tbat  of  tbe  lignage  tbat  tbe  arowe  sbold  be  taken  vp 
vJi  by  tbe  cbylde,  tbey  sbold  cbese  tbem  a  kynge*  XTbe 
cbylde  tokevp  oneof  a  lignage  tbat  after  was  called 
Selduces.  J^owtbey  knewe  tbat  of  tbis  lignagetbey 
muste  cbese  a  kynge,&  tbey  toke  an  bondred  of  tbe 
most  prudent  &  wise  men  tbattbey  coude  fynde  in 
u  tA  l^nage,  and  commanded  tbat  ecbe  of  tbem 
sbold  brynge  an  arowe,  wberon  bis  name  sbold  be 
wreton,  and  after  tbey  called  tbe  cbylde,  &  bad  bym 
C2  19 


take  vpone  of  tbe  arowes,  and  concluded  emonge 
tbem,  that  be  sbold  be  hynge,  of  wbom  be  tohe  vp 
tbe  arowe  j&YSz  tohe  vp  one,  on  wbicbe  was  wreton 
Selduc,  OnsSelducwas  a  mocbe  goodly  man,  and 
gretely  honoured  in  bis  lignage:  be  was  grete  and 
stronge,agood  hnygbtandwel  proued,andsemed 
wel  to  be  a  good  man  and  of  bye  werhes.  they  cbees 
alle  tbis  man  for  to  be  tbeyr  hynge,  as  tbey  bad 
promysed,  and  dyde  to  bym  bomage  and  f  ealte  by 
otb,  and  obeyed  bym,  and  honoured  bym,  lyhe  as 
18  don  to  a  new  kynge* 

HIS  hynge,  for  tbe  first  of  bis  com- 
mandementis,  commanded  &  made 
do  crye  ouer  all,  on  payne  of  lesyng 
of  tbeyr  lyues,  tbey  sbold  reoasse  & 
goo  ouer  agayn  tbe  flood  of  Cobar, 
and  retome  agayn  in  to  perse,  if  or 
tbey  wold  no  lengre  be  in  danger  for  to  secbe  place 
I  and  stede  wbere  tbey  mygbt  dwelle,  but  wolde  tbat 
[tbey  sbold  conquere  tbis  londe  and  otber,  and  re- 
1  teyne  tbem  in  tbeyr  seignourye,  Lyhe  as  be  sayd  & 
commanded  it  was  don,  fFor  tbe  peple  conquerd  in 
a  sbort  space  by  force  of  armes,  not  only  tbe  roy- 
ame  of  perse,  but  alle  Hrabe  and  otber  contrees  of 
tboryent,and  tohe  tbem  by  strengtbe,andretevned 
tbem  vndertbeyrpowerj^Hnd  tbus  itbapped  tbat 
tbis  peple  tbat  tof  ore  bad  be  so  rude,  and  [yued  so 
outof  ruleas  beestis,af ter gate  in  lasse  tban  f our- 
ty  yere  so  grete  seignouryes,  as  ye  now  bere,  And 
mounted  in  so  grete  pryde,  tbat  tbey  woldeno  more 
baue  tbe  name  lyke  as  tbe  otber  bad  whence  tbey 
came,  wberf  ore  tbey  were  called  TTurhes,  Tbe  otber 
20 


that  wold  not  leuetbeyrmanerof  lyuyngewerealle- 
way  named,  and  yet  ben, TTurquemanajSTCbiae  pe- 
ple, wban  tbey  bad  conquerd  tbia  contre  of  tbory- 
ent,  tbey  wold  entre  in  to  tbe  royamme  of  Sgypte, 
ffor  tbey  were  of  mocbe arete  puiaaaunce,  and  dea- 
cended  in  to  Surrye,andconquered  tbecontre.Hnd 
emonge  tbe  otber  cyteea,  tbey  tofce  tbe  boly  cyte  of 
Iberuaalem,  &aucbe  peple  aa  tbey  fonde  there  tbey 
demened  rigbt  euyl,  &  tormentid  and  greued  tbem 
more  than  tbey  bad  ben  tof ore,  tyke  aa  I  baue  aayd 
to  you  to  fore* 

Of  tborryble  aynnearegn)mgtbenne  in  cryatiante, 
aa  wel  in  tbyae  partyea  aa  in  tbo  partyea,  capitulo 

6  baue  berd  bow  tbia  peple  tbat 
were  cryaten  weredemened,in  tbia 
contre  of  tboryent*  ]Vow  ye  may 
here  bow  tbe  cryatiente  ia  con  ten- 
ed  A  ruled  in  otber  partyea  of  tbe 
world.  Knowe  ye  for  certayn  tbat 
tbia  tyme  were  f ounden  but  f  ewe 
tbat  bad  tbe  drede  of  our  lord  in 
tbeyr  berte*  Hlle  riofbt  wyaneaae,  alle  troutbe,  alle 
py  te  were  fay  lied ;  tne  f ay  tb  of  Ibeau  cry  ate  waa  aa 
it  bad  be  quencbid,  and  of  cbaryte  men  apach  not: 
debatea,  diacordea,  and  warrea  were  nybe  oueral,  in 
aucbe  wyse  tbat  it  aemed  tbat  tbende  of  tbe  world 
waa ny gbe,  by  tbe  aignea  tbat  our  lord  aay tb  in  tbe 
gospeluforpeatylenceaandfamyneaweregreteon 
tbertbe,  f  erdfulnea  of  beuen,  tremblyng  of  tbertbe 
in  many  placea,and  many  otber  tbingea  tbere  were 


that  ought  to  fere  the  bertee  of  men,  to  drawetbem 
fro  euyl,  and  to  brynge  to  tbem  tbe  remembraunce 
of  our  lord,  but  tbey  were  ae  deef  &  blynde  of  beer- 
yng  &  of  seeyng  tbie  tbat  was  nedef ul  to  tbem  for 
to  saue  tbeyr  eowlee  jff  Che  pryn  ces  and  tbe  barone 
brente  and  destroyed  tbe  con  trees  of  tbeyr  neigh- 
bours :  yf  ony  man  bad  saued  ony  tbynge  in  tbeyr 
kepyng,  tbeyr  ownelordestoke tbem,  and  put  tbem 
in  prison  and  in  greuous  tormentis,fortotake  fro 
tbem  sucbe  as  tbey  bad,  in  sucbe  wyse  tbat  tbe  cby  l- 
dren  of  tbem  tbat nad  ben  ricbemen,men  mygbtsee 
tbem  goo  fro  dore  to  dore  for  to  begge  &  gete  tbeyr 
brede,and  sommedeyefor  bungre  andmesease,Hs 
to  tbe  cbircbes  ne  religyouses,  tbey  kept  not  tbeyr 
priuy leges  ne  none  other  frauncbyses,  but  were  ta- 
ken fro  tbem  alle  that  mocbt  be  founden,  as  wel  me- 
obles, rentes,  &  other  tbynges.Ye  tbe  crosses,  cha- 
ly  ces,&  tbe  sensour6,tbey  toke  fro  tbe  cbircbes,  and 
molte  tbem  for  to  selle*Yf  ony  fiedde  to  the  cbircbe 
for  to  warante  and  saue  bym,  be  was  taken  &  draw- 
en  out  vylaynously,as  out  of  a  tauerne  or  an  other 
place*  'Co  monkes  and  clerkes  were  doon  wronges, 

andall  tbe  shames  tbey  mygbtj^Tber  wasnoius- 
tyce,  but  on  tbem  that  trespaced  not  ne  f orfayted 
notbyng,  Che  contrees  were  ful  of  tbeues  and  of 
murdriers:in  cytees  ne  in  good  townes  was  noman 
eureXbere  regiied  customably  dronkensbip,  lech- 
erye,  playengatdyse  and  roberyes:  tber  was  no  ma- 
nage kepte,ne  lignage,and  also  as  of  euyl  lyf  were 
the  clerkes  or  werse,as  tbe  otberXbe  byssbops  ne 
tbe  other  prelates  durst  not  reprebende  ne  cbas- 
tyse  none  for  tbeyr  euyl  werkesXbe  rentes  of  holy 

22 


cbircbetbey  gaf  ne  payd  none,  but  solde  the  benefi- 
ces j0Bx\d  fynably  Isayeyow,  tbat  alle  euylwerfces 
bad  surprysed  alle  crystiente,  in  sucbe  wyse  tbat 
it  semed  tbat  eueryebe  dyde  payne  for  to  serue  tbe 
vdeuylL 

Of  a  batay  lie  tbat  tbemperour  Romayne  of  Cons- 
tantinople badayensta^uissauntprynce  of  tbor- 
ent  named  Belpbet,  capitulo  x&& 

1<HR  lorde,  tbat  by  bis  py  te  cbas- 
tysetb  in  tbis  world  for  to  spare 
in  tbat  otber,  &  can  wel  bete  bis 
cbylderen  tbat  be  louetb  for  to 
saue  tbem,  suffred  a  grete  fliawe 
to  come  in  to  tbe  contre  for  to 
cbastyse  tbe  peple,  ffor  in  tbis 
Ityme,  wban  tbemperour  Rom- 
ayn  was  lord  in  Constantynoblcyssued  out  of  tbe 
partyes  of  tboryent  a  puissant  betben  prynce  na- 
med Belpbet,  wbicbe  brought  witb  bym  so  grete 
plente  or  peple  out  of  perse  and  Surye,  tbat  tbey 
couerd  alle  tbe  contre,  <&  tbe  multitude  was  sogrete 
tbat  it  mygbt  not  wel  be  nombred,  TIbey  brought 
witb  tbem  cartes,  cbaryottes,  borses,  camels,  beuf- 
f  es,  kyen,  and  otber  smale  beestys,  so  grete  plente, 
tbat  vnnetbe  it  mygbt  be  byleuyd,  Hnd  witb  tbis 
grete  apparayl,  tbis  grete  force  and  strengtbe  be 
brought  in  to  tbempire  of  Constantinoble,  and  be- 
gan to  take  &  waste  alle  tbat  be  f ondejS?  Hnd  where 
as  they  fonde  fortresses,  cytees  or  castellis,  they 
tokeit  al  witb  assault,  ffor  nothing  mygbt  resiste 
tbem  but  tbat  tbey  smotealle  doun  to  tbertbe*Hlle 
tbe  peple  bool  fliedde  to  fore  bym, 

c^  23 


RIS  tydynges  cam  to  tbemperour 
that  this  ofrete  lord  bad  supprised 
and  taken  bis  contre*  Hnon  without 
taryeng,be  sente  allc  about  in  tbem- 

Circ,  &  dyde  tbenne  eomone  allc  bis 
oost  &  assembled  as  mocbe  peple 
as  be  coude  gete,  and  as  mocbe  good  as  be  mygbt 
fine  for  tbis  werke  tbat  was  so  ofrete^Oaban  bis 
peple  were  comen,  be  yssued  with  as  many  men  of 
armes  and  of  warre  as  be  mygbt  baue,  and  drewe 
to  tbat  partewbere  this  Belpbet  cam.  fief ondebym 
to  sone,  as  be  tbat  was  f  erre  entred  in  to  tbe  londe* 
dban  tbey  knewe  tbat  ecbe  of  tbem  was  so  nygb 
other,  tbey  ordeyned  tbeyr  bataylles  for  to  fygbte, 
and  assembled  so  cruelly  and  of  so  grete  angre,as 
peple  tbat  bad  ecbe  to  other  grete  bateXbe  betben 
fougbte  for  tenbaunce  tbeyr  lawe,  and  for  tencrece 
tbeyr  power,  and  tbe  cristen  men  defended  tbeyr 
faytb  and  tbe  lawe  of  Ibesu  criste,and  tosaue  and 
kepe  tbeyr  liues  and  franchises,  and  tbeyr  wyues, 
cbilderen,  &  tbeyr  con  tree*  Xlbt  bataylle  was  mocbe 
arete  &  cruelle,mocbe  peple  slayn,&  blode  sbadde 
here  and  there  j^Htte  laste  tbe  ©rekes  mygbt  not 
suffre  tbe  f aytes  ne  tbe  cjrete  plente  of  tbe  mescre- 
auntes,  and  nedde  as  discomfyted  soo  f owle  tbat 
none  retomed  agayn,  but  ranne  away  witboute  or- 
denaunce,  eueryebe  where  be  mygbt  best  saue  bym. 
Cbey  tbat  folowed  tbem  dyde  well  nigb  alle  that 
tbey  wolde/Cbey  slewe  many, and  toke  grete  plente 
a/lyue;  &  emonge  alle  other,  tbemperour  was  taken 
hym  self  ♦  Qlban  tydinges  cam  in  to  the  con  tre  tbat 
the  batayl  was  loste,  &  tbemperour  taken,  ther  was 
24 


grete  soroweof  alle  tboldc  men,  wyues,  &  cbilderen 
that  bad  not  ben  there* 

BLpfietT,  tbis  prynce  of  myscrea- 
untes,seeyng  tbat  be  bad  tbus  playn 
victorye  of  tbc  cristen  men,  mount- 
edandaroos  in  to  grete  pryde,fforbe 
thought  wel  tbat  be  sbold  fyndeno 
barre  tbat  sbold  lette  bym  to  doobis 
will  tn  tbempyre-jfrCClban  be  was  lodged,  and  bis 
boost  aboute  bym,  be  commanded  tbemperour  to 
be  brought  to  fore  bym,  wbicb  bad  be  taken  in  tbe 
bataylle,  and  be  sette  bie  f oote  vpon  tbe  necke  of 
tbemperour,  &  tbis  dyde  be  of  te,  &  wban  be  sbold 
mounte  vpon  borsbak  or  descende,  in  sbame  and 
despiteof  tbe  fay  tb  of  our  lord  and  of  tbe  cristen 
peple.  ttlben  be  bad  tbus  a  wbyle  sbamed,  reuyled, 
and  despyted  tbemperour,  be  lete  bym  goo,  and 
delyuerd  bym  and  som  of  bis  barons,  tbat  bad  be 
prisoners,  Hnd  wban  tbemperour  was  come  agayn 
in  to  Constantynoble,  tbe  barons  of  tbe  londe  re- 
puted bym  as  ouermocbe  dishonoured,  as  be  tbat 
bad  shamefully  conduyted  tbe  bataille,  and  toke 
bym  and  raced  out  bis  eyen,and  let  bym  vse  bis  lif 
m  sorowe  and  sbame, 

RIS  prynce  Belpbet  began  to  take 
alle  tbe  londe,  in  sucb  wyse  tbat  in 
a  lytil  wbyle  be  conquerd  fro  Lali- 
cbe  in  Surye,  vnto  tbe  see  called  tbe 
braas  of  Seynt  George,  wbicb  is  wel 
xxx  ioumeyes  of  lengtbe,  and  x  of 
ibrede,  &  in  som  place  xv,  Hnd  wban  be  cam  to  tbe 
'braas,  be  wold  baue  passed  in  to  Constantinoble, 

25 


i 


wbicbe  is  on  that  other  side  of  that  litil  see,  but  be 
mygbt  notfinde  sbippis  ynowgb.  TIbus  tbe  cris- 
ten  pepleof  tbat  londe  for  tbeyr  synnes  werevnder 
tbis  cruell  peple;  emong  tbe  otber,  tbe  noble  &  bye 
cyte  wbere  Saynt  peter  was,  &made  fyrst  as  cbyef 
of  cristente,  tbat  isHntiocbe, was  taken  in  tbeende, 
and  subgette  vnto  tbeXurkesXbus  bad  tbis  Bel- 
pbet  in  bis  seygnorye  and  demayne  tbe  londes  na- 
med Celessurye,  tbe  two  Cilices,  pampby lee,  Lyce, 
Ly  came,  Cappadoce,  ©alace,  Betbyne,  &  a  parte  of 
tbe  lasse  Hsye.  Hlle  tbise  countrees  ar  mocb  fertile 
andf  ul  of  peple^Cbis  betben  peple  began  to  bete 
doun  tbe  cbircbes  and  greue  tbe  cristen  peple,  as  it 
plesyd  tbem,  ffor  so  grete  affraye  and  drede  was  in 
tbe  bertes  of  tbe  cristen  peple,  tbat  tbey  alle  fledde  xj 
iourneyes  fro  tbe  said  BelpbetXbis  was  a  tbynge 
tbat  greuydmerueylously  tbe  boly  cyteof  Iberusa- 
lem  and  tne  peple  of  tbe  coun  tre,  ffor  whiles  tbem- 
perour  of  Constantynoble  was  in  good  pees  and 
in  bis  arete  power,  many  grete  socours,  grete  com- 
fort of  ryebe  yef tes  &  of  large  almesses  cam  vnto 
tbe  peple  of  Surye,  and  also  fro  tbe  londe  of  Hnti- 
ocbe.  But  tbenne  tbey  bad  loste  alle,  and  bad  none 
bope  tbat  euer  ony  ayde  ne  socours  sbold  come  to 
tbem,  wberf  or  tbey  supposed  euer  to  be  in  seruage 
and  captyuite  without  ony  raunsom. 


26 


Of  many  maners  of  tormens  that  the  cristen  peple 
suffred  for  tbeyr  synnesin  that  time,  capitulo  %]& 

"RY^BS  that  this  tyme  was  so 
peryllous  for  the  scygnoryc  of 
tbysc  betben  men,  cam  oftymes 
in  pylgremages  tbe6rekes&  tbe 
Latyns  in  tolberusalem  ffor  to 
praye  oure  lord  &  cry  e  bym  mer- 
cv,tbatbewoldnotforgetetbus 
bis  peple*Yet  many  cam  tbeder  in 
gretepery  lie,  ffor  alle  tbe  coun trees  by  wbicbe  tbey 
sbold  passe  were  f  ill  of  tbeyr  enemyes,  &  of  te  tbey 
were  robbed  and  slayn,  Hnd  wban  tbey  mygbt  es- 
cape and  come  to  tbe  boly  cy te,  tbey  mygbt  not  en- 
tre  tberin,  but  ecbe  persone  muste  paye  a  besaunt 
for  try  bu  te,wberof  bapped  of  te  tbat  tbey  tbat  were 
despoylled  bad  not  wberof  tbey  mygbt  paye  tbis 
tribute,andmygbt  notentre  in  to  tbe  town,  and  for 
tbis  tbey  suffred  colde,bungre,and  grete  mesease, 
and  many  deyde,Hnd  berof  tbe  cristen  men  of  tbe 
toun  were  mocbe  greued,  for  tbey  susteyned  tbem 
tbat  lyued,  and  muste  burye  tbem  tbat  were  dede, 
and  secbe  sucb  tbyng  as  was  nedef  ul  to  tbem  self 
and  otber,  TTbey  tnat  mygbt  entre  in  tbe  toun  were 
yet  more greuea, ffor  som  were  murdred  in  tbe  boly 
places  of  tbe  cyte  secretely,  and  was  doon  to  tbem 
mocbe  sbame  and  repreef  openly,  0>er  was  fyltbe 
caste  in  tbeir  visage,  &  otber  spy tte  in  tbe  myddes 
of  tbeyr  visage,  and  som  men  bette  tbem,wberf  ore 
tbe  cristen  men  of  tbe  town,  tbat  bad  som  acqueyn- 
taunceswitb  tbe  betben  men,conduytedand  ladde 

27 


,tbem  to  tbeyr  pylgremages,  for  to  kepe  tbem  to 
tbeyr  power. 

■JI^eRe  were  in  tbe  cyte  of  tbem  of 
)Malf  e,wbicb  is  a  cy  teof  puy  ell,wbicb 
bad  a  cbircbe  in  tberusalem  named 
Saynte  JVIarye  de  la  Latyne,  where- 
by was  an  hospital  of  poure  peple, 
J  wbere  as  was  a  cbappel  tbat  was  na- 
med sayn  t  Xoban  eieymon  t,  tbis  saynt  loban  was 
a  patriarke  of  HUesandrye.  Cbabbot  of  tbe  cbircbe 
of  our  lady  bad  in  bis  cure  and  in  bis  pourueyaunce 
tbis  hospital,  and  pourcbassed  alle  tbat  was  nede- 
f  ulf  or  tbem :  there  were  receyuyd  alle  tbe  pour  pyl- 
gryms  whicbe  badnot  wberof  to  lyue,  &  this  bows 
was  of  mocbe  gfrete  chary tej^Cbus  were  the  cristen 
peple  in  gfrete  disease  in  tbe  toun,  but  there  was  no- 
tbyng  tbat  displesyd  tbem  as  whan  they  badmade 
tbeyr  deuocions  atte  holy  places  in  tbe  toun,  with 
grete  trauey  lies  and  arete  costes,  &  whan  they  were 
m  tbe  seruyse  of  our  lord,  tbe  hetbenmescreauntes 
cam  in  with  grete  noyse  and  crye,  &  satte  vpon  tbe 
au Iters,  tbrewe  doun  the  chaly  ces,  brake  the  lampes, 
and  the  tapres.Hndyet  for  more  to  angre  tbe  cris- 
ten peple,  they  toke  of  te  tbe  patriarke  which  was 
tbenne,  by  tbe  berde  and  by  the  beer,  &  tbrewe  bym 
doun  to  the  grounde,  &  def  owled  bym  vnder  tbeyr 
feet,  of  wbiche  alle  cristen  te  bad  grete  sorowe  and 
mocbe  pytcjffln  tbyse  sorowes  and  meseases  were 
thecristenmeninthelondeofSurye,asibauesayd 
you  to  fore,  CCCC  four  score  and  ten  yere,  and  al- 
wey  cryed  vnto  our  lord  for  mercy  with  syghes  and 
teeres,  and  prayde  bym  deuoutly  tbat  be  wold  not 
28 


y 


alle  f orgctc  tbem.  But  the  good  lord,  that  after  the 
tempeste  and  derke  weder  can  wcl  brynge  clerenes 
and  fayr  season,  bebclde  this  peple  in  pyte,&sente 
to  tbem  comforte  &  delyuerance  of  tbe  tormentes 
mi  wbicbe  tbey  bad  longe  ben. 
Row  af tir  tbey  bad  ben  four  CCCC  ixxxx  yere  in 
seruage  of  tbebetben  peple, our  lord  pourueyed  re- 
medye  for  bis  cristen  peple,  capitulo  xijV£*£ 

fiHGS  wel  said  to  you  byf  ore, 
tbatoutof  many  londes  cam  pil- 
grymsin  toIberusalem.Bmong 
alleotber  tber  wasonewbicb  was 
of  tbe  royame  of  fraunce,  bom 
in  tbebissbopprycb  of  Hmyens, 
tbat  is  towete,one  named  peter, 
wbicbe  bad  ben  an  beremyte  in  a 
'wode,  and  tberfor  be  was  called  peter  ITberemyte. 
TTbis  was  a  litil  man  of  body,  and  as  a  persone  bad 
in  despite,  and  lytil  preysed  by  semblaunt,  but  be 
was  of  amerueyllous  grete  berte,  of  mocbe  clere  en- 
gyne,and  good  vnderstondyng,&  spafc  rigbt  wel. 
Slban  be  cam  to  tbe  gate  of  Inerusalem,  be  payd  tbe 
trybute  of  a  besaunt  and  entred  in  to  tbe  cyte,  and 
was  lodged  in  a  good  cristen  mans  bows  JSP  tbis 
Petrealweyenquyredanddemaundedmocbeofbis 
boost,  of  tnegouernaunce  and  estate  of  tbe  cyte,& 
bow  tbe  cristen  men  conteyned  tbem  vnder  tbe  be- 
tben  men,  and  bowtbeyr  lord  demened&aouerned 
tbem.  r>isboost,wbicbe  bad  longe  ben  in  tbetowne, 
tolde  to  bym  alle  tbe  maner  playnly  of  tbe  tymes 
passyd,&  bow  tbe  cristen te  bad  be  defowled,  and 
tbe  boly  places  dishonoured,  wbicbe  was  sorouful 

29 


■*  * 


tobere,Hnd  be  hym  self , which agood while  had  be 
in  the  toun  for  to  doo  hie  pylgremage,  sawe  wel  & 
perceyued  a  grete  partye  of  the  caityfnes  in  which 
the  cristen  men  were*  He  herd  saye  that  the  patri- 
ate wae  a  good  wyse  man,  deuote  and  religyous, 
which  wae  named  Symeon,  peter  thought  that  he 
wold  goo  and  spehe  with  hym,  &  demande  of  hym 
the  estate  of  the  cbircbes,  of  the  clergye,  and  of  the 
peple:  he  camtobymt&dydesoa6  betbougbt,and 
ashed  of  hym  alletbisetbyngesXbe  patriarke  ap- 
perceyuedwel  by  bis  wordes  and  his  countinaunce, 
that  be  was  a  man  that  dreddegod,and  right  wyse 
and  vnderstondyng,  Hnd  began  to  telle  to  hym  by 
layser,  alle  the  meseases  of  the  cristen  peple, 

>HJV  peter  herde  thise  sorowes  of 
the  moutheof  this  good  man ,  whom 
hebyleuydwelthe  coudenotabsteyne 
hym  fro  grete  sygbes,  and  wepyng 
manye  teeres  for  pyte,  and  of te  de- 
manded of  the  patriarke  yf  ther  were 
(ony  conseil  and  remedye  for  this  werke  jS^Hnd  the 
iholy  and  deuote  patriarke  answerd  hym :  Cde  haue 
made  many  ory sons  &  prayers  vnto  oure  lord  god 
for  to  receyue  vs  in  to  his  mercy  and  grace,  but  we 
(apperceyue  wel  that  our  synnes  be  not  yet  purged, 
ff  or  we  ben  certaynly  in  the  culpe  and  blame,  whan 
oure  lord  whiche  is  so  rightwys  holdeth  vs  yet  in 
the  payne.  But  the  renomme  of  the  contrees  by- 
yonde  the  montaynes  is  moche  grete  here,  that  the 
peple  there,  and  specially  of  them  of  f  raunce,  ben 
good  cristen  peple  &  moche  stedf ast  in  the  f  aytb, 
and  therf  or  oure  lord  holdeth  them  at  this  day  in 

30 


mocbe  grete  peas  and  in  bye  puyssaunce.  Vf  tbcv 
wold  praye  our  lord  tbat  bewolde  bauc  pyte  on  vs, 
or  yf  tbat  tbey  tokc  counseyl  for  to  socoure  vs,  we 
baue  certaynly  bopc  tbat  our  lord  sbold  belpc  vs 
by  tbem  for  taccomplyssbeourewerke.  for  yc  see 
wel  tbat  tbeGrekesandtbemperourof  Constanti- 
nople, wbtcbe  ben  our  neygbbours  and  as  kynnes- 
men,  mayenot  belpene  counseyle  vs,  flp or  tbey  tbem 
£self  ben  as  wbo  saytb  destroyed,  &  baue  no  power 
:  todefendetbeyr  owne  lande. 

RHJV  peter  berd  tbis,  beanswerd  in 
tbismaner:  fayrfader,troutbeitis 
tbat  ye  baue  sayd  of  tbat  londe  fro 
whence  am  I.  Hnd  god  be  thanked, 
the  faytb  of  oure  lord  is  mocbe  beter 
bolden  tbere  and  kepte,  tban  it  is  in 
ony  otber  londes  tbat  I  baue  ben  in,  sy tb  tbat  I  de- 
parted on  my  journeye  fro  my  contre.Hnd  I  byleue 
[ certaynly  tbat  if  tbey  bad  knowlecbe  of  tbe  mes- 
'ease  &  seruage  in  wbicbe  tbise  betben  mysbyleuyd 
peple  bolde  you  inne,  tbat,  by  tbe  playsyre  of  al- 
mygbty  god,  by  tbeyr  good  wylles,  tbey  sbolde 
f  ynde  counseyl  &  ayde  in  tbis  your  grete  nede  and 
werk,  Cdberf or  I  counseyl  you  one  tbyng,  yf  it  be 
aggreable  to  you  and  seme  good,  tbat  is,  tbat  ye 
sende  your  lettres  vnto  oure  boly  fader  tbe  pope, 
&  to  tbe  cbircbeof  Rome,  vnto  tbe  kynges,prynces 
and  barons  of  tbe  Occident  &  weste  partem  wbicb 
late  tbem  weteplaynly  bow  it  iswitb  you,  Hnd  tbat 
ye  crye  to  tbem  for  mercy,  tbat  tbey  wolde  socoure 
you  for  tbe  loue  of  god  and  for  bis  faytb  in  sucbe 
maner,  tbattbey  mygbt  bauebonoure  in  tbis  world 

31 


. 


' 


and  sauacion  of  tbcir  souks  in  tbat  otber,  Hnd  for 
that  ye  be  pour  peple,  ye  baue  no  nede  to  make  grete 
dispencis ;  yf  ye  tbynhe  I  be  suflkiaunt  for  so  grete 
a  message,  ffor  tbe  loue  of  Xbesu  Criste  and  re- 
myssyon  of  my  synnes,  I  sbal  entreprise  tbis  vy- 
age,  and  offre  my  self  to  tahe  so  mocbe  traueyl  for 
yow.  Hnd  X  promyse  truly  to  you  tbat  X  sbal  late 
tbem  baue  Imowlecbe,  bow  it  is  witb  you,  yf  god 
sende  me  grace  to  come  tbydre  jg?Gdban  tbe  patri- 
ate berde  tbis,  be  bad  mocbe  grete  ioye*  Re  sente 
anon  for  tbe  moost  saddest  &  wysest  men  of  tbe 
cristen  peple,  andfortbe  clerhes  and  laye  men,  and 
sayde  and  sbewde  to  tbem  tbe  bounte  and  tbe  ser- 
uysetbat  tbis  good  manoffryd  to  tbem Xbey  were 
rigfbt  glad,andf  tbanked  bym  mocbe* 'Cbenneanon, 
witboute  taryenge,tbeymade  tbeyrwrytyngesand 
sealed  tbem  witb  tbeyr  seales,  &  delyuerd  tbem  to 
Peter  Tberemyte* 

RowtbesaidpeterCberemyteentreprisedtbemore 
bardyly  bis  vyagc,  by  tbapparicion  or  vision  tbat 
be  sawe  in  bis  sleep,  capitulo  xiij^,*? 

|RGLY  our  lord  god  is  swete, 
pyteous,  and  mercyf ul,  ffor  be 
wylle  not  suffre  to  peryssbe,  ne 
to  be  loste,  tbem  tbat  baue  in 
bym  ferme  and  stedfast  bope, 
and  wban  tbe  men  lacke  belpe, 
god  sendetb  to  tbem  bis  ayde, 
Hnd  tbis  may  clerely  be  seen  in 
tbis  werfce,  for  fro  wbens  cometb  tbat  tbis  pour 
man,  wbicbe  was  lytil  and  despysed  persone,  wery 
&  brused  of  so  grete  ioumeye  &  waye,  tbat  durste 


enterprise  so  grete  a  dtdz  and  werke?  Row  mycrbt 
bewene  tbat  our  lord  wolde  accomylyssbe  so  grete 
a  werke  by  bym,  as  for  to  dylyure  bis  peple  fro  tbe 
myserye  and  caytyfnes  tbat  tbey  bad  ben  in,  nyqb 

SueCyere?  But  tbis  bardynesse  cam  to  bym  of 
e  grete  cbarytetbat  be  bad  in  bym,  and  tbe  faytb 
wrought  in  bym  for  tbe  loue  tbat  be  bad  to  bis 
bretberen  j0Xr\  tbise  dayes  bapped  a  tbynge  tbat 
mocbe  lyft  vp  bis  berte  to  poursue  bis  enterprise; 
if  or  tbis  good  man,  wban  be  bad  taken  tbis  mes- 
sage and  charge  tberof ,  be  wente  mocbe  of ter  tban 
bewaswoonte  to  doo  to  tbe  boly  places  in  tbe  cyte, 
and  cam  on  an  euentide  to  tbe  cbircbe  of  tbe  boly 
sepulchre,  and  made  there  bis  prayers  deuoutlv 
with  grete  plente  of  teeris, 

fXTeR  tbis  be  sleepte  vpon  tbe  pa- 
mente,  and  bym  semed  tbat  our  sa- 
ueour  Ibesu  Criste  cam  to  fore  bym, 
and  charged  bym  to  doo  this  same 
message,  and  said  to  bym :  petre, 
aryse  vp  bastely,  and  goo  surely  tbe- 
dyrastbou  bast  entreprised,fforIsbalbewitb  tbe. 
It  is  now  tyme  from  bens  forth,  that  my  holy  cyte 
be  clensed,  and  tbat  my  peple  be  socouredjS^petre 
awoke  in  tbis  poynt,  and  was  fro  tban  fortbon 
more  abandouned  vnto  tbe  waye,  and  also  sure  as 
™  his  ioumeye  &  message  bad  be  doon.  Re  entermed 
W  and  appoyn  ted  bis  departyngf  or  to  doo  bis  erande, 
and  bad  leue  and  benediction  of  tbe  patriarke.  Re 
descended  doun  to  tbe  see,  and  f onde  tbere  a  sbyp 
of  merchandise  tbat  wolde  passe  in  to  puylle.  Re 
entred  m  to  tbe  ship,  tbe  which  bad  good  wynde, 
dl  33 


--■=*. 


and  in  sborte  tyme  arryued  at  Ban  peter  yssued 
out,  &  wente  by  londe  to  Romej^fie  fonde  in  the 
contre  the  popeVrban,&salewed  bym  in  the  name 
.of  the  patriarke  and  of  the  cristen  peple  of  Surye, 
^and  delyuerd  to  bym  tbeyr  lettres,  &  sayde  to  bym 
by  moutbe,  mocbe  truli  and  wysely,  tbe  grete  sor- 
owes,  tbe  miseryes  and  vyletees  tbat  tbe  crieten 
suffredtbennein  tbe  boly  londe,  as  be  tbat  wae  ex- 
pert tberof  ,and  coude  wel  saye  to  bym  tbetroutbe* 

Of  tbe  persecutions  of  tbe  cbircbe  in  tbat  tyme,  & 
bow  tbe  pope  Vrban  was  putte  oute  of  tbe  see  of 
>Rome  by  tbebyssbop  of  Rauenne,  capitulo  xiiij,*? 

]JV  tbis  tyme,  fiarry  tbemperour 
ofHUemayne,badagrete  debate 
ayensttbe  pope  Gregory  tbe  se- 
uentb,  to  fore  tbis  Vrban,&  tbe 
discordearoos  for  tbe  rynges  & 
tbe  croses  of  tbe  bissboppes 
tbat  were  dzdt  in  tbem  pyre*  for 
sucbe  a  customme  bad  ronne  a 
[grete  wbyle  tbere,  tbat  wban  tbe  prelates  were  dccdr 
'tberynges&  croses  of  tbem  were  brought  to  tbem- 
perour, and  be  gaf  tbem  to  bis  clerkes  &  bis  cbapy- 
j  layns,  or  wbom  be  wolde,andsente  to  tbe  cbyrcbes, 
&  bad  tbem  tbattbey  sboolde  bolde  tbem  for  tbeyr 
bissbops  &  arcbebissbops  without  otber  election 
and  otber  proef,  by  wbicbeboly  cbircbe  wasadom- 
maged  sore,  for  be  sente  of  te  personnes,  tbat  were 
not  propice  tbertojfiTCbepopeGregorie  sawe  tbat 
.tbis  custome  wasayenst  tberigbtand  lawewreton, 


w 


m 


and  alsoayen6treason,andprayd  bymamyablvto 
Icuc  tbis  for  the  loue  of  god,  of  boly  cbircbe,  &  for 
sauacion  of  bis  sowle,  if  or  it  apperteynednotbyna 
to  bym.  rbemperour  wold  not  Icuc  tbie  for  tbe 

pope,wberfortbepopecursedbym,beroftbemper- 
our  bad  so  grete  despite  and  sogrete  desdayne,  tbat 
incontincntbc  began  towarre  ayensttbecbyrcbeof 
Rome.Hnd  ayenst  tbe  pope  be  made  to  rise  an  ad- 

uersarye,  tbarcbiebissbop  of  Rauenne,  wbicbewas 
named  Gilbert,  and  was  wel  lettred  &  mocbe  ricbe. 
Cbis  bissbop  trusted  ouermocbe  in  tbayde  of  tb- 
emperour,and  in  tbe  plente  of  bis  rycbesse,andbe 
cam  toRome,anddeposedand  put  out  tbepopeof 
bis  see  by  fauour  and  force.flnd  becam  so  f eCand 
of  so  grete  pryde  tbat  be  bad,  tbat  be  f  orgate  bis 
wy  tte  and  reson  tbat  be  ougbt  to  baue  by  bis  clercrv, 
>and  sette  bym  self  in  tbe  see,  and  made  bym  to  be 
bolden  for  pope,  as  betbatwelwende  to  bauebenit. 
RHQe  said  you  to  fore,  tbat  at  tbat 
tvme,  cristen  peple  werein  gret  paryll 
;,  tburgbout  alle  tbe  world,  and  tbat 
%  tbe  comandemensoftbegospel  were 
'  mocbe  forgotcn,  &  of  boly  cbyrcbe, 
-1  &  men  ranne  faste  &  baboundantly 
to  tbe  werkes  of  tbe  deuyl  and  to  alle  synnes.  Hnd 
,  whan  tbis  discorde  &  scysme  was  so  grete,  tbenne 
{alle  troutbewas  goon  and  tbefaytbof  our  saueour 
W59  lJr c  i8*  bad  b™  alle  pery  ssbedXbe  by  ssbop- 
pes,  theabbottes, and  tbe  prouostes  were beten  and 
sette  in  prison,  and  alle  tbeyr  tbynges  were  taken 
awey  fro  tbem,namely  by  tbem  tbat  beldeof  tbem- 
perour.  in  tbis  debate  was  donealle  tbesbamesand 

d2  35 


repreues  to  the  popejjTCbennetbe  holy  fadersawe 
that  be  was  not  obeyed  as  be  sbold  be,  and  tbat  be 
was  in  parylof  bis  lyf,and  bewent  in  topuylle,by 
tbe  belpeand  counscyl  of  Robert  Guicbaft,  wbicbe 
tbenne  was  lord  of  tbe  contre.  Xlbxe  Robert  dyde 
vnto  our  boly  fader,  and  to  bis  peple,  as  mocbe  of 
honour,  of  servyse  &  boun  te  as  tbey  wold  take,  and 
yet  more* 

C  laste  our  boly  fader  wente  bym  in 
to  Salerne,and  becam  seke,  and  laye 
j  doun  and  tbere  deyde  and  was  tbere 
buryedj^Cbe  cardynals  tbat  were 
tbere  cbose  another,  wbicbe  was  na- 
med Victor,  wbicbe  endured  but  one 
monetbortbereaboutes.flfterbym,tbeycboo8tbis 
Vrban  tbatlspacfcof  toforeXbis  Vrban  sawetbat 
>  tbemperourwasyetin  bismalicc  and  bisangre,  and 
durst  not  abandone  bym  self  to  bym,  ne  put  bym 
in  bis  power,  but  belde  bym  in  tbe  forteresses  of 
some  barons,  tbat  for  goddes  sake reteyned  bym  in 
grete  doubtejS?<Qbiles  be  was  in  tbis  poynt,  peter 
^beremyte  cam  to  bym,  &  brougbt  to  bym  tbemes- 
sage  fro  tbe  crysten  men  in  tbe  boly  londe.  Our  boly 
fader  tbe  pope  fcnewe  mocbe  wel  tbe  bounte,  tbe 
wy  tte,  and  tbe  religion  tbat  was  in  tbis  peter,  and, 
ansuerd  to  bym  mocbe  swetly,  and  sayde  tbat  be 
sbold  goobastyly  spefce  to  tbe  princes  and  barons 
of  tbe  royame  of  f  raunce  of  tbis  werke,  for  yf  be 
mygbt  escape  sauely  f ro  tbe  bandes  of  tbemper- 
our,  be  bym  self  bad  intencion  to  passe  tbe  mon- 
taygnes,and  drawe  bym  toward  tbo  parties  for  to 
belpe  tbe  better  to  tbis  wberke,  yf  it  were  possible, 
36 


ne^tyf e  peter  was  right  glad  of 
this  goodanswereof  our  boly  fader, 
and  passed  Lombardye  &  tbe  mon~ 
taygnes,  and  cam  in  to  france,  and 
began  diligently  to  seke  tbe  barons, 
like  as  be  was  sent  expresly  to  tbem, 
and  tolde  to  ecbe  of  tbem  tbe  sbames  and  discon- 
venyences  tbat  tbe  betben  peple  dyde  to  tbe  crysten 
f olke  in  tbe  boly  londe,  Hnd  tbe  same  besaid  to  tbe 
mene  peple,  for  be  assembled  tbem  oftymes,  and 
tolde  to  tbem  tbe  sorouful  state  of  tbe  londe  &  cy  te 
of  Iberusalem,  in  sucbe  wyse  tbat  be  made  tbem  to 
wepe  many  ateere,Hnd  at  euery  tyme  be  made  some 
truyt  by  mssayeng&  exbortyng  tbe  peple  to  ovue 
socours  to  tbe  boly  lande,  Hnd  like  wise,  as  saynt 
lobanBaptysteprecbed  to  fore  to  make  tbe  way  to 
fore  Ibesu  Cryste,  so  in  tbe  same  wyse  tbis  peter 
brought  tydynges  to  fore  tbe  comyng  of  our  boly 
fader,  wberf ore  be  bym  self  wban  be  cam  was  tbe 
better  berd  and  byleuid,  and  tbe  more  dyde  in  tbis 
werke* 

Of  ageneral  counseyl  tbat  tbe  pope  Vrbanordeyn- 

cdfortbereformacionofbolycbircbe&tbamende- 
ment  of  tbe  peple,  capitulo  xv&& 

tbe  yere  of  tbyncamacion  of 
oure  lorde  JVI  Ixxxxv  regned  tbe 
fourth  Rarry,  kyngeof  Mlma^n 
and  emperour  of  Rome,  tbe  xviij 
yere  of  bis  regne,  and  xij  of  bis 
empire,  and  in  fraunce  regned 
tbennepbilipe,tbe  soneof  Har- 
ry ♦  XTbenne  sawe  our  boly  fader 
d3  37 


tbe  pope  Vrban,  that  tbc  world  was  mocbe  empeyr- 
ed  andtorned  to  evyl,&belde  a  counseyl  tbervpon 
of  tbc  prelates  of  ytalye  at  playsance,  where  be 
made  establyssbemens  by  tbeyr  counseyl,  for  ta- 
mende tbemaners  of  tbe  clergye  &  of  tbe  laye  peple 
j&Jlf ter  be  knewe  wel  tbat  be  was  not  sure  in  tbe 
power  of  tbemperour,  and  passed  tbe  montaynes 
and  cam  in  to  tbe  royameof  f  raunce,  He  f onde  tbe 
peple  euvlendoctrynedand  ouermocbe  enclyned  to 
synne,  cnarite  fay  lied,  &  warres  and  discordes  were 
emongetbericbemen,and  tbougbt  tbatitwasnede 
to  doo  bis  power  &  mygbt  for  tamende  cristiente* 
He  ordeyned  a  general!  counseylof  alle  tbe  prelates 
tbat  were  by  twene  tbemon  taynes  &  tbe  see  of  Gng- 
lande*  XTbis  counseyl  was  sette  fyrste  at  Clony,  a- 
notber  tyme  at  puy  J^ostre  Dame,  and  tbe  tbirde 
tyme  at  Cleremont  in  Huuergne.  TTbis  was  in  tbe 
monetb  of  J^ouembre.  TTbere  were  many  arcbebis- 
sbops,  bi88bop8,abbotes,&  grete  prelates  &  per- 
sonesof  boli  cbircbe  of  tbise  parties*  0>er were  by 
tbe  general  counseyl  many  conmandements  gyuen 
for  tamende  clerkes  &  layetee,  for  tesbewe  synnes 
and  recouere  good  man  ers.'Cbere  was  boly  cnircbe 
'al  reformed,  of  wbicbe  it  bad  grete  nede, 

"IJVIOJVGe  alle  other,  peter  TTbere- 

myte  was  tbere,  wbicbe  forgate  not 

tbe  werke  tbat  be  was  charged  with, 

bu  tadmonested  tbe  prelates  ecbe  pry- 

I  uatly  by  bym  self,  and  prayde  tbe  co- 

I  munepeple  openly  mocbe  wel  &  wyse- 

ly /Cbenne  toke  our  boly  fader  tbe  wordes,  &  shewed 

generally  to  alle  tbe  counseyl,  wbat  grete  sbame  it 

38 


was  to  alle  tbc  cristen  men,  of  our  faitb  that  was 
so  nygbe  destroyed  and  faylled  in  the  place  where 
it  began,and  it  mygbt  begretefereand  dredewban 
it  f aylled  at  tbe  beed  &  welle,  tbat  tbe  ryvers  sbold 
not  endure,  tbat  were  rennyng  tburgb  tbe  world 
Hnd  saide  mocbe  wel,  tbat  alle  tbe  very  crysten  pe- 
plesbold  takeberof  grete  despite  yf  tbus  desbery- 
ted  by  tbeir  defaulte,  and  bis  contre  delyuered  to 
bis  enemyes,  &  promysed  tbat  yf  tbey  wolde  take 
vpon  tbis  pylgremage,bewoldecbaungetbeyr  pen- 
aunce  m  to  tbis  werke,  Hnd  yf  tbey  deyde  in  tbis 
waye,  conf  essidand  repentaunt,  be  wolde  takeit  on 
bis  faytb,  tbat  tbeyincontinentsbold  gooin  totbe 
joye  of  beuen.  On  tbat  otber  syde,  as  long  as  tbey 
were  m  tbe  seruyse  of  our  lord,  tbey  were  in  tbe 
warde  and  fcepyng  of  boly  cbircbe,  botbe  tbey  and 
tbeyr  tbynges,  in  sucbe  wvse  tbat  tbey  tbat  dyde 
to  tbem  ony  domage  sbold  be  acursed.  Hnd  alle 
tbis  commanded  be  to  be  kept  of  alle  tbe  prelates 
tbat  were  atte  counseyl  J$Tj6\q  doon,  be  gaf  euery 
man  leue,  and  commanded  tbat  be  sbold  precbe 
tbis  pylgremage  and  pardon,&  tolde  totbem  tbat 
alle  men  sbold  trauaylle  to  gyue  and  make  longe 
trewes  and  pees  of  tbe  warres,  for  taccomplyssbe 
tbe  better  tbis  pylgremage,  and  to  perf orme  it* 


d4 


39 


HB 


Row  many  noble  and  bye  men,  and  otber  of  tbe 
royameof  fraunce,  crossed  tbem  for  to  goo  ouer 
see,  capttulo  xvj,4**£ 

dlR  lord  gaf  bis  grace  vn  to  our 
boly  fader  tbe  pope  in  vtteryng 
of  tbe  word  of  god,  wbicb  was 
said  in  sucbe  wyse,  tbat  it  was 

Sxed  and  roted  in  tbe  bertes  of 
em  tbat  berde  bym,  and  not 
only  of  tbem  tbat  were  present, 
I  but  of  alle  otber  tbat  it  was  re- 
corded and  tolde  vnto,  if  or  tbe  bissbops  wente  in 
to  tbeyr  countrees  and  precbed  to  tbeyr  peple  like 
,  as  it  was  to  tbem  commanded  Row  beit  tbat  it  was 
a  strange  tbyng  and  rigbt  greuous  for  a  man  to 
)leue  bis  con  tree,  bis  wyf,  bis  cbildren,and  lygnage, 
and  leue  tbem  tbat  be  louetb  by  nature.  But  wban 
,one  tbynketb  wbat  reward  be  sbal  baueof  our  lord 
so  to  doo,  tbenne  be  aetetb  a  feruent  loue  in  bym 
self  for  tbe  cbaryte  of  our  lord,  and  leuetb  tbe  na~ 
turel  loue  of  bis  flessb,  for  to  saue  bis  sowle,  Hnd 
tbis  mygbt  wel  be  perceyued  and  seen,  ff  or  tbe  pe- 
pleof  tbe  royameof  f raunce,and  tbe  gretebarons, 
and  otber  lasse  tbat  were  enclyned  to  synnesand 
acustomed  to  doo  ylle,  as!  baue  sayd  to  f ore,af  tir 
tbey  berde  tbis  precbyng,  entreprysed  so  vycror- 
ously  tbe  werke  of  our  lord,  and  auowed  tbem  to 
ward  tbis  pylgremage,  as  yesbal  bere,  ff  or  itsemed 
tbat  euery  man  ougbt  to  entreprise  tauenge  tbe 
wronge  &  sbame  tbat  tbe  betben  dyde  to  our  lord, 
and  to  bis  peple,  in  tbe  londe  of  Iberusalem  jj? 
Ye  sbolde  baue  seen  tbe  busbonde  departe  fro  bvs 
40 


^^^^^^^^H^^H 

^^^^ 

i 

w                                    ■  n  ■  m 

wyf ,  and  the  f aders  fro  the  cbylderen,  &  the  chil- 
dcrcn  fro  the  f adres.  End  it  seined  that  euery  man 
wolde  departe  fro  that  be  louyd  bestin  tbis  world, 
for  to  wynne  tbe  ioye  of  tbat  otber. 

^RGRwas  so  grete  affrayer  so  grete 
a  meuyng  tburgb  alle  tbe  londe,  tbat 
vnnetbe  ye  sbolde  baue  founde  an 
bows,  but  tbat  som  bad  enterprysed 
tbys  viage,  I  saye  not  tbat  alle  tbat 
-  wente  were  wyse  &  of  pure  entencion 
tpwardourlord,forsommonkeswenteoutof  tbeyr 
cloystres  without  leueof  tbeyrabbotes  or  pryours, 
and  the  recluses  wente  outof  tbe  places  where  tbey 
bad  ben  closed  in,  and  wente  forth  with  tbe  otber. 
bom  wente  forth  for  loue  of  tbeyr  frendes,  to  bere 
them  felawsbip;  otber  wente  forth  for  bobaunce, 
lest  tbey  shold  be  reputed  for  euyl  and  not  good; 
and  som  there  were  tbatwolde witbdrawe  them  for 
tbeyr  creancers,  and  baue  respite  of  tbeyr  dettea 
But  how  tbat  it  was  tbeyr  entencions  within  tbeyr 
bertes,it  semyd  good  for  the  grete  enterpryse  that 
tbey  shewed  outwardHnd  itwasof  gretenede  tbat 
tbispylgremagewaschosenattbattymcfforthere 
were  in  tbe  world  so  many  synnes  tbat  tbey  witb- 
drewe  tbe  peple  fro  our  lord  Hnd  it  was  wel  be- 
houeful  tbat  god  sbold  sende  to  them  som  ad- 
dressement,  by  wbiche  tbey  myght  come  to  beuen, 
and  that  he  gaf  them  som  trauey  lie,  as  it  were  a  pur- 
gatorye  to  fore  tbeyr  dctbj&Ht  this  counseyl  a- 
uowedpresently  tbis  pylgremage,  the  good  bis- 
sbopofpuynamedHymart,whtcbeaftirwardwas 
legate  tn  the  same  boost,  &  conteyned  hym  mocbe 


wyeely  &  truly.Hleotbe  bieebopof  Orengewbicbe 
,  was  an  boly  man  and  relygyoue,  auowed  tbcrc  tbc 
eame  viage,  and  ynowbe  of  otbcr  wbicbe  were  not 
at  that  couneeyl  tbat  enterprieed  tbe  eame  vowe, 
CJR  boly  fader  bad  commanded,  and 
made  tbe  bieebope  to  bolde  it,  tbat 
alle  tbey  tbat  wolde  auowe  tbie  pyl- 
gremage  ebold  eette  tbe  eigne  of  tbe 
croase  on  tbeir  rigbt  eboldre,  ffor 
tbonoure  of  bym  tbat  bare  tbe  tor- 
ment of  tbe  croeee  vpon  bie  eboldere  for  to  9aue 
ve,  and  taccomplyeebe  tbie  tbat  oure  lord  eaytb  in 
tbe  goepell:  «Ibo  tbatwil  lyue  af  tir  me,renye  bym 
eelf  and  take  tbe  croege  and  f  olowe  me,  CUel  f or- 
eaketb  be  bym  9elf ,  tbat  leuetb  tbat  tbe  fleeeb  lo- 
uetb  for  eauyngof  bie  eowlej^OIban  one  of  tbe 
grete  barone  wae  croyeed  eo  on  bi9  eboldre  in  a 
contre,  alle  tbe  peple  of  tbe  contre  tbat  were  al9o 
croeeyd  cam  to  bym,  and  cbeee  bym  for  tbeyr  cap- 
tayne,  &  made  to  bym  f eaulte  for  to  baue  bte  ayde 
.and  warantige in  tbe wayeof  tbe eayd  pylgremage. 
tXTbe  nameeof  noblemen  tbat  enterprieed  tbie  pyl- 
gremage, ae  wel  on  tbie  eide  ae  beyonde  tbe  mon- 
taynee,  capitulo  xv\]g*g* 

IN  tbe  royame  of  f  raunce  and  of 

Hllemayne,nugbela)VIaine,  bro- 
ther of  tbe  kynge  of  f raunce, 
Robert  tberle  of  f  laundere,  Ro- 
bert due  of  Normandye,  eone  to 
kyng  KhUiam  of  6nglond,Ste- 
pben  tberle  of  cbartree  and  of 
fcHoye,  wbicbe  wae  fader  to  erle 
^bybauld  tbe  olde,  wbicbe  lyetb  at  Laigny,  Ray- 


mondtberleofO>olouse,&manyknygbtesoftbat 
londeXbe  valyantman  Godefroy  or  Buyllon,  due 
of  Lorayne,witb  bis  two  bretberen,Bawdwyn  and 
Gustace,  and  one  tbeyr  cosyn,  Bawdwyn,  sone  to 
tbc  countc  fiuon  de  RetelXberleGarnyer  deGres, 
Bawdwyn  tbc  erle  of  fienawde,  Ysoart  tbc  crlc  of 
Ye,  Rembout  tberle  of  Orenge,  <miliam  tberle  of 
forests,  Steuen  tberle  of  Hubmalle,  Rotrout  tbe 
erleofpercbe,r>ugbetbeerleofSayntpol,&many 
barons  &  knygbtes  tbat  werenot  counted,  as  Raoul 

d^^ug<md,euerarddupui6at,6uyde6arlande, 
wbicb  was  steward  of  fraunce,  TTbomas  de  f  erre, 
t>uy  de  possesse,  Giles  de  Cbaumount,  Girard 

Cbmsy^ogierdeBaruyle^enryd^sque^Centon 
of  Beart,  Guillem  Hmanaix,  Gaste  tbe  Bediers, 
Guillem  de  JMontpellyer,  &  Gyrard  deRoussilon. 
Yc  may  wel  fcnowe  tbat  witb  tbis  peple  were  croys- 
sedmocbe  grete  plenteof  fcnygbtes  and  otber,  witb 
gretenombreofcomunepeple,wbicbepeteri:bere- 
myte  gadred  in  tbe  royamme  of  fraunce  &  in  tbem- 

pyreofHllemaygnej^Hndbyyondetbemontayns 
men  croyssed  tbem  also,  Buymount  tbe  prynce  of 

XTarente,wbicbewas90ontoRobartGuycbart,tbat 
was  due  of  puylle,and  TTancre  bis  neuew,  bis  sus- 
tres  sone,  &  many  otber  grete  barons  of  tbislonde 
tbatwerenotsorenommednefcnowen  as  tbisewere. 
cberewa6afreteappareyllemens,andarayetbatwa8 
made  for  tbis  pylgremmagej^Cbe  grete  men  bad 
enterprised,  tbat  assone  as  tbewynter  was  passed 
tbey  woldputtetbem  on  tbispylgremageXbemene 
peple,  tbe  knygbtes,tbe  barons,  &  otber,  aftir tbey 
were  acqueynted  tbat  one  witb  tbat  otber,  sente  to 

43 


ecbeotber  lettres  and  messages  for  taccorde  to  goo 
to  gydre,  apoynted  the  tyme  of  departing,  and  of 
tbe  waye  tbat  tbey  sbolde  bolde. 

^JVDwbanJYIarcbewascom^yesbolde 
baue  seen  borses  arrayed,  witb  som~ 
myers,  palfroyes,  and  stedes,  tentes 
and  pauy  lions,  and  to  make  armures. 
J&  Ye  maye  wc*  knowe  tbat  tbere  was 
mocbe  to  doo  of  many  tbynges,  ffor 
tbe  barons  were  acorded  tbat  tbey  sbold  not  goo 
alle  to  gydre,  ff orno  contre  mygbt  suffysenefynde 
tbat  wbicb  sbold  be  nedef  ul  for  tbem,  ff  or  wbicbe 
cause  alle  tbe  boostes  neuyr  assembled,  as  ye  sbal 
bere,  tyl  tbey  cam  vnto  tbe  cyte  of  JNfycenej^rbe 
menepeple  charged  tbem  self  notmocbewitb  tentes 
ne  armures,  ff  or  tbey  mygbt  not  bere  it,  &  tberf or 
euery  man  gamyssbid  bym  af tir  tbat  bewas  witb 
moneye  &  goods,  as  mocbe  as  be  supposed  sbold 
be  nedef  ulfor  bymj^Cdban  tbedayeof  departing 
cam,  tber  were  grete  sorowes,  grete  wepynges,  and 
grete  cryes  at  departyngof  tbe  pylgryms,  ffor  tbere 
were  but  f  ewe  bowses  but  of  tbem  som  wente.Hnd 
sucb  bowsbolders  tbere  were  tbat  tbey  wente  alle, 
and  caryed  tbeyr  wyues  and  bare  tbeyr  cbilderen 
witb  tbem.ltwas  a  merueyllous  tbynge  tosee  tbis 
meuynges,  ffor  it  bad  not  byf ore  be  acustomed  to 
see  sucbe  tbynges  in  f  raunce,  ne  neuer  byfore  was 
crosse  bom  ne  taken  for  pylgremage. 


44 


Of  tbauentures  that  a  rowte  of  cristen  men  bad  in 
this  viage,  of  wbomeoneGaultyer  witboute  know- 
Iccbc  was  captayne,  capitulo  xviij^^ 

~]R6  y  ere  of  tbyn  camarion  of  our 
lord  .JVI.f ourescorexvj,  tbc  egbt 
daye  of  JVIarcbe  cam  a  gentil- 
man,aknygbtrigbtnoble,nam- 
ed  Gaultier,  witbout  hnowlecbe 
to  bis  surname*  Glitb  bym  cam 
a  meruevllous  grctc  plentc  of 
folhe  a/root,  for  tber  were  but 
f  ewe  men  a/bors/bak  in  tbis  rowte,  tbey  passed  in 
HUemayn e,  &  drewe  bem  toward  Ron grye/Cbe roy- 
amme  of  Rongrye  was  alle  enuyronnecl  witb  grete 
waters,  and  large  mersbes,and  depe  lakes, in  sucbe 
wyse  tbat  none  mygbt  entre  ne  yssue  but  by  cer- 
tayne  places  and  strayt  entrees  tbat  ben  as  yates 
of  tbe  londej^In  Rongerye  was  tbenne  a  hynge,  a 
mocbe  valyaunt  man  named  Colemant,  and  was  a 
very  good  cristen  man.  Re  hnewe  tbat  Gaultier  cam 
by  londe  witb  grete  peple,  and  bad  tberof  mocbe 
grete  ioye,  and  belde  wel  witb  tbe  pylgremage  tbat 
Be  bad  enterprised,  Rereceyued  tbem  debonayrly  in 
bis  londe,  and  commanded  tburgb  bis  rovame  tbat 
tbey  sbold  baue  alle  maner  vytaylle  goocl  cbeap,  & 
alle  tbat  tbey  neded. 

RG  pylgryms  passed  alle  Rongrye 
in  good  peas,  ty  I  tbey  cam  to  tbe  enae, 
wbere  tbey  f ounde  a  waterwbicb  was 
named  JVlarce.  "Cbis  was  tbe  bounde 
of  Rongerye  towarde  tboryent  J8F 
XTbey  passed  tbis  water  in  good  peas, 

45 


] 


and  entred  into  Bougrye,  and  witboute  knowyng 
of  tbis  ©aulteer,  some  of  bis  peple  abode  ouer  tbe 
water,  &  cam  to  a  castel  named  JVIalleuy  Ue  for  to  by 
vitaylles,  of  tbe  wbicbe  tbey  badnedeXbe  fiongres 
by  cause  tbat  alle  tbe  boost  was  passed  sauf  tbey, 
wbtcbe  were  but  a  fewe,ranne  vpon  tbem,  and  bette 
tbem,and  dyde  to  tbem  ouermocbe  sbamejfiXbey 
passed  tbe  water, and  cam  to  Gaultier,and  sbewde 
tobvm  playnly  bow  tbey  bad  ben  demened without 
f orraytteXbey  bad  mocbe  grete  despite,  &  mocbe 
sorowe  berof  and  bad  passed  tbe  water  agayn,  yf 
tbey  bad  not  bad  so  grete  peryl  and  so  grete  dis- 
tourblyna,  and  tbougbt  tbey  wold  goo  tbeyr  wave, 
andleueTortauencre  tbis  tbynge, 

~]0  long  tbey  wente  tyl  tbey  cam  to 
Bellegraue,  wbicbe  is  tbefirst  cyte  of 
Bougrye  on  tbys  sydej^Gaultyer 
sente  to  tbe  due  of  tbe  town,  and  re- 
quyred  bym  tbat  be  wolde  late  tbem 
I  tber  by  vytaylles,  be  wold  not  suff  re 
|ony  to  be  sold  to  tbem,  O>oost  bad  grete  disease 
[forlakeof  vytaylle,&mygbtnot  lenger  hepe  tbem, 
.but  tbat  a  grete  parte  of  tbem  wente  a  fowragynq 
if  or  to  aete  vytaylles  for  tbem,  &  for  tbeyr  beestys, 
tlbey  f ounde  grete  plente  of  beestes  in  tbe  contre 
wbicbe  tbey  tohe  and  brought  to  tbeyr  lodcrynaes' 

(Hbantbeyof  tbe  contre  berdtbis,tbeyarmed  tbem 
and  assembled  gretepeple  of  tbe  coun  tree,  and  ran 
vpon  tbem  wbere  tbey  droef  tbeir  proves,  &fouqbt 
witb  tbem,  an  d  toke  tbe  beestes  fro  tbem,  and  many 
of  tbem  tbey  slewe,  &  bunted  tbe  otber  away,  Zbe 
nombre  wel  of  Cxi  of  oure  men,  sbytte  tbem  in  a 
46 


monasterye  for  to  kepe  tbem  there  sauf,  but  the 
[Bougres  cam  there  aboute,  and  sette  fyre  on  the 
cbircbe,  and  brente  alle. 

|HCIJXieR  sawe  that  be  ledde  with 
bym  many  folyssb  peple,  wbicbe  be 
coude  not  rule  ne  sette  alle  in  orden- 
aunce,and  witbdrewe  bym  fro  tbem, 
and  toketbem  tbatwold  be  ruled  and 
_  obeve  bym,  and  wente  in  to  f orestes 
of  Bougrye,  wbicb  ben  large  and  long,  and  began 
to  passe  tbe  moost  wysely  &  stylle  tbat  be  mygbt 
tyl  ■* cam  to  a  cytenamed  Stralyce,and  is  a  contre 
yarned  Danemarcbe  tbe  JVfoyen,  there  fonde  be  a 
good  man  tbat  was  duke  of  tbe  londe.  (Oban  tbis 
duke  knewe  wbat  tbey  wereand  wbytber  tbey  wente, 
be  receyued  tbem  mocbe  debonaryly,  &  made  tbem 
to  bauevytaylles  &  other  tbynges  goodcbeep,and 
dyde  to  tbem  bountes  &  seruyses  ynowgb  for  tbe 
oultrage  tbat  was  doon  to  tbem  at  Belgraue,  and 
dyde  redresse  and  yelde  agayne  to  tbem  as  mocbe 
as  be  mygbt  recouere,  and  aboue  alle  tbis,  be  dely- 
uerd  to  tbem  good  conduyte&  sewrtyl  tbey  cam  to 
Constantynoblejfif(Oban  tbey  were  come  to  Con- 
stantinoble,tbemperoursentefor6aultier.necam 
vnto  bym,  and  sayde  to  bym  tboccasion  of  bis  vi- 
age,  &  tbat  be wolde  abyde  there  peter  TIberemyte, 
by  tbe  commandement  of  wbom  be  bad  brought 
tbyse  pylgryms.  Cdban  tbemperour  berde  tbis,  be 
receyued  bym  mocbe weland  swetly,and  assygned 
to  bym  a  f  ayr  place  without  tbe  town,  where  as  be 
lodged  bym  witb  bis  f elawsbip,  &  comanded  tbat 
tbey  sbold  baue vytaylleand  alle  other  necessaryes 
good  cbepe,  and  tber  soioumed  tbey  a  wbyle. 

47 


nowptetertbefieremytewascbyefofagreteboost 
in  tmsviage  toward  tnc  boly  londe,  capitulo  x\x# 

C  wasnotlonge  af  tir  tbat  peter 
TTberemite  cam  fro  bis  contre, 
witb  grete  plente  of  peple,  vnto 
tbe  nombre  of  xl  JVL  De  cam  in 
to  Lorayne,&  passed  f  ran  cone, 
Bauy  ere,Ostery  cb,  &  drewe  bym 
towardftungrye.petersente  nis 
.  messagers  to  tbe  kyng  of  fion- 
grye,  to  tbende  tbat  be  mygbt  passe  bis  royamme; 
be  sente  bym  worde  tbat  be  sbold  baue  good  leue 
yf  tbey  wold  goo  in  peas  without  medlynges  and 
oultragesXbey  answerd  tbat  tbey  were  pylgryms 
of  our  lord  and  bad  no  talente  for  to  trouble  tbe 
pees*  TTbus  entred  tbey  tbe  royamme  of  fiongrye, 
and  passed  by  tbe  lande  without  ony  debate:  vy- 
tayllesand  otber  tbynges  bad  tbeyynougb  ofood 
cbeepejSFHt  tbende  tbey  cam  totbecastelof  wbicbe 
X  spah  to  fore,  named  JVIaleuylle;  tbere  berd  tbey 
saye,  wbat  was  doon  to  tbeym  of  tbe  retenue  of 
©aultier,  &  tbe  grete  oultrage  doon  to  tbem  with- 
out cause,  and  sawe  yet  tbe  armes  and  despoyllis 
of  tbeyr  f elawes  tbat  bad  berobbed  tbere bange  yet 
pntbewalles* 

aRe  pylgryms  tbat  sawe  tbis  were 

alle  as  tbey  bad  ben  out  of  tbeyr  wytte, 

and  ran  to  armes,  &  began  euery  man 

to  do  welXbey  toketbetoun  by  force, 

and  smote  of  tbe  beedes  of  alle  tbem 

tbat  were  witbin,  sauf  a  f  ewe  wbicb 

ran  in  to  tbe  water  and  were  drownedjSTCber  were 

f ounde  of  tbem  tbat  were  deed  wel  a  four  JVI,  &  of 

48 


peters  meyne  were  slayn  an  C<flban  this  was  don 
the  booste  fonde  there  grete  plente  of  vytaylles, 
and  abode  wel  v  dayes  in  that  place  jffXLhz  due  of 
Bougrie,wbicb  was  named  JNicita,  vnderstode  bow 
tbisepilgrymsbadvengedtbeirfelawsayensttbem 
of  JVIaleuylle,  and  doubted  for  as  mocbe  as  be  bad 
defended  tbe  vytaylles  to  our  peple,  &  tbat  be  bad 
slayn  many  of  tbem,  and  bym  semed  tbat  Belle- 
graue  was  not  strong  ynougb,  tberf or  be  lef  te  tbe 
town,  and  wente  in  to  a  strenger  castel  TTbus  alle 
tbey  of  tbe  cyte  yssued  witb  tbeir  goodes,  &  drewe 
tbem  to  tbe  depe  fores  tesj^  peter  wbyles  be  laye 
yet  at  JVIaleuylle,  berd  saye  tbat  tbe  kyng  of  Ron- 
grye  bad  berd  of  tbe  detb  of  bis  peple,  wberof  be 
was  mocbe  angry,  and  tbat  be  somoned  &  assem- 
bled alle  bis  power  for  tauenge  bis  men  tbat  bad  be 
slayn,  and  doubted  berof,  and  was  no  merueylle, 
wberf  ore  be  made  tassemble  alle  tbe  sbippes  tbat 
mygbt  be  founden  atte  ryueof  tbe  see  to  bym,  and 
made  bis  peple  to  departe  mocbe  bastely  bis  cartes 
and  cbaryottes,  &  tbe  beestes*  XTbey  bad  merueyl- 
lous  grete  praye,  and  lad  away  grete  ryebesses  fro 
tbecastelof  JVlaleyulle  tbat  tbey  bad  tbere  taken  J9t 
Qlban  tbey  were  passed  ouer  in  to  Bougrye,  tbey 
cam  to  fore  Bellegrauc,  &  fonde  tbecyteallevoyde, 
ffor  tbey  were  alle  fled, 

fCXR  tbey  wente  eabt  grete  iour- 
neyes  by  many  grete  f  orestes  ty  I  tbey 
cam  to  tore  a  cy  tenanted  JVyzeXbis 
town  fonde  tbey  mocbe  stronge,  and 
wel  wallyd  witb  grete  towres  and 
stronge,  and  witbin  was  grete  gar- 


nyson,and  tbe  beste  men  of  warreof  alle  tbelonde, 


and  grete  plcntc  of  armours  &  vytaylle*  peter  the 
fieremyte  and  bis  boost  f  onde  a  brygge  of  stone 
by  wbicbe  tbey  passed  a  water  rennyng  nygbe  to 
tbe  cyte;  tbey  passed  tbe  brygge  and  lodged  tbem, 
bytwene  tbe  water  &  tbe  towne*  Hnd  by  cause  tbey 
bad  not  mete  ynougb,  peter  sente  bis  messages 
vnto  tbe  lord  of  tbe  toun,  and  prayd  bym  f  ayr  for 
bym,  and  for  bis  peple  tbat  were  cristen  and  pyl- 
gryms  tbat  wente  in  tbe  seruyse  of  our  lord,  tbat 
tbey  mygbt  bye  vytaylles  of  tbe  toun  at  resonable 
prys^tTbenne  tbe  lord  sende  worde  to  peter  tbat 
be  wold  not  suff  re  tbat  tbey  sbold  not  entre  in  to 
tbe  toun ;  but  and  yf  be  would  gyue  bym  good  os- 
tages,  tbat  bis  peple  sbold  doo  no  barme  ne  oult- 
rage  to  tbe  peple  and  marcbeauntes  of  tbe  toun 
tbat  sbold  come  fortoselle  tbem  vytaylle,  be  sbold 
sende  to  tbem  ynougb  at  resonable  prys  j^COban 
peter  &  bis  peple  berd  tbis  tbey  were  glad  ynougb : 
tbey  delyuered  cjfood  ostaaes,and  anon  tbey  of  tbe 
toun  cam  out witb  grete  ptente  of  vy tayl  and  otber 
tbynges  necessarye  in  tbe  boost. 
How  some  of  tbe  oost  of  peter  Cbermyte  vnwet- 
yng  bym  sette  fyre  in  tbe  subarbesof  JVyzat  tbeyr 
departyng,  capitulo  xx&& 

OCT)S  was  tbys  nygbt  tbe 
boost  of  tbe  pylgryms  refres- 
sbyd  of  alle  tbynges  tbat  tbey 
bad  nede,  ff  or  tbey  bad  ben  Ion  g 
fro  ony  good  toun,  and  tbey  of 
tbe  cyte  were  to  tbem  mocbe  deb- 
onair &  resonable.On  tbemome 
tbey  demanded  tbeyr  ostages, 


and  tbey  were  delyuerd  qfladly,  &  forth  tbey  wente 
in  peas  j^But  now  ye  sbal  here  bow  tbedeuyl  dotb 
gretepeyne  for  to  empessbeand  lettegoodwerkes. 
tn  tbiscompanye  bad  ben  tbeeuena/foreastryf  to 
one  of  tbe  marccbauntes  of  tbe  town,  and  som  of 
tbeoost,  (Oban  tbe  boost  was  departed,  tbeDucbe- 
men  assembled  to  tbe  nombre  of  an  bunderd,  and 
f orvengeaunce  of  tbe  stryf ,  tbey  sawe  vij  my  lien  es 
wbicbe  stode  at  brygge  nygbe  tbe  town,  and  sette 
tbem  a  fyre,  and  brente  tbem  anone.  "Cbis  was  not 
'ynougb,  but  tbere  was  a  Util  borougb  witbout  tbe 
cyte,  and  tbey  sette  tbat  a  fyre  also  and  brende  bit 
i  to  assbes,  and  sytb  wente  tbeyr  waye  aftir  tbeyr 
fejawebi^wbiebe  hnewe  notbyng  berof ♦ 

*|f  tbis  tbynge  tbe  lord  of  tbe  town, 
wbicbe  bad  tbeeuen  toforesbewde  to 
tbem  grete  debonayrte,  was  gretely 
meuyd,  for  be  sawe  tbat  tbey  rendrid 
euyl  for  god,  and  was  balf  out  of  bis 
1  wy  tte  for  angre,  &  tbis  f elonnye  tbat 
tbis  f ewe  dyde  was  wy  ted  alle  tbe  boost,  wbicbe  was 
euyl  and  pytejS?F)e  madeanone  arme  alletbe  town, 
and  yssued  on  borsbak  and  on  fote;bym  self  cam 
to  fore,  and  prayde  &  mucb  desyred  bis  peplef or  to 
vengevpon  tbyse  false  rowters,&  tbeuys  tbe  ou  It- 
rage  tbat  tbey  bad  don*  ^Qban  tbey  approcbed  tbe 
boost,  tbey  fondefyrsttbisemalefactours,  wbicbe 
bad  not  yet  ouertaken  tbeyr  f  elaws,  and  ronne  on 
tbem,  and  smote  of  tbeir  needes*  It  bad  tbenne  be 
ynowgb,  but  tbey  werenot  content,  butsmotein  tbe 
af  tirst  parte  of  tboost,  wbicbe  doubted  notbyng. 
"Cbey  fonde  cbaryottes,  sommyers,  males,  seru- 
tz  51 


auntes,  wymmen,  and  children,  wbicbe  mygbt  not 
goo  eo  f aste  as  tbc  other.  Oey  elewc  many,  and 
sommc  tbey  ouertbrewe,&  laddc  away  tbc  cariage, 
1  and  tbusretoimd  into  tlxyr  cyte  without  burte,and 
alle  blody  of  tbc  bloodc  or  tbc  pylgryms. 
How  peter  Cberemyte  was  aduertysedof  alle  this, 
and  of  tbe  barm  tbat  ensiewed,  capita  lo  xx}&& 

SXTSR  was  goyng  with  tbc 
grcte  companye  of  tboost,  wbt- 
cbc hncwcnougbt  of  tbtstbyng, 
wban  a  messager  cam  to  bym 
rydyng,andtold  tobym  of  tbis 
aduenturetbatwas  fallen  in  tbe 
taylle  of  tboost.  peter  sente  a- 
non  to  tbem  tbat  were  to  fore, 
tbat  tbey  sbold  retourne  aaayn  tbe  way  tbat  tbey 
were  comyn  vntotbe  cyte  of  jNvzjj?In  tbis  retorne 
tbey  f onde  tbynges  ynowgb  tnat  displesyd  tbem, 
ff  or  tbey  f  onde  tbeir  f  elawes  bybeded,  lyeng  by  tbe 
■  waye.'Cbey  bad  arete  sorowe  berof ;  one  fonde  bis 
1  fader  deed,  anotner  bie  brother  or  bis  sone,  and  a- 
notber  bis  wyf  or  bis  douabter,  there  were  many 
disconueny  en  tsjjppeter,  wbicbe  bad  bis  en  ten  cion 
pure  vnto  oure  lord,  entended  not  but  tappese  tbc 
malyce&leyedoun  the  discorde  which  was  sourded 
emong  the  peple.  He  sente  som  wyse  and  prudent 
men  to  tbe  lord  &  to  tbemoos  te  hyemen  of  the  cyte, 
for  to  demaunde  by  what  occaston  tbey  had  don 
tbis  euiland  crueltees  ayenst  the  peple  of  our  lord. 
TTbey  answerd  tbat  tbis  was  by  tbe  default  of  tbe 
pylgryms,  &  tbat  tbey  bad  fyrst  doon  grete  oult- 
rage  to  brenne  tbeyr  mylnes  and  burghe, 
52 


f>HJN[  peter  &  the  wysemen  that  were 
with  bym  herd  this,  they  thought 
wel  that  it  was  no  place  ne  tyme  to 
venae  theyr  shames,  &therf or  torn- 
ed  the  mater  vnto  peas  &  acorde,  for 
to  recou  vre  the  pray  e,  the  prysonners 
andcaryagewbicbe  they  had  ledde  away  fro  tboost, 
ff  or  there  wereof  the  mene  peple  which  wold  not  be 
ruled,  &  wold  not  suffre  them  of  thetowne  to  haue 
pees  with  vs,  but  woldauenge  by  force  theoultrage 
that  they  had  doonj^peter  f elte  this  thynae,  and 
apperceyuedanone  the  euylle  that  sourded  &  sente 
of  the  wyses  t  an  d  grettes  t  of  his  com  pany  e  to  make 
the  pees*  Ris  peple  wold  not  haue  pees*  Re  made  a 
crye  on  payne  or  deth,in  his  name  and  the  name  of 
the  barons,  that  noman  be  so  hardy  to  brefce  the 
pees  that  was  made,  and  this  be  charged  vpon  their 
py Igremages,  theyr  f  eaulte,  &  on  thobedyen  ce  that 
they  had  promysed  bym*  Hnd  whan  they  of  the 
boost  herd  this,  they  beleuydnot,but  f  olyssh  peple 
wentefortb&madegretenoyse,andwoldnotobeye 
jjSTCbemessagers  thatwerein  the  toun  for  taccorde 
this  that  was  don,  sawe  that  the  noyse  grewe  more 
and  more,andretoumed  to  theyr  felawshhip  with- 
oute  ony  conclusion  or  doyng  that  they  had  enter- 
prised,  and  dyde  theyr  best  to  seece  the  debate,  but 
they  hadno  power,  for  there  were  moo  than  a  thou- 
send  pylgryms,  whiche  noman  myght  holde  ne  re- 
teyne,  but  that  they  wold  goo  armed  to  the  toun* 
Out  of  the  toun  yssued  as  many  or  moo  ayenst 
them:  ther  began  the  bataylle  and  the  medlegrete 
and  thy  k,  &  began  to  slee  eche  other  largely*  peter 
ne  his  route  meuyd  not,  but  byhelde  the  bataylle* 
e3  53 


ftGY  of  tbe  toun  that  were  on  the 
walles  &  at  wyndows  sawe  that  theyr 
peple  had  the  werse,  and  appercey  ued 
that  tbe  grete  power  of  thooet enter- 
meted  not  of  this  warre,  &  thought 
that  they  wolde  not  help  them,  and 
opened  tbeyryatesandyssued  outeby  grete  rowtes 
allearmed,andemotc  in  tbebataylle,andfoundeof 
our  peple  aboute  a  v  C  vppon  the  brygge,  and  ad- 
dressyd  tbemselues  to  them  and  slewe  them  alle, 
sauf  somme  that  were  caste  in  the  water,  and  alle 
were  peryssbed*  <Oban  the  grete  boost  apperceyued 
theyr  peple  thus  euyl  demened,  they  mygbt  suff  re 
it  no  lenger,butwentetoarmes,andsmotein  to  the 
bataylle,  one  af tir  another,  lyke  as  they  mygbt  be 
armed  jfiTCbe  peple  that  had  bygonne  this  debate 
were  discomfytea  fyrst,  and  began  to  flee  so  fast 
that  nothyngmyght  tary  them*  they  began  to  bete 
them  on  horsbak,  that  cam  for  to  belpe  them,  by 
whiche  the  good  men  were  discomfyted,  and  they  of 
the  cyte  that  were  nygh  to  theyr  retrayt,  began  to 
chase  tbemmocbestra^tly,&  to  slee  them*  Ht  last, 
whan  oure  peple  were  withdrawen,  they  retomed  by 
the  caryageand  hamoys,and  caryed  alle,  and  ledde 
it  with  them,  and  toke  wymmen  and  children  that 
mygbtnotflee,&  putte  them  in  prison  j^Chere  were 
wel  slayn  and  lost  of  the  peple  of  the  boost  x  M, 
and  the  Bougres  wan  alle  the  hamoys  of  thoost 
TThere  was  a  cart  lost  that  longed  to  peter  there- 
myte,alle  f ul  of  rychesse, whiche  had  ben  youen  to 
hymin  frauncefor  to  socoure&sustene  tbeneces- 
sytees  of  tbeboostjfiTCbey  that  mygbt  escape  fro 
54 


1  this  discomfiture,  drewe  tbcm  in  to  tbc  forestes,  & 
>bydde  tbcm  in  tbc  depe  valeyes  in  tbc  nygbt,  and 
on  tbc  mom  tbey  began  to  callc  cebe  other,  and  to 
wbystle,  and  sowne  trumpes  and  busynes  in  tbc 
woodes,andtbus  began  to  reassemble,  and  gadred 
tbem  to  gydre  on  a  territories 
fiow  tbemperourof  Constantynoble,  being  aduer- 
tised  of  tbise  oultrages,  sente  bis  messagers  to 
Peter  Cheremy te,  capitulo  y&\)&& 

~\C  tbe  fourtb  daye  were  nygbe 
alle  assembled  aboute  peter,  & 
tbey  were  about  a  four  tbous- 
U  and,  'Cbey  were  in  mocbe  grete 
mescbvef,as  tbey  tbat  bad  lost 
tbeyr  frendes  and  tbeyr  peple, 
ana  almost  alle  tbeyr  barnoys. 
IjflfJVotwitbstondyngtbey  lefte 
not,  but  wente  forth  on  tbe  waye  tbat  tbey  bad  en- 
terprise^ witb  grete  mesease  and  payne  for  lak  of 
vytaylle.  Hnd  as  tbey  were  in  tbis  poynt,  tbey  sawe 
came  ayenst  tbem  tbe  messagers  of  tbemperourof 
Constantynoble,  wbicbe  spak  to  peter.  Hnd  anon 
be  dyde  assemble  tbe  beye  men  and  capytaynes  of 
[  tbe  boost  for  to  bere  tbemessage  tbat  tbey  brought 
j!S?Hnd  aftir  tbey  sayd  in  tbismanere:  fayrsyrs, 
mocbe  euyl  tydynges  &  renomme  is  comen  of  you 
to  our  lord  tbemperour,  for  it  is  tolde  to  bym  tbat 
ye  goo  by  tbe  countree  of  bis  em  pyre  witb  force,  & 
)robbe  tbe  peple  of  sucbe  as  tbey  bauc,  breke  bis 
townes,  and  sice  bis  peple,  and  doo  alle  tbe  oult- 
rages and  wronges  tbat  ye  may.  Cbe  good  cbere, 
*bounte,  and  alle  tbe  seruyse  tbat  is  doon  to  you 
«4  55 


auaylletb  notbyng,ne  may  adoulcc  ne  aswage  your 
bertes,  tbcrf ore  be  commandetb  you  tbat  ye  abyde 
in  noneof  bis  cytees  more  tban  tnredayes,  butgoo 
your  waye  strayt  fortb  to  Constantynoble,  for  be 
natb  commanded  vs  to  goo  witb  you,  and  tbat  we 
do  bryng  to  you  on  tbe  waye  vytayll  good  cbeep 
ynowe* 

fiHJNT  tbise  good  men  berd  tbis,  tbat 
tbemperour  bad  don  to  tbem  tbis 
bounte,  tbey  bad  greteioye,  &  excus- 
ed tbem  of  tbise  batay Ilea  &  fygbt- 
yng,  &  sbewd  openly  wbat  tbeBou- 
gres  baddoon  witboute  tbeyroff ence 
or  culpe  by  force  &  grete  oultrage,  €be  messagers 
dyrected  tbem  on  tbe  way  tyl  tbey  cam  to  Conatan- 
tynoble* Oey  fonde  tbere  Gaultyer  sans  sauoyr, 
and  bis  peple,  tbat  taryed  for  tbem,  &  tbenne  tbey 
wente  alle  to  gydre,  and  lodged  tbem  in  tbe  place 
tbat  was  assygned  to  tbem,and  tbereecbe  tolde  to 
otber  of  tbeyr  mysauenturesjjTCbemperour  sente 
for  peter,  &  be  wente  to  bym.  Re  sawe  in  tbe  towne 
many  tbynges,  and  in  tbe  palaysse  many  ryebesses 
and  marueylles,  but  be  was  a  man  of  grete  berte  & 
courage,  and  abassbyd  of  notbyng,  tbemperour 
demanded  of  bym  of  tbestate  of  bis  peple,  and  of 
otber  barons  of  tboccydent,  tbat  were  tbus  meuvd 
to  tbis  pylgremage.  peter  answerd  bymmocbewel 
of  alle  tbynges,  and  said  tbat  tbey  were  pour  peole 
and  were  come  to  fore,  but  tbepryncesand  bye  men 
cam  aftirwitb  mocbe  grete  peple,  wbicb  wold  not 
bng  tarye,  Tbemperour  and  bis  baronsof  tbe  pa- 
lays  sawe  alle  tbat  peter  was  so  lytil  and  so  wel, 
sowysetysofayr&sowelappoyntofalletbynges 


answerd  that  they  merueylled  oucr  mocbe,  and  al- 
owed  and  preysea  bym  mocbe* 'Cbemperourgaf  to 
bym  grete  yef  tes,  and  receyued  bym  in  bis  grace, 
and  sytb  be  lete  bym  retome  to  bis  peplejj?  there 
rested  tbe  oost  of  tbe  pyl^fryms  wel  at  ease  and  in 
peas,  and  a  wbyle  af  tir  sbippes  were  made  red?  by 
tbe  commaundementoftbemperour,&tbey  passed 
tbe  see  named  tbe  braas  of  Seynt  George, and  cam 
in  to  tbe  lond  named  Bytbyne.  TTbis  is  tbe  fyrst 
party e  of  Hsy  e,  vpon  tbe  see,  Hnd  they  lodged  them 
in  a  place  called  Cinintot 
Of  tbe  mayntenyng  of  tbe  boost  of  peter  TTbere- 
myte,  &  bow  tbre  thousand  Ducbemen  tohe  a  cas- 
tel  by  assault,  and  slewe  alle  that  were  tberin  with 
tbe  swerde,  capitulo  xxi\j&& 

f)ISwasin  tbe  marches  of  tbeyr 
enemyes*  'Cbere  was  tbe  boost 
about  two  monetbes,  and  euery 
daytbeyfondefresshevytaylles 
toselle  good  cheep, wherof  they 
were  wel  at  ease,  so  mocb  that  it 
coudenotwel  be  suffred  longe, 
ilbey  began  to  meue,  and  made 
routes  for  to  goo  en  fouragein  the  contrey.O>er 
wente  wel  somtyme  x  M  or  more,  maulgre  tbe  ba- 
rons, that  were  capytayns  in  the  boost  JVeuertbe- 
lesse,  peter commandedand  sente  lettres  to  them, 
that  theysboldabyde,and  not  remeue  frotheoost, 
to  pylle  tyl  tbe  grete  prynces  were  comenj^Ona 
daye  it  happed  that  pieter  passed  tbe  braas,  and 
cam  in  to  Constantynoble  for  tospehe  f orvytayl- 


lee,  that  began  to  wexe  dere.  TTbe  mene  peple  sawe 
that  peter  was  not  there,  and  were  the  more  hardy : 
tbey  assembled,  and  were  of  a  companye  wel  eignt 
thousand  a  f  ote,  &  tbre  bonderd  a  borsback/Cbey 
made  tbeyr  bataylles,  and  wente  alle  in  ordenaunce 
toward  tbecyteof  JVycene,ayenst  tbewilleand  def- 
f  ence  of  alle  tbe  grete  men  of  tboost  j0  GCTban  tbey 
cam  nygbe  to  this  grete  cyte,  tbey  smote  in  to  tbe 
townes  about  it,  &  tokemerueyllous  many  beestes, 
grete  and  smale,  and  brought  mocbe  grete  gayne, 
and  retomed  saufly  witboute  burte  borne  agayne 
in  to  tbe  oost,  witb  grete  ioye  and  f este* 

pS  Ducbemen,  wbicbe  ben  a  peple 
rudeand  bardy,  sawe  tbis  glorye  and 
tbis  gayne  tbat  tbey  bad  wonne,and 
bad  grete  enuye  tberat  &  were  meuid 
witb  couetyse  of  good,  and  to  baue 
-  worship,  relyed  tbem  to  gydrealleof 
that  tongue  vnto  tbe  nombre  of  tbre  thousand  a 
f oote,  &  wente  strayte  toward  JVycene.  'Cbere  was 
a  castel  at  f  oote  of  an  bylle,  nygb  vnto  JVycene,  at 
lestefoure  myle  of  jS^Cbese Ducbemen  cam  tbeder 
&  began  tassaylle  tbe  castel  mocbe  strongly; tbey 
within  defended  tbem  to  tbeyr  power  as  long  as 
tbey  mygbt.  But  it  auaylled  not,  if  or  tbe  castel  was 
taken  by  force,  &  tbe  Ducbemen  entred  tberin,  and 
alle  tbem  tbat  tbey  fonde  witbin,  men,  wymmen  & 
cbylderen,  tbey  slewe  without  mercy.  TLbty  fonde 
ther  in  vytaylle  ynowgb,&  other  tbynges,&  sawe 
that  tbe  place  was  mocbe  fayr  and  delectable,  and 
gamyssbed  it,  and  sayde  tbat  tbey  wolde  it  bolde 
tyl  the  grete  prynces,wbome  tbey  abode  and  taryed 
for,  were  comen. 

58 


Row  Solyman,  lord  of  that  con  tre,  reprysed  &  toke 
agayn  the  castel,and  slewe  allc  the  Ducbemen  that 
where  tberin,  capttulo  xxiiij^^ 

OLYM^Nt  wbicbe  was  lord  of 
tbis  con  tre  andgouernoure,bad 
berd  longe  to  fore,  tbat  tbe  cris- 
ten  peplewere  meuydof  tbe  roy- 
amme  of  f raun  ce  for  to  goo  in  to 
tbelonde  of  Surye,  and  tbat  tbey 
addressed  tbem  for  to  passe  by 
ZM  bis  londe,  tberf  ore  be  bad  ben  in 
tboryent,frowbens  be  was  come,  and  bad  brought 
grete  plente  of  knygbtes  andotber  peple,  by  wbom 
be  en  tended  to  kepe  bis  londe,  &  greue  bis  enemyes 
tbat  sbold  passe  tbere  by,  F)e  was  tbenne  drawen  to- 
wardour  peple,  andwitb  bisfolkeswasin  tbemon- 
taynes  and  woodes.  F)e  berde  bow  tbyseDucbemen 
bad  taken  bis  castel  and  slayn  bis  men,  and  cam  tbe 
moostbastywysebemygbteandassyegedtbecas- 
tel,  and  toke  it  without  taryeng,  &  be  smote  of  tbe 
beedes  of  allc  tbem  tbat  be  f  onde  jff  Oe  tydvnae 
cam  in  to  tbe  boost  tbat  Solyman  bad  slayn  allc  tbe 
Ducbemen  and  tbeyr  f  elawsXbcy  bad  mocbe  sor- 
ow,  and  tber  arroos  a  grete  crye  and  grete  wepyng 
in  tbe  lodgys  J&  Oe  peple  arote  toke  berof  grete 
despite  emonge  tbem,  and  began  tospeke  sbewdly, 
and  said  tbat  tbe  barons  of  tbe  oost  ougbt  not  to 
suff re  this,  but  tbat  tbey  sbold  renne  a  borsbak  & 
auengebloodof  tbeyr  bretberen,  tbat  so nygbe  was 
sbedXbe  grete  men  of  tboost,  tbat  knewe  more  of 
warre&of  otber  tbynges  tban  tbemenepeple,wold 
baue  bolden  tbem  in  peas,  and  sayde  tbis  may  wel 

59 


?■ 


be  yet  amended,  Hnd  also  them perour  counccy tied, 
and  it  was  troutbe,  that  tbey  sbold  abydetbe  com- 
yngof  tbegretebarons,wbicbe  sboldnot  longeta- 
ryeXbe  peple  and  tbe  folyssb  folke  were  not  con- 
tent with  tbyse  wordes,  but  tbey  bad  a  capytayne 
named  (3odefrey  Bureau,  wbicbe  brought  tbem  in 
sucbe  reuerye  and  murmur  tbat  tbey  spake  largely 
and  rudely  ayenst  tbe  knygbtes,  &  sayde  alle  clerly 
tbat  tbey  were  vntrewe  and  euyland  tbat  tbey  lete 
not  to  auenge  tbis  by  wysedom,  but  for  grete  cow- 
ardyse. 

Row  oure  men  armed  tbemfor  tauenge  tbe  Ducbc- 
men,  &  of  a  recountour  tbat  tbey  bad  ayenst  Soly- 
man,  capitulo  xxv&& 

Cbappetboftymetbat  tbe  werse 
counseyl  ouercometb  tbe  better, 
and  it  is  no  meruaylle,ffor  tbere 
ben  more  f ooles  than  wysemen. 
Cbysc  mene  peple,  and  without 
reson,  meuyd  them  so  mocbe  & 
cry ed  tbat  tbe  barons  and  other 
men  tbat  were  with  hem  ran  to 
armes,  on  horsbak  &  on  f  oote.  TTbere  were  wel  xxv 
,JV1  on  f oote,  and  v  C  a/borsbak,  alle  wel  arrayed  J& 
XTbey  madetbeyr  bataylles,  &  wentef ortbin  orden- 

aun  ce  toward  tbe  mon  taygn  es  by  tbe  woodes  s  tray  t 
toward  Jtycene.  XTbey  were  not  departed  tbre  myle 
wban  Solyman,wbicbe  bad  mocbe  peple  with  bym, 
apperceyued  tbem ;  for  be  cam  alle  couerd  &  secrete- 
ly  in  tbe  wode,  f  or tomakean  assaylle  in  tbe  oost of 
tbe  py  Igryms,  But  wban  be  herd  tbe  noyse  &  thaf- 
fraye  in  the  f oreste,  he  wyst  wel  tbat  thei  were  the 

60 


crieten  men  that  cam  ayenet  bym,  &  euffred  tbcm 
to  paeee.  Re  bym  self  witb  alle  nis  peple  drewe  bym 
incontinent  oute  of  tbe  wode  in  to  tbe  playn  wbere 
ae  tbey  sbold  paeee,  (Oban  oure  peple  were  yeeu- 
ed,  tbey  eewed  tbem  eodenlv,  tbey  tokenonebede  of 
bym,  and  anon  witb  tbeir  relawebip  ran  vpon  our 
men  witb  tbeirsperes  &  swerdes  for  tauenge  tbeyr 
bretberenXbe  betben  men  sawe  on  tbatotbersyde 
tbat  certaynly  tbey  wold  fygbte,&  tbat  euery  man 
dyd  biebe9te,receyuedtbem  mocbe  fierslyXbe  ba- 
taylle  began  mocbe  cruelle,  and  many  were  dede  on 
bo  tbe  eyde9,andtbe  bataylledured  longe,ButSo- 
lyman  bad  mocbe  more  peple  on  borsbacke,  wbom 
tbe  pylgryms  a/fote  mygbt  not  lenger  suffre,  but 
began  tofleewitboutordenaunce,andweredi9com- 
fytedXbeCurkeefolowed  tbem  aftir,9leeyng  alle 
tbem  tbat  tbey  mygbt  atteyne,  tyl  tbey  cam  to  tbeyr 
lodgyngj^CberewereslaynGaultiersaneeauoyr, 
Reygnald  de  Broyes  &  f oucber  d'Orleane,  wbicbe 
were  good  and  valyaunt  knygbtes,and  almost  alle 
were  slayn  and  brought  in  to  prison,  if  or  of  xxv  JVI 
men,andfyuebonderdmen  on  borsbak,coudenot 
be  f ounden  tbre  to  gydre,  but  tbat  tbey  were  taken 
orslayn. 


! 


61 


)m 


fiow  peter  Cberemvte  beyng  in  Constantynoble 
was  aduertysedof  tbisdisconfyture,  &saued  tbre 

tbousandcristenmen,beyngin  grete  daun<rer,capi- 
tuloxxvj^^  r 

HIS  vyctorye  brought  Soly- 
man  in  grete  pryde,andin  grete 
sewrtebe  smotein  totbe  lodgis 
of  tbe  cristen  men,  wbere  as 
wer  lef te  tbauncyentpeple,men, 
wymmen,  clerbes,  and  monkes, 
wbome  be  put  alle  to  detb,  He 
-fonde  maydens  and  smale  chil- 
dren, wbtcbe  be  ledde wttb  bym,  for  to  be  euer  af tir 
m  seruagejffOn  tbat  one  side  of  tbe  tentes  nygbe 
vn  to  tbe  see,  was  an  old  fortress  f orleten  and  beten 
doun,  in  wbicbe  no  man  dwelled, netber  was  fonde 
tberem  dorene  wyndowe.  Oeder  fliedde  of  tbe  pyl- 
gfryms  aboute  a  tbre  thousand,  one  aftir  another 
for  to  kepe  tbeyr  lyues,  they  stopped  then  trees  tbe 
best  wyse  they  mygbt  wytb  grete tymbre  and  trees, 
andwitb  grete  stones.TTbetWkeeknewe  tberof,& 
earn  and  began  tassaylle  it  on  allesides  mocbe  an- 
guyssbously,  Tbev  defended  them  the  best  wev 
they  mygbte,  ffor  they  bad  gretenede,  Olbvles  tbev 
were  thus  assaylled,  a  messager  wente  hastely  to 
peter  Cberemyte,  which  was  in  Constantynoble, 

a8ttt66atdtoyoutofore:tbt6me66agesaidtobvm 
that  alle  bis  men  were  perysshyd,  sauf  a  lytil  re- 
menaunt,  wbicbe  were  at  grete  mischief  in  an  old 
bows  asyeged,  wbicbe  were  in  mocbe  grete  dancrer, 
yf  tbey  bad  not  hasty  socoure* 


i 


r.-— 


eiTGR  was  mocbc  abassbed,  &  bad 
meruayllously  grete  sorowe.  JVeuer- 
tbelesse,  anon  be  rannc  to  tbemper- 
our,  and  fyld  doun  at  bis  feet,  and 
prayd  bym  for  goddes  sake  and  for 
tbe  sauacion  of  bis  sowle,  tbat  be 
woldsendesocoure  to  tbis  pourcpcplc  tbat  werein 
so  grctc  pery  11,  tbat  yf  be  basted  not,  tbey  sbold  be 
alle  deed.  TTbem  perour  tbat  mocbe  louyd  peter  sent 
anon  bis  messagers  tbeder,  and  commaunded  tbe 
TTurhes  tbat  essaylled  tbem  sbold  leue  tbassault 
&departetbensXbey  wenteaweye  anon  wban  tbey 
bad  berde  tbe  commandement  of  tbemperour,  but 
tbey  ledde  witb  tbem  prisonners  ynowe,  borses, 
mules,  and  otber  beestes,  tentes,  pauyllons,  and 
gonnes,  and  wytb  alle  tbey  retoumed  in  to  J^ycene 
jplSere  yemaye  bere  bow  so  mocbe  peple  was  loste, 
by  tbe  f  olye  of  tbe  moyen  peple,  wbicbe  wold  not 
baue  ne  endure  tbegouemaunceof  tbe  wyse  men  a- 
boue  tbem.  Here  may  men  wel  see  tbat  it  is  grete 
peryl  to  truste  totbebataylleorwarreof  tbem,  tbat 
nnowenotof  it* 

Row  a  preest  named Godecban  made bym  self  cap- 
tayn  of  xl  JV1  Ducbemen  in  tbis  viage,  and  of  tbeyr 
oultragcs,  capitulo  xxvij^A? 

Y€H  tbat  pieter  was  passed  in 
toBytbymeasIbauesaid,itwa8 

not  longe  af  tir  tbat  a  priest  na- 
med Godecban  bad  precbyd  in 
Ducbelonde,lykeaspeterCber.- 

emyte  bad  doon  in  f raunce,  and 
cam  witb  bis  peple  for  to  goo  in 
in  tbis  pylgremagc,  ff or  be  bad 


wel  assembled  xl  M  of  Ducbemen,  Cbey  entred 
alle  in  to  tbe  londe  of  Hongrye,  ffor  tbe  kyng  bad 
comaundedtbattbeysboldbereceyueddebonayrly, 
by  cause  it  was  bisneygbours,and  tbat  tbey  snold 

aevytaylle&otber  necessytees  at  prys  resonable, 
xy  tbat  f  onde  tbe  londe  rigbt  good  began  to  a- 
bydetberealletbewynter,and  fortbeease  tbat  tbey 
bad  tbey  began  to  wexe  prowd,  in  sucbe  wyse  tbat 
tbey  toke  away  tbe  vytaylles  &  otber  tbynges,and 
ledcte  awey  tbe  beestes  ou te  of  tbe  f  eeldes,  Cbey  toke 
wyues,  bete  tbeyr  busbondesandslewetbem,  &for 
noman  wold  tbey  leue  tbise  outrages  jjTCbe  kynge 
of  tbe  londe  berde  tbe  tydynges  of  tbis  peple,  and 
was  mocbe  displaysed,  and  was  mocbe  sory  tber- 
fore,  &mygbtnotwytb  bis  honour  no  lenger  suffre 
it,  lest  it  sbold  tome  to  ouermocbe  burte  of  bis 
londe  and  of  bis  subgettes,and  dyde  do  assemble 
mocbe  peple  on  borsbak,  and  on  rote  for  tauenge 
on  tbise  Ducbemen,  He  began  to  poursyewe  tbem 
so  f  erre,  tbat  be  f onde  tbem  rigbt  in  tbe  mydle  of 
bis  royame  by  a  castel  named  Bellgraue.^be  kyng 
bad  seen  and  also  berd  of  tbou  Itrages  tbat  tbey  bad 
doon  in  bis  londewbyles  besiewedaftirtbem.'Cbe 
Ducbmen  knewetbat  tbe  kynge  cam  vpon  tbem  and 
was  nygbe,&  tbey  knewe  wel  tbat  tbey  bad  not  ben 
wel  gouerned  toward  bym,but  bad  doon  many  ylle 
tornes  and  wronges  in  bis  londe,  wberf  or  tbey  bad 
not  deseruyd  bis  grace  and  bis  loue,  J^euirtbeless 
tbey  ranne  to  armes,andsayde  tbat  tbey  wolde  de- 
f ende  tbem  fro  tbe  Honares,  and  wold  neuer  deye 
fornougbt,  but  erst  wold  tbey  selle  tbeyr  lyf  mocbe 
derej^ttlban  tbe  kyng  and  tbe  Mongers  sawe  tbis, 
64 


/they  thought  that  this  peple  were  moche  stronge 
and  hardy,  &  there  as  alle  dispayred,  and  sawe  that 
.bemygbtnotouercometbemwitboutgretelosseof 
'bispeplein  that  m  an  er,  &lef  te  the  force  of  bataylle, 
and  toke  hym  to  subtilite  &  f  alsbed,  as  peple  that 
is  f  ill  of  barate,  deceyte,  and  tryeberye- 

"  He  kynge  &  thenongers  sente  mes- 
sage to  Godecban  &  to  the  grete  men 
of  the  companyefor  to  deceyue  them 
by  f  ayre  wordesof  peas,  and  sayd  to 
them  in  thismanere:Ouer grete  com- 
J  playnte  andmoche  f owle  renommeis 
comen  to  the  kyng  of  you,  f  ayr  syres,  whiche  hath 
sentevsbetber,foras  he  hath  herd  saye,  ye  hauenot 
had  to  none  of  youre  hoostes  no  f ayth  ne  troutbe, 
but  haue  taken  fro  them  that  they  badde,and  haue 
beten  &  slayn  them.  Ye  have  taken  their  doughters 
i  and  wyues,  and  doo  suche  oultrages  to  them  as  it 
VST  ougbtnot  tobesaydXbe  marcheauntes  and  other 
peple  that  ye  fynde  by  the  wayes,  be  not  sure,  and 
goonot  quytefroyou,butbe  robbedand  pyled-Of 
wbicbetbyngestbe  kyng  hathgrete  clamours  aftir 
him ;  neuirtheles  the  kyng  knowetb  wel,  that  ye  be 
not  alle  in  this  default,  but  ther  ben  emong  you 
many  good  men  &wyse  to  whom  this  folye  moche 
displaysy th,  and  the  oultrage  of  the  malef  actours 
whiche  haue  so  angred  the  kyng  and  his  peple,  ther- 
for  the  kyngwil  not  put  thedefaulte  of  one  partye 
vponalle,ne  it  is  not  right  that  tbetrewepylgryms 
shold  a/bye  the  trespas  of  the  bad,  &  he  doubtetb 
to  take  vengeaunce  on  you  alle*  Slherf  ore  we  coun- 
seyle  vou  that  ye  appese  the  kynge  in  thismaner,  & 
fi  65 


we  promyse  you  in  good  f aytb  that  ye  sbal  neuer 
bauc  damage*  Off re,  and  putte  your  bodyes,  your 
amies, and alle your  tbynges  in  bis  wylleand  in  bis 
mercy,  witboutmakyngofonyappoyntementwitb 
bym,f  or  yf  yewilnot  sodoo,yesee  wel,ye  bauenot 
tbe  puysaunce  ayenst  bym,  for  ye  be  in  tbe  myddle 
of  bis  royamme,  and  may  not  escape  bym. 

aODecnH)S[  &  tbe  grete  men  of  bis 
boost  to  wbom  tbisoultragesmocbe 
displesyd,andtbefolyesoftbemene 
peple,  trusted  wel  in  tbe  wordes  tbat 
tbey  bad  brought  to  tbem,  and  bad 
arete  bope  in  tbe  byenes  and  mercy  of 
tbe  kyngj^Cbey  called  tbe  peple,  counseyled  and 
prayde  tbem  tbat  tbey  wolde  rendre  tbeyr  narnoys, 
and  put  tbem  in  tbe  mercy  of  tbe  kyngXbey  wold 
not  doo  it,  and  sayde  tber  sbold  neuer  come  good 
to  tbem  to  put  tbem  under  so  vntrew  peple:  neuer- 
tbeles,atte  laste  tbey  dyde  by  tbecounseyl  &  wylle 
of  tbe  wvsemenXbeyr  barnoys, and  alle  tbat  tney 
badde  tbey  delyuerd  atte  commandement  of  tbe 
kynge,  Cdban  tbey  supposed  tberby  to  baue  goten 
tbeyr  lyf  ,tbey  ran  totbe  detb,ffor  tbefiongresas- 
saylled  tbem  anon  in  tbe  mydle  of  tbem  alle  armed, 
of  tbe  wbicbe  poynt  tbey  toke  none  bede.  Tbey  be- 
gan to  slee&smyteof  beedeswitbout  demandyncr 

wbowasgoodnewbowaseuylXbeyslewesomany 
tbat  tbey  waded  in  tbe  blood  vnto  tbebalf  legge,it 
was  soroweandpyte  to  see  tbeyr  bodyes  of  sofayr 
peple  slayne  in  tbe  stretes, wayesand  feeldes.Som 
bapped  tescape  tbatwente  emong  tbeotberand  re- 
torned  in  to  tbeyr  contre,&  tolde  tbis  mescbeyf  and 
66 


trayson,  by  wbicbe  tbcy  taugbt  allc  tbc  pylgryms 
tbat  tbcy  ronde  tbat  tbcy  sbold  not  truste  to  tbc 
pcplc  of  Dongrye, 

How  CC  JW  cristen  men  a  f ootc  &  tbrc  JW  a  bors- 
bak  witboute  capytayn  assembled  in  tbis  pyt- 
gremage,  &  of  tbeyr  mayntene,  capitulo  xxvxxj^^ 

JJS"  a  litil  tyme  af  tir  tbis  ofrete  oc- 
[  cisyon  tbat  I  baue  said  to  fore, 
assembled  mocbe  grete  peple  a 
f  ootewitbout  capitayne,  pleuer- 
tbeles  tber  wer  emong  tbem  bye 
men  and  good  kny  gbtes,  bu  t  tbe 
comune  peple  obeyed  tbem  not 
I  ne  byleuyd  tbem  of  notbynge, 
TZbere  was  emonge  tbem  Hbomas  de  fere,  Clerem- 
bault  of  Vendueyl,(3uillem  Carpenter,&tbe  counte 
Herman,  TTbese  peple  tbat  were  a  f  oote  dyde  many 
ylles  and  oultrages  by  tbe  waye,  and  tber  arrose 
emong  tbem  a  madnesse  and  a  rage  of  wbicbe  tbey 
coude  not  kepe  tbem  fro  sleyngof  alle  tbe  lewes  in 
alle  tbe  wayes  and  townes  by  wbicbe  tbey  passed, 
ITbey  slewemerueyllous  grete  nombre  at  Coleyne, 
at)Vlagonce,and  m  otber  places.  In  tbise  partyes 
as  tbey  wentewas  an  erle,a  rigbt  noble  lord  named 
Bmycon :  wban  be  sawe  tbis  peple,  be  put  bym  self 
in  tbeyrcompanyefortogoowitbtbemin  tbispyl- 
gremage,  be  cbastysed  not  ne  blamed  tbemysruled 
peple,  but  entysea  tbem  to  doo  euyl  tomes. 


wmm^^^m 


RSY  passed  by  francone  and  by 
Bauyere  so  f crrc  that  tbey  drewe  in 
to  nongrye,  and  cam  in  to  a  toun 
named  JMleeszeborsjj^CCTel  supposed 
tbey  to  baue  passed  in  to  nongrye 
witnoute  ony  gaynsayeng,  but  wban 
tbey  cam  to  tbe  brygge,  it  was  deff  ended  tbem  and 
closed*  "Cbere  was  a  fortresse  wbicbe  was  closed* 
on  tbat  one  syde  witb  tbe  ryuer  of  tbe  Dunoe,  and 
on  tbat  other  syde  witb  tbe  ryuer  named  Lintans ; 
tbe  remenauntwasenuyronnedwitbadepe  mareys. 
<Hitbin  tbe  fortresse  was  grete  plente  of  peple  wel 
armed,  wberf ore  itwas  not  lygbt  for  to  passe  tbat 
toun  by  force,  ff or  tbe  kynge  of  nongrye  bad  wel 
vnderstande  of  tbe  comyng  of  tbis  peple,  wbicbe 
were  witbou  te  fay  lie  wel  cc  JA  on  f ote,  and  on  bors- 
bak  were  nomoo  but  tbre  thousand,  and  doubted 
mocbe  tbat  tbey,  wban  tbey  were  entred  in  to  bis 
londe,  wolde  auenge  tboccision  tbat  was  doon  by 
falsebed  and  trayson  vpon  tbepepleof  ©odecban, 
ff  or  tbe  rumoure  and  specbewas  mocbe  yet  of  tbat 
f owle  and  vylanous  f ayte  tburgb  out  al  tbe  londe* 
XTbey  tbat  sawetbat  tbeymygbt  not  passein  to  tbe 
londe,  prayd  tbem  of  tbe  fortresse  tbat  tbey  wold 
suffre  tbem  to  sende  messagers  to  tbe  fcyng  of 
nongrye,  for  to  requyre  bis  grace  tbat  tbeymygbt 
passe  in  <?ood  peas,  and  tbey  wold  lodge  tbem  tber 
wbylest  m  tbo  places  tbat  wer  ful  of  pastures  to 
fore  tbe  paas* 


68 


fiow  tbis  peple  began  to  destroye  the  londc  of  the 
lkyng,  by  cause  bewold  not  graunte  to  tbem  leuefor 
)to  passe,  capitulo  xxix&& 

1 LYOL  wby  le  taryed  tbey  tbat 
wente  to  tbe  kyng,  but  retomed 
anon,ffor  tbey  mygbtnotspede 
of  sucb  tbynges  as  tbey  dem- 
anded. TLbz  kyng  answerd  tbat 
for  yef te  ne  for  prayer  sbolde 
tbey  en tre  in  to  bis  londe.  Cttban 
J  tbey  of  tbe  oost,  grete  &  smale, 
berd  tbis,  tbey  were  mocbe  angry,  ffor  tbey  bad 
trauaylled  &  aespended  mocbe  cjood  to  come  tbe- 
dyr,  and  now  tbey  bad  loost  tbeir  wayeXbey  con- 
cluded among  tbem  tbat  tbey  sbold  brenne  &  de- 
stroye tbe  contreye  of  tbe  kynge,  as  mocbe  as  was 
on  tbis  syde  tbe  mareys ;  tbey  sette  fyer on  townes, 
and  toke  tbe  men,  and  destroyed  alle  tbe  con  trey. 
Qlbyles  tbey  dydc  tbus,  tbe  peple  of  tbe  f ortresse 
cam  out,  and  witb  otber  peple  of  tbe  kynges  to  tbe 
nombre  of  viiCwbatof  knygbtes  and  otber  peple 
wel  armed,  and  passed  by  sbippis  er  euer  tbe  pil- 
gryms  knewe  or  it  ony  word,  and  tbey  sette  tbem 
for  to  deff ende  tbe  pylgryms  at  a  paas  tbat  tbey 
sboldnotentre.Cttbantbepylgrymssawetbis,tbey 
ran  vygorously  vpon  tbem  in  sucbe  wyse  tbat  er 
tbey  my  gbt  saue  tbem  self  tbey  were  slayn  alle,  sauf 
a  f  ewe  of  tbem  tbat  witbdrewe  tbem  in  to  tbe  ma- 
reys, and  bydde  tbem  in  tbe  reed. 


f3 


60 


RHJN"  tbyse  pylgryms  tbus  bad  tbe 
victorye,tbey  mounted  in  mocbc  grcte 
bardynes,  and  said  tbat  by  force  tbey 
woldtaketbefortresseofr>ongrye,& 
witboute  leue  tbey  wold  passe  tburgb 
tbc  londeXbenne  tbey  began  to  som- 
onne  and  recomf orte  euery  man  to  doo  wel.  *Cbey 
tohe  poles  &  made  scaffboldes  mocbe  grete  plente, 
wbicbe  tbey  sette  to  tbe  walks,  &  mounted  vp  cou- 
erd  witb  tbeyr  sbeldes  and  targes,  and  assay  lied  it 
mocbe  bardely*  JVlany  py  bed  witb  pyhoys,  &  myned 
tbe  walleswitb  grete  force  tbat  tbentree  semed  al 
redy  f  or  to  entreXbey  tbat  were  witbin  were  nygbe 
deed  for despayer,frortbeydefendedslowlyasmen 
affrayedin  tbeir  bertes,ffor  tbey  supposed  anon  to 
be  slayn.  Hnd  sodenly  cam  a  fere  and  a  drede  vpon 
tbe  bertes  of  tbe  pylgryms  tbat  wened  anon  to  be 
slayn,  and  neuer  was  hnowen  wberf  ore  it  was,  and 
anon  fyl  doun  fro  tbe  scaff oldes,  &  taryed  not,  but 
fiedde  sodeynly,  &none  wystewby  tbey  fleddeXbe 
Rongers  wnan  tbey  sawe  tbis,  mygbt  wytb  grete 
peyne  by  leue  it,  tbat  tbis  was  trou  tbe,  ffor  tbey  sawe 
no  rayson  wby*  JVeuertbeles,  wban  tbey  appercey- 
uyd  tney  descended  doun  and  began  to  f  olowe  tne 
cbaas  in  sucbe  wyse  tbat  tbem  next  to  fore  tbem 
were  almost  alle  taken  and  slayn*  In  tbis  auenture 
was  fonden  none  otber  reson,  sauf  tbat  tbe  peple 
was  sofulof  synne, tbat  tbey  badnotdeseruyd tbe 
loueofourlora,netbonoureof  tbe  world,  and  tber- 
for  tbeyre  synnes  acowarded  tbem  in  sucbe  wyse 
tbat  tbey  mygbt  not  doo  ne  accomplyssbe  tbis 
grete  werhe,  wrocbe  tbey  bad  nygbe  acbyeued* 
70 


"EsZJgaRG  crlc  Gmycon  cam  agayn  in  to  bis 

contrc  with  gretenombreof  pejpledis- 

confitedXbeotberbaronsoffraunce 

tbat  I  fore  bauc  named  wente  in  to 

Lombardye,  &  so  in  to  puylleXbere 

bad  tbey  miowlecbe  tbat  somme  of 

tbe  grete  barons  were  passed  in  to  Duras,and  fro 

tbens  in  to  ©rece,  tbey  wente  af  tir  &  f olowyd  tbem. 

In  tbis  manere  were  tbe  peple  of  f  rauncedisperpled 

and  of  tbe  contrees  tber  by.  TTbe  waye  of  nongrye 

wasmocbe  more  strayte  &  ner  yf  tbey  mygbt  baue 

goonit,and  bad  not  bedestrowbledby  tbeyrfolye- 

^But  tbe  otber  tbat  camaftirpeyned  tbemmocbe 

for  to  goo  more  wysely  and  more  in  peas* 

Row  tbe  due  ©odefroy  of  Boloyne  beyng  witb  a 

grete  boost  cam  vnto  Dongrye,sente  bis  messag- 

ers  to  tbe  fcyng  for  to  demande  passage,  capitulo 

OJViejSfwas  tbemonetb  of  Hu- 
guste, in  tbe  yere  of  tbyncama- 
cion  of  our  lord,  JVI  Ixxxxvj,  tbe 
xv  day  of  tbe  same  monetb,  tbe 
valyaunt  Godefroy  of  Buyll- 
on,ducofLoraygne,assembled 

tbem  tbat  sbold  be  bis  f  elawes 
_  intbisioumcye,andcamfrobis 

contrey  witb  so  grete  apparayllement  as  it  apper- 

teyned  to  bis  estate.  OTith  bym  Bawdwyn  bis  bro- 

,  tber,  Bawdwyn  tbe  erle  of  nenawde,  Huge  tbe  erle 

V]  of  Seyntpol,euerard  bissone,wbicbwasamocne 

valyaunt  yongeman,(3amyertbeerle,sumamedor 

Crees,  Bemarde  tbe  erle  of  ITouU,pieter  bts  bro- 


tber,  Bauwdwyn  de  Bore,  cosyn  to  tbc  due,  fienry 
d'Hsque,  ©odefroy  bis  brother,  and  many  otber 
good  knygbtes  witb  tbemXbis  men  were  so  good 
frendee  emonge  tbem,  and  so  wyse  men,  that  in  no 
wyse  tbey  wold  departe  tbat  one  fro  that  otber  J& 
Xlbzy  cam  alle  boot  witb  tbeir  tbynges  in  toOster- 
yebe  tbe  xx  daye  of  Septembre,  vnto  a  town  wbicb 
is  named Cayllenborcb,  tbere  rennetb  aryuer  nam- 
ed Lyn  tans,  anddeparted  tbem  pyre  of  Hllemaygne 
fro  tberoyamme  or  fiongrye.SIban  tbey  were  com- 
en  tbeder,  tbey  bad  berd  by  tbe  waye  euyl  tydynges 
of  tbe  grete  mesauentures,  tbat  ©odecban  and  bis 
3eple  bad  in  fiongrye* 

g^  i^gsignBY  assembled  and  took  counseyl 
emon  ge  tbem,  bow  tbey  myabt  passe 
tbis  eontre  in  peasXbey  alle  acord- 
ed  tbat  tbey  sbold  sende  messagers 
and  lettres  vnto  tbe  kyng  of  fiongrye 
for  to  demande  first  by  wbat  reason 
tbeyr  f elaws,  tbe  pylgryms  wbicbe  were  tbeyr  bre- 
tberen,  were  tbus  peryssbed  in  bis  power  and  bis 
londe.Hf  tir  tbis  tbey  en  cbarged  tbemessagers  tbat 
tbey  sbold  en  tre  witb  bym  in  to  comunicacion,  tbat 
tbey  my gbt  passe  bis  royamme  seurly  and  in  peas, 
ana  tbat  berin  tbeyput  tbem  in  deuoyr  and  payne, 
if  or  tbis  waye  was  tor  tbem  mocbe  sborte,  &  more 
couenable  yr  tbey  mygbt  baue  it  tban  for  topasse 
by  see^In  tbis  message wenteGodefroy d'Heque, 
brother  of  Henry,  by  cause  be  bad  long  to  fore  ben 
acqueynted  witb  tbe  kynge  of  Rongrye;  witb  bym 
tbey  sente  otber  wyse  men.  XTbey  wente  so  f er  tbat 
tbey  f  onde  tbe  kynge,  and  salewed bym  in  tbename 
7* 


,  of  bem  that  sente  tbem,  and  delyuerd  tbeyr  lettres 
,  of  credence,  andaf  tir  sayd  to  bym  tbyse  wordes* 
Row  tbe  messagers  of  tbe  due  6odefroy  declared 
tbeir  message  vnto  tbe  kyng  of  Rongrye,and  tber 
upon  bis  answere,  capituloxxxj^^" 

^R6  wyse  man  and  noble,  (3ode- 
1  froy,  ducof  Lorayne,&  tbe  other 
prynces  tbat  win)  bym  come  in 
pylgremage,  baue  sente  vs  now 
vnto  you,  &  by  you  wolde  knowe 
by  what  occasion  tbe  otber  pyl- 
gryms,  whom  tbey  belde  for  f e- 
J  laws  &  bretberen,  baue  so  cruelly 
be  slayn  and  smeton  in  pieces  in  your  power*  <Oel 
tbey  knowe  and  sende  you  worde  tbat  tbey  baue 
ben  800  slayn,  flPor  tbey  baue  founden  many  of 
tbem  tbat  ben  escaped*  JVIocbe  tbey  meruaylle  now 
ye  and  your  peple,  wbicb  ben  cristen  as  ye  saye, 
baue  tbus  destroyed  tbe  good  companye,  wbicbe 
for  to  enbaunse  tbe  faytb  of  Ibesu  Crist  ben  de- 
parted out  of  tbeyr  contre,  in  sucbe  wyse  tbat  tbe 
most  mortal  enemyes  tbat  tbey  baue,  bad  not  don 
werseXbey  desire  mocbe  to  knowe  yf  it  were  by  tbe 
defaulte  or  tbe  pylgryms;  if  or  yf  ye  baue  doon  it 
by  iustyce,or  in  aeffendyna  you  andyoure  londes, 
or  otber  wyse  tbat  tbey  wold  enforce  and  take  ony 
tbyng  away*  Yf  it  were  so,  tbe  due  and  bis  f  elaws 
wold  take  it  more  ligbtly,  but  yf  it  be  doo  without 
tbeir  trespaas,  or  for  bate  tbat  ye  bad  to  tbem,  and 
tbus  murdred  tbem,  tbey  tbat  sente  vs  betber  lete 
you  wete  by  vs  tbat  tbey  baue  lefte  tbeyr  owne  coun- 
treyes  for  tauenge  tbe  wronges  and  tbe  oultrages 

73 


that  baue  ben  don  to  the  pcplc  of  ourc  lord,  and  yf 
tbey  finde  that  ye  baue  so  doo,  tbey  be  not  in  wylle 
to  passe  f ertber,  tyl  tbey  baue  to  tbeyr  power  au- 
enged  tbedetb  of  tbe  pylgryms  of  our  lordj^Hnd 
.berwitb  ©odefroy,  tbat  acounted  tbis  to  tbekyng, 
'made  an  ende  of  bis  wordes. 

fiG  kyng  was  in  bispalays,  wbere  be 
bad  grete  plente  or  barons  of  bis 
royamme  andof  otber  pepleXbenne 
l  \^//WA\  answerd  and  sayde  J?  Godef roy,  it 
KVx^^a \  plesytb  me  mocbe  tbat  ye  be  come  in 
r^^m-^mi  to  tbis  contrey  for  to  speke  to  me:  it 
isamocbegoodtbyng  for  mefortwocausesXbat 
oneis tbatye be  of  myn  acqueyn taunce &my  frende 
longesytb,and  we  snal  afferme&renewe  our  loues 
&  ouracqueyntaunces  in  tbis  yourecomyngXbat 
otber  cause  is  tbat  I  knowe  you  to  be  a  man  wyse, 
resonable,  and  of  good  wille,  and  am  mocbe  ioyous 
of  tbis  tbat  ye  sbal  bere  my  excusacionXroutbeit 
is  tbat  we  baue  tbe  name  of  tbe  cristiente,it  were& 
sboldbemocbe  fayrtovs  yf  we  bad  tbe  werkes,  but 
tbey  tbat  ben  passed  tof  ore  witb  peter  0>eremy  te 
&witb(3odecban,  baue  not  tbe  werkes  ofpylgryms 

neofcristen  men^forwereceyuyd  peter  X:beremyte 
and  bis  peplein  ourelondes  andin  our  townes  witb 
grete  debonayrte,  and  departed  witb  tbem  oure  vy~ 
tay  lies,  and  otber  tbyn  ges  we  gaf  to  tbem,  but  tbey, 
lyke  as  tbe  serpent  tbat  prycketb  or  styngetb  bym 
tbat  kepetb  bym  warme  in  bis  bosomme,  batb  guer- 
donned  and  rewarded  vs  for  our  good  dedes,  for 
in  tbende  of  tbe  royamme  of  fiongrye,  wban  tbey 
ougbt  to  tbanke  vs  and  rendre  graces  to  god  &  to 
74 


tbeyr  frendes,  tbey  toke  by  force  one  of  oure  best 
castellis,  and  put  to  detb  alle  that  were  tberin,  and 
caryed  tbe  beestys  with  tbem.  'Cbey  toke  alle  tbe 
maydens  of  tbetown  lykerowtersand  tbeuesXbe 
companyeof  ©odecban  cam  after  tbem,  tbey  abode 
not  to  f orf aytte  til  tbe  ende  of  our  royamme,  but 
assone  as  tbey  were  entred  and  passed  tbeyatesof 
fiongrye,  tbey  began  to  make  alle  tboultrages  tbey 
mygbteXbey  brente  tbe  townes,  slewe  tbe  men,  en- 
forced tbe  wymmen,  and  bare  away  alle  tbynges: 
tbey  dyde  so  mocbe  tbat  for  tbeyr  trespaces  were 
wel  worthy  to  baue  bate  of  god  and  of  tbe  world. 
<Oe  tbat  be  bere  in  tbe  place  and  in  tbe  dygnytt,  by 
wbicbeweougbttokepetbepepleaslongeasitsbal 
please  god,  and  our  barons  tbat  baue  swome  tbe 
f  eaulte  of  tbe  royalme,mygbt  not  wel  endure  tbus 
to  destroyeour  peple  andour  contrey,  but  baueput 
to  tbe  band  by  force  in  vs  def  endyng.  XTbe  tbyrde 
companye  cam  also  witb  folke  a  f oote,  we  doubted 
itbenoyse& debate  in  sucbe  wyse,tbatwewoldnot 
tsuffre  tbem  entre  in  to  our  londe  ne  come  emonge 
vs.  Our  lord,  tbatiugetb  alle  tbe  wordes  &  knowetb 
alle  tbynge,  woteweltbat  it  is  tbus,and  tbatlbaue 
1  lyed  to  you  no  worde.  JVow  we  praye  you  tbatye  ex- 
cuse vs  oueraal  wbere  ye  sbal  bere  speke  of  it 

"1  fiflJV  be  bad  said  tbis,  be  sente  tbe 
messagers  in  to  tbeyr  innes,  wbere 
tbey  bad  mocbe  grete  honour  and 
gretefesteXbekyngetokecounseyl 

of  bis  barons,  &  ordeyned bis  owne 
messagers,  wbicbe  be  sente  to  tbe 


> 


due  ©odefroy  and  to  tbeprynces  tbat  cam.  Re  bad 


spoken  ynowgb  to  Godefroy  d'Hsque,  and  made 
bym  gretecbere,andgaf  to  bym  &  bis  f elawsbippe 
yeftes,andaf  tirtookleue  of  bim  andretomed  al  to 
gydre  witb  tbemessagers^Glban  tbey  were  comen 
toforetbeduc©odefroy,oneoftbemsaydtbemes- 
sage  in  tbis  manere:  Oe  kyng  of  Rongrye  sale- 
wetb  you,  my  lordes,  and  sendetb  yow  worde  tbat 
be  knowetbeertaynly  by  renomme  tbatye  be  a  man 
of  mocbebye  lygnage,puyssaunt  of  peple,  wyse& 
treweof  berte,  prudent  &  valyauntof  body,in  sucbe 
wyse  tbatyour  prouesseis  bornein  to  many  londes, 
ffor  tbysetbyngesour  lord  tbekynge,  wbicbe  neuer 
saweyow,preysetb&  louetbyowmocbein  bie  berte, 
and  batb  mocbe  grete  desire  to  doo  you  bonoure* 
Cbesepylgryms  tbat  ben  witb  you,  &  tbat  baueen- 
terprysed  90  bye  a  pylgremage  be  preysetb  mocbe, 
and  desyretb  mocbe  to  9eetbem,and  to  worgbippe, 
and  to  naue  tbeyr  acqueyntaunce,  ff  or  be  boldetb 
bym  self  ewrous&  graciou9  tbat  our  lord  bad  9ette 
bym  in  9ucb  a  poynt,  tbat  be  may  doo  9eruy9e  and 
bounte  to  one  so  valyaunt  a  man.  Cberfore  vnto 
you,  f  ayr  lord,  &  to  tbe  bye  men  of  your  companye 
beprayetb,  requyretb&ciemandetb  for  a  synguler 
yefte,  tbat  it  wold  plese  you  tocomeseebym  atone 
r>is  castel  named  Ciperon,  ffor  bedesiretb  mocbe 
to  speke  to  you  at  leyser,  and  doo  tbat  ye  wille  de~ 
maunde. 


76 


Row  the  said  kynge  scute  for  to  fetebe  the  due 
<3odefroye,  and  bow  be  wente,  and  of  tbe  deuyses 
tbat  they  bad  togydre,  capitulo  xm]&# 

RH]N[  tbe  duc&bis  barons  bad 
berd  tbe  messager  tbus  spekc, 
be  drewe  tbem  a  parte  and  toke 
counseyl:  tbey  acordedwel  tbat 
tbeduc  sbold  goo.  Resente  for 
sucbecompanyeasbewoldbaue 
and  wentef  ortb  witb  tbre  bon- 
_  derd  borse,  witboute  moo,  on 
bis  way.  Rit  was  not  long  but  be  cam  to  Ciperon, 
be  passed  tbe  bryggcand  fonde  tbe  kynge,  wbicbe 
made  to  bym  grete  ioye  and  mocbe  bonour.  Hnd 
long  tbey  spak  to  gydre,&tbe  kynge  excused  bym 
of  tbe  detb  of  tbe  pylgryms  vnto  tbe  due,  lyke  as 
be  bad  doon  to  tbe  messager  JSfBx  tbende  tbe  kyng 
cam  so  to  poynt  tbat  tbey  were  appeased  goodly: 
tbe  kyng  acorded  to  bym  tbe  passage  tburgb  bis 
royamme,yf  bewoldsette  bym  sucbeboostagesas 
be  sbold  cbese  for  to  kepe  tbe  pees.  HUe  tbis  was 

graunted,and  be  demanded  in  boetage  Bawdwyn, 
rotber  of  tbe  sayd  due,  bis  wyf  and  ber  maygne, 
tbey  were  delyuerd  to  bym  gladly  J?Zbue  entred 
tbey  witb  alletbeyr  peple  in  to  tbelondof  Rongrye. 
Xlbe  kynge  belde  to  tbem  wel  bis  couenauntes,ff  or 
be  dyde  doo  crye  in  alle  tbe  townes  as  tbey  sbold 
passe,&  also  thereby,  tbattbey  sbold  selle  to  tbem 
vytaylles  good  cbeep,and  tbat  noman  sbold  meue 
to  tbem  no  debate,  tbe  due  commanded  also  ana 
made  to  be  cryed,  tbat  none  on  payneof  bis  lyr  were 
so  bardy  to  take  ony  tbynge  fro  tbe  lond  ne  fro  no 

77 


man,  ne  for  to  doo  no  wronge,  but  boldc  tbem  for 
f  elawes  and  brctbcrcnj^XTbue  it  bappcd  tbat  tbey 
passed  allc  Hongrye  without  ony  manerstryf  or 

noyse, 

F)G  kynge  rode  alwey  nyofbe  to  tbo- 
oste,  on  tbe  lyfte  syde,  ledyng  bis 
hostages  witb  bym,  redy  for  tappese 
yf  ony  noyse  arroos,Htte  laste  tbey 
cam  to  JVIalleuylle,  wberof  ye  baue 
berd  to  fore,  wbicbe  stondetb  on  tbe 
ryuer  of  tbe  Dunoe,  XTbere  tbey  taryed  tyl  allc  tbe 
boost  were  passed  by  sbippes,  wberof  were  but 
f ewe,  but  to  rore  be  bad  don  sette  ouer  a  thousand 
men  wel  armed  for  to  kepe  tbe  arryuyng  on  that 
other  sydejfiFOIban  tbe  boost  of  tbe  comyn  peple 
were  passed,  tbe  kyng  cam  to  the  due  and  to  tbe 
barons,  and  brought  the  hostages  tbat  were  dely- 
uerd  to  hym  j?Y)e  made  to  tbem  moche  ioye  and 
honour  at  departyng,  &  gaf  toeuerycb  grete  yef  tes 
and  ryebe*  Hftir  be  toke  leue,  and  retomed  borne 
ageyn^be  due  and  tbe  barons  passed  ouer  witb 
their  peple,  and  cam  to  Bellegraue,  a  cyte  of  Bou- 
grye,  of  wbicbe  we  baue  spoken  to  fore,  and  there 
tbey  lodged  tbemjSPHf  ter  tbey  passed  thurgb  the 
wodes,  til  tbey  cam  to  tbe  cyte  of  JVyz,  and  after  to 
Stralyce. 


78 


■ESWi 


fiow  the  due  ©odeffroye  sente  bis  messagers  to 
tbemperour  of  Constantinoble,  to  tbendc  that  be 
sbold  delyuer  fiuon  Ic  fflayne  &  otbertbat  bcbcldc 
in  prison,  capitulo  xxxiij^^ 

GRSmay  befcnowen  tbc  euildis- 
posicion  sdeceyteof  tbeOrefces, 
fFor  sytb  tbemperours  Latyns 
faylled  in  Constantinople,  and 
tbempyre  cam  vnto  tbc  ©rekes, 
of  whom  tbc  f yrstwasj^y  cef ores. 
Hnon  tbc  barbaryns  tbat  were  a- 
,  boutc  tbcm,  tbc  Blacz  &  tbc  Co- 
mans,tbey  of  Bougrye,wbicbe  ben  toward  tbcnortb 
suppriscd  &  tofce  tbyse  londcs  tbat  were  so  good, 
plentyuous,  and  delytable,  and  conauerd  alle  fro 
tbeDunoe  vnto  Constantynople,  ana  on  tbat  oth- 
er parte  vnto  tbe  see  Hdryane  jprbere  is  a  cyte  in 
Lombardye,  nygb  to  tbe  londe  of  tbe  marquys  of 
6ste  named  Hdre,  and  is  right  a  Htil  cyte.  But  by 
cause  it  is  nygbe  tbe  see  of  Venyse  and  of  Hncone, 
batb  tbis  see  tbe  name  of  tbe  see  Hdryane  in  wryt- 
yng.  TTbis  see  gotb  rigbt  nygb  Constantynoble, 
vnto  a  xxx  myUJfXMs  euyl  peple  of  tbempvre  of 
Constantynoble  bad  wel  wonne  vpon  tbe  ©rehes 
xxx  joumeyesof  lengtbe,and  xof  brede,  ffor  aboue 
tbis  see  tbat  I  baue  spoken  of,  is  a  countre  named 
epyre.  Tbe  cbyef  cyte  is  named  Duras,  of  wbicbe 
pyrrus  was  somtyme  fcynge-  In  tbe  contre  where 
these  pilgrims  passed  were  twoDanemarcbes*  cne 
one  is  named  of  tbe  Ripe  which  is  at  the  left  band 
upon  tbe  rive  of  tbe  Dunoe-  €he  other  is  named 


I 


km 


JVIayene,  that  19  in  tbc  myddle  of  tbe  londe,  where 
ben  also  noble  cytees,  jNyz  and  Stralyce.  In  tbis 
londe  was  Hrcbade,  TTbessale,  and  JWacbedone,  and 
tbre  landes  euerycb  wberof  was  called  TTrace.  Hnd 
alle  tbise  were  conquerd  vpon  tbe  Grekes  j^But 
afterward  tber  was  an  Smperour  named  Basilie 
recouerd  tbise  londes,  and  brought  tbe  Blacz  and 
tbe  Bougres  longe  afore  tbis  tyme,  in  sucbe  wyse 
tbat  tbe  two  Danemarcbes  were  comen  agayn  to  bis 
power.  But  yet  wold  not  tbe  Grekes  suff re  to  re- 
payreagayntbetownes,nelabouretbelondes,wbicb 
sbold  be  right  good,  to  tbende  tbat  none  shold  en  - 
babyte  there,  by  cause  they  bolde  it  for  a  strengtbe, 
and  tbat  notbyng  sbold  be  f onde  tberin.  Hlso  in 
Gspyre,  wbicbe  extendetb  fro  Duras  vnto  a  mount 
ynamed  Bagulars,and  enduretb  foure  iourneys.By 
.that  passed  tbe  other  barons,  but  tbe  due  and  bis 

fcompanyepassedbyDanemarcbelaJVIayen,wbicbe 
is  named  otberwyse  JVIese. 

aneY  cam  by  a  destrayte,  wbicbe  is 
named  tbe  cloystre  of  seynt  Basyle, 
&  sytb  they  descended  in  toaplayne, 
where  they  f onde  grete  plente  of  vy- 
taylle  and  of  pastures,and  cam  vnto 
Hsinepol,  wbicbe  is  a  mocbefayr  cyte 
>andgoodXbere  herd  they saye,and  troutbe  itwas 
tbat  tbemperour  of  Constantynoble  bad  enpri- 
sonned  fiuon  le  JYlayne,  broder  of  tbe  kvnae  of 
Jfraunce,&  many  other  barons  tbat  cam  with  bvm 
|f  or  tbise  noble  men  were  hasty,  and  cam  by  Lom- 
bardye  in  to  puylle,ffrotbens  they  passed  to  Du- 
ras, and  soioumed  for  tabyde  tbe  other  barons, 
80 


wbycbe  ought  to  come  in  to  tbo  partyes,  ne  tbey 
supposed  to  baue  doubted  ony  tbynqf  in  tbe  londe 
of  tbe  Grebes,  tbat  were  cristen  as  tbey  were.  But 
tbe  baylly  of  Duras  tohe  alle  tbemoost  grete  ba- 
rons, and  sente  tbem  in  yrons  to  tbemperour  of 
Constantynoble  to  doo  bis  wylle  witb  tbem.  Re 
belde  tbem  in  prison,  and  abode  tbe  comyngof  tbe 
otber  barons,  by  causey f  tbey  cam  witb  grete  power 
be  wolde  delyuer  tbem  for  tbeyr  loue,  and  yf  tbey 
cam  not  witb  grete  mygbt  be  tbougbt  not  lygbtly 
tolete  tbem  passej^ulban  tbe  due  Godefroyeand 
tbe  otber  barons  berd  tydynges  of  tbis  prison- 
ment,  be  tofce  good  messagers,  &  sente  tbem  witb 
tbeyr  lettres  to  tbemperour.  Hnd  tbey  prayde  and 
warned  bym  tbat  be  sbold  sende  to  tnem  without 
delaye  tbis  bye  and  noble  man  Ruon  le  JMayne  and 
alle  bis  companye,  if  or  tbey  belde  bym  for  lordes, 
bretberen  &  f  elaws  of  tbis  pylgremage.  Hnd  berin 
be  bad  don  more  bis  wylle  and  bis  force  tban  rigbt, 
wban  be  bad  reteyned  one  so  gentil  &  bye  prynce. 
Row  tbe  due  Godefroye  constreyned  tbemperour 
by  force  to  rendre  and  delyuere  bis  prisonners,ca- 

pitulo  xxxiiij^^ 

m-^m  wv^^JT^tbistymewasemperouraGrehe, 

mocbefalsandfuloftricberye,& 
was  named  Hlexes,  &  to  bis  sur- 
name Conius.  Re  was  mocbe  ac- 
queynted  &  pryue  witb  tbat  oth- 
er emperourj^yebof oresBotbo- 
niat,m  sucbewyse  tbat  be  made 
bym  bis  s  teward,&  was  tbe  grea- 


test man  of  tbe  londe  sauf  tbemperour.  Re  by  bis 


maly  ce  purcbaced  euy  I  and  barme  ayenst  bid  lordc, 
by  tnassen  t  of  grete  pcplc  tbat  be  bcldc  abou  tc  bym, 
and  toke  bym  and  bcldc  bym  in  bis  prison  vj yere  to- 
forctbatour  pilgryms  cam  tbederj&TIbemessacr- 
ersof  tbeduc&  tbc  otber  barons  demanded  of  tbis 
emperoure  Ruon  le  JVlayne,  lyke  as  tbey  were  com- 
maunded,  and  tbe  otber  prysonners  in  lyke  wyse. 
Cbemperouranswerde  shortly  tbatbewoldnot  de- 
lyueretbemXbey  retoumed  in  to  tbe  boost,  &  said 
totbem  tbansuerof  tbemperour, 

RHJ^tbeduc&tbeotberbaronsberd 
tbis,  tbey  were  mocbe  wrotb,  &  con- 
cluded emong  tbem  by  tbeyr  coun- 
seyll,  tbat  tbey  wold  playnly  make 
warre  ayens  t  bym,  tbat  dy  de  so  grete 
oultrage  to  bolde  so  bye  a  prynce  in 
1  prison,  ne  wolde  not  answere  by  mesure  ne  reason* 
Xbey  babandonned  to  tbeboosteto  take,  in  tbat 
contrewberetbevwerein,alletbattbeycoudefynde, 
an  d  brcn  te  alle  tf>e  townesXbus  abode  tbey  in  tbise 
party cs,  &  destroyed  alle  tbc  contrc,  &  dyde  mocbe 
grctc  dommagc  an  d  barme ;  &  grctc  plen  tc  of  proy  cs 
and  otbergayncs  cam  in  to  tbc  boost  of  tbe  barons 
^TTbempcrour  scnte  vnto  tbeduc  &  vnto  tbe  otb- 
er barons,  tbat  tbey  sbold  doo  bolde  tbeyr  peple  in 
pccs,and  tbat  be  wold  delyuere  fiuon  le  JVlayne  and 
tbe  otber  prisonncrsXbey  agreed  &  acordid  glad- 
ly, &  cam  witb  alle  tbeyr  batay  lies  renged  &  in  orde- 
naunce  toforeConstantynoble,asfor  tassiegctbe 
toun  jjMnonyssued  oute  fiuon  tbc  JSflayne,6reue 
de  J^eele,  Cuyllaumc  Cbarpenticr,  Clarembault  de 
Venduel,  and  entred  in  to  tbe  pauyllon  of  tbe  due, 
82 


and  thanked  bym  mocbe  and  allc  the  other  of  tbeyr 

>delyueraunce*  Mnd  the  due  and  the  booste  receyu- 

jed  tbem  witb  mocbe  grete  ioye,ffor  tbey  bad  mocbe 

greteangre&gretedespiteoftbatwasdontotbem. 

Cbe  grete  despyte  tbat  tbemperour  tolte,  tbat  due 
Godeffroy  reffused  to  goo  in  to  Constantinoble 
vnto  bym^apituloxxxv,*^ 

^f>YL6S  tbey  spah  tbus  to  gy- 

,dre,  cam  tbe  messagers  fro  tb- 

I  emperour  totbeduc&requyred 

tbem  in  tbeyr  lordes  name  tbat 

be  wold  entre  witb  a  f  ewe  of  bis 

com  panye  in  to  tbe  toun,  &  come 

spefce  witb  tbemperour  J9  Cbe 

due  bad  counseyl  berupon,  and 

answerd,  tbat  be  wold  not  yet  come  in  to  tbe  toune. 

T(Hban  tbemperour  berd  tbis,  be  bad  tberof  mocbe 

grete  despite,  &  deff  ended  oueral  tbat  tber  sbold  no 

more  vytaylle  be  sold  to  tbem,ne  none  otber  tbyn- 

f  ges  j^€be  noble  men  sawe  tbis,  and  sente  out  on 

f ouragyng  ouer  allc  tbe  countrey,  &  tbey  brought 

.  in  vytaylle  grete  plente,in  sucbe  wyse  tbat  tbey  bad 

ynowgb,  poure  &  ry  cbeXbem  perour  sawe  tbat  tbis 

contre  sbold  be  destroyed,  and  doubted  tbat  tbey 

iwold  yet  doo  werse,  tberf or  be  commanded  to  bis 

marcbeauntes  tbat  tbey  sbold  goo  in  to  tbe  booste 

and  selle  to  tbem  sucbe  tbynge  as  tbey  neded, 

"  He  daye  or  Cristemasse  or  of  tbe 
Natyuite  of  oure  Lorde  approcbed, 
tberf  oretbeduc  andtbe  barons  dyde 
doo  crye  in  tbe  booste,  tbat  no  man 
sbolde  forfaytte  ne  trespace  in  tbo 
f oure  dayes/cbe  mene  wbyle  cam  tbe 

g2  83 


messagers  of  tbemperour,  that  spak  to  tbe  barons 
mocbe  fayr,  tbat  tbey  wold  passe  tbc  brygge  and 
come  on  tbc  syde  of  tbc  palays  wbiebe  was  named 
Btaquerne,  if  or  tbcre  my  gbt  alle  tbc  booste  lodge  in 
grete  bowses  wbiebe  were  nygb  tbe  braas  of  seynt 
George,  Hnd  alle  tbis  said  tbey  for  tricberye  and  de- 
ceyte.  JSeuertbeles  our  peple  byleuyd  tbem  lygbtly, 
if  or  tbe  wynter  was  mocbe  cold&sbarpe  of  raynes 

andsnowes^nsucbewysetbattbepauyllonsroted, 
and  nc  my  gbt  not  bold  out  tbe  water  of  tbe  raync ; 
tbe  borscs  and  poure  peple  mygbt  not  endure  itjJF 
fierof  toke  tbemperour  bis  occasion  for  tosende  in 
to  tbe  boost,  and  tbat  tbey  sbold  passe  toward  tbe 
town :  and  semed  tbat  be  bad  grete  pyte  on  tbem, 
but  bis  en  tendon  was  alle  other  wyse,  if  or  be  dyde 
tbis  to  tbende  tbat  be  sbold  enclose  tbem  in  a  place 
more  stray  t,tbat  tbey  sboldnot  renne  in  to  tbe  con- 
tre,  &  tbat  be  mygbt  baue  tbe  gretter  power  to  con  - 
strayne  tbem  tberin. 

Of  tbe  description  of  Constantinoble,&  of  many 
coun  trees  &  londes  tber  abou  te,  capitulo  xxxvijg  & 

"OR  to  vnderstonde  bow  tbe  ba- 
rons were  enclosed  by  tbe  des- 
loyaulte  of  tbemperour,  it  is  to 
wetebow  tbecyteof  Constanti- 
nople stondetbj^Cbe  see  wbi- 
ebe is  in  Venyse  cometb  nyqb 
vnto  xxx  myle  of  Constant!- 
noble;  ffro  tbens  departetb  an 
arme  like  a  fressbe  water,  and  estendetb  it  toward 
the  eest  in  lengtbe  x)  C  xxx  myle, It  is  not  like  euen, 
tforinsommeplaceitisbut  a  myle  broode,&inan- 


other  it  is  wel  xxx  of  brede  or  more,  after  the  places 
that  it  rennetb  in*  Hnd  it  rennetb  bytwene  tbyse 
two  auncyent  cytees,  Sexton  &  Hbydon,of  wbicbe 
tbat  one  is  in  Hsye  and  tbat  otber  in  Surope,  flP or 
by  the  arme  is  deuyded  tbyse  two  londcs,  Constan- 
tinoble  is  in  Surope:  tbat  otber  parte  is  ]^ycene, 
wbicbe  is  in  Hsye,  vbis  braas  or  arme,  tbus  as  it  is 
moost  brode  toward  tbesee,  lyke  a  roode  wbere  tbe 
porte  is,  it  is  sayde  tbat  it  is  mooste  paysible,  and 
easyer  tban  tbe  see  is  jfr^ygbe  tberto  stondetb 
Constantinoble,wbicbeislykeatryangleXbenr8t 

syde  is  bytwene  tbe  porte  and  tbis  arme,  tber  stan- 
detb  a  cbircbeof  sevnt  George,  of  wbicb  tbat  seeis 
named  tbe  braas  or  sevnt  George,  &  tbis  enduritb 
vnto  tbenew  palays  orBlacquerne,  after  tbe  porte, 
Oat  otber  pan  or  tbe  walle  duretb  fro  tbis  cbircbe 
of  seynt  George  vnto  tbe  porte  Oire,  Cbe  tbyrde 
pan  fro  tbat  yate  vnto  tbe  palays  of  Blacquerne^ 
*Cbe  towne  is  mocbe  wel  closed  toward  tbe  cbam- 
payne  of  walles,  of  dy  cbes,  of  towres,  and  of  bar- 
bicans, Htte  porte  descendetb  a  fressb  water  ren- 
nyng,  wbicb  is  lytil  in  tbe  somer,  but  in  wynter  it 
becometb  mocbe  grete  for  tbe  rayneXbis  water 
batb  a  brygge,  on  wbicbe oure  men  passed  ouer,  tbe 
wbicbe  were  enclosid  bytwene  tbe  grete  see  and  the 
braas,  bebynde  tbe  porte,  wbere  tbey  were  lodged  in 
bouses  &  were  tbere  made  for  tabyde  tbat  comyng 
of  otber  barons. 


g* 


»5 


V 


nejVIpBROaRscntcoftcbisnics- 
sagers  to  the  due,  and  sen  tc  for  bym 
to  come  and  speke  with  bym.  XTbe  due 
doubted  mocbe  bis  tricberye,&  wold 
not  goo.  But  to  tbende  tbat  be  toke 
it  not  for  euyl,  be  sente  to  bym  tbre 
noble  men,  tbat  is  to  wyte,  Conon  de  JVIontagu, 
fienry  d'Hsque,  and  Bawdwyn  de  Bort,  &  excused 
bym  by  tbem  tbat  tbe  barons  tbat  were  witb  bym 
wold  not  counseylle  bym  to  goo  &  speke  witb  bym 
tyl  tbat  tbe  otber  barons  were  comen jSTCbemper- 
our  was  mocbe  wrotb,  and  deff ended  agayn  tbat 
no  vytaylles  sbold  be  sold  to  tbe  boost.  And  dyde 
yet  werse,  ff or  be  sente  on  a  daye  erly  in  tbe  morn- 
yngsbippes  al  fulof  arcbers,tbat  cam  sodenly  by 
tbe  braas  rigbt  tbere  as  tbe  due  was  lodged,  £bey 
sbotte  grete  plente  of  arowes,  in  sucbe  wyse  tbat 
tbey  slewe  mocbe  peple  tbat  was  goon  on  tbe  see 
syde,and  many  tbey  burted  by  tbe  dores  and  wyn- 
dowes. 

Row  our  peple  brente  tbeyr  lodgys  and  toke  tbeyr 
bamoys,  and  of  an  assault  tbat  tbe  Grekes  made 
on  tbem,  capitulo  xxxvij;&s& 

RHJN"  tbe  due  &  tbe  otber  bar- 
ons berdtbis,  by  comyn  coun- 
seyl  tbey  sente  tbe  brother  of 
tbe  due  for  to  take  tbe  brigge, 
to  tbende  tbat  tbey  of  tbe  toun 
sboldnotseasenetakeitXbey 
toke  v  bonderdmen,  wbat  kn- 
ygbtes  as  otber  wel  armed,  & 


camfyrst  to  tbc  brygge  andkepteit,and  sawe  that 
alle  tbc  cyte  was  meued  and  armed  for  to  come  on 
tbem.  Our  men  were  tben  adcerteyned  tbat  tbey  of 
tbc  townc  were  tbeyr  enemyes,and  sette  fyer  in  tbe 
bowses  where  tbey  lodged  in,  &  in  otber  by  wbicbe 
tbey  doubted  and  rered,  wel  a  vj  thousand  or  seuen, 
in  sucbewysetbat  som of  emperoursowne bowses 
were  bren  tej^Hf ter  tbey  dy  de  do  sowne  tbeyr  trom- 
pettes,and  wente  tbem  allc  in  ordenaunce  after  tbe 
due  toward  tbe  brygge,  ffor  tbey  doubted  mocbe 
tbat  tbey  of  tbe  towne  wold  come  tbeder  for  to  def- 
f  ende  tbem  tbe  paas,  Butaslbauesayd,  Bawdwyn, 
brother  of  tbe  due,  bad  tbenne  goten  it  vpon  the 
Crekes,  whom  be  bad  ouertbrowen  &  chased  rygbt 
f erre*  Che  boost  and  alle  tbe  cariage  passed  ouer, 
allc  in  to  the  con  trey,  and  arrested  there  alle  in  or- 
'denauncein  a  fayr  playn,  mocbe  fyersand  coura- 
geous, by  tbe  chircbeof  seynt  CosmeandDamyan, 
which  now  is  named  the  palays  of  Buymont  and 
palaysofJBlacqueme, 

~j  HHN  it  was  come  nygb  the  euentyd 
tbereweremanyslaynof  themof  tbe 
towne,  and  of  tbe  otber,  but  not  so 
many,  0>e  <3rekes  myght  no  lenger 
surrebut  tbe  pylgrymsdiscomfyt- 
J  ed  tbem  &cbassed  tbem,sleyngand 
bewyngalle tbem  tbat  they  mygbt arreche,m  sucbe 
wyse  tbat  tbey  droof  tbem  in  to  the  toun  by  force, 
tbenne  retoumed  they  agayn  as  tbey  tD^Jl*a 
wonne  tbe  f elde,  and  lodged  in  tbe  playne^^be 
©rekes  were  mocbe  swollen  and  angry  of  tbat  tbey 
bad  lost  somany  men  &  bad  ben  so  euyl  demened, 

g4  S? 


I 


i 


and  began  to  ordeyne  tburgb  tbc  town  bow  tbev 
mygbt  yssue  outc  witb  mocbe  more  affrave  and 
strenger  tban  tbey  bad.  But  tbenygbt  cam  tbat  de- 
stourned  tbetr  counseyl  JSt  TTbis  was  an  euident 
tbynge,  tbat  tbemperour  bad  don  tbe  barons  passe 
the  brvoge  by  tncberye  and  vntroutbe  for  to  baue 
closed  tbem  as  witbin  barryers. 

nowaftertbisourpeplebegantodestroyetbecon- 

tre./indofamessageofBuymontvntoducGode- 
froye,  and  tbe  answer  of  tbe  due  vpon  tbe  same, 
capituto  xxxvnj^^ 

S soneas  tboostapperceyued  on 
tbe  morn  tbe  day,  it  was  cryed 
tbateueryman  on  payneof  detb 
8boldarmebim,on  borsbakand 
on  f ote.  Tbe  capitayns  of  som 
batayUes  were  ordeyned  for  to 
lede  tbe  peple  in  f  ouragej^Cbe 
.  other  sette  tbem  in  ordvnaunce 
for  to  kepe  tbeir  lodgys,  ff or  wel  tbey  apperceyued 
certaynly  tbat  tbemperour  pourcbassed  for  tbem 
alle  tbe  euyl  tbat  be  mygbt.  Cbey  tbat  wen tef^r 
vytaylle  witbdrewe  tbem  wel  lxmyle:tbeypvlied % 
aboutetbem  alle  tbe  townes  tbat  tbey  fonde  and 
brought  corn,  wyn,  beestys,  and  otbe>  rXssTs 
whereof  tbe  londe  was  full,  tbat  vnnetb*  mS£ 
tbev  conduyte  alle.  Hnd  tbey  were  out  sex  dlvfs 
ancfafttr  retomned  in  to  tbc :  booste  w  t  b aUe&fs 
merueiUous  gayne.  uc  rDI9 


SS 


TYyhGS  as  tbcy  conteyned  thus, 
messagers  cam  froBuymonttof ore 
tbe  due,  and  salewed  bim  in  tbcyr 
lordesname,  &  dclyucrd  to  bym  let- 
trcs  wbiebe  saide  in  tbismanere.  f)e 
m  ealewed  in  bis  lettres  tbeducas  be 
ougbt  to  salewe  sucbe  a  manj^Hftir  tbey  sayde: 
Knoweye,sire,tbatyebaueto  doowitb  a  mocbevn- 
treweman,  wbiebe  alwey  sette  bis  berte  <&purpoos 
to  decey  ue  tbem  tbat  trus te  in  bym .Specially  be  bat/ 
etb  tbeLatyns  to  tbe  detb,  &  dotb  bis  power  in  alle 
maners  tbat  be  can  todooeu^l  to  our  peple.Hndyf 
ye  baue  not  yet  apperceyued  it, ye  sbal  knowe  al  by 
tyme  as  I  saye  to  you,  fror  I  knowe  wel  tbe  malyce 
of  tbeGrekes,  &  also  tbe  tryeberye  of  tbemperour. 
TIbeiforlprayyou,tbatyewitbdraweyourroCon~ 
stantinoble,  and  retome  to/ward  tbe  playnes  of 
Hndrenoble  or  of  Sympole,  &  tbere  ye  may  wyn tre 
you  wbere  as  is  grete  plente  of  alle  goodes.  Hnd  I 
myself  ,yf  it  please  god,  assone  as  tbe  sprynge  of 
tbe  yere  cometb,  sbal  come  &  baste  to  meue,&sbal 
assemblewitb  you,  and  sbal  belpe  you,  as  my  lord 
&  frende,ayenst  tbe  vntrew  prynce  tbat  entendetb 
todooeuyllwitb  alle  bis  power  vnto  cristiente. 

^HHJ^  tbe  due  badberd  tbyse  lettres, 
i  by  tbe  counseyl  of  bis  barons  be 
I  sente  to  bym  aaeyn  otber  lettres 
tbat  after  tbe  salewyng  spak  tbus : 
(De  tbanke  you  gretely,  and  so  doo 
J  tbe  otber  prynces  tbat  ben  witb  vs, 
of  tbe  loue  and  troutbe  tbat  ye  baue  sente  vs.  Hnd 
knowe  ye  certaynly  tbat  we  baue  founden  on  tbe 

89 


) 


. 


prynce  and  on  tbc  peple  of  <3rekes,  lyke  as  ye  wene 
wel  to  knowe,  <Oc  knowe  wel  that  yesayeit  of  wyse- 
domc  and  of  troutbe.  But  we  doubte  mocbe  tbc 
armes,  tbat  wc  tokc  in  our  con  trey  for  to  warre  on 
tbc  betben  men,  sbold  rctomc  and  conuertc  ayenst 
tbcm  tbat  bcrc  tbc  name  of  cristiante  as  wc  our  self 
doo.  <Oc  attende  and  desyre  mocb  your  comyng: 
tbenne,  yf  god  will,  wban  yc  sbal  be  comen  we  sbal 
doo  take  you  to  our  counseyl. 
Row  tbemperour  appesed  tbe  due  Godefroye  and 
sente  for  bym,  and  of  tbc  bonour  tbat  be  dydc  to 
bym,  capitulo  xxxix&& 

fiejWpeROCIR  was  mocbe 
anguyssous  emong  bis  pryue 
counseyl,  and  tbougbt  bow  be 
migbt  appese  to  bym  tbc  due  & 
bis  peple  by  cause  be  destroyed 
bis  contre,  of  wbicb  be  berd  tbe 
clamours  right  grete  and  ofte. 
Hnd  by  cause  tbat  beknewetbat 
tbe  messagers  of  Buymont  were  come,  and  bad 
brought  tidynges  tbat  be  wold  bastely  come,  be 
sente  ageyn  bis  meesagers  to  tbe  due,  and  prayd 
i  bym  tbat  be  wold  come  speke  to  bym,  and  yf  be 
doubted  of  ony  tbyng  be  wold  sende  loban  bis 
sone  in  hostage  in  to  tbe  boost  j&Zbie  message 
,  plesyd  mocbc  to  tbc  barons  wban  tbey  berde  it,  and 
tbey  sente  Conon  de  JVfontagu  and  Bawdwyn  de 
Borgb  for  to  reccyue  tbe  hostage.  TTbcy  reccyued 
bym  &  dclyuerd  to  Bawdwyn  brother  of  tbe  Due, 
wbicbe  abode  for  to  reule  and  gouerne  tbe  boost 


and  to  kepe  the  hostage  JfVbz  due  and  other  ba- 
rons wente  in  to  Constantynople  to  fore  tbem- 
perour which  had  mocbedesyred  tbemXbeGrekes 
made  to  them  grete  ioye  merueyllously  what  som- 
euer  they  tbougbteXnemperour  kyssed  them  alle, 
>and  demanded  of  eueryebbis  name,  for  to  honoure 
eucryebbybym  self,  as  he  that  wel  coudedoitXbey 
,were  wel  beholden  of  alle  them  of  the  palays. 

WC  last  themperour  eatte  in  his  mag- 
I;  este,andtbebaronsaboutebym,  and 
sayde  to  the  due  thysewordee^CHe 
haue  herd  saye  many  tymes  in  tbys 
londe,  that  thou  art  of  hyghe  lygn- 
I  age,  and  of  moche  grete  power  in  thy 
jcontre,  and  a  good  knygbte  and  trewe,  in  sucbe 
wyse  that  for  the  fayth  of  Ibesu  criste  tenbaunce, 
hast  enterprised  to  warrre  ayent  the  mescreauntes 
and  hethen  peple,  whiche  greue  the  cristen  peple 
merueyllously.  for  alle  tbyse  tbynges  we  prayse 
the  and  loue  in  our  berte,  &  wylle  nonoure  the  with 
grettest  honour  that  we  may  doo,  if  or  thou  art 
worthy  and  dygne.  It  playsetb  vs  and  therto  ac- 
corden  our  barons,  that  we  cheese  the  &  auowe  for 
our  sone,  &  we  put  our  empyre  in  to  thyn  hande, 
that  thou  kepe  tt  as  our  sone  from  henssforth  in 
good  estate  and  in  termes  of  louejflFCdban  be  bad 
seyde  this,  he  dyde  bym  to  be  clad  with  the  robe  of 
an  emperour,  and  to  sytte  by  bym.  Hnd  tbenne  the 
barons  made  to  bym  rigbtorete  festeandsolemp- 
ny  te  af  tir  the  custom  of  thelonde  in  sucbe  tbynges. 
Hnd  thus  was  the  peesaffermed  bytwene  the  pryn- 
ces  and  also  bytwene  the  peple. 

9i 


in 


Of  the  yeftes  that  tbemperour  made  to  due  Gode- 
froye,  to  the  barons  and  to  the  gentilmen  of  bis 
boost,  capitulo  xl&& 

JSOJVG  wban  tbis  was  don,  tbe 
tresour  of  tbemperour  was  op- 
ened, and  was  presented  to  tbe 
due  &  to  bis  felawsbip  so  grete 
yeftes  and  so  grete  ryebesses 
tbatitwasmerueylletosee/Cber 
was  grete  plenteof  gold,  of  syl~ 
uer,  &of  precious  stones,  many 
clotbes  of  sylk  rygbt  ryebe,  vayssellys  of  dyuerse 
facions,  wbicbe  were  merueyllous  or  faeions  and 
of  matere.  Oure  peplemeruellyd  mocbeof  tbis  arete 
rycbessejj^tTbyse  yeftes  cessed  not  at  tbe  fyrst 
tjjnie,  but  fro  tbe  daye  of  tbe  Gpypbanye  vnto 
XTbassencion  tyde,  tbemperour  gaf  totbeduceuery 
wekeasmocbeastwomygbtymenmygbtsusteyne, 
of  pierrye,  of  pens  of  gold,  of  copper,  and  of  tyn 
be  gaf  to  bym  ten  muyes,  euery  muye  is  four  bus- 
sbellys.  But  tbe  due  departed  alle  tbvse  tbynges 
vnto  knygbtes  and  alle  aboute  wbere  ne  sawe  tbat 
it  sbold  be  wel  em  ploy edj#<Klban  tbey  bad  ben  witb 
tbemperour  a  lytil  wbyle,  tbey  toke  leue  and  cam 
agayn  in  to  tbe  boost.  Ilbey  sen  te  agayn  loban  bis 
sone,  wbom  tbey  bad  bolden  in  bostage  mocbe 
honourably.  Tbemperour  dyde  do  cryevpon  peyne 
of  detb,  tbat  noman  sbold  doo  barme  to  tbe  pyl- 
gryms,  but  sbold  do  selle  to  tbemalle  maner  wares 
at  prys  resonable.  Tbe  due  in  lyke  wyse  dyde  doo 
crye,  tbat  euery  man  as  dere  as  be  louyd  bis  lyf 


II 


'sbold  doo  no  force  ne  wronof  to  tbcm  of  tbc  con- 
trcejffTTbus  fortbon  lyuyd  tbey  in  mocbc  peas* 

f>HJ^  JMarcbe  cam  tbc  due  knewe  wel 
tbat  tbc  otber  barons  wold  come,  and 
apperceyued  wcl  tbat  tbc  willc  of  tb- 
cm perour  was  tbat  be  wold  pass  witb 
bis  peple  tbe  braas  of  seynt  George: 
to  tbe  same  acorded  tbe  barons  &  tbe 
otber  of  tbe  boost,  Hnd  saide  to  tbemperour  tbat 
be  wold  passe  ouer,  and  be  anon  dydedomake  redy 
jmany  sbippes  &  passed  welalle and  cam  in  toBetb- 
rnie,  wbicbe  is  tbe  ryrs t  partye  of  Hsy  ej^Cbey  lodg- 
ed tbem  aboutetbe  cyte  of  CalcedonicOf  tbis  cyte 
fynde  we  wryten,  tbat  in  tbe  tyme  of  pope  Lyon  and 
JVIarcyen  tbem  perour  assam  bled  tbere  one  of  tbeiiij 
grete  counseyllis,  wbere  tber  were  iij  C  xxxvj  prela- 
tes, for  to  condempne  an  beresye  tbat  a  monke  na- 
med Bntyses  bad  founden,  and  tbat  belde  a  patri- 
arkeofHlysaundrenamedDi8cretu8,buttberetbey 
weredampnedXbiscyteissonigbeConstantyno- 
ble  tbat  tbere  is  but  tbe  braas  bytwene  tbem  botbe. 
Hnd  tbere  was  tbe  boost  lodged  mocbe  easely,  if  or 
wbo  so  bad  to  doo  in  tbe  cyte  of  Constantynoble 
be  mygbt  passe  twyes  or  tbryes  in  a  daye JlfCbz 
cause  wby  tbemperour  made  tbe  due  to  passe,  was 
forbewoldnot  tbat  tbe  boostesof  tbe  barons  tbat 
were  to  come  sbold not  assemble  to  gydre  sonygbe 
bym.  Hnd  in  lyke  dyde  be  to  tbe  otber  barons  tbat 
cam  af  tir,  ff  or  be  neuer  wold  lodge  tweyne  to  gydre. 


93 


Row  Buymont  was  made  capit ayn  of  a  grctc  boost, 
and  the  names  of  many  nobles  of  tboost  &of  tbeir 
mayntene,capitulo  xij^^ 

IfCIR  tbis  maner  con  tened  bym 
tbemperour  and  due  <3odefroy. 
But  Buymont  tbe  sone  of  Ro- 
bert ©uyebart,  prynce  of  XTar- 
ente,  bad  passed  tbe  see  Hdry- 
anc,and  was  come  vnto  Duras. 
Qlban  alle  bis  boost  was  com- 
len  be  toke  bis  waye  tburgb  tbe 
desertes  of  Bougrye,  and  wente  sof te  and  f ayr  by 
cause  of  tbem  tbat  f olowed  bym.  In  bis  rowte  were 
many  noble  men,  of  wbom  we  sbal  name  to  you  a 
part;  tbat  is  to  wyte,€ancre  tbe  sone  of  Graal  tbe 
marquys,  Rycbard  tbepryncipal  sone  of  Olilliam 
f lerbrace,  tbe  brother  of  Robert  Guy  chart,  Raym- 
on  t  bis  brother,  Robert  tbe  fianse,  Herman  of  Car- 
yn,  Robert  of  Sourdeval,  Robert  fytzOisten,Vm- 
frey  fytz  Raoul,  Rycbard  sone  of  tberle,  Ranyol 
erle  of  Rousygnol,and  alle  bis  bretberen,Ogan  of 
Cbartes,Hubery  of  Cannacand  Tmf  rey  of  JVIon- 

tygneux^  Hlle  tbyse  bad  made  Buymont  tbeir  capy- 
taynj^XTbey  cam  in  to  tbe  cite  of  Castore  and  made 
there  tbe  f  este  of  Cristemasse  and  helde  it  mocbe 
byely-  But  by  cause  they  of  tbe  con tre  wold  selle  to 
them  notbyng,whicb  helde  tbem  for  enemyes,  tber- 
for  by  force  they  muste  sende  out  on  fouragyng& 
brought  grete  proyes  and  good  gaynes,of  wbicbe 
they  dyde  moche  barme  to  alle  tbe  contrey.  Hftir 
tbey  cam  in  to  the  londe  of  pclagoine,  wbicbe  is 


m> 


mocbe  good  and  fertile,  &  lodged  tbem  tberej^Hf  ~ 
tir  tbey  berd  saye  tbat  nygb  by  was  a  castel  rigbt 
stronge,wberin  alle  tbe  popeliquans  of  tbe  lande 
were  withdrawal  for  tbe  strengbt  of  tbe  place,and 
tbere  were  none  but  sucbe  mysbyleued  peple*  Buy- 
mont  &  bis  peple  armed  tbem  and  wente  tbeder  a- 
non,and  founde  tbere  mocbe  grete  ryebesse  in  tbe 
towne  and  grete  proyes, wbicbetbey  putouta  part, 
and  after  sette  fyer  tber  in  tbe  town,  and  alle  tbem 
tbat  yssued  tbey  slewe  witb  tbe  swerde,and  tbe  re- 
menaunt  botbe  men  and  wymmen  tbey  brent  alle, 
IfiejVIpeROaRberdsaytbatBuy- 
mon  t  cam  witb  grete  peple,  &  doubt- 
edmocbe,andbadbis  comyng  mocbe 
9uepecyonou9,  ff  or  be  bad  many  de- 
bate9  ayenst  bym  and  bi9,  of  wbicbe 
_  be  bad  alwey  tbe  werse.  XLbz  souldy- 
ours  of  tbemperour  and  alle  tbey  tbat  entermeted 
of  arme9  9oioumed  &  wyntred  in  tbyse  partye9  by 
wbicbe  Buymont  passed,  Tbemperour  commaun- 
dzd  to  bi9  cone9table9  of  alle  bis  peple,  tbat  tbey 
9bold  coo9te  Buymont  witb  a9  mocbe  people  a9 
tbey  mygbte  gete  vnto  tbe  water  named  Bardare, 
in  9ucbe  manere  tbat  yf  tbey  mygbt  greue,  ennoye, 
&  dommage  in  ony  paa9  to  tbem,  tbat  tbey  9bold 
come  on  bym  9trongly  J?  Ous  be  bad  ordeyned 
cautelously  bebynde  tbem.  But  to  fore  a9  be  was 
mocbe  disloyal  &  couuert,&  coude  wel  make  sem- 
blaunt  of  otber  tbynge  tban  be  tbougbte,  be  sente 
vnto  Buymont  of  bis  grete  men,  &  by  tbem  lettres 
mocbe  payssyble  and  of  fayr  wordes,&  of  boun- 
tes  mocbe  debonayr  and  deceyualle  wbicbe  were  as 

folowen. 

95 


Messages  and  letres  fro  tbemperourtoJBuymont, 
and  tbe contcnucof  tbc  same  as  f olowetb,  capitulo 

IfiBsalewyng  to  fore  was  mocbe 
fayr,and  af  tirsayde:  <Oe  knowe 
certaynly  tbat  tbou  art  an  bye 
prynce  &  mocb  noble  sone  of  an 
noble  &  valyaunt  man,  ff or  tbis 
in  gretemanerwe  preysetbe,and 
baue  tbe  in  cbierte.Hnd  also  for 
tbou  bast  enterprise^  witb  so 
good  berte  &  so  good  wille  in  tbis  tyme  tbe  seruyse 
of  our  lord,  and  tbepyloremage  wbicbe  is  due  from 
alletbem  tbatbyleue  in  ibesu  criste-<aebaue  ferme 
wy  lie  &  certayn  ly  purpoos  to  bonoure  tbe,  &  sbewe 
by  dede  our  grace  tbat  we  baue  tbougbt-  TTberfor 
we  praye  and  requyre  tbe  in  good  f aytb,  tbat  tbou 
commande  to  tby  peple  tbat  tbey  doo  noneoultrage 
toourepeple,and  baste  tbe  to  come  to  vsall  surely, 
fFor  tbou  sbalt  baue  tber  by  honour  and  prouffyt. 
Our  messagers  tbat  come  to  tbe  sbal  by  our  com- 
mandement  doo  tbyn  booste  baue  resonable  mar- 
ket of  vytaylles  &of  allotber  tbyngesjfiFTTbesem- 
blaunt  of  tbise  wordes  were  fayr,  but  tber  was  tber 
vndermoebvenym  and  of  f  elonnye. 

"aYMOJVr,  wbicbe  was  wyse  and 
knowyng  many  tbynges,  bad  many 
tymes  preuyd  tbedesloyalteof  tbem- 
perour,  and  receyued  tbyse  wordes 
by  semblaunce  mocbe  awortb  and  in 
_  tbanke,  but  be  preysed  tbem  lytil  in 
'bis  courage.  JVeuertbelcsse,  be  tbanketb  bym  by 


t 

mouth  and  by  lettres  that  be  daygned  to  wryte  to 
bym  and  sende,  considered  tbat  be  was  so  smal  a 
man  ay  enst  bym  &  sen  te  bym  otber  curtoy s  wordes, 
&cj^Cbisemes6agiers  tbat  were  tbus  comen,  con- 
duyted  tbe  boost  vnto  tbe  ryuer  of  Bardre-  Olban 
tbemoost  partye  of  tbe  boost  were  passed ouer,  & 
tbe  otber  ordeyned  tbem  for  to  passeaf  ter,  tbe  con- 
estables  of  tbe  soldy  ours  wbicbe  bad  awaytedand 
folowed  tbem  wened  tobaue  founden  tbeyr  poynt, 
and  launcedon  tbis  parte  of  tboost  wbicbe  wasnot 
yet  passed,  and  were  many  moo  of  tbem  tban  of 
oures.  0>e  noyse  and  tbe  crye  aroose  mocbe  grete. 
€ancre  wbicbe  mocbe  was  appert&  bardy,bad  tbo 
passed  balf  tberyuerwbicbewas  grete,  butwban  be 
herd  tbis, beretomed  agayn  as  bastly  as  bemygbt, 
and  ij  ]VI  of  tbe  moost  noble  retoumed  witb  bym 
land  discomfyted  tbem  vigorously  andputte  tbem 
to  flygbt  Hndmany  be  took  of  tbem  a4yue,wbom 
hebrouqbttoforeBuymont. 

^  6  demanded  tbem  in  tbe  presence  of 
alle,  wberfore  tbey  bad  ronne  so  on 
tbe  boost  of  tbe  cristen  men,  wbicbe 
were  also  cristen  and  peple  of  tbem- 
perour  tbeir  lord&frende?0>ey  an- 
J  swered  tbat  tbey  were  seruaun  tes  and 
soldyoursof  tbemperour  andmuste  doo  bis  com- 
'mandemen^ffor  by  bym  tbey  bad  tbis  donj^fiere 
by  mygbtalle  tbey  apperceyue  tbat  berde  tbis,  tbat 
tbe  f ayre  wordes  tbat  tbemperour  sayde  were  but 
deceyuaunce  and  tricberye.  Buymont,  wbicbe  was 
wyse  and  knewe  tbat  be  muste  passe  by  tbempyre, 
madesemblaunttbatbeapperceyuednot,andmade 

hi  97 


i  good  cbere  to  tbise  men  for  to  couure  bis  courage* 
>Hnd  tbat  plesyd  not  som  of  bis  barons* 

f)ow  Buymont  approucbed  Constantinoble,  and 
was  sente  to  come  to  tbemperour,  and  bow  by  tbe 
jprayer  of  due  Godefroye  be  wente  toward  bym, 
capitulo  xliij^^ 

ICIYMON^  &  Ws  boost  wente  so 
I  ferre  by  tbe  con  trees  tbat  tbey  ap- 
procbed  Constantynoble,  (uban 
tbemperour  knew  tbat,  be  sente  a- 
gayngretemessagers  tobymand 
prayde  bym  entierly  tbat  be  wold 
leue  bis  boost  &  come  speke  witb 
bym  witb  a  pryue  meyne,  Buym- 
ont  wvst  not  wbat  to  doo,  if  or  be  was  in  tbe  daun- 
ger  or  bym  so  ofrete  a  man.  wbom  be  doubted  to 
angre ;  and, on  tbat  otber  parte,  be  knewe bis  false- 
ncsse&  deceyuaunce,andbad  welapperceyuedtbat 
i  be  louyd  bym  not,&  tberf  ore,  be  f  ered  to  goo  to  bym 
JP&lbyke  be  was  tbus  entredeux,  tbe  due  Gode- 
froye  cam  to  bym  tbe'Cbursdaye  afore  Gsterdaye, 
ffor  tbemperour  bad  so  mocbe  prayd  tbe  due,  by 
cause  be  doubted  tbat  be  wold  not  gladly  come  to 
bym,  tbat  tbe  due  wente  to  bym  for  to  make  bym 
come  to  tbemperour,  (Oban  tbe  due  and  Buymont 
,mette,  tbey  made  mocbe  greteioye  to  gydre,&spak 
to  gydre  of  many  tbynges ;  after  en tred  tbe  ducf or 
to  pray  e  bym  to  come  to  bis  fader  tbem  perour.Buy  ~ 
montwaslotb  tobey  bis  prayer  &  request,  butwitb 
grete  peynetbe  due  vaynquyssbyd  bym  by  prayer, 
andmadebymtogooj^XTbemperourreceyuedbym 
witb  grete  honour  and  ioye  and  kyssyd  bym,  and 
98 


1 


I 


l> 


I 


af  tir  span  so  mocbe  to  bym  &  to  tbeduc,  tbatBuy- 
mont  by  tbc  counseylof  tbc  ducmade  to  tbemper- 
our  bommage  witb  bis  bondes,  and  swar  to  bym 
fcaulte  as  to  bis  lordeXbenne  sboldc  ye  bauc  seen 
come  out  of  tbc  trcsour  of  tbemperour  many  grctc 
ryebesses,  gold,  syluer,  vessel,  precious  stones,  & 
clotbes  of  syln,  so  mocbe  tbat  vnnetb  mygbt  be 

preysed.  .     .  -     , 

~  r>YL6S  tbat  Buymont  abode  in  tbe 
palay6,Oncrebisneuew,soneofbi6 
suster,  tbat  was  rigbt  wyse  and  of 
grete  berte,retcbed  not  for  to  seetb- 
emperour  ne  to  speke  to  bym,  but 
_  madealle  tbe  boost  to  passe  ouer  tbe 
braas  seynt  George,  and  to  lodge  in  Betbine,nygb 
toCalcedoine,  wberetboste  of  tbe  otber  barons  bad 
ben  a  good  wbyle^Cdban  tbemperour  knewetbat 
OncrebadescDewedbym,bewasmocbewratb,but 

be  made  no  semblaunt  tberof  ,as  be  tbat  wel  coude 
couurebiscourage-ftemademocbegretefestetotbe 
baronstbatwerewitbbym,andeuerydayebegafto 
tbem  greteyef  tes  andnewetbynges.Hftir  tbey  de- 
parted by  bis  leue,  and  passed  tbe  braas  witb  tbe 
otber/Cbere  soioumed  tbey ,  and  abode  tbe  comyng 
of  tbe  otber  barons,  Oere  was  brought  to  tbem 
grete  plen  teof  vy  tay  lies,  &  of  otber  tbynges  fro  tbe 
cyte  of  Constantynoble&fro  tbe  countree  aboute. 


b2 


99 


how  tbe  erle  Robert  of  f  launders  with  bis  booste 

^approcbed  Constantynoble,  and  bow  tbemperour 

sen  te  for  bym ,  &  of  tbeir  deuy ses  to  gy  dre,  capitulo 

OBeRC,  tbe  erle  of  f  laundres, 
wbicbe  was  comen  to  fore  tbe 
h  wvnter  to  Bar,  a  cyte  of  puylle, 
wnere  tbe  body  of  seyn  tj^icbolas 
Hetb,  bad  passed  tbe  see,  &  was 
descended  at  Durasj^Cber  in  a 
mocbefayrplaceandplentiuous 
be  badwynterdbym,butas6one 
asitbegan  towexefayrtyme,  tokebisjourneyeafter 
,  tbe  other,  and  basted  f aste  to  f olowe  tbem.  But  it 

happed  tbat  erbe  cam  to  tbebarons,bereceyued  tbe 
messagers  of  tbemperour,  tbat  sayd  to  bym  in  bys 
name,  tbat  be  sbold  leue  bis  booste  and  come  see 
tbemperour,  and  spekewitbbym  wytbafeweof  bis 
meyne.  Redemaunded  and  knewewel,  bow  tbe  other 
barons  bad  don  to  fore  bym,  and  tberf or  be  cam  in 
to  Constantynoble  witb  a  fewe  of  bis  companye. 
'Cbemperour  recevued  bym  wytb  grete  ioye  &  bon/ 
ourXbey  spak  or  many  tbynges  to  gydre,  Rafter, 
> lyke  as  other  barons  bad  don,  be  dyde  bommage  & 
made  otbof  feaulteXbemperour  gaf  to  bym  grete 
yef  tes,  and  to  alle  tbem  of  bis  companye.  ulban  be 
>andbispeple  bad  abyden  &  sojourned  tbere,  by  tbe 
wylle  or  tbemperour  be  made  bis  peple  passe  ouer, 
and  be  bym  self  wente  after  vnto  tbe  other  barons, 
wbicbe  witb  grete  ioye  receyued  bym,&spakmocbe 
to  gydre  of  tbeyrauenturesof  tbewaye,&oftetbey 


■<T    *■  m- 


were  in  counseyl,  bow  tbey  sbold  doo  fro  tban  f or- 
,  tbon  Xbey  were  mocbe  displesyd  for  tary  en  g  of  tbe 
.otber  barons  wbom  tbey  abodej^ltwasnotlonge 
after,  but  tbat  tbe  messagers  of  tbe  erle  of  XTbo- 
louse  and  of  tbe  bissbop  of  puy  were  come,  &  tolde 
bowtbeyr  lordes  cam,  and  tbat  tbey  werenygb,and 
sbold  be  bastely  in  Constantinople. 
Of  tbe  mayntieneof  tbe  boostetbattberleof  Cbo- 
louse  and  tbe  bissbop  of  puy  brought  ouersee, 
capitulo  xlv&& 

|f)YSetweynenoblemen  depart- 
ed to  gydrc  out  of  tbeir  coun- 
trees  wi  tb  grete  n  om  bre  of  peple 
witb  tbernXbey  were  accompa- 
nied witb  many  valyaunt  and 
puyssaunt  men  of  tneyr  coun- 
treyesXber  was  fyrst  GliUiam 
byssbop  of  Orenge,  Ray  bout 
erle  of  tbe  same  cyte,  Gaste  de  Bedyers,  Giralt  de 
Roussylon,  Guillem  de  JVIontpeliers,  Guillem  erle 
of  f orestes,  Raymont  peles,  Centon  de  Beart, 
(3uillemdeHmaneux,&  many  otber  barons  mocbe 
worsbipf  ul,wbicbef or  tbeseruyseof  oure  lord  lef  te 
tbeyr  coun  trees,  tbeyr  lygnages  &  alle  tbeyr  delytes 
j^tbey  cam  alle  in  toLombardye,  &  passed  by  tbe 
sydeof  Hquylee,andaftircamin  totbelonde  called 
Ister,  ffro  tbens  in  to  Oalmace,  wbicbe  is  a  grete 
contrey  bytwene  fiongreye  and  tbe  see  Hdryane. 
Cberin  be  foure  arcbiebissbopps,  ladre,  Spalete, 
Hntibare,  and  RaguseXbe  peple  of  tbat  contre  is 
cruel  &  mocbe  acustomed  to  robbe&  to  sleeXbere 
be  montaynes,  and  tbe  londe  is  f ul  of  depe  waters 
rennyng,  &  largemareyses  in  sucbe  wyse  tbat  tbere 
b3  101 


1 


* 


is  but  lytil  londc  gaynable.  Beestes  tbcr  be  grctc 
plcntc  in  tbc  pastures  by  wbiebe  tbey  lyuc;  neuer- 
tbeles,  tbey  tbat  dwelle  nygb  tbc  see  ben  of  otber 
mancr  lyuyng  of  babytc  and  of  langage,  ffor  tbey 
spekeRommant.HndtbeotberspekenotbutScla- 
uoun  as  tbey  be  nouryssbid. 
P^  J^giSJinGnoblemenofwbomlspak,  camen 
in  to  tbis  londe &  bad  tber many  grete 
trauayllys&  diseases  for  tbewynter, 
wbicb  was  ouer  cold,  &  f or  tbe  contre, 
wbiebe  was  euylgarnyssbydof  vyta- 
ylles.  ^bey  badde  merueyllous  grete 
suffraunccfFor  alletbe  peple  of  tbe  con  tree  forfeer 
of  tbe  py  Igryms  bad  lefte  cy  tees,castelly8,&towne8 
f  or  toflee&  byde  tbem  in  montaynes :  tbey  bad  bom 
tbeder  all  tbeyr  tbyngesj^f  rom  tbens  tbey  pour- 
siewed  tbe  pylgryms,and  tbem  tbat  wereolde,8eke 
and  feble,  &  taryed  after  tbe  boost,  tbey  slewe  alle. 
Cbe  erle  wbiebe  was  wy  se  toke  bede  of  tbe  boost,  tbe 
otber  barons  be  sentetofore,bekeptealwey  tberier 
garde  witb  grete  nombre  of  bis  peple  wel  armed 
aboute  bym.  TTbe  ayer  of  tbe  contre  was  so  f  ul  of 
mystes  and  so  tbycke,  tbat  tbey  bybynde  mygbt 
vnnetbf olowe  tbem  tofore;ffor  tbis  londe,asIsaid 
to  fore,i8fulofryuersrennyngandwaters,of  lakes 
andmareys,  tbata  grete  nyle  sourdetb  euery  day,  it 
semed  tbatit  sbold  neuersesse.  On  tbatotbersyde 
tbe  Sclauouns  and  tbe  Dalmaces  tbat  knowe  tbe 
places  and  tbe  countrees  made  on  tbem  many  as- 
saultes  at  certayn  paas,  &  slewemany  of  tbem  tbat 
were  vnarmed.  Cbe  erle  and  tbe  good  men  of  tbe 
boost  closed  tbem  in,  and  slewe  many  of  tbem,  and 
many  moo  sbold  baue  slayn  yf  tbe  wodes  &  tbeir 
102 


retraytesbad  not  be  sonygbe.  Somtymeit  napped 
tbattberletokeoftbemalyue,andmadetosmyteof 
tbeyr  feet  and  bandes,  &  lef  te  tbem  lye  in  tbe  waye 
for  to  fere  witb  tbe  otber  tbat  cam  af ter* 
ft^S^^^N  tbis  maner  tbey  were  tbre  wekes  in 
i§r5l  /wr  tbatlondeingreteparyl,andingrete 
Xil  t  a  i%  my  sease,Hf  ter  tbey  cam  in  to  a  castel 
named  Serdre,  tbere  tbey  f ounde  tbe 
kyng  of  Sklauonye  j0  XTbe  erle  tbat 
was  wel  bespoken,  spak  mocbe  f ayr 


to  bym&gaf  to  bym  largely  greteyeftes  andiewel- 
tys,ffor  be  boped  tber  by  tnat  be  wold  bauebolden 
bid  peplein  peas,  and  baue  don  bem  bad  couenable 
market  of  vytaylles.  But  it  auaylled  not,  forneuer 
for  prayer,ne  f or  no  seruyse,migbt  tbey  aswage  bis 
courage,  nemollyfye  tbe  peple  of  tbe  countre,  but 
tbey  f  ounde  tbem  more  cruel&morevyllanoustban 
to  rorejflPCbus  were  tbey  f oure  wekes  after  in  tbis 
sorowe,ffor  tbey  were  fourty  dayesin  passyngtbis 
contre*Hf  ter  cam  tbey  to  Duras* 
Hmbassadoursof  tbemperourtotbe  sayderle  and 
bissbop,  and  of  tbe  contenue  of  bis  lettres,  and  of 
tbe  daunger  wberin  tbe  said  bissbop  was  tbenne, 
capituloxlvj^/^ 

nejVIpeROaR  bad  in  sus~ 
pection  tbe  comyngof  tberle,  by 
cause  tbat  be  knewe  wel  tbat  be 
wasamocbewiseman&ofgrete 
courage,  and  wel  berd  saye  tbat 
be  bad  witb  bym  greteplente  of 
good  menXberf  ore  be  sente  to 
tbem  to  Duras  noble  men  of  bis 


I 


londe  that  delyuerdtobym  lettresfro  tbemperour, 
which  spack  in  this  maner  after  the  salewyng  J& 
TTbegood  renomme  that  renneth  of  the  tburgb the 
world,  hath  made  V6  tobauecertayn  tydynges  that 
thou  art  a  man  ofgrete  wytte,of  grete  power,  and 
of  grete  prouesse.'Cberf ore  we  moche  desyre  to  see 
thee,  &  honoure  as  bym  that  we  loue  of  good  berte, 
&  preyse.  Hnd  we  praye the  moche  acertaynly,  &  re- 
quyre  for  a  grete  yef te,  that  thou  do  thy  peple  passe 
our  contrees  witnout  oultrages  and  doyng  barme. 
Hnd  haste  the  to  come  to  vs,  alle  sure  to  baue  oure 
grace  and  oure  bounte.  (Oe  haue  commanded  that 
vytaylles  andother  necessytees  shal  be  sold  to  thy 
peple  at  prys  resonablej^dban  the  erle  &  alle  the 
barons  berde  tbise  tydynges  by  tbyse  lettres,tbey 
were  glad  and  ioyous,  ffor  tbey  bad  longe  suff red 
grete  diseases/Cbey  toke  tbeyr  waye  by  f orestes  & 
by  montaynes,&  passed  the  londe  of  6pyre.Hftir 
tbey  cam  in  to  pelagonne,  where  tbey  f  onde  mocbe 
grete  plente  of  alle  goodes, 

F)G  valyaunt  bissbop  of  puy  lodg- 
ed bym  on  a  day  f  er  fro  the  boost  in 
afayr  place  that  befounde,andin  the 
nygbt  tbeBougres  assay  lied  bym  in 
bis  lodgys  &  toke  bym.  But  by  cause 
be  was  necessarye  to  cristiente  oure 
lord  sauyd  bym,  that  tbey  slewe  bym  not, ffor  one 
t  of  the  barbaryns  demaunded  of  bym  gold,  tberf ore 
Ibe  defended  bym  fro  the  other,  that  tbey  slewe  bym 
'not.  In  the  mene  wbyle  the  noyse  was  berde  in  the 
Jboost-  Oenne  tbey  ranne  to  armes,  and  sytb  ran 
on  them,  and  recouured  the  bissbop  with  alle  bis 
104 


3. 


tbynges  jSFOn  tbe  mom  tbey  tohe  tbeyr  waye  and 
passed  Salenyfce,&  alle  JMacedonie,  and  after  grete 
trauay  lies  &  many  iourneyes  tbey  cam  to  a  cyte  na- 
med RedostXbetber  cam  tbe  messagers  of  tbem- 
perour  agayne,  and  spah  to  tbe  erle,  prayeng  bym  in 
tbeyr  lordes  name,  tbat  be  wold  come  to  fore  bis 
boostewitbaf ewe  of  bis  companye  in  to  Constan- 
tynoble.  JVIessagers  tber  were  also  fro  tbe  barons 
that  bad  passed  tbe  braas,  &  requyred  tbe  same  by 
moutbe,&by  lettres  fro  tbeyr  lordes*  TIbe  erle  bym 
selfbadsentemessagerstoforetohnowetbebeyng 
of  tbe  country  and  of  tbe  barons,  and  tbey  werere- 
torned,wbicbeacordedmocbetotbe  same,  &  coun- 
seylled  bym  to  doo  tbat  tbemperour  requyred. 
F)ow  tbe  erle  of  O>olouse  beyng  witb  tbemperour 
wold  not  do  bommage  to  bym,  and  of  tbe  despyte 
tbat  tbemperour  dyde,  capitulo  xlviij^^ 

jY  tbe  prayer  of  so  mocbe  peple 
tberle  muste  nedes  doo  soo  at 
tbeyr  instaunce,&  tbus  lef  tebis 
booste,  &  cam  in  to  Constanti- 
noble  witb  a  f  ewe  of  bis  meyne. 
(Vlany  messagers  encountred 
bym,wbicbe  alle  cam  for  to  f et- 
cbe  bym.  dban  be  cam  to  fore 
tbemperour  be  was  well  receyued  witb  mocbe  grete 
cbere  and  ioye  of  bym,  &  alle  tbe  barons  of  tbe  pa- 
lays.  Hfter  tbemperour  dyde  to  be  sayd  to  bym,& 
requyred  bym  rigbt  swetly,tbat  for  to  baue  alwey 
alyaun  ce  and  amy  tee  witb  bym,  &  also  for  tbe  grete 
proufty t  tbat  be  sbold  baue  tberof ,  be  sbold  make 


p«ir 


WBKBB^tm 


^■m^BHHHB 


^■■■H^HM 


bommage  to  tbemperour,  lyke  as  allc  tbc  other  bad 
donj&nz  answerd  shortly  tbat  be  woldnone  make 
ne  doo  to  bymXbemperour  bad  grete  desdayne,  & 
wasmocbewrotb.nesentetofetcbetbeconestables 
of  bis  souldyours,&  for  tbem  tbat  bad  tbe  charge 
of  bis  men  or  armes,  &  commaunded  tbem  secretely 
in  counseyl,tbat  they  sbold  auyse  tbeyr  tyme  and 
poynt,  and  smyte  in  to  tbebooste  of  tbe  erle,&  doo 
to  tbem  alle  tbe  barme  they  mygbte,  and  alee  grete 
plente  of  tbemj^Cbisdydetbemperourcomaunde 
tbemtbemoresurely,bycau8etbatbewysteweltbat 
tbey  tbat  were  on  tbat  otbersyde  mygnt  not  belpe 
tbem,and  by  cause  tbey  werebismen  tbey  woldnot 
sone  greue  bym.Hnd  bad  commaunded  tnat  alle  tbe 
sbippes  to  bereouer  vytaylle,  sbolde  come  bastely 
aaeyn  in  to  tbe  cyte,so  tbat  tbey  on  tbat  other  syde 
shold  not  come  ouer  agayn,ff or  euer  he  bad  suspec- 
tionoftbassembleofourepeple,&tberforebemade 
tbem  to  passe  ouer  ecbe  after  other  as  tbey  cam  jf 
Che  grete  cbere  tbat  be  made  to  tbem,  and  tbe  grete 
yef  tes  tbat  begaf ,  cam  more  by  barate  and  of  drede 
than  of  loue  or  of  largesse*  But  oure  peple,  &  spe- 
cially tbe  f  renssmen,  mygbt  not  byleue  tbat  this 
ioye  tbat  be  made  to  tbem,  ne  tbe  ryebesse  tbat  be 
gaf ,  mygbt  come  of  ony  trayson  ne  of  euylXbey 
fcnewe  not  by  experyence  so  mocbe  tbenne  as  tbey 
dyde  afterward. 


106 


f)ow  tbemperour,  for  tauenge  bym  on  tberle,made 
bis  conestables  tenbussbe  tbem,  and  assaylle  tbc 
boost  of  tberle,  capitulo  xlviij^^ 

T)G  conestables  wbicbe  bad  co- 
mmandement  of  tbemperour, 
spak  to  gydre  to  tbeyr  men,  and 
made  a  bussbement  nygbe  to 
tbe  booste  of  tbe  erle  of  TTbo- 
louse.  In  tbe  nygbt,  wban  tbey 
bad  supposed  alle  wel  to  be  as- 
sured, tbemperours  peple  smote 


in  emong  tbem,  and  slewe  and  wounded  many  or 
tbey  were  awaked  and  apperceyued  it,  Butwban  tbe 
cryearoos,  &  tbe  noblemen  of  tboosteapperceyued 
*tbe  trayson,  tbey  armed  tbem  and  reteyned  tbeyr 
peple  tbat  began  to  flee,  and  after  ran  vpon  tbem  of 
•tbemperour,  and  slewe  many,  and  cbassed  tbe  re- 
menaun  tj9  On  tbe  mom  tbey  of  tbe  booste  began 
to  bemocbe  esmayed  of  tbe  trauaylle  tbat  tbey  bad 
suffred  in  tbe  nygbt,  and  of  tbe  trayson  of  tbe 
Grekes,  and  tbeyr  bertes  began  to  cole,  &  to  f  aylle 
of  tbe  purpoose  of  tbeyr  waye  &  pylgremage.  Hnd 
not  only  tbe  smal  and  comune  peple,  but  many  of 
tbe  grete  and  noble  men  bad  f  orgoten  tbeyr  vowes 
and  tbeyr  honours,  and  wold  baue  retorned  borne 
vn to  tbeyr  countrev.But  tbe  noble  bissbopof  puy 
and  tbe  bissbopor  Orenge  were  emonge  tbem, and 
many  good,  wyse,  rely gyous  men  and  clerkys,tbat 
precbyd  to  tbem  tbe  wordes  of  our  lord,  &  recom- 
f orted  tbem  mocbe  wel,  and  sbewde  tbem  tbat  ^f 
tbey  retourned,  tbey  sbold  lese  tbonour  of  tbis 

107 


iworld,  &  also  of  that  other,  Cbuswitb  gretepeyne 
;tbey  reteyned  them. 

iHfi  the  erle,  wbiebe  was  in  Con- 


>&s»ifc:f*»ssl 


stantynople,  bcrdc  of  tbc  trayson 
tbat  was  don  to  bym  in  bis  boost, 
be  was  as  a  man  out  of  bis  wytte,  & 
anon  sente  bis  men  to  tbemperour, 
and  sente  bym  word  tbat  be  bad  be- 
trayed bym,ff orwbyles  be  reteyned  bym  and  made 
»bym  good  cbere,  be  nad  doo  slee  bis  peple  by  tray- 
son,  Hnd  sente  worde  bereof  to  tbe  barons  tbat 
were  on  tbat  otber  syde,  pray  en  g  tbem  as  bis  bre- 
tberen  tbat  tbey  wold  come  to  bym  to  auenge  itj0 
'CHel  may  ye  knowe  tbat  yf  tberle  bad  power  suffi- 
cient, be  wold  not  baue  departed  ty  I  bebadauengyd 
bym,  and  tbat  it  sbold  baue  ben  dere  bougbt,  ffor 
be  was  a  man  of  grete  courage,  and  forgate  not 
lygbtly  sbame  don  to  bym  J?  tbemperour  sawe 
i  tbat  tbis  tbyngewasgoon  ouer  ferre,in  sucbewyse 
tbat  be  repented  bym  tbat  be  bad  so  commaunded 
in  bis  angre  and  bastynes,and  basted  bym  mocbe 
for  to  sette  counseyl  in  tbis  werke,  Hnd  sente  for 
Buymont  and  tberle  of  flaundres  to  come  &  speke 
witb  bym,  by  cause  be  wold  sende  tbem  for  to  ap- 
pese  tberle  of  Cbolousej^tTbey  cam,  wbiebe  were 
.mocbe  angrv  of  tbis  tbat  was  don, 

R6Y  wente  to  tberle  in  tbe  name  of 
tbemperour,  but  tbey  sayd  to  bym 
more  on  tbeyrowne  bebalue  tban  of 
tbemperours.'Cbey  sbewde  bym  wel 
tbat  it  was  not  tyme  ne  place  for  ta- 
uenge  bis  sbames  tbat  bad  ben  don 


to  bym  in  the  seruyse  of  oure  lord,  ff  or  it  sbold  be 
empessbement  vnto  tbe  gfretewerhe  tbat  tbey  bad 
enterprised  f  or  to  saue  tbeyr  sowles,  and  on  tbat 
otber  syde,  yf  tbey  wolde  so  doo,  tbey  bad  not  tbc 
power  nepuyssaunceXberf or  it  were  better  to  byde 
tbeir  tbougbtes  tban  to  discouere  tbeyr  bertes  to 
tbeyr  domage  and  sbame  j&FO>e  erle,  tbus  angry, 
was  no  fool,  but  soulfred  tbat  bio  wytte  vayn- 
quyssbe  bisangre,and  said  tbat  bewold  submette 
to  tbyse  two  noble  men  tbat  spak  to  bym,  and  by- 
leue  tbem j^XTbey  cam  to  tbemperour  priuely,  and 
sbewd  to  bym  al  tbe  fowle  dede  and  werhe  tbat  was 
commysedXbemperourvnderstode  tbe  greteyre 
tbat  tbey  bad  in  tbeir  bertes,and9ente  fortberle  to 
come  to  bym  in  to  bis  palays,  and  excused  bym  to 
fore  alle  pryue,and  apperte,and  estrangers,  tbat 
be  bad  not  comanded  tbis  f  ayte  to  be  doon,  but  it 
displesyd  bym  mocbe*  Hnd  yet  be,  beyng  without 
culpe  and  blame  tberof ,  be  was  redy  to  restore  to 
tbe  due  alle  tbe  dammages  tbat  were  don  to  bis 
booste  after  bis  power jfiTCbus  euery  day  by  day, 
and  more  and  more,  mygbt  wel  be  perceyued  tbe 
grete  bate  tbat  tbe  Grehes  bad  to  tbe  Latyns,  and 
of  tbe  desloyal  felonnye  tbat  tbemperour  bad  in 
bis  berte  ayenst  oure  peple,  but  it  must  be  suffred, 
ff  or  it  mygbt  not  tbenne  be  amended. 


109 


«* 


How  at  tbynstaunt  prayer  of  the  barons  of  the 
booste,  the  crlc  made  bommage  to  tbemperour, 
wbicbe  gaf  grete  yeftes  to  bym  and  bis,  capitulo 

fC6R  tbecounseylof  tbe  otber 
barons,tbeerlewastbertomeuyd 
&  by  tbe  grete  prayers  of  tbem- 
perour,tbatbedydebommageto 
bym,  and  sware  to  bym  feaulte, 
lyke  as  tbe  otber  bad  doon,  and 
tbe  pees  was  affermed  emong 
tbem,  O>emperour  gaf  to  tbem 
so  grete  yef tes,  tbat  alle  tbey  were  menieyUously 
esmayedXbe  otber  barons,  that  were  come  ouer  a- 
gayn  on  tbe  betber  syde,  receyued  newe  yef  tes  and 
presentesj^Hf ter,  tbey  passed  tbe  braas,  and  re- 
toumed  in  to  Betbnie,  &  tbey  prayd  mocbe  tbe  erle 
tbat  besbold  not  longe  tarye  and  abyde  tbereXbe 
erles  boost  cam  in  to  Constantynoble,  &  be  made 
tbem  passe  ouer  tbe  braas,  and  to  lodge  witb  tbe 
otber,  He  bym  self  abode  in  tbe  toun,  for  certayn 
necessytees  tbat  be  bad  do  to  doo  and  to  ordeyne 
j?Hndbe,as  a  mocbe wyseman,praydeandin cited 
oftetbemperour,tbatbesbolde  enterpryse  tbeser- 
uyseof  our  lord, and  tbat  bewold  be  lord  and  cap- 
tayn  of  alle  tbe  boost,  wbere  as  were  so  many  noble 
men,  and  be  bad  bope  tbat  our  lord  sbold  sendeto 
bym  su  cbe  bonnour  tbat  be  sbold  delyuere  bis  peple 
andlonde  by  bym.  <Hel  coude  tbe  erle  make  to  bym 
remonstrance,  acordyng  to  tbat  wbicb  tbe  other 
barons  bad  shown  bim  wbicbe  bad  spoken  in  tbis 


■ 


mater  jgFTIbemperour  answerd  to  tbem  allc  in  one 
maner,  that  tbis  pylgremage  was  a  mocbc  bygbe 
tbyng,and  tbatbc  mocbedesyred  tbepardon,&  a- 
bouealleotbertbyngtbecompanyeofsobyenoble 
men  plesyd  bym  mocbe,Hnd  about  bym  &  bis  em- 
pyre,  be  sayd,  be  bad  mocb  cruel  peple  and  mocb  vn  - 
trew,  as  tbe  Bougres,  tbe  Comans,  and  otber  tbat 
gladly  wold  doo  barme  to  bym  &  to  bis  londe,and 
conquere  bis  empyre,asmocbe  as  tbey  mygbt  cjete 
j^Hnd  tberf oreit was  grete  parylle  for  me  to witb- 
drawe  fro  my  countreyej^Gdell  &fayre  be  excused 
bym  witboute  fortb,but  tbat  be  sayd  to  oure  peple 
was  but  tryeberye  and  falsebed;  ne  be  bad  neuer 
>talente  to  belpe  our  peple,  but  tbougbt  wel  in  bis 
bertebowbemygbt  noye  tbem  to  bis  power, 

~]f)6Y  tbat  were  ouer  tbe  braas,  tbe 
due  Godeffroy,  Buymont,  tberle  of 
f  laundres,  and  tbe  bissbop  of  puy, 
aduysedand  ordeynedtbeyraffayres 
for  tbem,and  sayde  tbey  wolddrawe 
i  tbem  to  ward  JSycene,  ffor  to  abyde 
tbere  tbeotber  barons  tbatwere  comyngon  tbewaye 
.J&X&bm  tbey  approcbed  a  cyte  wbicb  was  named" 
JSycomede,  wbicb  is  tbe  oldest  cyte  of  tbe  countre 
of  Bytbyne,  be  ye  certayne  tbat pieter  Cberemyte, 
witb  a  f  ewe  peple  tbat  bad  abyden  tbere,  y ssued  ou  te 
of  tbe  poure  place,  and  bad  ben  tbere  for  tbe  wynter, 
and  cam  ayenst  tbyse  barons,  and  salewed  tbem, 
j^TJbev  madetotbem  goodcbere,and  demaunded 
tbem  or  tbeyr  wayeand  ioumeysXbey  gaf  to  tbem 
grete  yef  tes,  of  wbicbe  tbey  bad  grete  nede,  pieter 
tolde  to  tbem  tbeyr  grete  mesauentures,and  sayde 

in 


tbatitcambvtbeyrowneoultrage&folyej^byse 
noblemen  orwbomeIbauesayd,badpepleynowgb, 
and  cam  to  JVycene,  and  assieged  it  tbexv  day  of 
JVIaye.  XTbey  lef te  places  ynougb  for  to  lodge  tbe 
otber  barons  tbat  cam  after.  XTbe  erleof  TTbolouse, 
w  ban  be  baddomade  sucbetbynges  as  bym  neded 
in  Constantynoble,  be  toke  leue  of  tbemperour, 
wbicbe  gaf  to  bym  ryebe  yef tee  alle  newe,  and  cam 
after  bastely  to  tbe  syege  of  JVy cene. 
RowducRobertof  JVormandye,  &otber  bere  nam- 
ed, approcbed  Constantinoble,  and  made  bomage 
to  tbemperour,  capitulo  1&& 

"  tbe  wbyle  tbat  tbey  leyde  tbe 
syege,  Robert  due  of  JVorman- 
dye,&otbernoblemenwitbbym; 
tbat  is  to  saye,  Steuen  tberle  of 
Cbartresand  of  Bloys,6ustace 
broder  of  due  GodeHrYoye,  sente 
totbemperour&  tootber  barons 
_  tbeyr  messagers.  In  tbeyr  com- 
panye  were  Steven  Daubmarle,  Hlayn  f  ergaunt,& 
.Conayn,  two  bye  barons  of  Bry tayne,  tbe  erle  Ro- 
tberon  of  perse,  RogyerdeBameuvlle^rbyse^ 
otber  ynowgb  were  witb  tbe  count  off  launders  and 
fiuon  leJVIaynein  tbeyere  to  fore,  in  tbentre  of  wyn- 
tcr,  comen  in  to  puylle  &  in  to  Calabre.But  wban 
tbe  otbers  passed  ouer  unto  Duras,  tbese  for  tbe 
force  of  tbe  winter  rassembled  to  tbem  tbeir  men, 
and  cam  again  into  puylle  &  into  Calabre,  wbicbe 
ben  good  countreyesj^^Hban  tbe  newe  tyme  was 
comen,  tbey  assembled  tbeyr  peple,  and  ordeyned 
hheyr  passage  on  tbe  see,  and  cam  to  Duras,  &  by 
112 


cause  tbey  bad  taryed  so  longe,  tbey  basted  tbem 
mocbe,andpassedMacedomoneand  tbe  twoTTba- 
arses,  and  by  grete  iourneyes  and  grete  trauaylles 
cam  vnto  Cons  tan  tynopleXbemperour  scnte  for 
tbcm  to  come  to  bymj^€bey,  tbat  knewe  bow  tbe 
otber  barons  bad  don ,  cam  in  to  bis  palays  to  bym : 
be  receyued  tbem  witb  mocbe  grete  ioye,alle  bis  ba- 
rons made  to  tbem  grete  f  este*  Re  spak  to  euery cbe 
by  bym  self  rygbt  swetly,  &  acqueynted  witb  bem, 
arter  dyde  dorequyreof  tbem  bommage  &  f eaulte. 
XTbey  dyde  as  tbe  otber  bad  don  tbat  were  passed 
to  fore,  and  sayd  it  was  no  sbame  to  ensiewe  tben- 
sample  of  so  valyaunt  men,netodootbattbeybad 
don:  tbey  becam  bismen,and  dydebym  bommage, 
&  swore  to  bym .  0>em  peroure  receyued  tbem  in  bis 
grace,  &  gaf  to  tbem  so  greteyef  tes  tbat  tbey  were 
abassbed  alle,  ffor  tbe  yef tes  were  so  ryebe  and  so 
dyuerse,  tbat  tbey  neuer  to  fore  bad  seennonesucb. 
Hnd  after  toke  tbeyr  leue  of  tbemperour  &  passed 
tbe  braas  of  seynt  Ceorge,  &  cam  witb  grete  baste 
to  Nycene,  wbere  as  tbe  booste  of  cristiente  abode 
for  tbemXbeioye  was  grete  wban  tbey  were  comen, 
wbyebe  were  tbe  laste.  €bey  lodged  tbeym  in  tbe 
places  tbat  were  kept  for  tbem* 


n 


113 


How  tbempcrour  sente  for  to  destroye  ourc  crtsten 
men  one  bis  seruaunt,  faynyng  to  be  a  trewe  con-* 
duyteur  and  guyde,  capitulo  lj&& 

HTTYNS  was  a  Greke,  and  w  el  ac- 
queynted  wytb  tbemperour,  the 
moostfals,vn  trewe  man  tbateuer 
was.Hnd  so  bewel  semed,  ffor  be 
bad  bis  nosetbrellysremuledand 
tourned.  This  f  elawe,  by  tbe  com- 
mandement  of  bis  lorde,  wente 
witb  oure  men,  and  sayd  tbat  be 
wold  conduyte  tbem,  ffor  be  knewewel  alle  tbe  con- 
tre  and  tbe  paases  by  wbicbe  tbey  wold  passe  and 
goojSFBut  tbemperour  dyde  alle  tbis  for  euyl,ffor 
be  trusted  in  tbe  falsenesse  of  tbvs  false  Greek, 
wbicbe  counseylledtbemallewey  to  tneyrdammage, 
and  was  alway  as  tbe  serpent  emonge  tbe  elis.Hnd 
tbemperour  bad  charged  bym  for  to  late  bym  wyte 
euery  day  bow  tbe  boost  bebaued  tbem,  &  of  tbeyr 
purpose,  and  tberupon  be  wold  send  to  bym  bis 
wylle  and  entente  j!?Ht  tbis  siege  oure  peple  first 
assembled  to  gydre,  &  tbe  capyteyns  and  barons 
spak  of  tbeyr  comune  werkes  and  counseyls,  ffor 
to  fore  tbey  bad  neuer  ben  to  gydre,  ne  seen  ecbe 
other.  There  was  knowen  certaynly  tbat  tbey  bad 
by  nombre  &  by  extymacion  to  fore  JVycene,  wban 
tbey  were  alle  assembled,  sixe  C  thousand  men  a 
f  ote,  and  of  knygbtes  and  men  of  armes  on  bors- 
bak,  an  hundred  thousand  or  moo.  XTbey  alle  bad 
moche  grete  wylle  for  to  employe  tbem  wel  in  tbis 


»$ 


>warre*Hnd  desyred  mocbeattbisfyrstbegynnyng 

of  tbeyr  warre  to  enterprise  so  byely  and  doo  90 

'wel,  tbat  alle  otber  peple  sbold  doubte  tbem, 

>  Of  tbe  situation  of  JSy  cene, and  bow  our  pepleap- 

procbed  tberto,  merueyllyng  of  tbe  place  &  of  tbe 

strengtbe,  capitulo  lij,*^ 

f  tbe  cyte  of  JSycene,  hnowe  ye 
tbat  it  bad  be  vn  der  tbarcbeby  s- 
sbop,  &  it  was  a  place  of  hon- 
our, by  cause  tbe  fyret  of  tbe 
iiij  grete  counseylles  bad  besette 
tbere;  ffor  in  tbe  tyme  of  eeynt 
Syluestre  tbe  pope,  tber  was  a 
Ipatryarke  of  Constantynoble, 
named  Hlexandre,  and  emperour  Constantin,  tber 
rwas  a  meecreauntnamed  Hrrius,  wbicb  mesprised 
certeyn  poyntes  of  tbe  f aytb,  and  many  men  f ol- 
oweabym.Oerfor  assembled  in  tbe  cyteof  JNfy- 
>cene  iij  C  xviij  prelates,  and  tbere  was  disputed 
ayenst  tbis  popelican.Hndby  wytnesof  scripture, 
and  by  tbaccord  of  bolv  men  tbat  were  tbere,  Hr- 
ryus  was  condempned  «  bis  myscreaunce  jSFSytb 
after,  in  tbe  tyme  of  an  anotber  Constantyn  em- 
^perour,  wbicbewas  sone  vnto  Hyerne,  assembled 
'another  counseyl  in  tbe  same  place,  wbicbe  was  tbe 
vij*  0>enne  was  Hdryan  pope  of  Rome,  and  Car- 
este  was  patriarke  of  Constantinople,  TTbere  were 
dampned  som  mysbyleuyd  peple,  tbat  said  tbat 
^alle  tbe  ymages  tbat  were  made  in  boly  cbircbewere 
ayenst  tbe  f aytb,  and  tbey  were  false  cristen  men 
and  vntrewe  tbat  suffred  tbemj^Cbis  cyteof  J^y- 
ieene  stondetb  in  a  playn,  but  tbe  montaynes  ben 


12 


"5 


nygbe,  and  it  lacked  not  mocbe,  but  tbey  be  round 
aboute  it  boot  0>e  countrey  is  mocbe  fayr  and 
plentyous,  tbe  grete  f orestes  ben  by  a  ryuer  nygbe 
tbe  cyte,  toward  tbe  weste, mocbe  longe  and  brode. 
By  tbat  ryuer  tbe  sbyppes  brynge  vytaylle  &  otber 
marcbandysein  to  tbe  cyte;  wban  itis  a  grete  wynde, 
tbe  grete  wawes  smyte  sore  on  tbe  walles.  On  tbat 
otber  part  of  tbe  toun  ben  grete  dy  cbes,  brode  and 
depe,  &  f ul  of  water  of  a  lake  &  otber  ffontaynes. 
TIbe  walles  aboute  be  stronge,  bye,  tbycke,  &  f ulle 
of  grete  tourettys*  Cbe  peple  witbin  tne  toun  were 
fiers  and  bardy,  and  wel  aduysed  of  armes,  and 
cjrete  plen  te  tbere  werej^GIban  ouremen  approcbed 
it,  tbey  merueylled  mocbe  of  tbe  strengtbe  of  tbe 
toun* 

Row  tbe  puyssaunt  ^urke  Solyman,  witb  a  grete 
boost,  aduysed  tyme  &  boure  to  assa^le  &  emyte 
on  our  peple,  for  to  reyse  tbe  siege,  capitulo  liij^ 

OLYM^^°fWDOmIDaucsP°- 
ken  to  fore,  wbicbe  was  a  mocbe 

puyssaunfCurke,  bad  tbeseya- 
\  nofye  of  tbis  cyte,  and  of  alle  tbe 
countre  aboute*  Re  was  mocbe 
wise,bardy  &manly  of  bis  body* 
fro  tbe  tyme  tbat  beberdeof  tbe 
M  comynge  of  our  peple,  be  was 


gamyssbed  of  bis  frendes  and  soldyours  for  to 
defende  bis  cyte  and  bis  londe^Hn  vncle  of  bis, 
named  Belpbet,  mocbe  puyssaunt  and  ryebe,  bad 
late  conquerd  alle  tbe  londe  tbat  is  fro  tbe  braasof 
seynt  George  vnto  Surry,  wbicbe  is  xxx  ioumeyes 
longe.  In  tbat  tyme  Romanus  Diogenes  was  em- 


perour,  wbicbe  was  to  fore  Hlexes,  that  was  depo- 
sed j?€bis  Belpbet,  soudan  of  perse,  bad  gyuen 
tbc  gretter  part  of  tbc  londetoSolyman  bis  neuew, 
in  sucbewysetbat  be  bad  alle  tbe  londe  frotbecyte 
of  Carce,tbat  is  in  Cylyce,vnto  tbe  braasof  seynt 
George,  Cbus  tbis  Solyman  bad  bis  baylleswitb 
in  sigbt  of  tbe  town  of  Constantinoble,  wbyebe 
resseyuyd  bis  passages  &  custommesof  tbe  mar- 
cbans  of  tbe  toune  and  of  otber  j^Ons  Solyman 
was  witbdrawen  to  tbe  montaynes  witb  as  mocbe 
peple  as  bemygbt  baue,  a  x  myle  fro  tbe  boost,and 
dyde  lye  in  a  wayte  and  espye  bow  be  mygbt  fynde 
tbe  maner  to  reyse  tbe  siege,  yf  be  bad  mocbt* 
How  Solyman,  beynof  in  tbe  montaynes,  sente  bis 
(messagers to  tbem  of  tbe  toun,  and  of  tbe  comfort 
tbat  be  gaf  to  tbem,  capitulo  \\\\j&& 

nCQRBpeple  cam  toforetbe  toun, 
i  and  witboute  acorde  &  witbout 
ony  ordenaun  ce  began  tassay  lie, 
J  in  sucbe  wyse  tbat  tbey  witbin 
mygbt  not  yssue,ne  tbey  witb- 
out entre*8ut  tbe  grete  lake  tbat 
toucbed  tbe  towne  destroubled 
J  mocbe,  ff or  tbey  mygbte,  maul- 
'gre  tbe  booste,  goo  and  come  by  tbe  see  as  of  te  as 
tbey  wolde,  Oure  peple  badnone  sbippes,ne  mygbt 
not  deffende  tbe  lake:  certaynly  tbey  bad  besyeged 
it  wel  by  Ion  de  j^Solyman ,  tbat  sawe  tbis  cy  te  tbus 
enuyronned  witb  peple,  wberof  be  was  wrotb  and 
angry  ,&dou  b  ted  mocbe  tbat  tbey  of  tbe  toun  sbold 
be  abassbed  of  tbe  grete  multytude,  tber  for  bee 
sente  two  of  bis  preuy  messagers,  and  commaund- 


13 


117 


It.  m  m  bl9  n.ame  tbat  tb*y  sb»W  mtrc  in  to  tbc 
toun,  and  saw  tbyse  wordes :  I  boldc  you  so  valy- 

t^  im!H' and  of  8ucbc  P'oucssc,  tbatl  by Icuc  cer- 
taynty  tbat  ye  preyse  and  sctte  lytil  by  this  pepte, 

^tter^8^fCTConmVes,wbmtbc8onnc 
^«h^U5'lnd  tbe*  blw^euyl  ordeyned  &  gar- 

Zll  mi  tbaJle  n<Ln  £  '"J™8  £at  may  endure  tra- 
uaylL  OTeben  fressb,  and  our  horses  rested  in  our 

contre,wberof  it  isno  doubte  we  be  better  than  tbey 
an  <_.  tymes.  And  tbat  ye  maye  wel  knowe.  ffor  it  i« 

tbantJVfXberfor  conforteyou  &maynteneyou  as 
noble  men.ffor  to/morn,  to  fore  the  bourTo/nonc 
ye  sbal  be  without  f  aytledelyuerd  of  tbem  alle  But 

£Z*  °°9u' ye  open-.e  ?oure  ?ates  and  yssue  vpon 
tbem  in  sucbe  wysc  tbat  ye  tbenne  be  parteyners  of 
tbe  vyctorye,  of  tbonour,  and  of  the  proufiVt. 

mS^,kI,lf8agcrs,0f  Sol^an  were  ^ken  by  our 
men,  &  by  tbem  was  hnowen  tbe  couync  of  tbe  sayd 
Solyman,capitulo  Iv^t^t  r  y" 

~~  RSmessagers  of  Solyman  cam 

upon  tbe lahe,andarryuedalvtil 
ferrcfrotbctoun.&aftcr  be<ran 
tespye&seebowtbeymygbten- 
trcintotbecyte.Ourepepleap- 
pcrceyued  tbem  &  ran  on  tbem, 
mat  one  of  tbem  was  slayn  atte 

"!r'IT"  ^hyngctbatotberwasbrouffbt 
alyuetoforctbebarons.rbeymadebymtobcdrfw- 
en^ynedtosaye  tbe  troutbe:  be  confessyd  and 


sayde  that  Solyman  bad  sente  tbem  in  to  the  cyte 
ffor  to  garny ssbe  tbcm  &make  tbcm  redy ,ff or  tbeyr 
lord  on  tbemorn  sbold  come  and  smyte  sodanly  in 
tbc  boost  j^Cbc  barons  byleuyd  bym  wel,&com- 
maunded  bym  to  be  kept,  and  toke  counseyl  cmong 
tbcm  bow  tbeysbolddoo/CberleofCbolouse&tbe 
bissbop  of  puy  wcrcnot  yet  come  vnto  tbc  boost; 
1  tbc  barons  scntcfor  tbcm  bastely  for  tbis  tbynge- 
TTbey  cam  &  rode  allc  tbenygbt,in  sucbe  wyse  tbat 
)  tbey  cam  in  to  tbc  boost  to  fore  tbe  sonne  rysyng. 
)  XTbc  bancrs  were  displayed,  &  tbe  trom  pes  sowned. 
Xber  was  mocbc  peple,  and  vnnetb  mygbt  tbey  be 
)  lodged  in  tbeplaces  tbat  were  keptf or  tbem/Cbenne 
>Solyman  at  tbe  bour  of  tierce,  lyke  as  be  sayd  tbat 
was  taken,  cam  doun  from  tbe  montayne  in  to  tbc 
*playn»  Cbcnnc  our  peple  tbat  were  wel  aducrtysed 
vanned  tbcm,  and  dyde  do  sownc  tbe  trompettes, 
eucry  man  drewe  bym  in  to  bis  bataylle  as  it  was 
ordeyned,and  mocbc  quyckely  were  allesette  in  or- 
idenaunce, 

►  How  a  grcte  bataylle  of  Solyman  cam  smy tc  vpon 

>  our  peple,  and  of  tbendc  of  tbescarmucbccapttulo 

Ivi^^ 

If  tbeboostcof  Solyman  depart- 
jeda  bataylle  frotbeotber,  wber- 
in  werexJVImen  on  borsbak,and 
drew  tbem  toward  tbe  gate  rigbt 
toward  tbe  sou  tb/Cber  was  lod- 
ged tberle  of  TTbolouse,  and  tbis 
yate  was  delyuerd  bym  to  kepe, 
J  But  Solyman  tbat  tbe  day  to 
fore  bad  espyed  tbat  waye  and  bad  seen  no  man 
i4  »9 


there  lodged,  and  wende  that  no  man  bad  ben  tbere, 
ffor  be  knewe  notbyngeof  tbecomyngeof  tberlene 
bis  companye,  tbis  bataylle  emote  in  emonge  tbe 
peuple  tbat  were  comen.TTbey  receuyed  tbem  mocbe 
nersly  witb  glayues  &  swerdes,  &  sore  adommaged 
tbem,  and  made  tbem  to  resorte  agayn  bakward. 
Solyman  tbat  ensiewed  made  tbem  toretournewitb 
bym,  &  assembled  to  tbe  pepleof  tbe  erleoff  laun- 
ders, Xlht  due  Godefroye,  Buymont,  and  tberle  of 
'Cboulouscaduysed&sawetbattberweresomany 
oftbetlurhes^tbattbeerleofflaundersmygbtnot 
suffrealle,  &adressyd  tbeyre  bataylle  to  tbat  parte, 
and  smote  in  emonge  tbem,  tTbe  medle  was  mocbe 
barde  &  aspre,  and  many  tTurkes  were  slaynXber 
was  so  mocbe  don  &  so  wel,  tbat  Guy  deGerlande, 
senesbal  of  tbe  kynge  of  fraunce,  Guy  du  puy- 
sette,  Rogier  de  Barneuylle,  tbyse  bare  aweye  tbe 
pry  s  to  fore  alle  otber.Bu  t  tbis  bataylle  en  dured  wel 
an  boure  al  boole. 

^jNtbendetbe'Curkesmygbtsuffreno- 

*  more  our  peple,butwerediscomfyted 

&fleddeaway  mocbe  fowly.Ourpeple 

folowedtbemnotferre,flPortbemon- 

taynes  &  tbe  wodes  were  ouer  nere  in 

wbicb  tbey  fledde,but  were  of  tlurkes 
f  slayn  iiij  thousand,  &som  tberwerea/lyue  taken  & 
Oure  peple  bad  mocbe  grete  ioye  of  tbis  vyctorye, 
and  cam  ageyn  to  tbeyr  siege,&besieged  tbe  toun  as 
wel  as  tbey  my  gbte.f  or  to  an  gre  &  discourage  tbem 
witbin  tbe  toun,  wbicbeaway  ted  after  socoure,  tbey 
'made  to  be  caste  witb  enaynes  to  tbem  witbin  tbe 
toun,  grete  plente  of  beedesof  tbe  Turkes  tbat  bad 
120 


ben  slayn  in  tbebataylleXbeprisonnersa/lyue  &  a 
>tbousand  becdes  of  tbe  Oirkes  tbey  sentetotbem- 
perour.Re  coudctbem  grctc  tbanke  and  bad  tbcrof 
'mocbeioye,andsentetotbemagayneneweyeftesof 

iewelly  s,  of  clotbes  of  sy  Ik  an d  otber  tby  n  ges  rigfbt 
largelyJlndcommaundedtotbemarcbauntestbat 
tbey  sbold  ledevytaylleynowevnto  tbeboostcand 
,  otber  tbynges  necessary  e. 
How  ourc  barons  were  lodged  in  tbe  sayd  siege,  of 
i tbeir  mayntene,  and  bow  euery  daye  tbey  enforced 
^tbem  taesayHc  tbe  toun,  capitulo  Ivij,*?,*? 

]OCR6tbougbtour  barons  bow 
tbis  cyte  mygbt  be  assieged  on 
alle  parties,  fror  otber  wysetbem 
semed  tney  mygbte  not  aete  it. 
By  comyn  counseyl  tbey  lodged 
tbem  alle:  tbey  sette  ayenst  tbe 
sonne  rysyng  tbe  duc&  bis  two 
bretberen,  toward  tbe  nortb  were 
lodged  Buymont  &  Oncre  and  tbe  otber  barons 
tbatwereintbeyrcompanyeXbeducofJSbrmandye 
andtbe  erle  of  f  launders  lodged  by  tbemXoward 
tbe  soutb,  tbe  erle  of  Oolouse,  Hue  le  JVIayne,  tbe 
bissbop  of  puy  ,tberle  of  Cbartres,  &  otber  barons 
many,  witballetbeir  peple,  were  so  lodged  tbat  alle 
tbe  cytewas  enclosed  sauftbelakewbicbewasin  tbe 

weste*Hnd  after  sente  tbey  bastely  in  to  tbe  forest, 
andmadetocomegreteplenteoftymbrefortomake 
engyns.Hlletbe  carpentersof  tbe  boost&sawyers 
cam  fortb,  of  wbom  was  grete  nombre:  in  a  lytill 
wbyle  reysed  tbey  engynes  &  slynqfes,  &  made  in 
tbertbewayes  &  caues  couerdfor  to  fylle  tbedyebes 

121 


&to  myne  tbewallesXber  was  grctc  caste  of  gfrctc 
atones  at  tbc  walls  and  tourettes,  so  that  in  many 
places  the  walks  were  clef  te  &  broken  in  many  par- 
tes^or  to  do  tby  se  tbyn  ges,tbey  were  wel  vij  wekes. 
Xbere  were  in  tbis  wbilemany  assaultes & fygbtes 
oft  to  fore  tbe  yates, 

JS  a  day  tbe  barons  acorded  tbat  tbe 
toune  sbolde  be  assay  lied;  but  tbys 
assault  endamaged  lytil  tbe  toune  ne 
tbem  witbin ;  but  tber  were  loste  two 
valyaunt  men,  "Cbat  one  was  named 
-  Bawdwyn  Cbauderon,a  ryebeman  & 
agood  knygbtof  BerryXbat  other  was  of  found- 
ers named  Bawdwyn  of  Gaunt,  noble  and  bardy. 
Tbysetwo  wente  so  ferre to  fore  tbat  daye,tbat  tbe 
one  was  slayn  witb  a  stroke  of  a  stone,  and  tbat 
otber  witb  an  arowe.Hn  other  day  tbe  barons  were 
accorded  to  make  agayn  tbe  assault,  and  was  slayn 
witb  an  arowe,  Guyllem  erle  of  forest,  and  Calles 
deLylle ;  tbyse  two  were  bye  noblemen,  &  assay  lied 
mocbe  tbat  day  JSTLrt  tbis  tymedeydeof  sekenesin 
tbeboostOuy  de  possesses  mocbe  good  knygbt 

O>eboosteweresoroufuloftbedetboftbysenoble 
men,  but  euery  man  bad  a  f  erm  bope  tbat  our  lord 
wold  gwerdone  tbem  perpetually  in  beuen  ffor  tbe 
good  seruyse  tbat  tbey  deyde  in,  Tbey  were  hon- 
ourably buryed.  Hnd  after  entended  tboost  unto 
tbeyr  werke* 


122 


^^^■"^ ^"^"~ 


m 


How  our  barons  made  tbeyr  castellys  of  tree  &  ap- 
proucbed  tbe  toun,  and  bow  tbey  witbin  tbe  toun 
brake  one  of  tbem  &slewetbem  witb  inne,  capitulo 

JS"  a  day  tbe  capytaynes  of  tbe 
booste  wereacoraedtbattbe  cas- 
tellys tbat  tbey  bad  made  sbold 
be  drawen  fortb  andaprocbetbe 
I  walks,  ffor  ecbe  of  tbe  greet  men 
bad  commaundedtomakeanen- 
|f?  gyne  bastely  in  bys  parte^Cbe 
«  erle  Herman  of  Ducbelond  and 
fienry  d'Hsque,  tbat  were  good  knygbtes  &  enter- 
prisers, baddeuyseda  tbyngof  agretetronke  of  an 
>oke,  and  bad  sette  tberon  xx  knygbtes  alle  couerd 
aboue,  and  vnder  tbey  bad  menynougb  fortomyne 
>tbewalleXbj^approucbedtbecasteltbatitioyned 
to  tbe  walle/Cbe  knygbtes  aboue  began  to  deff ende 
tbem,  and  tbey  vnder  persed  tbe  walleXbe  tTurkes 
witbin  bad  dressed  tbe  greatest  part  of  tbeyr  en- 
gyns  to  tbis  castel,and  many  strokes  badsmeton 
so  longe  tbat  wytb  tbe  strok  of  a  grete  stone  tbey 
brake  bit,  andf yllealle  doun  to  gydre  in  sucb  wyse 
tbat  neueroneescaped  aboue  ne  vnder,  but  alle  were 
deedXbere  was  grete  sorowe  in  tbe  boost,  &  mocbe 
more  sbold  be,  ne  bad  not  be  tbe  arete  com  forte  tbat 
tbey  bad  in  our  lord  j^Cbey  lefte  not  berfore,  but 
euefy  man  paynedbym  more  &  more  to  greue  tbem 
witb  inne,  and  gaf  to  tbem  so  many  assaultes  day 
&nygbt,tbattbeyletetbembauebutlytilreste,But 
onetbyngtber  was  tbat  greued  ourpeple  mocbe,& 
tbat  was  tbat  tbere  cam  euery  day  m  to  tbe  toune 

123 


[fressbe  vytaylles  and  newe  men,  armours  and  ar- 
:  tyllefy,  by  tbc  lake,  and  tbey  coude  not  def ende  it, 
wberof  tbey  were  mocbe  marryd. 

Of  tbe  counseyl  tbat  our  men  take  for  tassiegetbe 
>toun  by  watre  for  to  constreynetbemnotforto  en- 
tre  ne  yssue,  capitulo  \\%&& 

S226ROf  wold  our  barons  baue 
counseyl  bow  tbey  mygbt  die- 
trouble  this  comyng  by  water, 
'Cbey  assembled  and  acorded 
tbat  tbey  would  sendeof  tbeyr 
knygbtes  grete  plen  te,wysemen, 
and  men  a  fote,  and  take  alletbe 
sbippes  at  the  see  syde  tbat  tbey 
coude  f  ynde,  and  set  tbem  vpon  cbaryottes  of  tbe 
boost  &  brynge  sucbe  as  tbey  mygbt  bryngeboole, 
an  d  tbe  otber  tbey  sbold  part  in  two  pyeces  or  three, 
and  also  tbey  wold  sende  to  tbemperourandpraye 
bym  tbat  be  wold  delyuer  to  tbemsbippesj^Cbey 
tbat  bad  charge  of  tbis  wer ke  cam  to  tbe  see  witbou  t 
taryeng  and  fonde  sbippes  grete  plente,  sucbe  as 
tbey  bad  nede  of,  and  by  tbe  commaundement  of 
tbemperour,  wbicbe  graunted  gladly,  drewe  out  of 
tbe  water  ynowgb.  Cbenne  coupled  tbey  to  gydre 
four  cartes  or  fyue,  after  tbat  tbe  sbyppes  were,  and 
sette  tbem  tberon  by  force  of  pepleal  bole,  and  witb 
many  men  drewe  tbem  f  ortb  witb  cordes  and  witb 
trayse  of  tbe  cartes  in  one  nypfbt  vij  long  myle  or 
morej^Cbise  sbippes  were  taken  or  and  launched 
in  to  tbe  lakemocbe  nastely,  if  or  many  bondes  make 
\ligbt  werke,and  tbe  peple  wente  tberto  witb  a  good 
wylle/Cbey  bad  emongetbemmanymaronners  tbat 
124 


,— =s 


coude  wel  sbippecrafte,  and  tbey  were  sette  tberin. 
JViocbe  peple  oflferd  tbem  selfe  to  entre  alle  armed ; 
tbey  toke  as  many  as  neded,&  garnyssbed  wel  tbyse 
sbippes;  somme  sbippe  bad  in  an  bonderd,  &  otber 
I,  or  xxx,  or  xx,  after  tbeyr  gretenes.  In  sucbe  wyse 
tbat  tbe  waye  tbat  tbey  bad  in  tbe  lake,  oure  men 
badde  taken  from  tbem.  Cdban  tbey  of  tbe  booste 
sawe  tbat  tbis  way  e  of  tbe  lake  was  taken  from  tbem 
of  tbe  toun  tbey  bad  grete  ioye,and  boped  tbat  tbe 
siege  sbold  not  endure^Oe  Curkes  of  tbe  toun 
when  tbey  apperceuyed  tbat  oure  men  bad  don  so 
grete  a  werke  and  so  stronge,  tbey  fyll  in  despayre 
andwereabassbedandmerueylledortbevygourof 
our  peple  tbat  bad  don  this  in  so  sbort  tyme,  and 
tbenne  were  enclosed  on  alle  sydes,  &  bad  loste  tbe 
waye  for  tbeyr  sbippes. 

Row  after  tbe  cyte  was  asseyged  by  water  and  by 
londe  oure  men  assaylled  it,  and  or  a  sbotte  tbat 
due  ©odefroye  dyde,  capitulo  \x&& 

IRHJV  tbe  barons  sawe  tbat  tbeyr 
sbippes  were  in  tbe  lake  in  sucne 
Iwyse  tbat  no  man  mygbt  greue 
tbem,  anon  tbey  dyde  do  crye 
tbat  alle  men  sbold  arme  tbem 
|  and  come  to  tbassault,  and  it 
I  wasacorded  tbat  ecbeof  tbeba- 
I  ronssboldassayllein  tbatparte 
wbere  be  was  lodged ;  tbey  admonested  &  enforced 
tbeyr  peple  to  doo  wel.  cbassault  was  more  tban 
eueritbadbe.O>eresommetbreweoutoftbengyns 
gretenombreof  stones.  Guery  man  dyde  bis  parte: 
toward  tbe  south,  in  tbe  partye  tbat  was  delyuerd 

125 


to  tbcrlc  of  TIboulose,  there  was  an  bye  toure  more 
grete  tban  ony  of  tbeotber;  by  tbat  tour  was  tbe 
palays  in  wmebe  Solymans  wyf  was,  XTberle  bad 
setteallebisententfortobreketmstourlongetyme, 
flPor  bebaddoo  tbrowen  tberat  grete  stones,  &  bad 
not  broken  one  stone  of  tbe  tour,  Hnd  by  cause  be 
wold  not  for  sbameso leue  it  without  takyngof  it, 
and  ordeyned  gretter  stones  alle  newe,  wbicb  began 
to  breke  tbe  creuacbes  of  tbe  same  tour,  &  witb  tbe 
strokesof  tbe  stones  mocbepowdre  cam  outof  tbe 
clyftesXbe  peple  of  tbe  boost  apperceyuedit,and 
sawe  tbat  tbe  toure  began  to  falle,  tbey  passed  tbe 
dycbe&  brought  engyns  vnto  tbe  wallesXber  be- 
gan tbey  witb  greteexploit  tomyne  tbewalle  and  to 
perseit:  tbey  witbin  caste  gretestones  upon  tbeen- 
gyns,&witb  sbotteof  bandbowes  andarbalestres 
tbeyburtedmanyoftbemtbattbeysawediscouerd, 
andbycausetbeysawetbattbeclosyngoftbetoure 
began  to  f aylle,  tbey  walled  it  witbin  f ortb  witb 
stones &cbalk, and  made  arigbtstrong  wallgood 
and  tbycke.  Our  men  tbat  were  atte  tour  bad  made 
an  bole  in  tbe  balle,  tbat  two  men  mygbt  wel  entre 
attones  frelv* 

JN[  tbe  walle  in  tbe  parte  wbere  due 

Godeffroye  assaylled,  tber  was  a 

XTurke  stronge,  grete  &  bardy,wbicb 

dyde  grete  dommage  to  oure  men,  & 

burte  many  witb  a  strongebowetur- 

quoys  tbat  be  bad,  and  witb  a  lytil  of 

oure  langage  tbat  be  coude  cessed  not  to  saye  euyl 

and  discourage  tbem  tbat  assaylled  &  called  tbem 

cowardes.fiit  bapped  tbat  due  Godeffroye  sawe  it 

126 


I 


andauysed  bymmany  tymes  &wasmerueyllously 
displesyd  with  bym,  and  thought  how  he  mygbt 
cbevyssbe  to  be  at  his  easejSFRetoke  in  his  hand  a 
arbalestegoodandmygbty,and  held  it  bent  til  the 
XTurk  camagayn  &  abandouned  bym.'Cbeductoke 
,bis  sygbtandmarkeandsbotteat  bym,andsmote 
Jhym  right  tburgb  the  bely,  that  he  ryl  doun  to  the 
ground  fro  the  walle.  Hbe  crye  and  the  sbowtyng 
began  gretein  the  boosteand  tbeioyeXbe  due bad 
Igrete  honour  andmany  good  prayers  tberforeXbe 
other  Sarasy  ns  that  were  on  t  r>at  other  parte  of  this 
deffenceweremocbeabas8bed&ferd,thattbeydef- 
f  ended  them  the  more  cowardly, 

SjRe  other  that  were  in  the  other  par- 
tyes  of  the  toun  caste  fro  the  tours 
stones  vpon  our  peple  that  were  atte 
assault,  &  hurte  many  with  castyng, 
sbotyng,&  tbrowyng  vpon  oure  en- 
gyns  pytcbe,oyleandgrecealleboyll- 
yng,  and  tbrewe  also  brondes  and  other  tbynges 
brenny  n  g  moche  thy  eke,  in  su  cbe  wyse  that  somme 
they  brente.  Hbey  that  assaylled  on  the  partye  of 
therle  of  'Cbolouse,attbetourtbatIsaydtoyou  to 
.  fore,  laboured  sore  for  to  myne  the  walle,  but  one 
vty  tbyng  destroubled  them  sore,  what  someuer  they 
brak  on  the  day,  they  within  made  it  again  in  the 
nyght,  in  suche  wise  that  they  were  in  wylle  to  leu* 
it,  and  wrought  more  slowly  tr>an  they  dyde  byf ore. 
Qlberf ore  a  moche  valyaunt  knyght  of  the  hooste 
of  tbej^ormans  cam  right theder and  admonested 
the  assay  lers  for  to  goo  forth.  Repassed  the  dy  cbe 
tof  ore  with  bis  helm  laced,  the  shelde  vpon  his  heed, 

127 


rf 


! 


&  brak  vygorously  the  walle  where  as  tbellurkes 
bad  made  agayn.  But  tber  was  none  tbat  f  olowed 
bym,  and  tbey  of  tbe  wallys  tbrewe  sogrete  stones 
on  bim  &  so  tby  eke  tbat  tbey  slewe  bym  in  tbe  pre- 
►senceof  tbeotber  tbat  were  by,&  after  witb  bookes 
and  crocbettes  tbey  drewe  tbe  bodye  vp  to  tbem  on 
tbe  walk,  and  tbere  disarmed  bym,  and  tbrewe  tbe 
bodye  toour  pepleXbenneour  men  tbat  were  tbere 
toke  tbe  body,  and  buryed  it  worsbipf  ully*  Re  was 
mocbe  bewaylled  in  tboost  of  cristen  men, 
f)ow  aftermany  assaultes^ouremen  beingin  coun- 
sey  I,  a  Lorn  bard  cam  to  tbem,  wbicbe  offred  to  make 
an  engyne  tbat  sbold  destroye  tbe  toun,  capitulo 

IfiejSJ^S  sawe  tbe  barons  tbat 
tbey  loste  mocbe  peple  witb  tb- 
assault,anddydebutlitilbarme 
witb  tbeyrengyns  vntotbetoun 
and  tbeyr  enemy  es,&  assembled 
for  to  make  counseyl  bow  tbey 
mygbt  doojj?Cbere  cam  a  man 
to  tbem,  a  Lombard,  wbicb  bad 
seen  tbe  grete  burte  and  losseof  our  peple,  &  sayd 
to  tbe  barons  tbat  be  was  a  good  maister  to  make 
engyns,yf  be  mygbt  baue  stuff  and  maters  tberto 
propice  and  necessary,  wbicb  witb  goddes  belpe 
sbold  in  sbort  tyme  ouertbrowe  tbe  tour  wbere  to 
tbey  bad  don  so  mocbe  payne,  and  wold  make  large 
waye  for  toentre  in  to  tbe  toun  wbosowolde.'Cbey 
tbat  berde  bym  promysed  bym  tbat  be  sbold  bauc 
alle  tbat  sbold  be  nedeful,  &yet  a  goodrewardand 


rycbe  for  bis  laboure.  XTbis  maister  toke  werhmen 
and  made  tbem  to  werke  as  be  commaunded,  tbat 
in  sbort  tyme  be  bad  made  bis  engyn,  wbicbe  was 
merueillously  strong  &  grete,  and  ioyned  it  to  tbe 
walle  alle  f ul  of  men  of  armes  and  footemenXbey 
tbat  were  on  tbe  walles  vpon  tbe  tour  tbrewe  witb 
gretemy  gbt  grete  stones  andfyre  brennyng  mocbe 
tbycke,  but  tbengrynewassostrongeandrude,  tbat 
tbe  strokesdyde  it  nobarme,netbefyermygbt  not 
fastne  on  it 

RHJS"  tbey  of  tbe  toune  apperceyued 
vu  tbat  tbeycoude  not  noyetbisengyn, 
( tbey  were  sore  a/f  erde,  and  discour- 
\  aged  merueyllously,and  alle  in  des- 
j  payrejiSFOur  men  trau ey  lied  to  tbey r 
cl  power  to  take  oute  tbe  grete  stones 
atte  f  ote  of  tbe  walleof  tbe  toure,  Hnd  vndersetted 
it  witb  strongstancbons&grete^ban  tbey  bad  so 
mocbemyned  tbat  tbem  semedtbat  itwasynowgb, 
tbey  tofce  tbeyr  babyllemens  and  sette  tbem  f erre 
fro  tbe  walle,  &  tbenne  put  fyer on  alle  sydes  vnder 
tbe  toure,  &  wytbdrewe  tbem  to  tbeir  babyllemens 
and  to  tbengynes  alle  in  sauf  te,  wbicbe  were  agrete 
way  of.  Hbout  mydnygbt  tbe  fyre  bad  soo  brente 
and  wrought  tbat  tbis  tour  fylle  doun  to  tbertbe 
witb  so  grete  a  noyse  and  tempeste  tbat  it  semed 
tbat  alle  tbertbe  trembled,  and  tbere  was  none  but 
be  bad  grete  borrourandfeerinbisberte^Oure 
peple  made  bastely  do  sowne  tbe  trumpettes,  and 
crye  to  armes  for  to  come  dilygently  to  tbassault* 


hi 


129 


Row  after  that  this  engyn  bad  so  wel  wrought, 
the  wyf  of  Solyman,  with  two  of  ber  cbilderen, 
wente  out  of  the  toun  and  were  taken  by  our  men, 
capitulo  Ixij^A^ 

r>6  wyf  of  Solyman,  tbat  longe 
bad  be  in  mesease  of  drede,  bad 
so  grete  feere  tbat  almost  sbe 
deyde  for  drede,  and  sayde  sbe 
myofbt  no  lenger  see  itnesuffre, 
and  made  sodanly  make  redy  a 
vessel,  and  put  it  on  tbelake  tor 
tescape  by  nygbtButourepeple 


tbat  were  in  tbe  sbippes  for  to  kepe  tbe  water  fro 
tbeyr  enemyes  cam  ayenste  ber,  and  toke  tbe  lady 
witn  ber  two  sones  tbat  sbe  bad  with  ber  tbenne  in 
ber  companye,  Oey  presented  tbem  in  tbe  morn- 
yng  to  fore  tbe  barons,  Oey  made  tbem  to  be  kept 
rigbt  surely  witb  tbe  other  prisoners  tbat  tbey  bad, 
Cbe  burkes  in  tbe  toun  were  tbenne  in  grete  mes- 
cbief ,  as  wel  for  tbentre  tbat  was  so  grete  &  brode, 
as  for  tbeir  lady  tbat  tbey  bad  loste;  tbenne  tbey 
axed  trewes  for  to  speke  to  tbe  barons  togyueouer 
tbe  toun  &  tbem  self  in  to  tbeyr  ban desj^ Latins, 
tbe  Greek  of  wbom  X  baue  spoken  to  fore,  wbicbe 
was  mocbe  double  &  malycious,  spak  to  tbe  noble 
men  tbat  bad  tbe  gouemaunceof  tbe  toun  in  coun- 
seyl,  and  sbewd  to  tbem  tbat  tbyse  pylgryms  were 
straungers  of  ferre  countrees  and  euyl  and  cruel 
men,  and  sbold  doo  to  tbem  alle  tbe  barme  tbey 
mygbt,  and  destroy  e  tbe  peple&tbe  londe,  yf  tbey 
yelded  tbe  cyte  to  tbem.  But  and  yf  tbey  wold  ad- 


^n 


uowe  and  take  tbemperour  to  tbeyr  lord,  and  yelde 
tbcm  to  bym  tbeyr  lyues  sauf ,  and  tbeyr  goocies  in 
to  bis  bande,be  sbold  kepe  tbcm  well  6.  saufly,and 
sbold  doo  to  tbcm  grctc  good,  ffor  be  was  tbcyr 
neygbbour.  So  mocbc  sayd  be  and  dyde,  tbat  tbey 
of  tbe  toun  toke  tbeyr  counseyl  and  cam  to  tbe  ba- 
rons, and  sayd  to  tbcm  tbat  tbey  wolde  put  in  tbe 
bandes  of  tbempcrour  tbeyr  lyues  sauf,  tbeyr  bo- 
dyes,  tbe  cyte,  and  tbeyr  godesXbisdisplesydnot 
mocbc  to  tbe  barons,  flP or  tbeyr  entencion  was  for 
to  passe  fortber,  &  boped  tbat  tbemperour  wolde 
departe  tbe  gayn,  proye  and  goodes  of  tbe  toun, 
generally  in  tboost.  J^euertbeles,  to  fore  tbat  tbey 
wolde  graunte  tbem  tbis  tbynge,  tbey  sayde  tbat 
tbey  sbold  delyuer  entierly,  and  doo  come  in  to  tbe 
boost  alle  tbe  prisonnersof  pietcrXTbcremytctbat 
were  in  tbe  castel  of  Civintot,  and  in  lyke  wyse  alle 
tbeotber  tbat  tbey  bad  taken  in  tbesiege,and  tbem 
to  fore  tbat  Solyman  belde.  Hnd  tbis  don,  tbey  a- 
corded  tbat  tbey  sbold  yeld  tbem  to  tbemperour  J9 
XTbenne  tbe  barons,  prynces  and  knygbtes,  &  also 
tbe  comyn  peple,  sen te  by  one  acorde  messagers  to 
tbemperour  tor  to  sygnefye  bym  bow  tbey  of  tbe 
cyte  bad  yelded  tbem  to  bym.  tberf  ore  tbey  scnte 
to  bym,  tbat  be  sbold  send  of  bis  bye  and  noble 
men  witb  grete  nombre  of  pcplef  or  to  rcsseyue  tbe 
toun,  and  tbe  pcrsoncs  of  wbom  tbey  bad  many, 
ffor  tbey  alle  acorded  tbat  tbe  bonour  sbold  be  bis, 
and  tbat  tbe  toun  sbold  come  in  bis  demaync,  and 
tbe  prisonners  at  bis  wylle  jfiTCbey  tbat  bad  ent- 
erprised  tbeyr  vowe  for  taccomplyssbe,  bad  pur- 
posed for  to  departe  fro  tbis  place,  &  to  goo  f  ortb 
vnto  tbe  lande  of  Surye. 

k2  131 


How  tbetnperour  sente  grete  barons  for  to  receyue 
the  sayd  toun  after  that  our  pcplc  bad  acerteyned 
bym  tnat  tbey  wolde  yelde  it,  capitulo  Ivttj^^ 

1RBCB  ioye  bad  tbcmpcrour  of 
tbyse  tidyngesj^He  taryed  not, 
butsmteofbismoostpriuemen, 
as  wel  barons  as  knygbtes,  witb 
grete  quantite  of  men  of  armes, 
tbat  resseyued  tbe  cyte  in  bys 
name,  and  garnyssbed  it  of  alle 
tbynge  tbat  was  nedeful,  and 
jdyde  repayre  tbe  walles  and  alle  tbat  was  broken 
of  tbe  torettes,  Hlle  tbat  euer  tbey  founde  in  tbe 
toune  of  armures,  of  ryebesses,  and  of  vytaylles 
tbey  seased  for  tbetnperour,  and  sente  tbe  prison- 
ners  in  to  ConstantinoblejSTCbemperoursenteto 
euerycb  of  tbe  barons  special  lettres,  presented  to 
tbem  grete  yeftes,  and  tbanketb  tbem  mocbe  of 
tbonour  tbat  tbey  bad  don  to  bym,  &  of  tbis  tbat 
tbey  so  wel  kepte  tbeyr  promesse,  ffor  tbat  toun 
bad  don  grete  gryef  and  anoyaunce  to  tbem  pyre, 
0>e  mene  peple  tbat  mocb  bad  trauaylled  in  tbe 
siege  &  bad  bolpen  witb  grete  courage,  compleyned 
sore,  ffor  tbey  bad  boped  tbat  alle  tbe  bauoyr  and 
goodes  of  tbe  toun  sbold  baue  ben  departed  emonge 
tbem,  but  tbemperours  men  bare  it  alle  away,  and 
tbey  tbat  trauaylled  foritwerenot  rewardidjTCbe 
worde  tbat  was  mocbe  grete  cam  vnto  tbe  barons, 
and  tbey  sayd  tbat  tbey  bad  grete  wronge,  ffor  tbe 
couenauntes  made  bvtwene  tbetnperour  and  tbem 
were  sucbe,  tbat  yf  tbey  gate  in  tbeyr  waye  ony  cy- 
tees  tbat  bad  ben  to  fore  tbemperours,  tbey  sbold 

132 


delyuere  tbe  cyte  and  tbe  londe  to  tbemperour,  but 
tbe  proyesand  gayne  sbold  be  departed  in  tboost. 
Hyenst  tbyse  couenauntes  dyde  tbemperour,  but 
it  was  not  tyme  tbenne  ne  place  to  make  argument 
ne  debate  ayenst  tbe  Grekes,  tberf  or  tbe  noble  men 
made  tbe  comyn  peple  to  tarye,  to  tbende  tbat  tbey 
sbold  not  enpessbe  tbis  pylgremage  j&TLbuQ  was 
suffred  tbat  tbe  wyf  of  Soliman  &  bis  ij  sonesand 
grete  plente  of  prisoners  were  ledde  in  saef te  vnto 
tbemperour,  wbicb  made  mocbe  grete  f  este  to  tbe 
lady  and  ber  cbilderen,  and  as  longe  as  tbey  were 
in  tbe  toun  be  belde  tbem  mocbe  bonorably.  Hf  ter 
in  sbort  tyme  besente  tbem  agayn  toSolyman,alle 
quyte  delyuerd,  witbout  demanding  of  ony  raun- 
son.  XTbis  dyde  be  to  tbende  to  baue  tbe  loue  and 
grace  of  tbe  Oirhes,  in  sucbe  wyse  tbat  tber  was 
bytwene  tbem  a  counseyl  and  acorde  to  gfreue  our 
peple,  and  also  for  anotber  rayson,  tbat  is  to  wete 
yf  tbey  were  in  sucb  poyntof  anotber  cyte or  place, 
tbat  tbe  cristiens  constreyned  so  by  force,  tbat  tbey 
sbold  not  be  af  erd  to  yelde  tbem  f  rely  in  tbe  bande 
of  tbemperour/Cbus  was  taken  tbecyteof  J^ycene, 
tbe  yere  of  tbyncamacion  of  our  lord  a  JVI  Ixxxxvij, 
tbe  xx  day  of  tbe  monetb  of  luyn. 


k3 


133 


->*<- 


Rowourboostdepartedon  tbeyr  iourney,and  bow 
eom  departed  fro  tbeyr  f elawsbip,  and  bow  Soly- 
mandetermyned  tassayte  tbem,capitulo  bciiij,*£*£ 

RG  boost  of  tbe  pylgryms  de- 
partedbytbecommandementof 
tbe  barons,  tbe  iij  daye  to  fore 
tbentree  of  luylle,  fro  tbe  place 
wbere  tbey  bad  bolden  syegejp 
ITbey  wente  two  dayes  to  gydre 
mocnepeasybly,&  after  lodged 
tbem  by  a  brygge  for  tbe  ease  of 
1  tbe  water.  On  tbe  morn,af ter  tbeyr  customme  atte 
spryngyng  of  tbe  day,  tbey  passed  tbe  bryggej^ 
>Duryng  tbederfmesseof  tbenygbt,ffor  it  was  not 
wel  day,  or  perauen  ture,  tbey  departed  wetyn  gly  tbe 
onerrotbeotber,ffor8uymont,tbeducofjNorman- 
dye,  tber le  Steuen  of  Cbar tres,  On  ere  an  d  tberle  of 
Seyn  t  pol  tomed  away  on  tbe  lyft  syde,&  descend- 
ed in  to  a  valeye  named  6uraom,and  lodged  tbem 
tbereaboutnonebyaryuer,wbereaswa8greteplente 
of  water,  TTbere  rested  tbey  al  tbat  nygbt  in  peas, 
but,  neuertbeles,  tbey  made  tbeyr  booste  cbaunge 
tbeyrwatcbediligently.Hlle  tbeotber  tomed  on  tbe 
rigbt  bonde  alle  tbe  day,  and  went  tburgb  a  fayre 
i  countre,  and  lodged  tbem  in  fayre  grete  medowes 
vpon  tbe  water  syde,  and  tbat  one  boost  was  fro 
"tbat  otber  more  tnan  two  myle, 

~}OU]VIHJVbad  bis  berte  swollen,  and 
was  felly  an  angrred  tbat  bebadtbus 
loste  bis  wyf  witb  bis  children  and 
bis  noble  cyte.  Re  commaunded  to 
f olowe  on  re  peple  on  tbe  lyfte  syde,  & 
dydegretepeynetoseebowbemygbt 


grcuc  tbem,  be  bad  witb  bymamocbe  grete  notnbre 
of  men  of  armes  on  borsbafc,  Ris  espyes  were  witb 
tbepylgryms,wbicbetokebeedeofalletbeyrcouyne; 
tbey  dyde  bym  towetetbatoureboostwasdeuyded 
in  two  parties,  and  tbat  tbe  Usee  party  e  was  tomed 
toward  tbe  lyfte  side  ner  to  bym  tban  tbat  otber 
parte.  Rewasmocbegladandioiefulwban  be  berde 
tbysetydnges,be  sawetbat  bewaswel  in  poyntfor 
to  venge  bym,and  bad  bis  men al redy  &  ordeyned 
bis  bataylle  to  poynt  at  tbe  day  sette,  departed  for 
to  befygbte  oure  men. 


r>QS  as  tbe  spryngynge  of  tbe  day 
began  to  clere,  tbe  men  tbat  made  tbe 
watcbe  tbis  nygbt  tbat  were  witb- 
drawen  a  lytil  fro  tboost,  appercey- 
ued  tbem,  and  cryed  to  armes,  and 
blewe  bomes  and  trompettes  mocbe 
affrayedlyXbe  boost  awooksodenly,and  ourmen 
armed  tbem  rigbt  bastely,  and  ordeyned  tbeyr  ba- 
taylles  as  tbey  bad  deuysedXbe  wymmen,  seke- 
men  and  children  were  ledd  a  part  besyde  a  water  al 
fulof  reed,  by  wbicbemenmygbt  not  cometo  tbem, 
to  fore  were  tbey  closed  witb  cartes  and  cbaryottes, 
wberof  tbey  bad  grete  plente.Hnd  after  sente  mes- 
sagers  vnto  tbe  grete  booste,  ffrom  wbicbe  tbey 
were  folyly  departed,  for  to  praye  tbem  tbat  tbey 
dylygently  woldecome  socoure  tnem,ffor  tbey  were 
in  mocbe  grete  paryll  3Hban  tbeyr  bataylles  were 
tbus  renged,  euen  rigbt  tbe  first  day  of  luyllat  tbe 
boure  of  pryme,  be  ye  certayn  tbat  Solyman,  witb 
a  grete  nombre  of  men  of  armes,  estemed  at  two 
bonderd  thousand  wel  armed  topoyntandborsed, 
M  135 


arryued.  'Cber  was  not  one  of  tbem  but  be  was  on 
borsbak.  Oure  peple  were  but  f ewe,  and  tbe  moost 
part  of  tbem  on  foote,&itwasnomerueylletbougb 
tbey  doubted  tbe  comyng  of  tbeyr  enemyes. 
Of  tbe  bataylle  tbat  Solyman  bad  ayenst  som  of 
our  peple  tbat  were  departed  fro  tbeyr  felawsbip 
folyly,  capitulo  lxv,$V2* 

ptlff  tbe  booste  of  tbe  burkes 
smotein  on  our  men,  tbe  noyse 
wasmocbegreteof  busynes,of 
trompes,  of  men,  &  of  borses, 
tbat  none  mygbt  be  berd,  and 
was  grete  bydour  to  bere  tbe 
fyrst  comyngon  of  tbe'Curkes. 
TJbey  sbotte  so  tbycke  vppon 
our  peple  tbat  tbere  was  neuer  rayn  ne  bayl  so  like,  in 
so  mocb  tbat  tber  were  many  burte  of  our  peple  JSF 
(Oban  tbe  firste  route  bad  made  tbeyr  sbotte,  tbe 
'second  route  cam  after,  wbere  moo  arcbyers  were 
tban  to  fore,  and  began  sbote  mocbe  more  tbycke 
tban  may  be  recounted.  Our  knygbtes  sawe  tbat 
tbeyloste  tbeyr  borses  and  tbem  self  by  tbesbotte, 
ana  smote  in  to  tbe  'Curfces  vygorously,  but  tbe 
multitudeof  tbeOirkes  were  so  grete,  tbat  our  men 
bad  grete  dammage,  wbicb  were  but  f ewejgTCbey 
tbat  bad  tbeyr  sbeldes  &  targes  tbey  kept  tbem  som 
wbat,  but  tbey  tbat  were  without  armourmusteflee. 
or  ellys  tbey  bad  be  slayn  emong  tbe  borses,  and 
many  were  slayn  &  burte*  'Cbere  were  slayn  of  oure 
peple,asweloffootemenasofborsemen,twotbou- 
sandXber  was  slayn  a  mocbe  valyauntyong  man, 
noble  and  bardy,  wbicbebad  don  wel  alle  tbat  day, 
136 


Cuyllam,  sone  to  tbc  marquya,  brother  of  Oncre, 

be  waa  amoton  witban  aroweanddydein  tbeplace. 

Hndanotbervalyantman  in  like  wiaenamed Robert 

of  parie,  be  dey  de  by  bia  proweaee/Can  ere  tbat  was 

bardy  made  merueyllea  of  armea,and  abandouned 

bym  aelf ,  as  be  tbat  eette  not  by  bia  lyf.Buymont 

sawe  bym,  and  be  brake  alle  tbe  prees,  and  cam  tbere 

aa  be  was,andtokebymby  tbe  brydle  and  brought 

bymbaMTCbe'Curkessaweouremen  mocbe  burte 

i  and  trauaylled,  and  toke  tbeyr  bowes  on  tbe  lyf te 

arme,  and  after  ran  on  tbem  witbeawerdee  &maces 

\j\  in  sucbewyse  tbat  tbey  ouertbrewe  tbem  &puttbem 

yl  a  bak  vnto  tbeyr  caryageXbere  tbey  belde  tbem  and 

w  bydde  tbem  by  tbe  reed,  and  deflP ended  tbem  vygo- 

rously,andsuffred  tbe  grete  plente  of  TTurkes  dia- 

cbarge  vpon  tbem  one  route  after  another. 

Of  tbe  dilygence  tbat  due  Codeff roy  made  wban 

be  was  aduertieed  berof ,  &  bow  Solyman  waa  dia- 

comfyt  and  bia  bagage  taken,  capitulo  \vo]&& 

jflCIR  barons,  ©odeffroy  tbe  no- 
ble due,  and  tbe  otber  pryncea 
berde  tbyae  tydynges  bow  Buy- 
mont  and  bia  companye  were 
at  aucbe  meacbyef  ,baated  tbem 
sore.  Tiber  cam  to  gydre  tbe  due 
and  bia  ij  bretberen,  Bawdwyn 
_  and  Guatace,  tbe  erle  Raymont, 
Hue  le  JWayne,  &  many  otber  barona  ynowgb.O>c 
peple  a  f oote,  and  tbey  tbat  were  euyl  borsed,  tbey 
lef te  for  to  kepe  tbe  lodgys :  tbey  wente  f ort£>  and 
were  wel  xi  m,  alle  armed  and  wel  boraed  J0  vUban 


tbeyapprocbed  the  placewbere  tbebatayllwas,and 
sawe  tbem  so  put  a  back,  and  bcrdc  tbaffraye  of 
trompes  and  bore,  tbc  pcplc  of  Buymont  espyed 
tbem,  anon  tber  bcrtc  cam  agayn  and  were  entierly 
refressbyd,  and  smote  in  to  tbeir  enemyes  as  tbey 
tbat  notbynge  doubted,  and  began  to  doo  well^ 
Oe  good  bissbopof  puy  was  there,  &  comforted 
of te  tbe  barons  and  the  hnvgbtes  for  tauenge  tbe 
blood  of  tbe  cristen  men  wnicbe  tbenemyes  of  our 
faytb  bad  there  sbedde.  Incontinent  tne  barons 
tbat  cam  smote  in  totbeCurfcessovygoruslytbat 
it  semed  tbat  euericb  mygbt  abyde  tbe  burtbon  of 
tbe  batayle.  "Cbey  slewe  so  many,  and  bete  doun  in 
tbeyr  comynge,  tbat  tbe  other  durst  not  abyde,  but 
flieddawaydiscomfytedXbenoblesfolowedtbem, 
and  cbaced  tbem  wel  iiij  myle,  sleyng  al  tbem  tbat 
tbey  mygbt  atteyne,  and  tbey  f  ounde  many  of  our 
men  prisonners  tbat  tbe  Zurkce  ledde  witb  tbem, 
wbom  tbey  delyuerd, 

"fCSR  tbey  wente  to  tbe  tentes  of 
Solyman,  and  there  tbey  founde  so 

greteplenteofrycbesse6,ofvytayUes, 
of  sheep,  of  horses,  and  other  beestes 
tbat  it  can  not  be  recounted,  robes, 
vayssel,  &  pauyllons  of  dyuerse  col- 
ours and  of  straunge  f acions,  in  sucbe  wyse  that 
tber  was  none  but  be  was  ryebe;  ffor  ye  may  well 
knowe  tbat  ij  c  fA  men  tbat  Solyman  had,  beboued 
grete  plenteof  lodgys  and  of  other  estorementes 
j^Our  peplecam  agayn  m  tooure  tentes  with  grete 
ioye  and  honour,  Cherwere  lost  wel  in  tbat  batayll 
of  our  men  a  f  oote  aboute  a  iiij  JVI,  and  of  borsmen 
138 


but  f  ewe*  Of  the  TTurkes  were  f oimden  dcdc  iij  M., 
and  there  were  of  tbem  many  grete  men,  TTbis  ba- 
taylle  endured  fro  tbe  bour  of  pryme  vnto  nygbe 
none,  and  ofteour  peple  bad  tbe  werse;  if  or,  as  I 
baue  said,  Solyman  bad  ij  c  JA  men,  alle  on  bore- 
bah*  Our  peple  were  but  I JVI  on  borsbah  wban  tbey 
» were  alle  assembled  tbe  one  witb  tbe  other. 

jfJHJS  our  lord  bad  tbus  gyuen  tbis 
victorye  to  bis  peple,tbey  rested  tbem 
in  tbis  fayr  place  wbere  tbe  tentes 
weretbre  dayes;  tbeyrborses  refres- 
sbed  tbem  right  wel  in  tbis  wbyle* 
Of  tbe  armures  &  otber  gayne  mat 
>tbeybad  conquerdvpon  tbeyrenemyes,tbeyarayed 
and  apparaylled  tbem  rigbt  wel  tbat  to  fore  were 
euyl  armed,  JWocbe  wel  dyde  tbey  in  tbis  bataylle, 
and  grete  bonour  bad  tbey  and  sbal  euer  baue,and 
in  especial  tbey  tbat  bere  be  named,  Bawdwyn  le 
Borgb,  TTbomas  de  f edre,  Regnault  de  Beauvaye, 
Gale  de  Cbamont,  CJaste  de  fiedyers,  and  6erart 
de  Cberysy*  Cbenne  was  ordeyned  and  acorded  by 
tbe  barons  and  cryed  in  tboost,  tbat  noman  sbold 
ryde  fro  tbens  f ortb  by  bym  self  without  leue  of 
the  captayns* 


139 


Row  the  tit]  day  after  this  victorye  our  pcplc  went 
forth  on  their  wayc,  and  of  the  grete  mesease  of 
tboost  the  same  day,  capitulo  Ixvij,*?^ 

]fCGRtbis,wban  they  badaby- 
den  there  tbre  dayes,  the  fourth 
daye  f olowyng  by  tymes  to  fore 
!  day,  they  dyde  doo  sowne  tbeyr 
trompetes,  and  wente  forth  on 
I  tbeyr  wayej!?Sytb  they  passed 
Bytbyne,  and  entred  in  to  the 
londe  that  was  named  piside. 
Cbey  trauaylledso  long,thatattbelaatetbey  fonde 
a  contre  mocbe  drye  and  infertile,  without  watere. 
The  tyme  was  mocbe  boot  &  brennyng,  as  it  f all- 
eth  of te  in  luyll j&Zbcy  bad  so  grete  tburat  that 
they  wvet  not  what  to  doo.  The  peple  on  f  ote  spe- 
cially faylled  and  faynted,  alle  for  the  duste,  for 
the  beete,and  for  tburste;  tber  deyed wel  this  same 
day  of  mysease  fyue  bonderd  men  and  wymmen. 
Hnd  knowe  ye  certaynly  that  tber  happed  a  mer- 

ueylloustbyngetbatdayin  the  boost,  tbatwefynde 
nowber  in  none  other  bistorye,  if  or  the  wymmen 
with  cbilde  that  yet  were  not  come  to  tbeyr  terme, 
i  by  thanguyssb  of  the  beete  and  of  the  mesease  of 
tburst,  that  they  were  delyuerd  of  tbeyr  cbiideren 
and  cbilded,  and  not  only  the  pour  wymmen,  but 
the  ryebe  also;  this  was  a  grete  sorow,and  pyte  to 
see.  ^bemen,  that  ought  to  bemore  bard  &  stronge 
ayenst  trauaylle,  wente  tbeyr  moutbes  open,  and 
sought  thaver  and  moysture  tberof,  wbicbe  they 
mygbt  not  baue:  the  beete,  and  also  the  swote  de- 


stroked  tbem.  Y*  sbold  baue  seen  tbe  borses  and 
otber  beestes,  tbat  mygbt  not  goo  f  ortb,  in  sucbe 
wysetbat  tbey  muste  leue  tbem,  wbiebe  deyde  in  tbc 
waye,  boundes  for  tbc  cbacc  and  buntyng,  f owles 
for  tbc  flygbt,  as  ff awcons,  bawkes,  &  sperbawkes, 
yc  sbold  baueseen  tbat  day  abydcand  dcyc*Hnd  in 
,  lyke  wyse  tbc  grctc  stedes  and  cursours,  wbiebe 
were  moost  peryllous,becam  allc  araged  and  wood 
for  tburst,  and  witb  arete  paync  were  ledde  f ortb, 
^RHJ^tbey  bad  ben  longintbismes- 
ease  our  lord  bebeld  tbem  in  py te,  & 
made  tbem  to  adresse  in  to  a  valeye, 
wbere  tbey  fondea  rennyng  water, 
fayr  and  grete;  tbenne  ranne  oure 
peple  to  tbe  brynke  or  ryuagewitb 
Igrete  baste,  JVIany  tberwere  tnat  drank  eo  mocbe 
tbat  tbey  deyde  vpon  tbe  place;  fforsom  of  tbem 
tbat  bad  escnewed  tbe  detb,fonde  it  tberc  by  cause 
tbey  kepte  no  mesure.  Hnd  tbis  fylle  vnto  knygb- 
tes  and  otber  men,  and  beestes,  wbiebe  dranke  as 
mocbe  as  tbey  wolde  jff  Cdban  tbey  were  escaped 
tbis  euyl  aduenture,  tbey  cam  in  to  a  londemocb 
fayr  and  fertile,  fill  of  woodes,  of  ryuers,  of  me- 
dowes,  and  of  good  f  eldes  labourable.  Vb\Q  was 
by  Hntbyocbetbelasse,  wbiebe  is  tbe  cbyef  cyte  of 
tbe  londe  of  pisside;  and  tbere  lodged  tbey  witb 
tbeyr  boost 


■I 


hi 


Row  sommeof  the  grete  barons  of  tboost,  after  to 
baue  approucbedHntyocbe  tbc  lasse,  departed  for 
to  goo  vytaylle  tbem,  capitulo  lxv\ij&& 

~RO  tbens  departed  som  of  tbe 
barons  of  tboost  &  belde  tbeir 
waye,  by  cause  it  was  a  greuous 
tbyng  to  fynde  vytaylles  to  so 
mocbe  peple  to  gydreXbefyrst 
was  Bawdwyn,  brother  to  tbe 
due;  witb  bym  was  peter  tberle 
of  Stadenay,  Reynart  tberle  of 
>Coul,  Bawdwyn  de  Borgb,  &  Guyllebert  de  JVIont- 
cler,  tber  wer  wel  v  C  on  borsbak,  and  ladde  witb 
>tbemmenafotelargelyXbesecondwa80ncre,& 
witb  bym  Rycbard  du  pryncipat,  Robert  d'Hnse, 
and  other  knygbtes  grete  nombre,  tbat  tbey  were 
v  C  on  borsbak,  and  bad  also  many  men  a  footeas 
tbeotber  badjjTCbeyr  entencion  and  purpose  was 
}to  ride  about  tbe  tboost  in  tbe  contre,  for  to  secbe 
somme  aduenture  and  vytaylle;  andyf  tbey  bad 
founde  ony  parylle  of  a  grieuoue  paae,  or  plente 
of  tbeyr  enemyee,  tbat  tbey  wold  lete  tboost  baue 
knowlecbe  tberof .  ITbey  wente  strayte  tbeyr  waye 
and  passed  by  syde  ij  cy tees :  tbat  one  was  named 
Ly  cbonie,  &  tbat  otber  Gradee.  Hfter,  tbey  tomed 
on  tbe  rigbt  bonde  and  passed  toward  tbe  see  side 
\j^€beduc  Oodeffroy  and  tbeotber  prynces  abode 
in  tbeyr  lodgys,  for  tbe  plesaun  t  &  dely  table  places 
f  tbat  tbey  bad  founden,  by  cause  tbey  wolde  playe 
and  ref reasbe  tbem  of  tbe  trauaylles  and  annoyes 
tbat  tbey  bad  suffred.  XTbenne  said  tbey  tbat  tbey 

)woldgoobunteintotbeforestes,wbicbewerenygb 
to  tbem  on  allesydes  and  were  ful  of  wilde  beestes. 
142 


ft  the  mom  tbey  entred  in  the  woode, 
ecbebeldebiswayatbiswilleXbeduc, 
as  bewenteapatb  tburgb  tbeforeste, 
bcrdc  a  man  crye,  &  be  drove  tbeder- 
ward,  and  be  sawe  a  poure  man,  tbat 
was  goo  for  to  f etcbe  wode  for  to  bere 
in  to  tbe  boost,  fiedde  strongly  cryeng  to  fore  a 
grete  bere^'Cbe  due  ran  vpon  bym,and  drewe  bis 
swerd  for  to  delyuere  tbe  pour  man  fro  tbe  beeste. 
Cbenne  tbe  bere  adressyd  bym  vnto  tbe  due,  and 
lef  te  tbe  pour  man  tbat  fiedde  fro  bym ;  be  burte  tbe 
dukes  borssosore  tbat  becastetbe  due  to  tbertbe* 
'Cbe  due  leep  a  foot,  and  drewe  oute  bis  swerde. 
TIbe  beeste  was  notbyng  aferd  of  bym,  but  made 
a  felonnous  crye,  borryble  and  bydous,  and  sytb 
ran  vpon  tbe  due,  and  bote  bym  rigbt  cruelly  in 
tbe  tbye*  Hf  ter,be  adressyd  bym  rigbt  vp,andem- 
braceabym  witb  bis  potes,  or  feet  to  fore,  for  to 
baue  caste  bym  to  grounde*  TIbe  due,  tbus  burt  as 
be  was,  was  yet  mocb  stronpf,  &  fyl  not  to  tbe  ertb 
tbenne,butcaugbtbymbytbeskynabouttbenecke 
witb  bis  lyf  te  bande,  for  to  put  away  bis  beed  from 
bym ;  &  witb  tbat  otber  band  be  put  bis  swerd  in  to 
bis  body,  tburgb  botbe  tbe  sydes  vnto  tbe  crosse, 
an  d  so  slewe  by  m  ♦  Hfter,  be  wen  te  &  sette  by  m  doun 
on  tbertbe  rigbt  by,  ffor  be  bad  so  mocb  bledde  of 
bis  wounde  tbat  be  bad  in  bis  tbye,  &  was  so  mer- 
ueyllously  sore  burte  tbat  be  mygbte  not  stonde 
longeonbisfeet. 


143 


P^nsp§3r>e  poure man,wbicb  be  bad  delyuerd 

rk\3&fK&  ^°  ^ct^f ran  haetclT  *n  t0  t^c  boost 
« &toldetbem  tbistydyngeof  tbeduc. 
Hlle  tbey  that  berdc  it  were  so  effray- 
ed  tbat  tbey  ranne  witb  grete  baste 
tbeder,  tbe  barons,  and  alle  tbe  otber 
tbatmygbt  goo,  XTbey  founde  bym  lyeng  on  tbe 
ground,  pale  &  discoloured;  and  after  tofce  bym  in 
alyttier,  &  bare  bym  in  to  tbe  boostBut  neuerman 
was  more  demened,  ne  more  sorowe  made,  ne  noe 
moo  pytyous  cryes  and  lamentations  tburgb  alle 
tbe  lodgyses,  as  welrycbe  as  poure,  &  men  as  wym- 
men.  Hnon  were  sette  alle  tbe  maistres  and  cirur- 
gensforto  dyebte  bym  and  to  belebym ;  there  were 
many,  ffor  euerycb  of  tbe  prynces  bad  of  tbem  for 
to  awayte  on  tbem  in  tbe  boost 
Here  recountetb  tbystorye  of  somme  aduentures 
tbat  tbenne  fylle  in  tbe  boost  of  cristen  men,  capi- 
tulo  lxxx/&& 


|N  tbis  sayson,tbe  same  tyme,it 
bapped  tbat  another  valyaunt 
man,  named  Raymont,  erle  of 
TTbolouse,  laye  doun  seke  of  a 
maladyemocbegreuous&peryl- 
lous-  JVeuertbelesse,  tbe  booste 
wente  forth  alwey,  TTberfor  he 
muste  be  caryed  forth  in  a  tot- 
tier.  On  a  day  it  bapped  tbat  be  was  so  deteyned  of 
bis  maledye  tbat  certeynly  they  supposed  tbat  be 
sbold  deye,  Tbey  tbat  kepte  bym  made  tbe  littier 
to  be  sette  doun  to  tbe  grounde,ffor  they  sawe  bym 


so  fcblc  that  tbey  tbougbt  certaynly  tbattbesowle 
sbolddeparteXbe  bissbop  of  Orenge,  wbicbewas 
a  mocbe  boly  man  and  a  religyous,  sayd  tbc  com- 
mendation for tbc  sowleand  the  seruyse,as  of  one 
deyen&saufsyngyngmassejisrailetbeboostwas 
ouermocbe  discomforted  by  cause  tbey  supposed 
alle  tbat  anon  and  sodanly  to  lese  tbise  two  grete 
men,  wbicbe  were  of  mocbe  grete  counseyl  and  of 
greteaydeXbeymadeprayersandorysonstburgb 
alle  tboost,  wbere  as  tbey  songemassesXbe  ryebe 
and  tbe  pour  praydemocbe  bumbly  andwitbgood 
berte,  tbat  our  lord  wold  rendre  tbem  bool  &  sauf , 
for  to  socoure  &  counseyle  tbem  as  tbey  bad  nede. 
Cbe  barons  departed  in  cbaryte  largely  almesse 
vnto  tbe  pour  peple.So  mocbe  dyde  tbey,  one  &  tbe 
otber,  tbat  oure  lord,  wbicbe  is  f ul  of  pyte,  berde 
tbem  and  gaf  beltbe  to  tbe  twonoble  men  in  sbort 
tyme,  in  sucbe  wyse  tbat  tbey  rood  al  bool,  and  in 
qood  poynt  witb  tbooste, 

F)6Y  passed  al  pissyde&  after  en- 

tred  in  to  a  lande  named  Ly caone,  & 

cam  vnto  a  cyte  called  Licoine;  tbey 

f oundeit  alle  voyde,  ^notbyng  tber- 

in,  'Cbey  bad  grete  meseases  of  vyt- 

J  aylle,  ffor  tbe  Curkes,  wbicbe  bad 

berde  tbe  tydynges  tbat  ourepeple  cam,trusted  in 

none  of  tbeyr  fortresses,  but  voyded  tbem  &  fkdde 

in  to  tbe  forestes  and  montaynes,men,  wymmen  & 

cbilderen,  borses,  beestes,  vytaylle,  and  alle  otber 

tbyngtbey  caryed  witb  tbem  jSFCbeysuffredmocbe 

disease  to  passe  tbat  con  tre ;  tbey  cam  in  to  Graclee, 

and  after  cam  in  to  a  cyte  namedjVlaraseXbere  tbey 

li  H5 


lodged  and  soiourned  tbrc  dayes,  Bawdwyn,  bro- 
ther of  the  due,  that  was  departed  fro  the  boost, 
lefte  bis  wyf  with  bis  two  bretberen.  Sbe  deyde  tbere 
of  sefcenesse,  sbe  was  an  bye  lady  of  Gnglond,  val- 
yaunt,  wyse,  and  good,  Gutiera  was  ber  name,  Sbe 
was  buryed  and  enteered  mocbe  honorably  in  tbe 
same  place,  Sbe  was  mocbe  bewaylled  in  tbe  boost. 
Row  Cancre  tbat  was  departed  fro  tbe  boost,  as- 
sieged  TTarse,  and  toke  it  by  certeyn  couenaunt,ca- 
pitulo  lxx&,& 

JSCRG,  wbyebe  was  a  wyse 
man,  and  of  grete  courage,  rode 
itburgb  tbe  londe  sekyng  auen- 
ture,in  sucbe  wyse  tbatbef onde 
in  bis  waye  a  cy te  called  TTarse, 
XTbis  londe  of  Scylyceisacoun- 
treof  tboryent,  toward  tbe  son- 
-negooyng  doun,In  tbis  londe 
ben  twoo  grete  cytees,  wbicbe  ben  arcbebissbop- 

ncbs,tbatonenamedt:ar8e,ofwbicbl9aidtofore; 
therm  was  bom  seyntpoul  tbappostleXbat  oth- 
er was  namedHnauazie,  Hnd  eche  of  thise  two  cv- 
tees  baue  other  cytees  vnder  them,  XTarse  founded 
>oneof  the  cbildmnofJVoe,Ionen,  wbicbe  was  sone 
of  lapbet,  the  sone  of  JVoej^JVeuertbeles,  Solins 
say tb  that  person*  founded  it,  but  it  maye  be  wel 
►  tbat  one  founded  it,  and  tbat  other  repayredand 
amended  it  j*  Oncre  assieged  tbis  cyte,  and  con- 
streyned  them  within,  what  by  menaces  and  f avr 
wordes,  that  they  yelded  it  to  hym  in  a  manere, 
bey  sette  his  banere  vpon  tbe  hyest  toure  of  tbe 


i  toun,  and  be  swar  and  aff ermed  to  kepetbem  from 
^damage  and  burte;  nc  non  sbold  be  put  out  of  bis 
bows,  ne  Use  ony  tbyng  tbat  apperteyned  to  tbem 
vnto  tbe  comynge  of  tbe  grete  boost,  and  tbenne 
sbold  tbey  yelde  tbe  toun  vnto  tbe  grete  prynces  of 
tboost  without  ony  debatej^PCbus  was  it  acorded 
bytwene  bym  and  tbem  of  tbe  toun.  In  tbis  toun 
were  cristen  men,  fiermyns  and  6rekes,and  in  alle 
tbe  londe  about  But  tbe  €urke  belde  alle  tbe  for- 
tresses tbat  medledwitb  armes,and  bad  tbe  seyg- 
noryevpon  tbis  peple,  and  wold  not  suffre  tbem  of 
>notnyng,  sauf  tooccupyeand  laboure  tbertbe,and 
for  to  marcbaunte  to  bye  and  selle* 
T)owBawdwyn,brotberof  6odeffroy,secbyng  bis 
auentures,  sawe  Oncre  &  bis  peple  to  fore  TTarse, 
'and  adressed  bym  to  tbem,  capitulo  tocj>P>P 

jH<nD<KlYJV,  brother  of  tbe  due, 
and  tbe  peple  tbat  be  ledde  witb 
bym,  were  entred  in  to  a  countre 
moost  barayn,  wbere  tbey  suf- 
f  red  grete  peyne  f  or  vy  tay  lle.Hf  - 
ter,  tbey  cam  vpon  a  montayne, 
wbere  tbey  mygbt  see  alle  tbe 
londe  of  ©cilice,  and  tbe  cytees 
vnto  tbe  see*  XTbey  sawe  ^arse  nygb  tbem,  and  tbe 
pauyllons,  and  tbey  supposed  tbat  tbey  bad  be 
Curkes  tbat  bad  assieged  tbe  cyteXbey  descended 
doun  for  to  knowe  wbat  peple  tbey  were,  and  also 
for  tenquere  tbe  beyng  of  tbe  countre  about  0>ey 
tbat  were  witb  tlancre,  in  tbauaunt  garde,  sawe 
tbyse  men  of  armes  approucbe,  and  lete  tbeyr  lord 
baue  knowlecbe,  Oncre  wende  certaynly  tbat  tbey 
1 2  H7 


bad  be  TTurfces,  tbat  cam  f or  tosocoure  tbem  of  tbc 
toun,  and  made  ecbe  man  to  arme  bym  dylygently, 
and  sette  tbem  in  ordenaunce;  &  after  yssued  out 
ayenst  tbem,  tbe  baners  displayed.  Butwban  tbey 
approucbed  tbat  one  to  tbe  other,  and  knewe  ecbe 
otber  by  tbe  armes,  tbey  opened  tbeyr  belmes  and 
embraced  ecbe  otber,  &  made  mocbe  grete  ioye,  and 
after  cam  to  tbe  cyte.Hnd  tbenne  Bawdwyn  was  by 
TTancrerigbt  wel  &  honourably  lodged,  ffor  TTan- 
cre  bad  arete  plente  of  vytaylles,  of  wbicbe  Bawd- 
wyn and  bis  peple  bad  grete  nede. 
Of  tbenuye  tbat  Bawdwyn  and  bis  peple  bad  tosee 
tbebanerof  Tancrevpon  tbewalleof  tbe  toun, and 
bow  Tancre  departed,  capitulo  Ixxxi)^,*? 

"N"  tbe  mornewban  tbesonne  was 
vp,  &  deer  daye,  Bawdwyn  and 
tbey  tbat  were  witb  bym  sawe 
tbe  baner  of  On  ere  vpon  tbe 
byest  tour  of  tbe  toun.Hnd  bad 
tberof  mocbe  grete  enuye,  &  be- 
gan to  murmure  and  speke  ma- 
_  uciouslyof  tbat  tbey  bad  gretter 
power,  and  moo  peple  and  better,  and  said  tbat 
,  tbey  ougbte  to  baue  tbe  worship  of  this  toun.Itis 
troutbe  tbat  vnto  this  day  there,  Bawdwyn  and 
'XTancre  bad  ben  lyke  two  bretberen,in  mocbe  prvue 
acqueyntaunce  and  trewe  loue,  but  Bawdwyn,  bv 
,  enuyeof  bis  berte,and  by  euyl  wordes  tbat  som  of 
bis  men  made  bym  to  vnderstonde,  was  tbus  of 

tbistbyngemeuydXancrcwbicbewasmocbewyse, 
Dattemperat  and  resonable  man,  vnderstode  tbise 
wordes,  and  dyde  mocbe  payne  for  tapese  bym. 

I40 


Hnd  cam  in  persone  to  Bawdwyn,  &  sbewde  bym 
bowe  to  fore  that  be  was  comen,  ne  tbat  noman 
kneweofbiscomyngeweretbysecouenauntesmade 
by twene  bym  and  tbem  of  tbe  toune, and  bis  baner 
sette  vpon  tbe  toure,  and  berin  be  vnderstodenot 
tbatbemygbtbaueonysbamenedisbonour.Bawd- 
wyn  was  not  content  of  tbise  wordes,  &  be  f  ounde 
somme tbat  attysed  bym in  bis  f otye;  bes^ak  grete 
(wordes,  ylle  and  iniuryouses,  to  Can  ere,  in  sucbe 
wyse,  tbat  witb  lytil  more  tbey  wolde  baue  don 
armed  tbeyr  men  tor  to  baue  destroyed  ecbe  otber, 
RejSfJSfe  sente  Bawdwyn  for  tbem 
of  tbe  toun,  and  wban  tbey  cam  be 
menaced  tbem  strongly,&saide  tbat 
tbey  sbold  tbrowe  doun  tbe  baner  of 
Cancre  to  tbertbe,  &  sette  vp  bis  on 
J  tbe  tour :  and  yf  tbey  dyde  not,  tbey 
sbold  welknowe  tbat  be  wold  destroye  tbem,  A  alle 
tbat  tbey badwitbouttbetoun,&taketbetoun and 
caste  itto  tbertbe,maulgre  alle  tbatCancre  mygbt 
doo^Cbeyoftbecytesawetbat€ancremygbtnot 
waraunte  nedeff ende  tbem  ayenstBawdwyn,made 
witb  bym  sucbe  couenauntes  as  tbey  bad  made  to 
fore  witb  Can  ere,  and  sette  bis  baner  wbere  as  be 
commaunded/Cancre  saw  tbe  force  tbat  was  don  to 
bym,  and  was  gretely  desplesyd,  &bad  grete  yrein 
bis  berte.But  be  couerd  bis  tbougbt  wysely,&  wold 
notsuffretbepeple,tbatwere  comen  in  tbispylgre- 
mage  for  to  make  warre  ayenst  tbenemyes  of  tbe 
faytboflbesuCrist,sboldsleeecbeotberfortboc~ 

casionof  bym  j0V>t  departed  fro  tbis  place,  flr or  be 

doubted  tbat  somme  noyseor  medlemygbt  sourde 

1 3  H9 


hcroff  and  cam  to  a  cyte  nygb  by,  named  fldane. 
vbere  mygbt  be  not  entre,  ifor anoblc  man  of  Bur- 
goyn,  named  Gelpbes,  was  parted  fro  tboost  witb 
a  grete  route  of  men  of  armes  as  tbe  otber  dyde 
f or  toseke  auentures,  and  be  bad  taken  tbis cyte  bv 
force,  and  bad  caste  out  tbe  burkes,  and  belde  it 
entierlyj^rancre  berde  tbatsommeof  our  peple 
belde  it,  & sente good messagers  to Gelpbes;  and 
prayd  bym  to  opene  tbe  yates,  and  suffre  bis  men 
that  tbey  mygbt  goo  in  to  tbe  toun  for  to  bye  to 
tbem  sucbe  as  tbey  nededj^tlbis  <3elpbes  dvde  it 
debonayrto,  and  bym  self  gaf  to  tbem  largely  ifor 
nought,  ifor  be  bad  founde  tbe  toun  ful  of  crold 
and  syluer,  of  robes,  of  beestes,  of  wbete,  of  wyne, 
of  oyle,  and  of  alle  good  tbat  a  man  bad  nede  of. 
How  a  lytil  after  Tancrecam  to  tbe  cyte  of  Hnam- 
ystre,  wbicbe  tbeOirkes  belde  it,and  toke  it  bvas- 
eault,  capitulo  Ixxiij^/^  y 

HJ^CRG  on  tbe  mom  toke  leue 
of  bis  booste,  and  toke  bis  way 
witb  bis  peple,  &  rode  so  f  er  tbat 
be  cam  to  a  cyte  named  Hnamy- 
stre.  Cbis  was  one  of  tbe  beste 
cy  tees  of  tbat  londe,  it  was  f  ayr 
&  mocbe  delytable.  XTancre  cam 
J  tneaer,and  knewe  certevnlvthat 
tbe  XTurkes  belde  it;  be  assieged  it  al  aboute,  &  fro 
tbe  tyme  tbat  be  cam  be  assay  lied  tbe  toun.  Tbus 
be  dyde  tbe  first,  tbe  second,  and  tbe  tbirde  dav  •  so 
many  assaultes  be  made  to  tbem,  and  burted  tbem 
of  tbe  toun,  tbat  tbey  were  strongly  greuyd  and  a- 


bassbed.  Oey  without  toke  the  toun,  and  entred 
vnder  tbc  walles,  and  thus  was  the  toun  taken  by 
force,  and  alle  tbem  tbat  be  f  onde  tberin  of  betben 
peple  be  put  to  detb  without  mercy.  Hbe  toun  was 
ful  of  ryebesses,  and  alle  maner  of  vytaylles  were 
grete  plente.  Han  ere  departed  al  tbe  aayn  and  tbe 
goodes  of  tbe  toun  to  bis  men,  as  be  tbat  wel  knewe 
bow  tbat  be  sbold  doo,  and  to  ecbe  man  after  tbat 
be  was,  in  sucbe  wyse  tbat  alle  bis  men  were  ryebe. 
Xbey  refressbed  tbem  mocbe  wel,  &  tbeyr  beestes, 
of  tbemesease  tbat  tbey  badsuffred  in  tbeyr  waye. 
jj^Hbey  soioumed  tbere  a  grete  wbyle  witb  mocbe 
grete  deduyt. 

\TioxQ  Bawdwyn  entred  in  Orse,  and  bow  iiiC  of 
four  pylgryms  were  slayn  of  tbe  turkes  to  fore  tbe 
same  toun,  capitulo  Ixxiitj^^ 

(HaOOlYN  s^we  tbat  Xmcre 
was  departed  fro  Harse,  &  sen  te 
for  tbem  of  tbe  toun  &  sayde  to 
tbem  tbat  tbey  sbold  lete  tbem 
entre  in  to  tbe  toun,  ffor  bym 
tbougbt  sbame  to  lye  long  and 
abyde  tbere  ydle  without  doyng 
ony  tbyng,  tyl  tbe  comynge  of 
tbe  grete  boostXbey  sawe&aduysed  weltbat  tbey 
badnot  powerynougb  to  resiste  tbem,and  tbougbt 
yf  tbey  lete  tbem  not  entre  witb  tbeyr  agreement 
tbat  tbey  wold  entre  ayenst  tbeyr  wylle  and  witb 
w  forceXbennetbey  opened  tbeir  gates,  &  wold  tbat 
^  Bawdwyn  sbold  baue  two  toures  where  be  sbold 
lodge,  and  other  of  tboste  in  tbe  bowses  in  tbe  toun 
alle  peasibly  Xbe^urkes  tbat  bad  tbe  sey  gnorye  of 
1 4  '51 


the  toun  beldeyet  tbe  other  towres  in  tbeyr  puis- 
8aunce,tbeybadinmocbegretedoubteandsuspec- 
tion  Bawdwyn  and  bis  men  that  were  lodged  in  tbe 
toun,  &  tbey  thought  that  they  sbold  haue  no  so- 
cours.  Hnd  aboue  this  tbey  bad  moche  grete  drede 
of  tbe  grete  boost  that  shortly  sbold  arryue  there, 
and  sought  emonge  them  tbe  moyens  and  maner 
>bow  tbey  mygbt  yssue  oute  of  tbe  toun,  and  lede 
7witb  them  tbeyr  wyues  and  childeren  with  tbeyr 
>ryncipal  bagues  and  jewellys. 

XL  bapped  that  this  same  nygbt  tbre 
bonderdmen  afotetbat  were  depart- 
ed fro  Buymont  for  to  folowe'Cancre 
arryuedalle  to  fore  this  cyte  of  TTar- 
se,  where  tbey  thought  to  fynde  bym. 
1  Cdban  Bawdwyn  knewe  what  peple 
,tbey  were&tbat  tbey  wente  in  tbaydeof  TTancre,be 
wold  not  suffre  them  to  entre  in  to  tbe  toun.  "Cbey 
were  wery  and  trauaylled  and  prayde  bym  moche 
swetly,and  cryed  bym  mercy  many  tymes,  that  for 
tbe  loue  of  god  be  wold  doo  so  moche  that  tbey 
mygbt  this  nygbt  be  lodged  in  tbe  toun,  ffor  tbey 
woldnotbyngbutgood,fierof  tbefoteman  of  bis 
companye  prayde  bym  in  lyke  wise,  but  be  wold  in 
nowyse  here  tbem.  jNeuertbeles  by  cause  tbey  with- 
out bad  mesease,  tbe  mene  peplein  tbe  toun  aualed 
doun  with  cordes,  breed  ynougb,  &  wyn  in  barellys, 
and  other  vytaylles,  with  wbicbe  tbey  mygbt  wel 
passe  this  nygbt 


152 


BP 


F>HJNf  our  pcplc  were  a  slepe  in  the 
toun,  and  they  without  began  tbeyr 
firstsleep,itbappedtbattbeCurkes 
that  were  witbin  tbe  toures  opened 
the  yates  of  wbicbe  they  bad  tbe 
_  keyes  secretely  witboute  noyse,  and 
ledde  outtbeyr  wyues,  tbeyr  children,  andalletbeir 
tbyngsJindalltbebetben  men  of  tbetoun  thought 

they  were  not  sure  with  tbeyr  gbestes,  and  yssued 
out  of  alle  the  toun,  (Hban  tbeyr  wyues  &  children 
were  witbdrawen  a  ly  til  fro  the  toun ,  they  wolde  leve 
tokenes  cruellandylleof  tbeyr  departyng;  they  cam 
vntotbethre  bondred  pylgrims  tbat  laye  witboute 
gate  and  slepte  strongly  as  they  that  doubted  of 
notbyng,  &  put  them  alle  to  deth  and  slewe  them ; 
yf  ony  of  them  escaped  be  was  happy* 
fiowtbepepleofBawdwynknewetbedepartyngof 
tbe  TTurkes,  and  of  the  slaughter  of  tbe  cristen 
men,  capitulotocv,*?,*? 

HSiN  the  mome  erly  when  oure  men 
awoke  in  the  toun  they  sawe  the 
toures,  where  the  TTurkes  bad  be 
lodged,open  &  the  bowses  voide. 
€hey  knewe  wel  tbat  they  were 
fledae ;  they  serched  tbe  walles 
&  yates  for  to  enquyre  how  they 
-\  were  goon,  XTbey  wente  so  ferre 
tbat  they  f onde  this  greteoccision  and  slaughter  at 
the  gateXhenne  began  a  sorow  and  a  moche  grete 
crve  in  thetoun  ;allemen  put  tbe  blame  and  culpe  on 
Bawdwyn  &  bys  knygbtes,  ffor  they  wold  auenge 
the  deth  of  tbeyr  bretberen,  whom  the  Sarasyns 


badso  sbamely  &vylaynously  slayn,  by  cause  tbat 
tbc  knygbtes  of  Bawdwyn  and  also  be  bym  self 
wold  not  suffre  tbem  to  come  in  to  tbe  toun,  Hnd 
in  dede  tbe  m en  of  f  oo te  say d  tbis  was  don  by  arete 
oultrage  and  grete  falsbede,  and  yf  tbey  bacf  not 
lygbtly  witbdrawen  tbem  in  totbetoures,tbey  bad 
smy  ten  tbem  alle  to  detb,  rbe  knygbtes  belde  tbem 
alle  stylle  tyl  tbat  tbe  footemen  were  cooled,  and 
aftersente  messagerswbicbe  spak  to  tbem  and  re- 
quyred  tbem  to  forbere  so  longtyl  tbat  Bawdwyn 

badspokentotbemXbeywerecontenttobereBaw- 
dwyn  speke;  Bawdwyn  excused  bym  to  fore  alle,& 

swar&affermedtbatfornoneotbertbyngetbentre 
was  deffended  tbem,  but  for  tbat  be  bad  sworn  to 
tbem  of  tbe  toun,  tbat  by  bym  sbold  none  entre  tyl 
tbe  grete  booste  cam.  By  tbyse  wordes  and  by  cause 
otber  entermeted  to  make  tbe  peas  and  spoken  de- 
bonayrly  to  tbe  menepeple,  was  Bawdwyn  acorded 
tomefootemen  and  bis  knygbtes  also, 

"jj^  tbis  toun  tbey  soioumed  &  abode 
a  certayn  wbyle,  vntyl  a  mornynge 
tbey  sawe  in  tbe  see  nygbe  tbem  a 
sbippe  abou  te  iii  my  le  fro  tbem :  tbev 
yssuedouteof  tbe  toun  &  descended 
to  tbe  see,  Tbey  tbat  werein  tbe  sbip 
approcbed  to  tbem  m  sucbe  wyse  tbat  tbey  spak 
>to  gydre,  Tbey  of  tbe  sbip  sayde  tbat  tbev  were 
crtsten  men;  tbey  demaundedof  wbat  contre,and 
tbey  answerd  of  f  laundres,  of  fiolande,  &  of  f rv- 
selande,  Hnd  troiitb  tt  was  tbey  bad  be  escumours 
of  tbe  see  and  robbers  tbe  space  of  viij  yere.  Now 
tbey  repented  tbem,  &  by  penaunce  cam  in  py  <?re- 


mage  to  IberusalemXbey  desyred  tbem  to  come  a 
londe,  and  tbey  cam  and  made  to  gydre  grete  ioye. 
Hbey  bad  a  maister  ouer  tbem  named  Guynemer, 
and  was  bom  of  Boloyne  vpon  tbesee  in  tbe  londe 
of  erle  Gustace,  fader  of  tbe  said  due  Godeffroy. 
GIban  be  berde  tbat  Bawdwyn  tbesoneof  bis  lord 
wastbere,be  lefte  bissbip  &  said  bewold  goo  witb 
bym  tolberusalem.  Rewasmocberycbeof  tbiseuyl 
gayne,  and  bad  many  men  witb  bym  tbat  be  laddetn 
bis  snip.  Hbenne  Bawdwyn  lef  te  v  C  men  of  armes 
for  to  kepe  tbetoun  wel  in  poynt,  and  after  be  toke 
bis  way  for  to  seke  somme  auentures  as  be  dyde 
to  fore* 

G  belde  tbe  rygbt  way  til  be  cam  to 
tbe  cy  te  of  Hnamy  ster,wbicbe  Han  ere 
baddfoten  by  force  of  armes  vpon  tbe 
Oirkes,  as  I  baue  sayd  you  to  fore. 
Bawdwyn  tbougbt  wel  tbat  be  wold 
I  not  lete  bym  entre  in  to  tbe  cyte,  and 
tberfor  be  lodged  bym  in  tbe  gardynsaboutXan- 
creknewe  tbat  Bawdwyn  wbicbe  loued  bimnotwas 
so  ny gb  bym,  and  be  bad  not  f  orgoten  tbe  wronge 
and  tbe  oultraofe  tbat  Bawdwyn  bad  don  to  bym. 
tTbenne  be  dyde  do  arme  bis  men,  and  sayde  tbat 
tbmnewastymefortovengebym,fForbewasnygb 
bis  retrayt,  and  Bawdwyn  was  f er  fro  bis  J&TLbzy 
sente  arcbiers  to  fore  in  grete  nombre  for  to  burte 
and  slee  tbeyr  borses,  wbicbe  tbey  bad  sente  in  to 
tbe  pastures.  Han  ere  bad  witb  bym  fyue  bonderd 
men  of  armes  in  good  poynt  and  wel  borsed,  and 
smoteinsodanlyin  to  tbe  pepleof  Bawdwyn  wbicbe 
were  not  aduysed  of  tbem.  Hbey  slewe  many  and 

155 


moo  tbey  burted;  the  men  of  Bawdw^n  ran  bastely 
to  arme  tbcm  and  cam  and  f  ougbt  witb  tbcm  tbat 
ran  by  tbc  tentes.  Cbere  began  a  bataylle  bytwene 
tbem  mocbe  grete&  tiers,  but  it  endured  not  longe, 
If  or  Can  ere  bad  not  so  grete  plente  of  peple  tbat 
mygbt  endure  ayenst  tbe  men  of  Bawdwyn,  tber- 
for  tbey  wold  witbdrawe  tbem  in  to  tbeyrtoun,but 
tbeyr  enemyes  encbassed  tbem  strongly  so  mocbe 
tbat  tbey  muste  flee.  Cbere  was  a  brygge  ouer  a 
water  bytwene  tbe  boosteand  tbe  cyte;  tbe  peple  of 
Cancre  entred  so  tbyck  tbat  many  were  lost  and 
slayn  vpon  tbe  brygge  anddrowned  in  tbewaterj^ 
<Oban  tbeywereputin  totbetouneagayn  tbeywere 
mocbe  angry  in  tbeirberte,&  wold  take  more  peple 
&retomeagayn ;  buttbenygbt  cam  tbat  destroub- 
ledit. 

JN"  tbis  scarmucbe  was  taken  Rycbard 
lepryncipat,cosyn  germayn  ofCan- 
cre,  &  Robert  dTinse,  botn  two  were 
noblemen,  by  tbeir  counseyl  &  atyse- 
menfCancre  bad  ronnevpon  Bawd- 
wyn. Of  tbat  otber  syde  was  taken  a 
mocbe  noble  man,  named  Cylbert  de  JVfountcler. 
ICbey  were  mocbe  angry  on  tbat  one  syde  and  on 
.tbat  otber  for  tbem  tbat  tbey  bad  loste,  If  or  tbey 
doubted  tbat  tbey  bad  ben  slayn  or  drowned.  <dban 
it  cam  on  tbe  mom  &  tbeyr  bertes  a  lytil  aswaged, 
tbey  sente  messagers  ecbe  to  otber,  and  knewe  cer- 
taynly  tbat  tbyse  men  tbat  were  taken  lyued,  of 
wbom  tbey  dredde  tbat  bad  ben  deed,  &  good  men 
wente  bytwene  and  medled  for  to  speke  of  pees,  in 
sucbewyse  tbat  tbey  cam  agayn  to  en  tier  concord- 
156 


auncc  and  parfygbt  louc  by  tbc  grace  of  tbc  boly 
gboost  tbat  adressyd  tbeyr  bertesXbey  amended 
tbeyr  trespaas  ecbe  to  otber,  and  kyssecl  to  gydre 
as  f  rendes  in  good  f aytb. 
Dow  tbe  sayd  Bawdwyn  retomed  to  tbe  grete 
booste,  and  bow  Cancre  mayntenyd  bym  mocbe 
welin  conqueryng  contrees,  capitulo  Ixxvi^^ 

JHSIOSIYN  bad  counseyl  wban 
1  be  was  come  to  JWaraze,  as  I  bave 
recompted,  tbat  be  sbold  goo  no 
fertber  fortb,  but  retomed  in  to 
tboost  of  tbe  barons,  by  cause  be 
berd  saye  bow  tbe  due  bis  brother 
bad  be  burte  peryllously,  &  wold 
I  see  and  knoweof  bis  estate  &  bow 
be  f erdej^Cbeyr  counseyl  was  tbat  Han  ere  sbold 
goo  fortb.  Bawdwyn  lef  te  witb  bym  Guynemers, 
and  tbem  tbat  were  in  bis  companye  comen  fro  tbe 
sbippe.  XTbey  passed  all  Sylyce  and  bete  doun  alle 
tbe  fortresses  of  tbe  betben  men  tbat  tbey  mygbt 
fynde,  tbey  brente  tbe  townes,and  slewe  tbeyr  ene- 
myes.  Hnd  after  cam  vnto  a  cyte  called  Hlexandrye 
tbe  lasse,  tbat  tbey  toke  by  force,  and  conquerd  al 
tbe  contre  about^OttDermynsandOrkes  tbat 
dwellyd  in  tbe  montaynes  of  tbis  contre,  berde  ty- 
dynges  tbat  Hancre  and  bis  men  were  so  valyaunt 
and  so  mygbty  tbat  notbyng  mygbt  bolde  ayenst 
tbem,  and  sore  dredde  tbat  lykeas  be  conquerd  tbe 
playne,  be  wold  come  vpon  tbem  in  tbe  montaynes, 
and  destroye  tbe  londe  entierly  and  tbe  peple.  for 
tappease  bis  courage  tbey  sente  to  bym  good  and 
certeyn  messagers,  wbicbe  brought  to  bym  grete 

157 


yef  tee,  as  gold,  syluer,  precious  stones,  clothes  or 
'sylk,  horses,  and  mulettis.  TTbey  sente  bym  moche 
largely,  fforwbicbe  cause  TTancre  leftethemin  peas, 
j^Chus  dyde  he  wel  his  honoure  and  his  prouffy  t 
in  alle  places  that  he  went  by,  in  suche  wyse  that  it 
semed  wel  to  euery  man,  that  oure  lord  god  adres- 
syd  his  way  and  mayntened  his  werkes  vertuosly, 
Row  Bawdwyn  conquerd  a  grete  contre  vpon  the 
TTurkesby  tbecounseylof  a  knygbt  Rermyn,nam- 
ed  pancrace,  capitulo  Ixxvij^^ 

OUl  ye  haue  herde  how  TTancre 
mayntened  hym  in  Sylyce,  TTbe 
grete  hoost  that  folowed  hym 
came  vnto  JVforas^Bawdwyn 
S3  F^V/^!/  ^Ht^at^a^0een^brotbertbeduc 
If  Ik^Ai^l/ftPl  D0°l  &  sound,  bad  herd  agayne 

ty  dinges  of  On  cre,how  bedyde 

by  the  contrewbere  be  wente,  Re 

}ad  mocb  grete  desire  to  gadre  to  gydre  peple,  and 

goo  sercbetbe contre  lyke  as  be  dyde  to  fore,  butbe 

bad  lost  moche  the  good  wyl  and  grace  of  tboost, 

ffor  they  of  tboost  bad  herd  tolde  tboultrage  that 

be  had  don  to  tlancre  and  to  bis  men,  and  tberfore 

many  doubted  for  to  entreprise  the  way  with  hym, 

1  Buymontandbismen  also  bad  not  lygbtly  suffred 

ktbis  tbyng  vnauenged,ne  bad  itben  for  tbeloueof 

the  due  bis  brotberXberf or  Bawdwyn  foundebut 

few  f elawes  that  wold  goo  with  hym,  Codeffroy  the 

»  due,  wbicbe  was  amocbewyseman,&of  good  wyl, 

blamed  &repreuyd  moche  bis  brother  of  this  werk ; 

be  brought  hym  berto  that  beknowlecbedbisfolye 

)to  fore  alle  the  peple,  and  sayde  that  be  bad  made 

158 


amendes  to  Cancre  after  bis  will,  and  yet  wolde  a- 
mende  itvntobisplaysyr,&swar  that  bebaddoon 
it  more  by  tbe  counseyl  &  atysementof  otber  tban 
ofbymself.Bytbysewordesbeappeasydtbebertes 
of  many  men ;  for  be  was  a  mocbe  valyaunt  man 
and  mocb  curtoy  8  and  neuer  was  perceyued  in  bym 

vylonye* 

jje  bad  an  fiermyne  witb  bym  mocbe 
!  pryue  named  pancrace*  Re  was  rigbt 
wyse  &  an  bardy  kny gbt,  but  be  was 
ouermocbe  tryeberous  and  vntrewe, 
be  was  escaped  oute  of  tbe  prison  of 
5  tbemperour  of  Constantynoble,and 
cam  into  tbe  boost  at J^ycene, wbere  be  acqueynted 
bym  witb  Bawdwyn.  Hnd  be  prayd  bym  and  ad- 
monested  tbat  be  sbold  take  men  and  goo  in  to  a 
contre  wbere  be  sbold  lede  bym  to,  wbicbe  was 
mocbe  plentyuous  and  f ulof  goodes,  &yf  be  wold 
croo  be  sbold  conqu  ere  it  ligbtly.So  ofte  be  said  to 
bym  berof  tbat  be  began  to  take  bis  way  and  de- 
parted witb  two  bonderd  knygbtes  and  otber  men 
ofarmesynougbandfootemengretenombreXbey 

folowed  pancrace  alle,  wbicbe  brought  tbem  to- 
ward byse  in  a mocbrycbelondXbey  tbat  dwellyd 
in  tbis  londe  were  alle  cristen  men,  sauf  a  fewe 
Curkeswbicbebeldetbefortressesjtbeywerelordes 
oftbecontre,andsuffrednottbecristenmensbold 
meddle  witb  ony  armes  innowyse,&lban  tbey  tbat 
were  of  oure  f ay tb  sawe  Bawdwyn  &  bis  men,  tbey 
were  glad  &  ioyef  ul,  ff  or  tbey  loued  not  tbe  Xurkes ; 
tbey  delyuerd  ouer  tbe  contre  wbere  tbey  bad  puys- 
saunce,  in  sucbe  wyse  tbat  in  a  sbort  tyme  tbat  be 

*59 


badconquerdalletbelonde\mtotbeflood€ufrates 
jjFBawdwyn  was  mocb  drad  &  doubted  tburgb  allc 
tbc  contrc  tber  about  in  sucb  wyse  tbat  for  drede 
tbey  lefte  bym  allc  tbc  fortresses  wel  garnyssbed, 
and  toke  tbem  without  debate,  TTbe  cristen  men 
wbicbe  bad  receyued  bym  in  to  bis  londe,  by  cam  so 
tiers  &  bardy,tbat  tbey  bunted  allc  tbc  betbenmen 
out  of  tbe  contre*  Hber  were  somme  barons  of  tbc 
contre  tbat  seruydBawdwyn  witb  alletbeyr  puys- 
sanccand  beelpebym  tobryngetbyng  to  bis  wylle. 
Row  tbey  of  Rages  sente  tbeyrmessagers  toBaw- 
dwyn  prayeng  bym  tbat  be  wolde  come  to  tbem, 
capitulo  tovitj^^ 

IR6  renomme  of  tbis  grete  man, 
I  of  wbom  bis  prowesse  &  wytte 
spredde  oueral,  cam  vnto  tbe  cy- 
tezeyns  of  Rages,  bopyng  by 
bym  to  be  delyuerid  or  tbe  ser- 
uagein  wbicbe  tbey  bad  ben  long, 
TTbe  grettest  men  tbat  bad  tbe 
gouemauncc  of  tbe  toun  sente 
certavn  messagers  to  Bawdwyn,  and  prayd  bym 
for  tbc  loueof  god,  for  bis  bonourc  and  prouff  vt 
tbat  be  wold  come  vnto  tbeyr  cyte,  wbicbe  was  na- 
med Kage&jPHs  is  founden  in  tbe  byble,  tbetber 
sente  Tbobye  bis  sone,  yong  Cbobyc,  for  to  de- 
maunde  tbe  moneye  tbat  Gable  bis  cosyn  oucrbt 
bym,  and  on  tbe  way  wedded  Sara  bis  wyf jsrCbe 
cytezeyns  of  tbts  cyte  receyued  cristen  faytb  anon 
after  tbc  detb  of  oure  lord  Ibesu  criste,  by  tbe  pre- 
cbyn£  of  seynt  Iude  appostle,  brother  of  Symon, 
as  tt  ts  f  ounde  wreton  tbe  book  of  Gusebee  of  Ce- 
160 


E-U=    ^ 


saireXbey  beldeyetfermly  tbis  lawetbattyme,  but 
tbc  Tlurkes  tbatwereabout  tbem  constreyncd  tbcm 
80  mocb  tbat  tbey  made  tbcm  paye  greuous  and 
grctc  tributes  euery  yere.  In  so  mocbc,  wban  tyme 
cam  for  to  gadrc  tbeyr  fruvtcs,  of  tbeyr  vynes  and 
otber,  tbey  raunsouned  tnem  and  muste  paye  at 
tbeyr  wylle,  or  ellys  tbey  wolde  destroye  alle.  JVe- 
uertbeles  in  tbe  toun  durst  noman  dwelle  but  be 
byleuyd  in  Ibesu  criste,  flPor  tbis  only  toun  was 
bolden  bool  and  entierly  in  tbe  f aytb.  tbe  betben 
peple  bad  conquerd  tbe  otber  townes,  and  tberf  or 
tbey  greued  mocbe  tbe  cristen  peple  of  tbis  toun, 
ne  wold  not  suffre  tbem  yssue  out  of  tbe  toun  for 
to  doo  tbeyr  nedes,  ff or  on  alle  sydes  of  tbem  was 
tbepuyeeaunce  of  tbe  Tlurkes. 

ft  tbis  toun  bad  tbeseygnorye  aGreek 
tbat  was  mocbeoold,  &  bad  no  child/ 
eren.  Re  bad  ben  tbere  sytb  tbe  tyme 
tbat  tbis  londe  was  vnder  tbempe- 
rour  of  Constantynoblcffor  be  was 
sente  tbyder  by  tbemperour  for  to  be 
bay  lly,  and  wban  tbe'Curkes  tokealle  tbe  countrey, 
be  departed  not  tbens,but  abodealweyin  bis  bayl- 
liage.  JNeuertbeles  be  was  tbat  made  neytber  boot 
nc  cold,  ne  kept  not  tbe  peple,  but  at  tbeyr  wyll. 
(Oban  tbe  cytezevns  were  acorded  for  to  sende 
for  Bawdwyn  be  miewe  it  wel and  was  content^ 
Qlban  Bawdwyn  berde  tbat  tbey  of  Rages  bad 
sente  for  bym  by  comyn  counseyl  and  acorde,  be 
toke  counseyl  witb  bis  men  &  f onde  by  bis  coun- 
seyl for  to  goo  tbeder.  Re  ordeyned  ixxx  borsmen 
without  moo  for  to  goo  witb  bym.  Re  passed  tbe 
mi  161 


I 


ryuer  of  eufrates,  and  lef tc  tbc  remenaunt  of  bis 
pcplc  in  tbc  fortresses  tbat  be  bad  conquerd  in  tbe 
contre  to  kepe  them  surelyXbe  tlurkes  tbat  dwel- 
led in  tbis  lande  knewe  tbe  tydynges  bow  Bawd- 
wyn sbold  come  to  Rages  witb  a  fewe  men,  and 
madean  embussbement  by  tbewaye  wberebesbold 
passe,  &  sette  tbere  grete  plente  of  men  of  armes. 
RY^B  tydynges  wer  sayde  to  Bawd- 
wyn, and  tberef or  be  tomed  toa  cas- 
tel  by,  wbicbe  an  fiermyn  belde.  F)e 
receyued  bym  gladly  and  al  bis  men 
mocb  honorably,  &  was  lodged  tbere 
ij  daysXhetlurkes  tbat  were  ennoy- 
ed  to  be  so  longe  so  embussbed,  yssued  out  and 
cam  witb  baners  displayed  to  fore  tbe  castel where 
Bawdwyn  was  inne; none  yssued  out  for  tber  were 
Souer  many  menXbe  proye  tbat  tbey  f ounde  in  tbe 
Jpastures,  tbey  brought  alle  witb  tbem,  and  after 
tomed  in  to  tbeyr  countrey  J?  On  tbe  tbirde  daye 
Bawdwyn  yssued  out  and  toke  bis  waye  and  cam 
to  Rages,  the  due  of  tbe  toun  tbat  was  a  Greek, 
as  X  baue  said  to  fore,  cam  ayenst  bym,  Hnd  alle 
tbe  other  on  borsbak  and  a  foote  with  trompes 
and  busynesXbe  peple  of  tbe  toun  receyued  bym 
witb  procession  the  m oost  honorably  thev  m  vcrbt 
euerycb  peyned  bym  to  make  bym  f este  after  bis 
puyssaunce* 


162 


Row  tbc  due  tbatwas  atRagesvaryed  for  toboldc 
tbis  tbat  be  bad  promysed  to  Bawdwyn,  capitulo 

|R6€6  suspection  bad  tbe  due 
in  bis  berte  wban  be  sawe  tbis 
ioye  tbat  alle  made  to  Bawd- 
wynXbenne  by  enuye  be  began 
to  fynde  occasions  by  wbicbe 
be  mygbt  parte  fro  tbe  couen- 
auntes  sucbe  as  be  bad  sente, 
.wbicbe  were  eucbe,  Bawdwyn 
sbold  baue  balf  tbe  rentes  of  alle  tbe  cyte  &  of  alle 
tbexploytes,  as  long  as  tbe  due  lyued*  Hfter  bis 
detb,  wbicb  was  olde,  be  sbold  baue  alle  tbe  seyg- 
norye  entirely  and  bool j^J^ow  tbe  due  wold  not 
bolde  tbis,  but  sayde,  tbat  yf  Bawdwyn  wold  def - 
fende  tbe  cyte  fro  tbe  strengtbeof  tbet;urhes,and 
fro  tbeyr  gryeues  tbat  tbey  made  in  tbe  countre,  be 
wold  oyue  to  bym  &  bis  men  reasonable  souldye 
and  good  wages,  Olban  Bawdwyn  berd  tbis  tbat 
be  was  come  tbeder  for  to  be  a  souldyour,  be  bad 
mocbe  grete  desdayne,  and  sayd  tbat  be  wold  not 
abyde  there  so,  but  wold  ordeyne  for  bym  and  bis 
men  for  to  retorne. 

HB  cy  tezeyns  of  tbe  toun  sawe  tbat 
tbis  tbynge  wente  not  well,  and  cam 
to  tbe  duc,&  sbewde  bym  tbat  grete 
euyl  &  pery U  sbold  f  olowe  yf  be  lete 
tbis  noble  man  departe,  if  or  by  tb- 
-ayde  of  bym  tbey  and  alle  tbeyr  tby- 
nges  sbold  be  kept  in  peas  and  deff  ended,  &  tbey 


t 


sbold  be  tn  grete  francbyse  JSfZbt  due  sawe  wel 
by  tbyse  wordes  tbat  be  sbold  do  f  olyc  yf  be  sette 
bym  ayenst  tbem  of  tbe  toun,  tberf ore  be  couered 
Ms  berte  for  tbat  tyme,  notwitbstondyng  be  con- 

SfSSi  m*"l  tblnQce  &  tbougbt,  but  sayde  tbat 
be  wold  acorde  tberto,  &  made  semblaunt  tbat  be 
ayae  it  witb  good  wille  in  tbe  presence  of  alle  tbem 
or  tbe  toun.Hnd  avowed  Bawdwyn  to  bis  sone. 
and  graunted  bym  tbe  balf  of  alle  tbat  be  bad  and 
sbold  baue  bis  lyf  duryng,  and  after  bis  decees  to 
baue  alle  as  bis  beyrjfr  Grete  ioye  bad  tbey  in  tbe 
cyte  wban  tbis  was  made,  and  bad  moost  f erme 

tK??tu*rrTUlzrS  r.bc  twncbyeeof  tbe  tributes 
rrj"*5  ba<*  barged  tbem  witb.  fro  tbat 
day  f ortb  tbey  began  to  remembre  in  tbeyr  bertes 
tbe  wronges  and  gryefs  tbat  tbeir  due  bad  done 
to  tbem  m  tyme  passed,  and  tbougbt  mocbe  tbat 
yr  tyme  and  place  cam  to  poynt,  tbey  wold  suffre 
itnolenger,  but  tbougbt  bow  tbeymygbtauenge 
tbis  tbat  tbey  bad  suffred  alle  tbe  tyme  tbat  be 
bad  be  due, 

Row  Bawdwyn  wente  to  assay  lie  f amossette,  tbe 
cyte  nygbe  to  Rages,  capitulo  IxxxW 

CYjre  was  tbere  nygbe  by, 
mocbe  stronge  and  wel  garn- 

3   AS  ^2™*  named  f  amosette.  fln 
'  vntrfw  Turke  named  Blanduc 
was  lord  tberof ,  be  was  a  tryc- 
bour,  but  be  was  noble  &  bardy 
in  armesXbis  sarasyn  bad  don 
-- 0  mocyc  barme  to  tbe  cytezeyns 

of  Rages:  be  sette  on  tbem  trybutes  and  dyuerse 


dcmaundes  ofte,  as  tbey  bad  ben  bis  bondemen, 
&for  tobauc  tbyse  tbynges  be  bad  good  ostages. 
fie  bcldc  tbeyr  cbildercn  so  f owle  as  tbey  bad  ben 
in  seruage,  be  made  tbem  to  bere  donge  and  fyltbe, 
anddoo  fowle  werkes;  berof  tbey  of  Rages  were 
mocbe  greuyd.  Tbey  cam  to  fore  Bawdwyn,  and 
kneled  tobymat  bis  feet,&prayd  bym  witbioyned 
bandes  right  numbly,  wepyng  grete  teres,  tbat  be 
wold  delyuer  tbem  fro  tbis  €urk  forsayd,in  sucbe 
wyse  tbat  tbey  mygbte  recouure  tbeyr  cbilderen, 
wbom  be  belde  so  shamefully  jSFBawdwyn  wold 
fayne  doo  tbeyr  requeste  after  tbeyr  desire; at tbis 
tbeyr  first  requeste,  &  to  gete  tbeyr  loue  &  tbanke, 
be  dyde  do  arme  bym  and  alle  tbat  be  mygbt  baue, 
i  and  yssued  witb  tbem  out  of  tbe  toun,and  cam  to 
fore  f amosete,  and  assay  lied  tbe  toun  mocbe  vy- 
gorously,  but  tbey  witbin  deffended  tbem  as  men 
►  wel  qfarnyssbed  anc|  {n  a  strong  place. 

IRHJ^  Bawdwyne  bad  ben  tbere,  I 
wote  not  bow  many  dayes,  &  sawe 
it  coude  not  ligbtly  be  taken,  be  lef  te 
in  af ortresse  nygbe  by  ixxx  knygb- 
tes,  and  put  in  it  gamyson  of  men 
I  of  armes  and  vytaylles,  and  com- 
manded tbem  tbat  euery  day  tney  sbold  renne  to 
fore  tbe  toun  of  f  amosete,  and  suffre  to  yssue  of 
tbe  toun  neytber  man  ne  beste;  and  after  be  cam 
agayn  to  Rages.  XLht  cytezeyns  of  tbe  toun  sawe 
wel  tbatBawdwyn  was  a  mocbe  curtoys  man,  wyse, 
noble,  andvalyaunt  in  alle  bis  tbynges,  &baddes- 
pyte  and  grete  desdayne,  tbat  tbis  old  due  wbicbe 
was  nougbt  wortbe,  and  tbat  bad  don  to  tbeym 
m3  165 


F 


mocbc  sorowe,  and  was  not  bis  f  claw  but  bis  lord 
in  tbc  tounjgFtTberfor  tbey  toke  counseyl  emonge 
tbem,  and  sente  for  a  puyssaunt  man,  wbicbc  bad 
many  fortresses  by tbem  in  tbemontaynes,  named 
Constantyn,  and  acorded  alle  to  gydre  for  to  slee 
tbeir  due,  &  wold  make  Bawdwyn  due  &  lord  vp~ 
on  tbem,  ffor  tbey  mocb  bated  tbis  old  man,  tbat 
without  fayll  bad  greued  tbem  long  tyme  in  many 
maners,  for  be  toke  fro  tbem  gold  and  syluer  and 
all  tbat  plesyd  bym  in  tbe  toun,and  tberwas  none 
so  bardy  tbat  durst  witbstande  bym  ne  displese 
bym,  ffor  yf  tbey  dide,  anon  by  tbe  burkes  witb 
wbom  be  was  acqueynted,  made  tbem  to  destroye 
tbeyr  vygnes  and  fruytes,  and  brenne  tbeyr  wbete 
and  come,  and  lede  away  tbeyr  bees  tee,  and  yf  ony 
of  tbem  went  out  of  tbe  toun,  tbey  bad  fere  for  to 
lese  tbeyr  beedes. 

Row  tbey  of  tbe  toun  of  Rages  slewe  tbeyr  due, 
and  cbees  Bawdwyn  for  to  be  tbeyr  lord,  capitulo 

peyB  bad  not  forgeten  tbe 
wronges  andiniuryes  tbat  tbey 
bad  suffred  of  tbeyr  due,  Tbey 
boped  al,  tbat  yf  be  were  deedf 
tbat  Bawdwyn  sbold  deffende 
tbem  better  tban  be,  Tberf ore 
tbey  wente  al  armed,  as  it  was 
enterprised,  vnto  a  tour  wbere 
as  be  laye,and  began  strongly  tassayleit,  &  enuy- 
ronnedroundabout  j^t^beducsawe tbat  tbe peple 
was  so  sore  meuyd  and  angry  on  bym,  and  called 


see 


Bawdwyn,  and  prayd  bym  to  take  of  bis  tresour 
as  mocbc  as  be  wolde,  &  repease  tbe  peple.  Bawd- 
wyn cam  emong  tbem,  and  trauaylled  mocbe  by 
prayers  &  menaces  for  to  baue  supposed  to  baue 
repeased  tbem,  but  be  mygbt  doo  notbyng,  ff  or  al 
way  tber  cam  moo  &  more,  in  sucbe  wyse  tbat  tbe 
companye  encreced,  Bawdwyn  departed  tbus  fro 
tbem,  and  spak  to  tbe  due,  and  said  tbat  be  sbold 
take  to  bym  sucbe  counseyle,  tbat  be  mygbt  es- 
cbewe  tbe  f  urye  of  tbe  peple,  ff  or  be  mygbt  not  re- 
medye  it  J9  vbenne  tbe  due,  as  a  man  despayred, 
bonde  a  corde  to  a  wyndowe  and  descended  doun 
tberby ;  but  wban  tbey  apperceyued,  be  was  tburgb 
smeton  witb  arowes  er  be  mygbt  come  to  tbertne* 
rj^Tbennetbey  toke  bym  al  deed,anddrewebym 
'tburgb  tbe  town,and  after  smote  of  bis  beed,  and 
coude  not  doo  ynougb  to  satisfie  tbeyr  crueltees. 
JS  tbe  mom  tbey  toke  Bawdwyn  by 
force,  ayenst  bis  will  in  deff endyng 
bym  self,  and  lyf t  bym  vp  as  tbeyr 
kyng  and  lorde.  €bey  made  to  bym 
otb  of  f eaulte,  and  after  delyuerd  to 
bym  tbe  grete  fortresse  of  tbe  toun, 
(and  gave  to  bym  at  bis  will  ryebesses  and  mocbe 
grete  tresours  tbat  tbe  Grekes  bad  assembled  by 
long  time.  €bus  was  tbe  cyte  of  Rages  delyuerd 
>witboute  contradiction  to  Bawdwyn  j0  Blanduc, 
tbat  was  lord  of  f amosete,  sawe  bow  Bawdwyn 
conquerd  alwey  tbe  londes  and  contrees,  and  en- 
creced  bis  puyssaunce,  &  sente  to  bym  messagers 
wbicbe  lete  bym  wete  bow  tbat  bis  cyte  was  mocbe 
stronge,  and  mygbt  not  lightly  be  wonne,  but  be 
m4  167 


I 


wold  gyue  bym  x  JW  besauntes  j0  Bawdwyn  ad~ 
uysed  bym  berupon,  and  by  counseyl  acordcd  to 
bye  it,  and  payd  to  bym  tbat  somme,  and  receyued 
tbe  toun  entierly,  and  Blanduc  rendred  tbostages 
tbat  be  bad  bolden  alle  tbennej^Hnd  tbus  be  con- 
querd  tbe  bertee  and  loueof  tbem  of  tbe  toun,  tbat 
tbey  called  bym  tbeyr  fader,  &  tbey  dyde  alle  tbat 
plesyd  bym  to  tbeyr  power,  and  redy  tobeye  bym 
totbedetb. 

Row  Bawdwyn  wente  and  assyeged  tbe  toun  of 
Serorge,  nygb  to  Rages,  and  tofce  it,  and  of  bis 
ordenaunces,  capita  lo  ixxxij&& 

PS"  tbis  londe  was  a  cyte  named 

Serorge,  wberin  dwellyd  none  o- 

tber  peple  sauf  betben  men ;  tbe 

lord  of  tbe  toun  was  named  Ba- 

lahXbe  'Curkes  tbat  were  tberin 

dydemany  traueylsandvylayn- 

ou8  oultrage8,8omany  tbattbey 

prayde  Bawdwyn  tbeyr  lord  for 

tbe  loue  of  god,  and  for  tbaff ection  tbat  be  bad  to 

tbem,  tbat  be  wold  take  counseyl  and  sette  a  reme- 

dye  of  tbis  tbyng.  Re  answerd  curtoysly  &  sayde 

tbat  be  wold  doo  it  gladly Xbenne  be  commaund- 

ed  tbat  euery  man  sboldarme  bym  dylygently,  and 

>wban  tbey  wereredy  tbey  sbold  yssueoutof  Rages, 

and  goo  strayt  for  to  assiege  tbe  cyte  of  Sororge. 

0>enne  dressyd  tbey  tbeyr  engyns,  and  began  to 

'  leje  tbesiegeand  brak  tbe  walles  and  torettesXbe 

XTurkes  tbat  were  witbin  tbe  toun  were  mocb  abas- 

,sbed,  for  tbey  tbougbt  wel  tbat  Bawdwyn  ne  bis 

'peple  woldnotligbtly  departe  fro  tbe  siege,  ne  tbey 

168 


vnderstode  of  no  socours  fro  noo  syde,  wberfore 
tbey  scntc  tbeyr  messagers  to  Bawdwyn,and  so 
entreted  that,  tbeyr  lyues  saued,  tbey  wolde  yelde 
tbc  toun  to  bymjSFBawdwyn  receyued  tbc  toun,& 
put  in  tbc  grettest  fortresse  one,  bis  bayly,  tbat 
sbold  doo  bis  commaundement  in  tbat  countrey, 
and  ordeyned  a  mocbc  grctc  tribute  on  tbem  of  tbc 
toun,&lefte  bem  tberin,for  be  bad  not  otber  pcplc 
ynougb  for  to  people  tbe  toun  yf  tbey  wente  tbeyr 
waye.  By  tbe  prise  of  tbis  cyte,  was  alle  tbe  way  de- 
lyuerdoftbebetben,froRagesvntoHntbyocbe,for 

toforemygbtnonegoovnto  tbe  ryuer  of  Sufrates 
for  tbe  peple  of  Sororge.  Cbus  cam  Bawdwyn  to 
grete  honour  and  to  mocbe  ioyous  feste  in  tbe  cyte 
of  Ragesjj^JSow  we  sbal  leue  to  speke  of  Bawdwyn 
and  sbal  spehenowof  tbe  grete  booste  tbat  cam  be 
bynde  after. 

Row  tbe  grete  boost  cam  to  fore  JVlarese,  and  bow 
tbeCurhes  tbat  were  witbin  fiedde,  and  bow  our 
peple  payned  tbem  toconquere  countrees,capitulo 

He  ducGodeffroy  andtbe  grete 
plen  teof  tbe  barons  &  knygbtes 
and  noble  men  and  otber  witb 
tbem,  tbey  passed  mocbe  greu- 
ous  wayes,  and  were  comen  by 
valeyes  &montaynes  vn  to  a  cyte 
named  JVIareseXbis  is  not  that 
toun  tbat  I  span  of  to  fore,  for 
tbat  is  named  JVIarazejfiTCbis  cyte  named  JVlarese 
was  enbabyted  witb  crieten  men.  JSeuertbeless  tbe 
Curkesbeldetbe  fortresses,  and  badtbeseignorye 


of  tbc  toun,  &euylentreted  tbecristen  pepleXbyse 
bctbcn  pcplcbcrd  of  tbc  comying  of  our  peple,and 
flicddc  by  nygbt  for  f crc  of  tbem,  and  tbcrc  abode 
noneof  tbc  toun  sauf  tbey  of  ourc  faytb  J9  (Oban 
tbc  booste  approu  cbed,tbe  barons  knewe  tbc  troutb 
of  tbis  toun,  Tbcn  tbey  deffended  generally  tbat 
none  sbolddoonobarmeto  tbem  of  tbe  touneneto 
tbeyr  tbyngesXbey  lodged  tbem  in  a  mocbe  fayre 
place  and  dely table,  and  bad  vytay lies ynougb  and 
~ood  cbeetx 

f)6Y  of  tbe  countre  lete  tbe  barons 

oftboostebaueknowlecbc,tbattberc 

fast  by  was  a  ryebe  cyte  and  f  ul  of 

goodes  named  Hrtavsse,  &  dwellyd 

in  tbe  fortresses  of  tbe  toun  none 

otber  but  betben  men.  tTbe  prynces 

toke  counseyl  berupon,  and  sente  Robert  tbe  erle 

of  f  laundres  tbederj^Re  toke  witb  bym  Robert 

deRosoye&Gossolyn  tbesone  of  ConondeJMon- 

tagu,  tbey  were  wel  a  thousand  men  of  armes  wban 

fcl  tbey  cam  to  fore  tbe  toun,  anon  tbey  assieged  ifc 

MYl  ^eTTurkestbat  were  witbin  trusted  not  tbe  walles 

of  tbe  toun,  and  wold  baue  witbdrawen  tbem  to 

tbe  gretter  fortresses  of  tbe  toun,  but  tbe  fiermvns 

andtbeotbermenofourfaytb,towbomtbei:urke8 
bad  don  long  tyme  grete  sbames  and  mocb  barme 
m  tbetoun,  wban  tbeysawe  ouremen  tbey  badcrrete 
affyance  &  trust  in  tbem,  &  toke  vnto  tbem  mocbe 
grete  bardyncsse,  and  ranne  to  armes,  and  er  tbe 
€urkes  my  gbt  witb  drawe  tbem  in  to  tbe  fortresses 
and  toures,  tbey  slewe  tbem  &  tbrewe  tbeir  beedes 
ouer  tbewalles  to  our  men,  ^aftir  opened  tbe  gates 


I 


and  receyucd  tbem  in  to  the  toun  with  grete  iovc, 
and  therein  tbey  fondeal  that  tbey  bad  nedeof,for 
tbe  cyte  was  merueyllously  ryebe.  fro  tbens  vnto 
Hntbyocbe  was  but  xv  myle,  tbis  cyte  of  wbicbe  1 
speke  is  vnder  tbe  patriarkeof  Hntbyocbe,  and  for 
fere  of  oure  peple  were  tbe  moost  parties  of  tbe 
Oirhes  fledde  in  to  Hntbyocbe. 

nHJ^T  tbey  berd  save  tbat  Hrtayse  was 
tbus  tahen,and  tney  badslayn  tbem 
tbat  were  lordes,  tbey  tohe  counseyl 
emonge  tbem  for  to aduyse  bow  tbey 
my  gbt  burte  tboos  t.  XTbey  cboos  ou  t 
xJVfl  to  wbom  tbey  comanctedtaccom- 
plyssbe  tbis  tbyng,  Tlbey  wentef ortb,  &  wban  tbey 
approcbed  tboost  tbey  put  tbem  all  in  a  bussbe- 
ment  sauf  xxxwel  borsedandligbtly  armed,  wbom 
tbey  sente  f ortb  for  to  drawe  men  fro  tboost  TTbey 
approcbed  so  ny  gb  tbat  tbe  booste  of  tbe  toun  sawe 
tbemtfortbeymadesamblauntfortotahefourriers 
&  tbe  borses  nygbe  tbem,  Oure  peple  ran  to  armes, 
and  began  to  folowe  so  ferr  tbat  tbey  fougbt  to 
gydre  folyly  vpon  tbeyr  watcbe,  tbey  sprange  out 
and  wold  baue  ronne  bytwene  tbem  &  tbe  toun  for 
tenclosetbemin,butourmen  assembled  tbem  &ran 
to  gydre,andcam  deff  endyng  tbem  vntyl  tbey  cam 
intotbetoun  in  sucbe  wyse  tbat  tbey  loste  noman. 
7&y  ^^RB^urhessawewel  tbattbeymygbt 
not  recouure  tbe  toun,  and  began  to 
a98iegeit,fortbeybadf>epleynowgb, 
&  after  began  tassayleitXbey  witb- 
in  deffended  tbem  wel  tbat  tbey  with- 
out loste  more  tban  wan,  (Oban  tbe 

171 


XTurkessawe  that  tbegrete  booste  made  tbem  redy 
and  approucbe,  and  tbat  tbey  prouffytcd  not,  tbcv 
toke  counseylandretornedin  toHntbiocbe,  buttbe 
brygge  tbat  was  bytwene  tbey  garnyssbed  mocbe 
-  LT  of  f  ^undres  and  tbc  otber  tbat  were 

witb  bym  witbin  Hrtayse  wen  t  not  out,  but kept tbe 
toun,  but  tbat  day  maladye  toke  Goselyn,  tbe  sone 
of  Conon  of  JVTontagu,  a  yong  man,  curtoys  and 
mocbe  valyaunt.  fie  deyde  of  tbat  maladye,  &  was 
buryed  in  tbat  toun  witb  worship  &  grete  lamen  ta~ 
cion. 

fiow  it  was  commaunded  vnto  alle  tbe  barons  to 
comevnto  tboost  for  to  goo  vntoflntbyocbe,and 

SS3S5^ that  tbcy  had  in  tbc  ™y>  "*- 

RHJVtbeTTurkestbatwerecome 
fro  Hntbyocbe  for  to  recouure 
Hrtayse  were  departed  from 
tbens,  at  tbespryngyngf  of  tbe 
day,  tydyngs  cam  tbat  tbegrete 
boostewas  lodgednygb  by,  for 
tbey  bad  berd  saye  bow  tberle 
of  f  laundres  was  besieged,and 
tberfor  by  comyn  counseyl  tbey  bad  sente  ivC 
borsmen  to  fore  to  socoure  tbem  yf  tbey  bad  ned^ 
XTbey  commaunded  tbem  tbat  yf  tbe  siecre  were  de- 
parted, tbey  sbold  leue  pepleresonably  to  kepe  tbe 
toun,and  sbold  save  to  tberleof  f  laundres,  and  to 
tbem  tbat  were  wttb  bym,  tbat  tbey  sbold  come  a- 

gaynmtotbeboost^Cancrcwbicbebadconquerd 
alleSylyce,badincommaundement  to  comeagavn, 
and  be  retomed,  &  alle  tbe  otber  also  tbat  were  de- 
172 


parted  fro  tbe  boos tc generally  werecomenagayne, 
sauf  Bawdwyn,  wbicbe  abode  aboute  Rages,  where 
be  did  wel  bis  tbynges. 

RHJN  tbe  boost  was  tbus  counsey li- 
ed and  ordeyned,  tbey  dyde  do  crye 
tburgb  out  alle  tboost  that  noman 
sbold  departe  without  leueXbenne 
tohe  tbey  alle  tbeyr  way  for  to  goo 
strayt  vnto  Hntbyocbe*  TTbey  berd 
wel  saye  tbat  tber  ran  a  water  wnicbe  tbey  muste 
passe^buttbebryagevpontbiswaterwasmocbewel 
gamyssbed  of  tbeyr  enemyes,  Xio  tbende  tbenne 
tbat  tbe  boost  sbold  not  be  destroubled  for  to 
pass  wban  tbey  sbold  arryuetbere,  by  comyn  coun- 
seyl  of  tbem  alle,  Robert  tbe  due  of  J^ormandye, 
sbold  goo  to  fortohnoweyf  bemygbtdelyuere  tbe 
passage,  and  to  sendeworde  to  tbe  barons  wbat  be 
f  ounde.  Qlitb  bym  wen  te  Suerard  du  puysau  t  and 
Rogyer  de  BameuylleXbyse  two  be  made  cone- 
stables  of  bis  booste  and  bad  tbauaunt garde,  for 
tbey  were  botbe  mocbe  cbeualrous  and  proued  in 
amies,  TTbus  departed  tbey  fro  tbe  booste  &  cam  to 
tbe  brygge*  Tlbe  brygge  was  vpon  tbe  water  wbicb 
bastonameintbeancyent8cripturesOronte8,al80 
it  is  called  in  tbe  con  tre  fielle ;  tbe  brygge  was  mocbe 
strong,and  bad  at  tbentre  on  tbissydebye  towres 
and  stronge.  In  euery  tourwere  I  men  of  armes  for 
to  deffende  witb  bowes  and  arabalestres  tbe  entree 
of  tbebryggeandtbepassageof  tbe  water.  On  tbat 
otbersydetowardHntyocbewerecomenseuenbon- 
derd  borsmen  for  to  hepe tbat  sydeof  tbe  water  to- 
ward tbemXbisryuerof  F>elle  rennetb  on  tbe  syde 

173 


<rfflntyocbe,&cometbbyanotbercytenamedCes- 

airc,butit80urdctbbvanotbcrcvtcnamcdeiiopcc, 
and  is  called  Jtfalbec,  &  descended)  in  to  tbc  see  bv 
there  as  I  baue  sayd.  r 

WtBft  our  peple  were  comen  to  tbis 
bryggetbentrewaswcldenycd  tbem, 
for  grete  plente  of  Curkes  were  de- 
scended doun  to  tbebarieraXbe  oth- 
er toures  rested  not  to  caste  stones 
J&  sbote  so  sore  tbat  it  was  a  mocbe 

^^,T1^bcandfier8-t:b^foi,ffbt9on'ocbeto 
(gydre  tbat  tydynges  cam  in  to  tboost,  wbicb  alwev 
,meuyd  andwastbennenotfer  frotbebryg<?eXbev 
auauncedtbeyrpaa8&  sownedtrompesand  busv- 
nes,  andsmoteon  tbem  tbat  bclde  ayenst  tbem  tbe 

paas.Cbeytbatwereintbctouresdurstboldetbem 
no  lengcr  tbere  for  fere  of  tbe  grete  peple  tbat  tbcv 
sawe  come  witb  tbe  grete  boost,  f  or  they  thought 
tbey  sbolde  not  be  tbere  sure.  Cbe  otber  also  de- 
scended and  were  put  alle  to  flygbt,  in  sucbe  wyse 
that  our  men  tobe  tbe  brydge. ifbe  otber  bnygbtcs 
of  cure  peple  tbat  mygbt  not  come  to  tbebaryers 
for  tbe  preeswbihstbe  scarmucbe was,  were  mod* 
anguyssbous,  and  descended  doun  wbcre  astbere 

wa8aplacetopassewbicbetbeyoftbeco7mhn4e 
not  of,  and  passed  ouer  &  discomfyted 1  tbeseul 

bonderd  Sarasynstbat  heptetbebaS  SomoTe 

dyde  one  and  otber  tbat  aUe  tbe  boostepassed iT- 

lyuerly  ouer  and  caryage  after.  Cbcy  lodged  tbem 

ma  mocbe  fayr  place,  a  vj  myle  fro  tbe  toun  JrOn 

tbe  morn  tbey  approcbed  alle  tbe  grete  wayf  by- 

Si!beinTt?!!,C8  3nd.th<ryuer%  sucbe  wyse 
tbat  tbey  lodged  but  a  myle  fro  tbe  cyte 
174 


fiowHn  tyocbe,  by  succession  of  tyme,  bad  dyuerse 
names,  and  of  tbc  noblesse  of  auncyente,  capitulo 

ZjmZTiYOCr>e\e  a  mocbe  noble 

B  cytetwbicbconteynetbtbetbird 

■y  place emong tbepatriarkes after 

f£  tbe  cbircbe  of  Rome*  Cbis  cyte 

H  was  named  sometymeReblada, 

3j|  after  tbattbe  auncyent  wrytyn- 

ges  witnesse  Jf  JSabugodono- 

sor,kyngeofBabylone,brougbt 


Sedecbyas,  kyna  of  Iberusalem,  tbeder,  wban  be 
bad  taken  bym  &slewe  bis  sones  to  fore  bym,  and 
after  put  out  bis  eyen,  as  is  founden  in  tbe  fourth 
book  of  kyngesjfiP&Iban  Hlysaundre,  kyng  of  JMa- 
cedone,  was  deed,  Hntbyocbus  bad  tbis  part  of  tbe 
londe,  and  enforced  mocbe  tbe  cyte  of  grete  toures 
and  wallys,  and  wold  baue  it  named  after  bym  Hn- 
tbyocbe,  and  ordeyned  it  cbyef  of  alle  tbe  royame 
^Cbe  prynce  of  tbappostlys,  seyntpeter,  was 
first  bissbop  tbere,  in  a  cbircbe  tbat  tbeopbilus 
made  to  bym  of  bis  bows,  wbicb  was  a  noble  and  a 
mygbty  man  in  tbe  tounj^Seynt  Luke,  tbe  boly 
euangelyste,  was  bom  in  tbis  toun.  Co  tbe  same 
Cbeopbile  wrotebetbactesof  tbappostles,  wbicbe 
was  tbe  vij  bissbop  in  Hntbyocbe,  Cber  was  tbe 
first  counseylof  tbem  tbat  byleuydinlbesu  Criste 
after  bis  detb,  and  tbenne  was  established  tbat 
tbey  sbold  be  called  crysten  men  of  Crist  ;ff or  by- 
fore  tbey  were  called  J^azaryens,  of  tbe  cyte  tbat  be 
was  of1 j^Cbis  cyte  was  conuertedby  tbeprecbyng 


m 


of  scynt  peter.  Xberf ore  be  gaf  it  the  name  of 
Xbeopoble,  wbtcbe  is  as  mocbe  to  saye  as  of  god 
oure  lordjfiFVnder  Hntyocbe  ben  xx  grete  cytees  of 
wbtcbe  ben  xtttj  arcbebyssboprycbesXbe  sex  baue 
two  prymates,  wbtcbe  ben  called  Catboltcos;  tbat 
one  is  in  tbe  cyte  wbtcbe  is  named  Hmene,  and 
that  otber  is  at  Bandras,  Hnd  alle  tbts  is  clavmed 
tboryent. 

Of  tbeettuation  of  flntbyocbe,  capttulo  Ixxxvj^^ 

^RIS  cyte,  of  wbom  I  baue  spok- 
en, is  Hntbyocbe  and  stondetb 
in  tbe  londe  of  tbts  Surye,  and 
is  parteof  tbe  londe  of  tbe  grete 
Surye,  It  stondetb  in  a  mocbe 
fayr  place  and  dely table,  JVow  I 
sball  recounte  to  you  bow  it 
-  stondetb.  It  is  a  mocbe  grete 
towne,  and  aboute  mocbe  good  londe,  for  to  bere 
Jbabondaunce  of  wbete,  of  com,  of  fayr  fontaynes 
and  smale  rennyngf  waters,  and  it  is  emonge  tbe 
montaynes  toward  tbe  eest,  wbtcbe  contre  duretb 
wel  xl  myle  of  lengtbe,and  wel  vj  myle  of  brede,H~ 
boue  tber  is  a  lake  or  mere,  assembled  of  sprvnaes 
(  &  wellys,  tbatrenne  tbertn,  wbtcbe  tsfullof  fvsebe 
Of  tbts  lakeyssuetba  rennyng water,  wbtcbe  com- 
>etb  nygb  tbe  cyte,  and  rennetb  in  to  tbe  ryuer  tbat 
rennetb  by  tbe  toun,  rbemontaynes  closed  tbe  two 
sides  of  tbe  toun ; neuertbeles,  tber  ben  vnder  tbem 
fressb  waters  and  erablelondeXbe mount  wbtcbe 

tstowardtbesoutbtsnamedOrontclykeasIsavd 
.you  of  tbe  ryuer;  for  seynt  Gregotre  saytb  tbat 
'Hntyocbe  is  sette  bytwene  Oronte  tbe  ryuer  and 
170 


Orontetbemontayne;onepartieoftbis  montayne, 
that  gotb  toward  tbc  see,ismocb  bye,  in  suebwyse 
tbat  it  bad  a  name  by  bym  self  ♦  Somme  peple  wene 
tbat  tbis  bylle  bepernasus,a  montayneof  wbicbe 
scripture  speketb  mocbe,  by  cause  of  a  fontayne 
tbat  is  atte  tbe  foote  of  tbe  same  bylle,  wbicb  is 
named  Lescbielle  Buymand.  But,  without  faulte, 
^tbis  is  not  tbe  mountof  wbicbe  tbe  auctors  speke, 
for  tbismontaynepemasusstondetb  in  tbelande 

named  tibessaylle. 

H  r>EC  otber  montayne,  wbicbe  is  to- 
ward tbe  soutb,  is  named  tbe  black 
montayne,  fulle  also  of  sprynges  & 
welly  s,ofwodes  &  of  pas  tures/Cbere 
were  wonte  aunciently  tbermytesfor 
I  todwelle/Cburgb  tbis  valeyerennetb 
tberyuer  tbatlspakof  tofore,andrennetbtoward 
tbe  see^In  tbe  montayne  toward  tbe  soutb,  be~ 
gynnetb  tbewallesof  Hntyocbe,and  comevntotbe 
ryuer,  bit  is  a  greteespace  witbin  tbe  closure,  "Cber 
ben  enclosed  witbin  tbe  walks  twoo  montaynes ; 
vpon  tbe  byest  stondetb  a  fortresse,  so  stronge 
tbat  it  is  not  prenable,  but  by  famyne-  Bytwene 
tbyse  two  montaynes,  wbicbe  ben  mocbe  bye,  is  a 
valeye rigbt  depe,but  itis  strayt;  in  tbat  rennetb  a 
litil  water,  rigbt  fasteand  swyfte,and  entred  in  to 
tbe  toun  and  dotb  mocbe  good  to  tbe  toun*  In  tbe 
cyte  ben  man^  fontaynes,but  tbe  beste  is  tbefon<- 
tayne  wbicbe  is  named  tbe  f onteyn  of  seynt  pom, 
and  ie  nygb  to  tbe  eest  gate*  t^ber  is  anotber  fon- 
tayne witbout  tbe  toun,  wbicbe  by  craf  te  and  con- 
duces is  brougbt  in  to  tbe  toun  rigbt  subtylly. 
ni  V7 


'^=: 


S^ 


Hlletbe  wallesof  tbe  toun ;  tbat  is  to  wete,  tbey  tbat 
ben  on  tbc  mon  taynes,  and  tbey  tbat  ben  bangyng, 
&  also  tbey  tbat  ben  in  tbe  playn,  ben  merueyllous 
tbycke,fortbeybenofouerstrongewerkeXberben 
toures  mocbe  bye  &  wel  def ensable,  tbatie  toward 
tbe  sonne  goyng  dounXbe  ryuerrennetb  so  nygb 
tbetoun,tbattbebryggeonwbicbemenpasseioyn- 
etb  to  tbe  walles  and  to  tbe  gate  of  tbe  cyte.  T^be 
lengtbe  of  tbe  toun  is  wel  two  or  tbre  myle.  Hit  is 
nygbe  vnto  tbe  see  xij  myle  of  ♦ 
(Obo  tbat  was  tbenne  lord  of  Hntyocbe,  &  in  wbat 
manere  be  was  comen  vn  to  tbis  seygnorye,  capitulo 

|ftbiscyteofHntbyocbewaslord 
a  Hurk,  named  Hnceam  He  bad 
ben  of  tbemeyneof  a  puyssaunt 
sowdan  of  perse,  of  wbom  we 
baue  spoken  to  fore,  named  Bel- 
pbet,  wbicb  bad  conquerd  alle 
tbyse  londes, and  after  wban  be 
woldretomeagayn  in  to  bis  con- 

trey,bedepartedentierlybisconque6ttobisneueu6, 
and  to  somme  of  bis  meyne,  by  cause  tbat  be  wold 

tbattbeytbatwerebistrewemenandfrendes^sbold 
bolde  peas,  ecbe  in  bis  partye,  and  sbold  be  as  de- 
f endours  and  tbe  closyng  of  tbe  londe,  He  gaf  to 
bts  neuew  Solyman,JVycque,  orj^ycene,  witb  alle 
tbeyr  appertenaunts,  as  ye  baue  berd  to  fore.  Zo 

anotberneuew,namedDucar,begaftbecyteofDa- 
maske,  and  alle  tbe  countre  about,  and  wold  tbat 
ecbeof  tbem  sbold  bere  tbe  name  of  Soudan,  and 


■■■ 


lykedygnyte.  Solyman,by  cause  bemarcbed  on  tbe 
©rekes,  bad  euery  day  debate  ayenst  tbemperour 
of  Constantynoolej^Ducar  was  ayenst  tbein  of 
Ggypte,and  of  te  madewarreecbe  to  otber,  for  tbey 
louednottogydre/Cotbendetbennetbattbysetwo, 
Solyman  and  Ducar,  mygbt  tbe  better  mayntene 
tbeyr  warre,  be  wold  tbat  tbey  were  puyssaunt  and 
bye  men  as  soudans.  To  one  bis  seruaunt,  named 
Hssougur,  wbicb  was  fader  of  Sangum,&  graunt 
fader  of  J^oradyn, of  wbom  ye  sbalbere  bere  after, 
begaf  tberenommed  cyte  called  Halappej^Co  tbis 
)  Hncean,  of  wbom  I  spak  to  fore,  be  gaf  tbis  bye& 
noble  cyte  Hntyocbe,  and  lytil  lond  about,  for  tbe 
Calypbe  of  Ggypte  beldealle  tbe  countre  vnto  tbe 
boundesof  Surye. 

^^SgrvlSHncean,  wban  be  berd  tbat  tbe 

grete  boost  of  cristen  men  cam,  be 

sente  messagers  and  lettres  to  tbe 

barons  of  tbory ent,  &  bym  self  spak 

to  tbem  by  moutb  expressedly,  and 

J  requyredtbe  calipbeof  Bandras  and 

tbe  soudan  of  perse,  wbicb  was  moremygbty  tban 

ony  otber,  tbat  tbey  wolde  socoure  bis  londe  and 

bymXbey  beleuy  d  al  tbis  lightly,  for  Solyman  was 

comen  to  tbem  tnatbadwel  assayed wbatouremen 

coude  doo,  tberf  ore  be  also  requyred  mocbe  to  greue 

oure  cristen  men,  and  tbat  tbey  wolde  auenae  bym 

j^Hncean  requyred  tbat  tbey  wold  deffendebym. 

Vhz  grete  barons  of  tboryent,  and  otber  bye  and 

noblemen,promysedbymtbattbeywoldbelpebym 

certaynlye.  Hncean  forgate  not  in  tbe  mene  wbyle, 
but  gadred  as  mocbe  peple  as  tbey  my gbt  baue  in 

X\2  179 


d^X?!ab-°Ut£Jfe1' a9  tb*y  t^t  fro  day  to 
day  abode  tbe  exegejff  B£  assembled  vytavlles  ar- 
mures,  engyns,  and  alle  other  tbynges S. 
to  peple  assyeged,  and  prayd  moebf  en  "enXX 
eytezeyns  of  the  toun  that  eucry  man  sbold  mahe 
raXrT*  Sa™Veonforby7mself  asmoebeas 
+Z2lg  bt'  Zh™ni  W£"t«  ^e  eytezeyns  of  tbe  toun 

tovyHagesandotberpkeestberaboute.&brouabt 
alle m  to  tbe eyte, wbete,  wyn,  oyle,  & allemlnefof 
beestes.somoebe  that  tbe  toun  was  merueyUous?! 

garnyssbed^any  bye,puyssaunt,andnob  S 
were  eomen  fro  tbe  eontrees  that  oure  pep le  bad 
passed,  wbiebe  were  fledde  in  to  this  srVonae  toun 
for  to  hepe  tbem  self;  in  somoebe  that  k  wassavd 
and  was  troutbe,  tbat  there  were  in  the  eTte  S 
borsmen^allearmed  andwelin  poynt.andof  foott- 
men  there  were  tbat  bare  barnoys  mcio  tbar .  £ M 

Siw^TO"  0f  lurmcn  toforetbeyassieged 

|CIRe  men  were  approcbed  so 
nygb  tbe  eyte,  tbat  tbey  sawe  it 
nVffh  totbem.Hf ter.tbey  assem- 
bled for  to  take  eounseyl  bow 
tbey  sbold  proeede  forth  fo? 
there  were  sommeof  tbe  barons 
J^^y'fedthattbeysbold 

be  moebe  greuous  to  lye  out.  On  that  «be?2rtf 
tber  were  manv  of  tbooste  tbat  were  sprad  about 


in  the  cytees  &  castellys,wbicbe  mygbt  not  lygbt- 
ly  be  assembled  tyl  after  tbe  wynter.  Hud  fertber- 
morettbeysaydetnattbeiriperourof  Constantino- 
ple sboldsendegrete  peplefor  tobelpetbem/Cber- 
f  or  it  were  wel  reason  tbat  tbey  sbold  abyde  tbem* 
Hl80,ontbeotbersydeoftbemontayne8,tbeysayde 
tbey  sbold  baue  peple  al  fressb,of  wbom  tbey  bad 
grete  nede  for  tassiege  sucbe  a  toun.  Hnd  in  tbe 
mene  wbyle  mygbt  tbe  peple  and  tbeyr  borses  so- 
ioume  alle  tbe  wynter  in  tbe  coun tre  about,  &  sbold 
be  tbe  fressber  &  harder,  and  strenger  for  tendure 
trauaylle  and  payne  whan  it  sbold  nede* 
\\E^  ^^4^  othcr  baron9  ^corded  tbat  tbey 
I J  ^7T!^7?*§  sbold  sette  tbe  siege  forthwith  witb- 
aV  Aw  J f\£\n  out  delaye,  if  or  yf  tbenemyes  tbat 

were  in  tbe  cyte  bad  tbe  respyte,  tbey 
sbold  gamy  ssbetbem  better  of  men, 
of  armures,  of  engyns,  and  of  otber 


(estoremen tes  tban  tbey  bad  tbenne :  tbey  also  tbat 
were  comyng,  sbold  baste  tbem  tbe  more  y  f  tbe  cy  te 
werebeseged  for  to  belpe  them/Co  this  counseyl  a- 
corded  fynably  alle  jPZbcy  ordeyned  tbeyr  ba~ 
taylles,  &  cam  to  fore  tbe  toun,  tbere  tbey  lodged 
tbem  tbe  x  day  of  Octobre-  In  oure  booste  were 
men  well  armed  to  tbe  nombre  of  ccc  JVI,  without 
wymmen,  cbilderen,  &  otber  men  tbat  bare  no  bar- 
noys-  Hnd  yet  mygbt  not  alle  tbey  besiege  alle  tbe 
cyte,forwitbouttbemontaynes,wberewastbougbt 

toleyenosiege,was  at  tbefootof  tbe  bylle  vnto  the 
ryuer,agretepartof  tbe  walle  in  afayr  playn,wmcb 
my gbt not  be  leyedabou t  witb  peple-In  tbe  comyng 
of  this  grete  boost,  was  a  mocbe  grete  bruy  t  &n  oy  se 
ns  lSl 


ofbuysyn8,ofborse8,ofpeple,ofcarte8andcbary~ 
ottes.Buttbisdaye,neontbemornfolowynge,was 
nonoyse,butsemedtbattbetounbadbenaUevoyde, 
&noman  tbcrin;  but  tbis  was  don  by  cause  tbey  bad 
mocbegretegarnysonof  peple&orotber  tbynges, 
fiow,af  ter  tbe  situation  of  tbetoun,ecbeof  tbe  bye 
barons  of  tbc  boost  were  lodged  at  tbe  sayd  siege, 
capita  lo  Ixxxix^^ 

If^mYOCn  bad  conteynyeng 
in  tbe  cyte  v  yates  J&  toward 
tboryent  tberwas  one,&wasna- 
medtbeporteseyntpoul&tbat 
was  by  causeit  was  vnder  tbemo- 
nastery  of  seyntpoulwbicbe  is 
bangyng  on  tbe  territoire,  TLbz 
second  was  toward  tboccident, 
and  tbe  lengtbe  of  tbe  toun  is  bytwene  botb  tbyse 
yates,  and  tbat  is  named  tbe  porte  of  seynt  George, 
On  tbe  syde  toward  byse  ben  tbre  yates,wbicbe  alle 
yssue  toward  tbe  ryuer.  tTbat  yate  above  is  named 
tbe  porte  of  tbe  bound ;  tber  is  a  bry  gge  to  fore  tbis 
yate,  by  wbicbe  men  passe  tbe  mareys  wbicb  is  vn- 
der  tbe  walles  of  tbe  cy  teXbe  seconde  is  named  tbe 
porte  of  tbe  due :  tberyuer  is  tber  welamyle  lonafro 
tbyse  two  yatesXbetbirde  is  named  tbe  yate  of  tbe 
bry  gge,  by  cause  tbe  bry  gge  is  tbere,  by  wbicbe  men 
passe  tbe  ryuer;  trot 'bytwene  tbe  port  of  tbe  due, 
wbicbe  is  in  tbe  my  ddle  of  tbyse  tbre,  &  tbis  tbat  is 
tbe  laste  on  tbat  sy  de,  approu  cbe  so  tbe  flood  of  tbe 
toun,  tbat  fro  tbens  it  rennetb  costeyeng  tbe  toun 


alle  ioynyng  to  the  walles.GIberf or  it  was  that  this 
yate,  nc  the  yate  of  seynt  ©eorge,  our  men  mygbt 
Jnot  assiege,  for  noman  mygbt  come  tbeder  but  yf 
•be  wente  ouer  tbe  ryuer, 

QYM^N^  assieged  tbis  yate  af or- 
sayd  of  tbound,  witb  tbem  tbat  were 
comen  in  bis  companye.  Beside  bym, 
inaualyngdoun,were  lodged  Robert 
tbe  due  of JVormandye,  Robert  tberle 
J  of  f  laundres,  Steuen  tberle  of  Bloys, 
and  fiuon  le  JVIayneXbyse  bad  pourprised  fro  tbe 
lodgys  of  Buymon  t  vn to  tbe  yate  of  tbounde,  ff  or 
tbe  f renssbemen,  tbe]Sormans  &  tbeBretons,were 
witb  tbem  to  fore  tbis  gatejfiTCbenne  was  lodged 
tberle  Remontof€bolouse,&tbebi88bopofpuy, 

witb  tbem  tbat  were  come  in  tbeyr  companye;  tbat 
were  tbe prouyn  ceaulx,  tbe  Oascoyns,  and  tbeBur- 

ctovnons,  tber  wasmocbe  grete  peple/Cbey  tokealle 
tbe  place  vnto  tbe  gate  next  after,  Ht  tbis  gate  were 
lodged  tbe  due  Godeffroy,  6ustace  bis  brother, 
Bawdwyntberleoffienawd,ReynoldtberleofToul, 
Conon  de  ]YIontagu,&  otber  barons,  many  wbicbe 
alwey  belde  tbem  witb  tbyse  prynces/Cber  were  tbe 
Loraynes,tber>enewers;tbeyofSe880ugne,tbeyof 
Bauyere,  and  tbey  of  f  rancoine;  tbey  toke  vp  alle  tbe 
place  almoost  to  tbe  yate  of  tbe  brygge,  and  belde 
tbe  ryuer  tbat  ranne  tberej^ln  tbis  partye,  toward 
tbetoun,wa8greteplenteofappletrees,offygtrees, 

and  of  otber  trees  beryng f  ruy t,wbicbe  our  peple  cut 
andbewe  of  alleforto  lodge tbemXbey  of  tbe  toun 
bybelde,  by  tbe  bourdeys  and  batyllemens  of  tbe 
walles,  tbemanereandcontenaunce  of  tbooste,and 
n4  *& 


rncruayUcd  mocbe  of  the  armes,of  the  tentes,and 
of  tbef acion  and  manere that  tbey  bad  for  to  lodge 
tbemXbey  were  in  grete  doubte,ffor  tbey  were  wel 
adcerteyned,  tbat  so  mocbe  and  grete  peple  wold 
not  ligbtly  departe  fro  tbis  siege  without  doyng 
tbem  grete  dammage  and  barmeXber  were  many 
tbat  were  so  aretely  effrayed  for  tbeyr  wyues,  tbeyr 
cbilderen  &  tbeyr  otber  frendes,  tbat  tbey  wold  tbat 
tbey  bad  ben  deed  &  buryed  long  to  fore,  to  tbende 
tbat  tbey  sbold  not  see  tbe  destruction  wbicb  tbev 
doubted  for  to  see,  7 

Row  our  peple  assembled  in  counseyl  for  to  fynde 

tbe  moyen  for  to  sende  for  vy taylle,  &  of  a  brvdet e 

tbat  tbey  made,  capitulo  lxxxx&& 

-~—  i(HR  peple,  tbat  were  tbus  lodg- 

ed,founde  not  about  tbem  past- 
uresf ortbeyr  borsesnef ortbeyr 
otber  bees tes.  XTberf  ore  tbem  be- 
boeued  of  te  to  passe  tbe  ryuer, 
and  torenne  tburgbtbe  con  trey, 
Cbus  dyde  tbey  many  tymes,  by 

causetbeyoftbetounmeuvdnot 
yet;  &  it  was  a  noyous  and  greuous  tbynge  to  passe 

tbei7^r,ffortberwasnobi7gge,butfefiedouer 
botes  botbe  borse  and man  jgr&ban  tbe^urkes  of 
tbe  cyte  apperceyued  tbts,  tbev  sen  te  secretely  ouer 
tbeyr  brygge  tbeyr  peple,wbicbetoke  and  slewe  our 
men,  tbat  tbey  fonde  so  sprad  in  tbe  contre.  And 
tbis  dyde  tbey  surely  ynowgb,  by  cause  tbey  mycrbt 
not  retourne  but  by  tbe  ryuer,  and  tbey  of  tboost 
mygbt  not  socoure  tbem.CClberf  or  our  barons  con- 


vu^r* 


■w 


seylled  tbem  to  gydre,  &  concluded  that  tbey  wold 
make  a  brygge  in  somme  maner,  by  wbyebe  tbey 
mygbt  passewitboutdaunger  of  tbem  of  tbetoun. 
TZbcy  fonde  sbippes  in  tbelaye,&abouein  tberyuer 
tbey  toke  &  ioyned  tbem  to  gydre,  and  setteplankes 
on  tbem,  and  nayled  tbem  in  sucbe  wyse  tbat  tbre 
or  four  men  mygbt  passe  on  a  front,  tbis  brigge 
dyde  mocbe  ease  toalle  tboostj^TTbis  brygge  was 
nygb  tbe  lodgys  of  due  Codeff roy,  rigbt  ayenst 
tbe  yatetbat  be  kepte;  &  tberfor  tbe  yate  wasnam- 
ed  tbe  yate  of  tbe  duc;ffro  tbis  brygge  of  tree  vnto 
tbe  brygge  of  stone  was  a  grete  myle,  as  1  sayd  to 
you  to  f  orejfiP  By  tbis  yate  and  by  tbis  bryge  was 
mocbe  barme  don  to  our  peple,  &  fey  tbe  yate  nam- 
ed tbe  porte  of  tbe  bounde ;  tbey  greued  mocbe  our 
peple,  ff  or  tbey  bad  a  brydge  of  stone  by  tbe  toun 
ff or  to  pass  tbe  marese  of  dyuerse  waters  gadred 
to  gydre,  tbat  ran  tbere ;  by  tbat  brygge  tbey  made 
tbeyr  assaylles  day  and  nygbt  vpon  tbe  peple  of 
tberleof  TTbolouse,  wbicb  kepte  tbe  gate-  Of  tymes 
tbey  opened  tbe  yates,  and  yssued  out  vpon  tbeyr 
lodgy es,  and  dyuerse  tbey  burted,  and  slewe  many ; 
&  wban  tbey  bad  don,  tbey  retomed  in  to  tbe  toun, 
fforouremenmygbtnot  poursiewetbem  butby  tbe 
bryggeXberforebit  bappedtbat  tbebissboppeof 
Puy ,  tberle  of  TTbolouse,  and  tbe  otber  barons  tbat 
were  tbere,were  more  burte  in  tbeyr  mounture  tban 
alle  tbe  otber  of  tboost 


185 


& 


WV&fir 


fiow  our  peple  stopped  a  yate  of  the  toun  without 
forth,  &  of  a  castelof  tree  that  they  made,  capitulo 

RIS  peple  had  grete  despyte  & 
gretesbameoftbedomagesand 
barmes  that  were  thus  don  to 
them,  &tokecounseyl  that  they 
wold  bete  doun  the  brygge,and 
theder  they  cam  al  armed,  vnder 
theyr  targes  and  sheldes  grete 
hammers  of  yron  &  grete  plen  te 
of  pyquoys,  and  began  to  smyte  for  to  breke  the 
brydge,  but  the  walles  were  so  stronge  and  barde 
that  they  myght  not  hurte  it*  And  on  that  other 
sy  de  they  of  the  toun  were  on  the  walles  &  tourettes, 
whicbe  threwe  grete  stones  &  tbycke  on  them  that 
so  pecked  to  breke  the  brygge,  that  they  were  f ayn 
to  leue  their  enter  prise  &retome  fro  tbensjjSFHf  ter 
this  they  thought  of  another  thynge,  and  made  a 
newe  castelof  tree,  &  sette  it  ayenst  the  bryggefor 
to  kepe  ittbattbey  sboldnot  passeouer  it  on  them, 
it  was  moche  werke  and  payne  to  make  it  (Oban  it 
was  sette  &  dressyd  therle  gamysshed  it  with  his 
menXhey  of  the  toun  adressyd  theyr  gonnes  and 
engynes  at  this  castel,  &  smote  itwith  gretestones, 
and  they  in  thetoures  shotte  therat  grete  plente  of 

arowes,somanyinsuchwysethatnonedurstabyde 
in  this  castel  ne  about  itjSTOn  aday  it  happed  that 
our  men  withdrewe  them  fro  the  brydge  &  fro  ther 
about, andthey  within  opened  theyate  and  yssued 
out  by  the  rowtes.  €hey  that  were  in  the  castel  of 
tree  fiedde,  and  the  other  sette  fyer  on  it,  and  brent 


,tt  to  assbesji^Our  men  sawe  wel  tbennc  that  tbey 

.warred  not  wel  tbus,andordeynedtbre  gonnesfor 

to  sbote  stonesat tbe  brygge.<ftbyles  tbey  sbotte 

>  none  of  tbe  XTurkes  yssued  ou te  tbere,  but  as  sone 

as  tbey  cessed  tbey  cam  oute  and  made  tbeyr  as- 

,  saylles  as  tbey  dyde  to  f orej^It  displesyd  mocbe 

to  oure  barons  tbat  tbey  mygbt  not  sette  noreme- 

dye  ayenst  tbe  comyngeouteof  tbyse'Curkes.Htte 

laste  tbey  acorded  tbat  tbey  wold  take  arete  stones 

i  of  tbe  rocbe,  sucb  as  were  conuenyent  for  a  gate,  & 

s toppe  tbe  passage.  Xibzy  tohe  an  bonderd  men  and 

>more,  and  stopped  tbe  gate  ouer  tbe  brydge:  tber 

weresomany  tbattt  was  doon  in  sucbe  wyse  tbatit 

coudenot  be  ligbtly  broken  agayneXbey  bad  grete 

'  trauaylle  and  payne  to  mahe  it,  but  tbey  tbat  were 

lodgedtberehepteallearmedtbemtbatbrougbttbe 

stones.  €bus  was  tbe  gate  stopped  in  sucbe  wyse 
tbat  tboost  abode  alle  m  peas  tbere,  for  tberurhes 
,  mygbt  nomore  make  tbeyr  assay  lies  tbere. 
Row  our  peplewere  in  gretemescbyef  for  as  mocbe 
as  tbey  of  tbe  touneyssued  and  entred  in  and  oute 
;  witb  grete  rowtes,  capitulo  ixxmj&& 

^N  a  day  it  bapped  tbat  tber  went 
i  outof  tboost  as  wel  on  footeas 
I  on  borsbak  a  tbrebonderdmen, 
&  passed  ou  er  tbe  brydge  of  tree, 
and  sprad  tbe  contreye  as  men 
tbatwent  on  foragyng.ltis  tbe 
custome  of  an  boostfor  to  900 
J  out  so  of  tymes  &  retome  wttb- 
out  dammage  or  burte,  tberf  or  tbey  bad  supposed 
kobaueben  sureXbey  of  tbe  toun  apperceyued  tt  & 

187 


yssued  out  with  grete  plente  of  peple,  &  wen  teoucr 
tbebrydgeof  stone  frantic  on  tnem  that  tbeysawe 
goo  so  f oly  ly,  and  somme  tbey  slewe,  &  other  fledde 
to  the  brydge.of  sbippis  where  tbey  supposed  to 
baue  passed.  But  tbenem^es  were  there  to  fore, and 
deff ended  tbem  tbe  wa^e  in  sucbe  wyse  tbat  many 
of  tbem  were  drowned  in  tbe  water  tbat  supposed 
to  baue  passed  ouer.  Other  of  oure  men  recountred 
tbeTTurkes  tbat  bad  slayn  and  discomfyted  our 
men  and  bare  away  witb  tbem  tbeir  proves  &  dis- 
poylles,  &  ranne  on  tbem,  Tbe  TTurkes  nedde,  and 
ourmen  poursiewed  tbem,sleyngandbetyngtbem 
vntowitbintbe  brydge  of  stone, 
p^_J^^ar>eYof  tbe  toun  tbat  sawe  tbeyrmen 
sopoursiewedsprangout  witn  grete 
prees  and  passed  tbe  brydge,  and  ran 
on  our  men,  wbicb  wold  bauedeff end- 
ed tbem,  but  tbey  mygbt  not  suifre 
so  grete  nombre  of  peple  and  fiedde. 


0>ey  folowed  tbem  doyngtotbem  grete  dommage, 
til  tbey  cam  to  tbe  brydge  of  ebippis,  tbere  tbey  as- 
say lied  tbem  so  barde  tbat  many  men  armed fyll in 
tbe  water,  wbicbe  were  tbere  drowned  &  loste.  Oure 
men  losttberemany men  on  foote  &  on  borsbakjfiF 
In  tbismanereweretbey  of  tboostein  gretemesease 
ffortbey  were  better  besieged  tban  tbey  of  tbetoun. 
Tbere  were  many  of  tbeyr  enemyes  in  tbe  woodes 
and  montaygnes,wbicbe  of teranne  vpon  our  peple 

wbantbeysawetbemgoowitboutordenaunce,and 
tbey  of  tbe  toun  yssued  out  wban  it  plesed  tbem, 
in  sucbe  wyse  tbat  our  men  durst  not  goo  f er  fro 
tboostefortofouragenefornoneotbertbyng.Hnd 

1oo 


1 


also  in  tbeyrlodgys  were  tbey  not  assured,  if  or  the 
tydynge  was  that  the  burkes  assembled  mocbe 
grete  plen  te  of  peple  for  to  smy  te  in  tboos  te  on  tbat 
one  side,  &  tbey  of  tbe  toun  on  tbat  other  side  sbold 
yssue  on  tbem* 

Of  tbe  f amyne  and  mortalyte  of  tboost  after  tbat 
tbey  bad  be  at  tbe  sayd  siege  tbe  space  of  two 
monetbes,  capitulo  ixxxxi\j&& 

"OR  to  recounte  alle  tbe  auent- 
ures  tbat  were  in  so  grete  a  sieae 
sboldbeouergreuous  &amocbe 
longtbyng,tberfbrIsbalsayeto 
youtbistbatlongetbtotbecom- 
yn j^Cbooste  bad  bolden  siege 
vnto  tbe  tbyrdemonetb,  vytayll 
-began  to  faylle,  and  was  grete 
suffrete  and  scarsenes  in  tboost.  XLbty  bad  in  tbe 
becrynnyng  largely  &  grete  babundaunce  botb  for 
menandborses;but  tbey  made  gretewaast&more 
tban  neded,andsoby  tbeir  oultrageandfolye  tbey 
lacked  in  sbort  tyme,  wbicb  mygbt  baue  long  sus- 
teyned  tbem  yf  tbey  bad  kepte  it  wel  and  gouerned 
by  mesureXney  suffred  grete  penurye  in  tboostof 
vitayl  for  men  &  beestes,in  sucb  wise  tbattbepour 
peple  were  in  grete  peryUBuery  day  assembled  ijor 
iij  C  men  of  armes  to  gydre  for  to  sercbe  tbe  con- 
trey  andfetcbe  vytayllesXbey  swore  to  gydre  tbat 
alle  tbegaynetbat  tbey  mygbt fyndeandconquere, 
tbey  sbold  departe  egally  emon  ge  tbemXbey  wen  te 
fortb  fer  fro  tboost,  and  fonde  tbe  townes  mocbe 
wel  gamyssbed,  by  cause  tbey  were  fer  fro  tboost 

189 


& 


they  thought  tbatnoman  sboldrobbenetakenotb- 
^frotbcm.and  thus  brougbtvytayll  to  tboste. 
"JCTC  whan  the  Oir  kes  of  the  toun ,  an  d 
alsootberin  the  countrey,  badapper- 
ceyued  this,  they  made  embussbe- 
mentesandrannevpon  our  men  whan 
they  retorned,  or  other  wbyle  whan 

tbeywentfortb,&slewetbemsomme 
tyme  alle,  that  none  retomedfor  to  brynge  tydyn- 
ges  to  tboost,  tberfor  and  dursttbey  goo  nomore 

a/fouragyngXbedertbewasmocbegretein  tboost 
and  euery  day  grewe  the  famyn  in  sucbe  wyse  that 
man  ete  wel  at  a  mele  in  brede  four  d.  H  cowe  was 
worth  four  marc  weyght  of  syluer,  which  a  man 
mygbt  haue  at  begynnyng  for  echt  or  ten  sbyll- 
yngis.  H  lambe  or  a  fcyd  was  at  sex  sbyllyngis, 
wbicbe  toforewasworthbuttbre  orfour  pensXbe 
mete  for  an  horse  for  a  nygbt  cost  xvj  pens,  Tber 
deydemany  for  bongerin  sucbewyse  tbatattbebe- 
ofynnynge  of  the  siege  the  horses  were  nombredat 
lxxJVI,and  at  that  tyme  were  scarse  ij  JVI,  &  they  were 
so  poure, feble and  lene,  that vnnetbe tbeymyabt 
helpe  ony  manXbe  tentes  &  pauyllons  roted,ffor 
it  rayned  continuelly  a  rayne  so  tbycl*e&  grete'tbat 
no  cloth  mygbt  susteyne  it,  wberf ore  mocbe  peple 
in  the  hooste  deyde  for  colde  and  mesease,  Cbevr 
clothes  roted  on  tbeyr  backs  by  cause  they  mvcrbt 
fynde  no  place  to  drye  them,  tThere  was  oneso  crrete 
mortahte  m  tboost,  that  vnnetbe  mygbt  bef onden 
men  forto  burye  them  that  deyde. Many  that  sawe 
this  grete  daunger  and  peryll  m  thooste  wente  and 
departed  pryuely  to  Rages  where  Bawdwyn  was, 
190 


■ 


,&  in  toScilicewbere  other  cyteeswere  alsojTCbus 
were  many  slayn,  and  grete  plente  deed  of  famyne 
Jand  of  otnermaladyes,  &  the  boost  was  so  mynu- 
>yssbid  that  tber  were  not  half  so  mocbe  peple  as 
tbey  were  at  begynnyng. 

Row  our  peple  ordeyn  ed  grete  rowtes  for  to  goo  for 
vytayll,  &  toreteyne  tbe  peple  wbicb  fled  for  bungre, 
capitulo  lyyyytitj^^ 

fCYNBS  assembled  tbe  bar- 
ons for  to  fynde  counseyl  bow 
tbeymygbtreteynetbepepletbat 
tbus  departed,  and  also  in  wbat 
maner  &  bow  tbey  migbt  aduise 
&  ordeyn  for  vytayll  for  tboost* 
j^Hnd  tbey  concluded  tbat  one 
Jpartyeof  tbe  barons  sboldbaue 
grete  plente  of  men  witbtbem,andgorigbtdepein 
totbelondeoftbepaynemsfortobryngevytaylles, 
and  alle  tbat  tbey  mygbt  fynde  and  gete  on  tbeyr 
enemyes.  Co  tbis  were  cbosen  Buymont  &  tbe  erle 
of  f  laundresjfiTCboost  was  delyuerd  to  tberle  of 
Cboulouse  and  to  Huon  le  JVIayne  to  gouerne,  ff  or 
tbe  ducof  J^ormandye  was  not  tbere,  &  due  Godef- 
froy  layesekemocbegreuouslyXbey  departed  for 
to  goo  on  fourage;  many  folowed  for  to  gete  some 

gayne. 

nT)Efl  tbe  Curhes  of  tbe  toun  sawe 
tbooste  tbus  voyde  and  waxe  lasse, 
and  hnewe  for  certayn  tbat  tberleof 
f  laundres,  Buymont,  &  tbe  due  of 
JNx>rmandyewentnottbere,andtbat 

tbe  due  ©odeffroy  laye  in  bis  bedde 

191 


seke,tbey  preysedand  doubted  mocb  tbc  lasse  tbc 
remenaunt,and  tokecounseyl  tbat  tbey  wold  make 
an  assayllyng  by  tbc  brydge.  But  tbey  tbat  kept 
tboost  bad  knowlecbe  beror,  and  were  aduertysed 
and  were  al  armed  on  borsbak,  &  cam  ayenst  tbem 
&slewemany  of  tbe  burkes  tbat  were  come  to  fore 
and  were  many  grete  men  of  tbe  toun  j^Cdban  tbe 
p  otber  barons  sawe  tbis,  wbat  for  sorow  &  for  fere, 
were  discomfyted  and  fled  agayn  in  to  tbe  toun, 
mXC  a  grete  mesauenture  bapped  to 
oure  peple;  ffor,as  tbe  burkes  fiedde 
dyscomfyted,oneof  tbem  was  beten 
doun  of  bis  bors,  and  bis  bors  fiedd 
toward  tbe  lodgys,  and  many  of  our 
men  ranne  after  to  wynne  bym.  Tbe 
jrnene  peple  &  otber  tbat  sawe  tbe  borse,  supposed 
jtbat  our  men  bad  been  disconfyted  and  tbat  tbey 
{bad  fled  to  fore  tbeyr  enemyes,  and  tbey  began  to 
mee,  and  otber  tbat  sawe  tbem  flee  fledde  also,  in 
>sucbe  wyse  tbat  alle  tomed  to  discomfyture  ouer 
fowlejg?CClban  tbeTTurkes  bebelde  tbis,  and  sawe 
tbat  our  men  disconfyted  tbem  self,  anonc  tbey  re- 
tomed  and  passed  tbe  brygge,  and  began  to  cbace 
tbem  tbatsofledde,andbeteandslewe  tbem  fro  tbe 
brydge  of  stone  vnto  tbe  brydge  of  tbe  sbippis, 
XTbere  were  slayn  of  our  men  on  borsbak  a  xx  and  a 
foot  yet  moo,  CbelTurkes  retomed  in  to  tbeyr  cy te 
demenyng  grete  ioye  and  feste  for  tbis  iourneye. 


192 


ftowBuymontand  tberleof  flaundree  mayntened 
bem  beynginfouragcOf  tbeyrrecountrees  and  of 
tbe  aaync  tbat  tbey  made,  capitulo  Ixxxxvfjf 

— -^pAOJSTCandtberleof  flaun- 
dree, tbat  were  acntc  by  comyn 
couneeyl  in  f ouragyng,  entrcd 
fer  in  to  tbe  lande  of  tbeyr  ene- 
myee,  &  f ounde  a  mocbe  ryebe 
toun,good&ful  of  tbyng  tbat 
tbey  badnedeof  in  tboo8t;tbey 
J  tone  all,ffor  tbey  f ondeneytber 

man  ne  woman  tbat  empesabed  ne  letted  tbcm£ 
rbwetwobaronebadsentetbcyreapyeaindyuere 

partyea  of  tbe  londe  fortcnauyrc  ^9j*n*m 
tbeymygbtgetemorevytaylfortoledetbebooete. 

ftowTttfappcd  tbat  one"  of  tbe  W^X,  "£ 
mont&saydetbatagrete  eompany  of  Curhee  wm 

MubuBfibedin  a  place  nygbe  by  tbem,  for  torenne 
Z  tbeTwban  tfcey  wentt  on  fouragyng.  Cbenne 
tbev  o^deyned  tbat  tberle  of  flaundree  abold  goo 
fSb  witbbte  men,  and  Buymon  t  fbold  come  fer 
aftw.^d  so  waedoonXberle  of  f  laundreefonde 

tby8emen,&a88embledtogydrefierely;tbebatayll 
3tonge  and  cruel,  ffor  tbeTTurkce  bad  mo  men 

tbanS  of  f  laundrca.  Ht  tbe  Uett ™™™™£ 
diacomfytediortbeflemyngeemygbtnotendure, 

butneddeerBuymontcam,and  so  were  lefteof. pur 
men  there  welan  bundcrd  or  morein  tbe  place  .ma 
tbenne  our  men  retorncd  in  to  tbooat  wtb  grete 
good  and  gayn  tbat  tbey  bad  gadred  to  gycire. 


01 


193 


>YLGS  tbey  were  there  cam  to  tbem 
other  capyca  of  an  other  contre,tbat 
aduerty  aed  them  of  o tberOir kea  that 
way  ted  to  hurte  them  whan  they  aawe 
theyr  aduantagejjTCbey  were  tbenne 
moo  men  and  better  armed  than  tbey 
bad  ben  to  fore,  tbey  were  in  counaeyl,  and  tberle  of 
f  laundrea  wold  that  noman  ahold  enterprise  the 
batayl  but  be,  but  be tokemomen  with  bym  than  be 
dyde  tof ore.  Buymont  cam  after  with  as  many  aa 
be  mygbt  baue.  Tberle  of  f  laundrea  baated  bym 
&aurpriaed  tbeCurkea  in  a  valeye  atrayt,in  aucbe 
wyae  that  tbey  mygbt  not  renne  betber  ne  tbeder 
for  to  abote,  but  were  conatreyned  to  deff ende  tbem 
atrongly  with  theyr  awerdea  &  macea,  wbicbe  waa 
not  aure  for  tbem,  by  cauae  wban  oure  meyne  dia- 
cbarged  on  tbem  tbey  mygbt  not  auateyne  it,  but 
fliedde  anon.  Oure  men  f  olowed  tbem  in  newyng  & 
aleyng  tbem, and  ouertbrewe  many  of  tbem;  tbey 
wanne  boraea,  mulea,  armourea  &  robes  grete  plen- 
te,  and  after  retomed  in  to  tbe  booat  witb  grete  vie* 
torye  and  grete  gayne.  Grete  ioye  was  made  tbenne 
in  tboost  wban  tbey  were  comen.  Hlle  tbey  were  re- 
freaaby  d  &  alleged  of  tbeir  meaeaaea  tbat  tbev  bad 
longe  auff redXbey  bad  vytayllea  reaonable  a  cer- 

teyntyme,butitendurednotlongetbatwbicbetbey 
bad  brought  with  tbem.  7 


194 


!-^- 


fiow  a  grete  rowte  of  cristen  men  were  in  this  tyme 
slayn  by  the  Curkes  bytwene  f  ynemyne  &  Cerme, 

capitulo  lxxxxvj&& 

"W  this  tyme  cam  tydynges  fro 
Romane  tbat  doubled  tbeyrsor- 
ow  and  anguyssbis&tbeyr  me- 
sease  doubled.  It  was  sayd,and 
troutb  it  was,  tbat  an  bye  noble 
,man  &puyssauntof  Denmarke, 

'named  Guennes,  of  mocb  fayr 
-beaulte  &  of  good  maners,berd 
/  say  tbat  tbe  barons  of  f  raunce  and  tbe  valyaunt 
V*  men  of  tbat  londe  were  goon  in  pylgremaae  ouer 
w  tbe  see  for  to  make  warre  to  tbe  SarasynsXbis  no- 
ble man  tof ore  named,  wbicbe  bad  **f**™£^ 
and  bye,bad  grete  wylle  for  to  goo  ^tighT* 
toke  of  bisfader  certeyn  good,  and  ^^*W 
wel  v  C  knvtfbtes  and  otber  men  yongand  wel  arm- 
ed, fie  basted  mocbe  for  to  ouertake  tboost :  of  tbe 
f rcnssbemen,but  bemygbt  notouertake  tbem,ffor 
be  cam  ouer  late,  &  bad  none  m  bts  companye  sauf 
Imen  of  bis  countrey.  T>t  cam  by  Constantmobie, 
wbere  tbemperour  dyde  to  bym  bonour,&  after  be 
wente  toNycene  witb  alle  bis  companye  &  lodged 
bym  by  twene  two  cy tees ;  tbat  one  was  named  f  yn- 
emyne, &  tbat  otberCermeXbere  tbey  dyde  not  as 
tbey  ougbttodoo,by  causetbey  were  in  tbelonde  or 
tbeyr  enemyes,  but  tbey  assured  tbem  ou*™°™*> 
in  sucbe  wysetbat  on  a  nygbt  a  grete  partye  of  tbe 
Turkes  tbat  bad  espyed  tbem  smote  m  sodanly  on 
tbem  &  began  to  slee  tbem  in  tbeyr  beddes.JNeuer- 


tbeles  somme  tbcr  were  that  appercey  ued  tbem  and 
^ran  to  tbeyr  armes,&  cam  ayenst  tbeTTurkes  &  sold 
tbeyr  lyf  dere.  But  in  tbende  tbey  were  alle  slayn,  & 
none  escaped  of  alle  tboost  except  a  tbre  or  foure 
attemoste* 

)F>ow  tbe  vntrew  <3reek  Latyns  departed  fraude- 
louslv  fro  tbe  boost,  and  otber  moo  by  tbensam- 
*ple  or  bym,  capitulo  lxxxxvi}&& 

HTTfN^tbis  disloyal  6reek  of 
wbom  we  baue  spoken  to  fore, 
wbom  tbem  perour  bad  delyuerd 
to  oure  peple,for  to  lede  &  con- 
duy  te  tbem,  bad  f oynously  tak- 
en beede  of  tbe  gouernaunce  of 
tboost  vn to  tbis  day,  and  of  tbe 
Irewle  of  tbe  barons,  and  alway 
peyned  bym  for  to  deceyue  tbem  alle  tbe  maners 
tbat  be  mygbt.  JVow  apperceeued  be  wel,  tbat  tbaf- 
fayres  of  tbooste  were  not  in  good  poynt,  ne  in 
good  disposicion,  and  doubted  mocbe,  for  be  was 
nil  of  cowardyse,  &  tbougbt  tbe  pylgryms  sbold 
sommeday  be  surprisedof  tbeTTurkesof  tbetoun, 
and  sbold  alle  be  slayn.  TTberf or  be  spak  secretely 
to  one  and  otber,  and  counseylled  tbem  to  leue  tbe 
\ siege,  and  tbat  al  tbooste  sbold  departe  in  to  tbe 
cytees  tbat  our  men  belde  vnto  tbe  newe  tyme;  ffor 
*tt  was  certayn,  be  sayde,  tbat  tbemperour  bad  sen  te 
for  tbe  grettest  boostetbat  be  mygbt  assemble, 
,  for  to  come  and  socouretbem  as  sone  as  be  mygbt 
fynde  grasse  on  tbe  ertbe  for  tbe  borses^Hnd  be 
bym  self,  by  cause  be  loued  tbe  werke  of  oure  lord 
jwitb  tbe  noble  men  tbat  be  bad,  wold  enterprise 
vpon  bym  for  tbe  comyn  prouffy t  a  grete  trauay  11, 


and  be  bym  self  c  woldgoo  dylygently  to tbemper- 
our  for  to  baste  bym  witb  bis  boost  &  allc  tbc  vy- 
tavUe  tbat  be  mygbt  fynde,  &  to  make  bym  come- 
"Hjojy  of  tbe  barons  knewe  vpon  tbis 
poyntbisfalsene8,andapperceyued 
tbat  be  sougbt  manere  by  tbis  waye 
fortoflee,and  byleuyd  bym  not, but 
acordedtbat  be  sbold  goo  bis  waye- 
-  Re  made  semblaunt  for  to  retoume 
andcome  soneageyn,&left  bispauyllonsandsom 
of  bis  men  to  wbom  pereaduenture  be  badsayd  that 
tbey  sbold  f  olowe  and  come  after,  or  elly  s  tbat  be  n  e 
rauabt  wbat  mygbt  come  of  tbemXbus  departed 
be  wbom  tbedeuy  I  bad  brougbt,  and  lad  bym  away 
aaayn ;  if  or  by  tbe  wordes  tbat  be  bad  sowen,  and 
by  tbensample  of  bis  departyng,  began  many  men 
to  departe  fro  tboost,  and  toke  no  regarde  to  tbeyr 
auowe  ne  to  tbe  otb  tbat  tbey  bad  promysed,  but 
wente  secretly  one  after  anotber-  €be  f  amyne  was 
mocbe arete  in  tbooste ;  tbe  barons  coude  fynde  no 
remedye  ne  counseyl  tberf ore,  €routb  it  was  tbey 
sente  of  te  two  and  two  of  tbe  grettest  lordes  witb 
grete  companye  of  men  for  to  pourcbasse  vytayl- 
lesXbey  wente  mocb  surely  in  tbe  landes  of  tbeyr 
enemyes  rigbt  deep  and  f  era,  and  sleyng  many  of 
tbem  tbat  wold  baue  deff  ended  tbeyr  passage,  but 
vy  tay  lies  brougbt  tbey  none ;  if  or  tbeCurkes  of  tbe 
contre,  tbat  bad  apperceyued tbat  oure  peple  wente 
for  to  secbe  vytalles,  bad  do  ledde  away  alle  tbeyr 
beestes  &  tbeyr  vytaylles  vnto  tbe  montaynes  and 
desert  places  wbere  none  mygbt  come,  and  somme 
bad  tbey  bydde  in  tbe  wodes  and  caues  vnder  tbe 
ertbe,wr>icbe  our  men  coude  not  fynde, 

0  3  197 


I 


Ite 


f)ow  tbc  prelates  of  the  boost  counseylled  to  doo 
penaun  ce  for  tappese  god,  &  of  thordenaun  ces  that 
were  made  tescbewe  synne,  capitulo  lxxxxvi\j&& 

WRffl&f  mortalyte,  and  many 
other  perillis  cessednot  torenne 
on  the  peple  of  oure  lorde.  Che 
noble  and  wyse  men  of  tbooste 
tbat  were  trewe,  good,  and  re- 
ly gy  ous,as  tbe  bissbop  of  puy , 
tbat  was  legate  for  our  boly  fa- 
der tbe  pope,  and  other,  spak  to 
gydre  tbenne,  and  sayd  it  was  mocbe  to  drede  and 
doubte  tbat  ourlordwereangry  witb  bispylgryms 
for  their  synnes,  €berfor  tbey  aduysed  tbat  tbey 
wold  speke  witb  tbe  barons  for  to  make  peas  and 
acorde  vn  toour  lord*  Hnd  was  ordeyned  by  tbe  con- 
sentement  of  alle  tbem  of  tboost,  tbat  tbey  sbold 
faste  in  prayers  and  in  penaun  ce  for  to  crye  mercy 
vnto  our  lord  by  tbe  space  of  iij  dayes,  to  tbende 
tbat  bewold  pardone  tbeyr  trespaces  and  bebolde 
tbem  in  pyte.'Cbis  was  don  witbgretewepyngand 
wayllyngesof  bertej^Hfter  tbis  tbey  commanded 
tbat  alle  tbe  comyn  wymmen  of  euil  lyf  sbold  be 
voydedand  castoutof  tboost,  &  was  cryed  tburgb 
out  alle  tbe  booste,  tbat  wbo  tbat  after  tbat  were 
taken  in  adulteryeorinfomycacion  sbold  baue  bis 
beed  smeton  of  ♦Incontinent  tbedroncardysof  the 
tauemes,  tbe  players  of  dyse,  and  tbe  grete  otbes, 
were  deff ended  vpon  tbe  same  payne,fals  mesures 
&  tbef  te,  alle  sucbe  tbynges  were  commaunded  to 
be  lef  te  and  eschewed,  'Cbere  were  chosen  wise  men 


andtrewe,tbatsboldtakebeedfortopunnyssbetbe 
malefactours.Hf  ter  tbyseordenaunces  &  statutes 
were  somme  f ounden  culpable  in  tbe  same,  wbere 
were  so  punnyssbed  tberfore  tbat  tbe  otber  were 
cbastysedtberby^Glban  tbe  peple  were  amended 
vnto  our  lord,  tbe  mercy  of  our  lord  cam  without 
taryeng  on  tbem,  ffor  tbe  Due  Godeffroy,  wbicbe 
was  all  tbe  surete  of  tboost,  and  as  tbeyr  es  tandart, 
bad  ben  longeseke  by  tboccasion  of  bis  burte,  tbat 
be  bad  taken  in  tbe  londe  of  pysside  by  a  bere,  as 
it  batb  be  sayd  to  fore,nygb  by  lytilHntbyocbe,& 
was  now  sodenly  come  to  good  beltbe,  wberof  alle 
tbey  of  tbooste  bad  mocbe  grete  ioye,and  byleuyd 
fermely  tbat  tbeyr penaunce sprayers  bad  lengtb- 
ed  bis  lyf  and  respyted  it. 
How  Buymont  f onde  a  subtil  remydye  for  to  de- 
lyuer  and  purge  tbe  booste  of  tbe  espyes  of  tbe 
burkes,  capitulo  ixxxx\x&& 

"R6C6  renommee  was  spradd 
tburgb  out  al  tboryent,  and  to- 
ward tbe  contrees  of  tbe  soutb, 
tbat  ouer  grete  nombre  of  peple 
of  tbe  contrees  wbere  tbe  sonne 
gotbdoun  were  comen,  and  bad 
besieged  tbe  noble  cyte  of  Hn- 
i  tbyocbe.  Hit  was  a  grete  tbyng 
introutb,buttbetydyngesweremocbemoregretter 
witboutecomparyson.Guerycbeoftbepuyssaunt 
lordes  of  tbat  countrees  &  londes  bad  sente  tbeyr 
espyes  in  to  tbe  boost,  and  tber  were  so  many  that 
tbey  cessednot  to  come  and  goo,  &  continuelly,  and 
vnnetbemygbtony  tbyng  be  don  or  saydin  tbooste 
neintbelodgys^buttnatitwasanonknowenintbe 

04  199 


paynemye.Itwasa  light  &  easy  tbyng  for  tbcm  to 
)be  with  our  peplein  tbost  XTbcr  were  of  tbeCurkes 
tbatcoudspeke  Greek,  &  tbe  Ian  gage  of  ermenye, 
and  tohe  tbabyte  of  tbe  Surrey  ens,  of  Grebes,  &of 
tbem  of  RermenyXber  were  many  of*  sucbe  maner 

Y)G  barons  tohe  counseyl  emong 
tbem  bow  tbey  my  gb  t  voy  de  &  purge 
tboost  of  tbis  pestelence  of  espyes, 
ffor  tbey  belde  tbem  in  arete  paryll 
andgretedaunaer,  tbat  tbeyr  couyne 
andpurpoos  sboldbe  knowen  in  tbe 
londesof  tbeyr  enemyes,anditwasnoligbttbynge 
jtoknowetbemtbatweresucbeespyes.Gmongealle 
otbertbyngestbeycoudefyndenoneotberremedye, 
but  to  bolde  tbeyr  counseyl  secrete,  and  fro  tban 
f  ortbon  say  lasse  to  tbe  peple  tban  tbey  were  wont 
to  dooj^Buymont,  wbvebe  was  of  mocbe  grete 
wytte  and  bye  berte,  spak  to  tbe  barons,  and  sayd 
in  tbis  manere:f  ayr  lordes,!  praye  you  tbat  ye  wil 
late  me  cbeuyssbe  witb  tbis  matere,  ffor  1  baue  re- 
membryd  bow  we  sbal  be  delyuerd  of  tbis  peryl, 
wberfor,  1  praye  you,  give  to  me  tbe  cbarge  tberof 
jj^Cbe  barons  belde  Buymont  for  a  mocbe  wyse- 
,man,and  prudent,  &  gladly  sette  tbecbarge  tberof 
onbym,  and  departed  fro  tbe  counseyll 

"laYNONX:  forgate  not  tbis  tbat 
be  bad  promysedj^OIban  tyme  of 
souppercam  be  disposed  &  ordeyn- 
ed  bym  for  to  souppe,  He  made  tbe 
knygbtes  of  bis  contre  to  take  out 

sommeXTurkes  tbatbebadin  prison, 

200 


and  madetbeyr  tbrotes  tobecutte,andafter  smote 

rtbem  in  pyeces  and  arrayed  tbem  for  to  be  rested. 

fcbennebegan  tbey  todemaundewbat  bewolddoo. 

Olbenne  Buymont  sayd  to  bis  men,  &  bad  bismen 

also  to  saye  to  otber,  tbat  alle  tbe  barons  bad  tbus 

^ordeyned  &  sworn,  tbat  alle  tbe  espy  es  tbat  my  gbt 

be  taken  in  tbost  sbold  be  rosted  andseruyd  at  tbe 

tables  of  tbe  barons,  and  tbe  barons  sbold  ete  tbem 

by  tbeir  otb,  . 

^nyse  tidynges  were  anon  spred 

tburgbouttboost,tbatsucbeiustyce 

was  don  in  tbe  lodgys  of  Buymont 
Hlle  men  ran  tbeder  for  to  see  tbis 
merueylleXbeHurkes  tbem  self  tbat 
J  were  comen  in  to  tboost  for  to  espye, 
were  mocbeaffrayed,and  euerycb  of  tbem  tbougbt 
lonae  or  be  was  departed  fro  tbe  lodgys,  by  cause 
tbey  doubted  tbattbey  sbold  beseruid  mlykewyse, 
f  Hftirwban  tbey  wereretomed  borne  totbeir  lordes 
tbat  bad  sent  tbem,  tbey  sayd  to  tbem,  and  tolde 
m  alaboutetbe  countrey  tbat  sucbe  men  as  were  come 
vl£  for  tassiege  Hntbyocbe  suifred  mocbe  mesease,& 
werebarderayenst  trauyall  and  labouretban  stone 
or  yron.  Of  cruelte  tbey  passed  alle  beres  and  lyons, 
ffor  tbe  wylde  beestes  ete  men  alle  rawe,  but  tbyee 
men  roste  tbem  afore,  &  after  deuoure  tbem  j^Ons 
tydynge  was  in  sucbe  wyse  knowen  &publyssbyd 
in  alle  paynemye,  tbat  after  tbe  soudan  and  tbe 
greteadmyralsmygbtneuerfyndemanwoldecome 

and  espye  tbe  boost  Oey  bad  were  m  tbe  cyte  as- 
sy eged  were  so  effray  ed  an  d  bad  so  grete  by  dour  or 
tbis  tbat  fro  tbat  tyme  afterward  tbe  counseyl  of 

201 


tbc  barons  was  better  kept  and  more  secretely  tban 
it  was  to  fore* 

How  tbe  calepbe  of  Sgypt  sente  bis  messagers 
witbgreteyeftesvnto  our  boost,  capitulo  c^^ 

~]JVIOJV6  otber  mescreaunts  gfrete 
lordes  &  prynces,  tbe  calipbe  of 
Cgipte  was  tbe  moost  mygbty 
ofmen&moostrycbeofgoodes; 
be  sente  bis  messagers  vnto  tbe 
barons  tbat  were  in  tboost.flnd 
Xsbal  sayebow,&  by  wbat  occa- 
sion, grete  bate  and  mocbe  tiers 
batb  ben  bytwene  tbe  TTurkes  of  tboryentand  tbe 
pirkes  of  egypte,  and  batb  be  of  auncyent  and 
long  tyme,  by  cause tbey  discorde  in  tbeyr  creaunce 
>and  mysbyleue,andecbe  sayd  to  otber  and  yetdoo 
tbat  tbey  be  fals  Sarasyns,  as  1  baue  sayd  to  fore 
in  tbe  begynnyng  of  tbis  book,  and  tberfore  tbey 
ben  of te  in  warre.  Somtyme  one  partye  is  aboue, 
andanotber  tymetbat otber j0\x\  tbetyme  tbat  our 
peple  were  toforeHn  tbyocbe,  tbis  calipbe  of  wbom 
I  speke  now,  belde  all  tbe  londe  of  egy pte  vn to  tbe 

cyteofSureycwbicbeconteynetbwelxxxioumeves 
>  long,  Tbe  soudan  of  perse,  a  ly  ty  I  tof  ore  tbat  oure 
peple  cam,  bad  conquerd  tbe  toun  of  Hntbvocbe, 
wbicbeis  by  tbe  royame  of  6gypte,  &  alle  tbe  londe 
>entterly  ^tottebraas  of  seynt  George,  as  I  baue 
sayd  to  forej^JVow  bad  tbe  calypbe  of  egipte  in 
mocbe  suspection  tbesowdan  of  perse,  andmocbe 
plesyd  bym  bis  destruction  and  dommage,  &  bad 
jnocbe  ioye  tbat  Solyman  bad  lost  JVycene,  wbicbe 


Solyman  was  neuew  to  tbesaydsoudan,  &  was  so 
enf ebled  of  bis  m  en  ,and  also  be  was  plesyd  tbat  our 
cristen  peple  bad  besieged  tbe  cyte  of  Hntbyocbe* 
Xlberf  or  be  sen  te  aood  messagers  to  speke  to  tbem, 
wbicbebrougbtngbt^eteyeftes,andmocberycbe 
presente8yftbeywoldreceyuetbem,andtbeysayde 
tbat  tbe  calipbe was  redy  for  to  gyue  to  tbem  soc- 
oureand  ayde  rigbt  largely  of  men,of  goodand  of 
vy  tay  ll,and  prayd  tbem  mocbe  derely  tbat  tbey  wold 
maynteneand  coritenue  tbeyr  siegeXbe  barons  of 
our  boost  receyued  tbe  noble  men  tbat  were  comen 
and  sent  from  bym  bonorably,  and  made  tbem  to 
soioumewitb  tbem,  and  tbey  tbat  were  wyse  knewe 
anon  tbe  wytte  and  vygour  of  our  barons,  and  be- 
gonne  to  baue  mocbe  grete  doubte  and  suspection 
tbat  our  peple  were  so  valyaunt,  and  tbat  yet  tbey 
sbolde  do  grete  dommage  in  tbeyr  londe,  so  tbat 
tbey  deuysed  in  tbis  tbyngeas  ye  sbal  nowe  berein 
\redyng  boolly  tbis  book* 
f>ow  Hncean,tbe  lord  of  Hntbyocbe,&  bis  barons 
sen  te  vnto  tbe€urkes,  tbeyr  neygbbours,f or  to  de- 
maunde  socours,  capitulo  t)&& 

"3D6  lord  of  Hntbyocbe  and  tbe 
1  otber  greteand  noble  men  of  tbe 
toun,seyngf  tbat  our  men  suffred 
so  mocbe  f amyne  &  mesease,  as 
we  baue  sayd  to  fore,  &  fore  alle 
tbyse  tbynges  wold  in  no  wyse 
leue  tbeyr  siege,  but  sbewed  by 

„_., 'tbeyr  countenaunces  tbat  tbis 

trauaylgreuedtbem  not,  wberfore  tbey  were  mocbe 
abassbyd-  Hnd  tbenne  Hncean,  by  tbe  counseyl  of 

203 


bis  men  and  them  that  were  moost  pryuewitbbym, 
sente  messagers  and  lettres  to  bis  moost  ryebe 
neygbbours,  and  prayd  bym  rigbt  derely  for  tbe 
bonour  of  tbeyr  lawe,for  tbe  sauyng  of  tnem  self, 
and  for  bis  loue,  tbat  tbey  wold  come  and  socoure 
tbem  without  taryeng*  Hnd  be  sente  tbem  word  in 
wbat  maner  tbey  sbold  approcbe  secretely  to  Hn- 
tbyocbe,and  after  tbey  sbold  couere  tbem  in  abus- 
sbement  nygbby,and  tbere  abydetbepylgrymsas 
tbey  bad  benacustomed,andat  sucbe  tyme  as  tbey 
sbold  come  to  tbe  brydge,  ffor  tbere  sbold  tbey 
sprynge  outof  tbe  toun,  and  sbold  assaylle  tbem* 
Hnd  wbyle  tbey  were  besy  in  fygbtyng,  tbey  tbat 
were  embussbed  sbold  sodenly  breke  and  come  by 
byndeon  tbem  and  fygbt,  and  so  sbold  tbey  be  en- 
closed bytwene  tbem  witbin  and  tbem  witboute,in 
sucbe  wyse  tbat  none  sbold  escape* 

RBY  tbat  berd  tbise  lettres  &  tbyse 
messagers  doubted  tbem  mocbe  of 
our  peple^wberf  or  tbey  acorded  glad- 
ly to  tbis  counseyL  cbey  assembled 
tbem  of  f)allape,  tbem  of  Cezayre, 
tbem  of  Raman,  and  of  otber  cytees 
about,  tyl  tbey  were  a  grete  nombre  of  peple,  and 
tbis  dyae  tbey  tbe  moost  secretely  tbey  mygbt,  as 
was  to  tbem  commaunded,  and  began  to  departe 
and  approucbe  Hntbyocbe.  Hnd  cam  to  a  castel 
named  naran  t,  wbicbe  is  fro  tbens  axiiij  my  le,  tbere 
tbey  lodged;and  tbougbton  tbe  mome,assoneas 
tbe  scarmucbe  sbold  be  bytwene  tbepylgrymsand 
tbem  of  tbe  toun  tbey  sbold  smyte  in  witb  tbeyr 

sporesvpponourmenj^Hndourecristenmenwere 
204 


in  grctc  pcryl;  butone  tbyngtber  was  tbenne,  tbat 
tbo  &  other  tymes  dyde  tbem  grctc  good,  ffor  tber 
were  cristen  men,  fiermyns  &  Surryens  in  tbe  cytees 
of  wbicbe  tbe€urkes  were  departed,  wbicbe  anon 
letetbebaronsoftboostbaueknowlecbebowitwas 
concluded  bytwene  tbe  €urkes^€bey  assembled 
anon  for  to  take  aduys  berupon,  and  was  acorded 
emonge  tbem  tbat  alle  tbey  tbat  bad  ony  borses  to 
ride  on  sbold  be  arayed  and  on  borsbak  as  sone  as 
it  were  nygbt,  and  tbat  euery  man  sbold  drawem 
to  bis  bataylle  lyke  as  tbey  were  assygned,  &  arter 
sbold  yssue  outof  tboost  without  ony  yoyseXbe 
peple  on  foote  sbold  abyde  8tyllalle,and  be  redy  to 
deffende  tbe  lodgys,  yf  ony  tbyng  sourded  ayenst 

fioToure  peple  knewe  tbe couyne  of  tbcZurhte £f 
tbenbussbe  tbat  tbey  made,  and  of  tlw  victorye 
and  gayne  tbat  tbey  bad,  capitulo  *J** 

— *HS  sone  as  it  was  nygbt  tbey 
yssued  out  lyke  as  tbey  were 
J  commaunded;  tbey  passed  tbe 
I  brydge  of  ebippes,  &  tbey  were 
not  passy  ng  vij  C  men  on  bors- 
bak.  €bey  tbat  wente  cam  to  a 
laycwbicbewasbytwenetbelaye 

of  wbicbelbauespokcn  to  fore, 

and  tbe  ryuer  named  ftelle,  wbicbe  ben  tbat  one  fro 
tbatotbernygbamyleXbmtbeyrestedtbemtms 

nygbt;tbeyrmemyestbatknewcnotbyngoft^ 

comyng,weretbi9nygbtpas8edtbebrydge,wbicbe 

isupon  tberyuerof  fi?lle>In  tbemomyng,as8one 


'1 

asourmen  apperceyued  tbe  day,  tbey  armed  tbem& 
made  vj  bataylles  of  tbem:tbe€urkesbadsenteby 
fore  tbeir  corrours,  wbicb  cam  and  sayde  tbat  tbe 
grete  peple  cam  ayenst  tbem,  Cbey  sente  to  fore  ij 
of  tbeyr  bataylles,  and  af  tir  cam  tbe  grete  peple, 
tUban  tbey  approucbed  tbey  were  in  grete  desraye; 
tbe  arcbers  approucbed  first,  wbicbesbotte  tbycke, 
butouremensmoteinwitbtbesperesmocbeasprely 
in  6u  cbe  wyse  tbat  tbey  made  tbem  to  flee,  &  cbaced 
tbem  to  tbeyr  grete  bataylles,  €bere  were  tbey  in 
sucbe  adestray  t  betwene  tberyuer,  and  tbe  laye  tbat 
tbey  mygbtnot  sbote  ne  flee  after  tbeyr  customme. 
T~bere  was  tbe  medlyng  greteand fiers,and  tbe  ba~ 
J0™ |  and  men  of  armes  dyde  mocbe  wel  But  tbe 

curkestbatbadlosttbemaneroffygbtyngmygbt 
not  deffende  tbem,  ne  endure  tbe  strokes  of  oure 
xple,  but  fledde  tbeyr  way  al  tbat  tbey  my c?bt. 


RejVjNGwban  our  baron ssawetbis 
tbey  began  to  doo  wel,  &  commaund- 
ed  tbatnoman  sboldfayone,butfol- 
owe  tbe  cbaas  asprely,  tbe  burkes 
fiedde  vnto  Rernant;  oure  men  fol- 
owed  alwev,  sleyng  and  bewyng  of 

beedesandaiws,tbatal  tbe  wave  tbat  tbev  passed 
by  was  sowen  witb  dede  men.  tbis  cbaas  endured 

welxmyle^rberurkestbatwerewitbintbecastel 
of  nemantsawe  tbat  tbeyr  men  cam  alle  discom- 
fyted,  tbey  sette  fyere  on  tbe  castel,  and  tbev  tbem 
self  fiedde.  But  tbe  Rermyns  and  tbe  otbercristen 
men,  of  wbom  were  many  in  tbe  castel,  recouuerd 
tbe  fortresse  and  yelded  it  to  oure  men  wban  tbev 
cam  j?  rbis  day  were  slayn  of  tbe  TTurkes  moo 
206 


than  ij  thousand.  tlbey  toke  v  C  beedes  of  tbem 
that  were  best  arrayed,  and  brought  with  tbem  in 
eigne  of  vyctorye.  Xibty  wan  there  wel  a  JVI  horses 
for  armes,  grete  and  my  gbty ,  wberof  they  had  grete 
nedejSrcbu8retornedtbeytotbeyrlodgys,cbarged 
f  ul  of  proyes  of  armures  &  of  dispoy  lies,  makyng 
arete  joye,  and  tbankyng  oure  lord  that  bad  com- 
forted tbem  in  tbeyr  meseases. 
Row  the  tlurkee  of  Hntbyocbc  sprange  out  A  as- 
sayled  the  todays  of  oure  peple,  capitulo  riipW 

n  RG  cytezeyns  &  babytantee  of 
Hntbyoche  bad  herd  tydynges 
bow  tneOirkes,  that  bad  ben  so 
discomfy  ted,  were  departed  and 
meuyd  fro  tbeyr  con  trees  for  to 
come  socoure  them,  tberfortbey 
badtbeyreeresopenetoberetyd- 
_  ynaes  of  tbeyr  comyng,  &  were 
alle  armed  and  redy  for  to  make  thassayUe  by  the 
brvdac  alle  incontinentwban  they  sbold  see  tbem. 
But  whan  they  sawe  that  the  nygbt  passed,  &  that 
tbedaycamwithoutbauyngonyknowlecbeof  tbeyr 
approucbement,  tbeyr  espyes  made  them  certayn 
that  our  men  were  goon  on  borsbak  ayenst  tbem. 
Tberf  ore  they  toke  herte,  &y ssued  vn  to  the  lodgys, 
fforourmen  werenotyetcomenagaymn  totboost. 
tlbey  assaylled  tbem  mocbe  asprely  and  barde,  in 
so  mocbe  tbatsommeof  them  that  were  wttbtn  tbe 
toun  saw  tbem ;  than  signed  they  to  tbeir  men  tnat 
they  sbolde  retome,  for  they  sawe  come  our  men. 
Cbey  entred  in  to  the  toun  and  wente  vppon  tne 


toures  and  vppon  the  walls  for  to  knowe  if  tbev 
were  tbeyr  peple  that  sbold  come  Jf  End  as  oure 
peple  approucbed  tbe  tTurkes,  tbey  apperceyued 
that  tbe  other  tbat  tbey  abode  were  discomfyted, 
by  cause  oure  men  came  ioyously  wytb  alle  tbeyre 
despoylles.  tzbenne  aroos  tbe  sorow  grete  tburgb 
alle  tbe  toim*  Our  men  approucbed  tbe  toun,  and 
dyde  do  tbrowe  ij  C  beedes  of  tbe  TTurkes,  tbat 
tbey  bad  brought,  witb  engyns  in  to  tbe  cyte  for 
to  make  tbem  certayn  of  tbeyr  victorye.  And  yet, 
to  tbende  tbat  tbey  sboldnot  forgete tbeyr sorowe 
tbat  was  entred  in  to  tbeyr  bertes,  tbe  other  iij  C 
that  were  lef  te  tbey  pygbt  tbem  on  stakes  at  tbe 
toote  of  tbe  walle,  and  sette  there  men  for  to  kepe 
tbem,  by  cause  tbey  sbold  be  alwey  in  tbeyr  svabt 
wban  tbey  cam  to  tbe  deffencej^TTbe  nombre  of 
tbem  tbat  were  disconfyted  were  xxviij  M.  tTbus 
were  somme  grete  tTurkes  taken  and  brought  pri- 
soners. TTbis  was  don  in  feuerertbe  vj  day,  tbe 
yere  of  tbyncamacion  of  our  lord  JSfl  Ixxxxvij. 
Of  a  castel  tbat  our  men  made,  of  somme  pvUrrvms 
tbat  arryued  at  tbe  ported  bow  tbey  were  discom- 
fited by  a  bussbon  en  t  of  burkes,  capitulo  ciiij> 

ILLe  tbe  barons  of  tboost  toke 

counseyUndacordedtbatvpon 
a  terntoire,  wbicbe  was  at  tbe 
tentes  of  Buymont,  sbolde  be 

madeafortresscwbicbsboldbe 
welgarnyssbyd  witb  good  men 
of  armes,  to  tbende  tbat  yf  tbe 
r"ir—~'  ■  " — JCurhes  made  tbeyr  assavllies, 
astbeywereacustomedtbeyoftbisfortressesbold 

20o 


rcnnc  on  bem,  and  tbis  tower  was  a  barbycane  of 
tbooste.  Like  ae  tbey  bad  deuysed  and  ordeyned, 
80 was  it  madewitbout  taryeng,and  valyauntmen 
&bardyweresetteintbisfortre6selargelyXbenne 

was  alle  tbost  assured  as  tbey  bad  ben  witbin  tbe 
walks  of  a  good  cy  te,  €be  siege  bad  endured  tbenn  e 
v  monetbesj^Hsbyppeof  Genewes  cam  tbeder, 
wbicbe  bad  brought  pylgryms  and  vytay  lies ;  tbey 
aryued  at  tbe  porte,  and  sette  tbem  in  tbe  ryuer  of 
fielle  as  it  falletb  in  to  tbe  seeXbey  badsente  ofte 
messagers  in  to  tbe  boost,  tbat  tbey  sbolde  f etcbe 
tbem  by  som  of  tbe  grete  barons,witb  so  good  com- 
pany tbattbeymygbtbesaufly conduytedin  to  tbe 
boost.  €bey  of  tbe  toun  bad  tbenne  apperceyued 
tbat  messagers  wenteand  cam  fro  tbe  sbippe  in  to 
tboost,  and  sente  out  men,  tbat  slewe  somme  of 
tbem,  and  tberfor  durstenone  goo  more  without 

rrete  companye* 

idR  barons  bad  aduysed  to  make  a 

1  gretefortresseattbendof  tbebrydge, 

ui  a  mabommerye  tbat  tbe  €urkes 

bad,  &  wold  settemen  of  armes  there 

for  to  kepe  and  deff ende  tbyssue  of 

J  tbebrydgeyf  tbe  Curkes  woldecome. 

?But  by  cause  tbat  there  were  peple  yssued  out  of 

k tboost  for  to  goo  to  tbe  ship,  were  chosen  somme 

of  tbe  barons  wbicbe  sbold  goo  and  fetcbe  tbem, 

if  or  tbey  were  peple  tbat  were  goon  for  to  here  tyd- 

yngesoftbeyrcontree8,&woTdbauecomenagayn, 

but  tbey  durst  not.  XTberto  was  cbosen  Buymont, 

tbeerleof  ^bolouse,  euerarddu  puyssat,  &  tberle 

Garnyer  of  Grece,  wbicbe  also  sbold  conduyte  tbe 

pi  209 


messagers  of  the  calypbe  vnto  the  port  of  the  see, 
and  at  retomyng  sbold  brynae  agayn  &  conduyte 

tbemoftboosteXbeyofHntbyocbeberdsayetbat 
tbc  sayd  barons  were  departed  fro  tboost,andde- 

scendedtowardtbese^&sentoutfourJVIknygbtes 

oftbemoostnobletbattbeybad,fortolyemawayte 
at  tbeyr  retomyng.  It  bapped  tbat  tbe  fourth  day 
tbat  our  men  eette  tbem  on  tbe  way  for  to  retorne, 
and  brought  armuresand  many  borses  laden  wttb 

vytayllesandotbertbynges,andtokenonebeedeof 
tbem  tbat  layetn  awayteXbeTTurkes  brakesodenly 
02i!?cm  and  0urPri0cd  our  men  at  a  paasXbe  erle 

<^bolousebadtbevaward,&Buymontcamafter. 
Xbecrye  began  mocbe  grete, 

RHJN"  tbe  burkes  sawe  tbyse  noble 
men,  tbey  beld  tbemal  stylle,and  be- 
gan tensrigne  tbe  pepleon  f oote,  tbat 
tbey  sbold  bolde  tbem  to  gydreXbey 
of  tbe  grete  affraye  tbat  tbey  berde, 
ffordredetbat  tbey  bad,  bydde  tbem 
in  tbe  bus8hes,andfledde  in  to  tbe  montaynesand 
jwoodes,  and  toke  none  beed  to  tbat  tbey  brought 
KOban  our  barons  sawe  this,  tbey  knewe  wel  tbat 
tbeyr  strengtbe  was  not  lyke  tbeyrs,  and  began  to 
jcome  to  tbe  odgys  dylygently  witb  as  many  men 
as  tbey  mygbt  conduyteXbe  otber,  tbat  wold  not 
folowe,  ne  mygbt  not,  were  alle  tbere  slayn,  Tbere 
wereslayn  welof  men  and  wymmen  to  tbenombre 
of  uj  C.  Tbis  duryng,  tydynges  cam  to  tbe  boost, 
tbat  alle  tbey  tbat  were  comyng  were  al  slayn  and 
put  to  detb  by  tbe  TTurkes,  tbat  bad  espyed  tbem. 
Of  tbe  barons  tbem  self,  tbat  conduy  ted  tbem,  was 


210 


not  knowen  whether  they  were  a/lyueordeedjjTCbe 
due  ©odeffroy,  that  was  not  ydle,  had  grete  an- 
guyssbe  in  his  herte  for  the  peple  of  our  lord  that 
was  thus  lost,  and  lete  do  crye  that  alle  men  shold 
armetbem  in  thoost  on  peyne  of  detb,&  that  none 
shold  abyde  be  bynde  in  so  grete  a  werke.  fllle  as- 
sembled, and  passed  the  brygge  of  the  shippis,  & 
thev  made  v  bataylles-  Robert,  due  of  JHormandye, 
lad  that  one;  the  ij  lad  tberle  of  flaundres;  the 
tbyrd,F)uon  le  JVIayne;  the  forth,  Gustace,  brother 
Lto  tbeduc  Codefroy ;  andthe  due  hymself  bad  the 
'fyftbejSFOIban  they  were  all  ordeyned,  the  due 
called  them,  and,  alle  they  beryng,  sayde  in  this 

>manere.  _  ,  ,     - 

qHYRlordes,  yf  tt  be  trouthe  thus  as 
the  tydynges  renne,  that  for  owe 
synnes  tbise  cruel  boundesand  fals 
baue  slayn  so  valyaunt  men  and  of 
so  grete  counseyl,  whom  ye  sente  to 
J  the  see  side,  and  with  them  beperys- 
isbed  also  our  f  elows  whom  they  shold  baue  con- 
duyted,  X  see  not  but  of  two  wayes  that  one,  Ur 
thatwedeyewith  them  as  good  enstenmen  in  this 
world,  and  certeyn  to  receyue  the  reward  of  Ibesu 
Criste,  whom  we  shal  serue  vnto  the  detb-  Or  yr 
oure  lord  wyll  that  oure  seruyce  be  to  hym  accept- 
able, that  we  take  vengeaunce  on  thyse  mastyfs, 
that  baue  thus  en  paired  cristiente,  &  endommageci 
and  destroyed  tbysevalyaunt  men.Hsfor  my  seir, 
X  say  toyou  certaynlyXbad  leuertodeye  presently, 
than  to  lyue  without  to  be  aduenged  on  them-  JNow 
vnderstondeye  wbatXsbal  saye  toyou ;  me  semetb 
p2  211 


M 


m 


tbat  tbyse  Curhes,  yf  tbey  bauc  tbc  victorye  vpon 

grete  pnde,and  by  grete  bobaunce  for  to  angrero 
wyl  come  to  the  cyte,  and  brynge  tbcyr  proyeV and 
fardellys  to  fore  vs.  And  ye  sbal  wel  sec  that  tbev 

l?2lL*n* thxe  8balbc9W»uantagetov8Xber- 
£S  ~bM78  T* C0un8!?U'?f  *  seem  good,  tbat  we 
boldvsalredyfortodootbeseruyceofoirelord 
ffor  wbicb  we  departedoute  of  ourc  coun trees  late 
vs  baue  m  bymstedfast  bope,fforbe  guerdonnetb 

come  to  vs,  late  ve  receyue  tbem  vygorouslv  with 
flEE^T  fd.fwerdes.  Late  eueryebe  ofZ 
remembrewel  m  bis  berte  of  tbewronge  and  sbame 
tbat  they  baue  don  oure  lord,  and  to  Sure  self 

HIS  worde  tbat  the  due  sayde,  was 
wel  vnderstande  of  alle,  and  plesvd 
tbemmerueyllously  well^Cbey  be- 
gan to  warne  ecbeotber,  and  somone 
to  doo  well,  as  there  tbey  hnewe  to 
^f--—»-^gydre,  and  there  belde  tbem  al  red* 

,  tbey  tolde  to  tbem  of  toyr^SSSSS* 
bad  mocbe  grete  ioyc  of  tbeirronW^^ £FF* 

after  sayd  to  tbem  tbe  counscvl tf "dSl  d 
Cbey  acorded  tberto,and  «$  tffiSffi^' 
bedoo;and  so  abode  tberealfoSto«£$J*Ht0 

be  sawe,  bnewe  tbat  bis  pepk  LdXcom^bc 


oures.  Mocbe  doubted  be  of  tbeyr  comyng  agayn, 

by  cause  tbat  our  men  were  yssued  ayenst  tbem; 

tberf ore  be  dyde  do  crye  in  tbe  toun,  tbat  alle  men 

sbold  armetbem  &  come  to  tbe  yate  of  tbe  brydge, 

for  to  be  redy  in  araye  for  tosocoure  tbeir  peple,yf 

nede  were.  Our  men  bad  sen  te  tbeir  espy  es  and  tbeyr 

courreurs  in  dy  uerse  party  es,  for  tenquyre  &  knowe 

wban  tbe  €urkes  sbold  come,  and  fro  wbat  parte. 

Of  a  bataylle,  wbere  our  men  auenged  tbem  of  tbe 

TTurkes,  and  of  a  stroke  tbat  duc6odeffroy  gaf  in 

tbis  bataylle,  capitulo  Cv&& 

~]Cwasnotlonafeafter,butwbyles 

as  tbey  taryed  tbere  &  bad  tbeyr 
bertesdesyryngtodooprowesse, 

yf  tbey  bad  tyme  and  place,  tbat 
tbeyrmessagersarryuedalleren- 

nyng,  wbicbe  tolde  to  tbem  tbat 

tbe  Curkes  were  nygb.  ^bey  be- 

Jgan  to  recomande  tbem  self  to 

oure  lord,and  wente  forward  in  tbeyrbatay lies  like 

as  tbey  were  ordeyned.  OTban  tbey  sawe  tyme  and 

place,  tbeysmote  tbeyr  borswitb  tbeyr  spores,  and 

cam  to  so  ftersly  tbat  tbeOirkes  were  alabassbed. 

TTbenne  tbey  began  to  smyte  asprety  on  tbe  rigbt 

sydeand  lyft,&fleweinto  tbepressem  sucbe  wyse 

tbateueryman  wold  be  tbe  best  &™ostvalyaunt, 
ineomocbetbattbeygaftotbeyrenemyesn^oleyser 

to  aduyse  tbem  wbat  tbey  sbold  do jfiTCbey  mygbt 
not  endure  tbe  grete  strength  of  our  men,  but  wold 
bauedrawentowardtbebrydgebuttbeducooaer- 

froy  tbat  mocbe  knewe  of  sucbe  tbynges,  was  pour- 

ueyed  tberof  to  fore,  and  bad  taken  alytiltemtoire, 

ps  213 


i 


wbicbe  was  ayenst  the  brydac,  &  there  be  belde  bym 
in  bis  bataylle.  Hlle  tbe turkes  tbat  they  cbaced to- 
ward bym  neslewe  them,  or  be  maderetorneayenst 
them  fro  wbenstbey  cam,  where  they  slewe  them  alle 
and  bewe  them. 

R6  erle  of  f  laundres  dyde  rigbt  wel 
this  day,as  a  good,  valy  aunt  &  hardy 
man  in  armesXbeducof  JNbrmandye 
brak  tbe  presse,  that  no  fcurke  durst 
approcbe  bymXbe  erle  of  XTbolouse 
bym  self  wold  auenge  tbis  that  they 
bad  made  bym  to  spore  bis  bors  tbe  daye  to  fore* 
Ruon  leJVlayneforgate  not  to  sbewe  of  what  lygn- 
'agebewas^ofwbatcontrcbutsemedtbatbedyde 
to  bis  enemyes  tbat  alle  tbe  werke  and  charge  bad 
ben  bis,  TTbenne  Gustace,  brother  of  due  Codef- 
froy,  Bawdwyn  erle  of  Renawd,  Rugbe  tberle  of 
Seynt  poul,  and  alle  tbe  other  barons,  knygbtes 
jand  noble  men  in  theyr  countrees,  dyde  merueylles 
of  armes.  Tiber  was  neuer  man  lyuyng  tbat  sawe 
ony  werk  better  enterprised  and  more  valyauntly 
acbyeuyd,and  tbat  communely  of  alle* 

JSCGHJJ  sawe  tbis  bataylle  so  grete, 
5j  &did  bis  peple  toyssue  out, &for  to 
a  gyuetbemberteandcourage,&toput 
a  awaye  tbesperaunce  of  theyr  flygbt, 
commaundedtosbettetbeyatesafter 
ItbemXbey  cam  pryckyngayenstoure 
men,  &  wold  baue  madetbeyrs  retornediscomfyt- 
ed,  but  tbe  affrayer  the  dredewas  so  grete  in  them 
that  they  neuermadesemblaunt  thertoXbey  them 
'self  ,tbatfrely  cam  on,wban  they  sawe  tbe  prowesse 
214 


of  ourmen,and  felt  tbe  grete  strokes  that  tbey  gaf , 
tomed  tbeyr  baches  witb  tbe  otber,  ne  neuer  made 
greteresistenceXberewastbefygbtynggretcand 

merueyllous  betyng  doun  of  tbe  Tlurkes,  tbat  men 
mygbt  not  but  witb  grete  payne  passe  €ber  was 
so  grete  noyse,  so  grete  crye,andso  terryble  neyb- 
yng  of  borses  oueral,  tbat  a  man  sbold  not  baue 
berd  tbondrejSTCbey  tbat  badmade  tbeyatestobe 
sbette  after  tbem,  did  many  tbis  day  to  lese  tbeyr 
lyues.  €be  wyues  of  tbe  €urkes,  tbe  maydens  and 
feble  peple  of  tbe  toun,  were  vpon  tbe  walles  and 
tourettes,  wbere  tbey  sawe  tbeyr  peple  torn  e  to  mes- 
cbyef  and  to  destruction :  ye  may  wel  tbynke  tbat 
tbey  bad  grete  sorowe,  wepynge,&  mocbe  cryeand 
noyse.OIelcursedtbeytbattymettbattbeysolonge 

bad  lyued  tbat  tbey  sbold  see  sucbe  mescbyef  bap- 
pen  to  tbem^Hncean  sawe  tbat  be  loste  alle  bis 
men,  and  bad  none  bope  for  to  recoure  tbem,  and 
commaunded  tbat  tbat  yatesbold  ^opened  for  to 
recey  uein  to  tbe  toun  tbem  tbat  were  lef  te.  Olban  tbe 
TTurkes  sawe  tbe  yateopene/tbey  bad  so  grete  wy  lie 
to  entre  in  to  tbe  toun,  tbat  vpon  tbe  brydge  tbey 
pressyd  so  euyl  for  baste,  tbat  tbey  fylle  in  to  tbe 
water  of  tbem  grete  plente. 

"ine  due  Oodeffroye,  tbat  al  tbat  day 
bad  so  wel  don,and  wban  it  cam  for 
to  departe  to  fore  tbe  bridge,  be  gaf 
a  strook  mocbe  valyaunt,  and  sucbe 
onetbat  it  sbalpenxtuallyandeuer- 
-more  be  spoken  of  in  wele  &  in  hon- 
our, ffor  I  trowe  tber  bapped  neuer  none  sucbe  to 
fore,neneuersbalbappenbereafterXbereweretms 


: 


daye  many  beedes  smeton  of,  amies,  &  sbolders,  at 
onestroke.  Tit  wel  apperceyued  oneof  bis  enemyes, 
wbicbc  belde  bym  nygb  to  <3odeffroy,  and  auaunc- 
ed  bym  of  te,  and  peyned  to  greue  bym,  XLbz  valy- 
auntc  due  smote  bym  witb  bys  swerde  by  sucbe 
mygbt  and  vertue  that  besmote  bym  in  two  pyeces 
in  tbe  myddle,  in  sucbe  wyse  tbat  tbe  ouerste  parte 
of  bym  fy  I  to  tbe  ground,  &  tbat  otber  parte  abode 
styll  syttyng  on  tbe  bors,  wbicbe  entred  in  to  tbe 
cyte  witb  tbe  other.  Hnd  knowe  ye  certaynly  tbat 
this  sayd  Turke  was  armed  witb  a  good  bauberk 
&  mocbe  stron  ge.Hlle  tbey  tbat  sawe  tbis  meruevlle 
weregretely  abassbed;  &  tbe^urkes  them  self  bad 
grete  fere  &dredej0FOmercyf  ul  God,  what  myqbt 
andstrengtbe  oyuest  tbou  to  tby  seruauntes,  that 
baue  tbeir  faytb  and  truste  in  tbef  Sucbe  a  stroke 
batbnotbeberdof  to  fore  tbis  tyme. 

R7TC  same  daye  tbey  of  Hntbyocbe 

loste  moo  tban  two  thousand  men, 

and  yf  tbe  nygbt  bad  not  comen  so 

sone  on,  tbey  sbold  baue  ben  so  en- 

febledof  men,  tbat  witb  paynesbold 

-tbey  baue  conne  bolden  and  keot  the 

toune  ayenst  oure  men.  It  semed  well  tbatTt  the 

brydge  weremany  burkes  slayn,  If  or  it  wT«  thwEf 

there  of  deede  boW 

19S! <  blod?  t°  tbc  9ce> Som™  ^SS 

men  of  tbe  londe  yssued  oute  of  tbe  toun  and  cam 

bad  tbeCurkes  loste  m  the  batay lie,  for  whom  tbev 
were  ouermocbe  sorouful;  for  tbey  were  soendom- 

netond      *"*" '"      y* iyfsho{d  tbc?  bc  dwof 
216 


MHi 


f)ow  tbc  cristen  men  thanked  ourc  lord  of  tbisvyc- 
I  torye,  &  made  a  castel  in  tbeyr  mabommerye,wbere 
they  f  onde  grete  gayne,  capitulo  cvj^^ 

nne  next  day,wban  tbedaye  was 

1  wel  deer,  tbe  barons  assembled 

alienor  bumbly  to  tbancke  our 

|  lord  of  tbe  victorye  tbat  be  bad 

gyuen  to  tbem ;  and  after  spak 

of  tbe  comyn  besynes^Com- 

ynly  was  deuysea  and  acorded 

J  of  alle  tbat  tbere  sbold  be  made 

a  tour,  as  tbey  bad  enterprysed,  at  tbende  of  tbe 

1  brydge,  for  to  take  away  tbe  yssue  fro  tbem  or  tbe 

i  toun,  and  for  to  kepe  and warante  oure  peple  wban 

tbey  ranne  to  fore  itXbere  bad  tbe€urkes  buryed 

sbv  nvabt  tbe  dede  men  tbat  bad  ben  slayn  in  tbe 

}bataylle  tofore^ban  tbe  peple  *^tc  k^  ttas, 

vtbev  ranne  and  tbere  vnburyed  tbem,&  toke  tbem 

out  of  tbeyr  sepultures  and  graues,  and  tohe  and 

bareawaygold,syluere,andtbeyrrobes,tbewbicbe 

tbev  bad  buryed  witb  tbem  in  tbeir  sepultures,  af - 
tertbeyr  customme^€hey  of  tbe  toun  bad  mocbe 
sorowe,  by  cause  tbey  sawe  to  fore  tbeyr  eyen  tbe 
corses  taken  vp  of  tbeyr  frendes,wbicbe  tbey  bad 
burved  witb  grete  costes  &  despenses,  and  it  dis- 
plesvd  tbem  mocbe  tbat  tbe  nombre  of  tbeyr  deed 
men  sbold  be  knowen,wbom  tbey  bad  euppoeed  to 
baue  kepte  secrete,  for  witbout  tbem  tbat  fyU :  in 
tbe  flooSor  ryuer,  &  witboute  tbem  tbat  were  bury- 
ed in  tbe  toune,  and  tbem  tbat  were  burt  vnto  the 
detb  and  buryed  in  tbe  toun,  were  taken  vp  oute  or 
tbeyr  graues  in  tbe  mabomerye  a  thousand  &  ryue 
bonderd-  ^ 


'6 


vsm 


^^ J^^aRey  emote  of  tbrc  bonderd  beedes, 
^VT5^f§}  andsente tbem  to  tbemperour,  for  to 
fWrJM  late  bym  bauc  certayn  tydynges  of 
tbc  bataylle  tbat  tbey  bad  avenst  tbe 
Tlurkes.  XTbc  messagers  or  tbc  cal- 
vpbe  of  Ggypte  were  not  yet  depart- 
ed fro  tbens, «  wban  tbey  sawe  tbis,  tbey  were  ioy- 
ou8  of  tbe  detb  of  tbeyr  enemyes,  but  tbey  were  al- 
way  after  afeerd,and  dred  oure  peplej^Cbere  were 
many  of  oure  owne  men  tbat  bad  fkdde  in  to  tbe 
woodes  &  montaygnes,  wbkbe  after  retourned  in 
totbooste;  tbere  cam  many  in  to  tbooste  tbat  men 
supposed  bad  ben  deed  j^XTbe  barons  command- 
ed tbat  tbe  fortresse  sbold  be  made,  and  adressyd 
mocb  bye  &  stronge,  bastely .  It  was  made  of  sucb 
stones  astbej  drewe  out  of  tbe  tombes  and  sepul- 
tures of  tbevurkes;andafter,  tbe  baronsbegan  to 
aduyse  to  wbom  tbe  kepyng  of  tbis  tour  sbold  be 
delyuerd,  wbkb  was  fayr  and  strong;  and  to  fore 
was  made  a  dyebe,  mocbe  depe*  Tiber  were  barons 
ynowe  wbkbe  excused  tbem  by  many  reasons  wby 
tbey  mygbt  not  kepe  it;  but  tbevalyanterle  of  XTbo- 
louse  prouff red  bym  self,  &  prayde  tbat  it  myqbt 
be  delyuerd  to  bym  if  or  to  gouerne,ff or  by  tbe  crrace 
of  ffod  be  sbold  kepe  it  wet 

"LLG  tbe  barons  coude  bym  mocbe 
good  tban  eke,  and  by  tbis  recouerd  be 
tbe graceand  loue  of  tbe  comyn  peple, 
wbicbe  be  bad  alle  loste;  ffor  fro  tbe 
somertofore,  by  tboccasion  of  aseke- 
nes&maladyetbatbebad,bebad  don 
;none  auauncement  of  ony  werkes  and  nedes  of  tbe 
218 


boost*  Cuerycbe  of  the  other  barons  bad  don  bis 
power,butbedyderigbtnougbt,tberforetbempyre 
coudc  bym  tbank,ffor  it  was  supposed  tbat  be  was 
tbe  rycbest.But  for  tentrepriseof  tbistbyng,tbey 
sayd  wel  alle  tbat  be  was  not  a/f erd,  ne  euyll-  Hnd 
on  tbat  otber  syde,  yet  be  dyde  more,  ffor  be  leyd 
out  v  C  marck  wey gbt  of  sy luer  in  tbe  band  of  tbe 
bissbop  of  puy  &  otber  good  men,  for  to  belpe  to 
restore  tbe  dommages  of  tbe  borsestbat  tbepoure 
men  bad  taken  in  tbe  bataylle/Cbere  were  many  af- 
ter tbat  were  tbe  more  bardy  for  to  goo  ayenst  tbeir 
enemy  es,  for  bope  to  baue  &  recouere  tbeyr  borses, 
for  tbyse  tbynges  were  tberle  of  Cbolouse  mocbe 
louyd&preysed,in  so  mocbe  tbat  tbey  callyd  bym 
fader  and  wardeyn  of  tboost* 
Of  a  fortressetbatCancremade  ouer  tberyuerand 
deff ended  it  valyauntly,  capitulo  Cvij^ 

~1N  tbys  newe  fortresse  of  tbe 

brydge  tberle  of  Cbolouse  sette 

tbyrin  v  C  men  of  armes,  bardy 

and  valyaunt  knygbtes  &  otber, 

&  by  cause  of  tbis  fortresse  tbe 

yssuyngandgoyngoutoftbem 

of  tbe  toun  was  deffended,  Oure 

J  men  tbenne  wente  surely  in  tbe 

countre-  €be  Curkes  mygbt  not  yssue  but  by  tbe 

west  yate,  wbicbe  is  by twene  tbe  foot  of  tbe  bylle 

and  the  ryuer  of  Helle,  Hnd  tbis  yssue  mygbt  not 

mocbe  greue  ne  burteoure  men,ffor  alle  tbe  loagys 

were  ouer  tbe  ryuer ;  but  alway  by  tbat  way  cam  vy~ 

taylles&fressbemetes  totbemof  tbetoun,&tnus 


tbey  were  not  ynowgb  constreyned  by  90  mocbe  as 
tbey  bad  tbis  yssuejfiTCbe  barons  assembled  and 
counselled  bow  tbey  mygbt  take  tbis  waye  fro 
tbem/Cbey  acordedweltbat  tbismygbtnot  be,  but 
yf  tber  wereafortresse  made  ouer  tbe  ryuer  wbicbe 
muste  be  delyuerd  to  one  of  tbe  barons  for  to  kepe, 
TTbey  acorded  well  alle  tbat  tbe  f ortresse  sbold  be 
made,  butnoneproferd  ne  sayde  tbat  be  wold  kepe 
itJVlany  of  tbem  sayde  tbat  tan  ere  was  rygbt  pro- 
pyce  to  tbis  tbynge,  but  be  excused  bym,  and  sayd 
tbat  be  was  ouer  poure for  tendure and  beresogrete 
dispence^Cberleof  TTbolouse  sterte  fortb  to  fore 
andgaf  to  bym  an  Cmarck  of  syluerfor  to  makeit 
witb,and  it  was  ordeyned  tbat  besbold  baue  euery 
monetbxlmarke  of  tbe  comune* 

HJVCRG,  wbicbe  was  mocbe  valy- 

aunt  &  wyse,  dyde  do  make  tbis  tour 

in  a  lytil  tertre  nygb  ynowgb  to  tbe 

gate,  and  after  receyued  it  in  to  bis 

warde  and  kepyng,  Hnd  god  gaf  to 

bvm  so  mocbe  worship  tbat  be  lo9te 

notbynge,  but  kepte  it  al  bool  vnto  tbe  ende  of  tbe 

siege.In  tbe  9yde  bynetbe  by  tbe  ryuer  wag  a  mocbe 

fayr  playne  in  wbicbe  babounded  many  favr  pas- 

ture9,and  greteplenteof  trees  a  iij  orfour  mvlefro 

tbecyteXbeyoftbetounbycausetbeybadnotpas- 
tures  ynowgb,  tbey  bad  sente  grete  plente  of  tbevr 
borses  and  mounture  in  to  tbat  place,  (Oban  tbev 

oftboostapperceyuedit,tbeya88embledknygbtes 
ynoweandotbervalyauntmenofarmes,andwente 
tbeder,  butnot  by  tbe  rigbt  way,  but  by  patbes and 
byd  wayes,  so  longe  tbat  tbey  assaylecftbem  tbat 

220 


kept  tbem  and  slewe  tbem-  Zbty  brought  in  to  tbc 
boost  ij  M  borses  for  men  of  armes,  grete,  gente, 
andfayr,  besyde  tbe  mules  &  otber  beestes,  wberof 
tbey  bad  largely-  Of  tbis  gayne  bad  tbey  grctc  loye, 
ffor  tbey  badof  notbyngso  grctc  nede  in  tboostas 

of  borses,  ffor  tbey  bad  ben  mynnyssbedmocbefc 
lasscd  in  tbc  bataylle,  &  many  deyed  tbat  tymef or 
bungrc  and  mesease- 

Row  tbenne  tbc  TTurkes  of  tbc  toun  began  to  baue 
Imesease  and  sorowe,  and  our  pcplc  case,  capitulo 

nfiHN  tbc  cyte  was  tbus  on  alle 
i  sydesassyeged  tbat  tbeTIurkes 
mygbt  not  yssue  oute,  tbey  be- 
gan witbintobauemesease,ffor 
tbeyr  borsses  badnotvytaylle 
ynowgb,  wberof  it  bapped  tbat 
tbey  mygbt  not  belpe  tbem  in 
J  tbeyrnede,ffrc88bemctcffayllcd 

tbem,  wbicbe  grcuyd  tbem  ™°^°ZC£nK?ht 
bandon  to  goo vnto  tbe  portc  of  tbe  see,  by  wb  cbc 
tbey  badnotsomocbetosuffreas  tbey  badendured 

all  tbe  wynter,  if  or  tbc  pryme  temps  &  swetc :  tymc 
was  comein  sucbe  wysetbatsbippes  mygbt  goo& 
come  by  tbesee,  wbicbe  brought  vytavllce  ypowgb- 
TTbere  were  many  of  oure  peple  tbat  badeoiourned 
all  tbe  wynter  in  tbe  townes,  wbicbe  tbennccam  a~ 
gaync  in  to  tbooste  alle  fressb  and  wel  »"W 
Bawdwyn  tbe  brother  of  due  <3o^effroy,of  whom 
ycbaue  welberdspeke  to  fore, wbicbe  bad  eomoebe 
ryebesse,  bad  bcrd  tydynges  tbat  tbe  barons  bad 


suff red  many  meseases  in  tboost,  &sente  to  tbcm 
allc  greteyef  tes  and  presentes,  not  onlv  to  the  grctc 
prynces,but  also  to  tbemoyen  peple,&to  tbeleste 
gaf  be  alsoynowgbof  bisowen,wberforbebadtbe 
louc  and  arace  of  allc  tbis  companye.  Re  gaf  to  bis 
brother  tbe  due  alle  tbyssues  of  bis  londe  tbat  be 
bad  on  tbissyde  tbe  ryuer  of  Bufrates,  witb  wbicb 
be  gaf  to  bym  tbe  cyte  of  XTorbesel  and  tbe  contre 
tber  about,  wberin  was  mocbewbete,  wyneandoyle. 
Hndyetaboue  al  tbis  be  gaf  to  bym  JVl  besauntes. 
~WJD  there  was  a  noble  man  of  f)er- 
monye  wbyebe  was  named  J^ycose, 
wbicn  was  welacquey  n  ted  witb  Bawd- 
wyn,  and  for  bis  loue  sente  vnto  due 
©odeffroy  a  pauyllon,  tbemoostfayr 
I  and  moost  ryebe  tbat  mygbt  o/wber 
be  seen;  it  was  of  ouer  straunge  facion  and  mer- 
'uellously  grete  J&  But  wban  bis  messagers  bare 
.it  in  to  tbe  booste,  one  pancrace,  amocberyebeman 
of  r>ermonye,of  wbomlbaue  spoken  to  fore,dyde 
1  do  espye  tbem  by  tbe  waye,anddyd  to  take  it  from 
tbem.  And  after  sente  tbe  pauyllon  to  Buymont, 
and  was  presented  to  bym  in  bis  namejSFdlban  tbe 
seruauntes  of  J^ycose  cam  to  due  ©odeffroy,  and 
bad  told  bym  alle  tbis  tbatpancrace  bad  don  to 
bym,bebadtberofgretedesdayne.Sytbbetokewitb 
bym  tbeerleof  f  laundres,towbom  be  badmore  loue 
and  acqueyntaun  ce  tban  to  ony  other  of  tbe  barons, 
and  wente  to  Buymont  and  demaunded  bis  pauyl- 
lon tbatwasgyuen  tobym.Buymont  answerdtbat 
tberofbeknewenot;tbatitwaslongyngtobym,flfor 
a  nobleman  of  tbecountrebadgyuenittobym.But 


222 


wban  be  knewe  tbattbeduc  woldnot  sufrreit,by  bys 
curtosycand  atte  prayer  and  requeste  of  tbc  otber 
barons,  be  rendrcd  and  delyuerd  to  bim  bis  sayd 
pauyllon,  to  tbendc  tbat  no  noysesbold  sourdc  nc 
arryse  betwene  tbcm  and  mygbt  Uttc  tbc  werke  of 
oure  lord.  €bus  were  tbey  good  frendes.  JVfcmy  men 
mcrucyllcd  tbcm  bowtbatsovalyauntamanastbe 
du  c  Godcff  roy  was,in  wbom  was  no  tbin g  f  ounden 
to  be  reprehended,  was  so  meuyd  ayenstsobyeand 
noble  a  man  for  so  ly  til  a  tbyng  as  was  a  pauyllon. 
]^eIcanseenoneotberreason,buttbatanobleberte 

maye  not  suffre  sbame,and  it  was  late  bym  vnder- 
stande  tbat  it  sbold  be  to  bym  a  grete  sbame,  and 
also  it  sbold  be  ayenst  bis  honour  yf  be  suff  red  it 
to  be  taken  away  fro  bym :  ffor  couetyse  be  dyde  it 

not. 

Row  tbe  erle  Sstyeuen  of  Cbartres  and  of  Bloys 
fleddefro  tbebooste  shamefully,  capituloCtx^^ 

He  renommee  sourded  mocbe 
grete,  and  grewe  euery  day  bow 
tbesoudanofperse,wbicbewas 
so  ryebe  and  puyssaunt,  by  tbe 
requeste  of  tbem  of  Hntbyocbe 
bad  doosumonebispepleof  alle 
bis  power  for  to  come  socoure 
.  tbiscytetbebadassembledmer- 

ueyllous  grete  peple.f or  tbetydynae  cam  not  only 
to  tbcm  of  tboost,butit  wassaydof  many  men  that 
yssued  out  of  tbc  cite  for  to  come  in  to  tboost,  as 
hermyens  &  Surrycns,wbicbc  wereensten.^ber- 
of  it  bappedtbatStcucn,  tbcrlc  of  Cbartrcsandof 


Bloye,  wbtcbe  wae  eo  noble,  puyeeaun  t,  and  wyee, 
that  for  bte  wyedom  tbc  otbcr  barone  of  tbooete 
named  bym  tbc  fader  of  couneeyl,  made  bym  self 
eeke  ae  was  saydj^Re  tohe  leue  of  bie  frendee,  bv 
cause  be  eayde  be  wold  goo  in  to  flllexandrye  the 
laeee,  wbtcbe  wae  nygbe  to  tbe  porte,  and  wolde  a- 
byde  there  til  be  were  deed  or  ellys  bool  TTbue  be 
departed  and  lad  away  witb  bym  grete  good,  and 
with  bym  departed  iiij  JV!  men,  wbtcbe  were  of  bie 
com  pan  ve  and  of  bie  countreye* 

*ie  wente  etrayte  in  toHllexandrye  tbe 
I  laeee,  and  tbere  belde  bym  to  tbende 
that  yf  our  peple  bad  vyctorye  of  tbe 

batayllewbtcbetbeyawayteddayly,be 
wold  retome  in  to  tbooet  ae  guarye- 
_  ebyd  and  bool  of  bie  maladye;  &  yf 
tt  had  meebapped  them,  anon  be  wold  baue  entred 
tn  to  ebtppte  wbtcbe  were  allredy  for  to  retoume  in 
to  bte  countryjfiFOf  tbie  tbynge  all  tbe  barone  of 
thooetewereeo  abaeebed  &  angry  that  they  wepte 
boote  teerte,  for  pyte  that  they  bad  of  eo  bye  and 
noble  man  tbat  tohe  none  bede  to  bie  gentilneeee 
to  bte  wyttcne  to  the  worebyppe  tbat  men  dyde to 
bym,  but  departed  eoeuyl  in  poynt  tbatm*™mJ« 
badnoebamWbdrawe^ 
departeclr^ 

and  dyde  do  crye  tburgb  tbe  booete,  tKomln 
ebold  be  eo  hardy  to  departe  witboute  leue,  ffor  vf 
ony  wen  t  they  ebold  be  bolden  for  mur^Jd 
tuetyceebold  bedoon  toeucbemen.By  tbie  orden- 
£"?  foltC0^lewcl5be  pa?™  and  for  to  kept  tbeyr 
honour  they  held  them  tn  peae  in  tbooet,  &  obeyed 


alle  in  pecs  in  tbc  booste,  and  obeyed  debonayrly  to 
tbe  barons  of  tbooste,  as  monkes  or  cloystrers  to 
tbeyrabbotwitboutedepartyngonyoftbeyr  com- 
pany* 

Row  a  cristenman,emyrferius,wbicbewasinHn- 
tbyocbe,  acqueynted  bym  witb  Buymont,capitulo 

~N€f>  YOCfi,  tbis  boly  cy  te  tbat 
[1  baue  spoken  of  to  fore,  was 
conuerted  by  tbe  precbyng  of 
seynt  peter  tbe  appostle,  alle- 
way  it  belde  wel  tbis  f aytb,  and 
yet  boldetb  certaynlye,  aod  be 
tbanked,  SIban  tbe  disloyalte 
.  and  falsenes  of  JVIabomet  ran 
tburgb  tboryent  tbis  cyte  wold  neuer  receyue  bis 
lawe,  &  wban  tbe  mygbty  men  of  tbe  countre  wold 
tconstraynetbembyforcetotbiseuyUawe,tbeydef- 

\f  ended  tbem  well  ayenst  alle  sucbe-  ulberof  it  nap- 
ped tbat  wban  tbe  deuylbad  sette  tbisfalse  byleue 
tburgb  alle  tbe  londe  of  perse  vnto  tbe  braas  of 
seynt  George,  and  fro  Inde  vnto  Spayne,  tbis  cyte 
abode  alway  in  tbe  faytb  of  tbe  troutbe  of  Ibesu 
CristeXroutbe  it  is  tbat  fourten  yere  to  fore  tbat 
our  peple  cam  tbeder,  tbe  grete  soudan  of  perse  bad 
conquerd  alle  tbe  londes  vnto  Hntbyocbe,  and  by 
cause  tbey  were  not  mygbty  to  bolde  itony  lenger, 
tbey  yelded  it  vnder  tbe  puyssaunce  of  tbis  grete 
man.  Cbenne  after  cam  oure  men  for  tassiege  it. 


qi 


225 


LJMOSOlletbey  of  the  toune  bcldc 

tbe  f ay  th  of  ourc  lord,  but  witboute 

fay  lie  tbey  bad  no  power  ncno  seyg- 

norye  in  tbc  cyte,  ffor  tbey  medled 

of  notbynge  sauf  tbeyr  craf  tes  and 

J  tbeyr  mercbaundyses  to  wyn  tbeyr 

breed  'CheZurkce  bad  tbe  bay  Hies,  and  wente  to 

armes  wban  it  was  nede,  Tiber  was  none  so  bardy 

of  tbe  cristen  men  tbat  durst  arme  bym,  &  specially 

>sytbour  peple  cam  to  fore  tbe  toun,  tbe  cristenmen 

,  tbat  were  tberin  were  bolden  suspect  tbat  tbey  durst 

not  yssue  ne  goo  oute  of  tbeyr  bowses,  €bere  were 

jinany  of  sucbe  cristen  men  tbatwereof  grete  lygn- 

aae,  to  wbom  was  don  mocbe  sbamej^Cbere  was 

a  lygnage  of  noble  men  tbat  were  Reremyens ;  tbey 

were  named  in  tbeyr  langage,  Beni  f  erra,  tbat  is  to 

saye  tbe  sones  of  baubergyers.  Hnd  fro  certeyn  of 

tbe  same  langage  were  descended  tbeyr  lygnages, 

>and  yet  ben  tber  somme  tbat  make  bauberks ;  tbey 

bad  a  toure  wbicbe  was  named  tbe  tour  of  tbe  two 

sustres* 

JV  tbis  toure  were  ij  bretberen  tbat 
were  lordesof  tbis  lygnageXbe  old- 
est bad  tonameemerferyus,a  mocbe 
sage  &  prudent  man ;  acqueyn ted  be 
was  and  pryue  witb  tbe  lord  of  tbe 
toun,m  sucbewysetbatbebadmade 
,  bym  bisnotaryewitbm  tbe  palaysXbis  man  berde 

menspekemocbegoodofBuymontfrotbebecrvn- 

nynge  of  tbe  siege,  &  wel  vnderstode  by  tbecomyn 

^enomee  tbat  be  was  a  wyse  man  and  trewe,of  arete 

berte  and  enterpryseXberfore  be  sente  to  bym  bis 

226  7 


messager,  &  acqueynted  with  bym  mocbe  pruyely, 
and  Ictc  bym  knowe  allc  the  beynof  and  state  of  tbc 
cy  te,  and  tbc  purpoos  of  tbe€urkes ;  but  tbey  were 
botbe  two  wysemen,  tberfor  coude  tbey  wel  couere 
tbeyr  counntenanncesXbere  were  but  few  peple  a- 

bout  Buymont  tbat  knewe  bym* 
Ofsommedeuysestbattbesaydemyrferiussente 

to  Buymont,&  in  wbat  maner  be  acorded  to  dely  uer 
to  bym  tbe  toun,capitulo  C%)&& 

"eue)^  monetbes  bad  tbo  en- 
dured tbe  siege  to  fore  tbe  toun. 
Buymont,tbewyse&subtil,bad 
many  tymes  essayed  bis  frende 
of  tbe  toun  bow  tbe  cy te  mygbt 
be  yolden  to  tbe  cristen  men  jfiF 
So  of  te  be  sente  to  bym  by  bis 
-sone  tbat  sayd  tbus  to  bym  in 
tbis  manerejfrfayre  swete  syre,I  trowe  certaynly 
tbat  our  lordlbesu  Criste  wold  tbatl  bad  tbis  ac- 
queyntaunce  witbyou  and  tbis  loue;  ffor  euer  sytb 
tbauebeacqueyntedwitbyou,mynberteneuer  rest- 
ed to  drawe  and  acorde  euery  day  more  and  more  in 
your  bonnte,  &your  maner  plesydmemocbeJbaue 
veray  ferme  and  fast  bope  tbatl  and  tbe  myne  sbal 
be  yet  in  tyme  comynge mocbe bolpen  and  honour- 
ed by  you  of  tbis  tbynge  tbat  ye  baue  discouertd  to 
me,  of  wbicblbaueben  merueyllously  pensyf  ,syt*> 
I  baue  berde  of  it,  I  baue  mocb  counterpeysed  tbe 
wayesof  tbat  one  side&of  tbatotber,fforItbynhe 
111/  wel certeynly  tbat  yf  Xmay  delyuer  my  countrey fro 
V  tbe  peple  tbat  ben  enemyes  of  oure  lord, andrendre 


I 


and  delyuere  it  to  the  eeygnoryeof  my  faytb  ,Iabal 
baue  grete  guerdon  of  ourc  lord  &  grete  honour  in 

tneworld,Butyftteobappedtbu8,tbattbyawerke 
weredeecouered  tbatlbaue  enterpriaed,tofore  cr  it 
cam  toanende  or  concluaion,Iabold  bedelyuerdto 
aUctbctormentC8oftbcworld,andaUcmylycrnacTC 

cffaccdanddcstroycd^tbatitncucrsboldbcspoken 
or  after,  Hnd  neuertbelea  many  tbyngea  be  put  in 

aduenture,  tberforelwylle  diacouere  to  you  allemv 

berte,  as  to  bym  tbat  I  bold  for  a  trewe  frende,  Yf  tbe 

barona  tbat  be  tn  your  companye  wylle  crraunte  as 

trewe  men  as  tbey  be,  tbat  tbie  cyte  ebalbe  youree 

for  euermore&your  beyree  yf  it  may  be  conquerd, 

I  abal  put  me  tn  aduenture  bo  tbatlabal  delvuer  to 

you  tbte  tour  tbat  1 .  bolde,  wbicbe  ie  mocbe  strong 

&  wel  garnyaabedflnd  tbialabal  doofor  goddee 

loue  &  yourea.  But  yf  tbey  entende  tbat  eue%  men 

ebalbauebta  part,aa  of  tbynggoten  by  warre,  tber- 

upon  wyll  I  not  laboure  ne  doo  payne,  ffor  I  wote 

neuer  to  wbat  ende  it  abold  come.  Tberfor  I  prav 

you,  f ayr  awete  ayre  &  trew  frende,  tbat  ye  put  vou 

tn  deuoyr  and  payne  tbat  tbis  toun  be  yourea  not 

for  couetyse,  but  for  tbe  prouffy t  of  tbe  cyte  cria- 

ten,and  I  promyee  to  you  tbat  tbe  day  tbat  I  abal 

knowe  tbat  tt  abal  be  tbua  oraunted  to  you  I  aba 

delyuer  to  you  tbe  entree  o?  tbe  toun &vc one 

tbyncfe  I  aaye  to  you  for  certayn,  tbat  yfltll  nS 

maycTe  wttbtn  abort  tyme  tbat  ye  abal  neuer  day  of 

tbe  world  recouere  tt,fforeuery  day  cometo  tbe  lord 

of  tbta  toun  lettree  and  meaaagera  certefyeng  tbat 

JZ2r^lC°£\t0  e0u?uC- tbc  toun  bcn  *****  tbe 
ryuerof  eufratee,wbtcbe  ta  not  ferre,andtbey  ben 


wel  a  ij  C  M  men  of  armes/VT  tbey  come  an  you  on 

that  one  syde,  and  tbey  of  the  cy  te  on  that  otber,y e 

may  not  suffre  ne  witbstande  tbem,  but  ye  sbal  be 

alle  deed  or  taken*  Hnd  tberfore  take  ye  bere  vpon 

basty  counseyl* 

Row  Buymont  discouerd  tbis  tbynge  to  du  c  6ode- 

!froy,toHuontbejyiayne,totbeducomomiandye, 

and  to  tberle  of  flaundres,  capitulo  Of\w# 

"IRO  tbe  day  tbat  Buymont  bad 
berde  tbys,  be  began  to  enquyre 
mocb  subtylly  and  examyne  tbe 
bertes  of  tbe  barouns,  and  de- 
I  maunded  tbem  otberwbyle  wbat 
tbey  wold  doo  witb  tbis  cy  te  yf 
it  were  taken  J9 Of  tbe  answere 
J  somme  of  tbem  tbougbt  tbat  It 
wasfer  ofXberfore  taryed  Buymont  to  discouere 
bis  berte  &  bis  tbougbt  till  be  sawe  better  bis  poynt 
and  tyme,  neuertbeless  be  drewe  a/part  due  ©ode- 
froy,  Huon  de  JVIayne, tbe  due  of  Normandye,  and 
tberleofflaundresXotbembesaydetbatbe  trust- 
led  so  mocbe  in  oure  lord,  tbat  yf  tbe  cyte  my gbt  be 
graunted  to  bym  it  mygbt  be  welin  sbort  tyme  con- 
querdXbey  acorded  it  and  mocbe  preysed  in  tbeyr 
courage  tbe  wytte  of  tbis  man  tbat  bad  in  wylle  to 
accomplyssbe  so  grete  a  tbynge-  By  tbaccord lor 
tbem  tbis  tbyng  was  discouerd  to  tberle  of  J^o- 
louse,  beansueratbatbewoldneuer.yft^ecytewere 

taken,  gyue  bis  parte  to  another  man*  ^e  J*™9 
pray d  bym  mocne,  but  be  wold  not  consente  tber- 
tofor  notbyngeXberfor  tbe  tbynge  was  in  sucbe 


daunger,  that  almost  the  tbynge  was  alle  loste,ff or 
Buymont  put  not  the  payne,  nc  bis  frende  of  the 
toun  wold  not  but  yf  the  toun  sbold  be  alle  bis, 
J^euertbeles  for  alle  tbis,  Buymont  sente  to  bym 
ofte  grete  yef  tes  for  to  kepe  bym  in  acqueyntaunce 
and  m  tbe  loue  tbat  was  begonne  bytwene  tbem. 
Of  tbegrete  socours  tbat  tbe  soudan  of  perse  bad 
sentetotbemofHntbyocbe,andbowCorbagatas- 
syeged  Rages,  capitulo  Cxiij/^/^ 

JV  tbe  wbyle  tbat  tbyse  tbynges 
ran  thus  in  Hn  tbyocbe,  tbe  mes- 
sagers  tbat  fro  Hn  cean  were  gon 
to  tbe  soudan  of  perse  for  to 
demmaunde  ayde,  were  retomed 
as  tbey  tbat  bad  wel  don  tbeyr 
tbynges.  for  tbat  grete  prynce, 
atte  requeste  of  tbem  of  Hntby- 
ocbe,  and  atte  prayer  of  bis  men,  bad  enterprysed 
to  efface  and  destroy e  alle  ourpylgryms  tbat  trad- 
er were  comen.  Hnd  tberfore  be  sente  tbeder  grete 
plente  of  'Curkes  and  of  Cordyns  in  to  tbis  coun- 
tre,  and  bad  delyuerd  all  tbe  seygnorye  &  gouern- 
aunce  of  tbe  booste  to  one  bis  acqueyntecf,ffor  be 
trusted mocbe  in  bis  wytte,in  bis  loyalte,and  in  bis 
prowesseXbis  man  was  named  Corbagat;  be  com- 
maunded  alle  men  to  obeye  to  bym ;  be  sente  lettres 
pendantes  oueral  bis  londes,&  commaunded  tbat 
tbey  sbold  be  delyuerd  ouer  all,tbatwbere  be  sbold 
lede  tbem  tbat  tbey  sbold  goo,  &  alle  tbat  be  com- 
maunded tbem  tbey  sbold  doo  without  contra- 
diction. 


230 


BOB 


\S  departed  fro  bis  conn  trey  with  alle 
bis  peple  and  bis  power,  be  passed  so 
f erre  tbat  be  cam  in  to  tbe  countre  of 
RagesXber  was  told  to  by  m  tbat  on  e 
of  tbebaronsof  f raunce  beldtbecyte 
Jof  Rages  wbicbe  be  bad  conquerd,  & 
alletbelondeabouteitnebadtberofgretedespyte, 

and  saydtofore  and  er  be  passed  tbe  ryuer  of  £>u- 
frates,be  sbold  take  tbe  toun  and  destroye  alle  tbe 
f renssbemen  tbat  be  sboldfynde  witbtn^Bawd- 
wvn  wasnotof  Utyl  courage,  and  bad  wel  berdtyd- 
ynaesoftbis  peple,  Hebadwelgarnyssbedbiscyte 

witb  armes,vy  taylles,  and  noble  men,  and  doubted 
but  lytil  bis  comynge,  ne  tbe  menaces,  ne  tbe  grete 
wordes  of  tbyse  peple  tbat  were  reported  to  bym 
JSf  Corbaaat  commaunded  tbat  tbe  cyte  of  Rages 
sbold  be  assieged,  &  after  dydedo  crye  to  assault; 
aretepeynedydetbey,wenyn0tobauetakentbecyte 

f3e  tbem  tbat  were  tbenn.  But  tbey  tbat  kept 
tbe  toun  deff ended  tbem  mocbe  wel,in  sucbe  wyse 
tbattbeyendommagedmocbetbemjbatwere^ 
out,&tbeywitbinlostenotbyngeXbeybeldetbem 

about  tbe  toun  tbre  wekes;  be  bad  no  worsbyp  ne 

prouffyttbere.  _      ..  - 

"|€  laste  tbe  grete  and  noble  men  or 

tbooste  cam  to  bym,  and  sayde  and 


C  counseylled  bym  to  departe  fro  tbe 

*  siege,  ffor  be  ougbt  fyrst  do  tbat 

tbyng  for  wbicbe  be  cam,  tbat  is  to 

^J4.Lte  take&  slee  alle  tbem  tbat 

weretoforeHntbyocbcHndafterinbisretornyng 

in  a  morowtyde  be  sbold  baue  tbe  toun  of  Rages, 

~  *  231 


■ 


m> 


and  Bawdwyn,yf  be  were  not  deed,  tbey  sbold  take 
and  bynde  bym,  and  presente  bym  to  tbeyr  lordas 
a  sbeep  or  a  motonjj^fieacorded  to  tbeyr  counseyl 
and  departed  fro  tbens,  but  allewaye  tbe  taryeng 
tbat  tbe  TTurkes  bad  made  sauyd  oure  pylgryms, 
ffor  tbe  mater  was  not  so  acorded  bytwene  Buy- 
mont  &  bis  frende,  tbat  yf  tbey  bad  com  en  strayt 
to  Hntbyocbe,  oure  men  bad  ben  in  ouer  gretemes- 
cbyef  bytwene  tbem  tbat  be  brought,  and  tbe  otber 
TTurkes  tbat  were  in  tbe  toun, 
Rowour  men,  beyng  aduertysedof  tbe  grete  boost 
of  Corbagat,  sente  somme  of  tbeyr  knygbtes  for 
to  esteme  tbem,  &  wbat  tbey  reported  of  tbat  tbey 
bad  seen,  capitulo  Cxiiij,*?,*? 

H6  tydynges  began  strongly  to 
growe  of  tbis  people  tbat  cam, 
and  it  was  no  merueyll  yf  tbey 
were  effrayed  in  tbe  booste  of 
tbe  pylgryms,  TTbe  barons  as- 
sembled in  counseyl,&ordeyn- 
ed  by  comyn  acord,  tbat  somme 
of  tbeyr  wysemen  tbat  under- 


stode  tbem  in  sucbe  tbynges  as  to  esteme  peple  in 
tbe  f  elde  sbold  goo  and  knowe  tbeir  couyneXo  tbis 
were  cbosen  Dreues  de  J^elle,  Clarembault  de  Ven- 
duel,6uerarddeCberysy,&Renaudtberleofi:ouL 
Tlbey  ledde  witb  tbem  otber  knyabtes,  knowen  and 
preuy  d  in  armes,  Tlbey  departed  fro  tboost  so  f erre, 
tbattbeyapproucbed  tbeUurkes,  wbom  tbey  sawe, 
and  folowed  tbem  fro fer.JSeuertbeles  tbey  wel  ap- 
perceyued,  tbatlyke  as  water rennetb  in  tbesee,  cam 


w 


itif 


fro  alle  partes  grete  rowtesandmerueyllousplente 
of  pcplc  in  tbis  boosteof  Cor  bagatj^Oise  noble 
men  wenteso  ferr  tbat  tbey  sawe&  knewe  alletbevr 
beyng  and  strengtbe,  and  sytb  drewe  tbem  to  tbe 
barons,and  sayd  to  tbem  tbe  troutbeXbe  barons 
prayde  and  deflP ended  tbem  al  90  dere  as  tbey  bad 
tbe  werk  of  oure  lord,  tbat  tbey  wold  not  descouere 
tbis  tbyng  to  tbe  foote  men  of  tboost  in  no  wyse, 
but  kepe  it  secrete  fro  tbem,  flPor  it  sbold  be  grete 
peryll  yf  tbey  knewe  tbe  troutb  tbat  tbey  sbold  flee 
away  by  nygbt,  and  be  alle  in  despayr. 
Of  tbe  counseyl  tbat  our  peple  toke  for  to  ordeyne 
tbeyr  nedes  wf>an  tbey  knewe  tbe  comyngof  tbis 
,rigbt  grete  boost,  capitulo  Cxv&& 

HB  barouns  toke  counseyl,  on 
wbom  tbefaites  and  burtbon  of 
tbiswerke  laye,bow  tbeymygbt 
conteyne  tbem  in  tbis  greuous 
poynt  in  wbicbe  tbey  were,  Som 
tberwere  tbatgaf  counseyl  tbat 
tbey  sbolddeparte  fro  tbe  siege, 
.  &tr>atsommeof  tbemon  bors- 
bak,andtbey  on  footesboldeabydefortokepetbat 
tbey  of  tbe  toun  sboldnotmoweioynetotbeotber, 
&  sommeotber  tbe  best  borsedsbold  ledeof  tbem 
on  foote  a  grete  partye  ayenst  Corbagat,  &  fygbt 
ayenst  bym.  Tbe  tbyng  was  in  grete  doubte,  and 
wystenotbow  to  acordej^Buymont,  wban  besawe 
tbem  so  surprised,  called  tbe  duc6odeffroy,tberle 
of  f  laundres,  fiuon  de)VLayne,  tbe  du  c  of  Norman - 
dye,and  tberleofCbolouse,  and  sytb  sayd  to  tbem 

tbisewordes. 

233 


HYRlordc8,l8ccyou  in  mocbe  grctc 
doubtc,  and  it  is  no  merueyl,  ffor  the 
comyngeof  tbis  puyssauntman  that 
cometb  on  vs  and  bryngetb  witb  bym 
so  grctc  plcntc  of  our  enemyes.JNeye 
be  not  yet  acorded  in  wbat  maner  ye 
sbalattende,  ne  wbat  sballe  be  your  countenaunce 
wban  be  sbal  come,  ne  1  can  not  saye  to  you  as  me 
memetbtbyngtbat  by  tbis  waymay  mocbe  auaylle. 
for  yf  weyssue  all  ayenst  tbe  turhes,  lyheas  some 
men  counseylle,  somme  in  one  partye  &  tbat  otber 
to  abyde,  as  otber  counseyl,  we  baue  loste our  payne 
and  our  dispencis  in  tbe  siege  of  tbis  toun,  ffor  as 
soneaswe  sbaldepartefro  bens,  or  alle  orbalf,  tbey 
tbatcomen  sbalsendein  totbetoun  greteplenteof 
vytaylles,  and  fressbe  men  put  in  to  it.  Yeoman 
abyaeat  tbe  siege  tbissbal  be  good  for  tbem  to  do, 
&yf  tberabyde  a  parte  tbey sbal  not  leue  for  tbem. 
for  wban  we  be  alle  togydre,  vnnetbe  maye  we  con- 
straynetbemof  tbe  tounjtbenne  tbe  fewetbatsbal 
abyde,bow  may  tbev  baue  tbe  force  &  my  gbt  ay  ens  t 
tbem  witbin.'Cberror  me  tbyncketb  tbat  we  muste 
secbe  otber  remedye&  counseyl,  tbat  wemay  fynde 
maner  bow  tbis  cy  te  maye  beyolden  to  vs,  &  tbat  we 
maye  be  witbin  to  fore  er  tbyse  Curhes  come:  tbis 
sbal  beamoresuretbyng.Yfyedemaunde  bow  tbis 
maye  be,Isbalsbewe  you  tbe  way  andmanerebow  it 
sbal  wel  be  as  me  semetb.l  baue  a  frende  in  tbis  cyte, 
a treweman  & wyse, after  tbat  1  can  apperceyue.  ttle 
baue  couenaunted,  be  and  1  to  gydre,  wberfor  be 
ougbt  to  delyuer  to  me  a  tour  mocbe  strong  &  wel 
gamyssbed  of  alle  tbat  nedetb,wbicbe  be  boldetb, 
234 


=^= 


wban  I  sbal  demaunde  bym.l  muste  ayue  to  bym, 
tbusdoyng,agretepartye  of  my  goodand  bauoyr, 
and  francbysesand  other  alyaunces  muste  kepe  to 
bym  and  bys.  But  this  mayc  not  be,  but  tbat  cebe 
of  you  gyue  oucr  bis  part  to  me,  and  quytc  bym  of 
ony  part  of  tbecyte, tbat  itsbal  abydc  tomcandto 
myn  beyres  for  euermore,fror  other  wyse  be  enten- 
detb  not  tbat  shall  delyuer  bit.  Y?  **  plese  you,  in 
tbismaneryemay  baue  tbe  toun ;  &if  yewilgraunte 
this,  I  will  somone  and  warne  bim  to  doo  tn  sucbe 
wyse,  tbat  tbyse  couenauntes  bewelaccomplyssb- 
ed  by  godes  grace.  Hnd  yf  it  plese  you  not,  and  ye 
mayefyndeonyotbermaner,lamredytacquytealle 

my  parte  to  one  of  you  or  to  another  of  oure  com- 
panye,  yf  be  wyl  delyuer  to  vs  tbe  cyte.  Hnd  god 
knowetb  it  sbal  plese  wel,  &  I  sbal  be  rigbt  ioyous 
in  good  f  ay  tb. 

Row  after  tbat  Buymont  bad  declared  bisfayte  to 
alle  tbebooste,  tbey  acorded  tbat  tbe  toun  sbold  be 
bis,  sauf  tbe  erle  of  Cbolouse,  capitulo  Cxvj^^ 

TBH^  tbe  baron  8  berd  tbis  tbey 
bad  grete  ioye  in  tbeir  bertes, 
and  anon  acorded  to  tbis  tbat 
Buymont  requyredjfiFSuery 
man  graunted  bis  part  tbat 
be  sbold  be  quyte  tberof ,  ex- 
cept only  tberle  of  TTbolouse, 
J  wbicbe,  in  a  reuerrye  wberyn  be 
was,  sayde  tbat  be  wold  not  acqiiyte  bis  part,  ne 
gyue  it  ouer  to  noman  lyuyngj^Cbe  other  barons 
promyeed  certeynly  tobolde  it,  Agaf  tobym  tfteyr 
f aytb  tbat  tbey  sbold  not  discouere  it  to  noman. 

235 


Tbey  prayd  bym  that  be  wold  wysely  brynge  tbis 
mater  aboute,  &  dylygently  laboure  taccomplissbe 
it,  ffor  gfrete  peryllmygbt  come  in  tbe  taryeng  of 
it  Tbe  counseyl  departed  tbus^Tbis  Buymont, 
wbicb  was  wyse  and  trewe,  spak  to  tbe  messager 
tbat  knewe  tbeyr  couyne,  &  sen  te  bym  to  bis  frende* 
Hnd  bad  bym  saye  tbat  tbe  barons  bad  graun  ted  to 
bym  tbat  tbe  toun  sbold  be  bolly  bis  with  mocbe 
iglad  cbere,  tberfor  be  somoned  bym  by  bis  faytb 
tbat  be  sbold accom ply ssbe  tbisnextnygbt  booly 
tbat  be  bad  promyeed  bym. 

J^B  tbyngnapped  tbis  same  day  tbat 
was  mocb  belpyng  to  tbis  werke,  and 
totbaccomplissbyngtberof,ffortbis 
frende  of  Buymont  named  Gmyrf er- 
yus  entremedled  mocbe  of  tbaff ayres 
andtbyngesof  Hncean  &of  tbetoun, 
'Tbis  same  day,  wban  be  was  besy  in  tbis  werke,  be 
sente  bis  sone,  tbat  was  tbo  grete,  to  bis  bows  for 
to  f  etcbe  somwbat.<Hban  be  cam  to  tbe  tour  baste- 
ly,  be  f ounde  tbat  one  of  tbe  grete  admyrals  of  tbe 
toun  pleyed  &  deled  witb  bismodenCCman  be  sawe 
tbis,  be  bad  so  grete  sorowe  in  bis  bertetbat  be  ran 
agayn  to  bis  fader,  and  told  to  bym  ly ke  as  be  bad 
f ounden  it  j0  Tbe  fader  was  a  mocbe  wyseman,  & 
was  mocbe  sore  angry,  and  sayd  tbyse  wordes  to 
bis  sone :  f  ayr  sone,  it  semetb  not  ynowgb  to  tbyse 
f als  boundes  tbat  tbey  takefro  vsalletbat  webaue, 
&  kepe  vsf  owle  in  tbeir  seruage,  but  witb  tbis,  tbey 
doo  vs  alle  tbe  sbame  tbat  tbey  maye.  By  tbe  ayde 
of  Ibesu  Criste,  in  wbom  I  by  leue,  I  sbal  laboure  & 
doopaynetofyndetbemaner  by  wbicbe  tbeir  power 

230 


and  mygbt  ebal  be  lassed,  mynnyssbed,  &  sbort- 
fed,  &  tbey  sbal  baue  guerdon  for  tbe  euyl  tbat  tbey 
;bauedontovs. 

B  made  tbenne  no  semblaunt  of  an- 
gre  tbat  be  bad,  but  sentc  bis  sonc  to 
fcuymont  anon  by  tbe  maner  tbat  be 
was  acustomed  to  goo,  &  badde  bym 
tbat  be  sbold  be  redy,  ffor  as  to  bym 
$  be  wold  bold  bym  tbisnygbt  alle  bis 
coucnauntes*  Re  badde  bym  also  tbat  alle  tbe  bar- 
,ons of  tbooste  sbold  yssue  oute  about  none, euery 
[man  armed  in  bis  bataylle,&mahe  semblaunt  for  to 
goo  ayenst  Corbagat,  &  after  in  tbe  begynnyngof 
tbenygbt  toretomeagayn  pryuely  witboutenoyse, 
and  bepe  tbem  so  armed  &redy  to  dootbat  sbal  be 
sayd  to  tbem  aboute  mydnygnt  J9  Buymont  was 
mocbe  ioyouswban  be  berdtbis  message,  and  aftir 
ledde  bym  to  fore  tbe  barons,  to  wbom  tbis  tbyng 
was  discouerd,  &  made  bym  saye  in  tbeyr  presence 
tbe  wordes  as  be  bad  brougbt.  Tbe  barons  wban 
tbey  berd  bym  were  mocbe  ioyous,  &  sayd  wel  tbat 
tbis  counseyl  was  good  and  faytbf  ul,and  of  grete 
courage  acorded  tberto. 


\\ 


237 


Row  tbey  of  flntbyocbe  bad  f  ere  of  treson,  &  bow 
tbey assembled  in  counseyl,  &  of  tbat  wbicbe6m~ 
yrfrnus  deposed  tbere  at,  capitulo  Cxvij^^ 

[IVetbyngbappedin  tbis  toun 
tbat  is  acustomed  of  te  to  come 
in  grete  werkes,  TTbey  tbat  bad 
tbe  kepyng&  cbarge  of  tbe  toun 
began  to  baue  suspection  witbin 
tbeyr  bertes,&deuyned  tbat  tbe 
cyte  sbold  be  by/trayed,  TTbey 
knewe  no  reson  ne  bow,  ne  tbey 
apperceyued  no  grete  semblaunce,  but  alway  tbat 
one  spak  to  tbat  otber  of  tbe  grete  men,  and  tbem 
semed  tbat  it  sbold  falle  jfiF  So  mocbe  aroos  tbis 
murmur  and  wordes,  tbat  tbey  assembled  to  fore 
Hncean,  lord  of  tbe  toun,  and  told  to  bym  tbat  bis 
men  bad  sucbe  fere,  and  it  was  not  witbout  reson, 
fFor  tbe  cristen  men  were  in  tbe  toun,  and  were  in 
doubte  tbat  by  tbem  dominate  mygbt  come  to  tbe 
cyte,  *Cbey  ledde  so  Hncean  witb  wordes  tbat  tbev 
made  bym  to  be  af erd  also,  Hnon  be  sente  for  bvm 
tbat  was  named  Gmyrf  ery  us,  and  told  to  bvm  bow 
tbts  worde  ranneabout,&  by  cause  be  belde  bvm  for 
a  wyseman,  be  demaunded  wbat  counseyl  be  wold 
gyue  bere  on.  Re, tbat  was  sbarp  of  entendement& 
apperceyuyng,  knewanon  tbat  bis  lord  demaunded 

tbysewordesfortoknoweyfbesboldanswereonv 
tbynge  by  wbtcbe  besbold  besuspecte,  &  knewe  wel 
tbat  tbis  assemblee  was  tbere  made  by  cause  tbey 
bad  suspection  ♦  fie  tbougbt  wel  to  bryn  ge  tbem  out 
of  tbis  wenyng  by  bis  answere,  and  sayd: 

238 


H Y^  lordes,ye  be  by e,  noble,&  wyse- 
men,  allc  tbey  of  tbe  toun  ougbt  to 
conne  ye  good  tbancke,  and  tbc  lord 
]]  specially,  of  tbis  tbat  ye  ymagyne  & 
doubte  of  trayson,ffor  in  so  grctc  a 
tbyngasye  baue  to  kepe,  ougbt  to  be 
doubted  allc  tbat  may  be/falle;  ffor  we  be  in  peryll 
of  our  lyues,  of  oure  f rancbyses,  of  wyues,  of  cbyl- 
deren  &  berytages.  Xlbxec  ben  tbynges  tbat  ougbt 
to  be  well  vnderstanden  and  kepte.  But  me  semetb 
tbat  by  two  wayes  maye  be  gyuen  counseyl  in  tbis 
'tbyng,  in  sucbe  wyse  tbat  yf  ony  were  vntrew  and 
sucbe  a  traytre  tbat  wold  deetroye  bis  countrey  be 
,sbold  baue  no  power.  Tbis  tbynge  mygbt  not  be 
don  ne  spoken  of  but  by  tbem  tbat  baue  tbe  toures 
in  kepyngXberfor  me tbynketbyf  ye  baue  suspec- 
tion  berof ,  yemay  wel  remedye  it  by  ofte  remeuyng 
tbem  fro  tbeyr  places,  ffor  tbis  tbynge  may  not  be 
deuysed  but  by  mocbe  grete  leyser.  Hnd  wban  ye 
cbaunge  tbem  tbus  ofte,  in  sucbe  wyse  tbat  tbey 
tbat  beberetbis  nygbt  sbal  be  settetbe  next  nygbt 
fer  tbens,wberetbey  sbal  bauenoknowlecbe,ber  by 
ye  sbal  take  fro  tbem  alle  tbe  ease  for  to  commune 
^orspeke  of  ony  trayson, 

|fiHJN  tbey  berd  tbis  counseyl  tbat 
tbis  cristen  man  Bmyrf eryus  gaf  to 
tbem ,  tbey  acorded  alle  wel  tberto,  & 
by  tbis  fy  lie  from  tbem  alle  tbe  sus- 
pection  from  tbeyr  bertes  tbat  tbey 
badayenst  tbem, Hnd  tbus  as  be  bad 
deuysedsboldbauedonyfitbadnotbensolate,for 
it  was  nygbt,  and  so  grete  remeuyngmygbt  not  be 

239 


made  but  by  space  of  tymeXbelordcommaunded 
tbem  to  kepe  alle  tbe  cyte  boolyXbus  departed  tbey 
fro  tbe  counseyl  jfiF  Gmyrf eryus  tbat sawe  wel  tbat 
tbe tbynge  tbat  be  bad  enterprised,yf  be  and  Buy- 
montbastednot,tbatitsboldneuertakegoodcnde, 
tberforbetbougbtmocbetobryngebispurpoosto 
effect  without  tbat  ony  man  sbold  perceyue  it 

Of  tbe  mescbyef  tbat  tbe  TTurkes  made  euery  daye 
to  tbe  cristen  men  tbat  were  in  Hn  tbyocbe  en  baby  t- 
yng  witb  tbem, capltulo  Cxviij^^ 

RO  tbe  begynnyng  tbat  tbe  cyte 

was  assyeged,  tbe  tTurkes  of  tbe 

j  toun  bad  in  great  suspection  tbe 

Grekes,  Surryens  &  fteremyns, 

&  generally  alle  tbe  otber  cristen 

men  tbat  duellyd  in  Hntbyocbe- 

Qlberof  it  bapped  tbat  tbe  poure 

cristen  men  tnat  badnot  in  tbeyr 

bowses  gamyson  sufficiaunt  for  longe  tyme,  tbey 

jmade  tbem  to  voyde  tbe  toun  and  alle  tbeyrmeyne, 

)  if  or  tbey  wold  not  tbat  tbe  cyte  were  charged  ne  en- 

combred  witb  tbem,  0>ey  reteyned  tbe  ryebe  men 

witbin  by  causetbey  bad  vytayllynowgb;  tbey  kepte 

tbemstrayt^&byfalsoccasionsrobbedtbemeuerv 
daye,  &  toke  fro  tbem  alle  tbeyr  tbyngesXbey  cbac- 
ed  tbem  to  tbe  labours  and  werkes  of  tbe  toun  •  vf 
tbey  bad  walles  for  to  make  or  amende,  tbey  bare 'tbe 
stones,  tbemorter,  &  sande;yf  tbey  woldeadresse 
engyns  for  to  caste  stones  or  otber  instrumentes 
of  warretbey  mustedrawe  tbe  cordes;andneuer  as 
longe  as  tbey  f  onde  cristen  men  tbey  sought  none 
otber  for  to  doo  sucbe  werkes.  And  wban  tbey  bad 
240 


trauaylled  longe,  in  etede  of  rewardee  tbev  leddc 
tbem  &  bctc  tbem  tburgb  tbc  etretee,  in  eucbe  wyee 
tbat  tbey  badlcucr  tobaucbcn  caeteout  of  tbetoun 
attebegynnyngewitb  tbc  otbcr  tban  to  be  reteyned 
witb  inu^Cbieeuffieednot  to  tbyee  fale  boundee, 
tbat  tbue  grcucd  tbcm  of  tbc  toun  tbat  were  crieten ; 
tbus  were  tbey  acorded  viij  dayee  to  f ore,  to  epeke  to 
6myrferyue,frende  of  Buymont,  tbat  tbey  wolde 
eleealle  tbe  crieten  men,  and  bad  don  it  yf  oneof  tbe 
admyraleof  tbetoun  bad  not  letted  and  empeeeb- 
ed  it,  wbicb  wae  alway  pry  ue  and  frende  of  tbe  crie- 
ten men  jSf  He  made  to  delaye  it  vij  dayee  by  tbie 
reaeon ,  ff or  be  eayd  to  tbem :  f  ayr  eire,  I  bope  tbat 
tbe  crieten  men  tbat  baue  aeeieged  ve  ebal  departe 
fro  tbe  eieae  witb  in  viij  dayee  for  doubte  of  Corb- 
agat  wbicb  cometb,  and  yf  tbey  departe,  wby  eball 
we  elee  tbe  crieten  men  tbat  ben  in  tbie  toun?  Hnd 
yf  tbey  departe  not,  tbenne  maye  ye  doo  ae  ye  baue 
deuyeed  J?  Cbyee  viij  dayee  were  now  paeeed,  in 
eucbewyeetbatitwaecommaundedmocbepryue- 
1  ly  to  tbem  tbat  bad  tbe  cbarge,  tbat  tbey  ebold  elee 
tbem  tbeeame  nygbt. 

"  RGJHJS  tbe  eame  day  at  none  tt  wae 

cryed  tburgb  tbe  booete  of  tbe  pyl- 

gryme,tbatalle  tbey  tbat  bad  boreee 

were  armed,  and  to  drawe  euery  man 

to  bie  bataylle,  wbere  be  wae  coneti- 

tuted  and  ordeyned  for  to  doo  tbat 

tbeyr  captayne  ebold  commaunde  tbem*  0>e  men 

on  foote  knewe  notbyng  wbat  tbey  ebold  doo,  ne 

tbe  boreemen  neytber,  eauf  tbey  tbat  Buymont  bad 

aduertyeedXbue  departed  tbey  frotbooete  allem 


ordenaunce;it  seemed  wel  tbat  tbey  wold  goof erre; 
tbey  wente  forth  tyl  it  was  nygbtj^CHban  it  was 
derfee  it  was  commaunded  that  tbey  sbolde  retome 
agayne  secretely  without  ony  noyse,  and  that  tbey 
sbold  bolde  tbem  armed  in  tbeyr  todays  JS? 'Cbis 
valyauntman,emyrferius,ofwnomIbauespoken 
to  fore,  bad  a  brotner  witb  bym,  but  be  was  not  of 
sucbe  courage  as  be  was*  tlbe  good  man  bad  sayd 
no  tbynge  to  bym  of  tbat  be  purposed  to  doo,  Ifor 
be  doubted  mocbe  be  wold  not  be  agreable  tberto. 
XZbcy  weretogyderein  tbe  tourat  tbe  bourof  none; 
wban  tbe  batayllesyssuedof  tbooste,  tbey  bebelde 
it  by  tbe  batayllementes, 

WYRfeKyUSwold  preue&  knowe 
tbe  courage  of  bis  broder,  wbicbe  was 
yonger  tban  be,  and  sayd  to  bym: 
f ayr  swete  broder,  I  baue  mocbe  grete 
pyteof  tbyse  byemen  tbat  tbou  seest 
there,  ffor  tbey  be  of  oure  creaunce, 
mocbe  f ay  tbful  &  good  cristen  men,  JNfowryde  tbey 
al  so  surely  asyf  tbey  ougbtnotbyngtodoubte,  & 
their  detb  19  f  ul  nygh  tbem,  ifor  it  may  not  be  that 
they  may  resiste  ayenst  tbem  that  come,  &  ayenst 
tbem  of  the  toun,and  yf  tbey  knewe  it  1  trowe  tbey 
wold  take  other  counseylj^fiis  broder  answerd* 
This  is  a  mocb  folyssh  pyte  tbat  tbou  bast,andl 
seethe  m  a  gretemusardye.Certainly  it  sbold  plese 
me  wel  tbat  tbe  Turkes  bad  nowe  smeton  of  alle 
their  beedes,  and  slayn  tbem  alle  tbat  tbou  seest 
there  depart,  and  alle  the  other  in  lyke  wyse,  Ifor 
neuersyth  tbey  entred  in  totbislonde  we  had  neuer 

gooddayneonegoodnygbt,butbauemadevssuf- 
242 


i 


fre  many  euilles  by  tboccasion  of  tbcir  comyng,  & 
tberf or  t  may  not  louc  tbem*  But  1  wold  tbat  tbey 
sbold  bauc  an  euyl  endyng,  and  tbat  rigbt  soone 
jj^CHban  Gmyrferyus  bad  bcrd  tbyse  wordes  be 
doubted  to  fore  wnat  to  saye  to  bis  broder  of  bis 
purpoos,  but  fro  tbis  fortb  be  doubted  nomore,& 
began  to  batebym  mocbein  bis  courage*Re  tbougbt 
wel  tbat  by  bym  mygbt  be  destroubled  tbe  grete 
avauncement  of  cristendome;  tberfore  be  was  in 
arete  anguyssbe  bow  be  mygbt  delyuer  bym  self 
from  bym* 

Of  tbedilygence  tbatBuymont  made  in  tbis  werke, 
and  bow  Gm  vrf  eryus  slewe  bis  brother,  &  delyuerd 
tbe  toun  to  tne  cristen  men,  capitulo  Qxi%g*g* 

dYNOJ^tTsleptenot  tbisnygbt, 
if  or  be  sbold  baue  ben  mocbedis- 
}'  plesyd,  yf  by  bis  neclygence  tbis 
werke  sbold  be  taryecL  Re  wente 
ofte  to  tbe  barons  tbat  knew  of 
tbis  tbynge,  f or  tobe  counseylled. 
Re  belde  in  bis  bonde  a  laddre  of 
cordes,mocbe  subtylly  made;  a- 
boue,  it  sbold  be  fasted  to  tbe  creneaux  of  tbe  walle 
witb  goodand  stronge  crocbettes  of  yron,and  for 
to  fastne  also  in  tbe  ertbe  J&  (Oban  it  cam  aboute 
mydnygbt,  be  toke  bis  messaofer  tbat  knewe  bis 
secrete  pryuely,  &  sen  te  bym  to  bis  frende  to  knowe 
yf  it  were  yet  tyme  tbat  be  sbold  approucbe  to  the 
wallys,  ffor  bym  tbougbt  tbat  alle  tbe  cyte  was  in 
mocne  peas  and  restejj^CClban  tbis  messager  cam 
be  bad  bym  abyde  tbere  stylle,  and  saye  no  worde 


mil 


mi^ 


tyl  that  the  maysterof  the  watcbe  were  departed  & 
passyd  by;  if  or  the  custome  was  sucbe  in  tbecyte, 
tbat  a  noble  and  wyseman  sbold  sercbeand  vysyte 
euery  nygbt  tbe  watcbe,  and  amende  tbat  as  tbey 
foundeamys.Hndbewentetbustbreorfourtymes 
in  tbe  nygbt,  witb  a  grete  companye  of  peple  tbat 
bare  ligntj^Itwasnotlongeafter,  tbat  becamand 
sawe  in  tbe  tour  wbere  Gmyrferyus  was,  and  sawe 
alletbynges  welordeynedandin  gooddisposicion ; 
and  it  pleeyd  bym  wel,  and  passed  fortb. 

R1S  man  sawe  tbenne  tbat  it  was 
tyme  to  perf orme  bis  werke^and  say  d 
to  tbe  messager :  Goo  tby  way  dyly- 
gfen  tly,  and  saye  to  tby  lord  tbatnow 
is  tyme  to  doo  well,  and  tbat  be  come 
to  tore  tbis  tour;  &  see  tbat  be  baue 
good  companye  witb  bym  &trewejSTCbe  messager 
departed  forthwith.  Gmyrferyus  entred  in  to  tbe 
tour,  and  founde  bis  broder  slepyng  mocbe  faste. 
He  bad  fere  tbat  be  sbold  awake  er  tbe  werke  were 
accomplyssbyd,  and  tbat  be  mygbt  destrouble  it; 
tberfore  be  toke  bis  swerd,  and  roof  bym  tburab 
botbe  sydes,  &  slewe  bymj^€be  messager  cam  to 
Buymont,  and  told  bym  bis  erande.  Re  cam  incon- 
tinent to  fore  tbe  tour,  and  tbe  otber  barons  witb 
bym  tbat  kneweof  tbe  werke.  6cbeof  tbem  bad  but 
a  f ewe  witb  tbem,  but  tbey  were  good  &  trew.  6m- 
yrfenus  put  out  bis  beedandsalewed  tbem,  &  tbey 
resalewed  bym;  and  after  aualeda  corde  doun  tbe 
wall.  €bey  toke  it,  and  bounde  it  faste  to  tbende 
of  tbe  laddre  of  cordes.  Cdban  it  was  bounden  and 
drawen  vp,fastned  &  attached  witb  tbe  crocbettes 
244 


of  yron  aboue,  there  was  none  that  was  so  bardy 
tbat  wold  fyrst  goo  vp*  CCIban  Buymont  sawe  tbis 
be  toke  tbenne  tbeladdrefirst,asavalyaunt  man  & 
ardant  taccomplyssbe  tbe  werke,  and  wente  vp  til 
be  cam  to  tbe  batillemen t.  Bmyrf eryus  knewe  anon 
tbat  it  was  Buymont,  &  toke  bym  by  tbe  arme,  and 
kyssed  bis  bonde.  Buymont  wente  vpon  tbe  walle, 
and  kyssed  bym  swetly.  He  tbanked  bym  of  tbe 
seruvce  tbat  be  bad  don. 

myRf 6RYCIS  ladde  bym  in  to  tbe 
1  towre,  &sayde  to  bym  t  Bebolde,and 
see  wbatlbaue  don  for  god  and  you* 
Cbis  man,  tbatye  see  bere  deed,  is  my 
brotber  germayn;  I  baue  slayn  bym 
I  by  cause  be  wolde  not  acorde  to  tbis 
werke  tbatye  &  IbaueenterprysedjSPBuymontbad 
mocbe  grete  ioye,  if  or  fro  tbenne  f ortbon  knewe  be 
well  tbatbisfrendedyde alle in  good  faytb; tbenne 
cam  to  tbe  creneuls,andput  oute  bis  beede&  called 
bis  peple,  and  sayd  tbat  tbey  sbold  come  vp  dyly- 
gently  by  tbe  laddre.  €bey  durste  not  go  vp,  but 
alwaysupposeditbadbedeceyuauncejj^Buymont, 
tbat  was  mocbe  valyaun  t  &  iust,  put  doon  bis  f oote 
on  tbe  laddre,andaescended  doun  to  tbe  ertbe,and 
sayd  to  tbem :  f  ayr  lordes,  ye  tarye  ouer  longe,  tbere 
is  no  doubte,  ff  or  knowe  ye  certaynly  tbat  tbis  good 
man  batb  sbewde  to  me  bis  brotber,  wbom  be  bath 
slayn  f  or  loue  of  vs  j&Glban  tbey  berd  tbis,  tbey  all 
toke  tbe  laddre,  be  tbat  my  gbt  best  beste,  &  moun  t> 
ed  vp  so  many,  tbat  tber  were  men  ynowgb  on  tbe 
walleXberle  of  f  laundres  went  vp,  andean  ere,  for 
tenseyn  tbe  otber  bow  tbey  sbold  doo,  <Oban  tbe 
rs  M5 


fyret  towr  was  wel  garnyssbcd  with  men,  tbey 

rannctotbcotberby,and9lewctbcwatcbcmen,and 
beldetbetoures, 

)Of  tbe  mayntene  of  tbc  cristen  men  in  tbis  pryse, 
and  of  tbe  affraye  of  tbe  Curkes  of  tbc  tounf capi- 
l  tulo  Cxx&&  * 

YC  tbe  foote  of  tbe  laddre  abode 

sommeoftbebarons,fortocon- 
duyte  tbooste,<JCIban  tbey  sawe 
tbat  tbey  bad  vpon  tbe  walles 
men  ynowe  tbat  my gbt  gamy 9- 
isbe  dyuerse  toweres,  tbeye  ran 
has  tely  to  tbe  lodgys  f  or  tomake 
tn,~»  **  +u  -Jtbepeple  arme  tbem/&  todrawe 
nerer  to  tbende  tbat  tbey  mygbt  al  be  redy  for  to 
entre  in  wban  our  men  tbat  were  on  tbe  walles  made 
to  them  a  mgne^Our  men  tbat  were  mounted  vp 
I  on  tbe  walles  were  notydle,  but  were  noble  &  bardv 
in  such  wise  tbat  tbey  bad  anon  x  towres  taken  alle 
marenge,andbadslayn  alle  tbem  tbat  tbey  founde 

tnmn,andtbecytewa8notyetmeuyd;ffortbecrrete 

men  of  tbe  toun  wban  tbey  berde  tbe  novse  bad 

supposed  certaynly  tbat  tbey  badslayn  thicrfeSn 

»mcn,  lyke  aS  tbey  bad  commaunded,  and  tbat  th£ 

affraye  bad  be  fornoneotber  tbyngf  1  tfS  meued 

)not  oute of  tbeyr  bcddcs WtS^^ ™hS 

►oure  men  were  goon  vp,  wa9  a  posterne.  Our  mm 

tbatwereon  tbe  w*Ues  descended 

lock9,and  opened  tbe  yate,m9ucbwyse  tbat  many 
'f^ofoure^^ 

tbat  was  called  tbe  gate  of  tbe  brydge,  and  all?  tbe 


> watcbe  that  kepte  it  tbey  slewe,  &  after  opened  the 

>gate^H  squ^erof  Buymontysran  til  be  cam  toan 

bye  towre,  wbicbe  was  vpon  the  tertre  by  tbe  don- 

geon  of  tbe  toun;  tbere  be  fyxed  tbe  baner  of  Buy- 

mont  bis  lord. 

RHJHourepeple  tbatwere  in  tbe  toun 
apperceyued  tbat  tbedaye  was  nygb, 
3  and  tbe  dawenyng  appiered,  tbenne 
tbeymadetosownetbeyrtrompettes 
anabusynes,f or  to  calle  altbe  people 
of  tbe  boostejjTCbe  barons  vnder- 
>stode  tbe  signe, &smote  tbe  bors witb  tbe  spores, 
and  entred  by  tbe  yates  wbicbe  tbey  founde  opene 
witballe  tbeyr  batayllesXbe  foote  men  of  tbooste 
awoke,tbat  knewe  notbyng  of  tbis  counseyllXbey 
'sawe  tbe  tentes  empty  and  voyde,  and  apperceyued 
tbat  tbe  toun  was  taken ;  tbenne  began  tbey  bastely 
torennetotbegfayne^insucbewysetbatnoneabode 
lOtberjfiTCbeTAirkes  of  tbe  toun  awoke,  &berde  tbe 
noyse,  &  sawe  tbe  men  of  armes  tburgb  tbe stretes. 
tbenne  apperceyued  tbey  in  wbat  poynt  tbey  were; 
tbey  began  to  flee  out  of  tbeyr  bowses,  &lede tbeyr 
wyues  and  cbilderen  witb  tbem.  3dban  tbey  fiedae 
^f ro  one  rowte  of  our  men  tbey  recountred  another 
'  fretter,  wbicbe  slewe  tbem  alle. 

RG  Surryens,tbe  fiermyens,  and  tbe 
otber  cristen  men  of  tbe  toun  apper- 
ceyued tbat  tbe  tbyng  wente  so ;  tbey 
bad  mocbe  arete  ioye,  and  toke  tbe 
armes  bastely,  and  wente  fortb  witb 
our  men  and  tolde  to  tbem  tbe  places 
where  mooste  peple  were,  and  where  the  tresours 
M  *47 


werej^Cbey  tben  slewe  tbe  Curkes  mocbc  gladly ; 
tbey  payned  tbcm  mocbc  torendre  to  tbcm  tbc  guer- 
don of  betynges  andtormentes  tbat  tbey  bad  don 
totbemj^tboost  wastbenneentredin  totbetoun ; 
tbc  barons  bad  sette  tbeir  baners  on  tbc  toures; 
grctc  occision  &  slaughter  bad  be  in  tbe  toun ;  tbey 
spared  noman,  ne  woman,  ne  cbilde;  tbey  brak  vp 
dores  and  cbestes ;  ye  sbold  baue  seen  gold  &  sy luer 
departed  in  tbe  stretes.Xt  semetb  well  a  tbyngcon- 
quered&  wonne  by  warrej^^dbat  sballmakelong 
deuyses  ?  Tiber  were  slayn  of  tbem  of  tbe  toun  tbat 
day  moo  tban  x  JVI,  of  wbom  tbe  bodyes  laye  alle 
bare  in  tbe  wayes  and  stretes. 
f>ow  Hncean,  lord  of  Hntbyocbe,  fkdde  by  a  pos~ 
terne  out  of  tbe  toun,  and  be  was  recountred&  put 
to  detb,capitulo  OXXJ&4* 

^S^ftH]^  Hncean  sawe  tbat  tbe  cvte 
wastbus  bytrayed,and  tbat  nis 
peple  tbat  mygbt  escape  fledde 
an  bye  in  to  tne  f ortresse  of  tbe 
^  dongeon,  be  doubted  mocbe  to 
1  goo  tbeder,ffor  be  tbougbt  wel 
tbat  tbe  cristen  men  wold  enuy- 
ronne  incontinent  tbis  tour  yf 
ibe  entrcdXberfor  be  yssued  out  at  a  posterne  out 
/of  tbe  toun,  &  wente  allone  as  be  bad  be  oute  of  bis 
'wytte,ne  be  knewe  not  wbetber  be  mygbt  goo  &  flee 
for  to  kepe  bym^ban  be  wente  tbus  by  tbe  f eldes 
mocbe  ferre  fro  tbe  cyte,  certeyne  Rermyns  mette 
bym  &  knewe  bym,  &  mocbe  merueylled  wbat  tbis 
mygbt  be;  &  after  tbougbt  tbat  tbe  cyte  was  taken, 
Hnd  tbey  approcbed  bym,  lyke  as  tbey  wold  baue 
enclyned  to  bym  as  tbey  were  woonte,  but  tbenne 
248 


.?— "=* 


PHI 


ft 


tbey  toke  bym,  and  smote  bym  doun  to  tbc  tbertbe, 
ana  after  witb  a  swerde  smote  of  bis  beed,  &  bare 
it  in  to  tbe  toun,  and  presented  it  vnto  tbe  barons 
to  fore  tbe  peple* 

JjpTG  maner  peple  was  comenin  toHn- 
tbyocbe,wbicb  were  not  of  tbe  toun, 
tbat  were  come  for  to  deff ende  tbeyr 
lawe,andotber  for  to  be  souldyours, 
andotberforprowesse  of  armes,and 
to  gete  bonour  &  prysXbyse  knewe 
notweltbebeyngoftbetoun,&weremountedvpon 
tbeir  borses  alle  armed,  &  begonne  to  renne  ayenst 
tbe  bylle  toward  tbedongeon,  &  by  aduenture  tbey 
mette  a  route  of  our  men,  tbus  as  tbey  wente  secb- 
yngin  tbe  toun,  wbicbe  ran  on  tbem  mocbe  bardy- 
lyXbyse  maner  of  peple  wold  baue  escbewedtbem, 
and  smote  tbeyr  bors  toward  tbe  valeye,  and  fylle 
doun  of  a  ban  eke  in  sucbe  wyse  tbat  tr>ey  were  alle 
to  brused,  men,  bors,  bamoys  &  aby  llementes,  tber 
were  deed  wel  a  iij  C  j&  Som  tber  were  tbat  in  tbe 
toun  were  bom,wban  tbey  apperceyuedin  tbemorn- 
yng  tbat  our  men  were  witbin,tbey  toke  tbeir  bors 
and  rode  out  bv  tbe  yates  tbat  our  men  bad  open- 
edXber  were  ofoure  men  tbat  wente  aftir  and  sued 
tbem,  &  brougbt  many  of  tbem  agayn,  wbom  tbey 
put  in  pryson ;  som  otber  escaped,  S.  ran  vnto  tbe 
montaynes, 

BOOT:  tbe  bour  of  tierce,  wban  tbe 
toun  was  sercbed,our  peple  assem- 
bled, and  anon  apperceyued  tbat  in 
alle  tbe  toun  was  no  vytayll;  and  it 
was  not  wondre,  ff  or  tbe  siege  bad 
tbenne  endured  nygb  ix  monetbes, 

249 


m 


s$f 


W 


m 


and  mocbe  pcplc  bad  ben  tberin  duryng  tbe  siege, 
but  gold,syluer,  preceous  iewellis,&  vessel  of  dy- 
uerse  facions,  clothes  of  sylke,  and  ryebe  tappets, 
&  of  otber  tbynges  tbey  founde  so  mocb, tbat  ecbe 
^of  our  men  was  all  charged,  as  mocb  as  tbey  mygbt 
bere.lt  cam  wel  to  poyn  t  to  oure  poure  py  Igryms  for 

tofyndesucberyebesseaftertbegretemeseasetbat 
tbey  bad  suffredXber  were  f ounden  in  tbe  toun  v  C 
good  bors  of  armes,  but  tbey  were  right  lene  & wery 
JP'Cbue  was  tbe  cyte  of  Hntbyocbe  taken,  tbe  yere 
of  tbyncamacion  of  our  lord  a  JV1  toexxviij,  tbe  iij 
day  of  tbe  monetb  of  luyn. 
Row,  after  tbat  our  men  made  grete  slaughter  of 
tbeyr  enemyes,our  men  belde  counseyl  for  to  take 
tbe  dongeon,  tbenne  beyng  seased  or  tbe  burkes, 
capttulo  Cxxifr&P 

R6  pylofryms  tbat  were  tbeder 
comen  fro  many  countrees  by 
grete  labour,  were  tbenne  f  ul  of 
sbedyng  of  tbe  blood  of  tbeir 
enemyes.TTbe  barons  assembl- 
ed in  counseyl,  and  aduysed  e- 
monge  tbem  tbat  tbis  werk  was 
not  yet  parfygbt,  but  tbat  tber 


was  yet  trauay  11  &  peryll  tyl  tbat  tbe  dongeon  were 
taken  &goten,wbicbe  was  right  stronger  wel  crar- 
nyssbed  with  walles  of  the  toun.  Cbey  sette  good 
warde  and  kepersof  allethe  yates,and  dydedo  crye 
thurgb  alle  tbe  toun  to  assault,  and  commaunded 

thatallsboldcometothetourtbatwasonthemon- 
taynej^Olhan  tbey  cam  tbeder,  they  knewe  wel  cer- 


ww^- 


taynly  that  tbiswasnot  atbyngeligbtly  tobegot- 
en,  ffor  the  fortresse  mygbte  not  be  goten  but  by 
famyne;tberfortbey  trauay lied  but  lytil,but  witb- 
drewe  tbem,  &  made  tbe  peple  toretorneXbis  mon- 
tayne,  tbat  is  aboue  tbe  toun,  is  deuydedin  tweyne, 
like  as  I  sayd  to  fore,  by  a  depe  valley  e,wbicbe  is  as 
stepe  as  it  were  plom  doun.tbe  sycte  wbicbe  is  to- 
ward tboryent  is  mocb  fayrer,  vpon  a  playne  wel 
brode,  ful  of  vygnes  and  londe  erableXbat  otber 
partye,  toward  tbe  weste,  is  mocbe  byer,  as  a  man 
sbold  goo  vp  rigbt,  and  rigbt  vpon  tbe  sommet,  at 
toppe  of  tbe  tertre,  stondetb  tbedongeon,f  erme  of 
ouer  stronge  walles  and  tby  eke  toures,tbey  be  bye  & 
grete  toward  tboryent;  &  toward  nortbeste,  about 
tbe  valeye,  it  is  so  deep  tbat  it  semetb  a  rigbt  belle, 
&  it  is  an  bydoustbyngetobebolde,ltcoudeneuer 
be  ymagyned  bow  it  mygbt  be  myned/Co  ward  tbe 
,west  tbe  bill  is  lower;  bytwene  tbts  bille&tbedon- 
'geon  is  a  valleye,  &  in  tnis  valleye  fro  tbe  dongeon 
vn  to  tbe  toun  is  a  way ,  wbicbe  is  so  stray  t  tbat  witb 
grete  payne  one  man  allone  maye  ofoo  or  come. 

r>G  barons  acorded  tbat  tbey  wold 
closetbis  litil  terter&waye,totbende 
tbat  tbey  of  tbe  dongeon  sbold  not 
mowedescendcnedooeuyllne  barme 
to  oure  men  in  tbe  cyte*  tbey  made  a 
wall  mocbe  stronge  of  lyme&sonde, 
in  wbicbe  tbey  put  men  of  armes  ynowe,and  welin 
poynt/Cbey  sette  on  tbe  walks  stones,  andengyns 
>redy  for  to  caste  stones  yf  tbe  burkes  descended 
and  cam  doun  j^O>e  barons  wente  in  to  tbe  toun 
for  to  take  counsey  I  of  otber  werkes*  It  was  ordeyn- 
ed  and  deuysed  tbat  alle  men  sbold  retome  and  a- 

^5« 


II 


byde  there  about  tbis  newe  walle  tyl  that  the  don- 
geon  were  taken,  sauf  the  due  Godefiroye,  wbicbe 
by  comyn  counseylof  alle,  sbold  abyde  for  to  kepe 
the  gate  of  the  est;  and  the  fortresse  that  our  men 
bad  made  witboute  tbe  gate,  tbat  was  delyuerd  to 
Buymont j^TTbey  berde  tydyngee  tbat  tbis  grete 
prynce  Corbagat,  of  wbom  X  baue  spoken  to  fore, 
sbold  arryue  shortly,  ffor  be  was  tbenne  entred  in 
to  tbe  londe  of  Hn  tbyocbe.  It  was  acorded  tbat  tbey 
sbolde  sende  a  wyse  man  vnto  tbe  see,  and  saye  to 
tbem  tbatweregoon  for  to  doo  tbeyr  tbynges,  tbat 
tbey  sbold  retourne  bastely,  and  brynge  in  to  tbe 
cyte  alle  tbe  vytaylles  tbat  tbey  mygbtf  yndeXbey 
tbem  self  tbat  were  in  Hn  tbyocbe,  ran  alle  tbe  coun- 
trey  about  for  to  secbe  vytaylles,  but  tbey  f ounde 
but  litilXbe  labourers  of  tbe  playnecoun  trey  were 
mocbeioyous  tbat  tbe  cyte  was  in  tbe  bandes  of  tbe 
pylgryms,for  tbey  were  of  ourfaytb.HU  tbat  tbey 
bad  byd  tbey  brought;  but  it  was  not  mocbe,  for 
tbe  longe  siege  baddestroyed  tbe  countrewitbout, 
and  emptyd  tbe  toun  witbin, 
Row  wby les  tbooste  gamyssbed  tbe  toun,  somme 

oftboostofCorbagatcamrennyngtoforeit  ca»i- 
tulo  Cxxiij^?^  K 

IRB  second  day  after  tbe  toun 
wastaken,wbylesoure  peple  en- 
tended  to  gamyssbe  tbe  cyte, 

|  cam  three  bonderd  men  of  tbe 
boost,al  in  poynt,  of  Corbagat, 
wel  armed  &  borsed  vpon  lygbt 
borses,for  to  see  yf  tbey  mygbt 

I  fynde  ony  of  oure  men  tbat  rode 


folyly  by  the  countre*  They  embussbed  tbcm  allc 
sauf  xxx,  tbc  best  borsed,  wbicbe  cam  to  fore  tbe 
toun/Cbey  began  torennenycely,for  todraweoure 
men  out  of  arraye  Jf  GIban  oure  men  sawe  tbem, 
tbey  bad  grete  desdayne,  and  wende  tbat  it  bad  be 
a  grete  sbameyf  tbey  founde  not  to  wbom  tospeke 
to,sytbtbeywerecomesofertofore,Hnoblemanof 
wbom  I  bave  spoken  to  fore,  by  wbom  tbe  booste 
bad  bad  many  prouffytes  by  bis  wy tte  &  prowesse, 
and  was  named  Rogier  de  Barneuylle,  and  was  of 
tbe  companye  of  tbe  due  of  JVormandye,  be  toke 
witb  bym  xv  kny  gbtes  tbat  be  bad  of  bis  meyne,and 
cam  out  of  tbe  toun  ayenst  tbe  Turkes,  as  be  tbat 
'was  noble,  valyaunt  and  bardy,  and  acustomed  to 
doo  f ayr  f ay  tes* 

DHJ^  besawe  tbem^besmotebisbors 
witb  bis  spores  toward  tbem,  and 
tbey  by  cautele  torned&  fledde,Our 
men  folowed  bastely  so  ferre  tbat 
tbey  launced  vpon  tbeyrwatcbe;tbey 
sprange  oute  of  tbeembussbement, 
and  ran  vpon  oure  men,  ffor  tbey  were  many,  &  wel 
jproued  in  armes,  Rogier  relyed  bis  lytil  f elawsbip, 
and  cam  deffendyng  bym  toward  tbe  toun,  GIban 
tbeywerenygbcalTurkegamyssbedwitbastronge 
bowe  smote  Rogier  tburgb  tbe  body,  in  sucbe  wyse 
tbat  be  fyl  doun  deed  to  fore  bis  nors,  Hnon  bis 
felaws  witbdrewe  tbem  in  to  tbe  tounXbeCurkes 
descended  vpon  bym,  &  smote  of  bis  beed,  seeynof 
tbey  tbat  were  on  tbe  walles,  tbey  bare  away  tbe  beed, 
andtbusdepartedj^Xbey  of  tbe  toun  yssuedoute 
witb  grete  crye,  and  tamentacion,  as  tbey  tbat  bad 


grctc  losse.  ITbey  toke  the  body,  and  buryed  it 

( honorably  and  witb  grctc  sorowein  the  porcbe  of 

tbe  cbircbeof  seyntpeterXbe  barons  compleyned 

mocbe  abouc  tbc  otber  tbis noble  man,  as  tbev tbat 

beste  knewe  bym. 

1  gow  tbc  tbyrde  day  after  tbc  gctyngc  and  pryse  of 
Jttntbyocbe,  Corbagat  witb  bis  boost  arrvued  to 
fore  tt,  capita  lo  CxxiKkfop 

™  \ ^6 tbe  tbyrdc  day  after  tbat 

Hn  tbyocbe  was  tahen,tbis  grete 
1  pryn  ce  Corbagat  cam  to  tbe  cy  te 
in  tbe  momyng  at  tbe  sonne 
rysyng,  witb  so  grete  plente  of 
peple  tbat  alle  tbe  countre  tbat 

mvgbtbeseenfrotbebyestplace 
— I  of  tbe  toun  was  couerd  witb 
them/che  barons  sawe  mocbemore  peple  tban  tbey 
berde  saye  of,  for  tbeyr  boost  en  creced  euery  day,  nc 
passed  tbe  brydge,  and  lodged  bym  bytwene  tbe 
laye  and  tbe  rvuer  of  Helle,  wbicbe  is  wel  a  myle  fro 
tbat  one  to  tbat  otber.  r>e  bad  so  grete  plente  of 

Rnygbtes,and9ogretenombreoftentesandpauvU 
Ions,  tbat  tbe  grete  playne  wberof  I  baue  spoken  to 

»fore,wbereHntbyocbstondetb,neyetitmyqbtnot 
allereceyuetbem,  but  many  of  tbem  lodaed tbem  in 
tbe  terrytoryes  byj^Clban  Corbagat  bad  be  tbus 
>  tbre  dayes  lodged  bym  tbougbt  t&t  be  was  oZ 
IZ  a?  ^  cyte,  &  by  bis  counseyl  wold  bemore  ner 
tbe  dongeon  wbicb  tbe  Turkes  belde,  for  to  ayde  & 
comforte  tbem,  and  tbougbt  for  to  put  men  in  to 
.tbetoun  by  tbe  yate  tbat  was  under  tbe  dongeon 


— ~ 


ftlban  be  was  lodged  on  that  party  e,  be  comprised 
fro  the  yate  of  the  eest  to  the  west  yate  all  the  syde 
of  the  toun  toward  the  south, 

syde  tbe  parteof  tbe  eestwasafort- 
3resse,wbicbeouremen  badmadevpon 
a  litil  tertre  as  1  baue  sayd,  and  was 
delyuerd  to  Buymont,  but  wban  tbe 
toun  was  taken  and  tbe  yate,  be  de- 
lyuerd tbis  f ortresse  to  otber  for  to 
jkepe.  TTberby  lodged  som  burkes  of  tbooste  of 
Corbagfat,tbey  began  tassay  lie  tbis  tour/Cbey  tbat 
Jwere  wttbin  dyde  grete  payne  to  deff ende  tbem,  but 
(it  was  ouermocbe  cbarged  witb  grete  plen  te  of  peple 
tbat  were  tbere,  &  also  witb  archers,  of  wbom  tbey 

badmany/Cbeduc,wbicbewasbyeattbeyate,sawe 
tbat  bis  men  bad  ouermocbe  to  aoo,and  bad  good 

wyllfortobelpetbem,&woldbauedislodgedtbem 
tbat  were  come  ouer  f  er  forth  Re  yssued  out  witb 
al  bis  bataylle,  and  smote  bis  bors  witb  bis  spores 
toward  tbe  f ortresse,  and  sawe  tbat  tbere  were  ouer 
grete  plen  te  of  "Curkes  to  forebym,  wbicb  smote  in 
to  bis  men,  and  began  to  demene  tbem  euyll,ffor 
ayenst  one  of  tbem  tber  were  x  Oirkes^TTbe  due 
knewe  tbat  bis  strenatbe  was  not  like  tbeyres,and 
began  to  witbdrawe  bym  toward  tbe  toun,  but  to 
fore  tbat  tbey  mygbt  reentre  in  to  tbe  gate,  tbe 
TTurkes  assay  led  tbem  so  euyll  tbat  tber  were  ij  C 
of  tbe  batayll  of  tbe  due  taken  and  deed* 


255 


f)ow  after  that  the  due  was  within  the  barresof  the 
toun,  &  many  of  bis  men  slayn,  the  Curkes  entred 
in  to  the  toun,  capitulo  Cxxv&& 

T)S  due  cam  in  to  the  toun  mocbe 
angry  of  this  dommagej^But 
wban  tbeTTurkes  knewe  tbattbis 
bad  be  Godeffroye  of  Boloyne 
tbattbeybadtbusputabak,tney 
aroos  in  mocbe  grete  pryde;  tber/ 
fore  tbey  wente  tbens  vnto  tbe 
montayne  and  entred  in  to  tbe 
toun  by  tbe  yate  of  tbe  dongeon,  and  surprysed 
somme  of  our  men  tbattokenonebede;  witb  bowes 
and  witb  swerdes  tbey  slewe  tbem.  But  wban  tbey 
were  apperceyuedourmen  cbassed  tbem,  but tbev 
put  tbem  in  to  tbe  dongeon  where  tbey  were  saur. 
jj^busdyde  tbey  oftymesbarme,frbr  tbey  knewe 
another  way  to  descende  than  that  wbicbe  our  men 
bad  garnyssbed,  Cbe  barons  assembled  for  to  take 
counseyl  wbat  tbey  sbold  doo  of  tbe  peryll  wberin 
tbey  were.  By  corny n  acorde  it  was  ordeyned  tbat 
Buymont  &  tbe  erle  of  XTbolouse  sboldmake  tbere 
adyebe  mocbe  depe  andbrode  ynowgb  bytwene  tbe 
toun  and  the  pendaunt  of  tbe  montayne, 
^  iSs^afieYmade  ittbereas  it  wasdeuysed, 
&made  there  a  fortresse  wbicbe  tbey 
garnyssbedwel  witb  men  wel  armed. 
cbeCurkes  tbatwerein  tbe  dongeon, 
and  tbey  also  tbat  were  com  en  in  by 
tbis  gate,  descended  ofte  by  a  way 
couerte  vn  to  tbis  fortresse,  Hnd  assay  lied  it  mocbe 


w 


■ 


M 


fiersly,in  sucbe  wyseas  tbey  lete  tbem  bauenoreste; 
tbat  it  bappcd  on  a  day,  tbat  so  grete  plente  of 
Curkes  descended  tbat  tbecryaroosin  totbe  toun. 
Cbatandyf  tbeotber  barons  &  knygbtes  wbicbe 
were  a/brodein  tbe  toun  badnot  comeandronne  to 
tbem  tbey  bad  slayn  or  taken  tbyse  noble  men,  tbat 
is  to  wete  Buymont,  Guerard  du  puyssat,  Raoul 
delafontayne,RembaultCreton,andsommeotb- 
er  lordes  tbat  were  in  tbeyr  companye  jj^Hlle  tbey 
were  grete  men  and  good  knygbtes  tbat  were  put  in 
tbis  newe  fortresse  for  to  def ende  it  But  tberle  of 
f  laundres,  tbe  due  of  J^ormandye,  and  f)uon  tbe 
^layneranne  mocbe  bastely  tbeder,andmette  witb 
tbe  Curkes  er  tbey  mygbt  entre  in  to  tbe  dongeon. 
f  Cbey  slewe  many,  and  many  tbey  receyued  pryson- 

iners. 

psx  i^yjggfiS  otber  Curkes  tbat  escaped  cam 
to  foreCorbagat,  &  counted  to  bym 
tbat  tbyse  men  of  tbetoun  were  ouer 
f eers  and  bardye,  and  it semetb  wban 
tbey  ben  in  werke  tbat  tbey  doubte 
notbynge  tbe  detb,  ne  tbis,  ne  tbat 
j^Corbagat,  wbicbe  was  lodged  in  tbe  montayne 
as  I  bauesayd, dydenot tberon mocbe  bis  prouffyt 
ne  bis  bonoure,  ne  be  f ounde  not  tbere  pasture  for 
bis  bors,asbe  dyde  bynetbe  in  tbe  valeye/<Oban  be 
sawe  tbis  be  commaunded  tbat  be  sbold  be  dis- 
lodged, &  descended  in  to  tbe  valeye  witb  bis  men, 
Re  passed  tbe  riuer  of  fielle;  tbere  deuised  be  tbe 
places  to  bis  barons  about  tbe  toun^On  tbe  mom 
it  bapped  tbatlcan  not  say  bow  many  Curkes  ap- 
proved tbe  cyte,  and  descended  fro  tbeyr  borses, 
si  257 


I 


for  tosbote  atourpeple  that  were  on  the  wallesfor 
to  comemorenerXan  creyssued  by  the  gate  toward 
the  eest,&  stopped  the  way  fro  tbem  in  sucbewyse 
that  er  tbey  myabt  take  tbeyr  borses  be  slewe  yj  of 
tbem,  &  brougnt  tbem  tn  to  tbe  toun  fortorecom- 
forteourpeplefortbedetbofRogyerdeBarneuylle. 
Row  our  cristen  men  tbat  a  lytil  to  fore  assieged 
tbe  toun,  were  now  assteged  tn  tbe  same,  capitulo 

ft  tbts  tymc  durynge,  tbe  peple 
of  tbe  crtsten  men  tbat  bad  as- 
syeged  flntbyocbe  but  a  litil  to 
fore,  as  ye  baue  berd,  tbey  were 
now  tbem  self  assteged  wttbtn ; 
tbus  goon  tbe  cbaunges  and  mu- 
tations of  tbe  worldXbey  bad 
_  mocbe  grete  trauayll  for  to  kepe 
and  deff  ende  tbe  cyte ;  it  was  to  tbem  ouer  pery  llous 
tbat  tbe  dongeon  was  so  strong  &  so  wel  garnys- 
sbed  as  tt  was.  XTbey  made  to  tbem  of  te  grete  as- 
say ties  by  daye  &  by  nygbt,  if  or  tbey  of  tbe  booste 
cam  in  by  tbe  yate  vnder  tbe  dongeon  as  of  te  as  it 
plesyd  tbem.  Our  men  beaan  to  be  mocbe  abassb- 
>ed;  tber  weremany  tbat  tokenoregarde  to  tbeyr  otb 
tbat  tbey  bad  made  to  mayntene  tbe  companye  ne 
to  tbeyr  bonoure,  but  by  ny abt  descended  doun  of 
i  tbe  walles  by  ropes  and  cordes  andfledde  to  tbe  see, 
&many  of  tbem  tbeTTurkes  toke  wbom  tbey  slewe 
&  brought  in  prisonXbey  tbat  mygbt  escape  cam 
vn  to  tbe  porte,  sayeng  to  tbe  mercbauns  &  to  otber 
pylgryms  tbat  were  tbere  comen,  tbat  tbey  sbold 


disancre  tbeyr  sbippes  &flee  anon,  flfor  this  prynce 
Corbagfat,wbom  somocbe  pcplc  f  olowed,  bad  tak- 
en Hntbyocbe  by  force,  and  bad  slayn  alle  tbe  bar- 
ons and  alle  tbem  tbat  be  founde  witbin,  and  tbey 
were  escaped  by  ouer  grete  peryll  and  tiers  aduent- 
ureXberf ore,  sayd  tbey  to  tbe  maronners  tbat  tbey 
sbolddeparteandfleewitboutetaryenge,froryftbe 
Hurques  cam  sercbynge  tbe  countre  vnto  tbe  see  & 
founde  tbem  tbere  tbey  sbold  be  alle  delyuered  to 
detbXbus  tbey  fledde  alle  for  f eere,  and  tbey  tbem 
self  tbat  brought  tbise  tydynges  wente  with  tbem 
j0  Hnd  to  tbende  tbat  ye  snold  not  suppose  tbat 
tbyse  were  but  mene  peple,  for  tbe  troutbe  of  tbis 
bystorye  sparetbnoman,!  sball  name  somme  tbat 
tbus  departed  shamefully  Xbat  is  to  wete,  <3uyl- 
lamme  de  6ratemenyl,  a  noble  man  bom  in  JVor- 
mandye,  wbicbe  beld  grete  londe  in  puylle,&  bad 
to  bis  wyf  tbe  suster  of  Buymont;  Hubery  Cbar- 
pen  ter,  Guy  Croseaubc,  Lambert  le  poure,  &  many 
otber  bad  they  with  tbem, 

^OJVIJVIS  tbere  were  tbat  dide  werse, 
and  for  tbe  messease  of  bungre  and 
drede  for  to  be  slayn,yoldc  tbem  to 
tbet:urke8,&  they  tolde  tbe  certaynte 
of  tbe  meschief  tbat  oure  men  suffr- 
ed  alle  a  longeto  tbeOirkesj^JVIany 


abode  in  tbe  toun  tbat  gladly  wold  baue  goon,  but 
Buymont  by  tbe  counseyl  of  tbe  bissbop  of  puy, 
dyde  so  make  watcbe  atte  alle  tbe  gates  and  vpon 
tbe  walles,  and  tohe  kepe  botbe  by  daye  andnygbt 
that  none  sbold  goo  vp  ne  doun*  Hnd  tbey  swore 
alle  that  tbey  sbold  not  departe  fro  tbe  companye, 
ne  breke  the  commaundementes  of  Buymont,  He 

92  259 


bym  self  wen tc  euery  nygbt  tburgb  the  toun  wytb 
grctc  plente  of  men,and  with  grctc  lygbt  to  tbende 
that  no peryll  sbold  bappc  nc  trayson,  f  ourc  for- 
tresses bad  be  wbicbe  be  muste  nedes  kepe,  &  bet- 
ter than  tbe  otberXbat  one  was  on  tbe  lasse  tertre 
ayenst  tbedongeon,  &  that  other  was  lower  ayenst 
tbe  assay  lies  that  tbey  madeXbetbyrde  was  witb- 
oute  tbe  eest  gate,  tbe  wbicbe  was  made  to  kepe 
tbooste  er  tbe  toun  was  take,  XTbe  f  ourtbe  was  at 
tbende  of  tbe  brydge,  by  wbicbe  tbe  porte  of  tbe 
brydge  was  kept,  and  tberle  of  Tbolouse  kepte  it 
fyrst,  but  wban  tbe  cyte  was  taken  be  lef  te  it,  and 
entred  into  tbe  tounXberle  of  f  laundres  toke  it& 
aarnyssbyd  it  witb  fyue  bonderd  men  of  armes, of 
knygbtes  &  other  wel  in  poynt,  ffor  be  thought  yf 
tbeCurkes  toke  it  our  men  mygbt  not  after  yssue 
by  tbe  brydge,  by  which  their  strengtbe  be  mocbe 
employed, 

Row  Corbagat  dyde  do  assaylle  a  f ortresse  which 
tberle  of  f  laundres  kepte  witboute  tbe  gate  and  of 
that  ensiewed,  capitulo  Cxxvij^^ 

|jV  a  daye  it  bapped  that  Corba- 
gat tbougbte  that  tbey  of  the 
toun  bad  ouermocbe  lyberte  to 
yssue  oute  and  to  entre  agayn. 
p>erfor  be  commaunded  to  a 
I  bataylle  of  bis  peple,  in  wbicbe 
were  ij  thousand  XTurkes  wel  in 
I  poynt,  that  tbey  sbold  so  loncre 
assaylle  the  fortresse  of  the  brydge  tyl  tbey  were 
taken ;  &  it  bapped  so  that  tberle  of  f  laundres  was 
then  wythin  tbe  same  fortressej^XThassault  be- 


^? 


ganneatsonnerysynge,  mocbefiers  &mocbegrete; 
there  were  so  many  arcbiers  aboute  it  tbat  none 
mygbte  sbewe  bisbeadatte  creneulx  but  tbat  anon 
it  was  couerd  witb  arowes.  TTbey  tbat  were  witbin 
deff ended  tbem  mocbewell,  in  sucbe  wyse  tbat  tbey 
lost  notbyng  of  tbe  fortresse,  and  tbassault  en- 
dured tyltbesonnewentdounXbeTTurkes  depart- 
ed alle  wery.  liberie  of  f  laundres  doubte  tbat  tbey 
sbold  come  on  tbe  morn  to  tbassault,  ffor  tbey 
my  gbtnot  longe  suffre  tbem  tbere ;  tberf or,  as  sone 
as  it  was  nygbt,  be  put  out  alle  bis  men  preuyly, 
andsette  fyere  tberin,and  brent  tbe  fortresse  with- 
out f  ay llyng.  TTbe  TTurkes  bad  deuysed  tbat  in  tbe 
momyng  erly  tbey  sbold  baue  begonneagayn  tbe 
assault  &  tbat  twoJVImen  more  sbold  baue  comen 
tban  bad  ben  tbe  nygbt  byfore. 

TTwas  not  longe  after  tbatarouete  of 
tlurkes  departed  fro  tboosteof  Cor- 
bagat.  I  wote  not  bow  many  poure 
pylgryms  tbat  wente  pourcbassb- 
yngyftbeymygbtfyndeonyvytayl- 
lesin  tbe  countre,  tbey  toke  tbem  and 
, brought  tbem  alle  in  tbe  state  tbat  tbey  were  in  to 
fore  Corbagat.  Cdben  be  sawe  tbem  be  mocbe  de- 
spysed  tbem,  ffor  tbey  badno  armures,  &  butf eble 
bowes  of  tree,  tbeir  swerdes  rusty,  tbeir  gownes  and 
babellemens  were  old&rotenj^XTbenne  saydCor- 
bagatbydesdaynet'Cbysepeplesemewellmentbat 
sbold  takeaway  fro  tbesoudan  of  perse  bis  empyre 
and  conquere  tbe  londe  of  tboryent,  TTbyse  sbold 
be  wel  content  &  pay  d  y  f  tbey  bad  breed,  and  a  gobet 
of  bacon,  Xlbeir  bowes  ben  not  strongeynowgb  for 


S3 


201 


,- 


to  slee  a  sparowofb.  J^owlsbal  saye  to  you  what  ye 
sbal  doo,  ye  sbal  lede  tbem  bounden  in  tbis  poynt 
as  tbey  now  be  in  vnto  my  lord  tbc  soudan  tbat 
batb  sent  vs  betber,  and  telle  bym  tbat  be  dar  not 
besoreaferdof  tbysemen  tbatbecomen  betber,  ffor 
we  baue  enterprysed&begonne  warreayenstsucbe 
men  as  be  may  see.  Late  me  allowe  witb  tbis  werke, 
ffor  there  sbal  not  abyde  many  of  tbem,  but  I  sbal 
efface  and des troy e  tbem  alle  in  sucbewyse  as  there 
sbal  nomore  be  spoken  of  tbem,  as  they  bad  neuer 
beborn  j^Cbus  ledde  tbey  tboo  cristen  men  vnto 
tbe  soudan.  Re  wende  wel  to  baue  don  bis  honour, 
in  tbis  tbat  be  sente  tbem  to  tbe  soudan,  but  it 
tomed  bym  afterward  to  bis  sbame.Rym  tbougbta 
ligbttbyngetovaynquyssbetbecristenmenwbicbe 
bad  not  yet  wel  assayled  tbem. 
Of  tbe  grete  famyne&messease  tbat  ouremensuf~ 
fred  in  tbe  cy te  of  Hntbyocbe,  beynge  assyeged  on 
allesydes  by  tbesaydeCorbagat,  capitulo  Cxxviij. 

jN  alle  partyes  was  tbe  cyte  tbus 
assieged  j&  *Cbcy  of  tbe  toun 
ne  mygbt  not  yssue  out  for  to 
pourcbasse  vytaylle  for  tbem, 
€bey  were  euyl  at  ease  of  tbis 
ib mescbyef .H  famyn  aroos  in  tbe 
toun  mocbe  grete  and  greuous 
■  fordeifaulteof  vytaylle,in  sucbe 
wyse  tbat  tbey  ete  camels,  asses,  &tbo  borses;and 
yet  toke  tbey  werse  tbynges  wban  tbey  mygbt  gete 
it,  ffor  wbo  tbat  bad  founden  a  deed  bound  or  catte 
tbey  ete  itdelyciously  in  stede  of  grete  delices,ffor 


m 


tbebongrywombesmadenodaungertosecbesucbe 
ae  they  mygbt  fylle  tbcm  witbj^tbe  grete,  bye,  & 
noblemen  tbat  were  acustomed  to  be  mocbe  Hon- 
oured bad  now  nosbame  to  come  tberwbertbey  ete 
eucbe  mete,  but  wente  oueralmocbe  fowlly,andde- 
maunded  playnly  eucbe  ae  tbey  nededXbe  lactyee, 
gen  til  wymmen  and  maydene,  bad  alle  langour  of 
bon  gre ;  tbey  were  alle  pale  and  lene.  JYIany  were  com- 
pelled to  begge,  and  aeke  witb  mocbe  grete  ebame. 
TIberewae  none  tbatmygbt  baue  eobarde  an  berte 
buttbatbeebold  baue  grete  py  te  to  baue  eeen  it. 
RBR  were  many  men  and  wymmen 
tbat  aduysed  tbem  of  wbat  lygnage 
tbey  were  of  bom,  tbat  bad  eucbe 
courage  ferme  in  tbeyr  bertee,  tbat 
for  none  anguyeebe  tbat  tbeyeuffr- 
ed  of  bongre  wold  not  goo  axe  tbeir 
breed  fro  dore  to  dore.  TTbyee  peple  bydde  tbem  in 
tbeyrboweeejeommetbatRneweitdydetotbemyet 
eomme  eocour,  but  tber  were  many  tbat  deyed  for 
'bongretbattbey  badnotforto  etejjTCbere  mygbt 
men  eee  knygbtee  and  otbervalyauntmen  tbatbad 
betofore  etronge&  noble  in  tbeyrwerkee,  tbatnow 
were  so  feble  &poure tbat tbey  wente  by  tbeetretee 
lenyngon  tbeir  etaues,  and  tbeyrbeedee  enclynyng 
doun,aekynge  breed  for  croddee  loueXbere  ebold 
ye  baue  eeen  tbe  lytil  cbilderen  tbateoke  tbeyr  mo- 
dere  pappee,  &  tbemodere  bad  notbyng to  ete,  but 
tbrew  tbem  doun  in  tbeetretee  to  tbende  tbat otber 
eboldnoryeebe  tbem  j^GCIitb  grete  payneebold  ye 
baue  f  ounde  one  onely  man  emong  eo  mocbe  peple 
tbatbadeumaentlytbatbymneded;froryfonybad 
betbatbadgoldor9yluer,itauaylledbymnotbyng, 


94 


263 


rl 


ffor  be  f oundc  no  mete  for  to  bye  with  it.  TTbe  ba- 
rons and  tbe  bye  prynces  tbat  were  acustomed  to 
bolde  tbefayr  courtesand  togyue  mete  anddrynke 
to  many  men,  tbey  bydde  tbem  now,  by  cause  none 
sbold  fynde  tbem  etyng  ne  drynkyngXbey  bad 
gretter  anguyssbe  in  tbeyr  bertes  of  tbis  famyne 
tban  bad  tbe  pourepeple,ffbr  tbeymette  euery  day 
tbeyr  knygbtes  and  tbeyr  men  of  tbeyr  countrees 
tbat  deyde  for  bungre,  & tbey  bad  no  mete  to  gyue 
tbem  j^Xt  were  a  long  tbyng  to  recounte  alle  tbe 
meseases  &  tbe  mescbyef s  tbat  were  suffred  witbin 
Hntbyocbe  wbyles  tbe  tempeste  endured.  But  so 
mocbe  may  wel  be  sayd,  tbat  selde  or  neuer  sbal  ye 
fynde  in  bystorye  tbat  so  arete  prynces,  &  one  so 
gretean  booste  suffredsucbe  anguyssb  of  bungre 
J>o w  tbe XTurkes  f  elyng  tbat  our  men  were  in  sucbe 
mescbyef  of  bongre,  enforced  tbem  for  tassavlle 
tbecyte,  capitulo  Cxxix&& 

|F>Yk£S  tbat  tbe  cytewas  tbus 
on  alle  partes  assyeged  wytb 
TTurkes,  and  tbe  famyne  ran  so 
anguyssbous,  tbey  tbat  were 
without  &  knewe  tbe  euyl  cou- 
yneofourpeople,leftenottoas- 
i  Qf9^Jbz  walles  alle  tbe  longe 

tu^tu^^u  ,  J-d^c;PcVoftbedongeontand 
tbe  otber  tbatcam  tn  by  tbeyate,cam  &  madegrete 
assay  les  tn  tbe  tounXbey  bad  made  tbem  so  werv 

tbatouremenmygbtnotweldeffendetbemtandvn- 
netbe  kepe  tbe  toun;  ffor  wban  tbey  bad  defended 

!^CmiUct^l?ngcd^:atcucntbcy^dnotbyngto 
ete,«Iberof  it  bapped  tbata  tour  by  tbat syde  wbere 


our  men  cntrcd  was  euyl  kept,  and  on  a  nygbt  the 

Xurkes  cam  witboute  fortb,  and  apperceyued  wel 

.tbat  noman  was  witbin  tbe  tourXnenne  tbey  toke 

laddres  tbat  tbey  badmade,  and  mounted  vpon  tbe 

i  wallesXber  were  xxx  tbat wente  vnto  tbis  tour  for 

to  entre  in,  and  tbis  was  at  tbe  begynnynge  of  tbe 

nygbrjSTCbemaisterof  tbewatcbewentesercbyng 

rigbt  tbere,  and  sawe  tbe^urkes  comen  vp  tbere, 

andcryedXreson,tresonfHndtbenneawokefyrst 

and  ran  tbeder  Rarry  d'Hsque,  &  two  of  bis  cosyns 

witb  bym,  tbat  one  named  f  ranke,  and  tbat  otber 

SemerXbey  were  botbe  of  tbe  toun  called  JMatbale 

►vpon  tbeJMaseXbysetbre  smote  in  emong  tbexxx 

'turkes;  at  tbeyr  ryrst  comyng  tbey  slewe  four. 

Xlbzy  of  tbe  toures  sawe  tbem,  butnotsosoneXbe 

otber  xxvj  Curkes  deffended  tbem,  but  tbis  dured 

but  a  wbyle,  fFor  tbey  of  tbe  toures  tbrewe  tbem 

dountotbegroundwDeretbeybraktbeirleggesand 

neckes.  t^ber  was  none  tbat  fylle,  but  be  was  deed 

,  or  maymed.  Cber  was  slayn  Semer,  if  or  be  was  burt 

witba  swerdtburgbtbebely.frankwasborn  away, 

wbicbe  was  burte  peryllously. 

Row  Corbagat  sente  bis  men  of  armes  for  to  slee 

tbe  maronners  tbat  were  at  tbe  port,  wberof  oure 

^men  bad  a  grete  losse,  capitulo  Cycxx&& 

RHJN"  tbe  famyne  grewe  tbus 
euery  day  in  Hntbyocbe;  many 
tbere  were  in  tbe  toun  tbat  bad 
leuer  be  slayn,  tban  to  abyde 
tbus  tbebongreXbey  put  tbem 
in  aduenture,  and  by  nygbt  ys- 
sued  ou te  of  tbe  toun  wban  tbey 
mygbt  escape,  after  tbey  wente 

265 


to  the  porte  of  the  see,  Somme  sbippis  there  were 
yet  of  Crekes,  and  of  fiermyens  that  brought 
vytaylle-  Many  there  were  that  bought  it,  and  cam 
&  solde  it  tn  the  toun  by  nygbt  in  bydlesj^Cdhan 
the  ITurkes  apperceyued  this,  many  tymes  they  a- 
wayted  them,  and  slewe  many  of  them,  Htte  laste 
for  to  take  away  this  lytil  socour that  they  bad,  the 
curkes  sente  two  thousand  horsmen  to  the  see, 
wbiche  slewe  alle  the  maronners  and  mercbauntes 
that  they  f ounde,  and  bren te  their  sbippes,  Somme 
ther  were  that  laye  at  an  an  ere  in  the  see,  and  tbev 
fledde*  J 

RBJVJ^e  bad  our  men  lostealle  tbeyr 

hope  for  vytayll,  ffor  the  yles  of  the 

see,  as  Cypres,  Rhodes;  and  other 

lyenge  on  the  see  side,  as  Cylyce, 

pampbyle,&  of  other costes,durste 

-nomore  sende  tbeyr  sbippes  tbeder, 

cney  of  the  toun  of  Hntbyocbe  werenoweeuyl  de- 

,m  ened,  ffor  to  fore  to  them  cam  somme  comf orte  of 

bemercbauns;  now  they  bad  alle  loste  itj^Jdban 

tbelTurkesretouniedfrotbeseetbeyrecountredour 
pour  ptlgryms  wbiche  wente  that  way;  tbev  slewe 
them  alle,  sauf  somme  wbiche  bydde  them  in  TE 
bussbes^ban  they  of  the  touii  berde  KgJs 
beronbowtbevwmslayn,tbeyweremocbLorow! 
^1  °f  tYZ?  bad  °UCr  *"**  anguysshe  in  tbeyr 
hertesasofteasonymesauenturefyltotbeirpeple. 
In  this  povn  t  were  they  with  in  the  Cy  te,  and  wold 
take  none  bede  to  tbeyr  warde,ne  woldnotobeye  to 
^a™9'  whlchlm^gbt  tbenne  doo  to  them  no 
good,  \Zb\ie  were  they  m  grete  pervlle 
266  r 


-^ 


fiowGu)?Uem  deGratemenylle  &  bis  f claws  fugy- 
tyfs  cam  in  toHUexandrye  the  lasse,  capitulo  Cxxxj 

V^LLSJA  de  Gratemenylle  and 
tbe  other  that  fieddc  with  bym 
cam  in  to  Hllexandrye  tbc  IvtyL 
XTbcrc  tbey  foundeSteuen.tnerle 
of  Cbartres,  of  wbom  tbey  of 
Hntbyocbe  abode  bis  comynge 
fro  day  to  day  e,  ff or  tbe  baron  s  & 
tbe  mene  peple  supposed  tbat  be 


woldremembre  bow  be  departed,  and  retorne  agayn 
jSTCbey  told  bym  tbe  grete  sorowe  of  tbe  f  amyne 
tbat  was  in  Hntbyocbe,  and  to  tbende  tbat  tbey  ex- 
cused tbem  of  tbeir  departyng,  truly  tbe  troutbeof 
tbe  mesease  was  grete,  but  tbey  told  mocbe  more 
tban  it  was*  It  was  a  light  tbynge  to  reteyne  tbis 
erle,ffor  be  badno  grete  talente  fortoretorneXbey 
tokecounseylbytwene  tbem,&madetbeyr  sbippes 
to  be  in  poyntand  redy,  and  after  entred  in  to  tbem 
&  so  wen  te  to  tbe  see*  Hnd  wban  tbey  bad  ben  ,1  wote 
notbowmanydayesintbesee,tbeyarryuedatacyte 
of  tbem  perours  of  Constan  tynoble,  wbicbe  as  was 
sayd  to  tbem  cam  witb  alle  bis  boostmocb  greet  and 
merueyllous.of  Grebes  and  of  Latyns,and  basted 
mocbe  for  to  goo  to  Hntbyocbc 

6  was  tbenne  in  a  cyte  not  f erre  from 
tbensnamedf ynemyne.r>e  wold  well 
bolde  couenaunte  tbat  be  bad  made, 
to  socourour  peple  witb  tbe  peple  of 
bis  empyre,  and  tber  cam  in  bis  com- 
pany wel  xl  JVI  pylgryms  tbat  bad  a- 


I 


i  byden  in  bis  londe  of  the  grete  booste,  by  cause  of 
fsekenes  or  for  other  causes,  Hnd  grete  nombre  were 
comen  sytb  fro  tbeyr  countrees  for  tbeyr  pylgre- 
mages,  wbicbe  durste  not  passe  bis  londes  vnto 
jHntbyocbe  by  tbem  self, and  tbenne  stewed  tbem- 
perour j^GCIban  tbeerle  Stephen  knewe  tbat  tbeem- 
,perour  was  so  nygb,  be  went  stray t  to  bym,  and 
brought  bis  felaws  cowardes  witb  bym^ofrban 
1  tbemperour  sawe  tbem  be  made  grete  ioye,  and  re- 
,ceyuedtberleGsteuen  honorably,  ffor  be  belde  bym 
in  passyngtburgbbislonde  for  a  mocbewyseman 
'and  a  valyaunt,and  was  wel  acqueynted  witb  bym, 
fiedemaundedbymmocbeententyflyoftberenien- 
>aunt  of  tbe  barons,  &sayde  be  bad  grete  merueylle 
bow  be  was  tbus  departed  fro  tbeir  companye. 
Row  tberle  of  Cbartres  discoraged  tbemperour  of 
Constantinople  tbat  be  sboldnot  goo  and  socoure 
our  peple  in  Hnthyoche,  capitulo  Cxxxij^^ 

"jfiB  erle  answerd  in  this  maner, 

1  andsaydetotbemperourjfiFSire, 

tbe  barons  of  fraunce  wbicbe 

passed  tbisyere  by  your  empyre, 
Iwbom  ye  receyued  so  curtoys- 
1  ly  and  witb  arete  honour,  wban 
tbey  bad  taken  JVycene,  wbicbe 
tbey  rendred  to  you,tbey  passed 
vnto  Hntbyocbe,  Tbey  assieged  tbat  cyte  wel  ix 
monetbes,  Cbey  baue  taken  it  entierly,  reserued  a 
'dongeon,  wbicbe  stondetb  upon  an  hylic  within 
the  walles,  wbicbe  tbe  burkes  bolde  so  strongly 
that  it  is  unprenable,  €bey  supposed  to  baue  wel 
'cxploy  ted  whan  tbey  had  goten  tbis  cyte,but  tbenne 

20o 


tbey  fylle  in  gretter  peryll  than  to  fore;  if  or  on  the 
tbirdc  day  after  that  tbey  entred  cam  Corbagat, 
a  puyssaunt  prince  of  perse,  wbicbe  brought  so 
mocne  peple  tbat  alle  the  countrey  by  was  couerd 
with  tbem  J?  Oure  peple  suf fred  cjret  anguyssb 
tbenne,  ffor  tbis  Corbagat  with  bis  peple  enuy- 
ronned  tbem  on  alle  partes,  in  sucbe  wyse  tbat 
oure  men  mygbt  not  yssue,  and  dyde  to  tbem 
mocbe  payne  in  assayllyng  tbem  with  out  forth. 
Hnd  tbe  dongeon  made  to  tbem  grete  assaylles 
within  forth,  by  wbicbe  our  men  suffred  grete 
mesease^Hnd  also  tbanguyssb  of  bongre  was 
so  grete,  tbat  tbey  bad  no  power  to  defende  tbem. 
On  tbat  other  syde  tbey  bad  otberwbyle  comfort 
of  youre  londe,fror  fro  tbe  yles  of  tbe  see, and  also 
fro  other  portes  cam  somtyme  vytaylle,  tbat  was 
brought  in  to  Hnthyocbe.But  now  late  ben  comen 
tbetfurkes,  and  baue  slayn  alle  tbe  maronners  and 
the  mercbauntes  that  tbey  fondeatte port, in  sucbe 
wysetbatnowe  tber  dare  nomooarryue  tbere,wber~ 
f ore  tbey  baue  loste  alle  tbeyr  socours  of  vytaylle. 
Hndabouealletbistbeyoftbetounbegreuydnygbt 
and  day  by  tbem  of  tbe  dongeon ;  ffor  by  tbe  yate 
vnder  it  tne  TTurkes  may  entre  and  yssue  whan  it 
plesytb  tbem.  Qlesawetbattbiswerkemygbt  come 
to  no  goodende  in  tbis maner,  wberf  ore  we  warned 
tbem,  botbe  my  self  and  thyse  tbat  be  in  my  com- 
panye,wbicbe  be  mocbenoble&wysemen,ortyme8 
tbat  ayenst  tbe  wylle  of  god  tbey  sbold  not  enter- 
prise to  conquere  tbis  countrey,  but  sbold  departe 
with  the  lest  losse  tbey  mygbt,  and  tbe  peple  tbat 
f  olowed  them  tbey  sbold  conduy  tein  to  su  cb  a  place 

269 


tbattbeysboldnotbedelyuerdtodetb.JNffanytymcs 
we  sayd  to  tbcm  in  tbis  manere,  and  ncucr  wold  tbey 
bcrc  V9  nc  byleue,  but  mayntene  tbeyr  reuerye,  if  or 
tbcr  be  many  emonge  tbem  in  wbom  is  lytil  reson* 
Cde  our  self  bad  ben  deed  yf  we  bad  abyden  tbere, 
ne  we  mygbtdoonone  honour  to  our  lordne  to  our 
proffyte,  tberfore  we  departed,  and  commaunded 
tbem  to  god,  wbicbe  saue  tbem  and  kepe,  for  tbey 
bauenede, Yc^syret to  wboml am bounden  in  good 
f ay  tb,  I  aduyse  you  tbat  ye  take  counsey  I  of  your 
wyse  men  to  fore  ye  goo  ony  fertber,  "Croutb  it  is 
tbat  ye  be  tbe  moost  bye  man  of  tbe  world;  but  for 
al  tbat,  ye  baue  not  bere  now  in  your  companye  90 
mocbe  peple  as  Corbaaat  batb  abouteHntbyocbe, 
and  ayenst  one  of  you  be  batb  seuen,  tberfore  myn 
oppynyonisyftbeotbersoacorde,tbattoforeyour 
men  be  put  in  sogret  aduenture  ye  retome  borne  a- 
gayn.f oryf  ye  approucbe  tbem,  and  tbat  tbey  baue 
acbyeuedtbeyrwerkein  tbe  cyte,yesbalfynde  tbem 
redy ;  and  tbe  more  ner yeapproucbe  tbem,tbemore 
shame  and  vyle  sbal  it  be  to  retome  fro  tbem  wban 
ye  be  so  nygbe  tbemXbise  tbynges  tbat  I  baue  a- 
counted  to  you,  knowe  wel  tbise  valyauntmen  tbat 
be  bere  witbme,  &  also  a  grete  parte  maye  ye  knowe 
by  tbis  good  man  tbat  ye  delyuerd  to  vs,  tbat  ie  to 
wete  Latyns  your  seruaunt,  wbicbe  is  so  wyse  and 
trewe,  wbicbe  departed  fro  vs  for  many  def aultes 
tbat  be  apperceyued  witb  vs. 


270 


RHJVbebadsaydalltbistbemperour 
was  mocbc  ameuydof  tbise  wordes. 
Cditbbym  wasabrotberof  Buymont 
8  named  6uyon,tbat  wban  be  bad  berd 
tberleStepben  tbusspekebewas  alle 
wrotb  and  angrye,  and  as  balf  araged 


for  despyte  sayde  al  on  bye  tbat  be  sayd  not  tbe 
trutbe,  but  tbey  were  departed  as  cowardes.  Re  bad 
moo  grete  wordes,  but  Cuyllem  de  Gratemenylle, 
wbicb  was  a  gentilman  bom  of  lygnage,  and  not 
of  courage,  &bad  to  biswyf  tbesusterof  tbe  same 
<3uyen,  made  bym  to  bolde  bis  peas,  and  blamed 
bym  by  cause  be  spak  ayenst  tberle  Steuen.  Hnd 
so  tbis  6uyen  f orbare  bym. 
Row  b^  tbe  warnynges  of  tbe  sayd  erle,  tbemper- 
our,wbicbe  wold  bauegoon  and  socouredour  men, 
retorned  shortly,  capitulo  Cxxxiij^^ 

PO]^  tbyse  wordes  tbat  tbem- 
perour  bad  berd,  be  wolde  be 
counseylled,  and  called  bis  ba- 
rons. Hnd  all  tbey  acorded  tbat 
tbemperour  sbold  retorne  fro 
tbens  wbere  be  was,  witboute 
goyng  ony  fertber,  (for  tbey 
tbougbt  it  were  better  to  remeue 
bis  peple  witboute  perylle  and  burte  tban  for  to 
fygbt  in  so  grete  mescbyef  ayenst  Corbaaat,  and 
to  meue  ayenst  bym  in  bate&in  warre  all  tbe  londe 
1  of  tboryent  J9  Re  byleuyd  so  f ermely  tbe  wordes 
of  tberleStepben,  tbat  be  doubted  tbat  tbetTurkes 
bad  slayn  tbem  of  Hntbyocbe,&  wold  tbenne  goo 
in  to  bis  londe  for  to  receyue  tbe  cyte  of  J^ycene. 


I' 


Hnd  allc  the  londe  of  Bytbynie,  wbiebe  ourc  men 
bad  delyuerd  to  bym,  be  wold  garny99be  itj^<flban 
be  departed  fro  tbene  be  brente  and  destroyed  alle 
the  londe  frolcoine  vnto  JVycene  on  botb  eydes,  by 
cause  tbe  XTurkee  sbold  not  folowe  bym,  Vytaylle 
began  to  faylte  bim,  and  so  be  muste  retourne, 

RCIS  itbappedtbatby  tbewordesof 
tbi9greteman,tbatgofowlydepart- 
ed  fro  tbe  otber  barone,tbemperour 
retorned,andtbe  cri9tenpeplebeyng 
in  Hntbyocbe  lost  so  grete  eocoure, 
by  wbiebe  mygbt  baue  comen  alle 
rtbeyr  delyueraunce  in  90  grete  neceeeyte  ae  tbey 
were  tbennej^JBut  consydered  tbig  tbat  was  gyue 
^to  be  vnderetonde  to  tbemperour,  yet  be  dyde  not 
but  bis  deuoyre  j0  Certaynly  it  was  tbe  werke  of 
our  lord;  ffor  yf  tbie  emperour  tbat  cam  witb  bis 
peple  &  grete  power  of  men  al  freeebe,  bad  reyeed 
tbe  eiege  and  discomfyted  tbe  TTurkes,  oure  lord 
ebold  not  baue  ben  90  honoured  ne  tbanfced.Hnd 
yf  of  tbe  trauayll  tbat  tbe  barons  and  tbe  otber 
pylgrymg  bad  9uff red,  tbemperour  tbat  come  la9te 
9bold  bauebadtbe  vyctorye,  tbeyr  payne  9boldnot 
baue  ben  90  welguerdonnedXberfor  our  lord  9uf- 
fred  tbat  tbemperour  departed,  and  tbat  tbe  werfce 
9bold  be  accomply99bed,  a9  ye  9ball  bere,  to  bi9 
glorye  and  tbonour  of  bi9  peple. 


272 


.ftowourpepleofHntbyocbebeynaaduertysedber- 
!of  were  all  discouraged,  and  Corbagat  enbaunced 
in  pryde,  capitulo  Cxxxnij>P>P 

e]^0)VI)Viee  cam  in  to  Hntby- 
ocb  tbat  tbemperour  tbat  was  ap- 
procbed,  by  tbe  wordes  of  tberle 
Stepben,  of  ©uyllem  de  <3rate~ 
meny  U  &  tbeyr  f elaws,  was  tomed 
back,  €bey  bad  on  alle  sydes  an- 
guyssbes,  but  tbise  tydynges  em- 
poysonned  tbem  alle,&  put  tbem 
as  in  despayrXbenne  began  tbey  to  curse  tbe  erle 
Stepben  and  alle  bis  companye  tbat  bad  taken  fro 
tbem  so  grete  ayde^Corbagat  tbat  bad  knowlecbe 
tbattbemperourcam,badmocbdoubteofbiscom- 

yng,ffor  it  was  agrete  tbyngof  tbepuyssaunce  of 
tbemperour,  J^ow  was  be  certayn  tbat  be  was  re- 
torned,wberof  be  bad  mocb  grete  ioye  in  bis  berte; 
be  was  risen  in  a  mocb  tiers  pryde.  He  ran  tbe  more 
asprely  on  tbem  of  tbe  toun.  Oure  men  in  tbe  toun 
were  so  abassbed,  tbat  tbem  semed  wel  tbat  oure 
lord  god  bad  alle  forgete  tbem /Cbeylete  tbem  falle 
indespayre^woldnotendurenotrauaylletbatap- 
perteynedto  tbe  defence  of  tbe  cyte;  alle  bydde  tbem 
in  tbeyr  bowses, 

J^  a  daye  it  bapped  tbat  Buymont, 
wbicbe  bad  alle  tbe  power  of  tboost, 
badtodoowitb  men  ffor  tbassaultes 
witboute  f ortb,  and  for  tbassaylles 
witbin  f ortb,  Hedydedo  crye  on  peyn 
.  of  detb  tbat  alle  sbold  come,  &  tbere 
came  none.  He  sente  bis  men  for  to  f etcbe  tbem  in 


1 

tbeyr  bowses  and  somonc  tbem  to  command  none 
wold  come  oute.  Re  wasabassbed,  &  tbougbt  wbat 
be  sbold  doo  j^Htte  laste  be  sette  fyre  in  tbe  toun 
in  dyuerse  places,  &  tbenne  yssued  in  to  tbe  stretes 
greterowtes.  Buymon  t  sawe  tbem,  and  sayd  to  bem 
bis  commaundement,  &  bad  wbat  tbey  sbold  doo, 
and  tbey  dyd  it  J?H  worde  sourded  in  tbe  toun  tbat 
many  fcnygbtesand  barons  bad  badcounseyl  pry- 
uely  emonge  tbem  tbat  tbey  wold  yssue  oute  of  tbe 
toun  by  nygbt,  and  leue  tbe  pepolewitbin,  and  wold 
doo  tbe  best  tbey  my gb t,  &  drawe  tbem  to  tbe  porte 
fortoentrevpon  tbe  see* 

RS  due  GJodeffrey  knewe  tbis  word. 

Re  sente  bastelv  for  tbe  bissbop  of 

puy,  and  alle  tne  barons,  and  grete 

partye  of  tbe  knygbtes,  and  be  fylle 

at  tbeyr  feet,  and  requyred  tbem  for 

tbe  loue  of  god  tbat  tbey  wold  neuer 

tbynke  sucbe  a  tbynge;  ffor  yf  tbey  dyd  so,  god 

sbold  bate  tbem,  &  tbey  sbold  lese  tbeyr  sowles,as 

men  tbat  were  in  despayre  of  tbemercy  of  oure  lord, 

Hndon  tbatotber  syde,in  tbe  world  tbey  sbold  lese 

tbeir  honour  for  euer,  &  also  tbeyr  lygnage,wbicbe 

badnotbyngforfayted,and  sbold  be  sbamedeuer, 

&poyntedwitbtbefingreXbelondesoutofwbicbe 
tbey  yssued  sbold  be  tbe  lasse  renomed  and  lasse 
preysed  as  long  as  tbe  world  sbold  endure.  Of  alle 
tbise  departynges  mygbt  tbey  neuer  receyue  good 
worde  ne  bonoure  jff  By  tbyse  wordes,  and  by  tbe 
precbyng  of  tbe  bissbop  of  puv  tbey  loste  tbis 
euyl  talente,  alle  tbat  bad  be  in  tbis  euyll  purpoos ; 
but  tbey  began  to  affeble  in  tbe  toun  for  bonger 
274 


■■ 


====* 


&  mcsease,  in  sucbe  wyse  that  tbey  abode  not  but 
tbc  wylle  of  ourc  lord  JPOf  tc  cam  tn  tbcyr  remem- 
braun  cc  wbat  goodes,  ry  chesses,  &  grctc  cases  tbey 
bad  lefte  in  tbcyr  countrccs  for  tbclouc  of  tbc  ser- 
uysc  of  ourc  lord.Hndnow  yclded  be  to  tbem  suebe 
guerdon  tbat  tbey  deyed  eucry  day  for  bonger,and 
kept  bem  not  fro  tbyse  dogges  cruel,  wbicbe  by- 
leuydnot  in  bym,  but  tbey  slewe  and  bebeded  tbem 
in  despyte  and  reproucbe  of  tbe  cristen  f aytb  jfrln 
tbis  maner  wold  tbey  cbyde  witb  our  lord  often  as 
men  tbat  wyste  not  wbat  to  do  ne  saye* 
Row  tbe  spere  was  f ounden  of  wbicbe  Xbesus  was 
percyd  on  tbe  crosse.  Hnd  of  tbe  comfort  tbat  our 
pylgryms  toke  thereby,  capitulo  Cxxxv&& 

jRILBS  as  tbey  were  in  tbis  an- 
guyssbe  tberle  Herman, an  bye 
man  of2  Ducbeland,  was  in  so 
grete  pouerte  tbat  due  <3ode- 
froy  dyde  do  delyuer  to  bym 
euery  daye  one  loof  of  breede 
for  pytejwbicbewasnotmocbe 
I  grete,  but  tbe  due  mygbte  no 
more  gyue  bym,  ffor  be  bad  not  wberofj!?  Harry 
d'Hsque,  wbicbe  was  one  of  tbe  beste  knygbtcs  of 
tbooste,  was  brought  in  so  grete  pouerte  tbat  be 
deyde  for  bongrej^Xt  were  a  long  tbyng  for  to  re- 
counte  alle  tbetr  meseases;  but  our  lord  tbat  in  alle 
bis  werfces  may  not  f orgete  mercy,  sente  to  tbem 
grete  comfort  for  a  clerk  bom  in  prouynce  nam- 
ed peter,  cam  on  a  day  to  tbe  byssbop  of  puy  and 
to  tberle  of  €bolouse,  and  sayd  to  tbem  m  mocbe 


appiered  to  bym  tbryes  in  the  nygbt  ekovna  and 

lidi^hl^AbterT  mthw^^  our  lord  waspe?- 
od  in  tbe  syde  on  tbe  crosse  was  byd  in  tbc  cbtreh 
of  seint  peter  in  tbe  cyte;  tbe  place  wbmftS* 
bad  certainly  sbewd  to  bym.  "fie  said  we tbaV  he 
wasnotcomefortosayenesi^eryetbembutrh^ 

b^iT^'^^^^^^WmwhapKbls 

for  &fa£  £1«n&TUe*Ue?f  tbc  ^erfiedoubftd 
5ror  to  saye  this,  ffor  be  was  a  poure  man  and  of  * 

/**  '**"*«•  and  but  ly  til  lettred. 

lhJm^i,?0ubye  m"\  wb™  tbey  herd 
bym,  tbey  brought  bym  to  fore  tbe 

tatEk^tPP  a88£ml>lecltbem, 
|  and  tbey  wolde  that  be  sbold  saye  to 

tbem  tbesamewordesasbebadsayd 
k»-j  *«^~  1T~^ t0  tbem  ^  wban  tbe  other  ervneea 

m  to  tbe  cbirebe  of  seynt  peter,  &  sayd  tbevr  eoT 
fesstons,  and  eryed  our  lord  merey  iV  teres  ™« 
pynges  and  wayllyngea,  and  repentaVnees  on*£ 
rsynnesXbenne  began  to  delue  <6  d*™Z of -tb7r 
placetbattbeelerheLd ^shewed  S?bT^&S  T 
tbe  spere  lyke  as  be  bad  sayd  to  S  «tedc 
bad  tbey  a  ioye  emonge  tbem  s<W«lm  £  Cbcnnc 
man  bad  baJas  moclie a™ St  fe?  CUtry 
tbe  belles,  &  this  tbynge  wasS:^!  rZn& 
tbe  toun.  Cbey  ran  aTtoTbe  cSffiJrrf^J 

tbertbe,  TTbenne  were  tbev  rerrtmiwl^ i    .. !:    . 
^-^cn.poureY^^ 


lord  emong  them  and  seen  bym,  TTbere  were  thus 
many  other  goodmen  that  sayde  certaynly  that  cer- 
teyn  vysyonsof  angeles  andapostleswere  appered 

to  tbem. 

Y  tbyse  tbynges  the  peple  forgate 
mocbe  of  tbeyr  meseases.  T^be  bis- 
sbop  of  puy  &  otber  boly  men  tbat 
were  in  tbe  companye  sayd  to  tbe  pil- 
grym8,tbatourelord8bewdeto  tbem 
_  toReneandsignetbatsbortlybewold 
sende  to  tbem  bis  ayde  and  bis  counseyl/Cbey  con- 
cluded alle,  noble  and  vnnoble,  men  and  wymmen, 
grete  and  lytil,  and  sware  vpon  tbe  boly  relyques, 
tbat  yf  our  lord  wold  delyuer  tbem  oute  of  tbe  peryll 
in  wbicbe  tbey  were,  &  gyue  tbem  vyctorye  of  tbeyr 
enemyes,tbat  tbey  sbold  neuer  departe  fro  tbis  boly 
companye  vnto  tbe  tyme  tbat  tbey  bad  conquerd 
Iberusalem,  tbat  noble  cyte,wbere  our  lord  suffred 
detb  for  to  saue  bis  peple,  &  sbold  delyuer  tbe  boly 
sepulcre  oute  of  tbe  bandes  of  tbe  f  als  mysbyleu- 
yngboundes,€urkes  and  Saresyns,tbat  kept  it  in 
tbeyr  power. 

Row  peter  Cberemyte  was  sente  by  our  men  vnto 
Corbagat,  tbe  wordes  wbatbe  sayde,  &  tbe  answer 
of  tbe  sayd  Corbagat,  capitulo  Cxxxv)## 

fiey  bad  suffred  tbis  famyne 
xxv j  days  in  tbe  cyte,  in  somocbe 
tbat  tbe  people  to  wbome  our 
lord  god  bad  sente  good  bope 
in  tbeyr  bertes  began  mocb  to  be 
comforted,  and  fylle  alle  to  one 
wylle,in  su  cb  wise  tbattbey  sayd 
emongtbemtbatitweregoodto 

ta  277 


b^ngtbeyrmeseasetoanendeXberforewastbevr 

comynacordtbattbcyaboldfygbtwttbtbctrurkca 
that  bad  assieged  tbem,  ff or tbey  tbougbt  a  fayrer 
tbyng  tbat  yf  our  lord  wold  tbat  tbey  deyde  in  ba- 
taylle, tbat  tbcy  sbold  doo  it  in  deffendyng  tbcyr 
cytetbattbey  bad  conquered  to  tbe  cristiente,tban 
to  languyssbe&  to  faylle  witbin  without  essay  en  a 
yf  our  lordwoldayde  tbem,  fierofsourdedacomyn 
word  emonge  tbem  tbat  alle  cryed:  Bataylle,  bat- 
ay  lie,  tbe  bataylle  fwban  tbey  mygbt  see  ony  of  tbe 

barpn8.Hlletbey8aydtbattbeytaryedalletolonge« 
pbts  word  was  tbusmeuydof  tbe  mene  pepleXbe 
barons  tbougbt  tbat  tbis  enterprise  mygbt  well 
come  of  our  lord,  and  so  by  comon  acord  tbey  as- 
sembled tn  counseylXbey  alowed  mucbe  tbis  tbat 
the  peple  made  tbis  request,and  acorded  tbat  tbey 
wold  sende  to  tbisproude  prynceCorbagat,  peter 
Uberemyte,  wbicbe  was  an  boly  man,  mocbe  wyse 
and  wel  bespokin.flnd  delyuerd  to  bym  for  felaw  a 

valyauntmannamedRellom,trewe&ofgretewytte, 
tbat  coudewelspeketbelangageof  tbe  Sarasyns,& 
specially  tbe  langage  of  perseXbey  charged  tbem 
with  tbe  message,  like  as  ye  sbal  bere  wbat  tbev 
sayde  toCorbaaat  jfiF^bisetwo  sad  men  to  fore 
sayd,  dyde  do  cfemaunde  trews  for  to  goo  to  tbe 
sayd  Corbagat,  ffor  tbey  wold  speke  wTtb  bym  in 
tbe  name  o£ tbe  pylgryms.  fiit  was  graunted  witb 
good  wyllXbey  wenteout  of  tbecyteand  tokewitb 
btmgood  companve,  wbicbe  wereassygned  to  tbem 
^Cbey  wente  so  f erre  tbat  tbey  arryued  at  tbe  pa- 
uyllon  of  tbis  noble  prynce  Corbagat  Tbey  sawe 
bym  sytte  tn  mocbe  grete  bobaunce  emonge  bis 
ryebemen.  b 

278 


IBCBR  salewed  bym  notbynge,  ne 
made  to  bym  honour  nc  reuerence, 
but  spak  beeryng  allc  in  tbis  mancr 

jjjj  jfiTChis  boly  companye  of  bye  and 
T  noble  men,  barons,  noble  knygbtes, 

_3  andotber  peple  of  our  lordgod,  tbat 
ben  yonder  witbin  tbe  cy  te,sende  to  tbe  &  comaunde 
tbat  tbou  departe  fro  trris  siege,  and  tbat  tbou  no- 
more  assaylle  tbem,  but  late  tbem  baue  &  kepe  tbe 
toun  in  pees,  wbicb  our  lordlbesu  crist  batb  de- 
lyuered  to  tbem  for  to  bolde  bis  f aitb  and  for  to  doo 
bym  seruyse.  for  seynt  peter  tbe  prynce  of  tbap- 
postles,  vpon  tbe  creaunce  of  wbom  our  faytb  is 
founded,  batb  conuerted  it  fyrst  by  bis  precbyng, 
and  by  tbe  merueyllous  myracles  tbat  be  dyde.  Our 
peple  batb  conquerdit  not  longsytb  by  tbe  wyll  & 
ayde  of  our  lord  vpon  tbeOirkes,  tbat  baue  bolden 
itwitb  wrongandby  force  a  certeyn  tymeXberfore 
tbou  ougbtest  to  suffix  vs  to  enjoye  our  berytage, 
and  retome  tbou  in  to  tby  countrey-  Hnd  yf  tbou 
wilt  not  so  doo,  knowe  tbou  for  certayn  tbat  witbin 
tbe  tbyrde  day  swerdes  scbalfynyssbe&ende  tbis 
debate.Hndtotbendetbattboucomplaynenottbat 
we  desire  and wille  tbe  detb  pourcbasseof  somocb 
peple  in  comyn  bataylle,  tbey  sbal  oflPre  to  tbe  tbis: 
tbat  is  to  wete,  yf  tbou  wilt  fygbte  in  tbyne  owne 
persone,  tbey  sbal  sendeayenst  tbe  one,al  so  bye  a 
prynce  as  tbou  art,  to  wbom  tbou  sbaltfygbt.  Hnd 
wbicbe  of  you  maye  vaynquyssbe  &  ouercome  that 
otber,sbalconqueretbequarelleforeuermorewitb- 

outeotber  debate/^f  tbis  tbynge  plese  tbenot,  take 

certayn  nombre  of  tby  men,  vj,x,  or  xij,  or  as  many 

M  %79 


as  tbou  wylt,andour  pilgrymssbal  sette  as  manv 
ayenst  tbem,  wvtboute  ony  moo  of  tbat  one  svete 
and  tbat  other.  And  tbat  tbey  tbat  sbal  wynne  tbe 

^ig^i£L^^Tbauc  tbc  $*ym  of  tb™  debate. 
nSJVCorbagat  berde  tbis  message 
be  was  mocbe  wrotbandangry,and 
bad  grete  desdayne  and  despyteji? 

ITbennebetournedbym  toward  pe- 
ter &  sayd  to  bym :  peter,  tbey  tbat 

batbsentetbebetber,bennotinsucb 
.  poyntasme  semetb  tbat  tbey  sboldoffre  tomefor 
>to  cbose  of  tbeyr  deuyses,  but  tbey  be  brouabt  bv 

notbynge  of  tbeyr  wylle,  butlsball  doo  with  tbem 

13«  W;C'But  rct?urnc  thou  AeayetoSS 
nnisardes,and  saye  to  tbem  tbat  baue  made  tbe  to 

meue  fro  tbe  cyteand  come  betber,  tbat  tbey  vnder- 

stonde  not  yet  tbe  maluerte  tbat  tbey  be  in,  Hnd 

bfcCCr!,Tly  thatXJ  had  wold>  i  h^  or  now 
broken  and  destroyed  tbis  toun  and  sette  my  men 

therm  by  force,  m  sucbe  wyse  tbat  tbe  cresten  men 
bad  be  alleslayn,men  andwymmen,  lytil  andcrrete 
But  I  wyll  tbatye  abyde  in  more  cay tvfnes  £  m,! 
ease,  dyeng  andWuyssbyna  foVbonZ  [JE! Z 
otber  boundeaHncfwban  it  sfial  please  mc  1  sbal 
entre  m  to  tbe  toun,  andalle  tbem  SatlsbTlAnde 
men  &  wymmen  of  couenable  eage,Isbal mitt hfm 
alle  bounden  bandes  &  feet  in  pwfous  estate  5nd 
sbal  lede  tbem  alle  to  my  lorde  for  to  ^ufhvm  ^ 
tbey  sbal  be  bis  esclauel  WtfccSS^&fi 
wttb  rt>e  swerd,  ly he  an  euy I  tree  tbat  wyll  bere  no 

280 


■^ 


iyd  peter  retorned  in  to  the  toun,  and 
le  sayd  hid  message,  and  of  the 
of  the  duewbiebe  wold  not  suffre 

et36R  Cberemyte  vnderstode 
bys  pryde,  wbyebe  was  moche 
grete  of  grete  quantite  of  peple 
that  he  bad,  &  also  of  his  ryeb- 
esses  whiche  were  ouermocbejfiF 
XThenne  he  departed  and  cam  a- 
gaynin  totbetoun.Rewoldbaue 
sayd  the  message  of  Corbagat 
openlyinthe  presence  of  them  that  wold  here  hym, 
fror  theder  ran  grete  andsmale.But  the  ducOode- 
ffroytthatwasmochewyseandknewemoche,drewe 
hym  a  part,  &  called  only  the  barons,  and  bad  hym 
saye  that  he  hath  foundenj^Rerecounted  to  them 
alle,  as  he  that  had  wel  reteyned  in  his  mynde,  and 
coude  saye  and  vtter  it  in  the  bestmanereXhe  due 
doubted  thatyf  the  peple  had  herd  this  grete  pryde, 
and  the  menaces  that  Corbagat  had  sayd,  that  they 
shold  beouer mocheabasshed  and  f  eerd,  therf or  he 
commaundedto  peter  that  he  shold  saye  none  oth- 
er thyng,  but  that  only  Corbagat  desyred  and  de- 
maunded  the  bataylle  ayenst  them,  and  that  thev 
eholdmake  them  redy*  peter  acorded  wel  therto, « 
saydtothemlykeastheduchad  commaunded  hym 
jpttnd  vnnethe peter  had  saydtheworde,  butthat 
alle  cryed with  one  voys :  Hnd  we  wy lie  also  the  ba- 
taylle ayenst  hym  in  godes  namef  j^Cbev  sbewde 
wel  by  theyr  sight  and  semblaunce  that  the  desyre 


of  the  bataylle  was  grete  in  tbeir  bertes,  Hlle  tbeir 
meseases  were  forgoten  for  ioye  to  baue  tbe  vyc- 
toryeXbe  barons,  wban  tbey  sawe  tbat  tbey  rpeple 
made  sucbe  ioye  tbey  were  mocbe  glad,  and  mocbe 
tbe  more  trusted  in  tbem.  By  comyn  counseyl  tbey 
ordeyned  tbe  bay  of  tbe  bataylle  on  tbe  mom ;  and 
tbat  tbus  wold  Corbagat  baue  it,  tbey  byleuyd  it 
wel  Hnd  bastely  wente  every  man  to  bis  lodgyng. 
"Cbere  ye  sbold  baue  seen  armourers  put  in  poynt, 
bauberks  and  belmes  fourboussbed,  swerdes  and 
custrellis  wbette  J&TlbiQ  nygbt  slepte  tbey  not  in 
tbe  tounnomanXbey  tbat  kept  tbe  bors  tokegood 
bede  tbis  nygbt,  and  made  alle  tbvnge  redy, 

~\S  soone  as  it  was  nygbt,  it  was  cryed 
vpon  peyne  of  detne,  tbat  alle  man 
sbolde  be  in  tbe  morning  to  fore  tbe 
sonne  rysynofe  alle  armed  as  be  best 
mygbt,and  drawe  bym  in  to  tbe  bat- 
_  aylle  wbere  as  be  was  ordeyned,  and 
1  tbat  euery  man  sbold  f  olowe  tbe  baner  or  bis  cap- 
|tayne  j^Cdban  tbe  spryngyna  of  tbe  day  apperid 
in  tbe  mornyng  tbe  men  of  tbe  cbircbe  were  redy 
fortosynge  masse,  andsongedeuoutly/Cbey  tbat 
1  sbold  goo  to  tbe  batayll  were  conf essyd,  &  alle  re- 
ceyued  tbe  bodye  of  oure  lord,  wbicb  gaf  to  tbem 
surete  of  body  and  of  sowle,  Hlle  rancour  &  wratb 
were  entierly  perdonned,  by  cause  tbey  wold  be  in 
parfygbt  cbary  te,  and  tberin  doo  tbeseruyse  of  our 
lord,  wbicbe  saytb  in  tbe  gospell:  In  tbis  sbal  alle 
men  knowe  tbat  ye  be  my  disciples,  yf  ye  baue  loue 
and  cbaryte  emonge  you  j?  (Oban  tbey  were  tbus 
redy,  oure  lord  sente  to  tbem  bis  grace,  wbicb  gaf 
282 


to  tbem  so  grctc  bardines,  that  tbey  that  were  the 
daye  to  fore  so  ferdf ul,  feble  and  lene,  that  tbey 
mygbt  not  susteyne  tbem  self  for  f eblencsse,  be- 
cam  stronge  and  delyuer,  in  sucbe  wyse  tbat  tbe 
armes  tbat  tbey  bare  weyed  notbyngastbem  settl- 
ed, and  were  bardy  and  vy gorous,  so  tbat  tber  was 
none  90  litil  but  be  bad  talente  to  doo  grete  tbyng 
in  tbe  bataylle  jg^Cbe  tyme  cam  tbat  tbe  bissbops 
and  alle  tbe  otber  men  of  tbe  cbircbe  were  rcuested 
as  for  to  synge  masse.  Cbey  belde  tbe  crosse  and 
tbe  8ainctuaryes,witbwbicbetbey  blessyd  tbepe- 
ple  &  recommaunded  tbem  to  godXbey  graunted 
pardon  &  remyssyon  to  tbem  of  alle  tbeir  synncs, 
yf  tbey  deyde  in  tbe  seruyse  of  our  lordXo  fore  alle 
tbe  otner  tbe  bissbop  or  puy  precbyd  and  e pah  to 
tbe  barons,  &  prayd  tbem  tbat  tbey  sbold  tbyncke 
to  auenge  tbe  sbame  of  our  lord  Xbesu  Criste,  tbat 
tbyse  vntrewe  Sarasyns  bad  don  to  bym  so  longe 
in  witbboldyngof  bis  berytage.Htte  laste  be  bles- 
syd tbem  witb  bis  band,  and  commaundedtbemto 
god  deuoutly* 

f>ow  to  fore  er  our  men  departed,  tbey  made  redy 
tbeyr  bataylles  right  wel  in  poynt,&  of  tbe  nom- 
bre  of  tbem,  capttulo  Cxxxviij^^ 

|H  tbe  mom  erly  our  pylgryms 
assembled  as  it  was  oraeyned  & 
deuysed,  tbe  tbyrde  day  to  fore 
tbentre  of  luyll,  to  fore  tbe  yate 
of  tbe  brydge,  to  fore  tbyssue 
oute  of  tbe  yateXbey  bad  tbeyr 
j  batayllesordeynedanddeuysed 
lyke  as  wbo  sbold  goo  to  fore 


&  who  sbold  come  af tcrj&Zbc  fyrst  bataylle  bad 
fiuon  le  JVlayne,  broder  of  tbc  kynge  of  f  raunce,  & 
witb  bym  Hncean  dc  Rybemont,and  tbc  otber  ba- 
rons &  toiygbtes  of  tbeyr  countreyXbey  tbougbt 
wel  tbat  tbc  men  tbat  tbey  ledde  sbold  not  lygbt- 
ly  be  discomfyted,tberfore  wente  tbey  first,  for  to 
perse  in  tbe  better  to  fore  J&  TTbe  second  batayll 
ledde  Robert  tberle  of  f  laundres,  wbicb  was  called 
tbe  f  ryson :  be  bad  none  otber  in  bis  bataylle  but 
peple  of  bis  owne  countree  jff  XTbe  tbyrde  batayll 
ledde  Robert  tbe  due  of  JVormandye  witb  bis  neu~ 
euw,  wbicbe  was  mocbe  valyaunt,  tberle  Steuen  of 
Hubuale,  &  alle  tbem  of  bis  owen  countreyej^TTbe 
f ourtb  batayll  was  dely  uerd  to  tbe  bissbop  of  puy , 
wbicbe  bad  don  of  tbabyt  of  tbe  cbyrcbe,  and  rode 
upon  a  good  stede,tbe  belme  laced,  Hnd  be  bare  in 
bis  bond  tbe  boly  spere  of  wbicbe  oure  saueour 
IbesuCriste  was  perced  in  tbe  side, and  conduyt- 
ed  vygorously  tbe  bataylle  of  tberle  of  TTbolouse, 
wbicbe  was  not  tberejJTCbe  erle  Reignald  of  TToul 
bad  tbe  v  bataylle ;  witb  bym  was  peter  de  Stad- 
enous  bis  broder,  tberle  CSarnyer  of  Crece,  Renrv 
d'Hsque,  Reynart  of  Hnmellac,  Caultier  of  Dome- 
dart^ln  tbe  vj  bataylle  were  Rembold  tbe  erle  of 
OrengcLoys  deJMoncon,  &  Lambert  sone  of  Co- 
non  deMotitagu j^XTbe  vij  bataylle  ledde  tbe  ricrbt 

valyaunt(3odeifroyducofLoreyne;witbbymwa6 
eustace  bis  brother,  and  tbem  tbat  be  brought  out 
of  bis  countrey  J?  XTbe  viij  bataylle  conduyted  tbe 
noble,  wyse,  and  wel  preuyd  €ancre,  witb  tbe  men 
that  were  delyuerd  to  bym  j^XTbe  ix  bataylle  ledde 
tberle  ftuon  of  seynt  pout  Hniaran  bis  sone  was 
284 


with  bym,Tbomas  de  fere,Bawdwyn  deBourgb, 
Robert  fytz  Gerard,  Regnauld  de  Beauuoys,and 
Gales  de  Cbamont  j^Tbe  x  ladde  tberle  of  perse, 
and  bad  witb  bymGuerard  du  puyssat,Droon  de 
JVloncy,Raoul  fytz  ©odeffroy  &Conayn  tbe  Bre- 
ton J&  Of  tbe  xj  was  capytayn  Ysacbar  tberle  of 
Dye;  witb  bym  were  Remon  pelez,  Caste  de  Bed- 
yers,  <3yrard  de  Roussylon,  Guy  Hem  de  )V1on  pel- 
Iyer,  and  Guy  llem  Hmeneuxj^  Tbe  xij  &  tbe  laste, 
in  wbicbe  was  moost  peple,  was  delyuerd  to  Buy- 
mont,  and  was  ordeyned  tbat  be  snold  goo  soc- 
oure  sucbe  batayllos  as  bad  moost  nedejp Tberle 
of  Tbolouse,wbicbe  was  merueyllously  seke,  lefte 
tbey  in  tbe  toun  for  to  hepe  fro  tbeTTufces  in  tbe 
don  geon ;  If  or  y  f  tber  bad  be  no  garde,  tbey  my  gbt 
baue  sprongen  and  baue  slayn  alle  tbe  sebe  men, 
wymmen  and  children,  and  tbe  feble  men  tbat  a- 
bode  bybynde  in  tbe  toun, of  wbom  tber  were  grete 
nombre  in  tbeyr  berberous*  Tbey  bad  made,  as  I 
baue  sayd  tof ore,vpon  a  lytil  tertre  astronge  walk 
of  cbalhe,  in  wbicbe  were  ordeyned  places  for  to 
dresse  engyns,  wbicbe  were  all  redy  for  to  caste* 
Tbey  bad  leftijCmen  of  armes,  noble  &  hardy,  for 
to  deffend  tbis  paas  fro  tbe  Turhes,  wbicbe  were 
on  bye  on  tbe  dongeon. 


285 


•^ 


f)ow  Corbagatwasaduertysed  of  tbyssue  of  ourc 
peple,  and  scute  bis  arcbyers  for  to  deffende  tbc 
brydge,  and  bow  tbey  were  disconfyted,  capitulo 

RHJNf  tbey  bad  tbus  deuysed 
tbeyr  bataylles,  in  euery  batayll 
tbey  bad  sette  men  on  foote.  It 
was  acorded  emonge  tbem  tbat 
tbey  a  foote  sbold  goo  to  fore, 
an  cube  knyabtes  tbat  cam  after 
sbold  kepe  tbem.Itwas  deff end- 
ed and  cryed  on  payne  of  detb 


®r 


tbat  none  sbold  be  so  bardy  tbat  sbold  entende  to 
ony  gayn  as  longe  as  ony  TTurke  deffended  bym. 
But  wban  oure  lord  bad  gyuen  tbem  tbe  vyctorye, 
tbenne  sbold  tbey  retorne,andmygbt  tarye  to  take 
and  gadre  tbe  despoyllesj^Corbagfat  fro  tbe  be- 
gynnyngof  tbe  siege  of  tbe  cytebadalwaye  doubte 
and  grete  suspection  tbat  our  peple  sbold  sodanly 
comevpon  bis  boost,  andspeciallysytb  tbat  peter 
TTberemyte  bad  be  witbbym  in  message,  Hndtber- 
forbe  bad  commaunded  to  tbem  tbat  were  in  tbe 
dongeon,  tbat  yf  oure  men  tbougbt  to  yssue  tbey 
sbold  sowneabusyne,and  sette  oute  a  banerwbere 
tbey  sbold  yssue,  Sdberof  it  bapped  tbat  wban 
tbyse  bataylles  were  renged  to  fore  tbeyate,  to  fore 
tbey  yssued,aboute  tbeboure  of  pryme,  tbey  of  tbe 
tourmadetbe  signe  like  as  tbey  were  commaunded, 
Corbagatvnderstode  tbat  our  men  cam ;  and  anon 

besentetwotbousendarcbierstotbebrydgetokepe 
it  tbat  tbey  sbold  not  passe. 


HHJS"  the  TTurkes  cam  tbeder  for  to 
mayn  tene  tbe  passage,  tbey  descend- 
%  edalle  afooteXbeyateswere  opened, 
oure  menyssued  after  tbordenaunce 
tbat  was  deuysed*  Ruon  le  JVlayne 
witb  alle  bis  batay  lie  cam  fyrst  vn  to 
tbis  paas,  wbicbe  was  tbus  kepte  witb  bis  enemyes, 
so  tbat  bis  arcbiers  &  men  af  oote  taryed  a  ly  til  and 
'mygbt  not  passe  in  no  wysejjSF^Oban  Ruon  tbe 
nobleman  apperceyued  tbis,  be  smote  tbe  bors  witb 
tbe  spores,  and  so  smote  in  on  botbe  sydes,  tbat 
it  was  to  late  for  tbe  TTurkes  a  f oote  to  take  tbeyr 
borsesXbennetomedtbeyfleyng,defendyngtbem 
&  sbotyngwitb  tbeir  bowes.Hncean  de  Ribemont 
rode  ayenst  tbem,  and  bete  and  belde  tbe  rowte  so 
sbortallonetbatbismentbatcamafterbymmygbt 
comeandsmytein  emong  tbem  and delyuerd many. 
Hnd  of  tymes  be  plun ged  so  depe  in  tbe  presse  tbat 
certaynly  our  men  bad  supposed  be  bad  ben  lost; 
but  wban  be  cam  agayn,be  discouerd  bym  wel  and 
made  large  place  about  bym.  Hllemen  bebeldebym, 
begate  tberemocbe  grete  bonourandprys.Ruon  le 
JVIayne  f  orgate  not  bis  swerd,  &  be  dyde  so  mocbe 
tbat  our  pylgryms  bad  by  bym  good  luck  and  bope 
at  tbis  fyrst  assembleej^tberle  of  flaundres  and 
tbe  due  of  JNbrmandye,  witb  tbe  valyaunt  erle  of 
Denawde  cam  to  tbis  cbaas.  'Cbe  arcbyers  of  tbe 
Curkes  tbat  sofleddeweresoeuyl  mened,  tbat  tbey 
were  but  a  fewe  wban  tbey  retomed  in  to  tboostj^ 
Ourmen  f olowed  tbem  ty  Iny  gb  tbeyr  lodgys,many 
of  tbem  tbey  bete  doun  tbat  neuer  releuyd. 

287 


I 


Row  oure  men  raoyced  tbcmof  a  dewor  rouseede- 
scendyng  tbenne  frobeuen,andof  tbeyrmayntven 
'"  »PPg*fr"f  lb.e5"rfeefl- ""*-'"  <*-*  *  *   7 

"NS  tbynge  bapped  wban  ourc 
menysauedoutof  tbetoun  tbat 
ought  not  to  be  forgoten;  ffor 
wban  tbyae  arcbiera  were  dis- 
confyted,  tbe  Latyns  cam  after 
"J tbeyr  ordenaunce  a  aoftpaae. 
T-benne  began  to  falle  arayne  or 
■ a  dewe;  so  swete  a  rousee  wan 
neueraeen.lt  semed  to  eueryman  vervtablv  tbatl? 

and'al Z ^^^^tUy^mJ^ 
r\ & tfZllu  * tbc?  neuer  bad  8uffr«>  mesease. 
Cbt8refre88bmentwa8notonlyintbemen,butalle 
tbeyr  horses  were  anon  ao  strong,  ao  fressbTand 

££2*fc B  %>  b^l-bad  alwa?al  *at  wbfebe 
w^nedefulfortbemXbiawaamocbeapperceyued 

tbatdayecertaynly.ffortbeboraeatbatnianydayea 
bad  notbyng  toete  aauf  leeueaof  treea&  ahorcben 
orryndea,  were  in  tbta  bataylle  more  stronccand 
W"TMc  than  were  the  boraea  of  tbeffiel 
wbKbe^lwaye as moebe as tbey mygbj^  ' 
me  captayns  acorded  tbattbey  abold 
I  drawe  them  toward  tbe  monta™? 

ffor  yf  tbe  Curhes  wbicbe  bad  mocb 

,h„  ^  a  T  ry,    b£  bT tw«"«  oure  men  and 

tbe  toun,  and  abold  close  tbcm  in.  In  tbis  maner 
Iwent^one  bataylle  to  fore  another.  witboutTtbfe 


that  one  touched  another  in  ony  wysejgF<Hban  the 
turkes  sawe  them  alle  they  merueylled  &  were  ab- 
assbed,  ffor  they  had  supposed  that  they  hadnot  be 
but  a  fewe  enclosed  in  the  toun.  J^ow  they  semedby 
the  myracle  of  our  lord  that  they  were  as  many  of 
them  as  were  of  tbe€urkes,and  yet  moo,  Gmonge 
the  menofarmes  were  themenof  the  chirchereuest- 
ed  with  awbes  and  stooles,  they  that  were  preestes, 
and  the  clerhys  in  surplys,and  eche  of  them  bare  a 
crosse  in  his  hand,  £bey  that  were  abyden  in  the 
tounwereontbewalles,reuestydalso,inprayers& 
oroysonsand  teeris  cryeng  mercy  tooure  lord  that 
be  wold  baue  pyte  of  his  peple,andsaue  them  that 
day,&tbatbewoldnot8uffretbatbisnameandbi8 
faythshold  tome  to  reproche  by  the  mescreauntes 
and  hethen  peple. 

How  Corbagat  ordeyn  ed  his  batay  lies,  andhow  the 
two  hoostes  marched  to  gydre  in  batay  lie,  capitulo 

]Ythe  signes  that  they  of  the  don- 
]  geon  made  to  them  of  tboost,  and 
by  the  tydyngestbat  the  archiers 
brougbt,Corbagat  kneweandvn- 
derstode  certaynly  that  oure  men 
were  yssued  oute  of  the  cyte,  and 
cam  toward  hym  for  to  figbtcj? 
J  €henn  he  was  adcerteyned  of  this 
wher  of  he  had  desdayne  to  fore  and  holden  it  for 
mocquerye^fie  tone  counseyl  of  his  barons,  and 
hastely  ordeyned  his  bataylles  by  the  counseyl  of 
his  wysemen,and  specially  of  them  that  were  born 


in  flntbyocbc,of  wbom  be  bad  many  witb  bym.  Be 

^itL  2tayUcof "^rett  Plcntc  of  hnygbtes, 
tbe  best  &  moost  bardy  that  be  bad ;  this  bataylle 
dclyucrd  be  to  Solyman,  of  whom  ye  baue  herd  fn 

te8j  pUcct t0  fore- ne  wmmaunded  that  tbey 
f^wkraW/tLbemt5wardtbc8ce'tofo"«,ownieii 
sboldbauetahenand  pourpryscdalletbe  plavn  bv- 
twene  the  montayne  and  tbe  cyte.  Cbis  did  be  bv 
intent  that  when  our  men  were  descomfytcd,  and 
tbey  would  draw  tbem  selves  to  ward  tbc  sea  or  to 
ward  tbecy  tc,  this  grete  batayllesbold  eome  tbenne 
to  fore,  and  tbey  sfiould  be  stahed  as  by twene  two 
bills  and  closed>fii8  otber  bataylles  be  settein 
poynt  by  levser  and  made  that  oni  t^oo  to  fore 

£%£*£*  °»2fh,5>  tbc  "Ptoyn«e,  and  sayde 
to  tbem,  tbattbey  sboldmayntene  tbem  as  byemen 
and  good  hnygbtes,  &  not  to  be  aferd  ne  esmayed 
!ii  Syk  e  ^P™*:™™  «nft»myn«*  cuyll  armed,  & 
sufrred  ^^  trauaylles  tbat  tbc?  ba<i 

RHf«f  our  men  bad  pourpryscd  en- 

tjerlytbeplayninsucbwisetbattbcv 
doubtednottobe  closed  in.tbeyap- 
proucbed  so  nygbe  tbe  TTurKat 

.fyrst  bataylles  to  gydre- wel  fouS  tbey  tba 2 

ceyued  tbem, ffor  tbeCurhes  werearetc mm  * L^T 

'armcd^Our  men  dyde  rigbt wel^ tbfe com™ 

omtbefrenssbemen  l*di&  jE£££™^ 


i, 


tbem  vigorously  in  brekynge  well  tbe  presse.  But 
tbenne  cam  90  grete  rowtes  of  TTurkes,  tbat  it  be- 
boucd  tbc  otber  bataylles  of  our  men  to  assemble 
bastely  for  to  socoure  tbe  tbre  first  batayllesjfiF 
Hbey  were  alle  at  tbe  medle,  sauf  tbe  laste  bataylle, 
wbicbeBuymontconduytedas  ye  bauc  berdXbere 
sbold  ye  baue  seen  fiers  skarmocbe  of  swerdes,  of 
maces  &  axesse*  TTbe  malles  were  so  grete  &  strokes 
tbat  ye  sbold  not  baue  berd  yf  it  bad  tbondredj^ 
XTbe  due  Godeffroy  sawe  a  bataylle  come  wbere  in 
were  moo  men  tban  ony  of  tbe  otber.  <Helltbougbt 
be  tbat  yf  tbat  were  disconfyted,  tbe  otber  sbold  be 
mocbe  abassbed.  Re  drewe  tbederward,  and  smote 
in  tbem  asprely  and  vygorouslyXbere  dydebeand 
bis  f elawsbip  mocbe  wel,  and  so  valyauntly  tbat 
tbey  slewe  many,  and  bewe  of  beedes  and  armes,in 
sucbewysetbattbefeldelayfulofdedemen,ofburt 
&  wounded,  in  so  many  tbat  tbeXTurkes  mygbtno 
Slenger  suff  re  it  ne  lenger  endure,  but  were  discon- 
>fyted  and  were  put  to  flygbt. 

^OLYN^NtDatDadtDC^rctebata^Uc> 
as  I  baue  sayd  to  fore,  apperceyued 

fro  f erre  bis  men  conteyned  tbem  but 
febly,  and  approcbed  and  sawe  tbe 
bataylle  of  Buymont,  wbicb  yet  bad 
J  not  be  in  tbe  medle  witb  tbeotber*  Re 
adressidbym  tbedre,&dyde  do  sbote  at  bym  grete 
plenteofarowesattbeapproucbyngJButaftertbey 
benge  tbeyr  bowes  on  tbeyr  armes,  and  ran  vpon 
tbem  witbaxes  and  swerdes,and  smote  so  soreon 
tbem  tbatalmost  tbey  toumed  tbe  beedes  of  tbeyr 
borses,  ffor  tbey  my  gbt  not  abide  so  grete  estour  ne 
U2  2°i 


so  sbarpe  of  eo  mocbc  peple  jflTCbe  du  c  Godcfrro^e 
knewe  and  sawe  tbem  fro  f  errc,anddrewebym  dili- 
gently to  tbat  parte*  Oncre  toke  bede  also  of  bis 
vncle,  and  cam  dilygcntly  to  socoure  bym,  Ht  tbe 
comyng  of  tbem  two,  wbicb  brought  many  men 
witb  tbem,  was  Solyman  discomfyted,  and  muste 
parte  fro  tbe  place.  But  tbe  burkes  bad  made  redy 
fyre  grekyssb,  &  tbrewe  it  in  to  tbe  grasse,  wbicbe 
was  longe  anddrye  in  tbef  elde,  Ourmen  tbennede- 
parted  for  tbe  smoke,  wbicbe  was  blak  &  tbycke^ 
Glban  tbe  turkes  sawe  tbat  tbey  on  borsbak  were 
witbdrawen,  tbey  ran  vpon  ourmen  af oote,  &  slewe 
many  of  tbem.  Our  men  tbat  were  on  borsbak  were 
yssued  out  of  tbe  tbyck  smoke,  and  berde  tbe  crye 
of  tbem  tbat  tbey  so  slewe,  and  smote  tbe  borses 
witb  tbe  spores,  &  camen  agayn  alle,and  alle  tbem 
tbat  tbey  founde  of  tbeyr  enemyes  tbey  bete  and 
slewe,  &  put  to  flygbt.  So  f  erre  tbey  cbassed  tbem, 
betyngandbewvngtbem,tbattbey  cam  to tbegrete 
multitude,wbicr)etbennewerediscomfytedandput 
to  flygbt. 

Of  tbe  fleynge  of  Corbagat,  and  of  som  burkes 
g^dtcd  to  gydre  and  agayn  discomfyted  by  our 
men,capitulo  Cxlij^^ 

|J^  tbis  partye  wbere  tbe  bataylle 
bad  bee,was  in  a  valeye,as  wbere 
descended  in  to  tbe  see  a  lytil 
brook  or  rennyng  water,  Vnto 
tbatplace  bad  our  men  cbassed 
tbeCurkes,  &  tbere  tbey  drewe 
and  assembled  tbem  agayn  vp- 
on a  tertre  rigbt  bye,  &  made  do 


mm 


sowne  tbeyr  trompettes  &  busynes  for  to  brynge 
tbcir  pcplc  to  gidre.  But  our  men,  that  tbenne  bad 
not  to  doo  in  none  otberplace,  camen  alle  to  tbem, 
fiuon  leJNlayne,tberle  of  f  laundres,tbeducof  JNfor- 
mandye,tbe  ducGodeffroy,Buymont  andOncre, 
&  tbey  tbat  were  witb  tbem,  began  mocbe  mygbte- 
ly  to  assaylle  tbeyr  enemyes  tburgb  tbe  water,  so 
fiersly  ana  by  so  grete  bardynesse  and  force  tbat 
tbey  padded  ouer,  and  sodaynly  ran  on  tbat  bylle 
wbere  tbey  were  on,&  made  tbem  to  descende  doun 
mocbe  perilously  J&  fro  tbenne  tbe'Curhes  bad 
none  bope  to  abyde  no  longer  on  tbef  elde  ne  on  tbe 
cbampayns,  but  euery  man  wente  and  flcdde  bere& 
r  tbere  wbere  be  mygbt  and  tbougbt  beste, 

lORBHGHi:  tbe  lord  of  tbe  boost, 
fro  tbe  begynnyng  tbat  tbe  batay  lies 
assembled,  bad  escbewed  tbe  peryll, 
and  was  witbdrawen  vpon  an  bylle  a 
ferre  of,  for  to  see  tbe  ende,  fie  sente 
of  te  messagers  for  to  knowe  bow  bis 
|men  conteyned  and  demened  tbem, 3CTberf ore  be  a- 
bode  tbere,  and  sawe  bow  tbeOirkes  cam  alle  dis- 
confy ted, without  kepynof  araye  ne  ordenaunce  of 
bataylle  J9  fiis  frendes  tbat  were  about  bym  sayd 
to  bym :  Syre,  ye  see  well  at  tbis  tyme  bow  it  gootb, 
tberfore  tbynke  ye  dylygently  for  your  self,&  de~ 
parte  bastely  fro  tbis  placejj?  Re  tnenne  wente  bis 
waye  and  fledde  as  bastely  as  be  mygbt;  be  bad  so 
grete  fere  &  drede  in  bis  berte  tbat  be  durst  abyde 
m  no  place*  Re  passed  tbe  ryuer  and  flood  of  Bu- 
f  rates,  &  by  tbe  rennyng  of  bis  bors  be  witbdrewe 
bym  as  f er  as  be  mygbt. 

U3  293 


|f)HJV  bis  men  knewe  that  they  were 
without  capytayne  they  were  mocbe 
abassbed*  tbenne  thought  none  of 
them  of  other,  but  euery  man  dyde 
the  best  be  coude  or  mygbte  to  saue 
bymself ,and  fledde  alle  as  mocbe  as 
they  mygbt  jff  Our  valyaunt  barons,  wbicbe  that 
had  sore  trauavlled  tbeyr  horses,  durste  not  fol- 
owe  them  ouer  rerrelest  tbeyr  horses  mygbt  faylle 
them*  Can  ere  with  a  companye  of  four  thousand 
folowed,sleyng&betyngdoun  alle  them  that  they 
mygbt  atteyne,  ffor  the  fere  and  drede  was  so  grete 
in  the  hertes  of  the  Sarasyns  that  x  men  myght 
haue  chassed  v  C  SarasynsXher  was  iteuydently 
proued&  sbewd,  that  there  is  no  counseyl,ne  none 
maye  be  gyuen  ayenst  our  lord  god,  and  that  our 
lord  forgetetb  not  them  that  haue  stedfast  hope 
in  hym ;  for  a  smalle  peple,  poure,  and  as  alle  deed 
for  bonger,  wbicbe  were  come  frof  er  coun trees  and 
londes,  by  the  ayde  of  Ibesu  Criste  vaynquyssbyd 
alle  the  power  of  tboryent  in  tbeyr  owne  londe  and 
coun  tree,  wbicbe  were  so  grete  plente  of  peple  gar- 
nyssbyd  and  replenessbyd  of  alle  that  tbey  bad 
nede  on 


294 


fiow  our  pcplc  rctomcd  fro  the  cbaasse,and  wente 
to  the  pillage,  and  of  the  grete  ryebesses  tbattbey 
fonde,  capitulo  Cxliij,*^ 

aF)G  batayllewastbus  fynyssb- 
yd,  in  sucbe  wyse  tbat  tbc  pil- 
gryms  bad  tbc  vyctorye*  ITbcy 
wentestray  te  to  tbc  lodgyses  of 
tbc  XTurkce;  tberc  founde  tbey 
90  grete  ryebesses  of  gold,  of 
syluer,  of  precious  stones,  of 
vayssell  of  dyuerse  f acions,  ta- 


pytes  and  clotbesof  sylMomocbetbatneuerman 
mygbte  well  preysejG?Oxen,  sbeep,  and  kyen  were 
tbere  grete  plentye;  wbete  and  mele  grounden,  of 
wbicb  tbey  bad  grete  nede,  tber  was  so  mocb  tbat 
all  tbey  were  encombredtobere  it/Cbey  wan  borses 
in  tbis  discomfyture  good  and  fatte,  so  many  tbat 
tbey  wereabassbedof  tbe  grete  multitude  tbat  was 
tbere,  €bey  toke  and  gadred  tbe  despoylles  &  tbe 
tentes,wberof  tbey  bad  so  grete  ryebesses,  tbat  of 
sucbe  an  boost,  was  neucr  none  seen  more  f aire  ne 
rycbe-Hnd  tbis  cam  to  tbem  merueyllously  well  to 
poynt,ffor  alletbeyr  ten  tes  &  tbeyrpauy  lions  were 
bolly  rotten.  Gdymmen,  cbilderen,  and  other  peple 
wbicbe  bare  none  armes  tbey  founde  ouer  many  in 
tbe  lodgyses,  wbom  alle  tbey  brou gbt  in  to  tbe  cy  te 
emong  tne  other  tbyngesjfiTCbe  barons  assembled 
tbem  for  to  see  tbe  ten  tes  of  Corbagat,  wbicbe  was 
merueyllous,fforit  wasmadein  tbe  f ormeof  a  cyte- 
Itbadtowres&crestesofdyuersecolours  wrought 

with  fyn  sylke;  ffro  tbe  mayster  palays  were  aleys 


in  to  other  tentes  tyke  to  stretes  in  a  grete  toun  JSf 
Khcr  mygbt  sytte  in  the  grete  balle  moo  than  two 
thousand  men, 

RHfJourmen  badrecuyelled  thus  the 
ryebesaes  and  despoylles,  they  alle 
maade  grete  trusses  full  of  ryebe 
tbynges,and  charged  them  on  tbeyr 
horses  and  baches  and  entred  in  to 
_  the  cytye  of  Hntbyocbe  j&  Yf  they 
yj  thenne  were  glad  and  ioyous,  it  was  no  merueylle; 
/  ffor  in  lon^e  tyme  to  fore,  fylle  ne  happed  suche 
^aduenture  in  cristiente.  "Cbey  rendred  and  gaf  to 
four  lord  many  tbankes  and  graces  of  lawde  with 
alle  tbeyr  very  hartes  humbly  &  deuoutly,  ffor  wel 
knewetbey  that  alle  was  comen  fro  bymj^TTbe 
curkes  wbicbe  were  in  the  dongeon  bad  wel  seen 
tbattbeyr  peple  were  vaynquyssbyd,  and  badnone 
hope  thenneto  berescowedne  of  nosocoureXber- 
f or  anon  as  the  barons  were  entred  in  the  cyte  they 
made  them  to  speke  and  trete  with  tbem.  End  ac- 
orded  tooydre  that  they  alle  sbold  take  tbeyr  wy  ues 
and  cbilderen  and  here  with  tbem  sucbe  goodes  as 
they  had,  and  rendre  and  gyue  ouer  the  donaeon 
vhe  baners  of  our  barons  were  sette  aboue  on  it 
tbenne  ^  Che  werkes  of  our  lord  Ibesu  Crist  ben 
mocbe  bye  and  merueyllous,  ffor  fro  riqbt  arete 
pouerte,  cam  oure  peple  to  ouer  grete  ryebesses  in 
so  sbortatyme .It  is  mocbe  good  to  affye&  truste 
in  bym  that  bath  such  power  and  mygbt  It  was 
meruaylof  the  disease  &  pouerte  that  our  barons 
had  suffred  j0  Che  valyaunt  due  Godefroy  was 
brought  to  this  poyntat  the  day  of  the  batayl  that 


am 
1 


'be  bad  not  wberon  to  ryde,  but  be  must  praye  and 
requyre  mocbe  swetly  tberle  of  Tbolouse,  wbicbe 
remeuyd  not  oute  of  tbe  toun,  tbat  be  wold  leue  to 
bym  an  bors,  but  be  bad  grete  payne  to  gete  it* 

S  bad  despended  alle  bis  bauoyr  & 
good  entierly  for  to  susteyne  tbe 
|  pour  gentflmen,in  sucbe  wyse  tbat  be 
(r  bad  notbynae  bym  self.  XTbere  were 
!  many  knygbtes  tbat  ryebely  were 
a  come  in  to  tbe  booste  atte  begynn- 
yng,  tbat  were  brought  to  so  grete  pouerte  tbat  tbis 
day  tbey  rode  on  asses  and  on  pour  mares.  Hnd 
many  bye  men,  as  knyabtes  valyaunt  and  bardy, 
mygbt  not  cbeuyssbe  for  to  ryde,  but  wente  afoot 
emong  tbe  f oote  men,  wbere  tbey  belde  mocbe  wel 
tbeyrplace,ffor  tbeymayntened  &taugbttbemene 
peple  bow  tbey  mygbt  dooto  tbeyr  enemy  esgrett- 
est  dommage  jff  £be  power  of  perse  was  mocbe 
affebled  tbis  day,  ffor  tber  wer  so  many  slayn  and 
deed  tbat  alle  tbertbe  tber  aboute  was  couerd,  XTbe 
nombre  of  tbem  tbatwereslayn  was  neuer  very  tab- 
ly  knowen.  JMocbe  was  cbaunged  tbe  state  of  our 
men ;  fPor  be  tbat  in  tbe  momyng  yssued  oute  alle 
poure,  in  sucbe  wyse  tbat  be  nad  not  for  to  ete,  at 
euen  be  entred  in  to  tbe  cyte  ryebe  of  aood  and  of 
vitaylles,  in  sucbe  wyse  as  be  mygbt  baue  bolden 
a  arete  court  &  companye^Cbis  good  aduenture 
wbicbe  bonoured  alle  cristiente,  and  specially  tbe 
royamme  of  fraunce,  bapped  tbey  ere  of  tbyncar- 
nacion  of  oure  lord  fA  Ixxxxviij,  tbe  xxj  day  of  tbe 
monetb  of  luyn. 


297 


- 


^^^=p» 


Of  the  fayre  ordenaunces  that  oure  peple  made  in 
>tbe  cbircbesof  Hntbyocbe,andin  other  townee  by, 
after  tbis  vyctorye,  capitulo  CxUiij^^ 

PJXfi  tbat  tbe  barons  were  re- 

tomed  fro  tbe  bataylle,  and  tbe 

|  tbynges  of  tbe  cyte  were  wel  or- 

I  deyned,  by  tbe  counseyl  of  tbe 

|  valyaunt  oyssbop  of  puy,  and 

I  by  tbe  prelates  tbat  were  in  tbe 

boost,  was  acorded  by  tbem  alle 

tbattbecbircbesof  tbetoun  were 

'entierly  made  clene,&  ordeyned  to  doo  tbe  seruyse 

of  oure  lord  god,  Hnd  especially  tbe  cbyef  catbed- 

>rallecbircbe,wbicbeisfoundedintbonourofseynt 

peterXbey  establyssbed  tberin  clerkes&  curates 

tbat  sbold  serue  in  tbe  cbircbe,  &  otber  to  goueme 

and  kepe  tbe  boly  places  dene,  for  tbef alse  and  vn- 

trew  Sarasyns  bad  def owled  tbem ;  tbey  bad  sette 

)in  tbe  cbircbes  somme  tbeyr  kyen,oxen  and  sbeep, 

and  otber  tbeyr  borses  &  assesXbe  comyn  wym- 

men  and  euylle  knaues  bad  made  tbeyr  ordure  and 

fy  Itbe  in  tbem  tbat  it  was  py  te  to  see,  and  also  tbey 

def  owled  tbymages  of  Ibesu  Crist,  of  our  lady, « 

of  otber  sayntes  witb  fyltb,myre  and  ordure,Hnd 

1  ly  ke  as  tbey  bad  ben  a/ly ue,tbey  bad  drawe  tbem  an d 

cut  of  tbeyr  noses,  and  pycked  out  tbeyr  eyen, 

52359F>6  barons  and  alle  tbe  pylgrymes 
acorded tbere  sbold  be  ordeynedand 
establyssyd  rentes  to  tbe  clerkes 
tbat  sbold  serue  in  tbe  cbircbesjj^ 
Cbere  was  offerd  gold  and  syluer 
ynowgbe  for  to  make  crosses  and 


cbaly  ces,  &  also  clothes  of  sylk  for  to  make  agayn 
vestements  for  men  of  the  cbircb,  &  aoumementes 
f or  aultersj^Cbe  patriarke  of  the  toun,  wbicbe  was 
a  greek,  named loban,  tbey  ordeyned  and  sette  bym 
agayn  in  bis  place  witb  mocbe  more  grete  bonour 
and  solempnyteXbeTIurkesbad  caste  &  put  bym 
oute  witb  grete  sbame,  and  bad  don  to  bym  many 
euyllis  for  tbe  faytb  of  our  sauyourlbesu  Criste 
tbat  be  belde j&ln  tbe  c^tees  beyng  aboute  Hn- 
tbyocbe  oure  men  sette  bissboppes,  in  tbe  cytees 
wbere  as  none  were  at  tbat  tyme;  but  in  Hntbyocbe, 
wbere  as  tbey  f onde  one,  tbey  sette  none  other,  til 
afterward  tbat  tbe  good  man  apperceyued  tbat  be 
lytil  prouffyted  there,  by  cause  tne  Latyns  vnder- 
stode  nogrekyssbe  language,  &  lef te  bis  dygnyte, 
&  wente  in  to  Constantynoble,  witb  bis  good  wy  11 
without  ony  f orse  or  constraynt* 

fiGJ^G  assembled  tbe  men  of  tbe 
cbircbe,  &  tbey  cbose  and  elected  for 
to  be  patriarke  tbebissbop  of  TIarse, 
wbicbe  was  named  Bernard,  bom  at 
Valence.Rewascomen  witb  tbe  good 
'byssbop  of  Puy,  and  be  bad  made 
I  bym  bis  cbappellayn*  Re  was  made  patriarke.  TLbz 
,seygnorye  of  tbe  cyte  graunted  alle  tbe  barons  to 
Buymont,lykeas  tbey  bad  promysed&  couenaunt- 
ed.  Sauf  tbe  erleof  TIbolouse,  wbicbe  belde  tbeyate 
of  tbe  brydge,  &  I  wote  not  witb  bow  many  toures 
be  bad  garnyssbed  it,  and  in  no  wyse  wold  gyue  it 
ouer,butsayde  tbatitwas  bis  partejg?Hndby  cause 
tbat  Buy  m  on  t  to  fore  was  called  pry  n  ce  of  tbe  peple 
of  bis  contre,tberfortbatname  abode  to  bym,and 

299 


■ 


\S^ 


to  alle  the  lordes  after  bym  of  the  cyte,  and  ben  al~ 
waye  called  prynces  of  Hntbyocbe. 
Row  ourpeple  senteambassadours  to  tbemperour 
of  Conetantinoplef or  to  eomone  bym  to  come  and 
socoure  tbem  as  be  bad  promy sed,  capitulo  Oclv^ 

r>6  tydynges  weretbus  ordeyn- 
ed  in  tbe  cyte  as  1  baue  deuysed 
toyou/Cbenne  was  tbe  counsey  I 
taken  emonge  tbe  barons  tbat 
tbey  sbold  sende  to  tbemperour 
of  Constantinoble  for  to  som- 
onebym  by  bisf aytb,tbatacord- 
yng  to  tbe  couenauntes  tbat  be 


bad  made  to  tbem,  tbat  be  sboldnot  tarye,  but  come 
in  bis  proprepersonefor  to  belpe  tbem,  &  specially 
at  tbe  siege  of  Iberusalem  to  wnicbe  tbey  entended 
for  to  goo,  YT  be  wold  not,  tbenne  did  tbey  bim  wel 
to  knowe  tbat  tbey  wold  not  fortbonbolde  tbe  cou- 
enauntes tbatwere  madewitbbym,nekepetbem  J& 
Hnd  for  to  doo  tbis  message  tbey  cbaas  Ruon  le 
JVIayne,brodertokyngpbelipoffraunce,&Bawd~ 
wyn  tberle  of  Renawd  ^Cbyse  two  departed  fro 
tboost  for  togoo  vnto  Constantinoble.  But  in  tbe 
way  e  certayntTurkes  assay  lied  tbem,in  wbicb  medle 
was  lost  tberle  Bawdwyn,  in  sucbewyse  tbat  neuer 
afterwere  tydynges  berdof  bym.Sommesayd  tbat 
be  was  slayn  tbere,  &  otber  sayde  tbat  be  was  taken 
&  ladde  in  to  f  erre  coun  trees,bu  t  tbe  trou  tbe  of  by  m 
was  neuer  knowen  j!?Ruon  le  JVIayne  escaped  alle 
bool  without burt,  &  cam  vnto  Constantantinoble 
to  tbemperour.  But  tbere  be  empeyred  mocbe  bis 


renommee,  ffor  be  that  was  of  bo  bye  lygnage,and 
alway  bad  ben  in  tboost,  large,  wyse,  noble,  and  a 
mocbe  valyaunt  knygbt  bad  tbenne  no  regarde  to 
tbem  tbat  sent  bym,newolde  not  retourne  to  tbem 
agayn ,  but  departed  fro  tbem  perour  &  wen  t  stray  te 
in  to  f  raunce*  Rit  was  a  gretter  blame  in  bym  tban 
inalasseman* 

nyi-BS  tbe  pylgryms  soioumed 
in  Hntbyocbeamortalyteand  detb 
sourded  androos  emong  tbem,  so 
grete  tbat  tber  was  no  day  but  tbere 
were  xxx  or  xl  biers  in  tbe  cbircbes.lt 
s  was  so  grete  tbat  euery  man  away  ted 
presently  tbe  detb;  tbere  was  none  tbat  supposed 
tobaueescapedj^Cbennebappedagretedommage 
in  tbooste,  ffor  tbe  valyaunt  man  of  grete  troutbe 
and  of  bye  counseyl  deyde  tbat  tyme,  Hymart  tbe 
bissbop  of  puy ;  #or  bis  detb  was  grete  sorowe 
tbenne  tburgb  tbe  toun.Rewasenteredand  honor- 
ably buryed  in  tbe  cbircbe  of  seynt  peter,  wbere 
as  tbe  spere  tbat  opened  tbe  syde  of  oure  lord  was 
f ounden ;  be  was  mocbe  bewaylled  as  tbe  fader  of 
tboostj^flf ter  deyde  a  rigbt  valyaunt  knygbt,  a 
trew  wyseman  &  of  grete  courage,  fienry  d'Hsque, 
in  tbe  castel  of  XTorbesel  wbere  be  soioumed,  and 
tbere  be  deyde,  and  was  buryed  in  tbe  same  placed 
Reynard  ae  JVIollac,  a  good  knygbt  and  of  bye 
lygiiage,  deyde  in  Hntbyocbe;  be  was  buryed  in  tbe 
porcbe  of  seynt  peter* 


301 


LLG  the  wymmen  that  were  in  the 

toun  dcyed  by  this  pestylence  sauf 

a  fewe,  in  sucbe  wyse  tbat  of  tbis 

lytil  peple  deyde  in  a  lytil  wbyle  in 

tbys  toun  I  J\fl  men  and  wymmen  J? 

Vbc  occasion  of  tbis  mortaly te  was 

-many  tymes  demaunded  of  tbe  fisiciens  and  wyee 

clerkesXbe  somme  saydetbat  tbayer  wascorrom- 

pedXbe  otber  sayde  tbat  tbe  peple  bad  bad  ouer 

>longe  mocbe  anguyssb  of  bongre  and  of  tburst, 

fand  wban  tbey  cam  tberto  and  plente  of  vytalles, 

tbey  toketberof  oueroultrageously,  by  wbicbe  tbey 

ranne  inagrete  infirmyteandsekenesXbis  sbewde 

tbey  euydently  by  tbem  tbat  ete  but  lytil  &  by  me- 

sure,  if  or  tbey  tbat  so  dyde  cam  lygbtly  to  conua- 

lenceandbeltbe. 

Row  tbe  pylgryms  of  tboost  desired  to  goo  vnto 
Iberusalem  for  to  escbewe  tbe  mortality  and  tac- 
complissbe  tbeir  vowe,  capitulo  Cxlvj7ft»£ 

F>6  pylgryme,  for  tescbewe  tbe 
mortalyte  of  tbe  toun,  and  also 
for  taccomplyssbe  tbeir  pilgre- 
maae,  began  to  crye  for  to  goo 
toIberusalem,fror  tberfor  were 
tbey  departed  out  of  tbeir  coun  - 
treesXbey  mocbe  prayd  tbe  ba- 
rons tbat  tbey  wold  make  tbem 
,  redy,  &  dylygently  lede  and  conduy te  tbem  tbeder. 
Tbe  barons  tbat  mygbt  not  be  in  reste  for  tbeyr  re- 
questee,  assembled  &  bad  counseyl  on  tbis  mater. 
JfBommt  sayde  tbat  it  were  good  tbat  tbey  sbold 

302 


anon  go  forth  toward  tbc  holy  cyte,  by  cause  the 
comyn  pcplc  desyred  it  &  also  that  euery  man  was 
bounden  by  bis  vowe  so  to  doo.  XTbc  otber  sayde 
tbat  it  wasnot  tymefor  togoofortb,ffortbebren- 
nynge  bctc  was  oucr  grete,  and  tbc  drought  sbold 
cause  tbat  tbey  sbold  lacke  water;  tbc  pcplc  sbold 
not  fynde  wbete,  tbc  borses  sbold  lacke  pastures. 
But  counselled  to  tarye  &delaye  tbis  passage  tyl 
.JViycbelmasse;  tbennc  sbold  tbe  tyme  be  more  at- 
tempered &  moderate  Hnd  duryng  tbe  mene  wbyle, 
menmygbtdorestetbeyrborses^andgetenewefor 
tbem  tbat  bad  none  and  bad  nede  of  somme,  and 
(also  men  mygbt  refressbe  tbem  self  wbicbe  were 
wery  and  sehe  J&  "Co  tbis  laste  counseyll  acorded 
tbey  alle,  and  tberf  or  it  was  late  or  tbey  departed, 
HSJVJVS  deuysed  tbe  barons  tbat 
tbey  wolde  remeue  for  tbynfyrmyte 
of  tbe  place,  and  to  goo  tbere  as  tbey 
mygbt  baue  vytailles  better  cbepejfr 
Buymont  descended  in  to  tbe  londe 
of  Cylyce;  tbere  toke  be  Carse,  Hd- 
ane,  JYIamstre,  Hunaure*  €byse  four  cytees  a  fore 
sayd  be  gamyssbed  well  witb  bis  men,  and  belde 
en  tierly  alle  tbe  countree  aboutejg^be  otber  wente 
f crtber  in  tbe  countre,  &  ladde  tbeder  tbeyr  borses 
for  to  soioumeXbere  were  many  hnygbtes  &men 
s  a/fote  tbat  passed  tbe  ryuerof  Gufrates,f or  to  goo 
W  fortb  at  al  aucnture  tburgb  tbe  countrees  tyl  tbey 
come  to  Bawdwyn,  broder  of  due  Godeffroye,  to 
Rages,wbicbe  receyued  tbem  gladly,  and  gaf  tbem 
vytaylles,  and  made  tbem  good  cbere  as  long  as 
tbev  were  tbere,  and  atte  departyng  be  gaf  to  tbem 

7  303 


fayre  &  good  yef  tes  jPlt  was  not  longe  after  that 
it  bapped  that  one  Rodaban,tbe  lord  of  Ralappe, 
bad  debate  and  warre  ayenst  a  baron  of  bis,wbicbe 
was  castelayn  of  a  castelnamed  Rasart  Hndye  sbal 
vnderstande  for  certayne  tbat  tbere  was  founden 
first  tbe  playe  of  dyse,and  fro  tbens  it  cam,  and  it 
is  named  QOjgfCbxe  grete  man  of  Ralappe  assem- 
bled bis  peple,  &  assyeged  tbis  castel  witb  alle  bis 
power,  XTbe  lord  tbat  was  witbin  sawe  wel  tbat  be 
mygbt  not  bolde  it  ayenst  bis  lord,  and  be  bad  no 
'Curkes  for  to  socoure  bym,ne  belpe  bymXberfor 
be  spak  to  on  bis  frende,a  crysten  man,wbicb  was 
pryue  witb  bym,  and  sente  to  due  ©odefroy  many 
grete  yef  tes,  and  requyred  and  prayd  bym  mocbe 
affectuously  tbat  be  wold  socoure  bym  in  bis  nede, 
(for  be  bad  desire  to  be  bis,  and  wold  be  bounden 
to  bym  to  doo  bym  grete  playsyrs  and  seruyses* 
And  sente  to  bym  bis  sone  in  hostage  for  surete, 
RG  valyaunt  due,  tbat  bad  a  softe 
berte  &  debonayr,  receyued  tbe  loue 
and  tbalyaunce  of  tbe  lord  of  Ra- 
sart.  Re  tbougbt  wel  tbat  it  was  not 
ayenst  tbe  wylle  of  our  lord  for  to 
afeblyssbe  one  of  bis  enemyes  for 
another  jjPO>enne  sente  be  to  bis  brother  Bawd- 
wyn  to  Rages  for  to  send  bym  peple  ynowe,  (for 
bis  purpoos  and  wylle  was  to  reyse  the  siege  to 
fore  tbis  castel  fortosocoure  bisfrende,Rodaban 
bad  bolden  vij  dayes  longe  siege  to  fore  tbis  castel 
JSfXibt  due  Godefroy  cam  by  grete  ioumeyes;  tbe 
messagers  of  tbe  lord  of  tbe  castel  were  witb  bym, 
(for  tbey  mygbt  not  goo  in  to  tbe  castel  to  their 
304 


lord,  ffor  it  was  besieged  round  about  Tlberfor 
tbey  toke  two  douues  or  culuers,  wbicb  tbey  bad 
taken  and  brought witb  tbem  for  todoo  tbis;  tbat 
is  to  saye,  tbey  toke  lettres  and  wrote  tberyn  alle 
tbeyr  entent,  and  bonde  tboo  lettres  to  tbe  taytee 
of  tbe  douues,  and  lete  tbem  flee*  Hnd  tbe  douues 
fiewe  and  cam  strayt  to  fiasart,  fro  wbens  tbey 
were,  and  bad  ben  tbere  nourissbed,  TTbey  tbat  a- 
wayted  on  tbem  toke  tbem,  Cbe  lord  toke  tbe  let- 
tres, and  fonde  tberin  bow  be  bad  alyaunce  of  tbe 
due,  bis  loue  and  grace,  and  bow  be  cam  for  to  so- 
coure  bym  witb  grete  strengthen  Re  bad  tbenne 
grete  ioye,  and  toke  to  bym  grete  bardynesse,  in 
sucbe  wyse  tbat  be  bym  self  yssued  out  of  tbe 
yates  witb  bis  men  largely,  and  assaylled  tbem  of 
tbe  siege  vygorously,  whom  be  bad  sore  doubted 
not  long  byfore, 

Tlbe  dylygence  tbat  due  ©odeffroy  made  for  to 
socoure  a  Curke,  to  wbom  be  bad  promised,  and 
bow  be  reysed  tbe  siege,  beyng  to  fore  bis  castell, 
capitulo  Cxlvij,*?,*^ 

OCd  was  tbe  due  6odeffroy  ap- 
proucbedwban  bis  brother  cam 
witb  Hi  JVfl  borsmen,  noble,  valy- 
aunt  and  bardy  men,  and  rigr>t 
pq'i  m  g  wel  arm  ed*  TTbey  were  but  oon 
HI  ltuAi^(/^PvourncV  fro  tbe  castel  jfi^Cberle 

Bawdwyn  acorded  wel  to  tben- 
terprise  of  tbe  due  bis  broder, 
but  be  said  wel  tbat  Rodoban  tbe  lord  of  Halappe 
badd  mocbe  grete  peple,  and  tbat  be  knewe  wel  for 


i, 


certaynXberf ore  be  counsey  Ued  bym  tbat  be  sbold 
sende  for  tbe  otber  barons  tbat  were  abyden  in 
Hntbyocbe,  and  praye  tbem  as  bis  frendes  tbat 
tbey  wold  addresse  tbem  taccomplissbe  tbis  tbat 
be  bad  enterprysed  jjgFtTroutb  it  was  tbat  be  bad 
mocbe  prayd  Buymont  and  tberle  of  TTbolouse  to 
fore  er  be  departed,  but  tbey  bad  a  lytil  enuye,  by 
cause  tbe  'Curke  bad  more  requyred  tbe  due  tban 
ony  of  tbem.Butnowwban  be  badsente  for  tbem, 
tbem  tbougbt  tbat  tbey  mygbt  not  goodly  abyde 
bebynde,  and  ordeyned  mocbe  dilygfently  tbeyr 
goyng  fortb,  &  wente  so  f erre  tbat  tbey  ouertohe 
bymj^Cdban  tbey  were  alle  to  gydre,  tbey  werewel 
xxxjVLmenof  armes. 

~^ODHr>H^[  bad  bis  espyes,by  wbome 
be  bnewe  certaynly  tbat  tbyse  men 
cam  vpon  bymj!S?oe  doubted  tbem 
mocbe,and  be  badwel  xl  M  men,  but 
yet  be  durst  not  abide  tbem,  but  de- 
parted fro  tbe  siege, and  retomed  to 
RalappejfiTCbe  due  knewe  notbyng  tbat  tbe  siege 
was  departed,  but  wente  stray t  toward  Rasart. 
'Cbere  were  ynowe  in  Hntbyocbe  of  knygbtes,  gen- 
tilmen  and  otber, wbicbe  fmewe  tbat  tbe  valyaunt 
due  bad  to  doo  witb  men,  and  departed  fro  tbens, 
and  wente  toward  bym  for  to  belpe  bym. 


306 


,  Of  somme  pylgryms  govngf ro  Hn  tbyocbe  toward 
<3odeffroy,  were  disconryted  by  the  turkes,  &  re- 
scowed  by  tbe  due,  capitulo  CxmijjPjP 

<3R6t:e  quanttte  of  burkes 
were  embussbed  besyde  tbe  way 
wbere  by  tbey  sbold  passe,  for 
to  away  te  tbem*  Cdban  our  peple 
approucbed,  as  tbey  tbat  toke 
none  bede,  tbe  ^urfees  sprang 
on  tbem  sodanly,  wbicbe  were 
many  moo  tban  our  men  were* 
'Somme  tbey  slewe,  &  many  moo  toke  prysonners, 
and  bonde  tbem,  and  retomed  to  tbeyr  retrayteXbe 
tydynges  cam  to  tbe  due  and  to  tbe  boost,  wbicb 
were  out  of  tbeir  wytte  for  sorow  tbat  tbey  bad* 
'"Cbenneretomedtbey  bastely  for  tosiewe  tbe  male- 
factours  jSF'Zbc  people  of  tbe  countre  told  tbem 
wbicb  way  tbey  were  goon,andaddressyd  tbem  to- 
,  ward  tbyse  burkes,  Olban  tbey  bad  ouertaken  and 
approucbedtbem,tbey  ran  on  tbem  witbgreteberte, 
and  slewe  tbem  som  of  tbem,  and  somme  tbey  toke 
prysonnersjfewe  or  none  escaped*  Hnd  tbey  de- 
lyuerd  tbem  tbat  were  taken  prysonners,  tbe  cristen 
Lmen  wbom  tbey  bad  taken* 

lODORHJV  was  mocbe  endommag- 
'  ed,  for  tbey  were  wel  x  M  burkes  of 
tbe  best  and  cbosen  men*  Cdban  oure 
m  en  bad  don  tbis  tbey  toke  agayn  tbe 
waye  toward  fiasartjSFftlban  tbey 
approucbed,  tbe  lord  of  tbe  tounys- 
sued  out  witb  tbre  bonderd  men  on  borsbak,  and 
Itbere  as  be  founde  tbe  due,  be  descended  totbertbe, 
X2  307 


^ 


'and  kneled  to  fore  bym,  and  thanked  bymmocbe, 
andaf ter  alle  the  other  that  were  therewith  bym,  for 
the  socours  that  they  had  don  tohym  in  tmsnede. 

^henne  swarbe  to  fore  them  alle,  that  to  tbyse  ba- 
rons and  to  the  other  cristen  men  he  sbold  be  euer 
more  trewe  and  good  frende,  in  suche  wyse  thatbe 

Iwold  to  his  power  pourcbace  to  them  the  best  that 

'he  coude,and  warne  them  of  tbeyrbarme.  Re  lodg- 
ed them  mocb  weland  honorably,  and  made  to  them 
grete  presentee,  J&  On  the  mom  tberle  Bawdwyn 
retorned  vn  toRages,&  that  other  boost  belde  theyr 
waye  vnto  Hntbyocbe. 

Rowtbe  due  alway  enforced  bym  to  augment  cris- 
tiente,andof  somme  fortresses  by  bym  beten  and 
^destroyed,  capitulo  Q,yX\x&& 

|RG  due  Godeffroy  knewe  well 
that  the  pestylence&mortalyte 
endured  yet  m  Hntbyocbe,  and 
bis  broder  badmocbe  praydbym 
tbatbewold  come  andsoiourne 
in  his  londe  vnto  Hugust,  that 
than  the  tyme  sbold  be  better 
attempered.  Re  toke  with  bym  a 
rtytilcompanye  of  tbem  that  were  moost  suffrable, 
and  cam  to  tTorbosel,  and  to  two  other  castellys, 
'that  one  named  Ratap  &  that  other  RauendaL  Of 
'tbyse  landes  dyde  beentierly  bis  wylle.  Ris  brother 
visy ted  and  sawe  bym  of  te  wbytes  he  abode  there 
I  jTCbc  peple  of  the  country  &  specially  men  of  re- 
lygyon,  complayned  mocbe  of  two  Rermyens  that 
were  bretberen,  that  one  was  named  pancrace,and 


11 


5*wil 


=«: 


i^m 


that  other  Conasylles.  Cbey  bad  a  f  ortresse  in  that 
con  tre,  and  were  grete  andnoble  men  there,  but  they 
had  notrouthe  in  them ;  tbeyreceyuedtberobbours 
and  tbeuys  that  pylled  &  def owlled  the  holy  places, 
tbecbircDes,anddydemocbebarmetoallemanerof 
pepleXbey  were  enhaunced  in  so  moch  pryde, that 
they  tohe  the  presente  of  the  pauyllon  that  Bawd- 
wyn  had  sente  to  hie  brother  to  the  siege  of  Hn- 
tbyocbe,  and  dyde  it  to  be  presented  to  feuymont 
in  theyr  namejbftlban  the  due  herde  thyse  com- 
playntes  he  sen  te  of  his  men  of  armes,  &  the  people 
of  his  countre,  and  dyde  doo  take  the  fortresses  of 
thyse  twor>erm^ens,and  bete  anddestroyed  them 
totbertbejtfFCdbiles  that  the  valiaunt  due  soioum- 
ed  in  thyse  partyes,many  of  the  pepleof  the  boost 
wente  to  therle  Bawdwyn  to  Rages,  if  or  be  dyde 
them  moche  good,  and  refresshyd  them  wel,  and 
largely  departedof  his  good  to  themXhe  way  was 
thenne  alle  sure  and  good,  sytb  that  the  castel  of 
Hasartwas  alyedentierly  witf>  our  peple,as  yehaue 
[herd. 

Row  the  knyghtes  of  Rages  wolde  haue  betrayed 
Bawdwyn  theyr  lorde,  and  how  he  was  therof  ad- 
uertysed,  capitulo  Cl^^ 

O  moche  people  of  cristen  men 
cam  to  Rages  that  it  desplesyd 
mocbe  to  the  cytezeyns  of  the 
tounJ3ndO>ermyens&Latyns 
discorded  in  many  thynges,ffor 
withoute  faylle  oure  men  wold 
baue  the  seygnorye.  Chey  dyde 
many  ennoyes  and  vylonyes  to 


1 1 


tbeyrbosteswitbintbeirbowsesXbeerle  bym  self, 
by  cause  be  badsogrete  plente  of  men  of  bysowne 
countre,  be  called  tbe  fewer  and  lasse  to  counseyll 
of  tbe  noble  men  of  tbe  cyte,  by  wbos  belpe  be  was 
comen  to  bisbyenesse  &noble  lordsbipXbey  bad 
tberof  mocbegrete  desdaynewitbin  tbeyr  bertes,  & 
repented  tbemof  tbat  tbey  badebosen  bym  &sette 
bym  to  be  tbeir  lord  ouer  tbem ;  fFor  tbey  doubted 
tbat  tberle,  wbicbe  was  so  lyberallas  be  that  gaf  to 
euery  man,  sbold  on  a  day  take  all  tbat  tbey  bad, 
TTberfor  tbey  sente  to  tbe  admyrals  of  tbeTIurkes, 
tbat  were  tbeyrneygbbours,  tbat  tbey  would  pour- 
cbasse  gladly  by  tbeyr  belpe  bow  tberle  Bawdwyne 
sbold  be  slayn,  or  atte  leste  put  oute  and  ebassed 
away  e  fro  tbe  cyte,  in  su  cbe  wyse  tbat  be  sbold  n  eu  er 
retome.  TTbe  XTurkemans  acorded  wel  to  tbis  werk 
j^Cbis  mater  was  so  f  erf  ortb  tbat  tbey  of  Rages 
toke  alle  tbeyr  goodes  pryuely,  and  sette  it  in  tbe 
bowses  of  tbeyr  acqueynted  neygbbours  in  cytees 
and  castellys  tber  about, 

f)YkSS  tbey  spak  and  aduysed  of 
this  trey  son  ,a  fren  de  of  tber  leBawd- 
wyn  cam  to  bym  and  recounted  tbis 
f ay  te  al  a/lon  ge :  be  meruey  lied  mocb 
tberof  ,&dyde  enquyreof  tbis  thing, 
and  foundetbatitwassoo.fie  knewe 
>wel  tbem  tbat  bad  ordeyned  tbis  tray  son,  and  by 
wbom  it  sbold  be  doo.  Hnd  secretely  be  sende  bis 
men,and  toke  tbe  captaynsof  tbisfalsenes;beput 
out  tbeyr  eyen  of  tbeyr  beedes:  otber  tbat  bad  so 
mocbe  trespaced,  be  ebassed  tbem  out  of  tbe  toun, 
&  toke  alle  tbat  tbey  bad,  Somme  tbere  were  tbat  be 
310 


.v-r^/Tr; 


Ictc  dwelle  stylle  in  the  cyte,  but  be  toke  tbeir good 
as  mocbc  as  be  mygbt  gete.  Re  bad  wel  by  tbocca- 
sion  of  tbis  murcler  tbat  tbise  tray  tree  deuysed  xx 
JM  besauntes,  but  be  departed  alle  to  tbe  pylgryms 
tbat  bad  bolpen  bym  to  take  tbe  castellys  &  f ort- 
resses,&  somme  cy  tees  about  Ragfes.Rewas  mocbe 
dradde  and  doubted  mocbe  of  bis  neighbours,  in 
sucbewyse  tbat  noneof  tbem  durst  enterprise  ony 
debate  ayenst  bym.  tTbe  grete  and  bye  men  of  tbe 
contre  wold  ofladly  baue  pourcbased  tbe  moyens 
and  maners  for  to  be  delyuerdof  bym,  yf  tbey  bad 
mygbt* 

Row  tberle  Bawdwyn  was  in  daunger  of  detb  by 
tbe  treson  of  a  CurR  named  Balac,  capitulo  CljV? 

]N"  tbis  countre  was  a  grete  &  an 
bye  man,  a  tTurke,  &  was  named 
Balac.  Re  was  acqueynted  and 
mocbe  pryue  witb  tberle  Bawd- 
wyn.  Re  was  somtyme  lord  of 
tbe  cy te  of  Sorarge,  to  fore  tbat 
our  peple  cam  in  to  tbat  countre 
jSTCbisCurke  apperceyued  tbat 
tberle  Bawdwyn  sayde  not  to  bym  alle  bis  coun- 
seyll  and  secrete,  as  be  was  wonte,  ne  sbewde  bym 
so  good  cbere.  On  a  daye  be  cam  to  bym,  &  sbewde 
bym  by  f ayr  langage,  tbat  be  sbold  come  to  a  for- 
tresse  of  bis,  wbicbe  be  wold  gyue  to  bym  and  de- 
lyuer,  by  cause  be  bad  no  more,  and  also  be  wold 
bauenomoo,asbesaide,ffor  bis  louesboldsuffyse 
bym.  Hnd  be  would  sende  bis  wyf  &  bis  cbilderen 
in  to  Rages  for  to  dwell  tbere  vnder  bym,  by  cause 


as  be  sayde  that  the  tTurkes  bis  neygbbours,  and 
specially  tbey  of  bis  lygnage,  bated  bym  mocbe, 
and  pourcbassed  alle  tbe  barme  tbey  mygbt,  for 
tbe  grete  acquentaunce  tbat  be  bad  witb  tbecristen 
men  jgTCbe  erle  tbougbt  notbyng  but  alle  wel,  and 
sayd  tbat  be  wold  goo  at  bis  requeste  to  tbis  for- 
tresses Ht  tbe  day  appointed  bytwene  tbem  botbe, 
tberle  cam  tbeder  witb  an  bonderd  borsmen, 

HLHC  wente  to  fore,  and  as  a  fals 
traytre  bad  byd  an  bonderd  of  bis 
men,  well  armed,  witbin  tbe  fortresse 
jj?<tlban  tbey  were  arryued  to  fore 
tbe  fortresse,  Balac  prayd  tberle  tbat 
be  wold  come  vp  on  bye  and  see  tbe 
place  bow  stronge  it  was,  &  tbat  be  sbold  brynge 
but  f  ewe  men  witb  bym,  if  or  besayd  be  bad  certayn 
tbyngesof  wbicbbemygbt  take  barme,  yf  tbey  alle 
entredj^'Cbe  good  erle  wold  baue  doon  soo,  but 
be  bad  in  bis  company  a  valyaunt  knygbt,  wel  ad- 
uysed  &  a  wise  man,  wbicbe  aduertysed  bis  felaws 
otber  knygbtes  bow  itwas  grete  perylle  and  da  lin- 
ger so  to  lete  bym  goo,  Hnd  tbey  wold  not  suff  re 
bym,  but  reteyned  bym  by  force,  ffor  tbey  doubted 
mocbe  tbe  malyce  or  tbis  man,  in  sucbe  wyse  tbat 
in  tbeyr  bertes  tbey  bad  suspection  of  tresonjfiF 
XTbe  erle  abode  by  tbeir  counseyl,  and  sente  vp  xij 
of  bis  men  wel  armed  in  to  tbe  toure  for  to  see  yf 
tberwereonytbynatodoubte^Rebeldebymemong 
bis  men  J9  tbey  tnat  wente  vp  anon  apperceyued 
wel  tbe  trayson,  ffor  tbe  tTurkes  sprange  oute  of 
tbeyr  places  wbere  tbey  were  byd,  and  toke  tbise 
xij  men  by  force,  and  desarmea  tbem,  &  reteyned 
tbem  bounden  bandes  and  feet 

312 


RHJV  the  erle  knewe  this,  be  was 
mocbc  sorouful  for  bis  men  tbat  be 
bad  tbus  lostjJFTTbenne  be  drewe 
bym  fortb  and  spak  to  Balac,  and 
mocbe  prayd  bym,  &  coniured  bym 
by  tbe  feaulte  and  otb  tbat  be  bad 
,made  to  bym,  tnat  be  wold  yeld  bis  men  to  bym, 
oratte  leste  sette  tbem  at  rawnson,and  bewolde 
gyue  for  tbem  as  mocbe  as  be  wold  bauej^Balac 
answerd  to  bym  tbat  be  trauaylled  for  nought, 
I  ffor  be  sbold  neuer  baue  none  of  tbem,  but  yf  be 
wold  gyue  to  bym  tbe  cyte  of  Sororge,  wnicbe 
bad  ben  bis  to  fore  jSTCberle  sawe  tbat  tbis  for- 
tresse  was  not  lygbtly  to  be  goten,  ffor  it  was  ouer 
stronge,  and  stode  in  a  strange  place,  and  ryebely 
garnyssbyd.  Hnd  retorned  to  Kages  mocbe  an- 
guyssbousof  tbe  paryll  tbat  be  bad  bein,wban  be 
wold  by  tbatycementof  tbis  felon TTurk  bauegoon 
|vp  in  to  tbe  tour,  and  sorouful  be  was  for  tbem 
tbat  were  taken* 

6  bad  delyuerd  tbe  cyte  of  Sororge 
to  kepe  vnto  a  mocbe  wise,  valyaunt 
and  good  knygbt,  named  foubert 
de  Cbartres;  tbis  man  kept  bit  witb 
an  C  men  of  armes,  valyaunt  menjflf 
Cdban  beberdsayetbat  bis  lord  bad 
ben  tbus  almost  be  bytrayed,  and  bow  be  bad  lost 
xij  men,  be  was  sory,  and  tbougbt  bou  be  mygbt 
belpe  tbem  ayenst  trris  f  als  XTurk,  tbat  bad  don  to 
bym  tbis  feet  j0  It  was  not  longe  after  tbat  in  a 
^nygbt  be  sette  a  bussbement  nygb  vnto  tbis  f or- 
>  tresse,  a  part  of  bis  men,  and  in  tbe  momynge  be 

313 


with  a  f ewe  of  bis  companye  cam  to  fore  tbis  toure, 
and  toke  tbe  proye  of  beestesjj^ITbey  tbat  were  on 
bye  on  tbe  batayllement  sawe  tbat  tbey  were  but  a 
f  ewe,  and  told  it  to  Balak  &  to  tbe  otber  men  tbat 
were  in  tbe  f ortresse,  Hbey  tohe  tbeir  borses  bas te- 
ly  and  folowed  tbem,  for  to  rescowe  tbat  wbicbe 
tbey  droof  awaye.  In  sucbe  wyse  tbey  exployted 
tbattbey  cam  vpon  tbem  bussbement;  tbey  sprang 
sodanly  oute  and  closed  tbem  in.f  oubert  retomed 
vpon  tnem,  and  slewe  1  wote  not  bow  many,  but 
vj  be  toke  a  lyue,  ffor  wbom  be  bad  incontinent  vj 
of  our  men,  of  tbem  tbat  be  belde  in  bis  f  ortresse 
j&lt  was  not  longe  aftir  tbat  four  of  tbe  otber 
escaped  out  of  tbe  fortresse  &  brake  tbeyr  prison, 
wby  les  tbeyr  kepars  slepte,  <Oban  Balac  sawe  tbat 
tber  were  nomoo  but  two,  be  dyde  do  smyte  of 
tbeyr  beddes* 

RO  tban  fortb  on  tberle  Bawdwyn, 
tbat  bad  acqueyn  tan  ce  to  dy uerse  ad- 
myrals  aboute  by  m,  wold  neuer  after 
acqueynte  bym  more  ne  truste  ony 
TTurk,but  eschewed  tbeir  company  es 
&  tbeyr  amy  tee,  Hnd  tbat  be  sbewde 
wel  sone  after,  ffor  tber  was  an  bye  and  grete  man 
[a  Turk  in  tbat  contre,  named  Balduc,  of  wbom  1 
baue  spoken  to  fore,  wbicbe  sold  tbis  auncyen  cyte 
named  Samoloc  vnto  Bawdwyn,  Hnd  tbis  Turk 
bad  encouenaunted  and  promysed  tbat  be  sbold 
brynge  bis  wyf  and  cbilderen  witbin  Rages,  but  be 
sought  f als  occasions  for  to  delaye  tbis  tbyngej^ 
On  a  day  be  cam  to  Bawdwyn,as  be  was  acustom- 
ed  to  doo,  and  Bawdwyn  demaunded  bym  wby  be 
314 


dyde  not  that  be  bad  couenaunted  and  promysed. 
Re  began  to  excuse  bym  by  tbynges  tbat  were  not 
trewe^be  erle  toke  bym,  and  incontinent  dyde  do 
smyte  of  bis  beed. 

Row  tberle  of  Oolouse  toke  tbe  cyte  of  Hlbane, 
and  tbere  constitued  a  bissbop,  capitulo  Clij^^ 

"RB  due  Godeffroy  soioumed 
tbus  as  I  baue  sayd  in  tbe  land 
of  ^orbesel  j^O>erle  of  O>ol~ 
ouse  assembled  bis  peple,  and 
toke  grete  plente  of  poure  pyl- 
gryms  tbat  were  tbere  ydle  and 
dyde  nougbt  Re  wenteto  acyte 
welgarnyssbyd,namedHlbane, 
ij  ioumeys  fro  Hntbyocbe.  Re  assyeged  it,  and  so 
constreyned  tbem  witbin  tbat  tbev  yelded  tbe  toun 
to  bym,  and  be  entred  tberin  and  belde  it,  and  by 
tbe  moyen  tberof  be  bad  alle  tbe  countre  about  Re 
tbanked  oure  lord  bumbly  of  tbonour  tbat  be  bad 
gyuen  to  bymXbenne  cbasse  be  a  bissbop  in  tbe 
toun,  a  good  wyseman  tbat  was  namedpeter,  and 
born  in  F4erbonne,and  be  gaf  to  bym  entierly  balf 
this  cyte.  Hf ter  tbis  be  cam  in  to  Hntbiocbe,  and 
was  tbere  sacred  by  tbe  patriarke  Bernard,  and  gaf 
to  bym  bis  enterinement  and  made  bym  arcbibis- 
sbopj^In  tbe  company  of  tberle  of  TTbolouse  was 
a  noble  knygbt  and  valyaunt  named  Guyllamme. 
0>is  man  wban  Hntbyocbe  was  taken,  toke  by  ad- 
uenture  tbe  wyf  of  Hncean,  lord  of  tbe  toun,  &  two 
of  bis  neuewes  sones  of  bis  broder,  named  San sa- 
dol,  and  belde  tbem  yet  prysoners*  But  tbis  San- 


sadol  aaf  to  bym  for  tbcm  grete  good  &  ry cbesse, 

I  wberof  be  delyuerd  tbem,botbe  tbc  lady  &  cbildcrcn 

tJ?lt\  tbis  sayson  cam  grete  plente  of  pcplc  out  of 

Ducbelande,and  arryued  attc  port  seynt  Symeon, 

&  soiourned  witbin  Hntbyocbe,  But  tbc  mortalytc 

endured  yet,  in  sucbe  wyse  tbat  tbey  deyde  almost 

alle;  tbere  escaped  but  few  but  tbat  tbey  were  all 

\dttd  in  sbort  tyme;  ffor  tbis  pestylence  continued 

tbre  monetbes  nool  vnto  tbentree  of  wynterXbere 

were  deed  of  knygbtes  only  v  C;of  tbe  mene  peple 

noman  knewe  tne  nombre* 

Row  our  peple  retomed  in  to  Hntbyocbe,  and  toke 

counsey  I  for  to  goo  tolberusalem,  and  of  tbis  tbat 

folowetb,  capitulo  Cliij^^? 

\T)G  fyrst  day  of  J^ouembre,  tbe 
barons  tbat  were  departed  for 
tbe  pestelence  were  alle  retourn- 
ed  in  to  Hntbyocbe,  lyke  as  tbey 
bad  promysed*  Oeyr  counseyl 
and  delyberacion  was  tbat  tbey 
sbold  goo  and  assiege  tbe  cyte 
of  JMarran,  wbicbe  was  stronge 
&wel  garnyssbyd;froHlbare  tbat  tbey  bad  taken, 
it  was  not  but  viij  myle  jfi?  J^oman  mygbt  bolde 
lenger  tbeyr  comyn  peple;  all  were  desirous  to  goo 
to  tberusalem  jj^Htte  daye  named  tbey  were  alle 
redy ;  tberle  of  Cbolouse, tbe  due  6odeffroye, Gu- 
stace  bys  broder,  tberle  of  f  laundres,  tbe  due  of 
JVormandye,andCancre  cam  to  tbe  cyte  of  JVIarran 
andassiegeditXbey  of  tbe toun  were  mocb  ryeb,  & 
full  of  grete  pryde*  Hnd  specially  by  cause  tbat  tbe 
same  yere  at  assemblee  of  tbem  was  a  scarmocbe 
316 


mm 


SS£ 


SBB 


-  -'* 


ayenst  ourc  men,  of  wbome  tbey  toke  somme  and 
8omnic  slewe,in  sucbe  wyse  tbat  tbey  bad  tbc  bet- 
ter; ffor  tbat  cause  tbey  preysed  tbe  lasse  our  pyl- 
grymsXbey  blamed  and  iniured  our  barons, and 
despyted  tbem  and  alle  tboost,  tbey  beyng  on  tbe 
walles,  Vpon  tbe  bye  towres  tbey  sette  vp  crosses 
and  spytte  on  tbem  in  despyt  of  our  faytb,  and 
made  otber  sbameful  tbynges  for  to  angre  witb 
alle  oure  peple  J&  *Cbe  barons  were  mocbe  wrotb, 
and  dyde  do  crye  do  assault,  &  assailled  tbe  toun 
asprely  in  sucbe  wyse  tbat  yf  tbey  bad  bad  laddres 
tbey  wolde  baue  entred  in  to  tbe  cyte  by  force  tbe  ij 
,daye  after  tbat  tbey  cam  tbeder. 

F)G  tbirdeday  cam  Buymont,wbicbe 
brought  men  witb  bym  largely,  and 
lodged  where  as  tbe  cyte  was  not  as- 
sieged  jj^'Cbenne  bad  our  men  grete 
despyte  of  tbis  tbat  tbey  dydenotb- 
yng,  &  bastely  dyde  do  make  engyns 
and  reysed  tbem  castellys,  berfroyes,  and  slynges 
to  caste  stones,  and  fylled  tbe  dyebes  for  to  goo 
and  vnder  myne  tbe  wallesXbey  witbin  deffended 
tbem  mocbe  wel,  &  tbrewe  vpon  tbem  grete  stones, 
fy/e,  brent  lyme,oyle  boyllyng,and  sbotte  at  tbem 
witb  arbalasters,  and  bowe  turquoys  arowes  pas- 
syng  tbycke,  but  god  be  thanked  tbey  hurted  but 
f  ewe  of  oure  menXbey  within  began  mocbe  to  be 
mery;  oure  men  apperceyued  tbat,&  tbeyr  volente 
&  bardenesse  grewe  &  encreaced.  Hnon  tbey  dres- 
sed tbe  laddres  ayenst  the  walles,  &  wente  vp  dy- 
lygentlyj!S?Bmong  alle  otber  tber  was  a  noble  and 
valyaunt  man,  &  was  of  Limosyn,  named  Geffrey 

317 


devours;  be  mayntened  the  fyrst  tyme  merueyl- 
lously  well  Other  f olowed  bym :  tber  were  ynowe 
tbat  en tred  in  to  tbe  toures ;  tbey  bad  taken  tbe  cy te 
,yf  tbe  nygbt  bad  not  come  on  &destroubledtbem, 
TTberfore  tbey  left  of  til  on  tbe  mom,  (for  tbat  as- 
sault bad  endured  fro  tbe  sonne  rysyng  tyl  tbat 
tyme. 

f)SY  kept  wel  tbe  gates  tbat  tbay  of 
tbe  toun  sbold  not  yssue,  and  made 
good  watcbe  in  tbooste.  But  tbemene 
peplesawetbat  nonesbewdebym  vp- 
on  tbe  walles,and  en  tred  in  tbe  toun, 
and  fonde  tbat  it  wasallvoyde  of  pe- 
pleXbey  toke  alle tbat  tbey  wolde  and  badnede  of, 
Fas  tbey  tbat  longe  bad  suffred  famyne  and  grete 
>pouerte  jPHik  tbay  of  tbe  cyte  were  en  tred  in  to 
bnge  caues  and  depe,& supposed  to  baue  saued& 
kept  tbem  there*  On  tbe  morn  tbe  barons  sawe  tbat 
tbe  cyte  was  taken,&entred  in,  but  tbey  founde  but 
lytil  gayne,ffortbecomyn  peple  badtakyn  sucbe  as 
tbey  f ounde  jfiFCbey  knewe  wel  tbat  tbeTTurkes  of 
tbe  toun  were  byd  vnder  tbe  ertbe;  tbey  sette  fyre 
in  tbe  mowtbes  of  alle  tbe  caues,  and  sen  te  in  to  it 
so  mocbe  smoke,  tbat  by  force  tbey  muste  come 
out.  Oure  men  slewe  ynougb  of  tbem,  and  tbe  re- 
menaunt  tbey  toke  prysonners  J?  Zbcrc  deyde  of 
sekenesse  tbe  good  man  boly  &  relygyous,  wbicbe 
mocbe  louyd  &  dredde  our  lord  god,  Guyllaumme 
tbe  bissbop  of  Orengfe jff  (Oban  tbe  due  bad  aby- 
den  there  xv  dayes  with  tbe  otber  be  departed  witb 
tberle  of  f  laundres  &  cam  in  to  flntbyocbe,  wbere 
tbey  bad  to  do* 
318 


II 


^ses 


Row  tbe  due  <3odeffroy  wolde  goo  to  Rages  to 
vysy  te  bie  brother  er  be  began  bis  way  to  Iberusa- 
lemt  &  of  somme  of  bie  aduentures,  eapitulo  CUiij 

^0D6f f  ROYt  tbe  valyaunt  due 
of  Loreyne,  sawe  bow  tbe  men  a 
fotemadetbem  redyfor  taccom- 
plyssbe  tbeyr  vowe  and  goo  to- 
ward Iberusalem,  and  mocbe  re- 
quyred  &admonested  tbe  grete 
lordes  to  tbesame*But  tbe  valy- 
_aunt  due  would  see  and  vysyte 
bis  brother  to  fore  tbat  be  sbold  separate  fro  tbis 
countre,  and  toke  bis  pryue  companye,  and  wente 
to  Ragesj^Cttban  be  bad  seen  bis  broder,and  doo 
sucbe  tbynges  as  it  plesytb  bym,  be  wold  retome 
to  Hntbyocbe  to  tbe  other  barons  and  other  pyl- 
gryms  tbat  abode  there  for  bym,<Hban  be  was  ap- 
proucbed,tbatbebadbutsixorseuenmyletoryde, 
they  f ounde  in  tbeyr  waye  a  mocbe  f ayre  place  for 
to  dyne  and  ete  in  by  a  f  ayre  welle,  mocbe  delectable 
and  f  ul  of  grete  berbes  &  cjrasse.  Hlle  tbey  acord- 
ed  gladly  for  to  dyne  in  this  fayre  placejj?  (flbyles 
tbey  made  redy  tbeyr  dyner  be  ye  certayn  tbat  oute 
of  mocbe  reed,  wbicbe  was  nyabe  a  mareys  by,  a- 
roos  certayn  Curkes  wel  armecTjj?CQban  tbe  noble 
due  &  tbe  otber  barons  sawe  tbem  come,  tbey  toke 
tbeyr  armes  bastely  as  tbey  mygbt,and  toke  tbeyr 
borses  and  ran  vpon  tbem  vygorously,  and  tbere 
was  tbe  skarmocbe  grete  and  tiers*  Cbe  due  dyde 
mocbe  wel  and  valyaun tly ;  tber  were  many  Curkes 
slayn,  A  tbe  remenaunt  fledde.  Our  men  lost  tbere 


kw 


w« 


w 


H^^M 


■I 


notbyng,but  cam  with  mocbc  grete  ioye  vnto  Hn- 
tbyocbe* 

How  after  tbat  tbc  cyte  of  Hlbare  was  conquerd,  a 
grete  debate  arose  bytwene  tberleof  Ox>louse  and 
Buymont,  capitulo  Clv^^ 

f  tbis  noble  cite  of  Hlbare,  wbicb 
was  taken  as  tbaue  sayd  to  fore, 
aroos  a  grete  debate  bytwene 
J  Buymontandtbeerleof  tbolo- 
use,flfor  tberle  wold  bauealleHl- 
barejSFBuymontsayde  be  wold 
not  gyue  away  bis  part,  yf  be 
yelded  not  and  gaf  ouer  certeyn 
►towres  tbat  be  beld  in  Hntbyocbe*  Hnd  berupon 
Buymont  departed,  and  made  tbe  towres  to  be  as- 
saylled,tbat  tbe  men  of  tbe  erle  of  TTbolousebelde, 
i  Hnd  toke  tbem  by  strength,  and  made  tbem  to  goo 
(out  tbat  kept  tbem  in  tbe  name  of  tberle,  and  fro 
tben  fortbon  bebeldealleHntbyocbe  witboutfelaw 
or  partener  j&'Zbcrlc  sawe  tbat  Buymont  was  de- 
parted fro  tbe  cyte  so  conquerd,  and  gaf  tbe  toun 
entierly  to  tbe  bissbop  of  Hlbare  j^ttlbyles  tbey 
>ordeyned  and  disposed  bytwene  bym  and  tbe  bis- 
sbop, bow  tbe  cyte  mygbt  be  mayntened  and  kept, 
in  sucbe wyse  tbat  tbe turkes sboldnot  recouer  it, 
tbepeple  a/foote  began  tomurmure  of  tbis  tbat  tbe 
bye  &noble  men  taryed  for  to  take  tbiseuyl  cytees, 
►and  made  debate  and  nojse  emong  tbem  for  tbeyr 
conquest  But  tbe  pryncipal  cause  wberf or  tbey  de- 
parted fro  tbeyr coun trees  lef te  tbey,  as  forgetyng 
•and  settyng  not  tberby,  and  as  it  semed  tbey  sette 
notbynge  by  tbaccomplyssbyng  of  tbeyr  vowe, 

320 


SggSgRGRfOR  the  tnene  pcplc  acorded 
emona  tbem  self,  that  as  sone  as  the 
crlc  of  Cbolouse  sbold  be  departed 
fro  tbe  cyte  of  JMarran  tbey  sbold 
confounae  and  destroye  it  alle  vnto 
tbeertbe,in  sucbewysetbattbey  wold 
not  tarye  for  bym  fro  tban  fortbonj^It  bapped 
tbat  tbe  barons  assembled  at  Rouge,  a  cytewbicbe 
is  balf  waye  bytwene  JMarran  and  Hntbyocbe,  ffor 
to  baue  a  counsey  I  tbere  emonge  tbem,yf  tbey  sbold 
fro  tbens  drawe  fortb  toward  to  Iberusalem,  ffor 
tbe  tnene  peple  Ian  guyssbydmocbe  and  basted  for 
to  goo  tbederjjTXTbere  tbe  barons  coudenotacorde, 
so  tbat  tbere  was  no  conclusion  taken  j^Cdbyles 
tbat  tberle  of  Hbolouse  abode  at  tbis  parlemen  t,tbe 
foote  men  tbat  were  lefte  atJMarran,ayensttbewyll 
and  deffence  of  tbe  bissbop  bete  doun  tbe  walles 
and  touresof  tbe  cyteof  JMarran,  ffor  tbey  woldnot 
for  tboccasyon  of  tbys  toun  abyde  lenger  in  tbis 
countre  j^ulban  tbe  erle  retorned,  be  was  mocbe 
angry  of  tbis  tbat  tbey  bad  don;  but  for  tbat  be 
coudenot  amend  itbecouerd  well  bis couragewitb- 
out  fortb j^O>e  men  a/foote  began  alway  to  crye 
and  requyre  mocbe  tbe  barons  tbat  tbey  wold  con- 
duyte  tbem  for  taccomplyssbe  tbeyr  pylgremage; 
or  yf  tbey  wold  not,  tbey  wold  cbese  a  fcnygbt  and 
make  bym  captayn  ouer  tbem,  &  tbey  sbold  folowe 
bym  vnto  tbe  cyte  of  Iberusalem^On  tbat  otber 
syde  was  grete  scarsete  in  tboost  of  vy  taylles,  in 
sucb  wyse  tbat  tbe  poure  peple  deyde  tor  bonger. 
JVIen  sayde  tbat  many  of  tbem  ete  flessbe  of  men  & 
otber  tbynges  tbat  were  not  fayr  ne  good,  dene,  ne 
yi  32i 


5rs 


boneste  for  to  etc*  Rerof  sourdedagretemortalyte, 
ff or  tbey  bad  bolden  siege  about  tbis  cy  te  of  JViar- 
ran  witb  sucbe  mescbyef  of  famyne  tbat  tbey  bad 
lostmocbe  of  tbeyr  peple;  &  not  so  many  byarmes, 
but  by  mesease  tbat  tbey  suffredj^ITber  deydea 
mocb  noble,  valyaunt  yonge  man,  Gnjorran,  sone 
ofr)uon,erleofseyntpoulofasekene88e,ofwbom 
was  grete  dommage,  and  mocb  was  bewaylled  in 
tboost. 
Row  atte  request  of  tbe  comyn  peple  tbe  erle  of 

Ox>lou8eordeyneddayfortoconduytetbem,capi- 
tulo  Clvj^^ 

iJPtbyseinconuenientes  tbat  ran 
in  tboost  of  tbe  pylgryms  tbe 
vygorous  and  valyaunt  erle  of 
tTbolousewasin  mocb  grete  an- 
guyssbe,  ffor  be  wyste  not  wel 
wbatbemygbtdoo.Ontbatone 
syde  be  badpy  te  &  grete  sorowe 
of  tbe  meseases  tbat  be  sawe  tbe 
poure  peple  suffre,and  was  mocbe  meuyd  by  tbeyr 
requestes  wban  tbey  so  swetly  prayd  bym  and  tbe 
otber  barons  to  lede  tbem  for  taccomplyssbe  tbeyr 
>  vowesand  pylgremage.  On  tbat  otber  syde  be  bad 
wel  vnderstonden  tbat  tbe  barons  acorded  not  to 
tbis  tbat  tbe  comyn  peple  requyred,  Hnd  tberf  or  be, 
,  tbat  was  of  grete  courage  and  valyaunt  man,  sayde 
tbat  be  wold  no  longre  suffre  tbus  tbe  pour  peple 
languyssbe  ne  deye.  Hnd  ordeyned  to  tbem  a  daye 
tbat  be  wolde  departe  witboute  faylle  for  to  goo 
strayte  vnto  Iberusalem,  and  tbat  sbold  be  tbe  xv 


L^_ 


wm 


[>£****:•••• 


day  folowynof  jgFHnd  for  talledge  the  mesease  of 
f amyne,  be  tone  with  bym  a  part  of  bis  Imygbtes  & 
of  footc  men  tbe  strengest  and  most  delyuer,  and 
lefte  tbe  remnaunt  in  tbe  cyte,  and  went  fortb  and 
entred  in  to  tbe  londe  of  bis  enemyes  and  brake  vp 
tounes,  stronge  bowses, and  brought  grete  plente 
of  beestys  and  otber  vytaylles,  and  brought  also 
esclaues,  men  and  wymmen. 

RHJNf  be  cam  to  JMarran  be  departed 
all  tbe  gayn  tbatbe  badgoten,aswel 
totbemtbatabodeastotbem  tbatbe 
badwitb  bym,in  sucbewysetbattbey 
all  wereryebeof  goodes&  of  vytayl- 
lesj^TIbedaye  began  tapprocbetbat 
tberle  bad  named*  Cbe  comyn  peple  cryed  fast  for 
tbedepartynge,andsaydalle  playnty  tbatbe  sbold 
baue  no  lengfer  respite  of  tbem.  Re  wistnotwbatto 
doo,frbrbeRnewecertaynlytbattbepeplebadngbt. 
But  be  bad  but  a  lytil  company  on  borsbah;  tber- 
fore  berequyred  tbe  bissbopof  Hlbare  to  goo  witb 
bym.  Re  graunted  it  to  bim  gladly,  and  lefte  bis 
londein  tbe  bande  of  GuyllammedeCuuylly,  valy- 
aunt,  wyse,and  trewe  fcnygbt,and  delyuerd  tobym 
but  xxx  borsmen  and  xl  men  af ote.  But  it  was  not 
longe  after,  tbat  tbe  good  hnygbt  amended  soo 
tbat  be  bad  xl  on  borsbak  and  Ixxx  afotej^Gdban 
tbe  day  cam  tbat  was  appoynted,  tberle  put  fyre  in 
tbe  cyte  of  JVIarran  and  brente  it  alleto  assbe8,and 
after  toke  bis  way.  Re  bad  in  bis  companye  aboute 
ax)VlmentofwbomtberewerenotbutiijConbor8- 
bah^CHban  be  was  departed  tbe  due  of  Norman- 
dye  &TIancre  departed  after,  and  abode  for  togoo 
witb  bym. 

y2  323 


|C  HS  of  tbyet  two  bad  but  xi  men  on 
borsbak,  but  tbey  bad  mocbe  pcplc 
afote  witb  tbem.  In  tbeyrwaye  tbey 
fondc  plenty  of  vytaylles,  ffor  tbey 
passed  by  Cezaire,  by  Raman,  and 
by  Cbamelej^Of  tbelordesof  tbyse 
townee  bad  tbey  grete  yef tee,  gold,  syluer  &  otber 
ryebesses;  tbey  presented  to  tbem  oxen,  kyen, mo- 
tons  and  otber  vytaylles.  TTbey  dyde  tbem  baue 
resonable  cbeepof  alle  tbynges.  Gene  of  tbem  con- 
duyted  tbem  surely  tborugb  bis  countre  &  wbere 
as  tbey  bad  power  j^TTboost  encreced  and  grewe 
more  and  more  fro  daye  to  daye,  ffor  tbey  f ounde 
many  good  passages  oueralwbere  tbey  wente;of 
borses  also,  wbereof  tbey  bad  grete  nede,  fonde 
tbey  ofrete  cbeep,  in  sucb  wise  tbat  many  bought 
fressb  borses,  Hnd  so  mocbe  dyde  tbyse  to  fore 
tbat  tbeotber  barons  cam,  tbat  dyde  somocbetbat 
tbey  bad  in  tbeyrcompanye  a  JM  men  wel  borsedjj^ 
tbey  cam  tbus  a  f erre  fro  tbe  see  syde,  but  after 
tbey  acorded  tbat  tbey  wold  drawe  tbem  to  tbe  see 
syde,  for  to  bere  more  lygbtly  tydyngesof  tbe  ba- 
rons tbat  were  abyden  in  Hntbyocbe,  and  for  to 
fynde  tbe  better  and  bye  tbeyr  necessytees  at  tbe 
sbippes  tbat  were  in  tbe  bauenes  and  portes* 


324 


Row  tberle  of  XTbolousc  auengyd  bym  of  somme 
Curkes  robbours  tbat  robbed  bis  boost,  capitulo 

|]S  all  tbc  way  e  sy  tb  tbey  departed 
fro  JMarran  tbey  were  wel  comen 
in  peas  and  sauete,  sauf  only  of 
onetbyng;  tbat  is  to  wete,tbat 
somtyme  Curkes  tbeuys  cam 
after  tboost  and  slewe  somme 
of  our  peple,  and  toke  tbe  f  eble 
_  &  seke  tbat  abode  bebynde  tbe 
'otber,  liberie  was  mocbewrotbof  tbis  inconueny- 
ent,  tberfor  be  made  tbe  otber  to  goo  to  fore,  and 
be  and  tbe  bissbop  of  Hlbare  reteyned  a  fewe  men 
wel  borsed,  embussbed  tbem  bebynde  tbe  boost 
for  to  see  yf  tbey  wold  come  tbat  tbus  endom- 
maged  tbe  boost  jSFCttban  tbey  bad  a  litil  wbyle 
taryed  tbe  Curkes  cam  and  sprang  vpon  somme 
of  oure  men,  wbicbe  alwylbnge  made  semblaunt 
tbat  tbey  mygbe  not  goo*  tberle  sawe  tbem,  and 
.sprange  sodenly  on  tbem  out  of  bis  embussbe- 
)ment,  and  smote  of  alle  tbeyr  beedes,  sauf  somme 
tbat  be  laddewitb  bymXberewan  be  good  borses 
and  armures  many,  and  after  be  cam  agayn  in  to 
tbooste  witb  grete  ioyejflFf ro  tbis  daye  fortb  tbey 
wente  tburgb  tbe  londe  mocbe  surely  without  ony 
lack  of  vytaylles.  Of  cytees  &of  castellys  on  botb 
sydes  wnan  tbey  passed,  tber  was  no  lord  but  be 
sente  to  tbem  grete  yef  tes  ffor  to  gete  tbeyr  loue, 
and  dyde  tbem  baue  resonable  cbeep  of  vytaylles 
oueraU 


BSBRVBD  one  castel,  where  the 
men  that  were  tberin  trusted  ouer- 
mocbe  in  tbeyr  f ortresse ;  tberf or 
tbey  sent  to  tbem  neuer  presente  ne 
message,  but  descended  alle  armed 
ayenstouremen  fortodeffendetbem 
I  a  passage.  But  our  men  wban  tbey  sawe  tbem  as- 
saylled  tbem  vigorously,  in  sucbe  wyse  tbat  tbey 
were  anone  disconfyted,TTberewere  but  fewe  but 
tbey  were  alle  slayn  or  taken  jSFCdban  tbe  barons 
sawe  tbat  tbey  were  rebelle  ayenst  tbem,  anon  tbey 
I  wente  in  to  tbe  fortresse  &  toke  it  alle  at  tbe  fyrst 
comyng,  smote  doun  tbe  walles  vnto  tbertbe,  and 
"tbe  bowses  tbey  brente,  after  tbey  bad  taken  out 
'all  tbat  tbey  fynde  tberinXbey  ledde  away  borses 
ynowwbicbetbeyfoundeintbepasturesj^emong 
our  men  were  diuerse  messagers  of  tbe  con  tre,  tbat 
tbe  grete  lordes  and  men  tber  aboutes  bad  sente 
for  to  seetbeyr  couyne,wbicbe  wban  tbey  sawe  tbat 
oure  barons  dyde  tbus  tbeyr  wylle,  and  tbat  no- 
tbynge  mygbt  resiste  tbem,  tbey  wente  to  tbeyr 
lordes, and  told  tbem  tbat  tbey  were  ouer  cruel  and 
tiers  peple,  aspre  and  bardy,  XTbenne  sbold  ye  baue 
seen  brougbt,and  presented  to  oure  men  qrete  pre- 
sentes  and  honorable, and vytaylles  asfor  nouabt 
fro  alle  partes.  In  so  mocbe  tbey  doubted  tbem, 
tbat  tbey  dyde  grete  cure  for  tacqueynte  tbem,  and 
to  brynge  tbem  in  to  tbeir  louejfrlt  was  not  lonae 
but  tbey  passed  alle  tbe  con  tre  til  tbey  cam  to  tbe 
playnesof  an  auncyent  cyte  by  tbe  see  syde,named 
Hrcbys.  Tbey  lodged  nygb  by  tbe  toun, 

326 


V  L. 


Dowtberleof  Cboloueeapproucbedwitb  bie  bost 
vnto  Hrcbie,  and  of  tbc  eituacion  of  tbc  eame,  ca- 
pitulo  Clviij^^ 

^jRCr>YS  ieacyteof  tbc  landeof 
f enyce,and  etandetbatte  footc 
of  a  montayne  named  Lybane, 
in  a  territorye  mocbc  etronge, 
and  18  a  fourorvmyle  fro  tbc 
eee,and  batbmocbeplenteuoue 
j  londc  aboutc  it,  and  delectable 
_  of  pastures  and  of  watereXbe 
ecripturee  eaye  tbat  it  wae  founded  mocbe  auncy- 
ently.  for  J^oe  tbat  wae  in  tbe  arhe  bad  iij  eonee; 
tbat  one  of  tbem  wae  named  Caym ;  be  bad  a  eone 
named  Canabam :  of  bym  cam  a  eone  tbat  wae  Hr- 
racbeue,  be  founded  tbie  cyte.  Hnd  after  bym  tbie 
cytewae  named  HrcbyejfiTCber  were  prieonnere  of 
oure  men  in  tbie  toun.  Bit  wae  eente  worde  by  tbe 
pryeonnere  to  tberle  of  ^bolouee  tbat  be  ebold 
aeeiege  tbie  cyte,  &  aleo  to  tbe  otber  barone,  ffor 
tbey  ebold  baue  grete  good  tberby^Cbe  cite  of 
Cnple,  wbicb  wae  mocb  noble  and  ryeb,  wae  but 
vj  myle  from  tbene;  tbere  were  aleo  of  our  peple 
pryeonnere,  for  eytb  tbe  begynnynge  of  tbe  eiege 
of  Hn  tbyocb  and  after  it  wae  go  ten,  our  people  be- 
gan to  renne  in  tbe  contree  nycely  and  folyly  for  to 
retcbe  eommc  vy  tay  llee  and  otber  neceeeyteee  tbat 
tbey  lacked,  in  eu cbe  wy ee  tbat  tber  wae  vnnetb  cyte 
ne  caetel  in  tbe  contre  but  tber  were  tberin  eome  of 
our  pylgryme  pryeonnerejjfrln  tbe  cyte  of  Oyple 
were  moo  tban  tj  <J.  Cbey  tbem  eelf  bad  eente  to  oure 
y4  &7 


men  tbatyf  tbey  woldemaResemblaunttoconquere 
the  coun tree,  the  kynge  of  TTripple  wold  gyue  tbem 
grete  bauoyr  &  good  for  to  departe  tbens,  &  sbold 
delyuer  to  tbem  alle  tbeyr  prysonnersj^It  bapped 
tbenne  to  tbem  tbus  tbat  our  peple  approucbed  tbe 
cyte  of  Hrcbisfortoseewbat  semblaunt  tbey  wold 
make,  and  also  for  tabyde  tbe  otber  barons  tbat 
shortly  sbold  come  and  f  olowe  tbem. 

Of  a  toun  namedHortouscwbicbe  Raymont  tofce 
witbarowteofpylgryms,andoftbedepartyngeof 
tbe  otber  baron8froHntbyocbe,capituloCUx^^ 

"pBR  yssued  out  of  our  lodgys 
of  ouremen,an  bondredmen  on 
borsbah  &  two  bonderd  a  f oote, 
and  made  tbeyr  captayne  Ray- 
mont pelet,wmcbe  was  a  wyse- 
man&amocbe  valyaunt  knygbt. 
TTbey  wente  to  fore  a  cyte  wbicbe 
a  was  named  Hortouse,  for  to  see 
yf  tbey  mygbt  fynde  ony  auenture  for  to  gete  som 
&tjfayne*0>ey  approcbed  tbe  cyte  andbegan  tassayle 
Jit  vygorously  &  mocbe  sbarpely/Cbey  witbin  def- 
f ended  tbem,  botbemen  &  wymmen  valiauntly  tbat 
our  men  burte  tbem  but  litilornougbtXbe  nycybt 
cam  on  tbem,  and  tbey  left  tbassault  for  to  be  more 
fressb  on  tbe  mom,and  abode  formore  companye 
of  tbooste  tbat  sbold  f olowe  tbem,  and  to  begyn 
on  tbe  mom  tbassault  aaayn  J&Zhcy  of  tbe  toun 
bad  mocbe  grete  drede  that  our  men  woldassaille 
tbem  agayn  on  tbe  morn,  &  my  gbt  not  resiste  tbem. 
Tberfor  in  tbe  nygbt  tbey  wen  tepryuely  out  of  tbe 
toun  and  wente  to  tbe  montains,and  caryednotb- 
328 


I 


I 


yng  with  tbem  but  tbeyr  wyues  and  cbilderen,  alle 
tbeyr  otbcr  geer  tbey  lefte  in  tbc  toun. 

CIRGmen  tbatkneweno  tbyngeberof 
aroos  erly,&  began  to  make  redy  and 
en  corage  ecbe  other  todoo  welat  tbas- 
saultXbey  approcbed  tbe  wallesalle 
armed,  and  tbey  berde  noman.  ^bey 
entred  in  to  tbe  toun,and  opened  tbe 
yates  in  such  wyse  tbat  alle  entred.  Cbenne  sawe 
tbey  tbat  tbey  of  tbe  toun  were  yssued  and  goon. 
Cbey  founde  tbe  cyte  f ul  of  goodes,  in  90  mocbe 
tbat  tbey  were  allerycbeXbey  trussedall,  and  bare 
as  mocbe  as  tbey  mygbt  in  to  tboost,  &  recounted 
tbeyr  aduenture,  of  wbicbe  tbey  were  alle  glad  and 
ioyous,and  thanked  our  lor<wGHhan  tbe  monetb 
of  JNflarcbe  was  come,  and  tbat  tbe  season  was  more 
attemperat,  tbe  people  tbat  was  left  in  Hntbyocbe 
sawe  tbat  it  was  tyme  to  departe.  Vbcy  spack  to  due 
<3odeffroyeand  totberle  of  f  laundres,and  prayde 
tbem  mocbe  effectuously  tbat  tbey  wold  enterprise 
and  conducte  tbem  tolberusalem  fortaccomplys- 
sbe  tbeir  pilgremaofejsrcbe  goyng  fortb  of  tberle 
of  TTbolouse,  tbe  due  of  J^ormandye,  and  TTancre, 
caused  tbem  mocbe  to  baue  tbe  wyll  fortb,  if  or  tbey 
were  goon  to  fore,  &  ledde  witb  tbem  grete  nombre 
of  pvlgryms,  and  tbey  happened  wel  in  tbe  waye, 
and  bad  therby  grete  proutf yte  and  grete  honour. 
Y  tbysewordes  were  tbe  baronsgrete- 
ly  steredand  meuydXbey  ordeyned 
tbeyr  affayres  dylygently,  and  toke 
alle  tbeyr  peple,  as  wel  on  borsbakas 
I  a  f oote,  and  wente  so  f er  fortb  tbat 
tbey  cam  to  theLycbeof  SurryeXbey 

329 


were  xxv  Jfi  men,  all  in  poynt  and  armed,  eueryebe 
after  that  be  was  JSFVbe  good  man  and  valyaunt 
fcnygbtBuymont  conueyed  tbem  tbeder  witb  bie 
men.  But  it  was  not  tbeyr  entente  ne  wyll  tbat  be 
sbold  goo  ony  fertber,  ffor  tbe  cyte  of  Hntbyocbe 
was  newly  conquerd,  and  tbeyr  enemyes  were  fast 
byXberforeit  bebouedbym  notto  witbdrawe  bym 
femrroit,buttberforbetohegoodbedecontinuel~ 
ly  daye  and  nygbt.  But  of  bis  grete  courage  be  bad 
conueyed  tbem  tbeder,  and  tbere  tohe  bis  leue,  and 
weptemocbe  at  departyng.Rerecommaunded  tbem 
to  god,  and  retomed  agayn  to  Hntbyocbe,  and  tbe 
boostabodetbere^^TbeLycbeisamocbeauncyent 
cyte  &  noble,and  stondetb  vpon  tbe  ryuage  of  tbe 
seeXbatwas  tbe  only  cytein  Suryeof  wbicbtbem- 
perour  of  Constantinople  was  lord. 

OJV6G  to  fore  oure  men  cam  tbeder 
was  co men  <3uynemyers,of  wbom  X 
spak  long  to  fore,  tbat  was  born  at 
Boloyne  vpon  tbe  seesyde,andarryu- 
ed  at  TTbarse  wbyles  tnat  Bawdwyn, 
broder  of  tbe  due,  belde  itjfiPRe  was 
comen  to  tbe  Lycbe  witb  bis  sbippe,  and  supposed 
to  baue  taken  tbe  toun  by  force,  and  f olyssbly  be 
conteyned  bym  and  assaylled  it.  TTbey  of  tbe  toun 
yssued  out  lygbtlyand  tofce  bym,&yet  belde  bym 
m  pryson  wbanoure  barons  cam  tbeder jgrtbe  due 
knewe  tbat  be  was  bom  in  tbe  londe  of  bis  fader,  & 
tbat  be  bad  been  in  tbe  companye  of  tberle  Bawd- 
wyn bis  brotber.  Oerfor  be  demaunded  bym  of 
tbe  grete  men  of  tbe  toun,and  prayde  tbem  entierly 
tbat  tbey  wold  delyuere  tbem  to  bym.  Tbey  durst 

330 


not  gayne  saye  bym,  but  delyuered  bym  and  bis 
f elawsbip  witb  bis  sbippej^TTbe  due  commaundid 
bym  tbat  be  sbold  goo  to  tbe  see,  &  alway  e  cooste- 
yeng  by  tbe  booste,  He  dyde  it  gladly,  and  saylled 

fortb, 

Row  tbe  due  asseeged6ybelet,and  of  atrayson  by 

wbicbe  be  left  tbe  siege,  capitulo  Clx^^ 

inebooatdepartedfrotbeLycbe 
wban  oure  barons  bad  receyued 
tbeir  prysonnersXbey  tbat  were 
late  departed  fro  Cyly  ce,f roHn- 
tbyocbe,  and  fro  otber  cy tees  a- 
boute,were  alle  comen  andarryu- 
edtbeder,  in  sucbe  wyse  tbat  alle 
_j  wentetogydreby  tbeseesydevn- 
to  a  cyte  named  6ybelet, wbicbe  was  fro  tbe  Lycbe 
about  a  xij  my  leXbey  abode  tbere  and  assiegedtbc 
cyte,  H  baylly  of  tbe  calypbe  of  Ggypte  belde  tbis 
cyteXbis  was  tbe  first  cyte  on  tbe  see  side  vnder 
tbe  power  of  tbe  calypbe  of  egyptej^€bis  baylle 
yssuedout  by  sauf  conduyt,&  spaktoducGode- 
froy,  to  wbom  be  oflred  vj  JVI  besauntes  and  many 
grete  yef tes  aboue  tbat,  for  to  departe  and  reyse 
tbe  siege  fro  tbensXbe  due  wolde  in  no  wyse  bere 
tbyse  wordes,  but  sayde  tbat  it  were  treson  &  vn- 
troutb:  and  god  forbede  tbat  I  sbold  take  sucbe 
byref  Re  tbenne  departed  wban  be  sawe  ^  mVgbt 
not  make  bis  bargayn  witb  tbe  noble  duc^ttmr 
be  sente  bis  messagers  to  tberle  of  Cbolouscana 
offred  to  bym  tbis  grete  somme  of  moneye,yt  be 
mygbt  fynde  tbe  moyen  to  reyse  tbe  siege  fro  this 


m 


fm 


toun,It  was  sayd  that  be  receyued  the  moneye,and 
for  to  make  the  barons  to  departe  be  f ounde  a  les- 
ynge,ffor  be  dyde  to  be  sayd  to  tbem,  tbat  be  was 
wel  acerteyned  by  messagers  and  lettres  tbat  tbe 
soudan  or  perse  bad  so  mocbe  angre  &  desdayne 
of  tbis  tbat  Corbagat  bis  conestable  bad  be  dis- 
confyted,  and  so  mocbe  peple  of  bis  slayn,  tbat 
be  assembled  alle  bis  power,  &  cam  witb  grete  pe- 
ple for  to  fygbt,  and  to  destroye  tbem  alle  tbat  be 
coude  f  ynde  of  tbe  cristen  f ay  tr>, 

filSStydyngessentetberleofOol- 
ouse  by  tbe  bissbop  of  Hlbare  to  tbe 
due  a  fore  sayd  &  to  tberle  of  f  laun- 
dres,and  sen  te  to  tbem  bis  lettres,  by 
wbicbe  be  prayd  tbem  mocbe  swetly 
&  expresly  tbat  tbey  wold  leue  tbeyr 
siege  and  come  dylygently  to  bym,  in  sucbe  wyse 
'tbat  tbey  mygbt  be  alle  to  gydre  wban  tbis  peple 
>cam  J&  Qlban  tbe  due  and  otner  barons  berde  tbis 
tbynge,  tbey  were  mocbe  anguyssbous  &  meuyd, 
ffor  tbey  supposed  certaynly  tbat  alle  tbis  bad  be 
trewe,  Hnon  tbey  departed  fro(3ybelet*By  tbe  cyte 
of  Valerne  tbey  wente,  wbicbe  was  aboue  tbe  castel 
of  Margat  Sytb  tbey  cam  to  JVflarclee,  wbicbe  is  tbe 
first  cyte  of  tbe  londe  of  fenyce,wban  tbey  wente 
toward  tbe  nortbeest;  fro  tbens  tbey  cam  to  tbe  cyte 
of  CortouseXbere  is  an  isle,wbere  somtyme  was  a 
cyte,  tbere  abode  tbe  sbippes,  tbeyr  nauyej^l wote 
not  bow  many  dayes  after  tbey  basted  and  came 
to  fore  tbe  cyte  of  HrcbysXancre  yssued  out  of 
tboost  &  cam  ayenst  tbem,  and  tolde  to  tbem  alle 
a  longe  tbe  tromperye  and  tbe  barat  tbat  tberle  of 

332 


==^= 


'Cbolouse  bad  donXbey  were  mocbe  angry,  tber- 
f  ore  tbey  lodged  tbem  a  part  fro  tbem  tbat  bad  doo 
broken  tbeyr  syeae  jgf  tbe  erle  hnewe  tbat  be  bad 
Inot  tbe  loue  or  tbe  barons  tbat  were  newe  comen, 
>tberf  or  be  sente  to  tbem  messagers,  tbat  sayde  to 
tbem  in  bis  name  mocbe  fayre  wordes,&  brought 
to  tbem  greteyeftes.^Oberforein  short  tymeitbap- 
'ped  tbat  tbey  were  alle  repeased  &amyable&good 
frendes  to  gydre,sauf  only€ancre,wbicbe  acorded 
notwitbhym,  but  accused  bym  of  many  tbynges. 
"Tjf  ORG  tbe  comynge  of  tbisejaste 


barons,  tbe  peple  of  tberlesof  Cbol- 
j^J  ouse  mygbt  notbynge  aua^lle  and 
prouffy  te  ayenst  tne  cy  te  wbicb  tbey 
bad  assyeged.  But  now  tbey  bad 
i  grete  bope,  tbat  it  sbold  now  soon 
be  brought  to  an  en  de,  &  accom  plyssby d  by  tbay de 
of  tbem  tbat  werenewe  come, JVeuertbelesit  fyllnot 
so  as  tbey  supposed,  ffor  alle  tbe  tymes  tbat  tbey 
contryued  by  ony  engyne  for  tassaylle  tbe  walles, 
alway  it  fyll  contrarye  to  tbat  tbey  purposed,  and 
tbey  of  tbe  toun  brake  alle  tbeyr  ouurages,in  sucb 
wyse  tbat  tbey  loste  tbeir  costes  and  payne*  It  ap- 
pered  wel  tbat  our  lord  bad  witbdrawen  fro  tbem 
nis  ayde  and  bis  good  wyllXbey  witbin  tbe  toun 
slewe  many  of  tbem  without  TJbere  deyde  tweyne 
noble  &  valyaunt  knygbtes,tbat  is  to  wete,  Hnce- 
an  of  Ribemon t,  tbat  alway  dyde  valyaun tly  where 
sommeuer  be  cam, and  potom  de  JBaladon,an  bye 
man  and  wel  acqueynted  with  tberle  of  O>olouse 
j^XLbiQ  siegfe  displesyd  ouer  mocbe  to  all  tbem  of 
tbooste,&  in  especial  to  the  footemen,wbiche  bad 

333 


i^Mm 


mocbe  grctc  desyre  taccomplyssbe  tbeyr  vowe  to 
Iberusalemj^Hnd  also  wban  tbc  due  was  comen, 
tbey  tbat  bad  ben  tbere  to  fore  began  to  witbdrawe 
tbem  fro  tbe  werke,  in  sucbe  wyse  tbat  euery  man 
dyde  nougbt,  ffor  it  plesyd  tbem  well  tbat  tberle 
were  greued  and  ennoyed  tbat  be  mygbt  departe  & 
lede  tbem  f ortb  witb  tbe  otber  barons. 
How  tboost  murmured  of  tbe  spere  founden  in  Hn~ 
tbyocbe,andof  tbe  gretemyracle  tbat  bappedin  tbe 
presence  of  alle  tbe boste,  capitulo Clxj^^? 

^^^^RBRB  was  renewed  a  word  by 

wbicbetbecomyn  peopleandal- 

so  somme  of  tbe  barons  began 

to  doubte  of  tbe  spere  tbat  was 

founden  in  Hntbyocbe,  lyhe  as 

ye  baue  berde  tof ore,ff or  somme 

sayde  certaynly  tbat  it  was  tbe 

very  spere  tbat  opened  tbe  syde 

fof  oure  lord  on  tbe  crosse,  and  tbat  was  witb  bis 

precious  blood  bydewed,and  by  reuelacion  of  oure 

lord  bad  be  founden  by  an  boly  good  man  for  to 

recomf orte  bis  people,  wbicbe  bad  grete  necessyte 

&  nede*  Otber  sayde  tbat  it  was  not  but  f  als  barat, 

tromperye  and  abuse,  ffor  tberle  of  XTbolouse  bad 

f onden  tbis  and  contryued,  for  to  meue  tbe  peple 

to  drawe  and  gete  syluerof  tbeyr  offryngesj^Hnd 

(tbis  altercacion  was  meuyd  by  a  preest  named  Hr~ 

nold,  cbappellayn,and  mocbe  acqueynted  witb  tbe 

i  noble  due  of  J^ormandye,  Re  was  wel  lettred,  but 

be  was  not  of  good  lyf.  Re  was  ouer  malycious 

&  pourcbassoure  of  discordes,  as  ye  sbal  bere  af  ~ 

334 


terward  in  tbia  book  jtifCbie  rumour  was  grete  in 
'  tboo8t,aaIbaue  aayd. 

RG  man  that  bad  fondc  tbc  apere 
bcrdc  tbc  doubtc  of  tbc  peple,  &  cam 
to  fore  tbc  barons  mocbe  bardily,  & 
aayd  to  tbcm  in  tbia  mancr  jp  fayr 
lordea,  doubtc  ye  notbyng  tbat  tbia 
werke  batb  ben  by  barat  ne  by  trom- 
perye,  f or  tberyn  batb  benone,  but  ia  comen  of  god, 
and  certaynly  for  tbc  comfort  of  tbc  criaten  pcplc, 
Seynte  Hndrew  appered  to  mc  by  tbc  wylle  of  our 
aaueour  Ibeau  Criat,wbicbe  dcuyaed  to  mc  alle  tbc 
mancr,  bow  1  bauc  founden  it.  Hnd  for  to  abewe 
to  yow,  tbat  tbia  tbat  1  aaye  ia  troutb,!  praye  you 
tbat  yc  make  a  grcte  fyre  and  merueylloua,  &labal 
entrc  in  to  it,  and  bolde  tbc  aperc  in  my  band,  and 
abal  paaae  &  goo  tburgb  bool  and  aauf  JP  (Uban 
tbey  berd  tbia  tbey  acorded  alle  tberto.  Oe  fyre 
waa  made  and  brennyd  lygbt,  wbicb  waa  greete  & 
merueylloua.  Hnd  tbia  waa  on  tbe  bleaayd  Good 
f  riday.  Hnd  it  pleaed  tbem  tbat  tbia  tbynge  ebold 
be  tbua  preuyd  tbe  aame  day  tbat  oure  lord  waa 
ameton  to  tbe  berte  witb  tbe  aame  apere. 

6  tbat  tbua  oflPred  bym  aelf  tbua,  & 
enterpryaed  for  to  preue  it  waa  nam- 
ed peter  Bertilmewe,  clerk,  and  but 
litil  lettred  after  tbat  it  coude  be  vn- 
deratonde  without  f ortb,  and  waa  a 
-  mocbe  eymple  man  j0  Cbenne  waa 
alle  tbooete  assembled  aboute  tbe  fyre.  peter  cam 
fortb  &  kneled  doun  for  to  recommande  bym  vn- 
to  tfod.  <BCIban  be  bad  made  bis  prayer,  be  toke  tbe 

335 


epere  and  entred  in  to  the  fyre,and  passed  tburgb 
it,  and  wae  notbynge  on  bym  peryssbed  nc  burtc 
tbat  ony  man  coude  see  or  knowe  J7<0ban  tbc  pe~ 
plc  sawe  tbis,alle  tbey  rannc  for  tokysse  bym,and 
made  to  bym  mocbc  grete  ioye  J?  Of  tbys  doubtc 
tbennetbey  wendeveryly  tbat  it  badbequencbidj^ 
But  yetsourdedagretter  errour  &murmur  tban  to 
fore,  if  or  it  was  not  longe  after  but  tbat  tbis  clerke 
dcydc.  Tlbenne  sayd  somme  tbat  by  tbanguyssbe 
of  tbefyre  betoke  bis  detb,  and  tbat  sbold  be  tboc- 
casion  tberof  Xbe  otber  saydetbat  be  yssuedoute 
al  bool  and  sauf  fro  tbe  fyre,  but  it  was  tbe  wylle 
of  oure  lord  sytb  tbe  troutbe  wae  Imowen  tbat  be 
sbolddeyetbus;  or  peraduenturetbeprees  tbat  cam 
vpon  bym  was  so  grete  wban  be  yssued  out  of  tbe 
fyre,  tbat  be  was  tberby  bur te  tbat  bedeyde.In  tbis 
maner  murmured  yet  tbe  peple  emong  tbem. 
Of  tbambassadeof  Bgipte  comen  witb  our  men  in 
to  tboostof  pylgryms,  &of  tbe  reuerence  tbat  was 
don  to  tbem,  capitulo  Clxij^^ 

OJVIJVIG  messagiers  tbat  were 
senteintoGgypte  by  our  barons 
atte  requeste  of  tbem  tbat  cam 
vntoHntbyocbe  fro  tbe  calypbe 
of  Ggypte,  bad  be  reteynea  and 
bolden  tbere  by  force  and  barat 
wel  a  yere.  But  now  tbey  were 
retourned,  and  witb  tbem  were 
comentbemessagersoftbecalypbcwbicb  brought 
to  our  barons  fro  bym  wordes  mocbe  dyuerse  and 
mocb  cbaunged  fro  tbat  tbey  bad  sen  te  to  tbem  to 


fore  Hntbyocbe,  for  tbenne  be  sente  to  tbem  tbat 
tbey  sbold  conteyne  tbem  vigorously  ayenst  tbe 
sowdan  of  perse,  &  tbey  sbold  baue  of  bym  grete 
ayde  of  gold,  of  syluer,and  of  vytaylles.fJow  bad 
be  cbaungedmocbe  bis  langage,flfor  be  sente  tbem 
worde  tbat  be  tbougbte  tbat  be  dyde  mocb  grete 
tbynge  for  tbem,  yf  be  suffred  tbat  tbe  pylgryms 
my  gbt  goo  to  Iberusalem  ij  C  to  gydre,  or  iij  C,  alle 
vnarmed,  &  wban  tbey  bad  made  tbeyr  prayers  and 
don  tbeyr  pylgremage  to  retome  sauny  agaynjj? 
[  Cdban  oure  barons  berd  tbis,  tbey  bad  berof  grete 
)desdayne,  and  sayde  to  tbe  messagers  tbat  tbey 
sbold  retome  agayn  to  tbeyr  lord,  &  telle  bym  tbat 
by  bis  licence  ne  leue  wold  tbey  wold  not  goo  to 
Jlberusalem  vnarmed  one  after  another.  But  tbey 
sbold  goo  maulgre  bym,  alle  to  gydre  in  bataylles 
rencred,  and  tbe  baners  reysed  and  desployed* 

HOGCIlsballsaytoyouwbytbecalypbe 

|  of  Bgypte  was  reysen  in  so  grete 
pryde*  vuban  our  men  bad  discom- 
fyted  Corbagat  to  fore  Hntbyocbe, 
tbepoweroftbesoudanofpersewas 
mocbe  aff  ebledin  su  cb  wise  tbat  none 
of  bis  neygbbours  doubted  bym,ne  fered  to  mahe 
warre  agaynst  bym,  ffor  be  bad  alwaye  tbe  werse. 
By  wbicbe  occasion  it  bapped  tbat  a  conestable  of 
,  tbe  caly pbes  of  Bgy pte  named  Smites,  bad  taken 
tbe  cy te  of  Iberusalem  fro  tbe  men  of  tbe  soudan 
of  perse,  wbicbe  bad  bolden  it  xxsviij  yere-  0>er- 
foresawenowetbecalypbetbatbe  wasat  bisaboue, 
by  tbe  disconfyture  tbat  our  men  bad  don  to  Cor- 
bagat, and  bad  wende  tbat  be  sbold  not  baue  bad 
zi  **7 


\S^ 


U. 


M  * 

nede  of  ony  aydejTtTberfor  be  deepyeed  now  our 
peple. 

Of  an  ambaeeade  fro  tbemperour  of  Conetanti- 
noble  comen  to  our  pylgryme,  and  of  tbanewer  to 
the  eayd  ambaeeade,  capitulo  Clxiij^^ 

|JN"  tbat  other  eyde  were  commen 
meeeagiere  fro  tbemperour  of 
Conetantinoble,  wbyebe  com- 
playned  mocbe  on  Buymont,  & 
aleo  on  tbe  otber  baroune.  for 
tbey  eayden  tbat  all  tbe  barone 
^jwere  becomen  bie  men,  and  bad 
WS  ewom  vpon  tbe  boly  ewan  gely  ee 
tbatalleeucbecyteee  &  caetellye  by  tbem  conquerd, 
wbicbe  bad  be  vnder  tbe  power  of  Conetantynoble, 
ebold  berendred  to  bym  ae  bie  owen  tburgb  out  alle 
tbe  londe  to  Iberuealem*Now  Buymont  dydecon- 
trarye  tbie,  wbicbe  belde  Hntbyocbe,  and  tbe  otber 
barone  tbat  bad  gyuen  it  to  bym  jfiTCbue  spak  tbey 
of  tbe  couenauntee,  but  tbey  epak  not  of  alle*  for 
witboutefaylle  troutbe  it  wae  tbat  tbey  bad  couen- 
auntedtbie,buttbemperour  badpromyeedto  tbem 
tbat  be  ebold  f  olowe  tbem  witb  bie  grete  booet,  and 
ebold  f  umyeebe  to  tbem  grete  plente  of  vytayllee 
by  eee,  Hewae  tbe  fyret  tbatbadbroken  tbe  couen- 
auntand  promeeeee,fror  be  badnotdon  tbe  onene 
tbatotber,andbe  mygbtwelbauedon  it,Hnd  tber- 
for  tbey  werenot  bounden  to  bolde  bie  couenaun  tee 
made  by  oure  barone,  by  cauee  be  belde  not  tbat  be 
bad  promyeed;  if  or  tbe  lawe  wyll  not  tbat  a  man 
ebal  bolde  couenaunt  to  bym  tbat  boldetb  not  bie 


■n^n^r 


"— : 


jFCbue  answered  the  barons  to  tbem,and  tberfor 

,  sayd  tbey  tbat  tbe  yef  te  tbattbey  made  toBuymont 

ofrbecyteofHntbyocbeougbttobeferme&stable, 

land  so  wold  tbey  mayntene  it  to  bym  and  to  bis 

beyres  for  euer. 

FJHJN"  tbe  messagers  berd  tbis,  tbey 
mocbe  praydtbe  barons  tbat  would 
tarye  tbeyr  goyng  to  Iberusalem  til 
tbat  tbemperour  was  commen,  ffor 
tbey  sayde  tbat  without  faulte  be 
woldecome  toforetbentreeof  luyll, 
and  brynge  witb  bym  mocbe  grete  plente  of  peple, 
iHndyf  tbey  wolddootbusmocbefor  bym,  besbold 
tonne  tbem  grete  tbanke,  and  sbal  gyue  to  ecbe  of 
tbe  barons  many  grete  and  ryebe  yeftes,  and  also 
sbal  departe  largely  to  tbe  gentil  men  and  to  tbe 
f ootemen  jfifQIban  our  barons  berd  tbis  tbey  sayde 
tbat  tbey  wold  counseylletbem  togydre  anddrewe 
tbemapartXberleofCbolouseacordedweltotbis 
tbat  tbey  sbold  abyde  so  grete  an  ayde  as  was  tbe 
puyssaunceof  tbemperour,  and  sayd  be  supposed 
certaynly  tbat  be  sbold  corneas  it  was  sayd.  But 
tbe  otber  supposed  tbat  be  sayd  so  for  to  kepe  tbe 
barons  and  otber  men  atte  siege  til  tbe  cyte  were 
taken;  ffor  it  sbold  be  mocbe  desbonour  &  fowlfor 
bym  to  departe  fro  tben  s  witbou  t  accom  ply  ssbyng 
tbatwbicbebebadenterprised^'Cbe  otber  barons 
acordednotbyngetberto,butwolde  tbattbey  sbold 

goodylygently  assiegetbe  boly  cyte  of  Iberusalem 
fortodootbeyrpylgremage&accomplyssbe  tbeyr 
vowe,  for  wbicbe  tbey  bad  suff red  so  many  trau- 
aylles  and  deseases,  for  tbey  knewe  mocbe  wel  tbe 

Z2  339 


delaye  of  tbemperour,  and  bis  f ayr  wordes  full  of 
tromperyeeand  dcccytceXbcrf or  it  wasnot  tbcyr 
oppynyon  for  to  truste  ony  more  bis  coucrt  die- 
eimylacions. 

F)OS  sourded  a  grctc  debate  bytwene 

tbe  barone,  &  mygbt  not  acorde.  Of 

wbicbe  it  bapped  tbat  be  tbat  belde 

tbe  cy  teof  Cry  pple,wbicbe  bad  oflred 

to  tbem  eo  mocbe  good  bycouenaunt 

tbat  tbey  ebold  depart  fro  tbe  eiege, 

jand  goo  out  of  tbe  londe,  wban  be  knewe  tbat  tbe 

barone  were  emonge  tbem  eelf  in  diecorde  be  wold 

Jno  more  olfre  to  tbem  ony  tbyng,  but  enterprieed 

jeogretebardynestbatbewoldfygbteayenettbem 
J?5bc  barons  acorded  tberto,&  lefte  tbe  bieebop 
of  fllbare  for  to  kepe  tbe  lodgye,  And  wban  tbey 
badeodoo,  tbey  wente  eoallein  batayllee  ordeyned 
toward  Crypple.  (Oban  tbey  cam  tbere  tbey  f onde 
tbe  lord  of  tbe  toun  &  tbe  cytezeyneoutwitbgrete 

plenteofmenonborsbakandafootewberetbeybad 
ordeyned  tbevr  bataylles&  abode  our  peple,  wbicbe 
tbey  doubtednot  mocbe.  for  tbey  bad  eeen  tbat  tbe 
erle  of  Cbolouse  bad  bolde  eiege  to  fore  tbie  cvte 

andbadnotbyngepreuayledtwberfortbevpreveed 
our  men  mocbe  tbe  laese  tban  tbey  dyde  bvf  ore  0 

Butwbanouremenapproucbedeonyqbe  tbat  tbev 
eawe  tbe  Curkee,  anon  tbey  ranne  on  tbem  mocbe 
fierely,  m  eucbe  wyee  tbat  tbey  loet  anon  vij  C  of 
tbeyr  men  wbyebe  oure  men  elewe.  Hnd  of  ouree 
were  elayn  but  xmjjSTCbere  belde  tbey  tbe  f eete  of 
Ceter  or  paeque,  tbe  x  day  of  Hpry 11. 

340 


sy 


Row  tbe  comyn  pcplc  complayned  tbeym  of  tbys, 
that  tbey  wen  tenot  bastely  totberusalem,  capitulo 

SIR  barouns  tbat  bad  descon- 
fyted  tbyse  men,  retoumed  in 
to  tbeyr  lodgys  witb  allc  tbeyr 
gayne,  Cbenne  recommenced  & 
began  agayn  tbe  playnteand  tbe 
clamour  mocbe  grete  tbat  tbe 
peple  made  by  cause  tbey  wente 
1  not  bastely  to  Iberusalem,  HU 
tbey  cryed  witb  bye  vois  tbat  tbey  sbold  departe 
fro  tbe  siege.  So  long  contynued  tbeyr  crye  tbat 
tbe  valyaunt  due  Codeffrey,  tberle  of  flaundres, 
tbe  due  of  JVormandyeandtancre  sayde  tbat  tbey 
woldedoo  tbe  requeste  of  tbe  peple  a/foote.  Mnd 
tbennerecuylled  tbey  tbeyr  tentes  and  pauyllons, 
brent  tbeyr  lodgys,  and  departed  jSf  It  displesyd 
mocbe  tberle  of  €bolouse,  be  prayde  tbem  mocbe 
affectuously  to  abyde,  but  it  mygbte  not  be,  ffor 
tbey  tbem  self  tbat  fyrste  were  comen  witb  bym 
were  wery  &  anguyssbousof  tbe  siege,  Hnd  stray  t 
beld  tbey  tbe  way  toward  Cry  pple.  Sttban  tberle  or 
Cbolouse  sawe  tbat  be  mygbte  none  otber  wyse 
cbeuissbe  ne  accomplyssbe  bis  empryse, be  wold 
not  abyde  tbere  allone,  and  be  bad  rigbt,  but  dis- 
lodged bym  &  f  olowed  tbe  otber.  «lban  tbey  were 
a  v  myle  fro  Oypple,  tbey  lodged  tbem^^be 
baylly  tbat  belde  tbe  cy te  and  tbe  countre  about  in 
tbe  name  of  tbe  calypbe,  sente  tbeder  to  tbem  bis 
messagers.  Re  bad  mocbe  leyde  doun  bis  pryde, 


ffor  as  I  sayd  to  you  to  fore,  be  wende  to  baue 
f  augbten  peer  to  peer  J9 His  messagers  hnewe  wel 
tbat  be  was  to  f eble,  and  tbat  it  was  f  olye, 

"|G  tbenne  desyred  &  mocbe  requyred 
tbatoure  men  wold  taheof  bim  ngbt 
largely,  and  goo  oute  of  bis  power, 
Vhc  mater  was  so  demened  tbat  be 
gaf  xv  JM  besauntes,and  delyuerd  to 
_  tbemalle  tbe  prysonners  tbat  be  bad 
of  our  pilgryms,  Hnd  aboue  tbat  be  gaf  to  tbem 
grete  yeftes  &  ryebe  presentes,  as  borses,  mulets, 
clotb  of  sylk,  and  vessel  of  dyuerse  f acions,  Hnd 
tbey  promysed  to  bym  tbat  tbey  wold  do  none 
barme  to  tbe  cytees  tbat  be  bad  and  belde;  tbat  is 
to  wete,  Hrcbys,  Oypple,  andYbelyn,  ne  to  tbeir 
appertenauntes,  Hnd  be  bym  self  sente  to  tbem 
oxen,  hyen,  sbeep,  and  mocbe  grete  plente  of  otber 
vytaylles,  to  tbende  tbat  tbey  sbold  not  destroye 
bis  londej^Cbenne  cam  in  to  tboost  somme  Sur- 
ryens  wbicbe  dwellyd  upon  tbe  mount  of  Lybane, 
wbicbeisnyjfbevnto  tbyse  cytees  toward  tbe  est 
mocbe  bye/Cbey  were  of  oure  f aytb,  wyse  men  and 
trewe,  and  were  come  for  to  see  our  barons  for  to 
salewe  and  feste  tbem,  Tbe  good  men  of  tboost 
called  tbem,and  desyredof  tbem  affectuously  tbat 
tbey  wold  tecbe  tbe  moost  strait  way  and  easiest 
for  to  goo  to  IberusalemjjTCbey  tohe  aduys  and 
counseylled  to  gydre,  &  bebelde  alle  tbynges  tbat 
in  sucbe  a  case  beboued,  &  cam  to  our  barons,  and 
eayd  to  tbem  tbat  tbey  counseylled  to  bolde  tbe 
waye  by  tbe  see  coste  for  many  reasons,  f  yrst,  for 
tbe  surete  and  comforte  of  tbeyr  sbippes,  ffor  in 
342 


. 


tbe  nauye  were  not  only  tbe  sbippee  of  Guynemy- 
ere  tbat  cam  fro  f  laundree,  but  tber  were  sbippes 
of  Gene,  of  Venyee,  of  Cy  pree,  of  Rbodee,  and  of 
otber  ylee  of  Grece,  cbarged  witb  vytayllee  and 
marcbaundyses  wbicbe  dyde  mocbe  grete  good  in 
tboost  j^XIbe  Surry  ens  wente  to  fore  for  to  con- 
duce tbe  booet-  €be  baylly  of  Oypple  delyuerd 
to  tbem  alsomen  tbat  knewewel  tbe  countrees  and 
tbe  londe,  Xlbcy  paesed  alle  tbe  eee  syde  and  tbe 
cyte  of  Yb*tyn> anc*  lodged  vpon  a  ryuer  tbat  ren- 
netb  tbere  in  a  place  tbat  ie  named  JVlans.  Hnd  for 
tabyde  tbe  feble  peple  tbat  were  not  comen  ne  ar- 
ryued,  tbey  soioumed  tbere  a  day* 
Of  tbe  grete  dylygence  tbat  our  men  made  for  to 
approcbe  to  Iberuealem,  and  of  tbe  alyauncee  of 
somme  Oirkee  made  vnto  tbem,  capitulo  Clxv^ 

RB  tbyrde  day  tbey  cam  to  fore 
tbe  cyte  of  Barutb,  and  lodged 
tbem  upon  a  ryuer  tbat  ran  to 
fore  tbe  toun*  tbe  baylly  of  tbe 
toun  gaf  to  tbem  grete  good,  & 
made  do  come  plente  or  vitayll 
&  good  cbeep,  for  to  epare  tbe 
.  treee  &  tbe  f  ruy  tes  of  tbe  con  tre 
j^On  tbe  morn  cam  tbey  to  tbe  cyte  of  Sayette, 
tbere  tbey  lodged  tbem  vpon  a  ryuer  tberby-  ne 
tbat  gouemed&kept  tbe  cytewold  notdootbynge 
ne  bounte  to  tbem,l  wote  not  wberin  bej  trusted, 
but  be  eente  out  many  of  bis  men  for  to  doo  burte 
to  tbooste,  and  for  to  atteyne  certayn  knygbtes 
wbicb  were  lodged  by  for  tassaylle  tbem,  but  our 


I 


men  tokc  tbeyr  horses  &  ran  on  tbem  vigorously, 
and  slewe  of  tbem  I  wote  not  bow  many.  End  tbe 
other  fliedde  in  to  tbe  cyte,  and  bad  nomore  talente 
to  atteyne  our  peple,  in  sucbe  wyse  tbat  our  men 
rested  tbem  in  pees  tbat  nygbt^On  tbemorn,  for 
toresteand  refressbe  tbemene  peple,  tbey  departed 
not  tbens,  but  sente  oute  for  fourage  many  men  a 
f oote,  and  certayn  men  of  armes  to  kepe  tbem,  in  to 
tbe  contre  &  vyllages  aboutXbey  brought  largely 
vy taylles  &  horses  wytb  grete  quantite  of  beestes, 
grete  and  smale,and  cam  agayn  without  lesyngof 
ony  tbyng,  alle  togydre,  Sauf  only  a  knygbt  named 
faultier  de  Vere,  be  wente  by  bis  valyaunce  ouer 
f erre,  (for  be  retorned  neuer  agayn,  ne  neuer  was 
knowen  where  be  becam :  tbey  were  all  mocbe  sory 
for  bym  in  tboostj0F€be  day  af tir  passed  tbey  by 
a  mocbe  sharp  and  ae  pre  way,  and  after  descended 
by  a  destrayt  in  to  a  playne,  and  on  tbe  right  syde 
tbey  lefte  this  auncyent  cyte  named  Sarepte,  wber- 
in  nelyas  the  propbete  was  in, 

fCBR  tbey  pessed  a  water  wbicbe  is 

bytwene  Sur  &  Sayette,  t^bey  wente 

so  f  erre  tbat  tbey  cam  to  this  noble 

cyte  of  Sur;  XTbere  tbey  lodged  tbem 

by  tbe  noble  fontayne  and  pytte  of 

water  lyuyng,lykeas  scripture  say tb, 

€bey  lodaed  tbis  nygbt  m  gardyns  mocbe  delect- 

>ablej^<Oban  it  was  daye  tbey  sette  tbem  forth  on 

tbeyr  ioumeye,  &  passed  by  a  strayt  mocbe  peryl- 

lous,  wbicbe  is  bytwene  tbe  montaines  and  tbesee- 

JTTbey  descended  in  to  tbe  playnes  of  tbe  cyte  of 

Hcres  there  vpon,  &  by  a  water  rennyng  tbey  sette 

344 


vp  tbeyr  pauyllons,  He  that  bad  the  charge  of  the 
toun  maade  tbcm  to  baue  vytaylles  at  resonable 
prys,  and  made  acqueyntaunces  good  and  honor- 
able with  oure  barons,  &  made  also  couenauntwitb 
tbem  in  this  man er,  tbat  y  f  oure  people  my gbt  take 
tbe  cyte  of  Iberusalem,  and  dwelle  tbere  after  xx 
dayee  in  tbe  royamme,in  sucbewysetbat  tbey  were 
not  put  out  of  it  by  force,  or  yf  tbey  mygbt  dis- 
conryte  in  tbe  felde  tbe  puyssaunce  of  Ggypte, 
tbat  f  ro  tbenne  f ortbon  tbey  sbold  yelde  and  gyue 
over  tbe  cyte  of  Hcres,  without  makyng  of  ony  re- 
sistencejfifCbe  pylgryms  wente  fro  tbens  on  the 
lyf  t  syde:  tbey  left  fealylee  b^twene  the  mount  of 
Carmely  &  tbe  see,  Cbey  cam  in  toCezaire,  wbicbe 
is  tbe  second  arcbebissbopricb  of  tbe  londe  of 
palestyne,  tTbey  lodged  tbem  vpon  a  water  tbat 
>yssuetb  outeof  tbe  palus  or  maryses  wbicbe  ben 
by  tbe  toun;  there  belde  they  tbeyr  penthecost  or 
)wytsontyde.  €bre  dayesafter  tbentreof  Xuyn  they 
abode  tbere;  on  tbe  iij  day  they  toke  their  way* 

"IS  the  right  side  tbey  lef  te  lapbe,  and 
by  a  grete  playn  and  euen  waye  tbey 
cam  in  to  tbe  cyte  of  Lide,  where  tbe 
bodye  of  tbe  glorious  martir  seynt 
George  lyetb,  in  thonoure  of  whom 
Jlustynyen,  tbat  was  emperoure  of 
Rome,  made  tbere  a  moche  fair  cbircbe  and  ryebe. 
But  whan  tbe'Curkes  herde  tydynges  tbat  our  men 
[cam,  tbey  bete  it  doun  &  brente  tbe  tymbre  werke, 
which  was  moche  grete,  for  tbey  doubted  tbat  oure 
pilgrims  sbold  take  tbem  for  to  make  engyns  to 
caste  stones  &  castellis  to  assaile  with  jS?\Thenne 

345 


berdeour  barons  saye  tbat  tber  f ast  by  was  a  mocbe 
noble  cyte  named  Rames.  TTbey  sente  tbe  erle  of 
f  laundres  witb  v  C  borsmen  to  fore  tbe  toun  for 
to  knowe  wbat  semblaunte  tbey  wold  make,  J^one 
yssued  out  wban  tbey  approucbed  it:  tbey  camner 
and  founde  tbe  yates  open,  and  entred  in  to  tbe 
cyte,  and  founde  neytber  man  ne  woman,  for  tbe 
nygbt  to  fore  tbey  bad  berd  tydynges  bow  oure 
pilgrims  cam,  and  ladde  to  tbe  montaynes  wyues 
and  cbilderen,  and  alle  tbeir  bowsboldj^<flban 
tberle  knewe  berof  be  sente  to  tbe  barons  bow  tbe 
mater  was,  and  counseylled  tbem  to  come  in  to  tbe 
toun ;  tbey  were  mocbe  glad  of  tbyse  tidynges. 
Ubey  made  deuoutly  tbeyr  prayers  at  tbe  tombeof 
seynt  George,  and  after  cam  in  to  tbe  cyte,  wbicbe 
was  al  ful  of  wyne,  of  wbete,  of  oy lie,  and  of  other 
vytaylles  to  tbem  necessarye;  tbey  abode  there  iij 
dayes.  XTbey  chose  tber  a  bissbop  of  tbe  cyte,  and 
was  a  dormant  named  Robert,  wbicbe  was  bom 
m  tbarcbebissbopryebeof  RoenXbey  gaf  tobym 
entierly  tbe  twocytees  for  euermore,  tbatistowete, 
Lyde  and  Rames,  and  tbe  countree  and  vyllaaes 
about  tbem,  ffor  tbey  gaf  it  to  bonoure  aod  and 
seyntGeorge  for  tbe  fyrst  gayneof  tbe  same  bolv 
londe.  7 


346 


ftow  the  cristen  men  of  Bethlehem  receyued  well 
On  ere  and  his  rowte,  and  sette  his  baner  on  the 
chirche  of  our  lady,  capitulo  Cl*vjV$V£ 

ir>6  Turkes  beyngf  in  Iberusa- 
lem  herde  wel  tydynges  of  the 
comyng  of  our  pylgryms,  (Oel 
knewe  they  certaynly  that  alle 
tbeyr  entencion  was  to  come  to 
the  holy  cyte,ffor  whiche  tbynge 
they  were  pryncypally  meuyd 
ana  departed  fro  the  coun  trees* 
3Hban  they  herde  this  they  were  moche  esmeuyd,  & 
sayd  that  it  was  reason  to  deffende  it  jSfCbz  cris- 
ten  men  that  were  in  Bethlehem  sente  certayn  mes- 
sagers  to  the  barons,  &  desyred  of  them  tnat  they 
wold  delyuere  the  toun  in  to  their  bandes,  if  they 
wold  sende  men  to  receyue  and  kepe  itXbey  sayd 
that  it  was  reson  to  doo  that  they  requyredXhey 
toke  an  honderd  men  of  armes  wel  horsed,  noble, 
valyaunt  and  hardy,  and  delyuerd  to  tbenXancre 
for  a  capytaynXhey  that  cam  to  fetche  them  con- 
duyted  them  in  such  wise  that  erly  in  the  momyng 
they  entred  in  to  the  toun,  Hlle  they  of  the  cyte, 
clerkesand  lay  e  men,  receyued  them  honorably,and 
with  moche  grete  ioye  with  procession  broughte 
them  in  to  the  chirche,whiche  standeth  in  the  place 
in  whiche  the  gloryouse  vyrgyne  JVIarye  was  dely- 
uerd &  chy  Ided  oure  lordlhesu  Criste,  the  saueour 
of  the  world,  TThey  sawe  the  crybbe  in  which  was 
leyde  in  to  reste  the  swete  childe  that  made  heuen 
and  ertbe.<flban  our  peple  sawe  thyse  holy  places 

347 


tbey  weremocbe  ioyous,and  badgretetendrenesin 
tbeyr  bcrteejPCbc  cytezeynsof  tbc  toun  for  signe 
of  ioyc,  and  for  demonstraunce  tbat  ourc  lord  and 
bis  dere  modcr  ourc  lady  sbold  gyue  to  tbcm  vyc- 
torye,  tokc  tbc  bancr  of  tan  ere  and  sette  it  on  bye 
ypon  tbc  cbirebe  of  ourc  ladyXbcy  tbat  were  leftc 
in  tboost  bad  mocbc  gretedesyre  to  sec  andvysyte 
tbc  boly  places  tbat  were  nygb  by,  as  it  was  sayd; 
ffor,  for  tbc  loue  of  god  and  for  to  bonoure  bym 
weretbey  departed  fro tbeyrcoun tree  and  bad  suf- 
frcd  many  annoyes  and  grcte  trauaylles.Hnd  tbey 
mygbt  not  slepe  tbis  nygbt,  sucbe  brennyng  de- 
sire bad  tbey  for  to  see  tbe  cyte,  wbicbe  sbold  be 
tbende  of  tbeir  trauayllc  and  tbaccomplissbement 
of  tbeyr  voweXbem  thought  longe  er  tbc  day  cam, 
and  tbemscmed  tbat  tbysnygbt  was  mocbc  lenger 
tban  tbe  otber,  ffor  to  a  corageous  desire  tber  is  not 
baste  ynowgb. 

Of  tbardaunt  desire  tbat  tbe  pcple  bad  for  to  see 
Xbcrusalem,  and  bow  tboost  approcbed  and  were 
lodged  by  ordenaunce,  capitulo  Clxvij^^ 

|Y^r>  tbat  it  was  knowen  ccr- 
taynly  in  tbe  lodgys  tbat  tbc 
due  badde  receyued  tbys  nygbt 
|  tbe  messagers  of  Betblebem,& 
tbat  be  bad  sentc  bys  men  in  to 
tbc  toun,  tbe  peple  afootc  abode 
neuer  for  leue  of  tbc  barons,  ne 
Imygbtc  not  suffre  til  tbc  daye 
was  come,  but  begun  to  callc  alle  tbc  nygbt  for  to 
goo  vnto  Xberusalem  jfiF  (Oban  thCy  were  goon  a 
wby le  f  ortb,  one  of  tbc  noble  men  of  tbooste  nam- 


ed  Caste  de  Bedyere  bad  mocbe  grete  pyte  of  this 
pcplc  that  tbey  ebold  be  elayn  in  tbc  waye,  Hnd 
tberf ore  be  tohe  bis  bore,  &  toke  xxx  men  of  armee 
witb  bym  wel  boreed  and  ordeyned  in  arraye,  and 
tbougbt  tbat  be  wolde  goonygbtolberuealemfor 
to  see  yf  tbey  myabt  fynde  out  of  tbe toun  beestes 
and  otber  gayne  for  to  take  &  lede  away  witb  bym, 
HUetbusa6betbougbte,itfyUetbu6inpartye;ffor 
wban  be  cam  nygb  tbe  toun  bef  onde  oxen  and  kyen 
largely  in  tbe  pastures,  &  but  f  ewe  tbat  kept  tbem. 
tTbey  fkdde  away  wban  tbey  sawe  our  men  comej^ 
^Gaste  and  bis  men  began  to  gadre  tbe  beestes  to 
gydre  and  droof  tbem  bastely  toward  tbooet,but 
tbe  berdmen  and  kepars  of  tbem  made  a  grete  crye. 
JS[  tbe  toun  were  burkes  bardy,  and 
desyryng  to  doo  armes;  tbey  armed 
tbem  dilygently,  and  ronne  bastely 
after  for  to  rescowe  tbe  proye*  Gaete 
and  bys  men  sawe  tbem  come,  and 
knewe  well  tbat  tbey  were  not  strong 
ynougb  for  tbe €urkee,  tberf or  tbey  lef  te  tbis  tbat 
tbey  brought,  and  mounted  vpon  an  bye  montayne 
tberby,mocbe  angry  of  tbis  meeauenturej^<flban 
tbey  bad  abyden  a  wbyle  vpon  tbis  montayne,  tbey 
bebelde  in  to  tbe  valeye,  and  eaweOncre  come  fro 
Betblebem  retomyng  to  tboost  witb  an  C  men  on 
borebak.OIban  Gaete  sawe  tbem  be  emote  bis  bore 
witb  bie  eporee  and  cam  to  bym,  and  tolde  bym 
of  bie  meeauenture  and  mocbe  anguyeeboue,and 
eayd  tbat  tbe  TTurkee  were  not  f  erreXbey  ran  alle 
togydre  after  tbem  &ouertoke  tbem  er  tbey  mygbt 
come  in  to  tbe  cyte.  In  tbeyr  comyng  tbey  diecom- 

349 


41 


Sted  tbeTTurkes  that  tbey  that  mygbt  ficddc  in  to 
e  cyte;  tberemenaunt  tbcy  slewe,  and  oure  men  re- 
coueryd  tbeyr  proye,  &  brought  it  in  to  tboost  witb 
grctc  ioye.  Hlle  tbcy  tbat  were  in  tbe  lodgys assem- 
bled about  tbem,  &  demaunded  of  tbem  en  ten  tyfly 
fro  wbens  tbis  proye  camXbey  answerd  tbat  tbey 
bad  take  it  to  fore  tbe  yates  of  Iberusalem.  Cdban 
tbey  berde  named  tbe  boly  cyte  of  Iberusalem,  and 
knewe  certayn  ly  tbat  it  was  so  nygb,  tbenne  began 
tbey  tendrely  to  wepe,&  fylle  doun  on  tbeyr  knees, 
and  rendred  tbankynges  to  oure  lord  witb  mocbe 
grete  sygbes,  of  tbis  tbat  be  bad  so  mocbe  loued 
tbem  and  con duy ted,  tbat  tbey  mygbt  see  shortly 
tbe  ende  of  tbeyr  pylgremacjfe;  tbat  is  to  wete,  tbe 
boly  cyte  of  Iberusalem,wbicbe  oure  lord  so  mocbe 
lou^tbatbe  wold  dyetberin  for  tosauetbe  world, 
"ReiTS  pyte  was  it  to  see  and  bere 
tbe  teres  and  tbe  cryes  of  tbis  good 
peple.  TTbey  departed  in  tbis  same 
maner,  and  wente  so  f ortb  tbat  tbey 
sawe  tbe  towres  and  tbe  walks  of 
tbe  toun.  Cbenne  lyf t  tbey  vp  tbeyr 
bandes  toward  beuen  and  dyd  of  tbeyr  bosen  and 
sboes,men  and  wymmen,and  kyssedtbertbe:wbo 
1  t}P\  ??d  9Ccn  tbl0>lbouS»  be  bad  an  berd  berte  be 
sbold  baue  be  meuyd  to  pyte.  fro  tbens  f ortbon  tbe 
waye  ofreued  tbem  notbynge,  but  tbey  wente  mocb 
lygbtly  till  tbey  cam  to  fore  tbe  toun;  tbere  tbey 
lodged  tbem  all  af  tir  tbordenaunce  and  deuyse  of 
tbe  barons,  wbicbe  delyuerd  to  tbem  tbe  places jfiF 
vbennesemed  verytably  tbat  tbeworde  of  tbe  boly 
propbetewasentierlyaccomply8sbyd,wbicbesayd 


longe  to  fore: Leualberusalem, &<;♦ :  Hryse  vplbe- 
rusalem,&  lyft  vptbyneyen,and  bebolde  tbe  puis- 
saunce  of  tbc  hyng  tby  sauiour,wbicbe  cotnetb  to 
onbynde  tbc  and  put  tbc  outc  of  tbc  bondc  wber- 
in  tbou  art  J90  lord  god,  bowe  tbc  bye  barons,  tbc 
knygbtes,  tbc  gentylmen  of  our  boost,  and  allc  tbc 
otber  generally,  men  &wymmen,  were  recomforted 
and  reconcyled  of  tbe  grete  trauaylles  &  meseascs 
tbat  tbey  bad  longe  endured,  wban  tbey  founde 
tbem  to  fore  tbe  boly  cyte  of  Iberusalem,  and  bow 
ecbe  of  tbem  bad  good  wylle  to  conteyne  bym  self 
in  tbis  nede  and  werhe. 

Of  tbe  situacion  of  iberusalem  &  description,  and 
also  of  many  otber  cy tees,  town es,  and  countrees 
tber  aboute,  capitulo  Clxviij^^ 

W£sr5£^&  ^7&SHROUrr>e  it  is  tbat  tbe  boly 

cytee  of  Iberusalem  stondetb 
bytwene  two  montaynes,  wber- 
or  Dauid  saytb  in  tbe  psaulter : 
fundamenta  eius  in  montibus 
Sanctis;  tbe  fondementes  of  it 
ben  in  tbe  boly  montaynes* 'Co- 
ward tbe  west  is  tbe  see  and  tbe 


londe  of  tbe  pbilistees, xxiiij  mile  vn to  portlapbe, 
&  tbat  in  tbe  next  part  of  tbe  see*  Bytwene  botbeis 
tbe  castelof  Bmaus,  wbereasourelord  after  bis  re- 
surexion  appered  to  two  discyples ;  tbere  is  jviodyn 
tbecyte  and  tbe  fortresseof  tbeJVfacbabewsXbere 
is  tbe  place  and  temple,  wbere  Hbymelecb  tbe  boly 
prees t  gaf  to  Dauid  and  to  bis  squyres  tbe  loues  of 
breed  to  ete  tbat  were  offred  vpon  tbe  table  of  our 


lord,  wberf  or  Saul  dyde  do  slee  bym,and  the  other 
admynystratours  of  the  cbirebe  &  men  of  the  toun. 
Cbere  is  Lyde  where  seynt  peter  heeled  a  lameman 
named  Gneaux,  and  had  leyen  viij  yere  paralityk. 
jjgTCbere  is  also  lapbe,as  X  haue  sayd,  where  seynt 
peter  reysed  a  dede  woman  named  Tlbabyte ;  there 
was  seint  peter  herberowed in  a  tanners  hows,  that 
tann  ed  leder,  whan  be  receyued  the  message  fro  Cor/ 
nelle,wbom  be  baptysed  as  is  say  din  tbactes  of  the 
apostlesjjSTCoward  the  eest  is  the  flomelordan,& 
tbedeserteisbyyondewberetbebolypropbeteswere 
woontetorepayrXbis  is  the  vale  sauage,wbicbeis 
named  the  dede  see,wbicbe  was  a  mocbe  fayr  &  de- 
lectable countre,  lyke  a  paradyse,  to  fore  that  oure 
lord  made  do  synhe  v  cytees,  Sodome  &  the  other, 
as  is  sayd  in  Genesys. 

"jj^  thys  syde  lordan  is  the  cytee  of 
Iberycbo,  that  losue  wan  more  by 
prayer  than  by  bataylle ;  tbeder  wente 
oure  lord  Ibesu  Criste,  and  made  a 
blynde  man  to  seeXbere  is  Calgala, 
where  Relyzeus  the  propbete  dwell- 
yd^Coward  the  south  is  the  cyte  of  Bethlehem, 
, where  our  lord  was  bom,  and  leyde  in  the  crybbe 
emong  the  beestesXbere  by  is  TTecua,  the  cyte  where 
Hmos  and  Hbacuc  the  propbetes  were  bornj^to- 
warde  nortbeeste  is  Gabaon,  where  atte  prayer  of 
losue  the  sonne  rested,  til  be  had  vaynquyssbed 
thebatayllXbereisSychar6,wbereasourlord6pah 
to  the  woman  of  Samarye.  Xlbcrc  is  Bethel,  where 
as  the  peple  of  Israhel  worshipped  the  calf  of  gold 
ayenst  the  wylle  of  oure  lord,  TTbere  is  Sebaste, 
352 


wbicbe  19  named  seynt  loban  dc  Sebaste*  Cbcrc  is 
tbe  sepulcre  of  seynt  loban  Baptist;  fielizus,  and 
Hbyastbepropbetesweretbereburyed*fortbemon- 
tayneof  Somerwbicbe  is  tber  by  alle  tbis  londc  was 
sommetymenamedSamarye/Cbecyteof  J^aples  is 
tbere,  wbicb  sommc  tyme  was  named  Sy  cbem ;  and 
it  was  tbere  wbereSymeon  &Leuy,sones  of  lacob, 
for  tovengetbeyrsuster,  wbicbe  bad  ben  enforced, 
slewe  tbem  of  tbe  toun,  and  brente  alle  tbe  cyte* 
Row  Iberusalem  bad  many  names  after  dyuerse 
lordes  tberin  rennyngf,and  yet  of  tbe  situacion  wel 
at  a  longe,  capitulo  Cbcix^^ 

neRaSHLejVIis  tbe  cbiefcite 
ofludecltiswitboutemedowes 
&witboute  ryuers,ne  nobrooke 
newelle.Itwasfirst  called  Salem, 
&afterZebus*Hf ter in  tbe  tyme, 
wbattymewerecasteouttbetbe- 
rubesees,  wban  Dauid  badregn- 
i  ed  vij  yere  in  Gbron,  be  grewe  & 
amended  mocbe  tbis  cyte,  and  wold  tbat  it  sboldbe 
tbe  cbyef  &  bede  place  of  alle  tberoyamme;  tbenne 
was  it  named  iberusalem*  Co  fore  tbat  Dauid  as- 
say lied  tbe  toun,  be  toke  tbe  toure  of  Syon,  wbicbe 
wasnamedtbecyteofDauydXbennemadeDauyd 
tbe  cyte  tobemadeabouttbeplacewbicbewasnam- 
ed  JVIellon.  loab  made  tbe  remenaunt  of  tbe  toun, 
Hf  ter  wban  Salamon  regned  in  Iberusalem,  it  was 
named  Iberosolima;  tbat  is  to  saye,  Iberusalem  of 
Salamon,  He  tbey  sey e  tbat  made  tbystory es, af  tir 
tbe  detb  of  Ibesu  Criste,  Citus  tbe  sone  of  Vaspa- 
aai  353 


sian  was  a mocbc  grete  pryn  cc  of  Rome,  &  assieged 
this  cyte  with  a  grctc  boost,  &  tofce  it  by  force  and 
destroyed  it,  and  tbrewe  it  doun  to  tbertbe.  Hf  tir 
cam  eiyus  Hdrian  tbe  fourth  emperour  after  bym, 
&  called  it  after  bis  name  6lye,  ffor  be  reedefyed  it 
mocb  wel.  first  it  stode  in  an  bangyng  of  an  bylle, 
in  sucbe  wyse  as  toward  tbeest  and  soutb  it  was 
sette  in  tbe  roundnesse  of  tbe  tertre  of  tbe  mount 
of  Syon,and  of  another  mount  named JVIoriaXbe 
temple  only  and  tbe  toure  named  Hntbone  was  on 
toppe  of  tbe  tertre. 

GC  tbe  same  Slyus  made  alle  tbe  cyte 
to  be  bom  and  reedefyed rigbt  on  tbe 
toppeorsommetof  tbetertre,in  sucbe 
wyse  tbat  tbe  place  wbere  oure  lord 
was  crucyfyed,and  tbe  boly  sepulcre, 
wbere  bis  blessid  body  was  leyed  in, 
wbicbe  to  fore  were  without  tbe  cyte,  were  tben  en- 
closed witbin  tbe  wallesjfiTCbe  cyte  was  not  ouer 
grete,  ne  ouer  lytic ;  it  was  more  long  tban  brood. 
Bit  is  on  tbe  four  quarters  enuyronned  witb  depe 
valeyes.  Coward  tbe  eest  is  tbe  valeye  of  lopbat; 
tberestondetb  a  mocbe  fayr  cbircbe  made  in  tbon- 
ourof  tbe  glorious  vyrgyne  JMarye, wbere  it  issayd 
tbat  sbe  was  buryed,  and  there  is  shewed  vet  tbe 
sepulcreXber  vnder  is  tbe  rennyng  water  or  wbicb 
seynt  lobn  euangelyste  saytb  tbat  Ibesu  Criste 
passed. Coward  tbe  soutbe  is  a  valeye  named  Gn- 
non ;  there  is  tbe  f elde  tbat  was  bouaht  witb  tbe 
pens  tbatludas  sold  oure  lord  fore,  wbicbeis  made 
in  sepulture  of  pilgrims,  andnamedHcbeldemacb. 
Coward  tbe  weste  is  a  parte  of  tbe  valeye  wbere  as 

354 


^-^ 


the  piscyne  is,  wbiebe  was  a  grete  tbynge  wban  tbc 
kynges  of  lude  were  tbere:  and  it  stratcbetb  vnto 
tbe  cysterne,  wbiebe  is  called  tbe  lake  of  tbe  patri- 
ate. By  tbe  old  cymetyerwbicbe  is  in  tbe  caue  nam- 
ed Lyon,  toward  tbe  nortb/eest,  may  men  goo  vp 
blayne  to  tbe  cyte,  €bere  is  shewed  tbe  place  where 
'seyntStepben  tbe  protbomarter  was  stoned  of  tbe 
luys,  wban  be  prayd  vpon  bis  knees  for  tbem,tbat 
so  pytte  bym  to  detb,  and  so  deyed  a  very  marten 
Here  tbystorye  deuysetb  of  many  merueyllyus  edy- 
fyces  conteyned  in  tbe  same  cyte  of  Iberusalem,  & 

wbo  made  them,  capitulo  Clxx^^ 

0,asIbauesayd,twomontaynes 
ben  encbayned within  tbe  walles 
ofIberusalem,alitilvaleyeisby- 
twene  them  both  wbiebe  depart- 
ed tbe  toun  asin  tbemyddle.Syon 
is  toward  tbe  weste,on  tbesom- 
mete  or  toppe  tberon  stondetb 
_  tbe  cbircbe  wbicbisnamedSyon, 

and  after  tbere  is  a  tour  of  Dauyd,  wbiebe  is  tbe 
dongeonoftbetoun,madeofmocbestrongwerke; 

walles  and  barby  cans  tbere  bemany  tbat  ben  aboute 
tbe  toun  jfiTLn  lyke  manner  also,  but  on  tbe  bang- 
yng  of  tbe  bill  wbiebe  looketb  toward  tboryent, 
is  sette  tbe  cbircbe  of  tbe  blessyd  Resurrectyon, 
rounde  of  fasbyon,  wbiebe,  wbereas  it  is  sette  up- 
on tbe  bent  of  tbe  montayne  aforesayd,  in i  sucbe 
wise  tbat  tbe  cliff e  oerbangetb  tbe  same  bard  bye  the 
cbircbe,  batb  a  bylling,  witb  beames  raised  bigbe 
alof  te  &  woven  togeder  witb  wondrous  craf  te  into 
fasbyon  of  a  crown,  open  &  ever  coverlesse,  whence 


tbelygbtenedefulletotbe  cbircbe  is  powred  in,Be- 
neetb  wbicbe  open  gutfc  issettedown  tbc  monu- 
ment of  oursauyourXroutbeitis  tbattofore  oure 
pylgryms  cam  in  to  tbis  boly  lande,  tbe  place  wbere 

ourlordwaecrucifyed^bicbewaenamedCaluarve, 
&  tbere  wbere  tbe  very  crosse  was  f ounden,  &  wbere 
our  sauyour  Ibesu  Criste  was  taken  doune  of  tbe 
crossed  enoyntedwitb  precious  oynementis,and 
envoluped  m  wbyte  lynnen  clotb,  tbise  places  were 
etrayteas  ytil  cbapellyaBu t after tbat oure cristen 
men  bad  tbe  power,  tbem  tbougbt  tbat  tbe  cbircbe 
was  made  ouer  strait  and  lytil  wbere  so  arete  and 

^SSffl?9  ZS"*  °?Crforc  tb*y  madc  *  *  "ewe 
walledabout  witb  aood  strong  werke  &  bve,wbicb 

conteyned  and  enclosed  witbin  it  tbe  fyrst  cbircbe 
and  tbe  boly  names  tbat  I  baue  named  j^TToward 
tbe  part*  of  tbe  oryent  is  tbe  otber  mount  named 
Nona.  On  tbe  bangyng  tberof  as  wbo  beboldetb 
toward  tbe  soutb  stondetb  tbe  temple,  wbicbe  tbe 
laye  peple  calle  itTTemplem  domini,  tbere  aeDauvd 
a%  i  c  P^cefortoeettein  tbearkeof  oure  lord 
andSalamon  bis  sone  madetbere  tbetemole  bv  th* 
commaundement  of  Godj^Ht  tbe  begynnyna  of 

rw°°5  *?  S*y?c  *?  y?u> tbat  Omar  tbe  son?  of 
Captap  dyde  make  tbe  forme  in  tbis  manere?  tbere 
19  a  place  square,  longe  as  mocbe  as  an  arcber  mav 
sboteattwyes^asbrood,^^ 

two  gates  by  wbicbe  men  entreXbatone  is  named 

S^tpCter  bcclcd  h?m  th<*  was 
£HC  fro4bl9lbirth^ *£  satte  to  fore  tbe  gate  for  to 
demaunde  almesse,  rbat  otber  gate  bad  no  name 


toward  the  north  eest.  Howard  tboryent  is  an- 
other gate  named  the  ©olden  gatej^Coward  the 
south  is  the  hows  ryall,  whiche  is  the  temple  of 
Salamon, 

^SST^SpOJV  eche  of  tbyse  yates,  by  whiche 
3  men  entre  in  to  the  toun,  and  on  the 
comers,  ben  bye towres,vpon  whiche 
the  prouosteswerewoonte  togoovp 
at  certayn  bowres  for  to  warne  and 
somone  the  peple  to  praye  and  saye 


theyr  orysons,  &  to  bonoure  our  lord  after  tbeyr 
custommes ;  somme  endure  yet,  and  the  other  ben 
f allejSttn  the  cloysture  of  this  place  tber  dar  no- 
man  dwelle,  ne  noman  is  suffred  to  entre  but  bare 
foot  and  dene  wasben,  ffor  there  ben  porters  sette 
at  alle  the  yates  that  take  bedetberof  ♦  In  tbemydle 
of  tbys  place,  wbyebe  is  thus  cloosed,  is  another 
place,  more  bye  and  square;  toward  the  weste  men 
goovptberto  in  two  places,  by  degrees  orstappes, 
and  in  lyke  wyse  toward  the  soutbe,  but  toward 
the  south  goetb  noman  vp  but  by  one  placej^In 
eueryebe  of  the  angles  or  corners  were  woont  to  be 
oratory  es,  where  the  Sarasyns  made  tbeyr  orysons 
and  prayers;  somme  endure  yet,  &many  ben  beten 
doun.In  tbemyddleof  this  bye  place  stondetb  the 
temple,  whiche  is  made  viij  square,  &  with  out  ben 
the  walles  couerd  with  tables  of  marble  wrought 
with  fyn  gold  mocbe  ryebely ;  the  couerture  aboue 
was  of  leed  alle  round  right  wel  madej^ecbe  of 
tbyse  places  aboue  &  bynetbe  is  paued  with  mocbe 
f  ayre  wbyte  stone,  in  sucbe  wyse  whan  it  raynetb, 
aa3  357 


rr 


alle  tbe  waters  of  tbe  temple,  of  wbicbe  tber  f  alletb 
grete  plente,  falletb  doun  cleene  and  deer  in  tbe 
cysternes  wbicbe  ben  witbin  tbe  cloystrej^tbere 
bytwene  tbe  temple  and  tbe  place  wbicb  is  emonge 
tbe  pylers,  there  stondetb  an  bye  rocbe,  and  lowe 
bynetbe  a  dyebe  or  a  f  osse.  It  ie  sayd  tbat  tbe  an- 
gele  etondetb  there  on,  whan  be  elewe  tbepeple  for 
tbeeynnetbatDauyd  bad  nombred  bie  peple,  vnto 
tbetyme  tbatoure  lord  commaunded  tbatbeebold 
put  tbeewerde  in  to  tbe  ebetbe:  there  made  Dauyd 
after  an  aulter.  XTo  fore  tbat  oure  men  entred  in  to 
tbetoun,it  bad  been  a  certayn  tyme  all  discoueryd, 
but  after  tbat  tbey  bolde  it,  tbey  couerid  it  with  a 
fayrwbyte  marble,  and  made  an  aulterabouewbere 
tbe  clerkes  dyde  tbe  eeruyee  of  oure  lord, 
How  tbe  Curkes  of  Iberusalem,  wban  tbey  knewe 
tbe  comyngof  our  booete,  stopped  tbe  pyttesand 
fontaynesoftbetoun,  capitulo  Clxxj^^ 

~F)6  londe  in  wbyebe  Iberusa- 
lem  stondetb  is  named  lurye, 
by  cause  tbat  wban  tbe  x  lyg- 
nages  or  trybus  departed  fro 
tbe  beyerof  Salamon,and  belde 
tbem  to  Ieroboam,  tbe  tweyne 
abode  in  Iberusalem  witb  Ro~ 

r    *!?  t-bat  wcrc  tbc  trybe  of 

Juda  and  tbe  trybe  of  Bemamyn,  And  of  tbe  name 
of  Iuda  it  is  named  lurye- It  is  named  also  pales- 
tyne  for  tbe  pbylystees,  Zbie  cy te  standetb  as  it 
were  in  tbe  nauyll  of  tbe  londe  of  bybeste  or  of 
promyssion,  after  tbe  termes  tbat  were  named  by 


Ml 


mt 


m. 


g^Jtfi 


?osue,  wbicbe  endure  fro  deserteto  the  mount  of 
ybane,  and  fro  the  grete  flood  of  6uf rates  vnto 
the  see  J?  Cbe  place  in  wbicbe  tbe  cyte  standetb 
in  is  mocbe  ayerye  and  drye.  Cbere  be  no  waters  in 
tbe  toun  but  only  of  tbe  rayn ;  If  or  in  wynter  tyme, 
wban  it  is  acustomed  to  rayne  mocbe  in  tbe  londe, 
it  is  recey uyd  in  to  tbe  cisternes,  of  wbom  be  many 
in  tbe  toun,  and  tbey  occupye  tbis  water  in  alle 
tbyngestbattbeybauenedeof.J^euertbelessomme 
scriptures  saye  tbat  tbey  werewoonte  to  bauef  on- 
taynes,  wbicbe  were  witbout  tbe  toun  and  ran  in 
to  bit,  but  tbey  were  stopped  by  warn.  €be  leste 
of  alle  tbe  fontaynes  was  ©yon,  wbicbe  Szecbyas 
tbekyngstopped,lykea8tbescripture8aytb.<3yon 
isnowaplace  in  tbe  toun  toward  tbe  soutb,  witbin 
tbe  valeye  tbat  is  named  Brmon  ,♦  tbere  is  a  cbircbe 
founded  in  tbe  worship  of  seynt  procope  marter. 
Cberein  tbat  same  place  was  Salamon  enoynted, 
as  is  red  in  tbe  tbirde  book  of  kingesj^Ohtbout 
tbe  toun  a  two  myle  or  tbre  ben  founden  somme 
fontaynes,  but  tbey  be  but  fewe,  and  tbey  rendre 
but  lytil  water* 

TJS"  tbe  partye  toward  tbe  soutb,  where 
as  tbe  two  valeyes  assemble,  is  a 
f  ontayne  mocbrenommed,  wbicbe  is 
named  Sy  loe.  Our  lord  commaundes 
to  tbe  blynde  man  tbat  neuer  bad 
seen  tbatbesbold  goowassbebym 
in  tbe  water  tbere  of  tbis  fontavne,  and  be  sawe 
clerely,  and  incontinent  was  made  bool;  tbis  fon- 
tayne  is  but  a  lytil  myle  fro  tbe  toun.  It  semetb 
tbat  it  boylletb  a  lytil,  som  tyme  it  spryngetbnot, 
aa4  359 


eomme  saye  tbatatwaye  tbe  iij  daye  tbe  water  com- 
ctb  agayn  attc  f  ertbestj^OIban  tbc  TTurkes  of  tbc 
toun  knewe  tbat  ourc  men  cam,  they  stopped  tbc 
mowtbes  of  tbyse  f  ontaynes  and  of  tbc  cysternes 
a  fyue  or  vj  myle  aboute,  ffor  tbey  tbougbt  tbat 
tbc  py  Igryms  for  lacke  of  watres  sbolde  not  mayn  - 
teyne  tbeyr  syege  to  fore  tbe  toun,  Hnd  without 
fawte  tbat  tbey  bad  grete  lack  and  mesease  tberby, 
as  ye  sbal  bere  folowyngjTCbey  tbat  were  within 
tbe  cytc  bad  gretc  plente  of  water  in  cisternes,  and 
fro  tbe  fontaynes  without  cam  gretc  babound- 
annce  by  conduytes,wbicbe  descended  in  to  ij  pys- 
cynes  right  grete  by  tbetcmpleXbat  one  enduretb 
yet  m  to  this  day,  &  is  named  probatica  piscina, 
where  as  tbey  were  wonte  to  wasshe  tbe  flessbe  of 
tbe  sacrefyses,  of  wbicbe  tbe  gospel  speketb,  and 
saytb  tbat  it  bad  v  porches  where  the  angele  de- 
scended and  meuid  tbewater,and  be  tbat  fyrsten- 
tred  after  the  meuynge  of  tbewaterwas  made  hool 
of  whatdysease  tbateuerbe  bad, In  that  placeoure 
sauyour  Ibesu  Crist  heeled  a  lame  man  tbat  had 
leyn  there  many  yeres* 

Of  the  nombre  of  them  of  tboost,  of  them  of  Ibe- 
rusalem,  &  bow  oure  men  lodged  them  in  tbe  sieae 
toforelberusalem,  capitulo  £ixxij&# 

N  the  yere  of  tbyncamasion  of 
our  sauyour  Ibesu  Criste  JVIlxx- 
xxix,  m  tbe  monetb  of  luyn,  tbe 
vijdayeof  tbe  sayd  monetb,  was 
lodged  tbeboostof  cristiente  to 
fore  tbe  holy  cyteof  Iberusalem. 
che  nombre  of  them  tbat  were 
there,  as  wel  men  and  wymmen, 


were  xl  J^L  Cbere  were  not  men  defensable  of  the 
foote  men  aboue  xx  fA.  On  borsbacl*  were  not  pas- 
sing a  xv  C.  Hlle  tbe  other  were  f  eble  men,  as  sefce 
men  and  wymmen,  and  also  old  peplej^^Hitbin 
tbe  toun  were  men  able  to  bere  armes  xl  thousand, 
wbiche  were  comen  in  fro  cytees  and  castellys  tber 
aboute,  and  they  were  the  best  men  of  armes,  and 
chosen  fortbevalyauntest  that  they  coude  fynde 
jfiFHf  ter  that  oure  men  were  arryued  to  fore  tbe 
toun,  tbey  hadde  a  grete  counseyl  emonge  tbem, 
and  called  the  cristen  men  of  the  countree  for  to 
demaunde  of  tbem  in  what  syde  they  mygbt  beste 
asiege  tbe  toun*  Chey  sawewel  that  toward  tbory- 
ent,ne  toward  tbe  southe,  tbey  mygbt  nought  doo 
for  tbe  deepe  valeys  that  ben  there,  therefore  tbey 
accorded  to  sette  tbe  syege  to  fore  tbe  nortbeste. 
jPQlbtrf ore  it  was  so  that  fro  tbe  yate  named  tbe 
yate  of  seyn  t  Steuen,  wbiche  stondetb  in  tbe  nortb- 
este, vnto  tbe  other  yate  tbatstandetb  toward  tbe 
wee  te,  an  d  is  n amed  tbe  yate  of  Pauy  d,  were  lodged 
alle  tbe  barons  and  the  other  pylgryms- 
^TSS^ane  valyaunte  due  of  Loreyne  had 
the  fyrste  place*  In  the  second  was 
the  erle  of  f  laundres.  In  tbe  thyrde 
was  tbe  due  of  JVormandyejSFTTbe 
fourth  place  held  On  ere  besyde  a 
tour  of  a  comer,  wbiche  yet  is  named 


tbe  tour  of  Oncre,  &  other  grete  men  were  lodged 
there  with  bym.  fro  this  toure  vnto  the  yate  of  Oc- 
cident com prysed  therle  of  €bolouse  the  place,  and 
the  people  that  were  with  bym*  But  after  Oncre 
sawe  that  by  cause  tbe  tour  defended  tbe  yate  so 

301 


wel,  and  also  for  the  valeye  that  was  so  nygbe,  be 

mygbt  but  lytil  proufytc  tbere.  Therefore  by  tbe 

I  counseylof  tbe  wyse  men  tbat  knewe wel  tbe  beyna 

of  tbe  toun  be  remeuyd  fro  tbens,and  wenteon  tbe 

'tertre  on  wbicbe  tbe  cyte  is  sette  on  bytwene  tbe 

> toun  &  tbe  cbircbe  tbat  is  named  Syon,  wbicbe  is 

witboute  tbe  cyte  as  far  as  an  arcber  maye  sbote  at 

ones,  Xlbere  be  lodged  bym  to  tbende  tbat  be  my  abt 

beste  greue  tbe  toun  there,  and  for  to  deff ende  tbe 

X:\srhc8  tbissayd  cbircbe,  wbicbe  is  boly,ffortbere 

sowped  our  lord  witb  bis  discyples,  and  weesbe 

bumblytbeyrfeetXbere  descended  tbebolygboost 

an  fyry  tonges  on  OKtsondaye,  In  tbe  same  place 

jpassed  oute  of  tbis  world  the  gloryous  vyroyne 

f  jYiarye,  wbicbe  bare  in  ber  precious  body  tbe  saue- 

our  of  tbe  world  Tiber  is  sbewde  tbe  sepulture  of 

JseyntSteuen, 

Row  oure  men  began  tassaylle  Iberusalem,and  of 
tbe  grete  dilygence  tbat  tbey  dyde  tomake  engyns 
fcytotaheit,capitulo  Clxxiij^ 

IfiHJV  tbe  barouns  were  tbus 

I  lodged  fro  tbe  yate  towarde 

nortb/este,asIbauesayd,vn- 

to  tbetouron  tbecomerwbicb 

levpontbevaleoflosapbat, 
ana  fro  tbens  vnto  tbat  otber 
comerof  tbe  cyte  wbicbe  is  on 
.  - tbc  P^aauntof  tbe  same  vale 

,  toward  tbe  soutb,  tbenne  was  it  tbyncre  euvdente 
tbat  tbe  one  half  of  tbe  toun  was  wytb  pa?mor 
vnnetbe  assieged,  for  fro  tbens  tbat  1  baue  sayd 


r-zrz-ZZ 


vnto  tbe  yate  named  mount  Syon,  tbe  cyte  was  no 
tbynge  assiegedjaTCbe  fyftdaye  after  tbat  tboost 
was  lodgcdto  fore  tbc  cyte,itwasacordedcomynly, 
andcryed  tburgballc  tbc  lodgys,  tbat  allmen  sbold 
be  armed  tbe  best  wyse  tbey  mygbt  &  come  to  tbe 
assaultXbey  cam  alle,and  began  mocbc  strongly 
tbassaylle  aboute  tbe  toun.  €bey  baddc  tbe  bertes 
mocbe  bardy,  and  brennyng  desyres  and  wylle  to 
doo  tbewerkeof  ourelord-In  tbeyr  comyngon  tbey 
j  toke  tbe  barby Cannes  tbat  were  rigbt  ayenst  tbem, 
and  tbe  Curkes  embatilled  tbem  witbin  tbe  grete 
wallys, 

E^H^533F>eY  of  tbe  toun  were  so  effrayed  of 
tbe  grete  bardynesse  and  prowesse 
tbat  tbey  sawe  witb  oure  peple,  &  bad 
ouergretefere,in  sucbewyse  tbat  tbey 
loste  alle  tbeyr  bope  for  to  deffende 
J  tbe  toun,  and  was  wel  knowen  after- 
ward tbatyf  tbe  talent  of  our  men  badendured,  and 
tbat  tbey  bad  bad  skalyng  laddres  &  castellys,  by 
wbicbe  tbey  mygbt  baue  approucbed  tbe  walles  of 
tbe  toun,  tbey  bad  taken  it  certaynly.Butwban  tbe 
assault  bad  endured  fro  erly  momynge  tbat  same 
daye  vntoone  of  tbe  clok  of  tbe  same  daye  at  after 
none,  tbey  apperceyued  wel  tbat  witboute  engynes 
tbey  mygbtnotdoo  grete  burtene  dommage  to  tbe 
toun,  tberfor  tbey  witbdrewe  tbem  abak,  and  pur- 
posed to  come  agayn  to  tbassault,  wban  tbeyr  en- 
gyns  sbold  be  better  ordeyned^Tbe  barons  toke 
counsey  I  emon  g  tbem,  for  taduyse  bow  tbey  my  gbt 
fynde  manere  to  make  engynes  for  tassaylle  tbe 
toun,ffortbemsemedtbatinalletbecountreesbold 

363. 


notbefoundetreesnewodeynowefortomakesucbe 
tbynges  as  tbey  sbolde  nede*  But  a  valyaunt  man 
of  tbc  countre  cam  f ortb  &  told  to  tbcm  of  a valeye 
vj  or  vij  myle  tbens,  wbicbe  was  ful  of  trees  &  grete 
ynowgbe  for  to  make  engyns.TTbey  sente  tbeder 
grete  nombre  of  carpenters,  and  somme  of  tbe  ba- 
rons  to  conduyte  tbem* 

f5Cr>6  of  tbem  bewe  doun  tbe  tres,  & 

Sde  do  brynge  tbem  in  cbaryottes, 
oenne  made  tbey  come  alle  tbem  of 
tboost  tbat  coude  medle  witb  sucbe 
tbynge,&dydedomakeengyns,  peri- 
erers^magonneauls.casteUys^cbattes 
&wayescouerd,mocbe  grete  plenteXbepylgryms 
tbat  coude  werke  toke  none  byre  ne  wages  yf  tbey 
bad  as  mocb  as  tbey  mygbt  entretiene  and  kepe 
Stbem  self  Xbe  otber  tbat  were  pour  receyued  tbeyr 
Jwages  of  tbe  comyns,  ffor  of  alle  tbe  barons  of 
tboost  tber  was  none  tbat  mygbt  paye  tbe  costes 
of  tbis  werke  sauf  tberle  of  cbolouse*  for  be  bym 
self  allone  susteined  of  bis  propre  good  all  tbe 
werkemen  without  tbaide  of  ony  otber,  andalso  to 
many  knygbtes  tbat  bad  despended  tbeyr  good 
dyde  be  gyue  many  grete  yeftesj^Cdbyles  tbat  tbe 
barons  were  tbus  besy,  tbat  eueryebe  dyde  do  make 
bis  engyns  for  bym  self,  tbe  otber  knygbtes  &  tbe 
mene  peple  ran  vnto  bussbes  and  bedges  ffor  to 
fetcbe  stockes  and  roddes  witb  grete  dilygence  for 
to  make  burdles*  JVone  was  ydle,  but  alle  men  beelp 
to  tbis  werke,  Tiber  was  noman  bad  sbeme  ne  de- 
spy  te  to  doo  tbynge  tbat  mygbt  auaylle;ffor  tbey 
sayd  well  tbat  alle  tbeyr  trauaylle  and  despences, 
364 


TFTj.. 


that  tbey  bad  don  and  madein  alle  tbeyr  waye,  were 
notbyng  worth  yf  this  enterprise  for  to  take  this 
toun  were  not  wel  accomplished. 
Row  our  peple  were  in  grete  mescbyef  at  the  sayd 
siege,  and  how  the  'Curkes  desertea  them  by  cause 
tbey  mygbt  en  treandyssue  in  and  outof  the  toune 
I  capitulo  Cbcxiiij,*?,*? 

JJ^tboost  bad  they  grete  mesease 
jof  tburst;  ffor,  as  I  baue  sayd 
to  you,  the  place  where  the  cite 
stondetb  in  is  mocb  ayerye  and 
drye,  witboute  fontaynes,  with- 
oute  wellys  and  oyttes  of  water 
spryngyngejjFfor  tbey  of  the 
J  toun,  wnan  tbey  herd  saye  that 
oure  peple  cam,they  fylledsomme  pyttes  that  were 
witboute  the  toun  and  the  cystemes  also  where  as 
was  rayn  water,  and  tbey  bad  couerd  and  stopped 
them  to thende  that  thepylgrymssholdehauenone 
ease  of  water.But  the  cytezeynsof  Betblebem,and 
tbey  of  a  lytil  cytee  called  tecua,  that  knewe  the 
countre  al  aboute,  told  and  ensseygned  to  them 
^omme  fontaynes,  brokes,  pyttes,  and  cisternes. 
'Cher  was  grete  prees  &  grete  mesease,  sucbe  tyme 
there  was  that  whan  the  pour  peple  mygbt  brynge 
tbeyr  barellis  and  vessellys  full  of  troubled  water 
&  tbycke,  tbey  sold  it  ryebely  in  thoosteXbe  fon- 
tayne  of  Syloe,  of  whicbe  1  baue  spoken  to  fore, 
mygbt  not  suffyse  them,  ffor  it  spryngetb  not  al- 
way,  and  yet  that  was  not  right  goodXhanguys- 
sbe  of  tburste  grewe  mocbe,  of  the  heete  that  was 

365 


MHH 


■ 


in  luyn  and  of  the  trauaylle  that  tbey  suff  red,  and 
for  tbe  duett  that  entred  in  tbeyr  mowtbes.  Cdban 
two  ortbrcbadfounden  ony  water  rennyngorwelle, 
allerantbeder,  in  sucbe  wyse  tbat  it  faylled  anon. 
^RB  men  a  f  oote  were  not  in  so  grete 
deseaseastbey  tbat  bad  borses,ffor 
tbey  ledde  tbem  somtyme  tbre  or 
foure  myle  ferre  for  to  watre  tbem, 
&  yet  vnnetbe  f ounde  tbey  ynowgb. 
jj^tbere  were  many  tbat  lef te  tbeyr 
borses,and  babandouned  to  goo  wbere  tbey  wold, 
knd  otber  beestys  for  defaulte  of  water.  Yc  sbold 
baue  seen  mules,  asses,  oxen,  kyen,  &  borses  goon 
witboute  garde  or  kepar  in  tbe  f eldesjflFHtte  laste, 
wban  tbe  beestis  bad  long  languissbed,  tbey  deyde, 
wberof  cam  grete  s ten  cbe  in  tboos t,  wberof  tbe  ay er 
was  corrupte  ouer  peryllously.  0>e  peple  was  not 
in  lasseanguyssbe  tbere  for  tnurste,  tban  tbey  bad 
ben  to  f oreatHn  tbyocbef or  bongre.  Ouremen  were 
acustomed  for  to  secbe  pasture  for  tbeyr  borse 
mocbe  ferre  fro  tbe  toun  in  vyllages  tber  about.  0>e 
Tlurkes  of  tbe  toun  marked  it.  and  yssued  wbere 
as  tbesyege  laye  not,  and  cam  ayenste  tbem  and 
slewe  many,  and  toke  away  tbeyr  borse,  &  brought 
tbem  in  to  tbe  cyte.JVlany  escaped  tbat  fiedde  vnto 
tbooste.  €>uery  daye  lassed  tbe  nombre  of  tbe  pyl- 
grymsby  many  su cbe  aduentures,and  by  grete  in- 
fyrmyte  and  sekenesses  tbat  were  in  tbooste,  and 
by  many  otber  causes,  wberof  many  deyed.Hnd  in 
tbe  place  of  tbem  cam  none  otber;  out  tbey  in  tbe 
toun  en  creced  and  grewe  euery  day ,  if  or  to  tbem  cam 
newe  ayde  and  grete  refressbementes  of  men  and 
366 


vytaylle  tbatmygbt  cntrc  andyeaue  by  tbc  yatee 
beyng  outc  of  tbc  siege. 

Row  tbetTurkea  enforced  tbem  to  make  merueyl- 
leoue  engyne  ayenet  tbe  owree,  &  of  tbe  meecbyef 
tbat  tbey  dyde  to  tbe  crieten  men  tbat  dwellyd  in 
tbe  toun,  capitulo  Clxxv^^ 

OCfiBwere  our  barone  in  grete 
paynefor  tomake&adreeee  tbe 
engyneeXbemene  peple  payn- 
ed  tbem  ententyfly  toaecbe  and 
pourcbaaae  aucbe  ayde  &  belpe 
ae  tbey  mygbt.  Cbey  tbat  were 
in  tbe  toun  f aynednotbyng,  but 
.  made  grete  cure  &  grete  entente 
tomakeotberengyneayenetoureeXbeytokegood 
bede  to  tbe  inetrumentee  tbat  oure  men  made  for 
taaeay  Ue  tbem,  and  tbey  adreaey  d  ae  good  or  better 
to  defende  tbem,  (for  tbey  bad  gretter  plente  of 
tymbre  witbin  tbe  toun  tban  tbey  badde  tbat  were 
witboutXbe  toun  wae  mocbe  wet  gamyeebed  of 
alle  tbyngee  tbat  tbey  neded  to  fore  tbat  our  peple 
cam.  TTbey  bad  grete  plente  of  cordee,  etonee  wel 
fetyced,  and  otber  tbyngea  more  tban  tbey  neded. 
Xlht  criaten  men  of  tbe  toun  were  more  trauaylled 
and  charged  witb  tbyae  werkea  tban  ony  otber  men, 
and  aleo  tbey  were  beten  cruelly,  and  eomme  tbey 
elewe.  Hnd  witb  alle  tbyee  meaauenturee  tbey  bare 
tbem  on  bonde  tbat  tbey  were  traytoura,  and  de- 
ecouerd  tbevr  counaeyl  to  tbeyr  enemyea  jS?0>ere 
wae  none  or  tbe  criaten  men  tbat  duret  goo  vpon 
tbe  wallee,  but  yf  be  were  charged  or  laden  witb 
etonee  or  tymbre:and  yf  tbey  bad  ony  vytaylleein 

367 


tbcir  bowses  it  was  take  from  tbem,  in  sucbe  wyse 
tbat  tbey suffredmany meseases  jPUlban  one  bad 
nede  of  ony  tree,  anon  tbey  bete  doun  tbe  bows  of 
a  crysten  man,  for  to  baue  a  lytil  pyece  of  tymbre. 
Yf  tbeytaryed  a  lytil  to  com  eat  tbe  bourassygned, 
anon  tbey  were  beten  &  burt  ouer  sorowf  ully/Cbey 
were  brougbttosomoebsorow,  tbat  there  were  but 
f ewe  but  tbey  bad  leuer  to  baue  been  deed  tban  a4yue. 
Cbey  durst  in  no  wyse  yssue  out  of  tbeir  bowses 
without  commaundement 
In  this  tyme  arryued  a  sbippe  of  Oenewys  atte 
porte  of  Halappe,  and  bow  tbeyr  messagers  cam 
m  tboost,and  bow  tbe  barons  tbey  made  tbeyr  re- 
queste,  capitulo  Clyyyj^^ 

~  \C  tbe  syege  of  Iberusalem  tbe 

pylgryms  conteyned  tbem  as  I 
baue  sayde.Cbenne  cam  a  mes- 
sager  tbat  brougbte  tydynges, 
tbatsomme  sbippes  of  tbe  ©e- 
newes  were  arryued  atte  porte  of 
fialappe.  Hnd  mocbe  requyred 
tbe  barons  of  tboost  tbey  tbat 
were  come  m  tbe  sbippes,  tbat  tbey  wold  sende  to 
tbem  somme  knygbtes  for  to  conduyte  tbem  vnto 
tboostej^Tbe  barons  prayde  tberle  of  Tbolouse, 
wmebe  was  most  ryebest  of  tbem,  tbat  be  wold 
sende  tbeder  somme  of  bis  men.  He  dyde  tbat  tbey 
requyred,and  sentea  knygbt  of  bis  named  Olylde- 
martCarpynele,and  delyuerd  tobym  xxxborsmen 
and  I  men  a  foote  JPHf ter  tbat  tbey  were  departed 
tbe  barons  sayde  to  tberle  tbat  be  bad  sente  ouer 


f  ewe  men,  and  prayd  bym  that  be  wolde  eende  yet 
moo;  be  agreed  wel,  and  eente  Remon  pelet  and 
©uyllamme  de  Hrebran  witb  I  boreemen.  But  er 
tbey  bad  ouertaken  tbie  Olyldemart,  wbicbe  wente 
alwayfortb  til  bewaecomebytweneLyde&Ramee 
in  tbe  playnee  tbat  ben  tbere,  tber  mette  bym  vj  C 
Curkee  on  borebak,  wbicb  ran  vpon  bym  rudely .  Ht 
tbie  fyret  recountre  tbey  elewe  four  of  oure  bore- 
men,and  mooof  tbem  a  footcyetourmen  werenot 
dieconfyted  but  belde  tbem  to  gydre,  and  warned 
ecbe  otber  to  doo  weUj^In  tbie  tyme,  wbylee  tbey 
f ou  gbt  to  gydre,tby  ee  two  kny  gbtee  tbat  cam  after 
and  tbeyr  companye  eawe  tbie  ecarmucbe,  and  eo 
mocbe  baeted  tbat  tbey  cam  and  ioyned  witb  our 
otber  menXbenne  began  tbey  to  doo  wel,  in  eucbe 
wise  tbat  tbey  dieconfyted tbe€urkee&  put  tbem 
to  flygbt,  and  elewe  ij  C  Curkee  of  tbem.  Of  our 
men  were  elayn  two  valyaunt  kny  gbtee,  for  wbom 
lalle  tbe  otber  were  eory,  tbat  one  was  named  foyl- 
bert  de€reue,andtbat  otber  HcbartdeMounttille. 
1  fiHJSour  men  bad  tbue  dieconfyted 
tbe  TTurkee,  tbey  cam  tolapbe,  wbere 
tbey  were  receyued  witb  mocb  grete 
ioye:  tbe  maronnereof  ©enereceyu- 
edtbemmocbebonorablyj^SIbylee 
I  aetbey  eoiournedtbere&diecbamed 
>  tbeyr  ebippee,for  to  aduyeeandordeyne  bow  tbey 
>mygbt  come  in  tbe  booete,  eodanly  or  ony  man 
>tok?  bede  of  bit,  tbe  nauye  of  tbem ,  of ,€££"> 
'wbicbe wae  more  redy  in  tbe  porteof  Bekla uonye, 
eawe  tbeyr  tyme  for  toburte  ourpeple^and  cam  to 
forelapbe-  «Jban  oure  men  and  tbe  ©enewee  ap- 
b  b  i  369 


I 


perceyued  this,  bastely  tbey  descended  to  the  see. 
f  yrst  tbey  essayed  for  to  deff  ende  tbem,  but  tbey, 
wban  tbey  sawetbat  there  cam  so  mocbe  pepletbat 
tbey  mygbt  not  resiste  tbem,  tbey  disgamyssbed 
tbeyr  sbyppes  as  faste  as  tbey  mygbt,  and  bare 
away  cordes,  cables  and  saylles,  &  the  other  takle, 
and  bare  it  &  leyde  it  in  the  f  ortresse.  One  sbippe 
of  tbe(3enewes,  wbicbewasgoon  forsommegayne 
vpon  tbe  see,  cam  alle  laden  witb  grete  gayneand 
wold  arryued  at  tbe  porteof  Iapbe.  But  tbey  of  tbe 
sbippe  knewe  wel  fro  ferre  tbat  tbe  nauye  of  tbe 
burkes  belde  tbe  porte,  tberf  or  tbey  caste  about  & 
tomed  tbeyr  saylle,  and  wente  to  tbe  Lycbe.  Zhc 
cyte  of  Iapbe  was  tbenne  alle  deserte  and  voyde  of 
peple;  ffor  tbe  cytezeyns  of  tbe  toun  trusted  not 
wel  in  tbeyr  f ortresse,  tberf  or  tbey  were  goon  a 
litil  byfore  tbat  our  men  cam,  of  wbicb  it  bapped 
tbat  oure  men  kepte  nomore  tban  tbe  tourj^Hnd 
wban  tbey  sawe  tbeyr  tyme,  tbey  made  tbem  redy, 
and  sette  tbeyr  tbynges  all  in  ordenaunce,  &  wente 
tbeyr  waye  and  cam  in  to  tboost,  where  tbey  were 
receyued  witb  grete  ioye,  ffor  tbe  maronners  of 
Gene  were  mocbe  good  carpenters,  and  coude  wel 
make  engynes  and  other  instrumentes  of  warre  in 
suche  wyse  that  syth  tbey  were  comen,  the  barons 

beganmoredelyuerly^tbebettertbeyrenterprvses 
tobryngetoanend* 


370 


I  — ■ 


fiow  alle  tbe  pylgryms,  cucrycbc  after  bis  estate, 
payned  tbem  to  make  tbengyns  for  tbassault,  ca- 
pitulo  Ctovij^/? 

iney  tbatabodein  tboost  dyde 
I  tbeyr  power  for  tadresse  tbeir 
engyns,ffor  tbe  due  ©odefroy, 
tbe  due  of  flormandye  &  tberle 
of  f  laundres,  bad  a  valyaunt 
man  wbicb  was  mocb  wise  and 
iuste  named  ©ace  de  Beer,  be 
I  bad  tbe  cbarge  for  to  take  bede 
to  tbe  werkmenj^Cbis  man  dyde  do  make  tbeyr 
werkesjustly  and  wet  ^be  barons  conducted  the 
men  a  foote  for  to  gadre  to  gydre  tbe  roddes  and 
bowes  of  trees  for  to  make  wittbes  &  burdles  for 
to  couere  tbe  engyns,  and  also  to  bewe  tbe  grete 
tymbre  and  brynge  it  to  tbe  boost  to  tbe  workmen, 
Tbey  toke  tbe  bydes  of  tbe  beestes  tbat  deyde  and 
stratcbed  tbem  vpon  tbengynes  for  to  kepe  and 
def endetbem  fro  fyrejfiHn  tbis  partye  toward  tbe 
nortbest  tbe  barons  entremedled  vygorousty,  as  I 
baue  sayd,  for  to  assayle  fro  tbe  tour  of  tbe  angle 
or  comer  vnto  tbe  west  gateXan  ere  trauay  lied  also 
|  mocbe,&tbe  otber  kny  gbtes  tbat  were  tbere  lodged, 
for  taduyse  bow  tbe  cyte  mygbt  be  wel  assay  lied 
on  tbeyr  sydej^On  tbe  syde  toward  tbe  soutb, 
tbere  was  tberle  of  Tbolouseand  bis  peple-  fie  was 
moost  ryebe  of  tbem,  &  tberf or  be  bad  tbe  moost 
peple  tbat  wrought.  XTbey  of  Genes  were  drawen 
jalle  to  bym,  wbicbe  bad  a  captayn,  a  mocbe  excel- 
lent werkman  named  ©uylham  Sbryac,  be  made 


tbem  to  baste  mocbe  tbe  werke,  and  to  amende  it 
tCbue  was  alle  tboost  occupied  in  tbis  werke  four 
monetbes  all  bool  Cbey  bad  eo  mocbe  exploited 
tbat  eueryebe  of  tbe  barons  bad  doo  made  rigbt 
tbat  wbicbe  be  bad  begonne  &  entreprysed*  Cber- 
for  tbey  counseylled  emonge  tbem,  and  ordeyned 
at  a  day  sett  to  goo  to  tbassault*  But  for  as  mocb 
as  tberle  of  Cbolouse  &  Oncre  bad  be  grete  ran- 
cour and  wratb,  &  somme  of  tbe  otber  barons  and 
knygbtes  tbat  loued  not  wel  to  gyder  for  dyuerse 
reasons,  tbe  barone  by  tbe  admonestacion  of  tbe 
bissbops  wolde  tbat  of  alle  debate  sbold  be  good 
peas,  and  tbat  ecbe  sbold  pardone  otber  all  euyll 
wyll  &  talente,  by  cause  tbat  our  lord  sbold  belpe 
tbem  tbe  better  in  doynge  and  accomplyssbyng 
bis  worke,  and  yf  it  bapped  tbem  to  dye,  tbe  surer 
mygbt  tbey  attende  tbe  detb* 

Of  tbe  f  ayr  processions  tbatoure  pylgryms  made 
to  tbende  tbat  god  sbold  gyue  tbem  vyctorye,  and 
bow  tbey  pardonned  ecbe  otber  tbeyr  mal  talentes 
and  euyll  wylles,  capitulo  Clxxviij^^ 

\T)G  daye  was  ordeyned  &  taken 
by  comyn  accorde  of  alle,  tbat 
procession  sbold  be  made,  and 
tbe  relyquyes  sbolde  be  borne 
sucbe  as  were  bad  in  tboost. 
TJbey  sbolde  alle  goo  vnto  tbe 
mount  of  Olyuet,  &  tbey  sbold 
mayntenetbem  tbisdayin  fast- 
ing, in  repentaunce  of  tbeyr  synnes,  &  in  orysons 
and  prayer  vnto  our  lord,  to  tbende  tbat  be  wold 
baue  pyteof  bis  pepleand  receyue  in  gree  tbeyr  ser- 
372 


uyse,  in  sucbe  wyse  that  by  tbem  bis  berytages 
mygbt  be  rccoucrd  fro  tbc  bandes  of  bie  enemyes 
wbicb  bcldc  it  in  tbeir  possessionjjFpeter  XTbcrc- 
myte  on  tbat  one  part,  &  Hrnold,  tbe  cbappellayn 
of  tbe  due  of  J^ormandye,  wbicbe  was  a  grete  clerk 
and  wyse,  of  tbat  otber  parte,  made  tbe  sermon  to 
tbe  people*  €bey  exborted  tbem  by  swete  wordes 
to  enterpryse  vygorously  tbe  werke  of  oure  lord, 
wberin  it  were  better  to  deye  tban  to  lyuejjTCbe 
mount  of  Olyueteisayenstlberusalem  in  tbeeeste 
partye,  about  a  myle  f er  fro  tbe  toun,  ff  or  tbe  vaal 
'iof  losapbat  is  bytwene  botbe*  €bere  assembled 
our  lord  bie  discyples,and  styed  and  ascended  vp 
to  fore  tbem  alle  in  to  beuen,  tbe  day  of  tbassen- 
sion,  and  wente  up  in  a  clowde  wbicb  toke  bym. 
HHJNf  alle  tbe  peple  bad  ben  tbere  in 
greete  wepynges  and  prayers,  and 
alle  tbe  debates  appeased  tbat  were 
emongtbem,  tbey  descended  fro  tbe 
bylle  in  to  tbe  cbyrcbe  of  mount 
Syon,  wbyebe  is  by  tbe  cytee,  as  I 
baue  sayd,  in  tbe  side  toward  tbe  soutb  on  tbe 
toppe  of  a  tertre.  Xibt  Sarasyns  of  tbe  toun,  tbat 
were  in  tbe  toures  and  vpon  tbewallesof  tbe  toun, 
merueylled  mocbe  wbat  tbis  mygbt  be  tbat  oure 
men  made  tbere,  Hnd  wbere  tbey  mygbt  see  tbe 
pressenygb  totbemwitbinsbotte,  tbey  cessed  not 
to  sbote  arowes  and  quarellys,  in  sucbe  wyse  tbat 
tbey  burted  somme,  XTbenne addressyd  tbey  cross- 
es vpon  tbe  walles,  and  in  despy te  of  our  sauyour 
and  in  reprocbe  of  oure  faytb,  spytteon  tbem,  and 
made  otber  sbames  and  fowle  tnynges  wbicb  be 
bb3  373 


I 


not  for  to  be  sayd,  XLbz  people  of  our  lord,  which 
were  in  holy  wylle  for  to  serue  bym,  sawe  wel  tbise 
tbyn ges  that  the  'Curkce  made,  theyr  desyre  grewe 
and  encreaced  moche  in  theyr  bertes  for  tauenge 
the  shame  of  our  lord  Ibesu  Cristej^Slhan  they 
had  made  theyr  ory sons  and  prayers  in  tbecbircbe 
of  mount  Syon,  the  day  was  to  them  ordeyned  and 
named  for  to  make  thassault  by  comyn  acorde. 
'Cbenne  they  retourned  to  theyr  lodgysj^Yf  tber 
wasonythyngto  bemadeon  theyr  en  oyns,  anon  it 
was  accomplyssbyd,foreueryman  tokegood  hede 
aboutehymtnatnothyngefaylledthatsholdbene- 
cessarye  to  make  thassault  ayenst  theyr  enemyes. 
Row  oure  men  sodenly  transported  in  the  nyght 
theyr  engyns  vnto  the  other  part  of  the  toun  for 
tassaylle  on  that  side,  capitulo  Clxxxix^^ 

RHJN"  the  day  approched  that 
they  had  named  for  tassayle 
the  cyte,  the  nyght  to  fore,  the 
valyaunt  due  ©odeffroy,  the 
erle  of  f  laundres,  and  the  due 
of  pformandye  sawe  that  this 
partyeof  the  cyte  that  they  had 
assieged  was  moche  wel  gar- 
jnyssbed  of  alle  maner  of  engyns,  and  the  moost 
jdefensable  men  of  the  cyte  they  had  sette  there. 
XTherfore  they  doubted  more  this  part,  than  ony 
[otherXhenoblemen  had  herupon  counseyll;  they 
>knewe  wel  that  they  myght  not  endommage  the 
toun  there,  and  enterprysed  a  thynge  of  a  right 
grete  aff ayre  and  of  moche  grete  trauay  lie.  for  alle 
thengynes  that  they  had  by  them,  and  the  castel  to 
374 


fore  the  sydeswere  ioyned  togydrc,  tbey baretbem 
allc  on  that  other  syde,  wbicbe  ie  bytwene  the  gate 
of  seynt  Stephen  and  the  tour  of  tbangle  tbatie 
toward  the  nortbeest ;  ffortbem  semed,and  it  was 
troutbe,  tbat  by  cause  tbat  tbe  cyte  bad  not  be  as- 
sieged  on  tbatsyde  tbat  tbersbold  betbe  lasse  de- 
fen  ce*  Cdberof  it  bapped  tbat  tbey  wofceal  tbenygbt 
as  wel  tbey  as  tbeyr  peple,  in  sucbewyse  tbattbeyr 
engyns  were  alle  ioyned  and  reysed  vp  byf ore  day 
or  er  tbe  sonnearoos,  in  tbe  places  wbere  tney  ought 
to  be»0>e  castel  was  so  approucbed  tbe  walle,and 
was  mocbe  byer,  in  so  mocbe  tbat  tbey  tbat  were 
tberin  were  almoost  as  bye  as  one  of  tbe  touresjj? 
Hnd  hnowe  ye  for  certayne  tbat  tbis  was  noo  lytil 
trauaylle,  fF or  fro  tbis  place  wbere  tbey  were  fyrst 
f  lodged  vn  to  tbe  place  wbere  tbey  settetneyr  engyns 
vwas  nygb  balf  a  myle*Hnd  tbe  tbynges  were  so  wel 
and  so  booly  ordeyned,  tbat  to  fore  tbesonne  rys- 
yngalltbyng  was  redy  at  them* 

JN"  tbe  mornynge  tbe  Curves  bybelde 
on  tbe  walles  and  toures,  and  mer- 
ueylled  wbat  tbis  mygbt  be  tbat  our 
men  so  trauaylledall  tbenygbtXbey 
sawe  tbat  tbe  lodgys  of  tbe  due  and 
of  tbe  other  barons  aboute  bym  were 
iremeuyd*'Cbey  sought  them  about  tbat  other  side 
of  tbe  toun,  and  f  ounde  tbem  there  wbere  as  tbey 
had  sette  no  garde*  Gdban  tbey  sawe  tbengyns  and 
itbecasteldressyc^tbeymerueylledouermocbebow 
Jtbey  mygbt  doo  tbis  werhe  in  so  lytille  tyme*  for 
this  cause  tbey  doubted  mocbe  the  more  tnem  tbat 
had  thus  enterprysedandaccomplyssbed  so  so- 
bb4  375 


devnly  in  the  nygbt  about  that syde of  the  toun  JSF 
TTbe  barons  tbatwere  lodged  asye  bauc  bcrd  tof ore, 
were  not  ydle,  but  reysed  tbeyr  engyns  eueryebe 
in  bis  parte,  Hnd  tberle  of  TZbolouse  bad  made 
tapprocbetbewallesacastel  tbat  be  badmadewitb 

mocbegretetrauayllebytwenetbecbircbeof  mount 
Syon  and  tbe  cyte,  Cbe  otber  tbat  were  nygbe  tbe 
comer,  wbicbeis  called  tbetour  of  Oncre,redress- 
yd  a  castel  of  tree  mocbe  bye*  Hbyse  tbre  castellys 
tbat  were  about  tbe  toun  were  nybe  alle  of  one  f  a- 
cion,  ff or  tbey  were  alle  square;  tbe  sydes  tbatwere 
toward  tbe  toun  were  double,  in  sucbe  wyse  tbat 
oneof  tbe  panes  tbat  was  without,  mygbt  beaualed 
vpon  tbe  walles,  &  tbenne  it  sbold  be  lykea  brydge. 
But  for  alle  tbat  tbe  side  was  not  vnclosed  ne  dis- 
couerd,  but  it  was  bool  for  to  deffende  tbem  tbat 
were  in  tbe  castel 

How  tbe  day  folowyng  ourpeple  made  a  merueyl- 
lous  assault,  and  bow  tbe  Curkes  defended  tbem 
subtylly  and  wel,  capitulo  Clxxx/&*£ 

fiG  daye  beaonne  strongly  to 
wexe  clereXbenne,as  it  was  en- 
terprysedand  deuysed,ourmen 

wereallearmedfortapprocbetbe 
walles,  Tbey  alle  were  and  bad 
one  purpoos :  tbat  is  to  wete,  or 
tbey  wolde  take  tbe  toun  vpon 
tbenemyes  of  our  lord,  and  de- 
l  lyuer  tbe  ordures  of  tbe  mescreauntes  fro  tbe  boly 
f  places,  or  ellys  in  tbis  seruise  tbey  wold  rendre  tbeir 

sowlestobymtbatmadetbem,t:berwerenonetbat 
bad  wy  lie  to  draw  aback  fro  tbis  werke;  tbe  old  men 

376 


■IH9B 


f orgate  tbeyr  age,  the  seke  men  tbeyr  malady  es,  tbe 
wyues  andcbilderen  enterprysed  in  tbeyr  bertes  to 
doo  grctc  tbynges,  Hlle  generally  payned  tbem  to 
drawefortbtbeca6telly6,toioynetbemtotbewalle6 
in  sucbewyse  tbat  tbey  mygbt  approcbe  tbem  tbat 
defended  itjSFCbey  of  tbe  toun  cessydnottodrawe 
and  sbote  incessantly  grete  plenty  of  arowes  and 
quarellys,&witb  tbeyr  engyns  caste  grete  stones, 
and  tbrewe  tbe  moyen  and  maniable  witb  tbeyr 
ban  dis ,  fro  t  be  walks  an  d  towres ;  tbeir  en  ten  te  was 
tberwitb  to  make  oure  men  to  witbdrawen  fro  tbe 
walles,  ITbe  good  cristen  men,  tbat  doubted  notb- 
jynge  to  deye,couerdtbem  witb  targes  and  sbeldes, 
tbise  and  otber  babyllemens  tbey  sette  to  fore  tbem 
for  to  hepe  tbem  fro  tbe  stones  and  sbotte* 

HBY tbat  were witbin  tbe  castellis  of 
tree  lef  te  not  to sbote  &  caste  stones 
vpon  tbe  ITurhes  incessantly*  Hnd 
otber  bad  grete  leuers  and  plente  of 
ropes  and  cordes  witb  wbicbe  tbey 
J  laboured  and  payned  tbem  to  drawe 
fortb  tbe  castellysXbey  tbatwere  putfor  totbrowe 
>tbe  stonesand  to  occupye  tbengyns  were  not  ydle, 
but  bad  tbeyrtbynges  wel  adressyd,  andtbreweto 
,  tbem  tbat  defended  tbe  toun  grete  stones  mocbe 
asprely,&  traua^lled  mocbe  for  to  do  tbynge  tbat 
mygbt  greue  tbeir  enemyesj^But  tbey  tbat  wold 
baue  put  fortb  tbe  castellys  mygbt  not  doo  tbat 
tbey  wold;  for  tber  was  a  dyeb  mocbe  depe  to  fore 
tbe  barbycane,  flPor  wbicbe  tbey  mwbt  not  make 
tbeyr  engyns  ioyne  to  tbe  walles.  Cbe  strokes  of 
tbe  stones  tbat  were  tbrowen  on  tbe  walles  dyde 

377 


I 


PW- 


not  mocbe  barme  to  the  walles  of  the  cyte,  ffor  the 
burkes  bad8ackesfulofbeyeandofcoton,&grete 
peces  of  tymbre  bounden  witb  cables  of  sbippes, 
wbiebe  benge  a  longe  by  tbc  walles  and  towres,  in 
sucb  wyse  tbatwban  tbc  stones  of  tbengyns  smote 
tbyse  softe  tbynges,  tbe  strokes  were  lost  &  made 
no  burte  to  tbe  walles* 

tbat  otber  syde  tbe  burkes  witbin 
tbe  toun  bad  moo  engyns  adressyd 
tban  we  bad  without,  &  more  quan  tite 
ofotberartyllerye,ofarbalestreswitb- 
oute  comparison  tban  we  badde,  by 
wbiebe  tbey  slewe  many  of  tbe  pil- 
grims, and  it  mygbt  not  be  but  tbat  our  peple  were 
|  sore  aferdjSTCbus  was  tbassault  mocbe  grete  and 
rperyllous  fro  tbe  momyng  vnto  euensong  tyme, 
jandduring  tbassault  it  cessedneuerof  arowesand 
stonesfleynge  more  tbycke,  tban  was  in  aJVlyere  to 
foreXbereweresomany  tbatofte  tbe  stonesmette 
and  bytte  ecbe  otber  in  tbayer,  in  sucbe  wyse  tbat 
I  tbey  brakand  fiewein  pyecesXbaseaultwasin  tbre 
'places,  &  tbe  barone  payned  tbem  soretogreue  tbe 
ITTurkes:  men  mygbt  not  wel  knowe  wbiebe  partye 
bad  tbe  better*  Oure  pylgryms  were  put  to  grete 
payne  to  bere  ertbe  for  tofylle  tbe  dyebe,  to  tbende 
tbat  tbe  castellys  mygbt  ioyne  to  tbe  wallesXbey 
witbin  tbrewe  fyre  mocbe  tbyckein  to  tbe  castellys, 
men  mygbt  see  many  arowes  brennyng,  brondes, 
pottes  ful  of  sulpbre,  of  oylle,  and  otber  tbynges 
nouryssbyng  tofyreXbe  stones  smote  tbem  witb 
so  grete  strokes  tbattbey  brak  and  tbe  pyecesflewe 
tburgbouttbe  sydes,and  it  mygbt  not  be  but  tbat 
378 


aa 


many  wereburte  that  were  aboue  for  tassaylle.  f)yt 
semed  many  tymes  that  alle  sbold  falle  to  toe 
ground;  but  our  men  quencbyd  the  fyre  with  water 
and  vynegar,  and  badredy  pynnes  for  to  stoppe  tbe 
boles,andalsofortobolde  togydre  tbeyr  castellys 
mocbe  iustely,  in  eucbe  wyse  tbat  tbeyr  conten- 
>aunces  were  in  alle  tbynges  good  and  bardy* 
'Cbe  nygbt  departed  tbe  sayd  assault,  our  peple 
witbdrewetbem,andbowtbeywatcbedweltbeyren~ 
;gyns,  &  tbe  TTurkes  tbe  toun,  capitulo  Clxxxj^^ 

IRIS  greteassault  and  pery  llous, 
tbat  so  long  endured,  tbe  derk 
nygbt  departed  Ourmen  return- 
ed to  tbeyr  lodgys  for  to  ete  and 
ireste;  tbey  lefte  grete  watcbe  a- 
boute  tbeyr  engyns,  by  cause  tbe 
Curkes  sbold  not  brenne  tbem, 
I  and  tbey  of  tbe  toun  made  grete 
'watcbe  to  kepe  tbeyr  walles,  ffor  tbeye  doubted 
) mocbe  tbat  oure  peple,  wbom  tbey  bad  seen  so  vy~ 
gorouslyassayUe&defendetbem,mygbtbynygbt 
come  vp  on  tbe  walles  by  laddres  and  entre  in  to 
rtbe  toun.  XTberf  or  tbey  peyned  tbem  to  make  good 
[watcbe  alle  tbis  nygbt,  and  to  goo  roundabout  tbe 
,  walles  &  sercbe  tne  towres.  XTbe  stretes  also  made 
watcbewitbintbetounwitbgretenombreof  people, 
by  cause  of  fere  of  traysonXbey  sette  beron  grete 
entente,  ffor  it  was  for  tbe  sauacton  of  tbeyr  lyues, 
tbeyr  wyues,  tbeyr  cbtlderen,  and  alle  tbeyr  goodes 
boolly  JfOxxt  peple  tbat  were  in  tbe  tentes  and  in 
ftbe  lodgys  bad  not  tbeyr  bertes  in  reste,  but  tbey 

379 


w~ 


remembryd  of  tbassault  that  bad  be*  Guery  man 
remembryd  bym  wbat  be  bad  don,  and  bym  scmed 
tbat  be  bad  left  many  tbynges  vndon  tbatbe  ougbt 
to  baue  don,  and  mocbe  desired  tbey  alle  to  come 
to  tbe  poynt  for  to  doo  prowesseXbe  daye  taryed 
long  er  it  cam  as  tbey  tbougbt;  tbem  semed  tbat 
tbey  bad  no  greef  ne  ennoye  of  tbe  trauaylle  tbat 
tbey  bad  suflred  tbat  day*  TLbzy  bad  grete  bope  in 
tbeyrbertes,tbatassone  as  tbey  sbold  come  agayn 
togydre  for  tassay  lie,  tbat  tbey  by  tbe  belpe  of  our 
lord  tbey  sbold  baue  tbe  better*  Hnd  tbey  were  in 
grete  anguyssbe,  by  cause  tbem  semed  to  be  in  more 
mesease  in  tbeir  lodgys  tban  in  tbassault* 
How  our  peple  retomed  agayn  on  tbe  mome  to 
tbassault,  &  of  tbe  sorceryes  tbat  tbey  wold  baue 
cbarmed  one  of  our  engyns,  capitulo  Cbcxxij^^ 
%£^Z8p&  spryngeof  tbe  daye  appier- 
ed;  tne  peple  incontynent  were 
awahed*Gcbewente  to  tbe  place 
where  be  bad  ben  tbe  daye  to 
fore*  0>enne  sbold  ye  baue  seen 
somme  renne  totbengynes  and 
otber  goo  vpone  tbe  castellys 
for  to  sbote  witb  bowes  &  ara- 


balestres,  and  many  abode  vnder  for  to  drawe  tbe 
sayd  castellys  f  ortbj^J^owe  were  tbey  of  tbe  toun 
anon  redy  for  to  defende  vygorously  ayenst  tbe 
assayllers*  Hbere  deyed  ynowgbe  on  botbe  sydes 
as  well  of  stones  as  of  quarellys,  but  not  for  tbat 
tbe  otber  lef  te  not,  but  gretely  tbey  dyde  tbeyr  de- 
uoyr,  ne  neuer  was  f ounden  lasse  cowardyse  in  so 


peryllous  affayre  and  werke^Onc  tbynge  bappcd 
that  ought  not  to  beforgoten.  Abatis,  tbat  our 
men  bad  an  instrument  called  caable,  so  strong 
and  so  wel  made  tbat  it  tbrewe  tbre  grete  stones 
attones,  and  dyde  mocbe  burte  in  tbe  toun  wbere 
it  atteyned,  €be  €urkes  saw  welle  tbat  tbey  coude 
not  breke  it,  ff or  it  tbrewe  from  so  f erre  tbat  tbeir 
engins  mygbt  not  come  tbere  toj^€berfor  tbey 
dyde  do  come  vpon  tbe  walles  ij  old  wytcbes  or  en- 
cbaunteresses,  wbicbe  sbold  cbarme  tbis  enofyne, 
and  tbey  bad  witb  tbem  iij  maydens  for  to  belpe 
to  make  tbeyr  cbarme,  Hlle  tbey  of  oure  booste  be- 
belde  tbem  mocbe  ententyfly,  ffor  tbey  made  tbetr 
encbauntementvpon  tbe  wallesj^Cbey  abode  so 
longe  tber  tbat  tbengyns  tbrewe  tbe  stones,  and  at- 
teyned  tbe  two  old  wytcbes  and  tbe  tbre  maydens, 
in  sucb  wise  tbat  tbey  were  smeton  alle  to  pyeces, 
&  fyl  doun  deed  fro  tbe  walles,  of  wbom  tbesowles 
wente  fortbe  tobellejjTCbenne  oure  peple  made  an 
bu  andacryesogrete,andso  grete  ioyetberof ,  tbat 
euery  man  of  tbem  was  refressbyd  of  this  good 
strookj^Cbey  of  tbe  toun  were  ouersorowfulland 
mocbe  abassbed,  in  sucbe  wyse  tbat  tbey  semed 
tbat  tbey  bad  lost  alle  tbeyr  good  ewr  and  fortune 
for  tbe  losse  of  tbyse  two  wytcbes  tbat  tbus  were 
slayn. 


381 


Of  tbe  deapayr  of  our  peple  at  tbc  eayd  aaaault,  & 
bow  tbey  wererecomforted  by  a  knygbt vnknowen, 
andeuydcnt  myraclea,  capitulo  Clxxxiij,*^ 

|]ST  tbia  poynt  endured  tbaaaault 
vnto  after  myddaye,  tbat  men 
knewe  not  wbyebe  of  tbem  bad 
tbe  betterj^Our  men  began  to 
wexe  wery,  &  tbaaaault  toumed 
tbem  to  annoye  and  gryef,  ffor 
tbey  bad  longe  don  alle  tbeyr 
power,  and  tbe  werke  wae  not 

>  mocbe  amended,  but  were  f alle  in  a  deaperaunce,  in 
1  aucbe  wyae  tbat  tbey  bad  talente  to  leue  tbe  caatell 
i  of  tree,  wbicbe  waenygbal  to/broken  of  tbe  atones 
andabotte,  and  woldedraweabaktbe  other  engyne 
^tbatamoked  of  tbe  fyeretbat  tbellurkea  badcaate 
tberin,  tberfore  wold  tbey  prolonge  tbaaaault  til 
on  tbe  mom, and  berof  to  doo  tbue tbey  bad  good 
wylle*  tTbeyr  enemyea  apperceyued  tbia  tbat  tbey 
lefte  tbaaaault  tbua,  and  were  reyaed  in  to  grete 
pryde;  tbey  mocqued  oure  peple,  and  aayd  to  tbem 
fowleand  shamefuUwordea,and  more  aaprely  de- 
fended tbem  self,  and  burted  tbengyna.  In  mocbe 

>  f eble  poyn  t  waa  tbe  conduyte  of  our  py  Igryma,  and 
y f  ne  bad  be  tbe  debonayrte  of  oure  lord,  wbicbe  by 
myracle  comforted  tbem,  like  aa  ye  abal  berejJFf  ro 

>tbe  mount  of  Olyuetappiered  a  knygbt  wbicbe  waa 
not  knowen  ne  neuer  mygbt  be  founden.j^ITbia 
knygbt  began  toabakeandmeuebia  abelde,  wbicbe 
waa  mocbe  deer  and  abynyng,  and  made  eigne  to 
our  peple  tbat  tbey  abold  now  retorne,  and  come  a- 


gayne  to  tbassaultXbe  due  Godeflroy  was  in  bis 
estage  of  tbc  castell,  and  Gustace  bis  brodcr  witb 
bym,  for  to  deuyse  and  ordeyne  tberc  tbat  ougbtc 
bedon,&tokepetbatboldewbicbemocbwasgood, 
j?He  sone  as  be  sawe  tbis  eigne  tbat  tbis  knygbt 
made,  be  began  to  call  all  tbe  peple  agayn  witb  a 
mocb  bye  voys,  and  cryed  and  aff ermed  tbat  ^f  tbey 
wold retome tbe  toun  sbold  be  taken*  fierof  itbap- 
ped  tbat  by  tbe  debonayrte  of  oure  lord,  wbicbe  put 
in  tbe  bertes  bardynesse,  in  sucbe  wyse  tbat  tbey 
cam  agayn  witb  so  grete  ioye,as  tbat  euery  man  bad 
be  in  certain  te  of  tbe  vyctorye*  So  grete  bardynes 
was  come  in  to  tbeir  bertes,  tbat  tbey  were  entierly 
jrefressbyd,  as  tbey  tbat  in  al  tbat  day  bad  suffred 
no  trauaylle, 

JW  one  tbyng  bapped  wbicbe  was 
grete  meruaylle;  ffor  tbey  tbat  were 
burte  peryllously  and  laye  in  tbeyr 
beddes,sprangevpanon  &reprysed 
tbeyr  bamoys  and  armes,  in  sucbe 
wyse  tbat  more  dylygently  and  of 
greter  berte  tban  tbe  otber  tbey  began  to  assavlle. 
tbe  barons  of  tbooste,  tbat  were  capytayns  of  tbe 
people,  f or  to  gyue  ensample  tootbermen  puttbem 
self  alway  to  forej^iXlbere  tbe  grettest  daungiers 
were,  were  founden  tbe  moost  bye  men  of  tboost, 
by  wbicbe  tbe  mene  peple  were  tbe  more  bardyXbe 
wymmen  tbat  mygbt  bere  no  armes,  ranne  witb 
tbeyr  pottes  ful  of  water  tburgb  tboost,  and  gaf 
toall  tbem  tbat  were  wery  of  assayllyngto  drynke, 
and  mocbe  admonested  tbem  by  f ayr  wordes  for 
to  doo  wel,  and  to serue  our  lord  vy gorously.  Oure 

38a 


py  Igryms  bad  so  grctc  ioy  e  in  tbey  r  bertes  t  bat  tbey 
laboured  and  toke  tbc  werke  80  bertely,  tbat  witbin 
tbc  space  of  balf  an  bour  tbey  fylled  tbe  dy  cbe,  &  a 
barbycan  wbicbe  wasmocbe  stronge,in  sucbe  wyse 
tbat  tbey  brought  tbe  castel  vnto  tbe  wallcTTbe 
TTurkes  of  tbe  toun  bad  banged,  as  I  baue  sayd, 
witb  cordes  long  pyeces  of  tymbre  a/long  tbe  wall 
forto  receyuetbe  strokes  of  tbestones.Gmongall 
otber  tbere  were  two  grete  pyeces  of  tymbre  mocbe 
longe,  of  wbicbeour  men  tbat werein  tne  castel  cu tte 
tbe  cordes,  in  sucbe  wyse  tbat  tbey  fylle  to  tbe 
groundXbey  tbat  werevndertoke  tbem  witb  grete 
perylle,  and  drewe  tbem  ner  tbe  castel  for  to  belpe 
to  staye  and  sette  vnder  tbe  brydge  of  tbe  castel 
wban  it  sbold  be  aualed,  for  tbe  side  of  tbe  castel 
tbat  sbold  be  lete  falle  vpon  tbe  walle,  was  of  f  eble 
tymbre,  in  sucbe  wyse  tbat  yf  tbyse  two  pyeces  of 
tymbre  bad  not  be,  tbe  men  of  armes  mocbt  not 
baue  passed  on  it 

Row  tberle  of  TTbolouse  assay  lied  vygorouely  to- 
ward tbe  soutb,  and  of  tbardaunt  desire  tbat  ecbe 
man  bad  to  doo  wel,  capituto  Cbocxiiij^,*? 

"^T^^Sastbeyconteynedtbem 
tbus  vigorously  in  tbe  partye 
toward  tbe  nortbeest,  tbe  erleof 
vbolouse,  &  tbe  otber  tbat  were 
witb  by m  on  tbe  side  toward  tbe 
80utb,a6saylled  tbere  witb  grete 
strengtbej^rbey  bad  fylled  a 
dycbe,inwbicbetbeybadlabour- 
ed  I  wote  not  bow  many  dayes,  in  sucbe  wyse  tbat 
by  force  tbey  bad drawen  tbeyr  castelso  ferrefortb 


that  itwas  nygbe  the  walle,in  sucbewyse  tbattbey 

k  tbat  were  aboue  in  tbe  last  stage  mygbt  smyte  tbe 

TTurfceswitbtbeirglaues  tbat  defended  tbe  tourjfi? 

}H  man  coude  not  tbynfce  tbe  ardaunt  desyre,  ne  so 

i  grete  anguyssbeaseueryebeof  tbe  cristen  men  bad 

in  bis  bertefortodowelintbisassault.Onetbinge 

tbere  was  tbat  gaf  to  tbem  mocbe  grete  courage,  & 

merueyllously  grete  bardynesse*  for  a  man  tbat 

was  an  beremyte  on  tbe  mount  of  Olyuete  bad  pro- 

mysed  to  tbem  mocbe  certaynly,  tbat  tbat  same 

dayesboldbe  taken  tbe  boly  cyte  of  Iberusalem^e 

tbey  bad  not  f orgoten  tbe  demonstraunce  tbat  tbe 

>fcnygbt  made  to  tbem  wban  be  sboke  bis  sbelde,ne 

neuer  after  was  seenXbey  bad  mocbe  bope  of  tbe 

vyctorye  by  tbise  signefyaunces  tbat  were  shewed 

>  to  tbem^It  semed  tbat  tbassaultes  were  botbe  in 

f  one  poynt  in  eytber  syde  tbat  1  baue  named,  Cbey 

dyde  botbe  rigbt  wel,and  certaynly  it  appeeredwel 

tbatourelordwoldbelpe  bis80uldyours,&brynge 

tbeyr  pylgremage  to  an  ende,  wbicbe  so  longe  bad 

1  suffred  so  many  maners  of  mesease  for  to  doo  to 

bym  seruyse* 

Of  tbe  pryse  and  takynge  of  Iberusalem,  and  bow 
tbe  due  Godeffroye  entred  fyrst  vpon  tbe  walles, 
^and  wbo  f  olowed  after,  capitulo  Clxxxv^^ 

ine  people  of  tbe  due  ©odefroy 
&  tbe  otber  barons  wbicbe  were 
witbbym,as!bauesayd,fougbt 

i  mocbe  asprely  ayenst  tbeyr  ene- 
myes  on  tbeyr  syde,  and  dely- 
uerd  to  tbem  a  mocb  marueyl- 
lous  assault,  €bey  bad  don  so 
mocbe  tbat  tbeyr  en  emyeswexed 

c  c i  3$5 


1 


wery,&  weryly  &  slowly  defended  tbem.Oure  men 
were  drawen  forth  to  fore,  the  dvebes  were  fylled, 
the  barbycans  taken,  in  sucbe  wise  tbat  tbey  cam 
playn  totbe  walles,tbougbtbeywitbin  entremeted 
notmocbe  tosbote  and  launcb  fro  aboue  vpon  tbe 
walls,  ne  by  tbe  loope/bolesXbe  due  commaunded 
to  bis  peple  tbat  were  vppon  tbe  castel,  tbat  tbey 
sette  fire  in  tbe  pokes  or  cotton  and  in  tbe  sackes 
of  beye  tbat  benge  on  tbe  walks,  TTbey  dyde  bie 
commaundement;  tbenne  aroos  a  smoke  so  blacke 
and  so  tbycke  tbat  tbey  mygbt  notbynge  see,  TTbe 
wynd  was  nortbe/este,  and  blew  vpon  tbe  TTurkes 
tbat  were  at  defense  upon  tbe  walks,  in  sucb  wyse 
tbat  tbey  myofbtnot  open  tbeyr  even  ne  tbeyrmow- 
tbes,  but  by  force  tbey  muste  avoyde  tbe  placetbat 
was  delyuerd  to  tbem  to  deflfendejjSTCbe  valyaunt 
due  ©odeflfroye,wbicbesoynou8ly  entendedto  tbe 
werke,  appercey  uedfirst  tbat  tbey  sbold  drawedili- 
gently  tbe  ij  pyeces  of  tymbre  tbat  were  fallen  fro 
tbe  walk,  as  ye  baue  berde  to  fore,  TTbis  was  don 
anon,  in  sucbe  wyse  tbat  tbe  two  endes  of  tbe  two 
trees  were  leyd  upon  tbe  castel,  and  tbe  two  otber 
endes  vpon  tbe  walkj^Cbenne  commaunded  tbat 
tbe  syde  of  tbe  castel,  tbat  mygbt  be  late  doun, 
sbold  be  late  doun  vpon  tbe  two  pyeces  of  tymbre, 
and  tbus  was  tbe  brydge  made  good  and  strong 
vpon  tbe  tymbre  of  tbeyr  enemyes, 

"fie  fyrst  tbat  entred  and  passed  by 
tbe  brydge  vpon  tbe  walles  was  tbe 
du  c  6odeflProv  of  Boloyne&Gustace 
bis  brotber  witb  bym j&Ef ter  tbyse 
tweyne  cam  two  otber  kny  gbtes,  that 
were  also  bretberen,  wbicbe  also  were 


BH^HBHB 


fyers,noble  and  hardy;  that  onewas  named  Lutol 
&  that  other  Gylbert;  they  were  borne  in  tTomay, 
Hnon  ther  siewed  them  grete  nombre  of  knygbtes 
and  of  peple  a  f oote,  whiche  ranne  moche  tbycke, 
as  moche  as  they  mygbte  susteynejS^Hnon  the 
TTurkes  apperceyued  that ourmen  were  entred  in  to 
the  toun,  and  sawe  the  baner  of  the  due  vpon  the 
wallys,  &  were  disconfyted  &  gaf  ouer  the  toures, 
and  descended  in  to  the  toun,  and  put  them  in  to 
the  strayt  andnarowe  stretes  for  to  defendetbem, 
jS^Oure  peple  sawe  that  the  due  andgrete  partye  of 
the  knygbtes  were  now  entred,  and  that  they  had 
taken  1  wote  not  how  many  towres*  XZhcy  abode 
no  commaundement,  but  adressyd  laddres  to  the 
walles  and  wente  vp.  It  was  commaunded  a  good 
wbyle  to  fore  that  euery  ij  knyghtee  sbold  haue  a 
laddre,  therfor  ther  were  grete  nombre  in  tboost, 
whiche  anon  were  adressyd  vpjSTCbe  due  ranne 
moche  dylygently  vppon  the  walles,  and  sette  the 
peple  as  they  cam  in  the  towres,  He  moche  hasted 
for  to  take  the  fortressej^Hn  on,  after  that  the  due 
was  entred, entred  in  theducof  ]^ormandye,therle 
of  f  laundres,  Oncre  the  valyaunt,  therle  of  seynt 
poul,  JBawdyn  d'Gltors,  Gace  de  Barce,  Gaste  de 
Bedyers,  Thomas  de  f  ere,  Gyralt  de  Roussylon, 
Lowys  de  JVIoncon,  Conain  of  JBrytayne,  therle 
Remboult  of  Orenge,  Conain  de  JMontagfu,  Lam- 
bert his  sone,  &  many  other  knygbtes whiche  1  can 
not  namej^CHhan  the  valyaunt  due  knewecertayn- 
ly  that  they  were  in  the  toun,  he  called  them  and 
commaunaed  that  they  sbold  goo  hastely  to  the 
yate  named  the  yate  of  seynt  Stephen,  &  that  they 
c  c  2  387 


sbold  opene  it.  3CIban  it  was  open,  alle  the  people 
cam  in  with  mocbe  grete  prees,  in  sucbe  wyse  tbat 
there  abode  but  f  ewe  witboute,  but  alle  were  comen 
wttbtn  tbe  toun.  TTbis  was  vpon  a  f rydaye,aboute 
none jj?It  is  a  tbynge  for  to  be  beleuyd,  tbat  oure 
lord  dyde  tbts  by  grete  sygnefyaunce,  ffor  on  tbis 
daye  and  about  tbat  bour  suffred  be  detb  on  tbe 
crosse  rygbt  cruel  in  tbe  same  place,  for  tbe  re- 
dempcton  of  man.  TTberfore  wolde  tbeswete  lord 
tbat  tbe  pepleof  bis  trewe  pylgrymssbold  geteon 
this  day  tbts  toun,  and  delyuer  it  oute  of  tbe  ser- 
uage  and  tbraldom  of  tbe  betben  men,  and  make  it 
free  vnto  crtsten  men,  tbat  bis  seruyse  mygbt  be 
bad  tbenn  and  encreced. 

Of  tbemayntenyng  of  our  peple  entred  in  to  tbe 
toun  toward  tbe  nortbeest,  and  tberle  of  XTbolouse 
berof  alleygnoraunt  assaylled  alle  way,  capitulo 

fi€  valyaunt  due  Godeffroy  of 

Buy  lion,  tbe  knygbtes,and  tbe 

otber  men  of  armes  tbat  were 

witb  bym,  descended  from  tbe 

walks  all  armed  in  to  tbe  toun, 

\bey  wen  te  to  gydre  tburgb  tbe 

stretes  witb  tbeir  swercfes  in 

.  their  handes  and  orlavues*  aVU 

tbem  tbat  tbey  mette  tbey  slewe  ^Stkqbt 

doun,men,wymmen  and  cbilderen,sparyn<rnone: 

)  there  mygbt  no  prayers necryengof  mercy  auaylle. 

^hey  slewe  so  many  in  tbe  stretes  tbat  tberewere 

beeps  of  dede  bodyes,  &  mygbt  not  goo  ne  passe 


but  vpon  tbcm  that  so  laye  deed,  0>e  f oote  men 
wente  in  the  other  partyes  of  the  toun  by  grete 
rowtes,  boldyng  in  tbeyr  bands  grete  polaxes, 
swerdes,  malles  and  otber  wepens,  sleyng  alle  tbe 
TTurkes  tbat  tbey  coude  fynde,  ffor  tbei  were  tbe 
men  of  tbe  world  wbom  our  men  bad  grettest  bate 
vnto,  and  gladlyest  wold  put  to  detb-  XTbey  were 
tbenne  comen  vnto  tbe  mydle  of  tbe  cyte  j^berle 
of  €bolouse  ne  bis  men  hnewe  notbynof  yet  that 
tbe  toun  was  taken,  but  assaylled  mocbe  fversly 
tbe  toun  ayenst  Syon.  €be  €urkes  tbat  defended 
.tbem  ayenst  bym  apperceyued  not  tbat  our  peple 
j were  in  tbe  toun, 

\WC  wban  tbe  crye  and  tbe  noyseof 
tbem  tbat  men  slowe  began  to  growe, 
tbe  XTurkes  bebelde  and  sawe  fro  tbe 
walks,  and  knewewel  tbe  baners  and 
armes  of  tbe  cristen  men,  and  were 
.  mocbeabassbedXbey  lef  tealle  tbeyr 
deffences,  and  fiedde  tbere  wbere  tbey  supposed 
best  to  be  saued,  and  by  cause  tbat  tbe  dongeon 
of  tbe  toun  wbicbe  was  by,  and  was  tbe  cjrettest 
strengtbe  of  tbe  cyte,  alle  tbey  tbat  mygbt  entre 
entred  tberin,  and  sbette  fast  tbe  doores  on  tbem 
jpZbc  erle  of  €bolouse  made  tbe  brydge  of  bis 
castle  auale  vpon  tbe  walks,  and  entred  tbere  m 
tbe  toun,  be  bym  self,  and  tbe  erle  of  Dye,  Vfocar, 
Remonpelet,<3uyllem  de  Sabram,tbe  bissbopof 
Hlbare,  and  tbe  otber  barons,  mocbe  bastely,  and 
wende  tbat  tbey  on  tbat  parte  of  tbe  toun  bad  be 
tbe  first  tbat  bad  entred.  €benne  tbey  went  doun 
of  tbe  walks,  and  alle  tbeTTurkes  tbat  tbey  founde 
CC3  389 


in  the  strctcs  and  in  tbc  bowses  tbey  brought  to 
dctb  &  slewe  doun  right  fro  than  f ortbon  mygbt 
none  escape,  ffor  tbey  that  fledde  to  fore  due  God- 
effroye  and  bis  rowte,  mette  with  other  rowtes  of 
oure  peple,  wbicbe  smote  them  doun  &  slewe  them 
without  mercy  J?  I  may  not  reberce  ne  can  not  to 
vou  the  f aites  of  euery  man  by  bym  self,  but  there 
was  so  mocbe  blood  sbedde  that  the  canellys  and 
ruissbeauls  ronne  alle  of  blood,  &  alle  the  stretes 
of  the  toun  were  couerd  with  dede  men,  in  suche 
wyse  that  it  was  grete  pyte  for  to  see,yf  it  bad  not 
be  of  tbenemyes  of  our  lord  7besu  Creste, 
Row  x  ]VI  €urkes  were  slayn  in  the  temple,  and  of 
the  grete  tresour  that  Can  ere  founde  in  the  sayd 
temple,  capitulo  Clxxxvij^^ 

IN  to  tbynner  part  of  the  temple 

were  fledde  mocbe  grete  peple 

of  the  toun,  by  cause  it  was  the 

moost  seynorously  &  rial  place 

of  the  toun,  and  the  sayd  place 

was  fast  sbette  and  closed  with 

good  walles,  of  towres  &  yates* 

-  But  this  auaylled  them  but  lytil, 

ffor  incontinentCancre,  which  laddeagrete  partye 

of  thoost  with  bym,  ranne  tbeder  and  toke  it  by 

strengtbe,and  slewe  many  tberimHnd  itwas  savd 

that  Cancre  founde  tberin  grete  hauoyr,and  gold, 

syluer,  precious  stones  and  cloth  of  sylk  Re  made 

alle  to'be  bom  away;  but  after,  whan  alle  was  sette 

in  reste,  he  rendryd  all,  &  made  it  al  to  be  brought 

in  to  the  comyn  j^€he  other  barons,  that  bad  en- 


l^ 


'sercbed  tbe  toun  &  slayn  alle  tbeTTurkes  tbat  tbey 
encountred,  bcrd  saye  tbat  wytbyn  tbe  cloysture 
of  tbc  temple  were  fled  alle  tbe  retnenaimt  or  tbeyr 
enemyes.  Vbcy  alle  cam  to  gydre  tbeder,  &  founde 
tbat  it  was  trewe  J?  Cbenne  commaunded  tbey  to 
tbeyr  men  tbat  tbey  sbold  entre  in  to  tbe  place.and 
>ut  tbem  alle  to  detb,  and  so  tbey  dyde. 

^IftC  was  wel  couenable  tbyng  tbat  tbe 
betben  men  and  fals  mysbyleuyd, 
wbicbe  bad  fowled  and  sbamefully 
bad  maculated  witb  tbeyr  mabome- 
try  &  f owle  laweof  JVIacbomet,sbold 
abye  tbere  tbeyr  fals  rytes,  and  tbat 
tbeyr  blood  sbold  also  besbedd  wbere  as  tbey  bad 
spred  tbe  ordure  of  mescreauncejfifllt  was  an  byd- 
eouse  tbyncj  to  see  tbe  multitude  of  peple  wbicb 
were  slayn  in  tbis  place*  "Cbey  tbem  self  tbat  bad 
slayn  bem  were  sore  ennoyed  so  for  to  bebolde 
tbem,  ffor  fro  tbe  plante  of  tbe  foot  vnto  tbe  beed 
was  noneotber  tbyng  but  bloodXberwas  founde 
tbat  witbin  tbe  closyng  of  tbe  temple  were  slayn 
x  JYI  Curkes,  witboute  tbem  tbat  leye  in  tbe  stretes 
and  otber  places  of  tbe  cyte  J?  Unenne  tbe  mene 
peple  of  tbe  pyloryms  ran  sercbyng  tbe  lanes  and 
narowstretes.GIban  tbey  fonde  ony  of  tbeCurkes 
tbat  bad  byd  tbem,  were  it  man  or  woman,  anon  be 
was  put  to  detb  jb  XTbe  barons  bad  deuysed  to 
fore  tbat  tbe  toun  was  taken,  tbat  eueryman  sbold 
baue  tbe  bows  in  tbe  toun  tbat  be  tokeand  fyrst 
seased,  Ait  sbold  be  bis  witb  alle  appertenauntes ; 
wberefor  it  was  so  tbat  tbe  barons  sette  vpon  tbe 
bowses  tbat  tbey  bad  conquered  tbeyr  baners,  tbe 
CC4  391 


^J^h 


lasse  knygbtes  and  men  of  armes  tbeyr  sbeldes; 
the  men  a  foote  sette  vp  tbeyr  battes  and  tbeyr 
swerdes,ffor  tosbewe  tbe  tokenes  tbat  tbe  bowses 
were  tbenne  taken  and  seased,  to  tbende  tbat  none 
otber  sbold  come  in  to  it* 

Of  tbefayrordenaunces  tbat  tbecristen  men  made 
to  fore  tbey  wente  for  to  vnarme  tbem,  after  tbe 
toun  was  taken,  capitulo  Clxxxviij^^ 

RHJ^  tbe  boly  cyte  was  tbus 
taken,  and  alle  tbe  Sarasyns 
tbat  coude  be  founden  were 
slayn,  tbe  barons  assembled 
tbem  togydre  to  fore  tbey  vn- 
armed  tbem,  &  commaunded 
to  sette  men  in  tbe  towres  for 
to  make  good  watcbe,  &  kepe 
tbe  toun*  Hnd  sette  porters  for  to  kepe  tbe  yates, 
tbat  noman  from  witboute  sbold  come  in  to  tbe 
>  toun  without  leue,  vntotbe  tyme  tbat  tbey  bad  or- 
deyned  and  cbosen  a  lord  by  comyn  acorde,  tbat 
sbould  bolde  tbe  toun  and  goueme  it  at  bis  wylle. 
It  was  not  merueylle  if  tbey  doubted  yet,  fFor  alle 
tbe  countre  was  f ul  of  Sarasyns,  and  mygbt  per- 
aduenture  assemble  and  sodenly  come  and  smyte 
in  to  tbe  toun  yf  tber  were  not  good  watcbe  and 
bede  taken  jjTCbenne  departed  tbe  barons,  &  dis- 
armed tbem  and  toke  of  tbeyr  bamoys  in  tbeyr 
bostellys,  &  wessbe  tbeyr  bandes  and  f eete  mocbe 
el,  and  cbaunged  tbeyr  clotbesj^Cbenne  began 
tbey  goo  bare  foot,  and  in  wepynges  and  teeres, 
vntotbe  boly  places  of  tbe  cyte  wbere  oure  sauyour 
392 


^as 


^XbesuCristebad  ben  bodyly ;  tbey  kyssed  tbe  place 
fmocbe  swetly  wbere  as  bis  reet  bad  touched, 

^jF)6  crysten  peple  and  tbe  clergye  of 
tbe  toun,  to  wbom  tbe  TTurkes  bad 
many  tymes  don  grete  sbames  for 
tbe  name  of  Xbesu  Criste,  cam  witb 
procession  and  bare  sucbe  relyques 
as  tbey  bad  ayenst  tbe  barons,  and 
brougbttbem,yeldyngtbankestoHlmygbty6od, 
vnto  tbe  sepulcre*Hnd  tbere  it  wasapytous  tbyng 
[to  see  bow  tbe  peple  wepte  for  ioye  and  pyte,  and 
jbow  tbey  fylle  doun  a  crosse  to  fore  tbe  sepulcre. 
It  semed  to  eueryebe  of  tbem  tbat  ecbe  sawe  tbere 
tbe  bodye  of  our  lord  tbere  deed  j^TTbere  were  so 
many  teeres  &  wepynges  tbat  euery  man  tbougbt 
certaynly  oure  lord  was  tbere,  COban  tbey  cam  in 
one  of  tbe  boly  places,  tbey  coude  not  departe,  but 
yf  it  were  for  tbardaunt  desire  tbat  tbey  bad  for 
to  goo  in  another j^Cbey  bad  so  mocbeioye  and 
gladnesseof  tbis  bonour,  tbat  our  lord  bad  gyuen 
tbem  tbe  grace  to  see  tbe  day  tbat  tbe  boly  cyte  was 
delyuerd  fro  tbenemyes  of  Ibesu  Cryste  by  tbeyr 
trauaylles,  in  sucb  wyse  tbat  tbey  rougbt  not  ne 
sette  not  by  tbe  remenaunt  of  tbeyr  lyues,  XTbey 
offred  and  gaf  lamely  to  tbe  cbircbes,  and  to  men 
of  tbe  cbircbe,  and  made  vowes  to  yeue  yeftes  in 
tbeir  countrees,  wbicbe  tbenne  sette  lytil  by  tem- 
poral tbynges,  ffor  tbem  tbougbt  tbat  tbey  were 
atte  yates  and  entree  of  paradys,  ffor  neuer  m  tbis 
world  mygbt  gretter  ioye  entre  in  to  tbe  berte  of  a 
man  tban  was  in  tbem  in  secbyng  and  goyng  to 
tbe  bolye  places  wbere  our  sauyour  Xbesu  Cnste 

393 


?^9*£V»«»«>rv 


bad  benjfiPOnesbold  baue  badamocbe  bardc  bcrtc 
and  lytil  pyteous,  tbat  bad  seen  tbis  sygbt,  and 
iri^gbt  bauc  boldc  bym  fro  wepynge, 

"HHJS"  tbyse  barons  and  allc  tbeotber 
peple  bad  made  tbus  glad  cbiereof 
tbts  tbat  tbey  bad  accomplyssbyd 
tbeyr  pylgremage,  tbc  byssboppes, 
and  generally  alle  tbe  peple  of  tbe 
-  cbircbe,  mygbt  not  departe  fro  tbe 
cbircbeof  tbe  sepulcre,ne  fro  tbeotber  boly  places, 
'Cbcy  prayd  our  lord  mocbe  deuoutly  &  ententyfly 
f ortbe  peple, and  rendred  grete  graces  and  tbank- 
ynges  vnto  Ibesu  Criste  of  tbis  tbat  be  bad  suf  ~ 
fred  tbem  to  see  tbyse  boly  places  wbere  tbe  f ay tb 
of  crystendom  was  fyrste  gyuen  jp  In  tbys  daye 
bapped  certayn  tbynge  tbat  was  seen  of  many  men 
in  tbe  cyte  of  Iberusalem:  tbat  was,  tbe  valyaunt 
manHymart,tbe  bessbopof  puy,wbicbewas  dede 
in  Hntbyocbe,  lyke  as  ye  baue  berd  to  fore,  many 
noble  men,  wbom  men  ougbt  to  byleue,  affermed 
certaynly  tbat  tbey  sawe  bym  firste  mounte  and 
goo  vpon  tbe  walles  of  tbe  toun,  and  tbat  be  cal- 
led otber  to  come  aftir  bym J?Of  many  otber  pyl- 
gryms  also,  tbat  were  to  fore  by  tbe  waye  deed  it 
was  certayne  tbat  tbey  appiered  to  many  men  tbe 
da^wb^ntbey  vysyted  tbe  cbircbes  of  tbe  cyte, 
"Y  tbyse  tbynges  may  wel  be  knowen 
tbat  our  lord  louetb  tbis  boly  cyte 
aboue  alle  otber,  and  tbat  tbis  is  tbe 
byest  pylgremage  tbat  may  be,  wban 
deed  men  ben  reysed  by  tbewylleof 
oure  lord  for  taccomplyssbe  tbeyr 
pylgremage,  (Oban  oure  lord  Ibesu  Criste  aroos 
394 


K 


ffrodetb  to  lyf,  the  gospel  saytb  that  the  samedav 
aroos  many  bodyes  of  tbcm  that  bad  ben  deed,  &. 
appicrcd  to  many  in  tbc  cyteXbis  myracle  was  re- 
newed tbis  day  bylbesuCriste,by  tbis  cytewbicbe 
bad  ben  longfe  bolden  in  tbe  seygnoryeof  tbe  pay- 
nems,wban  itwas  vnder  tbem  tbat  serued  tbe  lawe 
of  JVIacbommet  JP  So  grete  noyse  was  tburgb  tbe 
toun  of  tbe  ioye  tbat  was  made,  tbat  tbey  remem- 
bred  not  tbe  grete  trauaylle  tbat  tbey  bad  suffred 
by  alle  tbeyr  wayeXbennewas  accomplyssbed  alle 
|  euydently  tbis  tbat  tbe  propbete  sayd:  Snioye  ye 
witb  Iberusalem,  and  make  ye  ioye  tberin,  ye  tbat 
loue  her. 

Row  tbe  cristen  men,  tbat  bad  charged  tbeir  mes- 
sage for  tbeir  delyueraunce  to  peter  Oeremyte, 
knewe  hym,  capitulo  Clxxx\x&& 

'  S  many  pour  cristen  men  as  bad 
dwellid  in  tbe  toun,  wbicb  bad 
seen  peter  Tberemyte  four  or 
fyue  yere  to  fore,  wban  tbey  de- 
lyuerd  tobym  lettres  for  tobere 
to  our  boly  fader  tbe  pope,  and 
to  tbe  barons  of  f  raunce,to  tbe 
_  ende  tbat  tbey  mygbt  sette  re- 
medye  for  tbeyr  affayres,  tbey  fmewe  bym  emonge 
tbe  otberj^XTbenne  tbey  cam  to  bym  and  f  yl  doun 
,to  bis  feet,  and  wepte  for  ioye,  and  mocbe  gretely 
thanked  bym  of  tbis  tbat  be  bad  so  wel  performed 
bis  message,  ne  tbey  cessed  not  to  yeue  preysyng 
^nd  lawde  to  our  lord  tbat  bad  gyuen  sucbe  coun- 
seyl  to  tbe  barons  and  to  tbe  peple,  by  which  tbey 


bad  performed  such  an  byewerke,  wbiebwasaboue 
tbe  nope  of  alle  men,  sauf  by  tbayde  of  oure  lord. 
Hll  tbe  oree  and  tbanke  tbey  gaf  to  peter  TTbere- 
myte,  wfiicbe  so  vygorously  bad  enterprysed  for 
to  delyuere  tbem  by  tbelpe  of  our  lord  fro  tbe  cay- 
tyfnes  and  seruage  dolorous,  in  wbicbe  tbey  bad 
ben  so  long  bolden  by  tbe  cruelte  of  tbe  Sarasyns, 
lyhe  as  ye  baue  berde  to  fore  J&  0>e  patryarke  of 
Iberusalem  was  goon  in  to  Cypres,  for  to  dem- 
aunde  almesse  and  ayde  of  tbe  cristen  men  tbere, 
for  to  belpe  and  socoure  tbe  cristen  men  of  Iberu- 
salem  to  pay  tbe  cruel  taillages  tbat  tbe  burkes  bad 
sette  vpon  tbem,  ff or  be  doubted  yf  tbey  fay  lied  of 
tbeir  payment,  tbat  tbey  wold  bete  &  tbrowe  doun 
tbeyr  cbircbes  or  put  to  detb  tbe  beste  of  tbeyr  pe- 
ple,lyke  as  tbey  bad  don  many  tymes  to  foreXbis 
good  man,  tbe  patriarke,  hnewe  notbyng  of  tbis 
good  auenture  tbat  oure  lord  bad  don  of  tbe  dely- 
ueraunceof  tbe  toun,  but  supposed  to  baue  come 
and  to  baue  founden  it  in  sucbe  seruage  ae  it  was 
1  wban  be  departed. 

Row  tbey  clensed  tbe  toun  of  tbe  dede  bodyes;  of 
many  other  ordenaunces,  &  bow  tbe  "Curkes  ren- 
dred  tbe  dongeon  vnto  tbe  eric  of  Cbolouee,  ca- 
pitulo  Clxxxx/?^ 

|F>HJV  tbe  barons  and  tbe  otber 
pylgrymsbad  made  tbeyr  pray- 
ers &  vysyted  tbe  boly  cbircbes 
tburgb  tbe  cyte  of  Iberusalem, 
tbe  bye  men  of  tbe  booste  as- 
sembled, and  sayd  tbat  it  was 
la  peryllous  tbynge  yf  tbe  toun 
Iwere  not  voyded  of  tbe  dede  bo- 


dyes,  and  purged  of  the  blood  and  ordure,  ffor  in 
snort  tyme  the  ayer  sbold  be  corrupt  by  wbicbe 
sekenessand  infyrmytes  mygbtenstewe&folowe. 
there  were  sommeTIurkes  yet  that  were  not  slayn, 
but  were  kepte  in  yrons;  totbem  wascommaunded 
this  werke  for  to  bere  tbe  bodyes  out  of  the  toun, 
but  by  cause  tbey  were  but  f ewe  of  tbem,  &  mygbt 
not  suffyee  to  doo  it  shortly,  tbey  toke  tbe  poure 
men  of  tboost,  and  ofaf  to  tnem  good  byre  for  to 
belpeto  accomplyssbe  tbis  werkej#<Oban  tbe  ba- 
rons bad  tbus  deuysed  tbyse  tbynges,  tbey  wente 
in  to  tbeyr  bowses  &  made  mocbe  grete  ioye;  tbey 
gaf  largeli  to  ete  and  drynke,  ffor  tbe  toun  was  re- 
plenesbed  of  alle  goodes,  in  sucbe  wise  tbat  tbey 
tbat  were  to  fore  poure  fonde  in  tbe  bowses  alle 
tbynof  was  nedeful  to  tbem,  wberof  tbey  bad  en- 
durecTto  fore  grete  anguyssbe&  penurye,ffor  tbey 
fonde  tbe  cysternes  alle  nil  in  alle  tbe  bowses* 

JV  tbe  tbyrd  day  was  ordeyned  tbat 
market  sbold  be  bolden  in  tbe  toun, 
and  tbat  tbey  sbold  bye  &  selle sucbe 
tbynges  as  tbey  bad  conquerd  in  tbe 
cyte  jJ^TIbey  were  mocbe  refressbyd 
and  rested,  ffor  tbey  abode  now  no 
^trauayll.  XTbey  f  orgate  not  our  lorde,  wbyebe  bad 
, brought  tbem  in  so  grete  honour  as  for  taccom- 
plyssbe  bis  werke  by  tbem,and  by  comyn  acord  of 
tbe  prelates,  of  tbe  barons,  and  of  all  tbe  people, 
was  ordeyned  tbat  tbis  daye  in  wbicbe  Iberusalem 
wos  goten  and  conquerd,  sbold  euermore  after  be 
bolden  f  este  and  boly  day  in  remembraunce  of  tbe 
cri8tenmen,totbankeandpreyseourlord,andalso 

397 


prayeto  our  lord  fortbesowlesof  tbem  that tbyse 
tbynges  bad  accomplished  jfrfl  gretc  partye  of 
tbe  Curkes  tbat  were  tn  tbe  dongeon  of  tbe  toun 
named  tbe  tour  Dauid,  sawe  wel  tbat  alle  tbe  cyte 
was  taken,  and  tbat  tbey  bad  no  more  hope  of  res- 
cows  ne  socour  ayenst  our  men.  t^berfor  tbey  re- 
quired by  messagers  tberle  of  TTbolouse  wbicbe 
was  next  to  tbem,  and  dyde  do  be  sayd  to  bym,  yf 
tbey  mygbte  departe  witb  tbeyr  wyues,  children, 
&  sucbe  goodes  as  tbey  bad  in  tbe  tour,  tbey  wold 
go  tbeyr  waye  &  delyuere  ouer  tbe  tour.  Re  agreed 
and  acorded  it  to  tbem,  and  so  tbey  departed,  and 
be  dyde  tbem  to  be  conduyted  saufly  vnto  6sca- 
lonne. 'Ubus  was  tbe  tour  yolden. 

RBYtbatbad  tbe  charge  for  to  purge 
and  voyde  tbe  dede  bodyes  oute  of 
tbe  toun  dyde  it  ententyfly  anddyly- 
gently,  in  sucbe  wyse  tbat  in  sborte 
tyme  tbis  tbynge  was  alle  don ;  if  or 
tbey  bery  ed  tbem  in  depe  py  ttes  witb- 
oute  tbe  toun  tbe  moost  parte,  tbe  remenaunt  tbey 
[brente  in  toa9sbe9,tbattbecendres  witb  tbe  wynde 
wae  blowen  awayj^Cbenne  were  our  men  in  good 
teewrte  and  ease  witbin  tbe  toun  to  goo  and  walke 
kburgb  tbe  stretes  and  otber  places,  &  dyde  dayly 
goo  in  pylgremages,  tbat  vnnetbe  mygbt  tbey  de- 
parte tbens,  tbey  abode  so  gladly  tbere  j^in  tbis 
manere,  as  ye  baue  berd,  was  taken  tbe  boly  cyte  of 
Iberusalem,  in  tbe  yere  of  tbyncamacion  or  oure 
sauyour  Ibesu  Criste  JVI  Ixxxxix,  tbe  xv  daye  of 
tbe  monetb  of  luyll,  on  a  f ryday  at  tbe  bour  of 
none,  tbe  iij  yereaf  ter  tbat  the  pylgryms  bad  enter- 
398 


MM 


ni 


prysed  tbis  viage*  TTbo  was  pope  of  Rome  Clrban, 
and  fienry  emperour  of  the  Romayns,  Hlexis  em~ 
perour  of  Constantinople,  and  pbylyp  kyngof 
ifraunce* 

Jftowe  the  bye  barons  of  tboost  assembled  for  to 
cbese  a  hyngeof  Iberusalem,  and  tboppynyon  of 
^betlergye1  pontbe  same,  capitulo  Cbcxxxj/^fr 

]YKB  as  ye  baue  berd,  tbe  pyl- 
1  gryms  wbicbe  bad  grete  nede  of 
Ireste  soiournedin  tbetoun.Tbe 
barons  deuysed  tbe  affaires  of 
tbe  cy  te»  In  mocbe  greteioye  were 
tbey  tbere  vij  dayes  J9  On  tbe 
Iviijdaye  assembled  alle  tbe  ba- 
I  rons  for  to  cbeseone  of  tbem,  to 
wbome  tbe  garde,  gouemaunce  and  kepyng  of  tbe 
toun  sbold  be  delyuerd,  and  tbe  seygnorye  of  tbe 
boly  cyte,  and  tbe  charge  of  tbe  royamme  entierly, 
as  it  was  reason  and  rigbtj^tTbey  made  tbeyr 
prayers  and  orysons,  &  witb  alle  tbeyr  berte  called 
tbe  boly  gbooste,  tbat  be  wold  counseylle  tbem 
(that  daye,and  to  yeue  to  tbem  grace  to  cbese sucbe 
;a  man  as  were  wortby  and  couenable  to  susteyne 
tbe  faytes  of  tbe  royammej^SIbyles  as  tbey  were 
>in  tbis  affayre,&  mocbe  entendedwitb  good  faytb 
tber  about,  an  bepe  of  clerkes  assembled,  wbicbe 
bad  not  good  entencion  but  tbougbton  malyce  by 
pryde  and  couetyseXbey  cam  wbere  as  tbe  barons 
I  were  assembled,  and  sente  to  tbem  for  to  speke  to 
'tbem  a  sbortword  or  two.Cbey  suffred  tbem  to 
come  in* 

399 


RHJVtbey  were  comen  in,  oncoftbem 

apak  in  tbia  manere:fayr  lordea,we 

bauevndcratanden  tbatyebeaaaem- 

bledbereforto  cbeae  akingtbatabal 

goueme  tbia  londe,  wbicbe  tbynge 

pleaitb  ve  mocbe,  and  we  bolden  it 

for  right  wel  don,yf  ye  dooit  in  tbe  manere  tbatye 

ought  to  doo  it,  ffor  without  doubte  the  apyrituel 

>tbyngea  be  more  digne  and  worthy  than  tbe  tem- 

( porallXberforewe  aaye  to  you,  that  tbe  mooatbye 

tbyngea  ought  to  goo  to  fore,  and  tbua  wolde  we 

that  ye  ahold  doo,  and  tbordenaunce  abold  not  go 

1  forth  other  wyae  than  it  ought  to  be,  JNk>w  tbenne, 

we  prave  you  and  requyre  you  in  tbe  name  of  oure 

lord,  that  ye  entremete  not  you  to  make  a  kynge  til 

that  ye  baue  cboaen  a  patriarke  in  tbia  toun  that  can 

goueme  the  criatiente,  Yf  it  pleaeyou  that  tbia  be 

don  fyrat,  it  abal  be  good  andweel  for  you,andwe 

abal  tbenne  bolde  bym  for  kyng  that  ye  abal  gyue 

tou8,Butifyewylldootberwyae,we8balnotbolde 
it  for  good,  ne  wel  don,  but  we  abal  diecorde,  and 
>  after  that  ye  doo  abal  not  be  ferme* 

filS  worde  aemed  outwarde  to  baue 
aomme  apparence  of  weel,  but  it  cam 
of  euy  I  purpooa ;  tber  waa  tberin  but 

deceytandtrecberycOftbiacomplot 
and  barate,  waa  maiater  &  capitayne 
a  biaabop  of  Calabre,  born  of  a  cyte 
>wbicbe  waa  namedjVIaturaneXbia  biaabopacord- 
ed  mocbe  to  oneHrnold,  of  whom  1  baue  apoken  to 
fore,  wbicbe  waa  ful  of  dealoyalte.  Re  waa  not  yet 
aubdeken,  and  waa  a  preeatea  aone,  and  of  ao  euyl 
400 


~  ,  ■■ 


j-rr-i. 


andfowl  lyf  that  the  boyesandgarsons  bad  made 
songes  of  bym  tburgb  tbooste,  Hnd  yet,  notwitb 
8tondyngealletbi6,tbebi88bopofCatabre,ayenst 
godandreson,  wolde  baue  made  bym  patriark,ffor 
tbey  knewe  ouermocbe  euyl,  tberfor  were  tbey  botb 
acordedtogyderXbeybadmadeabargainbytwene 
tbem  tbat as  soneas  tbisHrnold  sboldbe  patriarke 
tbe  sayd  bissbop  sbold  baue  tbarebbissopry  cb  of 
Betblebem,But  oure  lord  ordeyned  tbis  tbynge  in 
anotber  maner  as  ye  sbal  bereXber  were  in  tboost 
many  clerkes  of  euylle  contenaunce,  tbat  lytic  en- 
tended  to  tbe  seruyceof  our  lord;  tbey  litil  preysed 
relygyon  and  bonneste,  if  or  sytb  tbe  tyme  tbat  tbe 
valyaunt  byssbop  of  puy  was  dede,  wbyebewas 
legat  of  our  boly  fader  tbe  pope,  tbe  bissbop  Olil- 
liam  of  Orenge  was  in  bis  place,  wbicbe  was  a  re- 
lycryous  man,  and  mocb  doubted  our  lord,  but  be 
abode  not  longe  after,  but  was  deed  He  was  buried 
in  tbe  cbircbe  of  JVlarran  in  sucbe  wyse  lyke  as  ye 
baueberdXbennewastbecler^yewitboutpastour 

and  garde,  and  lete  tbem  f  alle  in  euyl  lyf\  €be  bis- 
sbop of  Hlbare  conteyned  bym  bolyly  in  tbis  pyl- 
gremage,andsommeotbertbatwerenoble,buttne 

comyn  of  tbe  clerkes  made  it  alle  ylle* 


ddi 


401 


F)owtbeduc<3odeffroywas  chosen  kyngof  Iberu- 
salem,  and  bow  be  was  presented  to  our  lord  in  bis 
cbircbe  pf  tbe  boly  sepulcre,  capita  lo  Clxxxxij&& 

]f)G  wordes  tbat  tbe  clerkes  bad 
brought  to  tbe  barons  in  tbeyr 
election  was  not  mocbe  preysed, 
but  aretted  it  to  grete  folye,  ne 
tberfore  letted  not  to  doo  tbat 
tbey  badbygonnen  jfiTCo  tbende 
tbenne  tbat  tbey  mygbt  knowe 
tbe  better  tbe  couynesof  alle  tbe 
barouns,tbey  ordeyned  wyse  men  tbat  sbolde  en- 
sercbe  tbe  lyf  of  eueryebe  of  tbem  and  tbe  maners 
>L#rbey  dyde  do  come  to  fore  tbem  sucbe  men  as 
|  were  moost  pryue  of  tbe  barons,  and  toke  ecbe  of 
I  tbem  a  parte  by  tbe  leue  of  tbeyr  lordes,  and  toke  of 
i  tbem  tbeyr  otbes  to  saye  tbe  troutbe  of  tbat  tbey 
I  sbold  be  examyned,  tbatwas  of  tbe  lyf  andmanere 
'oftbeyrlordes,witboutelesynge&fayllyngeoftbe 
»  troutbe,  TTbus  it  was  accorded  emonge  tbem  j&Xt 
was  a  grete  tbynge  wban  tbe  lordes  abandouned 
tbem  self  tensercbe  tbeyr  lyues,  but  tbe  wyse  men 
>tbat  made  tbis  enquest  were  trewe  men,  and  belde 
alle  tbyng  secrete  as  tbat  ougbt  not  to  be  knowen 
JVIany  tbyn^es  were  sayd  to  tbem  of  wbicbe  tbev 
toke  but  lytil  bede, 

1MOJVG  alle  otber  tbynges,  tbey  tbat 
were  moost  pryuee  of  tbe  due  <3od- 
effroy  e  wban  tbey  were  demaunded  of 
bismanersandbis  tetcbes,  tbey  ans- 
werde  tbat  be  bad  one  manere  rygbte 
I  greuous  and  ennoyous,  ffor  wban  be 
402 


herd  masse  and  the  seruyse  of  oure  lorde,  be  coude 
not  departe  out  of  the  cbircbe,  but  questioned  of 
tbe  pictures  and  glass  windowes  to  tbe  clerkes  and 
preestes,and  entendedmocbe  to  tbe  bistoryes,and 
tbe  livesof  tbe  saintes^Re  berd  gladly  tbe  ryngyng 
of  tbe  belles,  and  entendetb  so  mocbe  in  tbis  wyse 
tbat  many  times  it  displesyd  mocbe  to  bis  felaw- 
sbipandseruauntes,  &  oftymesbismeteappayred 
by  cause  of  bis  longe  taryeng  in  tbe  monasteryes 
and  boly  placesj^<Uban  tbe  wysemen  berd  tbis,  & 
tbat  tbis  was  tbe  grettest  vy  ce  tbat  coude  be  found- 
en  in  tbe  due,  tbey  bad  mocbe  grete  ioye,  ffor  tbey 
thought  wel  tbat  be  dyde  tbis  for  tbe  loue  of  oure 
faytb  &  for  tbonour  of  our  sauyourjj^Cdban  tbey 
bad  berd  alletbat  tbey  wold  enquyre  of  tbe  barons, 
tbey  spak  to  gydre,  and  grete  partye  of  tbem  were 
acorded  upon  tberle  of  vbolouse,  if  it  bad  not  be 
for  one  tbynge,  ffor  alle  tbey  of  bis  countre  tbat 
were  moost  pryue  witb  bym,  tbougbte  tbatyf  be 
were  cbosen  kyngtbat  be  sboldabyde  there  and  re- 
teyne  tbe  peple  of  bis  countrey*Hnd  yf  be  were  not 
cbosen  be  sboldsone  retornein  to  bis  countrey  fro 
wbens  be  cam,andtbat  desyred  tbey  mocbeXber- 
fore  men  wene  tbat  tbey  were  forsworn  wyllyngly, 
andsaydevpon  bym  somme  euyl  tatcbes  of  wbicbe 
bebadnoblame,JVeuertbelesbebadneuerintencion 
toretoum  to  bis  londe,  as  it  apperedafter ;  ffor  euer 
after  be  abode  in  tbe  seruyse  of  our  lord  wbicbe  be 
bad  enterprysed^Sdban  tbe  barons  berde  all  tbe 
tetcbes,  after  many  wordes  tbey  acorded  alvpon 
<3ode1froy  of  Boloyne,  &  named  bym  to  be  kyng, 
and  was  lad  witb  alle  tbe  peple  witb  grete  ioye  vn  to 
ddz  403 


¥ 


tbe  cbirebe  of  the  holy  sepulcre,  and  presented  to 
oure  lorde.  Guery  man  was  glad,  grete  and  smal, 
ffor  be  was  the  man  that  bad  the  bertes  of  alle  the 
comyn  peple. 

Row  the  ducGodeffroy,afterbiselection,requyred 
tberleof  TIbolousetbat  be  sbold  delyuer  to  bym  tbe 
tour  Dauid,  capitulo  Clxxxxiij^^ 

tbis  maner  was  tbe  ducGode- 
ffroy  cbosen  to  be  fcyng  andlord 
of  tbe  boly  cyte  of  Iberusalem. 
jjSTCberleof  tbolouse  beldetbe 
grettest  fortresse  of  tbe  toun, 
wbicb  was  called  tbetourDauyd; 
tbe  XTurhes  bad  delyueryd  it  to 
bym  lyfceasye  baue  nerd  to  fore. 


It  is  sette  in  tbe  by  est  parte  of  tbe  cyte  toward  tbe 
weste,  strongly  walled  witbsquarestones,andtber 
on  men  may  see  oueraltbe  cyteentierlyjjFGClban  tbe 
due  sawe  tbis  tour  was  not  in  bis  power,  it  semed 
to  bym  tbat  be  bad  not  tbe  seygnorye,  wban  tbe 
grettest  fortresseof  alle  tbe  countrewas  notin  bis 
possession.  TTberfor  be  demaundedtberleof  XTbo- 
lousein  tbe  presence  of  tbe  barons,andpraydbym 
debonayrly  tbat  be  wold  delyuer  it  to  bym.  XTberle 
answerdtbatbe  bad  conquerdit,and  tbenemyesof 
oure  lord  bad  y  olden  it  to  bym,andtberforbebelde 
it,  but  be  bad  concluded  to  goo  in  to  bis  countre  at 
Gster,  and  tbenne  be  wold  delyuer  it  witb  a  good 
wylle,  but  in  tbe  mene  wbyle  be  wold  fcepe  it.  tbis 
requyred  be  for  to  be  more  honoured,  and  in  tbe 
gretter  surete^Cbe  due  ansuerd  playnly,  tbat  yf 


. 


■ 


■R^fifeNK 


iH^HHIH 


bebadnottbetourebewoldleueall;fforbowmygbt 
be  be  lord  of  tbe  countre  wban  another  bad  gretter 
power  and  gretter  strengtbe  in  bis  londe  tban  be? 
'Cbuswere  tbey  in  debate* 

T)S  due  of  JVormandye  and  tberle  of 
f  laundres  belde  witb  tbe  due  Gode- 
flfroy*  Of  tbe  otber  barons  tber  were 
tbat  counselled  tbat  be  sbold  doo 
bis  wilwitb  tberle  of  0>olouseXbey 
of  tberles  countre  attysed  and  coun- 
teeylled  bym  tbat  be  sbold  notleve  tbe  tour,  by  cause 
tbey  wolde  gyue  bym  occasion  by  tbis  discorde  to 
[retorne  in  to  bis  countre jSFHtte  laste  tbey  acorded 
tbat  tbe  fortresse  sbold  be  put  in  tbe  bande  of  tbe 
byssbop  of  Hlbare  vnto  tbe  tyme  tbat  tbey  were 
acorded  wbat  sbold  be  doo  tberin*<flban  be  bad  it, 
witbin  a  short  tyme  after,  bedelyuerd  it  to  tbe  due 
jplt  was  demaundedbym  wby  be  bad  so  delyuerd 
it?0>enne  be  answerd  tbat  it  was  taken  fro  bym 
by  f orce*  Itwas  not  knowen  for  troutbe  whether  it 
was  taken  from  bym  by  constraynte,  or  yf  be  de- 
lyuerd it  witb  bis  aree  and  wyllj^SIban  tberle  of 
vbolousesawe  this,  be  wasmocbe  angry,andbym 
semed  tbat  tbe  barons  bad  not  wel  con  teyned  them 
selves  to  bym  ward  lyke  as  tbey  ought  to  do,  con- 
syderyng  tnat  by  tbe  way  be  bad  don  to  tbem  many 
grete  bountees  and  good  seruyses,  wbicbe  tbey  re- 
membryd  not,  as  it  was  sayd.f or  desdayne  berof, 
and  by  atysement  tbat  bis  knygbtesmade  tobym, 
be  enterprysed  to  retoume  in  to  bis  countre,  &  de- 
scended vnto  tbe  fflome  7ordan,  and  tbere  bayned 
bym*  Hf ter  be  ordeyned  bis  affayre  for  to  departe 
out  of  tbe  londe* 

dd3  405 


Of  a  patriark  chosen  and  elect  in  Iberu8alem,and 
bow  there  was  founden  a  part  of  the  very  crosse, 
capitulo  Cixxxxii\j&& 

^^^^RIS  euyl  man  of  whom  I  baue 
spoken  to  fore,  the  bissbop  of 
JVlaturane,  was  ful  of  grete  ma- 

lyceandofdesloyalte,&payned 
bym  mocbe  in  alle  maners  to 
sette  discorde  bytwene  tbe  ba- 
rons and  tbe  people,  for  tbey 
sayde  tbat  tbe  barons  wold  not 
suffretbatapatriarksboldbecbosen  bycause  tbey 
belde  tbe  rentes  of  tbe  cbircbe,  an  d  wold  not delyuer 
tbem,  fie  fonde  mocbe  peple  tbat  byleuydbym  and 
acorded  to  bym,  in  sucbe  wyse  tbat  by  tbayde  of 
tbem,  ayenst  tbe  wylle  of  other,  and  also  by  tbayde 
of  tbe  due  of  JVormandye,  to  wbom  be  was  mocbe 
pryue  and  bad  be  at  bis  table  in  all  tbis  werk,  be 
chose  for  patriark  tbis  Hrnold  tbat  was  bis  f  elaw 
in  alle  euyl  conditions,  and  by  force  tbey  sette  bym 
in  tbe  seate  of  tbe  patriarcbe  in  tbe  cbircbe  of  tbe 
sepulcrej^Cbis  was  ayenst  reason  and  ayenst  alle 
rigbt,  tberf ore  it  bapped  ne  fyll  not  wel  to  bvm  ne 
to  tbat  other,  7 

fiejyjye  it  bapped  tbata  parte  of  tbe 
very  crosse was  founden  in  tberthe  by 
tbe  cbircbe  of  tbe  sepulcre  in  a  secrete 
place,  for  tbe  cristen  men  tbat  were  in 
tbe  toun  to  fore  it  was  taken,  in  so 
y^frete  mescbief  asyebaueberd,  doubt- 
ed tbat  tbe  Curkes  wold  baue  taken  it  fro  them, 
406 


Cberfore  bad  tbey  byd  it  mocbe  surely,  and  fewe 
kneweofit.Butagoodman,aSuryen,wbicbetbat 
kneweit,  discoueridit  to  tbc  barons.  Hnd  wban  tbey 
baddoluen&dyggedagoodwbyle,tbeyfondeitin 
a  cbeste  of  syluer,  ly  ke  as  be  bad  to  tbem  sayd  and 
|deuysedXbennewastbeioyemocbegrete,andtbey 
Weitaproce88ioninsyngyngvntotbetemple.HU 
tbepeplewenteafter,  wbicb  wepte  forpyte,asmocb 
as  if  tbey  bad  seen  our  sauyourlbesu  Criste  yet 
bangyng  on  tbe  crossej^Cbey  alle  belde  tbem  for 
mocbe  recomf orted  of  tbis  grete  tresour  tbat  our 
lord  bad  tbus  discoueryd. 

Rowtbeduc(3odefFroy  payned  bym  toamendetbe 
royamme,  of  bis  good  constitutions  &  estatutes, 

capttulo  Cixxxxv&/& 

RS"Ce  ioye  was  it  tburgb  tbe 
londe  of  tfris,  tbat  tbe  valyaunt 
ducGodefroy  wascbosen  kyng. 
Hlle  tbey  obeyed  bym  witbgood 
bertej^ne  amended  dylygently 
alle  tbe  discordes  tburabe  tbe 
londe,  &  alle  tbe  otber  tbynges 
J  tbat  bad  nede  of  amendement, 
in  sucbe  wyse  tbat  bis  power  grewe  fro  day  to  day 
mocbe  appertely  jffOf  bym  sbal  I  saye  in  sborte 
wordestbeverytroutb:beregnednotbutoneyere, 

and  tbatwas  mocbe  grete  dommage,ffor  be  bad  tbe 
wylle,  wytte,  and  power  to  doo  grete  goode  in  tbe 
royamme,fortenfebletbenemyesofourelordlbesu 

Crist,&fortenbaunce  and  exalte  tbe  crtstenfaytb. 
But  our  lord  called  bym  fro  tbis  world  to  bym,  to 
tbende  tbat  tbe  malyce  of  it  sboldnot  cbaunge  bis 


bcrtcin  tbonourwberin  be  was^fie  was  born  in  tbc 
royammeof  f raunceat  Boloynevpon  tbc  see,  wbicb 
was  somtyme  a  cyte,  and  nowe  it  is  but  lytil  more 
tban  a  castel.  He  cam  of  bye  and  noble  folke&  good 
crysten  peple.  Hie  fader  was  named  Gustace,  noble 
&  puyssaunt  erle  in  tbat  countre,  wbicbe  bad  doon 
many  bye  werhes  and  bountees  vnto  our  lord  and 
noblewerkes  vnto  tbe  world.  His  moderwas  anoble 
lady  of  gentilesse,  morenobleof  bertetban  of  bye- 
nes  of  lygnage* Sbe  was  named  Yde,  &  was  suster 
to  tbe  du  c  of  Loreyne,  wbicbe  was  named  GodefFroy 
Bouce.  Hedeydewitboute  beyer,  tberfor  be  lefte  alle 
tbe  ducbye  and  tbe  countreye  to  bis  neuewe  wbicbe 
barebisname, ^adopted  bym  in  to  sone  and  beyr. 
jfiTCberf  ore  be  was  due  of  Loreyne  wban  bis  vncle 
was  deed* 

|6  bad  tbree  bretberen,  wbyebe  were 
mocbewisemenandgood  hnygbtes, 
and  also  mocbe  faytbf ul  and  trewe. 
j^Cbat  one  was  Bawdwyn,  tberle  of 
Rages,  wbicbe  after  bym  was  kyng 
of  Iberusalem,  0>e  second  was  na- 
med Gustace,  wbicbe  bare  tbe  name  of  bis  fader, 
and  was  erle  of  Boloyne*  'Cbe  hynge  Stephen  of 
Gnglond  toke  bis  dougbter  to  wyfe,  wbyebe  was 
named  JVIau  IdeXbe  barons  of  Surye  sente  fortbis 
Gustace  for  to  make  bym  kyng  after  tbe  detb  of 
bis  broder  Bawdwyn,  wbicbe  deyde  witboutebeyer, 
but  be  wold  not  goo,  ffor  be  doubted  tbe  barats  & 
discordes  of  tbe  londe  wbicbe  be  knewe  wel.  Cbe 
fourth  broder  was  William,  a  good  knygbt  and  a 
trewe,  ne  be  discorded  not  in  tbe  bounte  of  bis 
408 


^RHHHNIH 


ssi 


bretberenjJ?BawdwvnandGu9tace  folowcd  tbeyr 
lord  and  brodcr  in  tne  pylgremage  to  Iberusalem. 
*Cbe  fourth  broder  Guylliam  abode  in  bis  countre 
for  tokepe  tbc  londcj^HUc  tbefour  bretberen  were 
of  mocbe  grete  valeur,  but  tbe  ducGodeffroye,  lyke 
be  was  tbe  oldest,  90  bare  be  awaye  tbe  prys  and 
auantage  of  tbe  otber,  as  be  tbat  was  ful  of  ver- 
mes, of  bountes,  and  was  mocbe  noble  and  rigbt- 
f ul  witboute  couetyse.  Re  dredde  and  louyd  oure 
lorde  aboue  alle  tbynge ;  be  honoured  relygyouse 
men  &  good;  be  was  mocbe  ferme  and  constant  of 
bie  worde;  be  despysed  merueyllously  bobaunces, 
pompee,  and  disbonestees,  &  bated  tbem ;  be  was 
in  almesse  large  and  plentyuousj^Gladly  be  berd 
tbe  seruyse  of  our  lord,  &  mocbe  wel  vnderstonde 
it,  and  in  bie  prayers  &  oryeone  prayeng  our  lord 
be  was  rigbt  longe,  and  fylle  oftein  wepyng  ba~ 
boundantly  teeris,  &  vnto  alle  men  be  wae  pytoue 
and  amyable*  By  tbis  it  semed  wel  tbat  oure  lord 
louyd  bym,  wberof  bewas  wortbytobaue  tbe  grace 
of  tbe  world,and  90  be  bad  certaynly.  He  wae  grete 
of  body,  not  of  tbegrettest,butof  menegretnesse, 
more  stronge  tban  an  otber  man,  bie  armes  grete 
and  wel  quartred,  tbe  breste  mocbe  brode  &  large, 
and  vysagewel  made  and  coloured,  beerisabroune, 
and  in  bis  barnoys  and  armee  wel  enducte  &  acus- 
tomed,  tbat  it  semed  tbat  bit  greued  ne  coste  bym 
notbyng  to  bere  tbem. 


409 


Of  the  sayengof  tbe  countesseof  Boloyne,  moder 
\of  tbe  sayd  due,  that  she  sayde  of  ber  tbrc  oldest 
sones  was  verified,  capitulo  Cixxxxv}&/& 

JNfG  tbyng  is  sayd  for  troutb, 
and  it  napped  in  tbetyme  of  tbe 
yongtbe  of  tbyse  four  bretber- 
en,  wbicbe  ougbt  not  to  be  lef  te 
\  vnremembrydne  f orgoten.  0>e 
moder  of  tbyse  four  bretberen 
of  wbom  I  baue  spoken,  was  an 
boly  woman  and  en  ten  dab le  to 
good  werkes.  It  was  notbynge  merueylle  tbougb 
oure  lord  spak  by  ber  moutb  a  propbecye;  ffor  it 
ibapped  on  adayetbat  ber  tbreoldest  sones,  wbicbe 
were  yong  and  smale,  pleyde  ecbe  witb  otber,  and 
as  tbey  cbaced  ecbe  otber  in  tbeyr  playe,  alle  tbre 
fliedde  vnto  tbeyr  moder  wbere  sbe  satte,  &  by dde 
tbem  vnder  ber  mantel  Oeyr  fader  Gustace  cam 
jtberwbere  tbe  lady  was,  and  be  sawe  ber  mantel 
meue,  wbere  tbe  cbilderen  playde  vnder  it.  Re  de- 
maunded  tbe  lady  wbat  it  was.  Sbe  answerd  tbat 
sbe  bad  tbre  grete  prynces.  TTbe  fyrste  of  tbeym 
sbold  be  a  due;  tbe  second  sbolde  be  a  kyng;  and 
tbe  tbyrde  an  erle.  for  Godeffroye  was  due  of  Lo- 
revne  after  bis  vncle,  &  bad  alsoaf  ter  tberoyamme 
or  Iberusalem,  but  be  was  neuer  crowned,  ne  wold 
'not  be  callyd  kynge.  Xiht  second  was  Sawdwyn, 
wbicbe  bad  after  bym  tbe  sayd  royamme,  and  was 
crowned.  TJbe  tbyrdewas  Sustace, wbicb  after  tbe 
detbof  bis  fader  was  erle  of  BoloygnejS?JVow  late 
vs  retome  for  to  speke  of  tbe  valyaunt  due  <3ode- 
>ffroy ;  for  mocbe  bonour  may  be  sayd  of  bym,  and 
also  of  tbe  valyaunces  don  by  bym. 
410 


Of  tbe  wagyng  of  a  bataylle  that  was  bytwene  tbc 
due  Oodefroy  and  an  bye  baron  of  Hlmayne,  ca- 
pitulo  Clxxxxvij^^ 

M0JN6  all  otber  bye  feetes  tbat 
be  dyde,  1  ebal  recounte  to  you 
one  witboute  lesyngej&Ffiit  was 
so  certaynly  tbat  oneof  tbe  byest 
barons  of  Hllemayne,  agreteand 
strong  knygbt,  valyaunt  &  no- 
ble, siewed  tbe  due  Godeffroy, 
wbicbe  was  bis  cosyn,  in  plee  m 
tbecourtoftbemperourofHlmayne,towbomtbey 
were  men  both  two,  XLbxs  man  demaunded  of  due 
Godefroy  grete  parte  of  bis  londe  tbat  be  belde  in 
\  tbe  ducb^e  of  Loreyne,  and  tbis  baron  sayd  tbat  it 
was  bis  rigbt,  and  apperteyned  to  bym.  So  longe 
wente  tbe  plee  fortb  by  da^es  and  respytes,  tbat 
tbey  of  tbe  court  iuged  tbat  itsbold  bedetermyned 
by  wagynge  of  tbe  bataylle,  and  named  to  tbem  a 
l  day  to  fygbt  for  it  Ht  tbe  day  named  tbey  cam  in 
*  to  tbe  felde  armed  &  aparaylledof  tbat  tbey  ougbt 
Ito  baueXbenne  bissbops  and  good  men  laboured 
/mocbe,  and  otber  barons  tbat  were  tbere  payned 
'tbem  mocbe,  for  to  seke  moyen  &  manere  bow  tbe 
;pees  mygbt  be  made,  and  sbewde  to  tbem  bow  tbey 
r  were  of  one  blood  and  lynage,  &  tbat  tbey  ougbt  to 
1  departe  tbem  ten  terpryse  tbynge,  of  wbicbe  muste 
nedes  falle  to  one  or  tnem  sbame  and  dishonour, 
[  Cbey  payned  tbem  mocbe,  one  and  otber,  but  in  no 
Lmanere  coude  tbey  fynde  tbe  peas  to  be  made  by- 
twene  tbem, 

411 


RejVJVe  began  the  bataylle  by- 
twene  tbyse  two  barons  mocbc  fiers 
and  sharp,  ffortbey  were  bo  the  good 
andstrongknygbtes:  they  smote  to 
gydre  right  vigorously  J&TlbxQ  ba- 
taylle endured  so  long  that  tbevaly- 
^aunt  due  Godeffroy  smote  that  other  so  grete  a 
,strook  with  his  swerde  that  it  flewe  in  pyeces,  in 
suchewysethat  there  abode  nomore  in  bis  hande 
therof  but  half  afoote  longe  aboue  the  crosse  of 
the  swerde.  Che  baronsthat  bebeldetbefelde,sawe 
bow  the  due  had  broke  his  swerde  &  had  tbewerse, 
and  were  moche  sory  and  wroth  therof,  &  cam  to 
tbemperour,  and  they  prayd  bym  swetely  that  be 
wold  suffre  that  they  mygbt  comene  of  the  peas 
bytwene  them.  Re  graunted  it  gladly.  The  frendes 
spak  togydreand  acordedvnto  a  peas, wbicbe was 
ynowgb  resonable,  but  they  lef  te  somwhat  of  the 
dukes  rigbtj^Oban  they  brought  tbisacordeand 
pees  to  them,  the  due  in  no  wyse  wold  here  herof , 
but  began  the  bataylle  more  cruel  and  fiers  than  it 
was  to  fore,  tlhat  other  that  had  bis  swerd  bool 
doubtedne  f  ered  not  moche  thestrokesof  the  due' 
wbicbe  had  but  a  tron ebon,  but  ranne  vpon  theduc 
and  oppressed  bym  that  be  bad  no  leyzer  to  rate 
bym,  til  the  due  began  to  tbynke  and  to  take  berte. 
pbenne  bedressyd  bym  on  his steroppes,& smote 
bis  aduersarye  with  the  pommelle  of  bis  swerde 
that  be  helde,ypon  the  lyfte  temple,sucbe  a  strook 
tburgb  the  helme  that  be  fyl  doun  astonyed,  that 
it  semed  that  be  was  deed,  if  or  be  remeuyd  nofoote 
ne  bandejSTCbenne  thenobleduc  a/lygbtdoun  and 
412  ^ 


«~=~ 


descended  fro  bis  bors,and  tbrewe  a  way  bis  tron- 
cbon  of  bis  swerde,  and  toke  tbc  swerde  fro  bym 
tbat  be  bad  beten  doun,  &  mounted  vpon  bis  bore 
agaynXbenne  called  be  tbe  barons  tbat  bad  made 
and  brought  to  bym  to  fore  tbe  peas,  and  sayd  to 
tbem :  ye,  lordes,  sucbe  maner  of  peas  as  ye  offred 
to  me  rtgbt  now  is  now  to  me  agreable,  &  am  redy 
nowe  to  take  &  abide, ff  or  tbougb  I  baue  tbedom- 
mage  and  losse,  atte  leste  I  baue  no  sbame  ne  dis- 
bonour*Hnd  it  plesytb  mewel  to  gyueand  departe 
of  my  rigbt,  to  tbende  tbat  I  slee  not  tbis  wbicbe 
is  my  cosynj^Cdban  tbe  barouns  berd  tbis,  alle 
tbey  began  to  wepe*  Ok  peas  was  made  sucbe  as 
be  sayde*  Re  bad  more  bonoure  and  loos  for  the 
pees  to  wbicbe  be  adressyd  bym  so  swetly,  tban  of 
alle  tbe  prowesses  tbat  ne  bad  in  tbis  bataylle,  in 
wbicbe  be  dyde  many. 

Of  a  f ayr  feat  of  armes  tbat  tbe  due  dyde  in  a  ba- 
taylle tbat  tbe  emperour  of  Hlmayne  bad  ayenst 
tbem  of  Saxone,  capitulo  Clxxxxviij^^ 

fj  otber  feat  of  prowesse  I  sbal 
recounte  to  you,  lyke  as  it  bap- 
ped  without  lesyngej^XTbe  pe- 
ple  of  Saxone,  wbyebe  ben  tbe 
moostefelleand  moost  cruel  of 
alle  tbem  of  Hlmayne,  bad  des- 
dayne  and  despyte  tobey  to  tbe 
_  emperour,  and  sayde  tbat  tbey 
wolde  doo  notbynge  for  tbe  emperour  Henry,  But 
sayde  tbat  tbey  wold  baue  a  lord  vpon  tbem  self, 
wbicbe  sbold  obeye  to  none  otber j!?Hnd  made  an 


bye  noble  man  of  tbe  countre,  wbicbe  was  emonge 
tbem,  an  erle  named  Raoul,  for  to  be  kynge  vpon 
tbem,bywbom  tbey  wold  beiustisedand  gouemed 
j^Cdban  tbemperour  berd  tbis  be  was  mocbe  wrotb 
and  desired  mocbe  to  be  auenged  of  so  grete  oult- 
rageXberfor  sente  be  f oralle  tbe  barons  of  tbem- 
pyre,  and  assembled  mocbe  grete  court,  and  made 
to  be  sayd  and  sbewde  in  tbe  presence  of  tbem  alle 
tbe  pry  de  and  rebellion  of  tbem  of  Saxon e,  wberof 
be  demaunded  debonairly  counseyl  &  tbeyr  belpe* 
jSTZhcy  acorded  alle  tbat  tbis  tbynge  was  for  to 
beauenged  asprelyXbey  babandouned  bodye  and 
powertotbemperourfortbamendyngeoftbistres- 
paas,  Tbey  departed,  &  ecbe  wente  in  to  bis  coun- 
try tbemperour  somoned  bis  booste  as  strongly 
asbemygbtat  a  castel  on  tbe  marcbe  of  Saxone. 
RHJV  tbey  were  entred  in  to  tbelonde, 
tbeyr  enemyessayde  tbat  tbey  wolde 
fygbte  ayenst  tbem,  Ifor  tbey  were 
prowd  and  fiers,  in  sucbe  wyee  tbat 
tbey  eette  but  lytil  by  tbe  power  of 
tbemperour*  CEban  tney  knewe  tbat 
tbey  must  fygbt,  tbey  ordeyned  tbeyr  bataylles 
I  ifor  tbey  bad  mocbe  peple,  so  tbey  made  ynowe! 
^^benne  demaunded  tbemperour,  of  wbom  tbev 
( were  acorded  tbat  sbold  bere  tbaygle,  wbicb  is  tbe 
gonfanon  of  tbempyrejfiFrbey  cboos  to  fore  alle 
otber  for  todoo  tbat,  tbe  valyaunt  ducof  Loreyne, 
wortby  &  moostsufficiant  to  do  itXbey  reputed  it 
for  a  mocbe  grete  worsbip  tbat  be  was  tbus  cbosen 
by  comyn  acord  of  tbem  alle,  JVeuertbeles,  be  witb 
sayde  it  and  refused  as  mocbe  as  bemygbt:  but  be 
414 


muste  nedes  take  it  on  bymj^Cbis  daye  cam,  and 
that  one  partye  approucbed  that  other  in  sucbe 
wyse  that  tbey  assembled  fiersly,  'Cber  were  many 
men  put  to  detb,  for  tbey  were  merueillouslywrotD 
ecbe  ayenst  otber, 

|F>Yk6S  tbus  as  tbe  bataylle  was 
grete  and  fyers  in  many  places,  tbe 
ducGodeffroye,  tbat  conduyted  tbe 
bataylle  of  tnemperoure,  espyed  a 
grete  rowte  of  men,  wberin  was  tbis 
Kaoul  wbicbe  was  lorde  of  Saxon e, 
Hyenst  tbem  tbe  due  dyde  do  assemble  tbe  peple 
or  tbemperourj^XTbe  chic  knewe  tbis  Raoul,  and 
smote  tbe  bors  witb  bis  spores  ayenst  bym,  Hnd 
witbtbe  gonf  anon  tbat  bebare,iusted  ayenst  bym 
in  sucbe  wyse  tbat  be  bare  bym  tburgb  tbe  bodye 
and  slewe  bym,  tbat  befylledoun  deed  in  tbe  place* 
Hnd  incontinent  beredressyd&reysedon  beygbte 
bis  baner  alle  blody.  F>is  people  sawe  tbat  tbey  bad 
lost  tbeyr  lord,  &  anon  were  disconfyted,  Somme 
fkdde,  &  somme  fylle  doun  vnto  tbe  feet  of  tbem- 
perour,  and  put  tbem  in  bis  mercy,  Hlle  tbe  gen- 
tilmen  and  otber  gaf  goode  postages  for  tobeye 
euer  after  to  bym,  and  be  at  bis  comaundement, 
|HJ^Y  otber  prowesses  made  tbe  va- 
lyaunt  due  ©odeffroye,  but  it  bebo- 
uetbnot  to  put  tbem  alle  in  tbis  bis- 
torye,  ffor  my  purpose  now  is  for  to 
recounte  of  tbe  boly  londe  by  yonde 
tbe  see,  &  not  of  tbem  on  tbis  syde, 
>but  of  tbem  of  wbom  ye  may  vnderstande  tbat  be 
>was  in  bis  countre  nobleanda  valyaunt  knygbtjSF 

415 


Of  bis  largesse  ayenstoure  lordlsbal  saye  to  you 
one  tbyna,  by  wbicbe  ye  maye  vnderstande  tbe  o- 
tber,In  tbe  ducbye  of  Loreyne  was  a  castel,  wbicbe 
was  moost  renommed  and  cbyef  of  tbonour  of 
Buyllon,and  bare  tbat  name  j0  Olban  be  sbold 
meue  to  goo  in  bis  pylgremage  by  yonde  tbe  see,be 
gar  tbts  castel  as  tbe  mooste  noble  and  byest  of 
bis  berytage  vnto  oure  lorde,  in  almesse,  in  to  tbe 
cbircbe  of Xyege,  for  to  abyde  tbere  for  euermore. 
Row  tbe  valyaunt  due  ©odeffroye  augmented  tbe 
holy  cbircbe,  and  bow  be  wold  neuer  bere  crowne, 
capttulo  Cixxntix&& 

\XIY)  tbat  be  bad  tbus  by  elec- 
|  tion  tbe  royamme,  like  as  a  de- 
uoute  &  a  relygyous  man  as  be 
was,  be  louid  mocb  boly  cbircb 
and  tbe  seruise  of  our  lord.  By 
conseyl  of  tbe  bissbops  and  of 
otber  wise  clerbes  tbat  were  in 
_  tboost,  beordeyned  fyrst  in  tbe 
cbircbe  of  tbe  sepulcre  of  our  lord,  and  in  tbe  tem- 
ple, clerkes  for  toserucand  establyssbed  cbanon- 
nes,  and I  gaf  to  tbem  grete  rentes  and  lame  berv- 
tages,  of  wbicb  tbey  sbold  take  tbeyr  prebend™ 
^Hnd  bewold  tbat  tbecbircbes  Z^pl^ls 
tbere  sbold  be  ordeyned  after  tbe  establemends, 
,  vses,  &  customes  of  tbe  grete  cbircbes  of  f raunce, 
He  began  mocbe  byly,and  wel  bad  accomplyssbed 
yf  our  lord  bad  gyuen  to  bym  lenger  lyf  j^he  bad 
^brougbtwitb  bym  outeof  bis  countre  relygyous 
monkes,  wbicbe  sayde  &  songe  tbeyr  bowres  and 


f 


.seruyse  alle  a  longe  the  waye  as  be  cam.  Re  gaf  to 
>tbem  an  abbayein  tbevaleof  Iosapbat,and  estab- 
lyssbed  tbem  tbere,  &  endowed  tbem  tbere  mocbe 
ryebely  witb  good  rentes  and  reuenues,  &  gaf  to 
Mem  grete  pryueleges.  Re  was  a  very  relygyous  & 
deuoute  man,  and  bad  bis  berte  mocbe  large  vnto 
boly  cbircbe,  and  gaf  tberto  many  grete  tbynges. 
>HJV  be  was  cboosen  to  be  kynge, 
alletbe  barons  requyred  bym  tbat  be 
wold  do  bym  be  crowned,  &  receyue 
tbonour  of  tbe  royamme  as  byly  as 
tbe  otber  kynges  in  cristendom  doo. 
Re  answerde  tbat  in  tbis  boly  cyte, 
wbere  our  sauyour  Ibesu  Criste  suflPred  detb,  and 
bad  bom  a  crowne  of  tbornes  vpon  bis  beed  for 
bym  and  for  tbe  synners,  be  wold  neuer  bere,  yf  it 
playsydgod,  crowneof  goldneof  precious  stones, 
but  bym  semed  tbat  it  wasynowe  of  tbat  coron- 
acion  tbat  be  bad  tbe  daye  of  bis  passion  for  to 
bonoure  alletbe  kynges  cristen  tbat  sbold  be  after 
bym  in  Iberusalemjiff or  tbis  causetbat  beref us- 
ed tbe  crowne,  tber  ben  sommemen  tbat  wyll  not 
accomptebym  emong  tbe  kynges  of  Iberusalem, 
but  me  tbynketb  tbat  tberfore  be  ougbt  not  to  be 
lassed  ne  dymynued  of  bis  bonoure,  but  tbe  more 
andbyerexalted&enbaunced*f  or  be  dyde  not  tbis 
for  despysyng  of  tbe  sacrament  of  boly  cbircbe, 
but  be  dyde  it  for  tescbewe  tbe  bobaunce  &  pryde 
of  tbe  world,  and  for  tbe  grete  mekenes  &  bumy- 
lyte  tbat  be  bad  in  bis  berte,  Cdberfore  tbenne  1 
saye  not  only  tbat  be  was  kynge,  but  be  was  greter 
tban  ony  kynge  tbat  boldetb  ony  royamme  sytb 
tbat  tbe  boly  londe  of  Iberusalem  was  conquerd* 
eei  4*7 


L 


sSWTi 


Row  the  Ilurkes  of  Hrabe  and  of  Ggypte  made 
tbeyr  somaunce  for  to  come  in  to  Surye  tassaylle 
our  cristen  men,  capitulo  CC  ,*£,*£ 

edLY  wban  the  cy  te  was  tak- 
en, yet  er  that  the  barons  were 
departed,  cam  tydynges  in  to 
tbe  toun  of  Iberusalem,  &  trew 
tbey  were,  tbat  tbe  calypbe  of 
Sgypte,  wbicb  was  tbe  mooste 
puyssaunt  and  mygbtyest  of 
alle  tbe  londeof  tboryent,  bad 


i  somoned  alle  bis  power,  knygbtes,  gen  tilmen,  and 
alle  otber  tbat  mygbte  bere  armes,  in  sucbe  wyse 
i  tbat  be  bad  assembled  a  grete  booste  merueyllous- 
ly,  for  be  bad  grete  desdayne  and  despyte  of  tbis 
tbat  so  lytil  peple,  wbicbe  wereof  astraunge  londe 
and  f  erre  countrey,  were  so  bardy  and  durst  come 
in  to  tbis  londe  and  royamme,  and  bad  taken  tbe 
cytewbicbe  be  bad  conquerd  vpon  bis  enemyes.Re 
made  come  to  fore  bym  bis  conestable,  wbicbe  was 
prynce  of  bis  boost:  be  was  named  Glaf dales,  Co 
tbis  man  be  commaunded  tbat  be  sbold  take  all 
tbis  peple  witb  bym  &  goo  in  to  Surye,  and  renne 
\  vygorously  vpon  tbis  peple,  tbat  were  so  f  olyssb 
andoultrageous,  tbat  bad  tomed  bis  peas&made 
warre  to  bis  peple,  Cberf  or  be  commaunded  bym 
,  tbat  be  sbold  efface  &  destroye  tbem  alle,  in  sucbe 
wyse  tbat  neuer  worde  be  spoken  of  tbem  jj^Cbis 
Slafdales  was  of  Srmenye  bom,  and  was  called 
eimirieux  by  another  name.  Of  tbe  cristen  men  be 
was  comen,  but  for  tbe  ryebesses  tbat  was  gyuen 


i 


bym,  &  for  the  lecberye  that  be  fonde  emonge  the 
fmescreaun tes,  berenyedour  lord  and  cristen  f aytb 
■for  to  become  Sarasyn. 

IRIS  sameman  bad  conquerd  tbe  cyte 
of  Iberusalem  vpon  tbe  Hurkes,  and 
sette  it  in  tbepuvssaunceof  bis  lord 
tbe  same  yere  tnat  tbe  cristen  men 
bad  besieged  it,  &  bad  not  yet  bold- 
en  it  xj  monetbis  wban  tboost  of  tbe 
pylgryms  toke  it  vpon  tbem,  &  rendred  it  to  cris- 
,  tiente.  Rit  was  a  tbyngfe  tbat  it  mocbe  displaysyd 
Ibis  conestable  tbat  bis  lord  bad  bold  it  so  sbort 
a  wbyle,  and  enioyed  nomore  bis  conqueste;  if  or 
tbis  cause  be  enterprysed  in  bym  tbis  werke,  and 
for  to  renne  vpon  oure  peple.  Hnd  bym  thought  it 
but  a  little  tbynge  &  a  light  for  to  doo,  consyder- 
yng  tbe  grete  ptente  of  peple  tbat  be  bad,  for  to 
disconfyte  tbem  tbat  bad  taken  tbe  cytej^Re  cam 
in  to  Surye,  and  brought  with  bym  alle  tbe  power 
of  Ggypte.  Re  bad  grete  pryde  in  bis  berte  by  cause 
of  tbe  grete  people  tbat  he  bad,  and  was  mocbean- 
gry  toward  our  men.  But  our  lord,  tbat  can  sette 
wel  counseyl  in  alle  tbe  purpoos  of  men,  ordeyned 
tbis  werke  all  in  another  maner  than  be  deuysed 
jS?Re  cam  with  alle  bis  men  to  fore  tbe  cy te  of  Ss- 
calone.  XTbere  they  lodged  tbem,  and  pourprised 
grete  space  of  ground,  ulitb  tbem  were  ioyned  alle 
tbe  dukes  of  Damaske,  &  they  of  Hrabe  tbat  were 
in  tboo  partyes,  mocbe  grete  peple  j^TTrou  tbe  it  is 
tbat  to  fore  er  oure  peple  entred  in  to  tbe  londe, 
they  of  Ggypte  &  tbe  tTurkes  of  Hrabe  louyd  not 
to  gydre,  but  doubted  mocb  each  tbencreacyng  of 
ee2  4*9 


smm 


m 


tbe  one  and  otber^But  after,  tbey  accompanied 
tbem  to  gydre  to  come  vppon  oure  men,  more  for 
bate  of  oure  peple,  tban  for  loue  tbat  tbey  bad  e- 
monge  tbem  self*  "Cbey  were  alle  to  gydre  to  fore 
Gscalone,  and  tbey  tbere  concluded  to  come  after 
to  f orelberusalem  for  tassiege  tbe  toun,  if  or  tbey 
supposed  veryly,  tbat  oure  barons  durste  in  no 
wyse  yssue  out  ayenst  tbem  in  bataylle. 
Row  our  cristen  men,  wban  tbey  knewe  tbyse  tyd- 
ynges,  cryed  to  <3od  for  mercy  and  for  to  baue  tbe 
vyctorye,  capitulo  CCj^^ 

nHJVtbisetidyngeswerespradd 
tburab  tbe  cyte  of  Iberusalem, 
alle  tbe  peple  were  oretely  affray- 
ed,  grete  and  smaTe,  By  comyne 
accorde  of  tbe  bissboppes  tney 
cam  wullen  and  barfote  in  tbe 
cbircbe  of  our  lord,  0>ere  were 
alle  tbe  peple,  and  cryed  mercy  to 


oure  lorde  with  sygbes  and  teeris.  and  besoucjbt 
Ibesu  Criste  mocbe  swetly  tbat  bis  peple,  wbicbe 
be  bad  kept  and  deffended  vnto  tbat  day,  be  wold 
delyuerfro  tbisperyll,ne8uffre  tbat  tbe  cyte  &boly 
places  tbat  tbey  late  bad  rendred  and  yeuen  to  bis 
name  and  to  bis  seruyse,  and  tbat  be  woldnot  tbat 
tbey  sbold  be  remysed  agayn  and  babandouned  in 
ordureandfyltbe,  &in  tbe  desloyalte  of  tbe  betben 
men^f  ro  tnens  tbey  wen te  a  procession,  singing, 
witb  mocbe  grete  py  te,  vnto  tbe  templeof  oure  lord. 
T^bere  dyde  tbe  bissbops&tbe  clerkestbe  seruyse, 
and  tbe  laye  peple  prayde  witb  mocbe  good  berte 


he 


and  pytous,(31ban  tbis  was  don,  the  bissbopsgaf 
to  tbcm  tbc  benediction, and  after  tbey  departed^? 
tbeducordeyned  baronsand  knygbtestbat  sbold 
e  tbe  cyte. 

^HfCCR  tbis  be  yeeued  out,  and  tberle 
|  of  f  laundres,&camin  to  tbe  play  nee 
'#.  i  of  RamesXbeotber  baronsabode  in 
1  iberusalemj^^becytezeyns  of  ^ap- 
ples bad  sen  te  to  f  etcbe  Gustace,  bro- 
der  of  tbe  due,  &  Oncre,for  to  come 
tbedertotbem  and  tbey  wold  yelde  to  tbem  tbecyte. 
XTbey  were  goon  by  tbe  commaundementof  tbeduc, 
andgarnyssbedmocbe  weltbe  toun  witb  peple  and 
vytaylle,  of  wbicb  tbe  countre  was  mocbe  fertile, 
vberfor  tbey  abode  tbere,  and  knewe  notbynge  of 
tbyse  tydynges,  but  tbe  due  sen  te  for  tbem,  &  tbey 
cam  bastely,  &  were  witb  tbe  other  baron  s^GBban 
tbe  due  and  tbe  erle  of  f  laundres  arryued  atte  cyte 
of  Rames,  tbey  knewe  wel  tbe  troutbe  certaynly  tbat 
tbis  admiral  was  lodged  to  fore  Cscalone  witb  so 
grete  peple  tbat  tbe  countre  was  couerdjgFCbenne 
sentetbeybastelymessagersintolberusalemvnto 
tbe  otber  barons,  wbicbe  abode  and  awayted  tbe 
certaynteof  tbis  tbynge.Hndbebade  tbem  bastely 
to  come  alle,sauf  sucbe  as  sbold  kepe  tbe  cyte,  and 
sbold  brynge  alle  tbe  peple  mocbe  bastely,  as  for 
to  fygbte  ayenst  grete  plente  of  tbeyr  enemyes. 


ee3 


421 


f)ow  our  men  assembled  and  ordeyned  tbeyr  bat> 
ajllesfortofycjbteavenst  tbe^urkes^and  bow  tbe 
vurkes  were  disconryted,  capitulo  CCij^^ 

RGRLG  of  T^bolouse  and  tbe 
otber  barons  tbatwere  witb  bym 
knewe  tbe  certaynte  bow  tbeyr 
enemyes  cam  vpon  tbem  witb  so 
grete  power,  tberf or  tbey  gadred 
togydrealle  tbeyr  men  tbatwere 
inIberusalem,andyssuedout& 
come  to  tbem  mocb  dilygen  tly  in 
totbeplaynes,wberetbeducwas,atteaplacenamed 
now  Ybelyn  j^Cdban  tbey  were  all  assembled,  tbey 
jnombred  tbeyr  peple  and  fonde  xijC  borsmen,and 
!of  footemen  ix/VIj^GCIban  tboost  of  our  men  bad 
been  there  one  day  or  tberabout,  after  euensonge, 
I  wban  it  began  to  wexe  derk,  tbey  espyed  a/f  er  a  greet 
!prees  tbat  cam  takyngvp  tbe  countrey,and  couerd 
>grete  partesof  tbe  playnes.Oure  men  bad  suppos- 
ed certaynly  tbat  it  bad  be  tboostof  tbe  Sarasyns, 
and  merueylled  mocbe  bow  tbey  cam  ayenst  tbem 
at  tbat  bour.ITbenne  tbey  sente  oute  ijCborsmen, 
armed  ligbtly  and  wel  borsed,for  to  see  more  nygb 
wbat  pepletbey  were  tbat  cam,  and  bow  many  more 
were  of  tbem,  TTbey  roode  f  ortb  a  good  paas,  and 
wban  tbey  approached  tbem,  tbey  knewe  tbat  it  were 
>oxen,  kyen,and  maresXberwereso  many  of  tbem, 
ftbat  tbem  semed  if  there  were  no  moo  in  alle  that 
con  tre,  tbat  it  mygbt  suffyse  for  alle  tbe  peple  tber 
1  about Qlitb  tbyse  beestes  were  comen  men  on  bors- 
bak,wbicbe  kepte  tbem  from  tbeuys,  &  commaund- 
ed  to  tbe  berdmen  wbat  tbey  sbold  doo, 
422 


r-fi^i 


HSY  that  were  een  te  forth  by  the  ba- 
roneretomed  &  sayde  that  tber  was 
noneotberbutbeestesjgrCbennealle 
oure  men  ran  tbeder,  *Cbe  hepars  of 
them  fiedde  tbat  mygbt  Somme  tber 
were  that  were  tahen,wbicbetolde  the 
troutbe  of  tbeHurhes,in  sucb  wyse  that  it  was  wel 
hnowen,  that  tbis  grete  booste  of  Sarasyns  were 
lodged  but  vij  myle  fro  tbem,  and  tbat  tbeyr  pur- 
pooe  wae  to  come  on  tbem  and  to  slee  tbem  allejfif 
Our  barone  were  tbenne  certayn  of  tbe  bataylle,  and 
deuysed  emonge  tbem  ix  bataylles,  &  commaunded 
tbattbresboldgooto  fore  on  tbatonesyde,fortbe 
playnes  were  greets  tbre  sbold  go  in  tbemy  die, and 
tbre  ebold  come  bebynde*  Of  tbe  Sarasyns  mygbt 
noman  hnowe  tbe  nombre,  ffor  tber  was  so  grete 
plente  tbat  euery  dave  tbey  en  creased  and  gfrewe  of 
tbe  contre  about,  wnicbe  ranne  to  tbem  in  sucbe 
wyse  tbat  it  was  not  for  to  be  estemed^&Iban  our 
men  bad  goten  tbis grete gayne  tbatlspahof, tbat 
is  tosaye  of  alle  tbe  beestes,  tbey  bad  grete  ioyeand 
ioyously  restyd  tbem  tbatn  vgbt ;  but  tbey  tbat  bad 
tbe  cbarge  made  good  watcne  upon  tbooste* 

j^tbemornwbantbesonnewasrysen, 
tbe  due  dyde  do  crye  tbat  euery  man 
sbold  arme  bym  and  goo  to  bis  ba- 
taylle, &  after  wen  te  fortb  asof t  paas 
rigbt  tbeder  wbere  tbey  tbougbt  to 
fynde  tbeyr  enemyes.O>ey  badsted- 
f aste  bope  in  our  lord,  to  wbom  is  a  lygbt  tbynge 
to  mahe  tbat  tbe  lasse  in  nombre  vaynquyssbe  tbe 
more  andgretterj^Cbey  of  6gypte,and  tbe  otber 
ee4  423 


meecreauntee  that  were  with  tbem,  cam  in  mocbe 

gretedeerayevntotbeplacetbattbeyeaweourpeple 
alle  in  tbe  playne*  Cdban  tbey  eawe  and  knewe  tbat 
our  men  bad  noo  talente  to  witbdrawe  tbem  ne  ee- 
cbewe  tbem,  but  cam  for  to  eecbe  tbem,  tbey  began 
mocbe  to  doubte»3dban  tbey  eawe  tbat  our  men  bad 
taken  and  pourprieed  so  grete a  place  on  tbe  playne, 
wel  supposed  tbey  tbat  tbey  bad  ben  mocbe  more 
people  and  in  greter  nombre.  But  tbe  troutbe  wae 
eucbe  ae  I  baue  eayd.  Our  men  were  but  fewe  on 
borebak&  a  footeXbe  grete  companyeof  beeetee, 
ae  1  baue  eayd,  were  witb  tbem ;  wban  tbey  drewe 
fortb  on,  tbe  beeetee  wente  witb  tbemXbeiTurkee 
wende  tbat  tbey  bad  ben  alle  men  armed  and  bad 
ouergretefere  and  drede. 

2}r>6  gretteet  men  and  tbey  tbat  men 
supposed  ebold  beet  baue  born  tbe 
fayte  of  tbe  bataylle,  tbey  began  to 
witbdrawe  tbem  lytil  and  lytil  and 
lefte  tbeyr  batayllee  tbe  one  after  tbe 
other  and  fledde  alle  pryuely^<Jdban 
tbe  laeee  knygbtee  of  tbe  XTurkmane  apperceyued 
tbie,  tbey  neuer  toke  hope  on  tbem,  but  tomed  tbeir 
boreeeand  emote  witb  tbeir  eporee,  &  fliedde  euerv 

manwberebeeuppoeedbeettoeauebymjflFOntbie 
daye  wae  be  loete,  tbat  bad  eette  al  bio  berte  for  to 
i  eowe&  pourcbaeee  diecordeeouer  al  where  be  wae 
byleuyd;noman  wote  wber  be  becamXbie  wae  tbe 
bieebop  of  JWaturane.  Somme  men  eayde  tbat  tbe 
ducbadeentebymfortofetcbetbebaronetbatwere 
lefteintbecyte,&wbanberetornedSaraeineebold 
baue  take  bym  and  elayn  bym,  or  brought  bym  in 
424 


=£^£ 


~~     "- 


^H 


pryson*  Cdbat  sommcucr  cam  of  bym  it  was  no 
grete  barme,so  tbat  be  was  effaced  out  of  tbis  boly 
companyj^CHban  oure  barons  sawe  tbat  our  lord 
bad  fogbten  for  tbem,  and  tbat  be  bad  put  in  tbe 
bertes  of  tbe  XTurkes  so  grete  fere  and  drede,  tbat 
tbey  wmfledwitboutsmytyngeofstroke,  tbey  bad 
grete  ioye  and  rendred  graces  and  tbankynges  to 
oure  lorde  deuoutly,  XTbey  bad  counseyl  tbat  tbey 
sbold  not  f olowe  tbem  witboute  araye  tburgb  tbe 
feldes,  flPor  tbey  were  ouer  grete  nombre  of  peple 
vntotbereaarde  of  tbem,andyf  tbey  bapped  to  re- 
lyeand  gadre  togydre  agayn,tbeymygbtperauen- 
ture  put  oure  men  to  tbe  werse, 

ORG  men  roode  alle  in  ordenaunce 
vnto  tbe  tentes  of  tbe  betben  men, 
fFor  tbey  tbat  fledde  loked  neuer  be- 
bynde  them*  XZhcrc  founde  oure  men 
so  grete  plente  of  gold,  of  syluer,  of 
robes,of  iewellys,  and  of  vessell,  tbat 
tbe  leest  of  tbem  bad  ynowgb,  Hbus  gadred  tbey 
alle  tbat  tbey  fonde  there,  and  retomed  and  wente 
agayn  toIberusalem,eueryman  laden  and  charged 
witb  despoylles,  tbanhyng  and  preysing  our  lord, 
by  wbom  was  comen  to  tbem  tbis  vyctorye,  honour, 
&  gaynejj^^bennemade  tbey  witbin  tbe  cytemocbe 
ioye  and  grete,  as  doon  tbe  vaynquers  and  conquer- 
ours  wban  tbey  departe  tbeyr  gayne. 


425 


* 


w 


Row  somme  of  our  barons  wolde  rctomc  bomc 
after  tbey  bad  doon  tbeyre  pylgremage,  capitulo 

N  tbys  maner  tbeye  conteyned 
tbem  in  tbc  cyte  of  Iberusalem 
j^be  two  valyaunt  men  tbat 
bad  benlongtymeintbeseruyse 
of  our  lord,  and  bad  perfourmed 
tbcyr  py  Igremage,  tbatis  to  wy  tc 
tbc  due  or  JVormandye,  &  tberle 
of  f  laundres,  tbey  tofce  leue  of 


tbe  otber  barons  and  tofce  tbeyrwaye  for  toretorne 
in  to  tbeyr  countrey,  Tbey  cam  by  sbippe  to  Con- 
stantinople* TbemperourHlexys  wbicbe  bad  seen 
tbem  to  fore,receuyed  tbem  witbmocbefayr  cbiere, 
and  gaf  to  tbem  mocbe  f ayre  y  eftes  at  tbeyr  depart- 
yng,  Hf ter  tbey  cam  in  to  tbeyr  countre  bool  and 
joyousj^rbat  one  of  tbem,  tbat  was  tbe  due  of 
JVormandye,  foundetbe  tbyngealle  cbaunged  oth- 
erwise in  bis  countre  tban  be  lef te  it;  if  or  wby  les  be 
was  in  mayntenyng  tbis  boly  pylgremage,  lyhe  as 
ye  baue  berd,  bis  oldest  broderdeyde  without  bey er 
of  bis  body,  Cdylliam  Rous,  wbicbe  was  kyn<?  of 
englond  by  rigbt  Hnd  after  tbe  customes  of  tbe 
countre  tbe  royamme  was  fallen  totbisducof  J^or- 
mandye;  but  bis  broder  wbicbe  was  yon  ger,  named 
Renry,  cam  to  tbe  barons  of  tbe  countrey  and  made 
tbem  to  vnderstande  tbat  tbe  due  bis  broder  was 
fcyng  of  Iberusalem,  &  badno  talente,ne  purposed 
neuertoretomeon  tbis  svdetbemontaynes.By  tbis 
lesynge  tbey  made  bym  hynge  of  Snglond,  &  tbey 


w 


m 


MK 


becam  bis  menjg?<Ilban  bis  broder  retorned  fro  tbe 
holy  londe,  be  demaundedof  bym  bis  berytage  en- 
tierly,  and  be  wold  not  delyuer  it  to  bym, 

F)S  due  made  redy  a  grete  nauye,  and 
cjadryd  as  mocbe  peple  as  be  mygbt 
tn  J^ormandye  and  other  places,  and 
passed  tbe  see;  be  arryued  in  Bng- 
lond  witb  gretef orce.  Pis  broder  tbat 
was  kynge  camayenst  bym  witb  alle 
f  tbe  power  of  tbe  lande.  t  be  batey  lies  were  alredy  for 
i  tassemble;  but  tbe  noble  &  wysemen  sawe  tbat  it 
sbold  be  ouer  grete  burt  and  damage  yf  tbyse  two 
bretberensbold  fygbt  tbus*  t^berfor  tbey  spak  of 
pees,  &made  it  in  tbis  manere,  tbat  tbesayd  Henry 
sbold  boldetberoyamme,but  besboldegyueeuery 
yeretobisbrotberagreetsommeofgood,ofwbkbe 
bemadebymsureJindtbusretornedtbeducagayn, 
&  camin  tobislonde.Hfteritbappedtbattbefiyng, 
wbicbebadsomme  castellys  in  fiormandye  to  fore 
tbat  be  bad  tbe  royamme  of  Gnglond,  tbem  wolde 
be  kepe  as  bis  berytageXbe  due  demaunded  tbem, 
and  be  woldnot  delyuere  tbemXbenne  tbe  due  as- 
sieged  tbem,  and  toke  tbem  by  force j^Cttban  tbe 
kyngberd  tbis,  be  was  mocbeangry.  Reassembled 
gretepeple&passedouerintoJVormandye^Risbro- 
tber  cam  ayenst  bym,  and  tbey  fougbt  to  gydre  at 
TTyncbebrayXber  was  tbeducdisconfyted&  taken ; 
bis  broder  put  bym  in  pryson,  wberin  be  deydej^ 
Cbenne  bad  tbis  Renry  alle  to  gydre  tbe  royamme 
of  Bnglond  and  ducbye  of  J^ormandye* 


427 


RBRLB  of  TTbou  louse  cam  vntotbe 
Lycbe  in  SuryeXbere  icftc  be  bis  wyf 
tbe  countesse,  and  wente  vnto  Con- 
stantynoplc&sboldbastelyretorne. 
TTbemperour  made  to  bym  grete  ioye 
Jandreceyued  bym  mocbe  wel,  an  dgaf 
to  bym  greteyeftes.  Hnd  after  cam  agayn  to  bis  wyf 
booleand  sauf ,  to  bis  f elawsbipin  Surye,  butit  was 
two^ereafter,asye  sbal  berej^Cbe  ducGodeffroy 
was  in  Iberusalem.  Olel  gouerned  be  tbe  royamme 

wbicbeourelordbadgyuentobym.fiereteynedwitb 
bym  tbe  erle  Garnyer  of  Grece,  and  otber  barons, 
sucbe  as  be  mygbt  bauej^Tancre  tbe  valyaunt  a- 
bode  witb  bym,  to  wbom  tbe  due  gaf  for  to  bolde 
m  berytage  tbe  cyte  of  TTabarye,  wbicbe  stondetb 
on  the  laye of  Genesar,and witbtbat  alle  tbe  pryn- 
cipalyte  of  Galylee,  witb  tbe  cytewbicbe was  woned 
t0  5eSaiIled  PorPbH  andnowe  named  Caypbas, 
andalletbappertenauncesoftbysetbynges/Cancre 
belde  tbyse  londes  so  wel  &  so  wysely,  tbat  be  was 

alowedofgod&bonouredoftbeworld.Refounded 
cbircbes  of  tbis  countrey  mocbe  rycbely;  be  gaf  to 
tbem  grete  rentes,  and  endowed  tbem  witb  aourne- 
mentes  fayr  &of  grete  valure.  Specially  tbe  cbircbe 

ofNazaretb,ofObai7e,andtbatofmountrabor; 
be  lef  te  tbem  m  bye  estate  &m  mocbe  ryebe  poynt! 
But  tbe  barons  tbat  after  bym  baue  be  lordesof  tbe 
countrevbauetaken  from  tbem  ynowgbof  tbeirten- 
oursXbisOncrewas  wyse  and  trewe,and  delyted 
bym  to  doo  wel  to  tbe  cbircbes,  as  it  apperetb  after 
wban  bewasprynceof  Hntbyocbe-f or  be  enbaunc- 
ed  tbe  cbircbe  of  seyn t  peter,  and  tbe  pryncipalyte 


■■■■■ 


,  &  seygnorye  of  Hn  tbyocbe  made  be  mocb  tencrece 
and  enlarged,  as  ye  sbal  bere* 

Row  Buymont  &  Bawdwyn  beyng  certain  of  tbe 
i  pryse  and  conqueste  of  Iberusalem  wolde  accom- 
plyssbe  tbeyr  pylgremage,  capitulo  CCiuj^^ 

IRYkBS  *nat  *be  royammeof 
Iberusalem  was  in  sucbestate, 
%  Buymont  tbe  prynce  of  Hn- 
tbyocbe,  and  Bawdwyn  erle 
of  Rages,  broder  of  tbe  due 
Codeffroy,  bad  berd  certayn 
tydynges  tbat  tbe  otber  bar- 
ons tbat  tbey  beldeas  bretber- 
ten  for  tbe  accom  panye  of  tbeyr  pylgremage,  bad 
by  tbayde  and  belpe  of  our  lord  Ibesu  Criste  con- 
'querd  vpon  tbe  Curkes  and  recouerd  to  oure  faytb 
tbe  boly  cyte  of  Iberusalem,  by  wbicbe  tbey  bad 
accomplyssbyd  tbeyrvowes&  tbeyr  pylgremages* 
►Oerfor  tbey  assembled  on  a  day  named  for  to  goo 
to  tbe  boly  sepulcre,  to  tbende  tbat  tbey  were  as- 
soylled  of  tbeyr  vowes*  Hnd  desired  mocbe  for  to 
see  tbe  due  and  tbe  otber  barons,  to  wbom  tbey 
wold  gyue  ayde  vf  tbey  bad  nede,  tbat  is  to  wete  of 
ttbeir  bodyes,  or  tbeyrofoodes,  and  of  tbeyr  men 
'tbat  were  vnder  tbem*  tnyse  two  bye  men  were  not 
at  tbe  takynge  of  tbe  boly  cyte  of  Iberusalem,  ffor 
by  tbe  wylle  of  tbe  pylgryms  tbat  one  of  tbem 
abode  in  Hntbyocbe,  and  tbat  otber  at  Rages,  for 
}to  kepe  soygnousty  and  def ende  tbe  XTurkes  fro 
tbyse  two  cytees  wbicbe  were  bolden  in  so  bye  es- 
,temeincristiente* 

429 


fgCRG  man  bad  todoo  ynowgb  in  bis 
countrey,  but  tbey  leftc  allc  for  to 
comcto  tbeotber.Buymont  cam  fyrst 
fro  bis  cyte  witb  a  mocbc  fayr  com- 
pany, grete  nombrc  of  men  of  armes 
on  borsbak  and  a  f  oote.  Re  cam  vnto 
a  cyte  vpon  tbe  see,namedValerne,on  tbe  castel  of 
JjVIargat,  tbere  be  lodged  bym  maulgre  tbem  of  tbe 
'  cy  te.Bawdwyn  cam  fro  bis  countrey  sone  after  &  so 
mocbe  iourneied  after,  tbat  be  ouertoke  tbe  prynce 
Buymont  to  fore  tbis  cyte,  and  tbere  tbey  assem- 
\bkaj0Xn  tbat  same  tyme  were  arryued  pylgryms 
of  Ytalye  at  tbe  Lycbe  in  Surye»Bmong  tbem  was 
a  good  man  wyse  and  wel  lettred,relygyousand  of 
grete  bonneste,  named  Daybart,  arcbebissbop  of 
Pyse*  Hnotberwas  in  bis  company,  arcbebissbop 
of  puylle,  of  a  cytenamedHrriene.  fcbyse  men  witb 
,  tbeyr  meyne  cam  in  tbe  companyeof  tbyse  two  ba- 
rons for  to  oasse  more  surely  vnto  tbe  cyteof  Ibe- 
rusalem^Of  tbem  was  mocne  encreced  tboost  of 
tbyse  two  prynces,  in  sucbe  wyse  tbat  tbey  were 
wel  xxv  )M  on  borsbak  and  a  f  oote, 

r>ClS  tbenne  belde  tbey  tbeyr  waye 
by  sucbe  manere,  tbat  tbey  f  onde  no 
cyte  but  of  tbeyr  enemyes,  wberfore 
tbey  passed  witb  mocb  grete  payne. 
t^bey  suffred  mocbein  tbeyr  way  for 
lack  of  vytaylles,  ffor  tbey  fonde 
none  for  to  bye,  &  sucbe  as  tbey  brougbt  fro  tbeyr 
i  countrey  was  f ayllcd.  XTbey  bad  grete  cold  and  so 
, grete  rayne  tbat  notbyng  mygbt  endure,  it  was  so 
merueyllous.  It  was  m  tbe  monetbe  of  December 
430 


wbicbe  is  mocbc  rayny  customable  in  that  coun- 
trey.  for  tbis  cause  many  dcyed  of  mesease  in  that 
companye,  ffor  in  allc  this  longe  way,  tbey  mygbt 
fynde  none  that  wold  selle  to  tbem  ony  vytaylte, 
sauf  tbey  of  Tlry  pie,  and  tbey  of  Cesaire.  tTney  bad 
grete  scarcete  or  vytaylles  for  tbeyr  borses. 

"ICXTo  laste  by  tbe  mercy  of  our  lord 
tbey  cam  to  Iberusalem.  Oerewere 
tbey  receyued  witb  mocb  grete  ioye, 
of  god,  of  tbe  barons,  of  tbe  clergy e, 
and  of  alle  tbe  peple.  Oey  vysyted 
tbe  boly  places  of  tbe  cy  te  in  teeris  & 
[grete  sorowes  of  berte.  TTbey  fylle  doun  fiat  and 
?stratcbed  in  tbe  cbircbes,tbey  kyssed&ete  tbertbe 
►tbat  our  lord  bad  walked  vpon :  after  tbey  cam  in  to 
tbeyr  bostellys,  where  alle  tbey  of  tbe  toun  made 
to  tbem  grete  ioyej?<nban  tbe  bye  festeof  tbe  na- 
tyuyte  of  our  lord  tbesu  Criste  approucbed,  alle 
the  prelates  and  barons  yssued  out  of  tberusalem 
and  wente  to  Betblebem.  TTbere  belde  tbey  tbeyr 
CristemasXbere  bebelde  tbey  gladly  and  mocne 
ententyfly  tbe  boly  crybbe,  wbenn  tbe  sauyour  of 
tbeworld  laye  bytwene  tbe  beestes.Deuoutlymade 
tbey  tbeyr  prayers  and  orysons  in  tbe  place,  wbicbe 
is  as  a  lytil  dyebe,  wbere  tbe  swete  lady  tbat  was 
moder  and  vyrgyne,  after  tbat  sbe  bad  cbylded, 
wrapped  bersonewitb  lytiland  smale  clotbys,and 
gaf  bym  souke  of  tbe  mylke  of  ber  pappes. 


431 


FJowe  our  cristen  men  chosen  a  very  patriarke  in 
Iberusalem  and  assigned  to  bym  rentes,  capitulo 

^^^-^t«wN  to  this  tyme  bad  the  see  of 

Iberusalem  ben  without  pas- 
tour  and  patriark  tbat  duely  & 
truly  bad  entred.  It  was  wel 
tbenne  v  monetbes  tbattbecyte 
was  conquerd,  XTbenne  assem- 
bled tbe  barons  for  to  coun- 
seylle  to  baue  sucbe  a  man  tbat 
werewortby  of  honour &  mygbt  tobere  tbefaytes, 
ITber  were  wordes  ynowgb,  €be  somme wold  baue 
one,  and  otber  wolde  baue  another j^Htte  laste  by 
tbe  counseyl  and  good  wyll  of  alle  tbey  cbees  tbys 
Daybart,  arebbissbop  of  pyse,  wbicbe  was  but 
newly  comeXbey  constituted  and  sette  bym  in  tbe 
siege  of  patriark,  ffor  be  tbat  bad  be  made  by  tbis 
baratour  Hrnold,  of  wbom  1  baue  spoken  to  fore, 
lyke  as  be  was  made  ayenst  rigbt  &  reson,  in  lyke 
wj^eberetorned  agayn  to  nought, 

^f^HN  tbis  good,  wise  man  was  sette 
in  bis  dignyte  tbe  due  Godeffroy 
and  tbe  prynce  Buymont  cam  to 
fore  bym,  wbicbe  bad  gyuen  to  bym 
tbis  honour  as  for  to  be  tbevycayre 
of  Ibesu  Criste  in  tbat  londe,  and 
thankedand  preysed  alle  togydreoure  lord*QJban 
this  was  don  tbey  assygned  rentes  to  tbe  newe  pa- 
triark, sucbe  as  bis  predecessour,  wbicbe  was  a 
Creeke,  bad  bolden,  and  otber  gretter  aboue  tbat, 
in  sucbe  wyse  tbat  be  mygbt  honorably  mayntene 


a  good  and  boneet  company  of  people  jg?rbenne 
Bawdwyn  andBuymont  toke  leueof  the  due  and 
of  the  other  barone,and  descended vnto  fiom  lor- 
dan,  and  there  bayned  them,  fro  tbene  they  wente 
by  the  ryuer  eyde  til  they  cam  to  Cabarye,  thenne 
paeeed  by  the  londe  named  f  enyce,  and  lef te  Ce- 
eayre  on  the  right  eyde*  Hf  ter  they  cam  to  the  cyte 
named  Maubec.  Hf  ter  helde  they  the  eee  eyde  and 
eo  moche  exployted  that  they  carnal  hool  &eound 
to  Hntbyocne. 

How  by  thatyeementof  eomme  men  a  grete  debate 
eourded  bytwene  the  due  and  the  patriarke  of  Ihe- 
ruealem,  capitulo  CCvj^^ 

f>G  cuetomme  of  eomme  men 
ieeuche  that  they  may  not  euffre 
the  peas  emong  the peple,  where 
they  may  eette  diecorde.By  tha- 
tyeement  of  euche  maner  folke 
eourded  a  debate  bytwene  the 
due  and  the  patriate,  ffor  the 
patriarke  demaunded  of  hym 
the  chyef  tour  of  the  toun,  whiche  ie  named  the 
toure  Dauyd,  and  the  holye  cite  of  Iberuealem. 
Hboue  that  he  wold  haue  the  cyte  of  laphe  and  alle 
tbappertenauntee,  ffor  he  eayde  that  they  were  the 
droytee  and  rightee  of  hie  cbircbe  of  the  eepulcre. 
j^<£lban  thie  debate  had  a  whyle  endured  bytwene 
them,  the  due,  whiche  wae  humble  and  meeurable 
and  moche  doubted  our  lord,  on  Candlemae  day, 
in  the  preeenceof  all  the  clergy  and  all  the  peple,  he 
gaf  the  iiij  part  of  laphe  moche  debonayrly  to  the 


patriarke  and  to  bis  cbircbc  to  bolde  for  euermore* 
Hf tertbis  wban  it  cam  to  tbc  day  of  Sester,  to  fore 
all  tbcm  tbat  were  assembled  at  tbis  f este,  be  gaf 
in  to  tbe  bonde  of  tbe  patriark,  tbe  fourth  part  of 
Iberusalem  and  tbe  tour  Dauyd  witb  all  tbe  apper- 
tenauntes.  Hlway  forseen  by  couenaunt  tbat  tbe 
ducsbold  bolde  tbyse  cy  tees  and  tbe  londesaboute 
vnto  tbe  tyme  tbat  by  tbe  ayde  of  oure  lord  be  bad 
conquered  vpon  tbe  burkes  two  otber  cytees,  by 
wbicbe  tbe  royamme  mygbt  be  enlarged,  Hnd  yf 
it  bapped  tbat  be  deyed  in  tbe  mene  wbyle  witbout 
beyer,  alle  tbyse  tbynges  witboute  contradiction 
sbold  come  in  to  tbe  bonde  of  tbe  patriarke,and  to 
tbe  cbircbe,  Cbe  troutbe was  sucbe  as  I  baue  sayd, 
but  it  is  ouer  grete  merueylle  ff  or  wbat  reson  tnis 
holy  man,  tbat  was  so  wyse, demanded  tbus  tbyse 
cytees  of  tbis  noble  man,  tbe  due,  as  X  baue  sayd, 
XTbey  tbat  knewe  tbe  state  of  tbe  londe,  belde  and 
reputed  tbem  self  for  lasse  wban  tbey  vnderstode 
tbis  werke  and  couetyse  in  tbe  cbircne,  and  mer- 
ueylled  tberof ,  ffor  tbe  barons  tbat  bad  conquerd 
tbe  cyte  gaf  it  to  tbe  due  so  f  rely,  tbat  tbey  wold 

nottbatonymanlyuyngsboldbauenorigbtaboue 
bym,  but  tbat  be  sbold  bolde  it  bym  self  entierly 
witbout  making  to  ony  otber  ony  obeyssauncc* 


434 


Rier  recountetb  tbystorye  bow  tbc  fourtb  parte  of 
Iberusalem  cam  vnto  tbc  patriarke  of  tbe  same, 
capitulo  CCvij^^ 

LQIHY  it  is  certayn,  tbat  fro 
tbe  tyme  tbat  tbe  Latins  entred 
in  to  tbe  cyte,  and  yet  of  more 
auncyente,  tbe  patriarke  of  Ibe- 
4  rusalem  bad  tbe  fourtb  part  of 
pfS  tf~!¥&J&  tbe  cyte  of  Iberusalem,  &  belde 

1  itasbisowen.Rowtbisbapped, 
_  and  by  wbat  reson,  I  sbal  saye 
to  you  shortly,  ffor  tbe  troutbe  tberof  batb  ben 
sercbedj^It  is  founden  by  tbauncyent  bistoryes, 
tbat  wbyles  tbis  cyte  was  in  tbe  bondes  of  tbe 
betben  peple,  it  mygbt  neuer  baue  peas  tbat  longe 
endured,  but  was  of  te  assieged  of  betben  prynces 
tbat  were  about  it,  ffor  ecbe  of  tbem  wold  conquere 
it  and  put  it  in  bis  seygnorye,  ^berfor  tbey  toke 
of  te  tbe  proves,  and  mesdyde  and  trespaced  to  tbe 
cytezeyns  or  tbe  toun,  'Zbcy  brake  tbe  towres  and 
vwalles  mocbe  oultrageously  by  tbeyr  engyns,  and 
/for  tbeoldenesof  tbewalles  tbe  cyte  was  disclosed 
and  open  in  many  places* In  tbis  tyme  tberoyamme 
of  Bgypte was  more  ryebeand  more  puyssauntof 
bauoyr  and  good  and  of  wisedome  tban  onyotber 
of  tbe  royammes  of  t^urkye,  ffor  tbe  calypbe  belde 
tbenne  Inerusalem  and  tbe  londe  tberabout,  and 
witb  bis  grete  boost  tbat  be  sente  tbeder  be  con- 
querd  alle  Surye  vnto  tbe  Lycbe,  wbicbe  is  by  Hn- 
tbyocbe.  Hbus  bad  be  encreced  bis  empyre. 


:. 


6  establyssbyd  bis  bayllyes  in  tbc 
cytees  tbat  stonde  on  tbc  see  syde,  & 
in  tbem  also  on  tbc  Ion de.  'Cbcnnc 
commanded  be  tbatalle  sboldc  paye 
bym  trybute,and  ordeyned  &deuys- 
ed  wbat  be  wold  baue  of  euery  cyte* 
Hf ter  tbis  be  wold  tbat  tbe  cytezeyns  sbold  make 
agayn  tbe wallis  of  euery  cyte,  &  mayntene  in  good 
1  poynt  tbe  towres,andredresse  alle  aboute  sucbeas 
neded  j^By  tbe  aduyse  of  bis  men,  and  after  tbeyr 
establyssbement^tbe  bayllyeof  Xberusalem  com- 
maunded  to  tbem  of  tbc  toun  torcpayre  tbcyrwalles 
andsctte  tbem  entierly  in  poynt  lyke  as  tbey  to  fore 
bad  ben, 'Cbenne  ordeyned  be  &deuysed  bowmocb 
euery  strete  of  tbe  toun  sbold  make.  By  grete  cruelte 
and  malyce  be  commaunded  tbat  tbe  captyf s  cris- 
tiens  tbat  were  in  tbe  cyte  sbold  make  tbe  fourth 
part  of  tbe  wallesXbey  were  sopourandso  oreued 
of  tayllages  and  excises,  tbat  vnnetbe  tbey  bad  a- 
mong  tbem  alle  wberof  to  repayre  two  towrettys, 
RSY  sawe  wel  tbat  be  sougbt  occa- 
sion for  to  destroye  tbem  alle,  ITber- 
for  tbey  assembled  and  cam  mocbe 
bumbly  to  fore  tbe  bayly,  and  fyl  at 
bis  feet,  &  mocb  requyred  in  weping, 
tbat  be  wold  comande  tbem  to  doo 
tbynge  tbat  tbey  mygbt  doo,  ffor  tbis  tbat  be  bad 
commaunded  tbem  to  doo  was  ouermocbe  ouer 
itbeyr  powerXbat  in  bumayn  bay  lly ,  wbicbe  was  f u  I 
of  cruelte  and  of  pryde,  louyd  not  tbe  cristen  men, 
and  menaced  tbem  mocbe  fiersly,andsware  tbatyf 
tbey  accomplissbyd  not  tbe  commaundement  of 
436 


this  lord  the  calypbe,  be  wold  do  smyte  of  tbcyr 

beedes  as  traytours^OIban  tbey  bcrd  tbis,  tbey 

were  mocbe  aferd,and  on  tbatotbersyde  tbey  sawe 

wel  tbat  tbey  mygbt  not  bere  tbe  cbarge  that  be 

leyde  on  tbem.  XTberfor  tbey  dyde  so  mocbe  atte 

laste  by  tbe  prayer  of  somme  Curfces,  wbicbe  bad 

>pyte  on  tbem,  tbat  tbe  baylly  gaf  tbem  respyte,  til 

'tbat tbey  bad  sent  to  tbemperour  of  Constanty- 

nople,&  torequyre  bym  for  tbe  loueof  god  tbatbe 

wolde  sende  bis  almesse  to  performe  tbis  borrible 

|  werfce,  for  to  delyuer  tbem  fro  tbe  peryll  of  detb  in 

wbicbetbey  were  condempnedyfitwerenotby  tbem 
made* 

Of  tbe  same  mater,  capitulo  CCviij^^ 

RGmessagers  cam  fro  tbem  to 
tbemperourin  toConstantyno- 
ple,  tbey  sey d  to  bym  tbe  trou tb 
of  tbeir  message,  bow  tbey  were 
in  subiection,  &  wbat  meseases, 
wbat  fyltbes  tbe  TTurfces  made 
tbem  t08uflre;andfynally  tbey 
muste  alle  deye  yf  be  socoured 
tbem  not,  Hll  tbey  tbat  berde  tbem  began  to  wepe 
for  com  passion  ♦tbenne  was  emperour  a  valyaunt 
man,wyse,andofgretecoragenamedConstantyn, 
&  surname  JVfonamaques;  be  gouemed  mocbe  vy- 
gorously  tbempyre.  <Bban  be  berd  tbe  requeste  of 
tbe  poure  cristenmenbewasmeuydwitbgretepyte 
in  bis  berte,  &  say d  tbat  be  wold  belpe  tbem  gladly, 
and  sboldgyue  to  tbem  so  largely  of  bis  good  tbat 
tbe  iiij  part  of  tbe  wallis  wbicb  was  commanded 
ff3  437 


tbem  to  make  sbold  beaccomplyssbyd,  but  be  pro- 
mised tbem  wel  tbat  be  sbold  doonotbyng  butby 
couenaunt  J&  €bat  is  to  wete  tbat  yf  tbey  mygbt 
pourcbase  of  tbe  lord  of  tbe  londe,  tbat  witbin  the 
partye  of  tbe  cyte  tbat  ebold  be  closed  witb  bis 
money,  none  sbold  dwelle  but  cristen  men,on  tbis 
*  condicion  wold  be  doo  it,  and  otber  wyse  not. 

^jN  tbis  fourme  be  delyuerd  to  tbem 

1  bis  lettres  patentes,and  sente  to  bis 

I  bay ly  of  Cy pre,  tbat  yf  tbe  cristen 

men  of  Iberusalem  my gbt  pourcbace 

of  tbe  calypbe  of  6<jypte  tbis  tbat 

J  ye  baue  berd,  tbat  of  tbe  rente  tbat 

toe  ought  to  baue  in  tbat  londe  be  sbold  letemake 

1  tbef ourtb  part  of  tbe  wallys  of  tbis  boly  cy  tejfiTCbe 

^messagers,  tbat  bad  tbus  don  tbeyr  message,  re- 

*tomed  vnto  tbe  patryarke  and  to  tbem  tbat  bad 

'sente  tbem,  and  recounted  to  tbem  truly  bow  tbey 

baddon  and  spedjSFCbey  ansuerd  tbat  itsboldbe 

bard  to  be  bad,  not  witbstandyng  tbey  muste  es- 

saye,  ffor  tbey  mygbt  passe  in  none  otber  maner. 

t:bey  sente  good  messagers  and  trewe  to  tbis  grete 

lord  tbe  calypbe  of  Ggypte.  Our  lord  belpe  bym  in 

sucb  wyse  tbat  tbei  fonde  in  bym  tbis  tbat  tbey 

sought;  and  shortly  to  saye,  be  delyuerd  to  tbem 

a  good  cbartre  sealid  witb  bis  seal  and  conf  ermed 

witb  bis  propre  band,  tbat  so  closyng  tbe  iiij  part, 

be  graunted  to  tbem  tbe  fourth  part  of  Iberusalem 

jp'Cbc  messagers  retomed.  'Cbey  tbat  bad  sente 

tbem  made  to  tbem  grete  ioye  wban  tbey  knewe  bow 

tbey  bad  acbyeued  tbeir  message,  Xlbe  bailyes  of 

Cy  pre  passed  in  to  Surye,  &  tbey  made  tbe  fourth 

438 


■ 


part  of  the  walks  with  tbe  goodce  of  tbemperour, 
lyke  ae  be  bad  commaunded.  Hnd  tbis  werke  was 
made  in  tbc  yere  of  tbyncarnacion  of  ourc  lord  JW 
'Ixiij.  'Cbenne  was  calypbe  and  kynge  of  Ggypte, 
Bommensor,  &  tbis  was  xxxvj  yere  to  fore  tbc  cyte 
jwaeconqucrd. 

^%^  x^ijN^O  tbie  tyme  tbc  cristen  men  were 
iA  lodgedin  tbe  toun  emongetbe'Curkes 
comynlyonebyanotber,butfrotbens 
fortntbattbecalypbebad  commaun- 
ded, tbe  fourth  part  of  tbe  toun  was 
delvuerd  to  tbemj^'Cbenne  were  tbe 
jcristen  men  mocne  eased,  fforwban  tbey  dwellyd  e- 
mongtbe'Curke6,tbey  tbatwere  tbeyr  neygbbours 
dyde  to  tbem  grete  ennoye  and  sbames,  but  wban 
tbeywmby  tbem  self , tbey  dydetbemnotsomocbe. 
Yf  tbey  bad  ony  debate  emonge  tbem  self  it  was 
brought  to  fore  tbe  patriark,  ffor  fro  tbenne  fortb 
was  in  tbat  part  of  tbe  toun  none  otber  iustice  but 
be;  tbus  gouemed  be  it  as  bis  ounej^fiis  iiij  part 
is  bounded  as  Isball  saye  to  you.  fro  tbe  yate  tbat 
tbe  sonne  aotb  doun,  wbicbe  is  named  tbe  yate 
Dauid  by  the  tour  of  tbe  angle,  otberwyse  named 
tbe  tour  TIancre,  tbe  walles  tbat  tbey  made  witbin 
is  bounded  by  tbe  cbyef  way  tbat  gotb  fro  tbat  gate 
vnto  tbe  cbaunge,&fro  tbens  agayn  vnto  tbe  west 
yate.  In  tbis  spacestondetb  tbemountof  Caluarye 
wbere  our  sauyour  Xbesu  Criste  was  crucified,  and 
tbe  boly  sepulcre  wbere  be  laye  deed  in,  and  out 
wberof  be  aroos  fro  detb  to  lyf ,  tbe  bows  of  tbe 
bospytal,twoabbayes,one  of  monkesand  another 
of  nonnes,  tbe  bows  of  tbe  patriarke,  &  tbe  cloys- 
ture  of  tbe  cbanonnes  of  tbe  sepulcre. 

ff4  439 


fiowtbe  duc<3odeffroy,for  to  augumentethe  cris- 
tiante,  assieged  one  of  the  townes  of  tbe  Curkes, 
capitulo  CCix  ,*£,*£ 

|N  this  tyme,  after  that  alle  the 
barons  that  were  come  in  pyl- 
gremage  were  departed  fro  the 
londe,  and  retomed  in  to  tbeyr 
countrees,  the  valyaunt  due,  to 
whom  the  royamme  was  dely- 
uered,  and  Can  ere  wbicbe  was 
abiden  witb  bym,  tbey  were  al~ 


mostalone  in  tbo  partes ;  tbey  were  mocbe  pour  of 
good  andof  menTnnetbe  mygbt  tbeymake,wban 
tbey  dyde  alle  tbeyr  power,  tbre  bonderd  men  on 
borsbak,  and  two  thousand  a  f  ooteXbe  cytees  tbat 
tbepylgryms  bad  conquerd  were  ferreasondre,and 
none  mygbt  come  to  otber  without  grete  peryll  of 
tbeyr  enemyes*  0>e  vyllages  tbat  were  about  tbe 
cytees,  wbicbe  were  called  casiaus,tberin  dwellid  tbe 
Curkes  tbat  were  tbeyr  subgettis,  &  obeyed  to  tbe 
lordes  of  tbe  cytees,  but  tbiseTTurkesbatednomen 
moretban  tbey  dyde  tbe  cristen  men,  &  pourcbaced 
incessantly  alle  tbe  barme  &euyl  tbat  tbey  mygbt. 
<Oban  tbey  fonde  ony  of  our  men  allone  oute  of  tbe 
way,gladly  tbey  murdred  tbem,andsomtyme  tbey 
ledde  to  tbe  cytees  of  tbe  Sarasyns  for  to  selle  tbem . 
Yet  thought  they  of  gretter  meschyef  &  folye;  flPor 
they  woldnot  ere  nelabouretbeyr  londes,  totbende 
tbattbelordesandmenoftbe  cytees  sboldnot  take 
tbeyr  rentes,  and  desired  them  self  lyuer  to  suffre 
mesease,ratber  than  our  peple  sbold  haueony  good 
or  auay  lie. 


\ri 


Y)G  cristen  men  were  not  well  assur- 
ed within  the  cytees,  ffor  tbey  bad  but 
fewe  people,  and  tbere  cam  tbeuys  by 
nygbttbatrobbed  tbeyr  bouses,  and 
slewe  tbem  in  tbeyr  beddes,and  bare 
awaye  alle  tbeyr  tbynges*  By  tbis  oc- 
casion many  tbere  were  of  tbe  cristen  men,  tbat  lef  te 
tbeyrfayrtenementesandbouses  in  tbe  cytees,and 
retoumed  pryuely  in  to  tbeyr  countreyes;  ffor  tbey 
badde  grete  dredde  tbat  tbe  Oirkes,  wbyebe  tbat 
dwellydaboute  tbem,sbold  assemble  somme  daye 
and  tahe  tbe  townes  by  strengtbe  and  destresse, 
anddestroye  tbem  for  euer  in  suebwyse  tbatneuer 
sbold  be  memory  of  tbemjj^f  or  bate  of  tbem  tbat 
tbus  wente  was  establyssbyd  fyrst  in  tbat  londe, 
tbat  wbo  tbat  belde  a  yere  longe  in  peas  bis  tene- 
ment and  bis  londe,  be  sbold  neuer  after  answere 
tberof  to  ony  otber*  By  cause  tber  were  many  tbat 
for  fere  and  for  cowardice  lef  te  alle  tbeyr  tbynges 
and  fled  away;  after  wban  tbe  countrey  was  better 
assured,  tbey  cam  agayn,  and  wold  baue  recouerd 
tbem,  but  by  tbis  lawe  tbat  was  tbus  establyssbyd 
tbey  were  neuer  berd* 

RY^BS  tbat  tbe  royamme  was  tbus 
in  grete  pouerte,  tbe  valyaunt  due 
©odeffroy,  wbicb  bad  mocbe  grete 
courage  and  good  bope  in  our  lord, 
enlarged  bis  royamme^ He  assem- 
I  bled  as  mocbe  peple  as  be  mygbt,  & 
wente  for  tassiege  a  cyte  nygb  to  Xapbe  on  tbe  see 
sydcnamedHrsur.Butbefondeitwelgarnyssbed 
of  vy tay lies,  of  men  of  armes,  & otber engyns, and 

441 


I 


tber  were  tberin  Oirkes  many,  hardy  &  def ensable. 
TTbe  boost  of  tbe  cristen  men  tbat  were  witboute, 
were  but  f ewe  and  suffretous  by  cause  tbey  bad  no 
sbippes  by  wbicbe  tbey  mygbt  defende  tbe  waye  of 
"tbe  see,  where  tbey  mygbt  entre  and  yssue  wban  it 
plesyd  them,  for  tbise  tbynges  tbe  due  was  con- 
strained to  leue  tbe  siege,  and  departed  tbynkyng 
to  come  agayn  to  tbe  same  place,  wban  tbe  tyme 
sbold  be  more  couenable,  and  tbat  bis  men  were 
better  pourueyed  of  tbat  wberof  tbey  bad  nede  for 
to  take  tbe  toun .  Hnd  so  bad  be  don  yf  our  lord  bad 
gyuen  bym  long  lyf  in  tbis  world. 

Rowtbe'Curkes  brought  presen  tes  to  tbe  ducGodc- 
flroy  at  tbe  sayd  siege  &  of  tbeyrdeuyses  togydre, 
capitulo  CCx,«P,jP 

]Cbapped,in  tbis  siege  of  wbicbe 
I  baue  spoken,  a  tbynge  tbat 
ougbt  not  to  be  forgoten.  for 
tbe  montaynes  of  tbe  londe  of 
Samarye,  in  wbicbe  is  tbe  londe 
of  JSapples,  cam  summe'Curkes 
wbicbe  were  lordes  of  casiaus 
tberaboute,  and  brought  vnto 
the  valvaunt  due  CodeflProy  presen  tes  of  brede,  of 
wyn,  or  dates,  and  of  other  fruyte.  It  mygbt  wel  be 
tbat  tbey  cam  more  for  tespye  tbe  beyng  and  con- 
tenaunce  of  our  men  than  for  other  tbynge,  *Cbey 
prayde  so  mocb  tbe  men  of  tbe  due  that  tbey  were 
brougbttoforebym/Cbennetbeypresentedtobym 
sucbeas  tbey  bad  brougbtXbenobleducasbetbat 
was  bumble  &  without  bobaunce,sat  in  bis  pauyl- 


Ion  on  tbe  ground,  &  lened  vnto  a  eak  full  of  stuff . 
TTbereabode  be  a  part  of  bie  pcplc  tbatbc  badecntc 

in  fourage* 

RHJ^  tbey  tbat  bad  made  tbyee  pre- 
sentee eawe  tbe  due  eytte  eo  lowe, 
tbey  meruey  lied  tbem  ouermocbe,& 
began  to  demande  of  tbe  peple  tbat 
vnderetonde  tbeyre  langage,  wbere 
fore  it  was  so,  tbat  eo  bye  a  prynce 
of  tbe  wee  te,  wbicbe  bad  trou  bled  alle  tbory  en  t,  an  d 
bad  elayn  eo  many  men,  and  taken  and  conquerd  eo 
puveeaunt  a  royamme,  conteyned  bym  eo  pourely , 
ne  nad  notvnder  bym  tappytyene  clotbee  of  eylk, 
nebabyteof  akynge  on  bym,nebadnotaboutebym 
eergeanteeor  knygbtee  boldyng  naked  ewerdeeor 
bacbee  or  axie  danoye,  by  wbicbe  alle  tbey  tbat  eawe 
bym  ebold  doubte  and  fere  bym,  but  eatte  eo  lowe 
ae  be  were  a  man  of  lytil  affayre. 
^SFTS3533f)G  valiaunt  due  demaunded  of  tbem 
tbatknewe&  vnderetode  tbeyr  lang- 
age  wbat  tbey  eayde.lt  wae  told  and 
anewerdof  tbie  wbicbe  tbey  merueyl- 
ledj^tTbenne  be  eayd  tbat  it  wae  no 
ebame  to  a  man  mortelto  eytte  vpon 
tbertbe,ffor  tbeder  muete  be  retome  after  bie  detb 
an d  lodge  tbere  in  bie  body  &  becom e  ertbej^SIban 
tbey  berd  tbie  an  e  were,  tbey  tbat  were  com  en  for 
teepyeand  eeeaye  wbat  be  wae,  began  mocbe  for  to 
allowe  and  preyee  bie  wy  tte  and  bie  bumily  te*  tTbey 
departed  fro  tbene,eayengtbat  be  wae  ebapen  and 
lykeforto  be  lord  of  alle  tbatlonde,andto  gouerne 
tbe  peple,  tbat  wae  eo  witboute  pryde,  and  knewe 

443 


3 


)w 


poucrtc  &  the  fragilyteof  bis  nature  sowel^Oris 
wordwasspraddoueralbytbemtbatbadberdbym. 
Re  was  so  mocbedradde&  doubted  of  bis  en  emyes, 
tbat  en  quyred  of  bis  afFayres,  wbicbe  founde  not  in 
bym  but  vygour,  rayson  and  mesure,  without  ony 
pryde  or  oultrage. 

Row  Buymont  was  taken  in  goyng  to  JVkletene, 
wbicbe  cyte  tbe  lord  of  the  same  woldyelde  to  bym, 
capitulo  CCxj^/^ 

IN"  tbe  royamme  of  Iberusalem 
tbey  conteyned  tbem  tbus  as  ye 
baue  berd*  Oxnne  it  happened 
tbat  a  ryebe  man  of  Srmenve 
named  ©abryel  was  lord  of  tne 
cyte  of  JVleletene,  wbicb  stondetb 
by  yonde  tbe  ryuer  of  Sufrates 
i  in  tbe  londe  of  JVksopotayne. 
*Cbi8  Gabriel  doubted  mocbe  tbat  tbe  burkes  of 
Perse  sbold  come  on  bym,  ffor  tbe  men  tbat  tbey 
belde  ran  ofteon  bym,  in  sucbewysetbatbe  mygbt 
notwel  suffre  itXberforebe  tokecounseyl,  &sente 
messagers  to  Buymont,  prvneeof  Hntbyocbe,  tbat 
tbey  sbold  saye  to  bym  in  nis  name,  tbat  be  sbold 
*baste  bym  in  to  bis  londe,  fFor  be  wold  gyue  ouer 
to  bym  bis  cyte  by  certayn  couenauntes  resonable 
ynougb  wbicbe  be  sente  to  bymjj?Re  louyd  Buy- 
mont, &  sayde  tbat  be  bad  leuer  tbat  Buymont  bad 
bis  cyte  by  bis  agrement,  tban  tbe  burkes  sbolde 
take  it  fro  bym  ayenst  bis  wyll^^^^^^^ 


RHJS"  Buymonte  bcrde  tbyse  tyd- 
ynges,  as  be  tbat  was  bardy  baetcd 
nym  mocbe  for  to  make  bym  redy, 
and  toke  witb  bym  a  good  company, 
&  wente  fortb  on  bis  way*  Re  passed 
tbe  ryuer  of  Gufrates  and  entred  in 
toJVIesopotaync&wasnygbe  tbe  cyte  of  JVIeletene, 
fFor  wbicbe  be  wente  for  to  receyue,  wban  a  puys- 
saunt  amyral  of  tbe  Tlurkes  named  Donysmayn, 
tbat  bad  certaynly  tbe  very  knowlecbe  of  nis  com- 
ynge,  and  laye  in  a  wayte  for  bym,  and  ranne  vpon 
nym  sodenly,and  bis  men  beyng  alle  out  of  arraye 
'and  dispourueyed,  tbey  tbat  abode  were  alle  slayn, 
ffortberwereouergreteplenteofTIurkes/Cbeotber 
fiedde.  Buymont  was  taken  and  reteyned,and  tbey 
ladde  bym  tbe  bandes  bounden  witb  cordes,  and  bis 
'feet  cbayned  witb  yron, 

f  tbis  alien  ture  mounted  tbeTIurkein 
grete  pryde,  and  trusted  mocbe  in  bis 
boosttbatbeledde,tbatbecamtofore 
tbe  cyte  of  JVleletene,  and  assieged  it, 
by  cause  be  supposed  tbat  tbey  wold 
bauedelyuerditwitbout  taryeng*But 
somme  of  tbem  tbat  escaped  fro  tbens  wbere  tbe 
I  prynce  was  taken  cam  fleyngin  to  tbe  cyte  of  Rages* 
>Cbey  told  to  tberle  Bawdwyn  tbis  grete  mesauen- 
ture  tbat  was  fallen  to  tbemj^Qdban  tbe  valyaunt 
erle  berd  tbis,  be  was  mocbe  angrye,  and  bad  grete 
pyteof  tbe  prynce,  wbom  be  beldefor  broderfor  tbe 
icompanye  of  tbe  pylgremage*  Hnd  by  cause  tbey 
bad  tbeyr  coun  trees  so  ny of b  to  ay dre,  it  sbold  bau e 
displesyd  tbem  mocbe  yr  tbe  Curkes  sbold  con- 
?queretbiscytetbatBuymontsboldbauebad/Cber- 

445 


ifor  be  somoned  bastely  alle  bismen  tbatbe  mygbt 
baueon  borsbakand  a  rote, and tokewitbbym  tbat 
wasnecessaryeforsucbe  a  vyage  andwente  toward 
tboo  partyes* 

BL  a  tbre  daye  iourneye  was  Rages 

froJVleletene.De  bad  sone  passed  tbis 

wayein  sucbewyse  tbatbewasnygbe 

tbc  cyte*  But  tbe  sayd  Donysmayn 

knewe  wcl  tbc  comyng  of  tbcrlc  and 

_  durst  not  abyde  nc  fygbt  witb  bym, 

butleftetbesiegeanddepartedandleddefortbwitb 

bym  Buymont  fastc  bounden  &  stray tlyj^dlban 

Bawdwyn  berdc  tbat  be  durst  not  abyde  bym,  but 

fiedde  to  fore  bym,  be  ran  after  witb  bis  men  and 

cbacedbym  tbre  dayes  longej?3Bban  be  sawe  tbat 

be  mygbt  not  ouertake  bym,  be  retoumed  in  to  tbe 

cyte  of  JMeletene.  Gabryel  tbe  lord  of  tbe  toun  re- 

l  ceyued bym  witb mocbegrete  ioye  witb  alle  bismen, 

land  made  to  tbem  good  cbere,and  after  gaf  ouer 

tbe  cyte  to  bym  by  tbe  same  couenauntes  tbat  be 

'bad  olfred  to  Buymont  j^<Hban  be  bad  don  tbis 

be  retomed  borne  agayn  to  Rages* 

f)ow  tbe  due  Oodeffroy  assembled  allc  bis  peple, 

,  and  entred  in  to  Hrabye,  and  of  tbe  gayn  tbat  be 

'  made,  and  of  bis  detb,  capitulo  CCxij^^ 

lODef fROY,  tbe  valyauntduc, 
and  bis  men  tbat  were  lef  te  witb 
bym  for  to  kepe  tberoyamme,  be- 
gan to  bauemocbegretemesease, 
andsuffresucbepouertetbatvn- 
netbeitmay  be  deuysedXbenne 
it  bapped  tbat  good  espyes  and 
I  trewe  brought  to  bym  tidynges 


MBHBM1HM 


that  in  the  parties  of  flrabye  on  that  other  syde  of 
fiom  lordan  were  mocbe  ryebe  peplewbicbe  doubt- 
ed notbynge,and  tberforetbey  dwellyd  out  of  for- 
tresses^ tbey  were  surprised  tbere  sbold  be mocb 
grete  gayne  wonnej^^be  valyaunt  due  tbat  so 
mocbe  bad  suffred,  toke  witb  bym  peple  a  f  oote  and 
on  borsbabasmany  as  bemygbt,  sauf  tbe  aardeof 
tbe  cyteXbenne  entred  be  sodeynly  in  to  tbe  londe 
of  bis  enemy  esXberegadred  be  many  grete  proyes, 
that  is  to  wete,  borses,  beuf  es,  kyen  and  sbeep,  and 
ryebe  prvsonners  brought  be  grete  plente.Xbenne 
retornea  be  toward  Iherusalem* 

OJV1JMB  XTurkes  tber  were,  bye  and 
puyssaunt,oftbemofHrabye,wbicb 
weremocbebardyandnobleinarmes, 
and  bad  grete  prys.Gmongeallotber 
tber  was  one  tbat  bad  longe  desired 
for  to  see  tbe  ducGodeffroye  of  Bo- 
loyne,  and  wold  fayne  knowe  yf  it  were  trewe  tbat 
rwas  said  of  bisforce andstrengtbe,  andacqueynte 
bym  witb  bis  pepleof  f raunce,  of  wbom  bebadberd 
so  mocb,  tbat  were  come  fro  tbe  Occident  vnto  tbe 
oryent,and  bad  conquerd  so  many  londes,&  sette 
tbemintbeyrsubiectionj^Hboueallotberbedesir- 
ed  to  see  due  Godeffroy  and  knowe  y  f  it  were  trou  tb 
tbat  was  sayd  of  bis  prowesse  and  bis  strengtbe. 

RedidesomocbtosucbmenasbespaMbatbebad 
good  surete  and  triews  to  come  vnto  tbe  ducj0T)z 
salewed  bym  mocbe  lowe  en clynyng  lykeasis  tbeyr 
customme,  and  after  be  prayd  and  desired  of  tbe 
ducmocbebumbly  tbat  itwoldplese  bym  to  smyte 
witb  bisswerd  a  camel  tbat  be  bad  brought  mocbe 

447 


1 


grete,  for,  as  be  sayd,  it  sbold  be  grete  honour  to 
,  bym  tn  bts  countre,  yf  be  mygbt  recounte  ony  of 
hts  strokes  that  be  bad  seen  bym  self, 

"jfie  due  knewe  wel  tbat  be  was  come 
fro  fer  to  see  bym,  and  dyde  tbat  be 
required  bym,  He  drewe  bis  swerd, 
&  smote  tbe  camel  on  tbe  neck  where 
tt  was  grettest,  and  smote  it  of  as 
J  lygbtly  as  tt  bad  been  a  sheep,  <Bban 
the  j:urke  sawe  tbts,  be  merueylled  ouer  mocbe,  in 
sucb  wyse  tbat  be  was  al  abassbedj^Olban  be  bad 
|a  Itttl  bethought  bym, be  sayd  in  bis  langacre:Isee 
fwel,  sayd  be,  tbattbe  due  bath  a  good  swerd&  wel 
tren  cban  tand  cuttyng,  but!  wote  neueryf  be  coude 
smyte  so  grete  a  strook  with  another  swerdj^Tbe 
valyaunt  due  demaunded what  be  sayde,and wban 
be  knewe,  be :  began  to  smyle  a  lytil,  and  after  sayd 
tbatbe  sbolddehjuer  to  bym  hisowen  swerdeXbe 
Curke  dyde  so,  Che  due  tbenne  smote  tberwitb  a- 
notber  camel,  tn  suche  wys  tbat  be  made  tbe  bede  to 
nee  of  mocbe  lygbtlyer  tban  of  tbe  other,  Cbenne 
merueylled  ouermocbe  tbe  TTurk,  and  sayde  that  it 
was  more  by  tbe  strengtbe  of  tbe  arme  than  bv  th* 
bounte  of  the  swerd,  fie  bad  wel  preuyd  thatit wa« 
trewe  that  was  savd  of  the  due  in  bis  eountrevT^ 

Ubennehegaftotbeducmanyfayriewellysofaold 
and  of  ryche  stones,  and  mocbe  acqueynted  with 
bym,  and  after  retomed  borne  in  to  bis  countrej^ 
£be  valyaunt  due  cam  vnto  Iberusalem  with  alle 
bts  proye,  and  tbe  trusses  &  f ardellys  of  bis  cravn, 
wbtcbe  wer  so  grete  tbat  all  the  men  of  bis  com- 
panye  were  ryche. 
448 


N  that  monetb  of  luyll  the  valyaunt 
9  du  c  Godefroy  ,wbicbe  was  gouern  our 
of  the  royamme  of  Iberusalem,  bad 
a  maladye  and  sekenes  mocb  grete* 
Hlle  tbc  pbisiciensof  tbe  contrc  were 
sentefor/Cbeydydealletbatin  tbem 
was  possible,  but  alle  auaylled  not,  ffor  tbe  payne 
encresyd  alway  more,  Hfter  this  be  sente  for  men 
of  relygyon, as  prelates,  curates, &  other  goodand 
deuoute  men,  for  to  baue  counseyll  of  tbem  for  tbe 
beltbe  of  bis  sowle.  Re  was  mocbe  wel  confessed 
►and  veray  repentaunt  with  grete  wepynges,  and  in 
bis  right  mynde  with  grete  deuocion  departed  out 
of  this  world  Certaynly  we  ought  to  tbynke  that 
the  sowle  was  brouobt  vp  with  angelis  to  fore  tbe 
face  of  Ibesu  Crist  He  deyde  tbe  xiij  day  of  luylle, 
tbe  y  ere  of  tbyncarnacion  of  oure  lord  ffi.  C*  Re  was 
en  tiered  andburyed  in  tbe  cbircbe  of  holy  sepulcre 
,vnder  tbe  place  of  tbe  mount  of  Caluarye,  where 
our  lord  was  put  on  tbe  crosse.  TThat  place  is  kept 
mocbe  honestly  forto  entereand  burye  the  kynges 
vnto  this  day, 

RCIS  endeth  this  book  Intitled  the 
Laste  Siege  &  Conquest  of  Iberusa- 
lem,witbmanyotberbistoryes  therin 
comprysed,  fyrst  of  Bracks,  and  of 
tbemeseasesof  tbecristen  men  in  tbe 
holy  londe,  and  of  their  releef  &  con- 
quest of  Iberusalem,  &  bow  Godeffroy  of  Boloyne 
wasfirst  kyngof  tbeLatyns  in  that  royamme,and 
of  his  detb,  translated  &  reduced  out  of  f  renssbe 
in  to  Gnglysshe  by  me,  symple  persone,  <nylliam 

ggi  449 


Caxton,  to  tbcndc  that  euery  cristen  man  may  be 
the  better  encoraged  tenterprisewarrefor  the  de- 
fense of  cristendom,  &  to  recouer  the  sayd  cyte  of 
Iberusalem  in  wbicbe  oure  blessyd  sauyour Ibesu 
Criste  suflreddetb  for  al  man  kyn  demand  roosefro 
detb  to  lyf ,  and  fro  tbe  same  boly  londe  ascended 
in  to  beuen*  Hnd  also  tbat  cristen  peple,one  vnyed 
in  a  veray  peas,  mygbt  empryse  to  goo  tbeder  in 
pylgremage  witb  stronge  bonde  for  to  expelle  tbe 
SarasynsandtTurkesoutoftbesamctbatourlord 
mygbt  be  tber  seruyd&  worshipped  of  bis  cbosen 
cristen  peple  in  tbat  boly  &  blessyd  londe  in  wbicb 
be  was  incarnate,  and  blissyd  it  witb  tbe  presence 
of  bis  blessyd  body  wbyles  be  was  bere  in  ertbe 
emonge  vs,  by  wbicbe  conquese  we  mygbt  deserue 
after  tbis  present  ebort  and  transitorye  lyf ,  tbe 
celestial  lyf  to  dwellein  beuen  eternally  in  ioye  with- 
out ende,Hmenj^<Oicb  booh  1  presente  vnto  tbe 
mooste  cristen  kynge,  kynge  Sdward  tbe  fourth, 
bumbly  besecbyng  bis  byenes  to  take  nodisplesyr 
at  me  so  presumyng  J&  SIbicbe  book  I  began  in 
JVIarcbe,  tbe  xij  daye,  and  fynyssbyd  tbe  vij  day  of 
luyn,  tbe  yere  of  our  lord  JVICCCClxxxj,  and  tbe 
xxjyereof  tberegne  of  oursajdsouerayn  lordkyng 
Sdward  tbe  fourth,  &  in  tbis  maner sette  in  forme 
and  enprynted  tbe  xx  day  of  JVouembre  tbe  yere  a- 
forsayd,  in  tbabbay  of  Cdestmester,  by  tbe  sayd 
Slylliam  Caxton, 


45o 


h  cHsive  of  sojvie  sxtrhngb  chords. 


Berfroyes,  p.  317  (fit  bcrfroiz) 

wooden  towers,  made  in 

stages  and  mounted  on 

wheels. 
Creneaux,  p.  243,  battlements. 
Deduy  t,  p.  151  (f r:  deduit)plea/ 

sure,  pastime. 
Deport,  p.  13  (f r:  deportez),  to 

bear;  hence,  to  protect,  tahe 

care  of. 
Bnterinement,  p.  3i5(f r:  inter/ 

inement)  anabsolute  admit/ 

ting,  a  confirmation. 
Bntermed,p.33  (fr:enterina), 

admitted,  approved. 
Gscumours,  p.  154  (fr:  escu- 

meurs,  from  escumer,  to 

shim),  pirates,  scourers  of 

the  sea. 
f etyced,  p.  367  (fr:  fetices), 

fashioned. 
Gaultyer  withoute  hnowleche, 

p.  45.  "Chis  should  be  Sal- 


ter the  penny  less,  "Gau  tier 

sans  avoir, "  which  Caxton 

has  read, "  Gautier  sans  sa- 

voir." 
kyebe,  the ;  the  cy  te  of  Surye ; 

the  listes  of  Surye;  kalicbe 

in  Surye.  kaodicea. 
JMusardye,  p.  242  (fr:  musar- 

dee),  a  dreaming,  a  shilly- 
shallying, 
popeliquans,  p.  96,  heretics. 
Reuerye,pp.6o,  235,rage,f  ury, 

obstinacy. 
Shorches,  p.  288  (fr:  ecorces), 

rinds,  bark. 
Territory, -es,  p.  254,  and  else/ 

where(f r:  tertre,tertres)hill, 

hills. 
'Cerritoire,  hanging  on  the,  p. 

182  (f :  pendantdu  tertre),  on 

the  slope  of  the  hill. 
Chaitre,  p.  12  (fr:  Taitre),  the 

square  before  the  cathedral. 


f 

1 

CfilS  new  edition  of  ftKlliam  Caxton's  God- 
eflroy  of  Boloyne,  done  after  the  first  edition,  was 
corrected  for  the  press  by  r>,  fialliday  Sparling, 
and  printed  by  me,<nilliam  JVIorri8,at  the  Kelms- 
cott  press,  dpper  JYIall,  fiammersmitb,  in  tbe 
County  of  Middlesex,  &  finished  on  tbe  27th  day 
of  Hpril,i893. 


Sold  by  Olilliam  JVIorris^at  tbe  Kelmscott  press. 


r 


s 


SHKKHHHMHHBa 


I 


/ 


if  St  Wu 


1 


I 


. 


u 


! 

1 


Kg 


