TITLE: Urban and the crusaders
IDENTIFIER: UrbanAndTheCrusaders
URL: https://archive.org/download/UrbanAndTheCrusaders/UrbanAndTheCrusaders_djvu.txt

Google 



This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 
to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 
to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 
are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other marginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 
publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing this resource, we have taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 

We also ask that you: 

+ Make non- commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain from automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attribution The Google "watermark" you see on each file is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liability can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 



Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 

at http : / /books . qooqle . com/ 



Digitized by 



Digitized by 



Google 



Hisjto/y #f Western Civilization 



HE use by readers and students 01 tiiose original documents from 



J- which our knowledge of history is so largely drawn has come to be 
valued in recent times at something like its true worth. The sequence of 
past events, the form and spirit of institutions, the character of men, the 
prevailing habits of thought, obtain their greatest reality when we study 
them in the very words used by the men to whom the past was the living 
present. Even historians who have not been characterized by a close de- 
pendence on the results of patient investigation of the sources have recog- 
nized the superiority of an appeal to original testimony. Mr. Froude says, 
" Whenever possible, let us not be told about this man or that. Let us hear 
the man himself speak, let us see him act, and let us be left to form our own 
opinion about him." And in " Stones of Venice," Mr. Ruskin writes, * 4 The 
only history worth reading is that written at the time of which it treats, the 
history of what was done and seen, heard out of the mouths of the men who 
did and saw. One fresh draught of such history is worth more than a thou- 
sand volumes of abstracts, and reasonings, and suppositions and theories.' * 

Experience has proved, not only that the interest of students can be 
more readily obtained through the vividness of a direct and first-hand pre- 
sentation, and that knowledge thus gained is more tangible and exact ; but 
that the critical judgment is developed in no slight degree, and the ability 
as well as the interest for further study thus secured. 

The utilization of the original sources of history has, however, been 
much restricted by their comparative inaccessibility. A great proportion of 
such documents as illustrate European history exist only in languages more 
or less unfamiliar to the average American reader ; many are to be found 
only in large and expensive collections, or in works that are out of print 
and therefore difficult to obtain or consult. 

The desire to overcome in some degree this inaccessibility, especially 
for their own classes, led the editors of the present series of translations 
and reprints from the original sources of European history to undertake its 
publication. During the past eight years evidence has been given of the use- 
fulness of the documents in several directions. Their most considerable use 
has naturally been with college classes. One or more of the issues has 
been used in forty -three of the principal Universities and Colleges. In addi- 
tion to these and their use in lower schools they have been found to give 
increased value to University Extension courses and reading circles. 
Annual subscription, Ji.oo. 

Single numbers, Vol. I, 15 cents; Vols. Hand III, 10 cents. 
Double numbers, Vol. I, 25 cents ; Vols. II, III, IV and VI, 20 cents. . 
Numbers in Vol. V, unbound, 60 cents each ; bound, 80 cents each. 
Bound Volumes, $1.50. 

Discounts will be given on orders for 25 or more copies of one number 




Digitized by Google 



H«tpr, . f We,ter„ Civili*^ 

Translations and Reprints 

PROM THE 

ORIGINAL SOURCES OF EUROPEAN HISTORY, 



TABLE OF CONTENTS. 

L Speech op Urban n at the Counch, op Cusrmont. 

1. Version given by Fulcher of Chartres 9 

2. Version given by Robert the Monk •••••••• 5 

II. The Truce op God. 

1. First Canon of the Council of Clermont 8 

2. Truce of God for Diocese of Cologne, April 20, 1083 • 9 

HI. PRIVHtEGES OP THE CRUSADERS. 

1. Privilege granted by Urban II, 1095 12 

2. Privileges granted by Eugene III, 1145 13 

3. Decree of Philip Augustus, 1188, concerning debts of 

Crusaders • 13 

4. Privileges granted by Fourth I^ateran Council, 1215 • 16 

5. Privileges granted for Crusade against Heretics in 

Languedoc, 1207-08 18 

& Privileges granted for Crusade against Frederic n» 

1248 18 

7. Privilege granted by Louis IX., 1270 19 

XV. Peter the hermit. 

1. Guibert of Nogent's Account . . . 20 

2. William of Tyre's Account 20 

V. Fuixher's Account op the Start , 22 

VL Sexect Bouography 23 



Digitized by Google A 



2 



578847 

TRANSLATIONS AND REPRINTS* 



L SPEECH OF URBAN II. AT THE COUNCIL OF CLERMONT. 



Four contemporaries, who were probably present at the Council of Clermont, give 
in their histories accounts of Urban's speech. No one pretends to reproduce his exact 
words. Each gives an outline of what was said, and dwells on the part which espec- 
ially interested him. Guibert of Nogent was most affected by the mysticism of the 
Pope, and the need of contending against Anti-Christ, when he should arise. Baldric 
of DoFs account is the least full, and adds little to the other accounts. The versions 
given by Fulcher of Chartres and Robert the Monk are reproduced here. (For other 
versions, see RShricht: Beitrage zur Geschichte der Kreuzziige, II, 45.) 

The version of Urban's speech given by William of Tyre, though the one gen- 
erally quoted, is wholly untrustworthy. The learned bishop colors and reworks the 
accounts of the contemporaries, and adds some statements of his own. He speaks of 
Peter the Hermit, who is not mentioned by any one of the first four and who 
certainly was not mentioned by Urban. His whole account reflects the ideas of a 
later age. 

Of Urban's speech Wilken says : "Many orations have been delivered with as 
much eloquence, and in as fiery woids as the Pope used, but no other oration has ever 
been able to boast of as wonderful results." 



Most beloved brethren, moved by the exigencies of the times, I, 
Urban, wearing by the permission of God the papal tiara, and spiritual 
ruler of the whole world, have come here to you, the servants of God, 
as a messenger to disclose the divine admonition. I desire that those 
whom I have believed to be the faithful servants of God shall show 
themselves such, and that there shall be no shameful dissimulation. 
But if there is in you, contrary to God's law, any deformity or crooked- 
ness, because you have lost the moderation of reason and justice, I will 
earnestly strive to root out the fault. For the Lord has placed you over 
His family as stewards in order that you may feed its members with 
pleasant tasting food suited to the time. You will be happy indeed, if 
when He requires of you an account, He shall find that you have been 
faithful in your stewardships. You are also called shepherds ; be not 
hirelings. Be true shepherds and have your crooks always in your 
hands. Fall not asleep, but watch in all places over the flock com- 
mitted to your charge. For if, through your carelessness or negligence, 
any wolf snatches away a sheep, you will not only lose the reward pre- 
pared for you in the presence of your Lord, but also, having been first 
bitterly tortured by remorse for your crimes, you will be savagely hurled 
into the deadly abode* 



November 26, 1093, 



I. Version given by Fulcher of Chartres. 
Recueil, III, 322 ff. Bongars, I, 382-383. Latin. 





SPEECH OF URBAN H. 



3 



In the words of the Gospel, " Ye are the salt of the earth." But 
if you fail in your duty, how, we ask, can it be salted? Oh, how 
admirable is that salting ! Truly, you must strive by the salt of wisdom 
to correct these foolish people, hastening open-mouthed after the 
pleasures of this world, lest putrefied by sins and unsalted, they may 
be a stench in the nostrils when the Lord wills on some future day to 
address them. For if, through your neglect of duty, He shall find in 
them any worms, that is sins, He will in contempt order them to be 
hurled into the abyss of unclean things. And because you are unable 
to make good to Him so great a loss, He will certainly drive you, con- 
demned by His judgment, from the presence of His love. 

But for this reason the distributor of this salt ought to be wise, 
prudent, modest, pacific, learned, watchful, pious, just, equitable, pure. 
For how can the unlearned make others learned, the immodest make 
others modest, the impure make others pure? If any one hates peace, 
how can he be a peace-maker? Or if one's own hands are unclean, 
how can he cleanse the impurities of another? We read also that " if 
the blind lead the blind, both shall fall into the ditch." Accordingly 
first correct yourselves, so that without reproach you may be able to 
correct those under your charge. 

If you wish to be the friends of God, do willingly the things which 
you believe to be agreeable to Him. Look to it especially that the 
rules of the church are vigorously maintained, so that simoniacal heresy 
in no way takes root among you ; take heed lest purchasers and venders 
alike, struck by the chastisement of the Lord, be miserably driven 
through narrow ways to confusion and destruction. Keep the church 
and those in its service entirely free from all secular power, cause the 
tithes due to God from all the fruits of the field to be faithfully paid ; let 
them not be sold or held back. If any one shall lay hands on a bishop, 
let him be considered as wholly an outlaw. If any one shall seize or 
despoil monks, priests, nuns, and their servants, or pilgrims or merchants, 
let him be anathematized. Let robbers, incendiaries and their accom- 
plices be shut out from the church and stricken with the anathema. 
Therefore we must, as Gregory says, especially consider how he, who 
steals the property of another, is to be punished, if he who from his 
own possessions does not employ a part in alms, incurs the damnation 
of hell. For so it befel Dives mentioned in the Gospel, who forsooth 
was punished not for having stolen the property of another, but because 
he was a bad steward of what had been intrusted to him. 




4 



TRANSLATIONS AND REPRINTS. 



By these evils, therefore, as has been said, dearly beloved brethren, 
you have seen the world troubled for a long time to such an extent 
that in some places in your provinces, as has been reported to us — 
mayhap through your weakness in administering justice — hardly any one 
can venture to travel upon the highways, by night or day, without 
danger of attack by thieves or robbers ; and no one is sure that his 
property at home or abroad will not be taken from him by the violence 
or craft of the wicked. Therefore, let us re-enact the law made by 
our holy ancestors long ago and commonly called " the Truce " [of 
God]. I most earnestly exhort you that each one should strenuously 
do all in his power to have it observed in his bishopric. But if any one 
misled by pride or cupidity breaks it voluntarily, let him be anathema- 
tized by the authority of God and by the sanction of the decrees of this 
council. 

(Here Urban paused and the council enacted the decrees which he desired, and 
which all who were present took oath to obey faithfully. The Pope then proceeded :) 

Since, oh sons of God, you have promised the Lord more earnestly 
than heretofore to maintain peace in your midst and faithfully to sustain 
the laws of the church, there remains for you, newly fortified by the 
correction of the Lord, to show the strength of your integrity in a 
certain other duty, which is not less your concern than the Lord's. 
For you must carry succor to your brethren dwelling in the East, and 
needing your aid, which they have so often demanded. For the Turks, 
a Persian people, have attacked them, as many of you know, and 
have advanced into the territory of Romania as far as that part of the 
Mediterranean which is called the Arm of St George ;* and occupying 
more and more the lands of those Christians, have already seven times 
conquered them in battle, have killed and captured many, have de- 
stroyed the churches and devastated the kingdom of God. If you 
permit them to remain for a time unmolested, they will extend their 
sway more widely over many faithful servants of the Lord. 

Wherefore, I pray and exhort, nay not I, but the Lord prays and 
exhorts you, as heralds of Christ, by frequent exhortation, to urge men 
of all ranks, knights and foot-soldiers, rich and poor, to hasten to exter- 
minate this vile race from the lands of our brethren, and to bear timer/ 
aid to the worshippers of Christ I speak to those who are present, I 
proclaim it to the absent, but Christ commands. Moreover, the sins 

*The Hellespont 



Digitized by Google 



SPEECH OF URBAN II. 



5 



of those who set out thither, if they lose their lives on the journey, by 
land or sea, or in fighting against the heathen, shall be remitted in that 
hour ; this I grant to all who go, through the power of God vested in me. 

Oh, what a disgrace if a race so despised, degenerate, and slave of 
the demons, should thus conquer a people fortified with faith in omnip- 
otent God and resplendent with the name of Christ 1 Oh, how many 
reproaches will be heaped upon you by the Lord Himself if you do not 
aid those who like yourselves are counted of the Christian faith 1 Let 

/those who have formerly been accustomed to contend wickedly in pri- 
vate warfare against the faithful, fight against the infidel and bring to 
a victorious end the war which ought long since to have been begun. 
Let those who have hitherto been robbers now become soldiers of 
Christ. Let those who have formerly contended against their brothers 
and relatives now fight as they ought against the barbarians. Let 
those who have formerly been mercenaries at low wages, now gain 
eternal rewards. Let those who have been striving to the detriment 
both of body and soul, now labor for a two-fold reward. What shall I 
add? On this side will be the sorrowful and poor, on the other the 
joyful and the rich ; here the enemies of the Lord, there His friends. 
Let not those who are going delay their journey, but having arranged 
their affairs and collected the money necessary for their expenses, when 
the winter ends and the spring comes, let them with alacrity start on 
their journey under the guidance of the Lord. 

2. Version given by Robert the Monk. 
Recueil, III, 727 ft. Bongars I, 31-32. Latin. 

Oh, race of Franks, race from across the mountains, race chosen 
and beloved by God — as shines forth in very many of your works — set 
apart from all nations by the situation of your country, as well as by 
your catholic faith and the honor of the holy church ! To you our 
discourse is addressed and for you our exhortation is intended. We 
wish you to know what a grievous cause has led us to your country, 
what peril threatening you and all the faithful has brought us. 

From the confines of Jerusalem and the city of Constantinople a 
horrible tale has gone forth and very frequently has been brought to 
our ears, namely, that a race from the kingdom of the Persians, an 
accursed race, a race utterly alienated from God, a generation forsooth 
which has not directed its heart and has not entrusted its spirit to God, 
has invaded the lands of those Christians and has depopulated them 



Digitized by Google 



6 



TRANSLATIONS AND REPRINTS. 



by the sword, pillage and fire \ it has led away a part of the captives 
into its own country, and a part it has destroyed by cruel tortures ; it 
has either entirely destroyed the churches of God or appropriated them 
for the rites of its own religion. They destroy the altars, after having 
denied them with their uncleanness. They circumcise the Christians, 
and the blood of the circumcision they either spread upon the altars or 
pour into the vases of the baptismal fonU When they wish to torture 
people by a base death, they perforate their navels, and dragging forth 
the extremity of the intestines, bind it to a stake ; then with flogging 
they lead the victim around until the viscera having gushed forth the 
victim falls prostrate upon the ground. Others they bind to a post 
and pierce with arrows. Others they compel to extend their necks 
and then, attacking them with naked swords, attempt to cut through 
the neck with a single blow. What shall I say of the abominable rape 
of the women? To speak of it is worse than to be silent. The 
kingdom of the Greeks is now dismembered by them and deprived of 
territory so vast in extent that it can not be traversed in a march of 
two months. On whom therefore is the labor of avenging these wrongs 
and of recovering this territory incumbent, if not upon you? You, 
upon whom above other nations God has conferred remarkable glory 
in arms, great courage, bodily activity, and strength to humble the 
hairy scalp of those who resist you. 

Let the deeds of your ancestors move you and incite your minds 
to manly achievements ; the glory and greatness of king Charles the 
Great, and of his son Louis, and of your other kings, who have destroyed 
the kingdoms of the pagans, and have extended in these lands the 
territory of the holy church. Let the holy sepulchre of the Lord our 
Saviour, which is possessed by unclean nations, especially incite you, 
and the holy places which are now treated with ignominy and irre- 
verently polluted with their filthiness. Oh, most valiant soldiers and 
descendants of invincible ancestors, be not degenerate, but recall the 
valor of your progenitors. 

But if you are hindered by love of children, parents and wives, 
remember what the Lord says in the Gospel, " He that loveth father or 
mother more than me, is not worthy of me." " Every one that hath 
forsaken houses, or brethren, or sisters, or father, or mother, or wife, 
or children, or lands for my name's sake shall receive an hundred-fold 
and shall inherit everlasting life." Let none of your possessions detain 
you, no solicitude for your family affairs, since this land which you 




SPEECH OF URBAN IL 



7 



inhabit, shut in on all sides by the seas and surrounded by the moun- 
tain peaks, is too narrow for your large population ; nor does it abound 
in wealth; and it furnishes scarcely food enough for its cultivators. 
Hence it is that you murder and devour one another, that you wage war, 
and that frequently you perish by mutual wounds. Let therefore 
hatred depart from among you, let your quarrels end, let wars cease, 
and let all dissensions and controversies slumber. Enter upon the road 
to the Holy Sepulchre ; wrest that land from the wicked race, and sub- 
ject it to yourselves. That land which as the Scripture says " floweth 
with milk and honey," was given by God into the possession of the 
children of Israel. 

Jerusalem is the navel of the world ; the land is fruitful above 
others, like another paradise of delights. This the Redeemer of the 
human race has made illustrious by His advent, has beautified by 
residence, has consecrated by suffering, has redeemed by death, has 
glorified by burial. This royal city, therefore, situated at the centre 
of the world, is now held captive by His enemies, and is in subjection 
to those who do not know God, to the worship of the heathens. She 
seeks therefore and desires to be liberated, and does not cease to im- 
plore you to come to her aid. From you especially she asks succor, 
because, as we have already said, God has conferred upon you above 
all nations great glory in arms. Accordingly undertake this journey 
' for the remission of your sins, with the assurance of the imperishable 
glory of the kingdom of heaven. 

When Pope Urban had said these and very many similar things in 
his urbane discourse, he so influenced to one purpose the desires of all 
who were present, that they cried out, " It is the will of God ! It is 
the will of God !" When the venerable Roman pontiff heard that, 
with eyes uplifted to heaven he gave thanks to God and, with his hand 
commanding silence, said : 

Most beloved brethren, to-day is manifest in you what the Lord 
says in the Gospel, " Where two or three are gathered together in my 
name there am I in the midst of them." Unless the Lord God had 
been present in your spirits, all of you would not have uttered the 
same cry. For, although the cry issued from numerous mouths, yet the 
origin of the cry was one. Therefore I say to you that God, who 
implanted this in your breasts, has drawn it forth from you. Let this 
then be your war-cry in combats, because this word is given to you by 
God. When an armed attack is made upon the enemy, let this one 




8 



TRANSLATIONS AND REPRINTS. 



cry be raised by all the soldiers of God : It is the will of God ! It is 
the will of God 1 

And we do not command or advise that the old or feeble, or those 
unfit for bearing arms, undertake this journey ; nor ought women to 
set out at all, without their husbands or brothers or legal guardians. 
For such are more of a hindrance than aid, more of a burden than 
advantage. Let the rich aid the needy ; and according to their wealth, 
let them take with them experienced soldiers. The priests and clerks 
of any order are not to go without the consent of their bishop ; for this 
journey would profit; them nothing if they went without permission of 
these. Also, it is not fitting that laymen should enter upon the pil- 
grimage without the blessing of their priests. 

Whoever, therefore, shall determine upon this holy pilgrimage and 
shall make his vow to God to that effect and shall offer himself to Him 
as a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, shall wear the sign 
of the cross of the Lord on his forehead or on his breast. When, truly, 
having fulfilled his vow he wishes to return, let him place the cross 
on his back between his shoulders. Such, indeed, by the two-fold 
action will fulfill the precept of the Lord, as He commands in the Gos- 
pel, "He that taketh not his cross and followeth after me, is not 
worthy of me." 

II. THE TRUCE OF GOD. 
The Trace of God was proclaimed at Clermont, bat the wording of the decree 
has not been preserved. Consequently, we give here, first, the Canon enacted by the 
Council, as reported by William of Malmesbury, and second, a Trace which was 
framed twelve years before and which served as a model for later enactments. 

I. Thi First Canon of the Council of Clermont. 

William of Malmesbury, Book IV, chap. 2. Rolls Series. Latin. 

Be it enacted, that monks, clergymen, women, and those who may 
be with them, shall remain in peace every day ; farther, on three days, 
viz., the second, third and fourth days of the week, an injury done to 
any one shall not be considered an infraction of the Peace ; but on the 
remaining four days, if any one injures another, he shall be considered 
a violator of the Sacred Peace, and shall be punished in the manner 
decreed. 



i 

Digitized by Google 



TRUCE OF GOD. 



9 



2. The Truce of God for the Diocese of Cologne.* April 20, 1083. 

M. G. LL. vol. ii (1837), pp. 55-58, left-hand columns. Reprinted 
from the above in Altmann and Bernheim's Ausgew&hlte Urkunden, 
etc. (Berlin, 1895), PP* 204-207, Latin. 

Inasmuch as in our own times the church, through its members, 
has been extraordinarily afflicted by tribulations and difficulties, so 
that tranquility and peace were wholly despaired of, we have endeavored 
by God's help to aid it, suffering so many burdens and perils. And 
by the advice of our faithful subjects we have at length provided this 
remedy, so that we might to some extent re-establish, on certain days 
at least, the peace which, because of our sins, we could not make 
enduring. Accordingly we have enacted and set forth the following : 
having called together our parishioners to a legally summoned council, 
which was held at Cologne, the chief city of our province, in the Church 
of St. Peter, in the 1083d year of our Lord's Incarnation, in the sixth 
indiction, on the XII day before the Kalends of May, after arranging 
other business, we have caused to be read in public what we proposed 
to do in this matter. After this had been for some time fully discussed 
" pro and con " by all, it was unanimously agreed upon, both the clergy 
and the people consenting, and we declared in what manner and during 
what parts of the year it ought to be observed : 

Namely, that from the first day of the Advent of our Lord througk 
Epiphany, and from the beginning of Septuagesima to the eighth day 
after Pentecost and through that whole day, and throughout the year 
on every Sunday, Friday and Saturday, and on the fast days of the four 
seasons, and on the eve and the day of all the apostles, and on all days 
canonically set apart — or which shall in the future be set apart — for 
fasts or feasts, this decree of peace shall be observed ; so that both 
those who travel and those who remain at home may enjoy security and 
the most entire peace, so that no one may commit murder, arson, 
robbery or assault, no one may injure another with a sword, club or any 
kind of weapon, and so that no one irritated by any wrong, from the 
Advent of our Lord to the eighth day after Epiphany, and from Septua- 
gesima to the eighth day after Pentecost, may presume to carry arms, 

* This document has been preserved only in the form in which the Bishop ol 
Cologne communicated it to the Bishop of M&nster. The Truce decreed by Henry 
IV. in 1085 is modeled upon this, and its language is in many parts the same. A 
translation of the latter decree can be found in Henderson's Select Historical Docu- 
ments (London, 1892), pp. 208-211. 




IO 



TRANSLATIONS AND REPRINTS. 



shield, sword or lance, or moreover any kind of armor. On the 
remaining days indeed, viz., on Sundays, Fridays, apostles' days and 
the vigils of the apostles, and on every day set aside, or to be set aside, 
for fasts or feasts, bearing arms shall be legal, but on this condition, 
that no injury shall be done in any way to any one. If it shall be neces- 
sary for any one in the time of the decreed peace — /. e., from the 
Advent of our Lord to the eighth day after Epiphany, and from Septua- 
gesima to the eighth day after Pentecost — to go from one bishopric into 
another in which the peace is not observed, he may bear arms, but on 
the condition that he shall not injure any one, except in self-defence if 
he is attacked ; and when he returns into our diocese he shall imme- 
diately lay aside his arms. If it shall happen that any castle is besieged 
during the days which are included within the peace the besiegers shall 
cease from attack unless they are set upon by the besieged and com- 
pelled to beat the latter back. 

And in order that this statute of peace should not be violated by 
any one rashly or with impunity, a penalty was fixed by the common 
consent of all ; if a free man or noble violates it, /. e., commits homicide 
or wounds any one or is at fault in any manner whatever, he shall be 
expelled from our territory, without any indulgence on account of the 
payment of money or the intercession of friends, and his heirs shall 
take all his property ; if he holds a fief, the lord to whom it belongs 
shall receive it again. Moreover, if it is learned that his heirs after his 
expulsion have furnished him any support or aid, and if they are con- 
victed of it, the estate shall be taken from them and given to the king. 
But if they wish to clear themselves of the charge against them, they 
shall take oath with twelve, who are equally free or equally noble. If 
a slave kills a man, he shall be beheaded ; if he wounds a man, he 
shall lose a hand ; if he does an injury in any other way with his fist or 
a club, or by striking with a stone, he shall be shorn and flogged. If, 
however, he is accused and wishes to prove his innocence, he shall 
clear himself by the ordeal of cold water, but he must himself be put 
into the water and no one else in his place ; if, however, fearing the 
sentence decreed against him, he flees, he shall be under a perpetual 
excommunication ; and if he is known to be in any place, letters shall 
be sent thither, in which it shall be announced to all that he is excom- 
municate, and that it is unlawful for any one to associate with him. In 
the case of boys who have not yet completed their twelfth year, the 
hand ought not to be cut off ; but only in the case of those who are 




TRUCE OF GOD. 



II 



twelve years or more of age. Nevertheless if boys fight, they shall be 
whipped and deterred from fighting. 

It is not an infringement of the peace, if any one orders his delin- 
quent slave, pupil, or any one in any way under his charge to be chastised 
with rods or cudgels. It is also an exception to this constitution of 
peace, if the Lord King publicly orders an expedition to attack the 
enemies of the kingdom or is pleased to hold a council to judge the 
enemies of justice. The peace is not violated if, during the time, the 
duke or other counts, advocates or their substitutes hold courts and 
inflict punishment legally on thieves, robbers and other criminals. 

The statute of this imperial peace is especially enacted for the 
security of those engaged in feuds ; but after the end of the peace, they 
are not to dare to rob and plunder in the villages and houses, because 
the laws and penalties enacted before the institution of the peace are still 
legally valid to restrain them from crime, moreover because robbers and 
highwaymen are excluded from this divine peace and indeed from any 
peace. 

If any one attempts to oppose this pious institution and is unwilling 
to promise peace to God with the others or to observe it, no priest in 
our diocese shall presume to say a mass for him or shall take any care 
for his salvation ; if he is sick, no Christian shall dare to visit him ; on 
his death-bed he shall not receive the Eucharist, unless he repents. 
The supreme authority of the peace promised to God and commonly 
extolled by all will be so great that it will be observed not only in our 
times, but forever among our posterity, because if any one shall presume 
to infringe, destroy or violate it, either now or ages hence, at the end 
of the world, he is irrevocably excommunicated by us. 

The infliction of the above mentioned penalties on the violators of 
the peace is not more in the power of the counts, centenaries or officials, 
than in that of the whole people in common ; and they are to be espe- 
cially careful not to show friendship or hatred or do anything contrary 
to justice in punishing, and not to conceal the crimes, if they can be 
hidden, but to bring them to light. No one is to receive money for 
the release of those taken in fault, or to attempt to aid the guilty by 
any favor of any kind, because whoever does this incurs the intolerable 
damnation of his soul ; and all the faithful ought to remember that this 
peace has not been promised to men, but to God, and therefore must 
be observed so much the more rigidly and firmly. Wherefore we exhort 
all in Christ to guard inviolably this necessary contract of peace, and if 




12 



TRANSLATIONS AND REPRINTS. 



any one hereafter presumes to violate it, let him be damned by the ban of 
irrevocable excommunication and by the anathema of eternal perdition. 

In the churches, however, and in the cemeteries of the churches, 
honor and reverence are to be paid to God, so that if any robber or 
thief flees thither, he is by no means to be killed or seized, but he is to 
remain there until by urgent hunger he is compelled to surrender. If 
any person presumes to furnish arms or food to the criminal or to aid 
him in flight, the same penalty shall be inflicted on him as on the 
criminal Moreover, by our ban we interdict laymen from punishing 
the transgressions of the clergy and those living under this order ; but 
if seized in open crime, they shall be handed over to their bishop. In 
cases in which laymen are to be executed, the clergy are to be degraded ; 
in cases in which laymen are to be mutilated, the clergy are to be sus- 
pended from office, and with the consent of the laymen they are to 
suffer frequent fasts and floggings until they atone. 



The privileges were of gradual growth. Urban promised remission of sins, possi- 
bly more. His successors found it necessary to add great material inducements to the 
spiritual. As the seal for the crusades flagged, the privileges increased. Finally 
when Innocent IV. preached a crusade against a Christian king, Conrad IV., he 
" granted a larger remission of sins than for the voyage to the Holy Land, and in- 
cluded the father and mother of the crusaders as beneficiaries in the assurance of 
heaven." 

In his struggle against the heretics in Languedoc, Innocent III. made free use 
of his power to offer inducements to crusaders. The privileges were nearly identical 
with those granted for the crusades in the East, and the time of service required was 
only forty days. Those who had taken a vow to fight against the infidels in the Holy 
Land were freed from their oath on condition that they would fight against the 
heretics in Languedoc 

The examples given here illustrate the growth of the privileges — until they be- 
came burdensome even to those who were supposed to profit by them, — and also the 
manner in which the popes attempted to turn this weapon against their political 
enemies. 

I. IVivilegt granted by Urban at the Council of Clermont, fogj. 
Labbe, Collectio magna conciliorum, vol. X., col. 507. 
William of Malmesbury in Rolls Series, Book IV, chap. II. Latin. 

If any one through devotion alone, and not for the sake of honor 
or gain, goes to Jerusalem to free the church of God, the journey itself 
•hall take the place of all penance. 



IIL PRIVILEGES OF THE CRUSADERS. 




PRIVILEGES OF THE CRUSADERS. 



*3 



2. Privileges granted by Eugene III, 1146.* 

Otto of Freising, Gesta Friderici, I, 35 in M. G. SS. xx, 371. Latin. 

Moreover, by the authority vested by God in us, we who with 
paternal care provide for your safety and the needs of the church, have 
promised and granted to those who from a spirit of devotion have 
decided to enter upon and accomplish such a holy and necessary under- 
taking and task, that remission of sins which our predecessor Pope 
Urban instituted. We have also commanded that their wives and chil- 
dren, their property and possessions, shall be under the protection of 
the holy church, of ourselves, of the archbishops, bishops and other 
prelates of the church of God. Moreover, we ordain by our apostolic 
authority that until their return or death is fully proven, no law suit shall 
be instituted hereafter in regard to any property of which they were in 
peaceful possession when they took the cross. 

Those who with pure hearts enter upon such a sacred journey and 
who are in debt shall pay no interest. And if they or others for them 
are bound by oath or promise to pay interest, we free them by our 
apostolic authority. And after they have sought aid of their relatives 
or lords of whom they hold their fiefs, and the latter are unable or 
unwilling to advance them money, we allow them freely to mortgage 
their lands and other possessions to churches, ecclesiastics or other 
Christians, and their lords shall have no redress. 

Following the institution of our predecessor, and through the 
authority of omnipotent God and of St. Peter, prince of the Apostles— 
which is vested in us by God — we grant absolution and remission of 
sins, so that those who devoutly undertake and accomplish such a holy 
journey, or who die by the way, shall obtain absolution for all their sins 
which they confess with humble and contrite heart, and shall receive 
from the Remunerator of all the reward of eternal life. 

Granted at Vetralle on the Kalends of December. 

3. Decree of Philip Augustus , 1188, concerning the Debts of the Crusaders. 

Rigordns: Gesta Philippi Augusti in Bouquet: Recueil, xvii, 25. Latin. 

In the name of the holy and indivisible Trinity, Amen. It has 

* The whole Boll is translated in Henderson, pp. 333-336. For date, see note 
in M. G. SS. 1. c. and Kugler ; Stndien zur Geschichte des zweiten Krenzzugs, p. I. 




14 



TRANSLATIONS AND REPRINTS. 



been decided by lord Philip, king of the Franks, by the advice of the 
archbishops, bishops and barons of his land : 

1. That bishops, prelates, and clerks of the conventual churches, 
and knights who have taken the cross, shall have a respite of two years — 
dating from the first feast of All Saints after the departure of the king — 
in paying the debts which they owed to Jews or Christians before the 
king took the cross ; that, is on the first feast of All Saints the creditors 
shall have a third of the debt, and on the following feast of All Saints a 
second third of the debt, and on the third feast of All Saints the last 
third of the debt. Also, for each one, from the day on which he takes 
the cross, interest on debts previously contracted shall cease. 

2. If a knight, who is the legitimate heir, son, or son-in-law of a 
knight not taking the cross, or of a widow, and who is under the juris- 
diction of his father or mother, takes the cross, his father or mother shall 
have a respite from their debts, in accordance with the above ordinance. 

3. If, however, their son or son-in-law, who has taken the cross, 
is no longer under their jurisdiction, or, if he is not a knight, or, if he 
has not taken the cross, they shall not enjoy a respite through this 
decree. 

4. Also, within a fortnight after the next feast of St. John the 
Baptist, those debtors who have lands and revenues, shall through the 
lords in whose territory the lands are, assign the lands and revenues to 
their creditors ; in order that from these the creditors may collect their 
debts at the aforesaid times and according to the aforesaid form. The 
lords shall not be able to prevent those assignments, unless they them- 
selves settle with the creditor for the debt. 

5. Those who do not have sufficient lands or revenues to make 
an assignment for their debts, shall give their creditors sureties or bail 
that they will pay their debts at the dates fixed. And unless they give 
security, as has been arranged, through assignment of lands, or sureties, 
or bail if they have no lands, within a fortnight after the next feast of 
St. John the Baptist, they shall not have the respite which is granted 
to others. 

6. If any crusader, who is a clerk or knight, is in debt to a cru- 
sader, who is a clerk or knight, he shall have a respite from his debt 
until the next feast of All Saints — provided, however, that he furnishes 
good security for paying his debt at the time indicated. 

7. If any one of those, who have taken the cross, shall have assigned 
to any one gold, silver, grain, or any other personal property, a week 




DECREE CONCERNING DEBTS. 



*5 



before the Purification of the Blessed Mary or after that time, the 
creditor shall not be compelled to give him a respite on that account. 

8. If any one buys from another, who has not taken the cross, the 
usufruct of his lands for one year at a fixed price, the bargain shall 
stand. 

9. If any knight or clerk shall have mortgaged his lands or reve- 
nues to a citizen, who is also a crusader, or to a clerk or knight, who is 
not a crusader, or shall have assigned them for a period of years, the 
debtor this year shall ieceive the produce of the lands or the revenues ; 
and the creditors, as a recompense for this year, shall hold the property 
for one year after the completion of the years for which the mortgage 
or assignment ought to continue. However, if the creditor shall have 
cultivated the mortgaged lands or vineyards, he shall have one-half the 
grain this year for his labor. 

10. All bargains made a week before the Purification of the Blessed 
Virgin, or after that date, shall hold good. 

11. For all debts on which he obtains a respite, the debtor must 
give as good security as, or better than, he had previously given. If a 
dispute arises about the security, the council of the lord of the creditor 
shall demand as good security as, or better than, before. And if the 
security is not fixed by that lord, it shall be fixed by the council of the 
prince of the land. 

12. If any lord or prince under whose jurisdiction the said creditors 
or debtors shall be, shall not wish to observe, or shall not cause to be 
observed, this decree concerning the respite for debts or the assignments, 
he shall be warned by his metropolitan or bishop ; if he shall not make 
amends within forty days, he may be placed by the same under a sen- 
tence of excommunication. Nevertheless, as long as the lord or prince 
shall be willing to prove, in the presence of his metropolitan or bishop, 
that in this respect he has not failed in his duty to either creditor or 
debtor, and that he is prepared to comply with the decree, the metro- 
politan or bishop shall not have the power to excommunicate him. 

13. No crusader, whether clerk, knight, or any one else, shall be 
obliged to defend himself in a law suit, concerning the land of which he 
was tenant, from the day on which he takes the cross until he returns 
from his undertaking, unless the suit had been brought against him 
before he had taken the cross* 




i6 



TRANSLATIONS AND REPRINTS. 



4. Privileges granted by the Fourth Lattran Council^ 
Mansi, Concilia, vol, XXII, p. 1057 sq. Latin. 

Moreover, we grant to the clergy that they may retain their fiefs 
intact for three years as if they were resident in their churches ; and if 
necessary, they may mortgage them for the same length of time. 

In order that nothing relating to Christ's business may be neglected, 
we wish and command patriarchs, archbishops, bishops, abbots and 
others who have charge of souls, to set forth zealously to those com- 
mitted to their care the word of the cross, exhorting in the name of the 
Father, Son and Holy Ghost, — one only, true and eternal God, — kings, 
dukes, princes, marquises, counts, barons and other magnates, also the 
communities of cities, towns and villages, who do not go in person to 
the aid of the Holy Land, to send a suitable number of warriors, with 
the necessary expenses for three years, according to their individual 
means, for the remission of their own sins — as is stated in our general 
letters, and as is also stated below, for the greater surety. 

Of this remission we wish to be partakers, not only those who 
furnish their own vessels, but also those who may have striven to build 
ships for this purpose. Moreover, let it be sternly announced by apos- 
tolic authority to those who refuse — if perchance any shall be so un- 
grateful to our Lord God — that they are to understand that for this 
they will have to answer to us on the last day of the strict judgment, 
before an awful judge. Nevertheless, let them first consider with what 
conscience or what security they will be able to appear before the only 
begotten Son of God, Jesus Christ, into whose hands the Father gave 
all things, if they shall refuse in this matter, which is peculiarly fitting 
for them, to aid Him who was crucified for sinners, by whose bounty 
they live, by whose kindness they are maintained, nay, more, by whose 
blood they have been redeemed. 

Since it is certainly right that those who give their allegiance to 
the heavenly Emperor should enjoy a special privilege : when the time 
of the expedition shall exceed one year in length, the crusaders shall 
be free from collections, tallages and other taxes. And we have taken 
their persons and property, after the assumption of the cross, under St 

♦The whole of the decree relating to the crusade is translated in Henderson, pp» 
337-344. 



Digitized by Google 



PRIVILEGES OF THE CRUSADERS. 



17 



Peter's and our own protection, and we have decided that their defence 
shall be entrusted to the archbishops, bishops and all the prelates of 
the church. We have also appointed officers of our own especially for 
their protection, in order that their property may be kept intact and 
uninjured, until their death or return is known with certainty. And if 
any one attempts any attack upon their property he shall be restrained 
by ecclesiastical censure. 

If any of those setting out thither are bound by oath to pay interest, 
we command that their creditors shall be compelled by the same means 
to release them from their oaths and to desist from the exaction of 
interest. But if any creditor shall compel them to pay interest, we 
order that he shall be forced by a similar chastisement to pay it back. 

We command that the Jews, however, shall be compelled by the 
secular power to remit interest ; and until they remit it all association 
of any kind with them shall be refused by all faithful Christians, under 
penalty of excommunication. For those, moreover, unable at present to 
pay their debt to the Jews, the secular princes shall provide by a useful 
delay, so that after they begin their journey they shall suffer no incon- 
venience from interest, until their death or return is known with cer- 
tainty. The Jews shall be compelled, after deducting the necessary 
expenses, to count the income which they receive in the meantime from 
the mortgaged property toward the payment of the principal ; since a 
favor of this kind which defers the payment and does not cancel the 
debt does not seem to cause much loss. Moreover, let the prelates of 
the church, who are proven to be negligent in doing justice to the cru- 
saders and their families, understand that they shall be severely punished. 

Therefore, trusting in the mercy of omnipotent God, and in the 
authority of the blessed apostles Peter and Paul, by that power of bind- 
ing and loosing which God has ponferred on us, although unworthy, we 
grant to all, who undergo the labor in their own person and at their 
own expense, full remission of the sins of which they have truly repented 
with contrite hearts, and which they have confessed with their mouths ; 
and at the retribution of the just we promise an increase of eternal 
salvation. To those also who do not go thither in person, but yet 
according to their ability and means send suitable men at their expense, 
and to those likewise who go in person, although at the expense of others, 
we promise full remission of their sins. We also will and grant that, 
according to the kind of their aid, and the depth of their devotion, all 




i8 



TRANSLATIONS AND REPRINTS. 



shall partake of this remission who minister fitly from their property to 
the aid of that land or furnish opportune counsel and assistance. Also 
on all who piously proceed in this task the universal Synod bestows in 
common the aid of all its benefits that it may worthily conduce to their 
salvation. Amen. 

5. Privileges granted for the Crusade against the Heretics in Languedoc, 

1207-08. 

Regesta Inn. Ill, Lib. X, Ep. 149, and Lib. XI, Ep. 156-159. Latin. 
(The Regesta are reprinted in Migne's Patrologiae, etc Books X and 
XI are in VoL 215.) 

Since those who fight for liberty of the church ought to be fostered 
by the protection of the church, we, by our apostolic authority, have 
decided that our beloved, who in obedience to Christ are signed— or 
are about to be signed — against the provincial heretics, from the time 
that they, according to the ordinance of our legates, place on their 
breasts the sign of the quickening cross, to fight against the heretics, 
shall be under the protection of the apostolic seat and of ourselves, 
with their persons and lands, their possessions and men, and also all of 
their other property ; and until full proof is obtained of their return or 
death all the above shall remain as they were, free and undisturbed. 

The above is taken from Lib. XI, Ep. 156, written to the Archbishops, Bishops, 
etc., on October 1 1, 1208, from Ferentino. Owing to lack of space, it is not possible 
to print all the letters referring to the privileges. Lib. X, Ep. 149, offers remission 
of sins and protection to crusaders, and also grants possession of all land taken from 
the heretics. Lib. XI, Ep. 157, permits the clergy to mortgage their property for 
two years, in order to obtain money for the crusade. Lib. XI, Ep. 158, confirms 
some of the above privileges and frees crusaders from paying interest Lib. XI, Ep. 
159, enjoins king Philip of France to compel the Jews to remit all interest to the 
crusaders. Numerous other letters in the Regesta confirm one or more of the privi- 
leges mentioned. 

6. Privileges granted for a Crusade against Frederic II. 

Extract from letter of Innocent IV, Aug. 30, 1248. 
Huillard-Breholles ; Hist diplomatica Frederici Secundi, VIn. 647-8. 
Latin. 

Wherefore we advise that publicly in Rome, Campania, and Mara- 
tima, you preach a crusade against the aforesaid Frederic ; and that 
you also cause suitable men to preach the crusade frequently and 
solemnly. And by our authority grant the remission of sins, — which 
was granted in the General Council to those who went to the succor of 



Digitized by Google 



PETER THE HERMIT. 



19 



the Holy Land — to all those who with fervent zeal choose to undertake 
a crusade against the same Frederic, in order to aid the church in 
rooting out, from the aforesaid kingdom, the perfidy which flows from 
its diseased head to the adjacent members, and in restoring there the 
faith formerly cherished. And also publish solemnly, and cause others 
to publish, that the same Frederic and all who aid him by counsel, 
succor or favor, in person or property, openly or secretly, are excommu- 
nicated by us ; and also that the whole kingdom of Sicily is placed 
under an ecclesiastical interdict, as long as it shall adhere to him. 

7. Privilege granted by Louis IX, 1270.* 

fitablissemens, Bk. I, 84, in Isambert: Anciennes Lois, II, 465. Old 
French. 

If the king, or a count, or a baron, or any lord who has the right 
of jurisdiction in his land, arrests a clerk, or crusader, or any man of 
religion, even if he is a layman, the lord ought to deliver him to the holy 
church, whatever may be his crime. And if the clerk has committed 
a crime for which the penalty is death by hanging, and is not tonsured, 
the secular justice ought to try him. But if he is tonsured and wears 
the habit of a clerk, even if he is a thief, no confession, no answer that 
he may make, can injure him, for he is not before his regular judges ; 
and any confession made by one who is not before his regular judges has 
no value, according to the law written in the Decretals, De judiciis 
cap. Et si clerici and cap. Cum hominc \Cutn non ab homine\.\ 



Two of the participants were soon singled out by popular tradition as the heroes 
of the first crusade. Godfrey of Bouillon was pre-eminently the representative ot the 
warlike element, and was falsely glorified as the leader of the whole expedition. His 
descent was traced from " the knight of the swan," and many were the valorous 
deeds imputed to him. But the ascetic element was even more important than the 
military, and Peter the Hermit was selected as the representative of the ideal ascetic 
His real deeds were obscured by the fables which clustered about his name. 

It is certain that he never was in Jerusalem before the first crusade ; that he did \ 
not incite Urban to preach the crusade; that he did not speak at Clermont; that his 
preaching was limited to a few months and a small part of France, and that he was 
in no way " the immediate cause of the crusade." Guibert gives the best account of 

* For explanation of some of the points in the above, see " Benefit of Clergy M in 
H. C. Lea's Studies in Church History ; especially pp. ao6, ft (Ed. 1883.) 
f Corpus Juris Canonici, c. 4 and 10, X, II. 1. 



IV. PETER THE HERMIT. 




so 



TRANSLATIONS AND REPRINTS. 



the real Peter. The passages from William of Tyre have been translated to illustrate 
the fables which were common a century after the first crusade, and show the spirit 
to which these fables owed their rise. 

1. Guibert of Nogenfs Account 

Hist Hieros. Bk. II, ch. viiL Recueil, IV, 142 f. Bongars, I, 482. 
Latin. 

Therefore, while the princes, who felt the need of many expenses 
and great services from their attendants, made their preparations slowly 
and carefully ; the common people who had little property, but were 
very numerous, joined a certain Peter the Hermit, and obeyed him as a 
master while these affairs were going on among us. 

He was, if I am not mistaken, from the city of Amiens, and we 
have learned that he had lived as a hermit, dressed as a monk, some- 
where in Upper Gaul. After he had departed from there — I do not 
know with what intention — we saw him going through the cities and 
towns under a pretense of preaching. He was surrounded by so great 
throngs of people, he received such enormous gifts, his holiness was 
lauded so highly, that no one within my memory has been held in such 
honor. 

He was very liberal in the distribution to the poor of what he had 
received. He restored prostitutes to their husbands with gifts. By his 
wonderful authority he restored everywhere peace and concord, in place 
of discord. For in whatever he did or said it seemed as if there was 
something divine, especially when the hairs were snatched from his 
mule for relics. We do not report this as true, but for the common 
people who love novelties. He wore a woolen shirt, and over it a 
mantle reaching to his ankles ; his arms and feet were bare. He lived 
on wine and fish ; he hardly ever, or never, ate bread. 

2. William of Tyre's Account 

Belli sacri hist. Bk. I, ch. ii, ffi Recueil, I, 32 ff. Bongars, I, 637-8. 
Latin. 

A certain priest named Peter, from the kingdom of the Franks 
and the bishopric of Amiens, a hermit both in deed and name, led by 
the same ardor, arrived at Jerusalem. He was small in stature and his 
external appearance contemptible, but greater valor ruled in his slight 
frame. For he was sharp witted, his glance was bright and captivating, 
and he spoke with ease and eloquence. Having paid the tax which 
was exacted from all Christians who wished to enter, he went into the 




PETER THE HERMIT. 



at 



city and was entertained by a trusty man who was also a confessor of 
Christ. He diligently questioned his host, as he was a zealous man, 
and learned more fully from him not only the existing perils, but also 
the persecutions which their ancestors had suffered long before. And 
if in what he heard any details were lacking, he completed the account 
from the witness of his own eyes. For remaining in the city and visit- 
ing the churches he learned more fully the truth of what had been told 
to him by others. 

Hearing also that the Patriarch of the city was a devout and God- 
fearing man, he wished to confer with him and to learn more fully from 
him the truth concerning some matters. Accordingly he went to him, 
and having been presented by a trustworthy man, both he and the 
Patriarch mutually enjoyed their conferences. 

The name of the Patriarch was Simeon. As he learned from 
Peter's conversation that the latter was prudent, able and eloquent, 
and a man of great experience, he began to disclose to him more confi- 
dentially all the evils which the people of God had suffered while 
dwelling in Jerusalem. 

To whom Peter replied : " You may be assured, holy rather, that 
if the Roman church and the princes of the West should learn from a 
zealous and a reliable witness the calamities which you suffer, there is 
not the slightest doubt that they would hasten to remedy the evil, both 
by words and deeds. Write them zealously both to the lord Pope and 
the Roman church and to the kings and princes of the West, and con- 
firm your letter by the authority of your seal. I, truly, for the sake of 
the salvation of my soul, do not hesitate to undertake this task. And 
I am prepared under God's guidance to visit them all, to exhort them 
all, zealously to inform them of the greatness of your sufferings and to 
urge them to hasten to your relief." 

Of a truth, Thou art great, O Lord our God, and to thy mercy 
there is no end ! Of a truth, blessed Jesus, those who trust in Thee 
shall not be brought to confusion ! How did this poor pilgrim, destitute 
of all resources and far from his native land, have so great confidence 
that he dared to undertake an enterprise so much beyond his strength 
and to hope to accomplish his vow, unless it was that he turned all his 
thoughts to Thee, his protector, and filled with charity, pitying the 
misfortunes of his brethren, loving his neighbor as himself, he was 




22 



TRANSLATIONS AND REPRINTS* 



content to fulfill the law? Strength is a vain thing, but charity over- 
co:neth. What his brethren prescribed might appear difficult and even 
impossible, but the love of God and of his neighbor rendered it easy 
for him, for love is strong as death. Faith which worjteth by love avail- 
eth with Thee, and the good deeds near Thee do not remain without 
fruit. Accordingly Thou didst not permit Thy servant long to remain 
in doubt Thou didst manifest Thyself to him. Thou didst fortify 
him by Thy revelation that he might not hesitate, and breathing into 
him Thy hidden spirit, Thou madest him arise with greater strength to 
accomplish the work of charity. 

Therefore, after performing the usual prayers, taking leave of the 
lord Patriarch and receiving his blessing, he went to the sea-coast. 
There he found a vessel belonging to some merchants who were pre- 
paring to cross to Apulia. He went on board, and after a successful 
journey arrived at Bari. Thence he proceeded to Rome, and found 
the lord Pope Urban in the vicinity. He presented the letters of the 
Patriarch and of the Christians who dwelt at Jerusalem, and showed their 
misery and the abominations which the unclean races wrought in the 
holy places. Thus faithfully and prudently he performed the commis- 
sion entrusted to him. 



Fukher of Chartres took part in the first crusade, and has left ns many a vivid 
picture of the more important incidents. His account of the start has been translated 
in order to show the conflict of emotions in the breasts of the crusaders, and the 
motive which was strong enough to overcome the natural affections.* 

Such then was the immense assemblage which set out from the 
West Gradually along the march, and from day to day, the army 
grew by the addition of other armies, coming from every direction and 
composed of innumerable people. Thus one saw an infinite multitude, 
speaking different languages and come from divers countries. All did 
not, however, come together into a single army until we had reached 
the city of Nicaea. What shall I add? The isles of the sea and the 
kingdoms of the whole earth were moved by God, so that one might 
believe fulfilled the prophecy of David, who said in the Psalm : "All 

* For another account by William of Malmesbury, see Michaud : History oi the 
Crusades (English Translation, London, 1852), III, 356. 



V. ACCOUNT OF THE START. 
Recueil, III, 328. Bongars, I, 385. Latin. 




SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY. 



*3 



nations whom Thou hast made shall come and worship before Thee, 
O Lord j and shall glorify Thy name," and that all those who reached 
the holy places afterwards said justly : " We will worship where His feet 
have stood." Concerning this journey we read very many other pre- 
dictions in the prophets, which it would be tedious to recall. 

Oh, how great was the grief, how deep the sighs, what weeping, 
what lamentations among the friends, when the husband left the wife 
so dear to him, his children also, and all his possessions of any kind, 
father, mother, brethren or kindred ! And yet in spite of these floods 
of tears which those who remained shed for their friends about to de- 
part, and in their very presence, the latter did not suffer their courage 
to fail, and, out of love for the Lord, in no way hesitated to leave all 
that they held most precious, believing without doubt that they would 
gain that hundred-fold in receiving the recompense which God has 
promised to those who love Him. 

Then the husband announced to his wife the time of his return, 
assuring her that if he lived by God's grace he would return to her. 
He commended her to the Lord, gave her a kiss, and, weeping, prom- 
ised to return. But the latter, who feared that she would never see him 
again, overcome with grief, was unable to stand, fell lifeless to the 
ground, and wept over her dear one whom she was losing in life, as if 
he were already dead. He then, as if he had no pity — and neverthe- 
less he was filled with pity — and was not moved by the grief of any 
friends — and yet he was secretly moved — departed with a firm purpose. 
The sadness was for those who remained, and the joy for those who 
departed. What more can we say? " This is the Lord's doings, and 
it is marvelous in our eyes." 



This is not intended for a bibliography of the crusades, bat only to aid in die ant 

of this pamphlet 

i. GENERAL WORKS. 

I. Wilken : Geschichte der Kreuxauge. 7 vols. Leipzig, 1807-183*. 
S. Michaud : Hiatoire des Croiaades. 1st e<L, Paris, 1812-1817, in 3 rob. 

Various later editions ; the 7th, 4 toIs., 186a, much improved. Also in Eng. 

fish translation, 3 rols. 
3. Kugler : Geschichte der Kreuxauge. 1 voL ad edition. Berlin, 1891, 

in Oncken's Allgememe Geschichte. 



VI. SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY. 




V| History of Weat-ra Civilization 



*4 



TRANSLATIONS AND REPRINTS. 



4. Archer and Kingsford : The Crusades. 1 vol. New York, 1895, in "The 
Story of the Nations " series. 

The first is the most complete history of the crusades. The later volumes are 
still extremely valuable, and must form the basis of any comprehensive study of the 
period. But the volume dealing with the first crusade is of little use. Wilken relied 
upon the statements of William of Tyre, and consequently his account is untrustworthy. 

To the second the same objection can be applied with even greater force. 
Michaud's history, although very readable, is not a safe guide, and shows very little 
critical genius. 

The third is scholarly and has good bibliographical notes ; it is illustrated and 
supplied with maps. There is, unfortunately, no index, and since 1 891 there has 
been much excellent work on the crusades which would modify some of the state- 
ments made by Kugler. 

The fourth is the best work in English, but some subjects are neglected and 
certain chapters are unsatisfactory. 

//. THE SOURCES. 

x. Recueil des historiens des Croisades. In course of publication since 1841. 
The historians are divided into four series. Of the Western chroniclers, five 
volumes have been published. 

2. Bongarsius : Gesta Dei per Francos. 2 vols. Hanoviae, 161 1. 

3. Guizot : Collection des Memoires relatifs a V histoire de France. 31 

vols. Paris, 1824-1835. 

Each of these contains most of the chronicles mentioned in this pamphlet ; the 
first two in the original Latin, the third in a French translation which is very imperfect 

III. WORKS ON THE FIRST CRUSADE. 

z. H. von Sybel : Geschichte des ersten Kreuzsuges. 2d ed. Leipzig, 1 88 1. 

2. Hagenmeyer: Peter der Eremite. Leipzig, 1879. 

The first is the best work on the first crusade. The second discusses all the 
questions connected with Peter the Hermit and disposes of the fables. It is rich in 
citations from the sources, and is of great value for the history of the first crusade. 
There is also a French translation. 

SybePs History and Literature of the Crusades contains four of his lectures and 
an analysis of the sources which still has some value. This compilation, however, 
is due to the translator, Lady Duff Gordon, and not to Sybel himself. Michaud's 
Bibliotheque des Croisades can be used only with care, but the fourth volume, con- 
taining extracts from the Arabic historians, is useful. Ducange's Glossarium, under 
« Crucesignati" should be used for the privileges of the crusaders ; also H. C. Lea's 
History of the Inquisition, VoL I, p. 42, £ et passim, and especially his latest work, 
History of Auricular Confession and Indulgences, VoL IIL 




History of Western Civilization 



SERIES FOR 1894. 

I. Early Reformation Period in England.{ Single number, 20 pages. 

II. Urban and the Crusaders.! Single number, 24 pages. 

III. The Reaction after 18154 Single number, 24 pages 

IV. Letters of the Crusaders.t Double number, 42 pages. V» 

V. The French Revolution, I789-I79 1 ! Double number, 36 pages. 

VI. English Constitutional Documents.! Double number, 36 pages. 

SERIES FOR 1895. 

I. English Towns and Gilds.f Double number, 36 pages. 

II. Napoleon and Europe.! Double number, 32 pages. 

III. The Medieval Student.! Single number, 21 pages. 

IV. Medieval Sermon Stories.* Single number, 20 pages. 

V. England in the Time of WyclifFe.f Single number, 20 pages. 

VI. Period of Early Reformation in Germany.f Double number, 39 pages. 
VII. Life of St. Columban.f Double number, 36 pages. 

SERIES FOR 1896. 

I. The Fourth Crusade.! Single number, 20 pages. 

II. Statistical Documents of the Middle Ages. Single number, 23 pages 

III. Period of the Later Reformation.! Double number, 32 pages. 

IV. The Witch-Persecutions.* Double number, 36 pages. 

V. English Manorial Documents.* Double number, 32 pages. 

VI. The Pre-Reformation Period.* Double number, 34 pages. 

SERIES FOR 1897. 

I. The Early Christian Persecutions.! Double number, 32 pages. 

I I . Canons and Creeds of the First Four Councils.* Double number, 31 pp. 

III. Documents Illustrative of Feudalism. ;{: Double number, 36 pages. 

IV. Ordeals, Compurgation, Excommunication, and Interdict.* Double 

number, 34 pages. 
V. Typical Cahiers of 1789.1 Double number, 36 pages. 

SERIES FOR 1898. / 

I. Monumentum Ancyranum. 91 pages. / 
II. Protest of the Cour des A ides, April, 1775. viii, 154 pages. 

SERIES FOR 1899. / 

I. French Philosophers of the Eighteenth Century .f W 
35 pages. 

II. The " X. Y. Z." Letters.f Double number, 36 pajK 

III. The Early Germans.! Double number, 36 page^/ 

I V. Extracts from the Notitia Dignitatum. Double/ 
V. Laws of Charles the Great.! Double number 

VOLUME FOR 19^ 

Selections from Zwingli. 258 pages./ 

VOLUME F^ 

The Merchant Adventurers oif 

DEPART^r 



Jauuary,i9o8. 

* Revised edition. 



Digitized by 



GoogI 



T i 



Digitized by 



Google 




STANFORD UNIVERSITY LIBRARIES 
STANFORD AUXILIARY LIBRARY 
STANFORD, CALIFORNIA 94305-6004 
(650) 723-9201 
salcirc@sulmai I. stan ford.edu 
All books are subject to recall. 
DATE DUE 




Digitized by Google 



